


THE DIET OF THE DISEASED. THE FIRST BOOKE.

THE ARGVMENT.
IN this first booke are conteined the natures and properties of the aire and other Elements, the winds and such other things thereunto belonging: All maner of food fit for the use of man; both bread and drinke, naturall and artificiall, together with the use thereof, and the various wayes of preparation: as also the nourishment afforded vs by fourefooted beasts, both greater and lesser; of fowles of all sorts, and fishes; as also concerning all manner of pot-herbs, sallets, sauces, spices in most frequent and ordinary use. And by the way are here and there handled divers pleasant and profitable points not a little concerning the health of mankind: as namely concerning climactericall yeeres, concerning the period and prolongation of mans life; and whether by art it may be prolonged or no; and whether one may live any long time without food or no? Concerning the use of the Elements, especially aire and water, with the right use and election, and some other things concerning them. Some questions concerning the use of drinke at certaine times. Something also concerning gluttony and drunkennesse, being the abuses of the creatures, with the many mischiefes thereby insuing both to the party in private, and to the whole common-wealth in generall.



CHAPTER I.

Divers acceptations of this word Diet; what health is, and whether Diet be a thing necessary for healthfull and sicke persons.

AS health of body is accounted the prime and chiefe happinesse that can befall a mortall man in this earthly Tabernacle of clay,Health best earthly happinesse, as sickenesse the greatest sorrow. so sickenesse being a reward of sinne, is one of the greatest sorrowes that can befall a mortall man. Now, as the great Architect of this universe, hath provided a multitude of meanes, both for preserving in health, and repairing the same when it is lost, to this Microcosme man; so among all these none more effectuall than a due and orderly Diet: And because the matter of diet, as well in healthfull as diseased persons is one and the same in substance, howsoever differing in preparation, etc. therefore, I must of necessity say something concerning such things as are incident to the use of man, for the maintaining of health, and preventing future infirmities, and afterward descend unto a particular survey of the diet of the diseased, with divers things thereto belonging. But before we proceed, it will not be amisse, first,Divers significations of this word Diet. to explaine the ambiguity of this word Diet. Amongst the Greeks, this word Diet hath divers acceptations; and first, a certaine kinde of life, or profession: Secondly, it signifieth  an habitation, or certaine place of abode, as in England, France, etc. Againe, it signifieth certaine houses of pleasure, into the which, personages  of note did, sometimes, for their recreation withdraw themselves. Amongst the Latines, it signifieth a certaine place next adjoyning to the  parlour, or rathet a part of the same, wherein (saith Varro) they were wont in the day time to take their repasts. It signifieth also an assembly  or meeting of many about some serious and important businesse; and thus the Germans call their generall meetings, wherein the Princes, Electors, and other Princes of the Empire are assembled, Diets; and such also are our Parliaments here in this Iland. In these latter times, custome hath so farre prevailed, that not onely hydroticke, or sweating drinkes, exhibited  for the cure of the poxe and other chronicall diseases; but even our purging ales also, and such other infused purging drinks, and continued for certaine daies, have assumed unto themselves this same name. But  Physitians doe most commonly take it for all the sixe things, called not naturall, as the aire; meat and drinke; repletion, and evacuation;And as Physitians commonly us it. Exercise or motion, and rest; sleeping and waking; passions or perturbations of the mind: of all which, by Gods good assistance, I purpose hereafter to speake somewhat largely, and how hurtfull and helpefull they are, both in sicknesse and in health. Lib. ad Thrasib. Galen observeth, that in the time of Homer, diet was not taken notice of, nor any waies looked into: And Plato writeth, that the antient Physitians seldome observed this diet. Hippocrates was the first

that brought it in request, and so is by Lib. 29. Cap. 1. Pliny acknowledged for the first author of the same. Now, before we descend into a particular survey of these sixe things; we must first handle some generall points, and in the first place, What health is, that thereby the contrarie, to wit, sicknesse, may the better be seene in its colours. Nam contraria iuxta se posita magis clucescunt. This therefore, and some other things thereto belonging, shall goe before, and then take other things in order.
Plato wisely warneth us, that the principles of every Art and Profession, are diligently and narrowly to be inquired into, because that from any one false principle, doe innumerable false and erronious conclusions proceed. It is agreed upon by all for an uncontrolled truth, that then men are said to injoy perfect health, when their actions are duly and well performed, as to be sicke when the faculties lie a languishing. Eam vero corporis constitutionem, in qua nec doloribus cruci^mur, nec in vitae actionibus impedimur sanitatem appellamus. Sanitas una optima est, and ut sic dica^ consummata, atque s^mma; quaedam vero, seu deficiens ab hac, nec plano absoluta perfectave, atque hac etiam latitudinem habet non parvam. Quare etiam sanitates multae variaequon ipsa co^muni omniu^ forma unde dictae sanitates sunt, sed mai^ris minorisque ratione inter se dissidentes. Gal. de sanit tuenda lib. 2. Galen defines it a symmetrie, or due proportion. Now, this due proportion is double, the one perfect and absolute, the other imperfect, and declining from the former integrity. In like maner, health is of two sorts; one perfect and exquisite, and another imperfect: and yet betwixt these two is a great latitude comprehended, in so much that it may be divided into eight severall degrees, answerable to the eight severall temperatures, or constitutions of mans body. So that we may say, a man is in health, when as there is no sensible impediment or hinderance of his actions to be perceived, whereby diseases are ingendred. Now, this by Galen is as a fundamentall point laid down, that Health is preserved by things like unto the temper and constitution of the body; neither neede this tenent seeme strange to any: for seeing diseases are cured by contraries, why should not health be preserved by things which are alike; neither doth it any thing at all make against the truth of this principle which some object Qua propter si eorum quae natura humidiores calidioresque sunt mutare temperamentum ad frigidiore^ siccioremque speciem libe^, contrariam his victus rationem instituas oportet, sin id custodire placet, similem. Idem lib. 6. de tuenda sanit. concerning children that are naturally of a hot constitution, who are to be accustomed to cooling things: as likewise old men, who by reason of their age, being of a cold constitution, are to be nourished with diet of a contrary quality; for, according to the same Galen, there be Vide lib de sanit. ad Thrasibulum. two parts of health; one called euectice, preserving it by things like unto it selfe; another called correctrix, or the correcting part, amending that which is amisse. But because this is a question better befitting the schooles than this place, I passe it over, and proceede to that which followeth, to wit, Whether diet be a thing necessary for healthfull and sicke people or no.
That a strict and precise kind of diet is by diseased and sicke people to be observed, may perhaps finde entertainment for truth, from an ordinary understanding: and that by reason, that whensoever the speedy recovery of former health is hindered, it is for the most part occasioned, by reason of the omission of the necessary rules of diet, for the which cause amongst the antients, after Hippocrates, as the Physicians employment was not in every one alike, so were there some of set purpose appointed to wait upon the sicks diet, called for this cause Clinici, or attending the bed of the sicke, as hereafter shall appeare. And Galen writes, that there is no remedie whatsoever of so powerfull an operation, that can performe the helpe it promiseth; without the help and furtherance of a good and orderly diet. But whether it be so strictly by healthfull persons to be observed, may, and that not without some shew of reason, be called into controversie,

and that by reason of the saying of Celsus,A good and laudable diet is not only to be observed of the sicke, but even of such as are in health also. that a healthfull man ought to be tied to no rules of diet; and not farre dissenting from this, is that old saying: Qui medice vivit, misere vivit. Hee that leads his life according to Physitians prescriptions, leads a miserable life. Alphonsus, King of Aragon, having heard by what maner of diet one had attained to 90 yeeres of age; replied, that hee had rather die within ten yeeres then live a hundred yeeres by meanes of so strict a diet. And I make no question, that without seeking farre, wee might easily find many of this Epicurean Kings mind: but since that health comprehends within its compasse a great latitude, it cannot be that a like diet should fit every individuall and particular person: Such as by reason of a laudable temper, and natural constitution of body, even from their very cradle injoy a perfect health, are by an extraordinary prerogative privileged above their neighbours, and may more boldly deale with any kinde of diet; but let even such not be too bold, but wise and circumspect, lest they be overtaken: and although the constitution may be strong, yet we know a strong and able horse may be overloaded, and sometimes haue his backe broken: and let the aliment be of as laudable a condition as it will, and thy stomacke as strong as that of the Ostrich, yet may it be mastered at length. And consider well this sentence, worthy to be ingraved with letters of gold:Plures gala, quam glaedio periere.The sword hath killed his thousands, but gluttony his ten thousands, Plures gula, quam gladio periere, The sword hath killed his thousands, but gluttony his ten thousands. How many generous gentlemen of noble parentage, and of an ingenious and liberall education, might have attained to Nestorian yeeres, and shined like bright starres in their orbes, by the great good they might have procured to their common countrey, if they had not too much prostituted themselves to their sinfull and carnall pleasures, and bin drowned too licentiously in their worldly delights, which have too much now adaies ceized upon the most part of the Christian world. Now, such as are valetudinary, and of a more crazie constitution, ought in a stricter manner compose themselves to a more exact observation of physicall prescriptions.Herodicus his strict diet. Herodicus being but of a crazie constitution of body, yet by vertue of his precise diet, attained to the age of an hundred yeeres. Asclepiades relied so much upon his diet,Asclepiades his confidence of the use of diet. that he would lay a wager against Fortune, that hee would never assume to himselfe the name of a Physician, if ever he fell sicke. And surely, who so considereth aright the fraile and crazie condition of the body of man, dare scarce be so bold as to lay any such wager. I count it for a miracle (saith Lib. 7. cap. 50. Plinie) and finde but onely this one example, that Xenophilus the Musitian lived an hundred and five yeeres without any bodily infirmity; or as Valer. Maximus l. 8, cap. 2. another calleth him, Pythagoras of Chalcis, Q. Curtius in vita Calani. Curtius relateth the life of the Philosopher, Calanus, who being surprized with a great loosenesse, and fearing lest his former felicity of seventy three yeeres health should be by this noysome disease interrupted, threw himselfe into the fire, and so was consumed into ashes.



CHAP. II.

Whether by meanes of Diet the life of man may be for many yeeres prolonged.

IT is reported of that famous Philosopher Theophrast. moriens natura^ accusavit, quod vitam longiorem brutis animantibus dedit, hominibus vero tam brevem and malignam, ut aequa lance vitam and mortem pensitando, dubites an vita an mors sit ^ptabilior. Quinetiam aestimatione nocturnae quietis, quisque dimidio vita suae spatio vivit, and pars aequa morti simi^is iransigitur: ne reputantur infantiae anni sine sensu, nec senectae in poenam vivaces; tot periculorum genera, tot morbi, tot casus, tot curae, toties invocata morte, ut nullum frequentius votum, etc. Reolanus junior in privatis praelect. Theophrastus, that dying, he accused nature, in that shee had given and granted to brute and unreasonable creatures a long, and to man the noblest of all other creatures so short and so sorrowfull a life: in so much, that weighing both life and death in even and equall balance, one might, and not without cause, doubt, whether life or death were rather to be chosen: as also in regard of the nights rest, a man lives but the one halfe of his time: that I say nothing also of the yeeres of infancy, when as he liveth void of understanding; and of old age, his yeeres seeming to be produced to this period onely for a punishment, witnesse so many cares and casualties; so many dangers and sicknesses, extorting so frequent an invocation of death, that nothing seemeth more welcome then the fruition of such a wish. But unjustly was noble nature of this unjust judge condemned before shee was heard: For, shee like a kinde and loving mother, being very solicitous and carefull of the life of man, hath not onely ministred unto him such things as are necessary for the maintaining and producing of his life; but besides, hath indued him with reason, and given him hands, to the end hee might more comfortably make use of such things, as she in her bounty had bestowed upon him.What life is. Now, De vitae definitione variaesunt Philosoph^ru^ sententia and definitiones. Arist. tamen ut and medici omnes ejus essentiam in calido and humido collocant.Vide Arist. de longitud. and brev. vitae cap. 2. Iohan. Magirum physiol li. 6. cap. 4, etc. our life consisteth in moisture and heat, neither is our life any thing else, but a ioint-continuance of heat and moisture in our bodies. But since our heat doth daily consume and waste away this naturall and radicall moisture, it is againe by the like humidity to be repaired. Now, this is performed by meanes of food, both meat and drinke; the right and moderate use whereof this dieteticall part doth instruct and direct; the which also not onely maintaineth and entertaineth health present, but helpeth also to recover that which is by sicknesse impaired (and as some would have it) produceth the life of man farre beyond the fatall period for all men appointed. And some there were, who by meanes of diet, would promise the perpetuity of mans life, and of a mortall man, to make him immortall; and such a one was that Sophist mentioned by Galen lib. de marasimo and lib. 1. salut. Galen, who promised immortality to all such, whose education he had from their tender yeeres undertaken. Galen is of opinion, that the necessity of death, can by no solid reason be demonstrated, but confirmed by experience onely. Some, who would make good Galens assertion, argue thus: All men die, either by meanes of externall, or internall causes. Externall causes, which procure violent death,Reasons seeming to prove that death may be avoided. are either such as may be avoided, and befall the body of man from without; as blowes, bitings of venomous beasts, and the like; all which, since they may easily be avoided, come not within the compasse

of this dietetiall art; or else they are unavoidable, and such be the things we call not naturall, by the excesse and defect of the which, diseases are ingendred, and death doth thereon ensue. In the golden mediocrity consisteth this health we now discourse of, the which, whosoever shall strictly observe, shall prolong his life for many yeeres. This mediocrity did our forefathers in that first and golden age of the world, strictly observe, and so many of them attained 900. and some neere 1000. yeeres. Neither are we to suppose that these were Lunary yeeres, or of the age of a Moone onely, as Lib. 15. de civit. Dei. S. Austine proves against Pliny and Baro. But yet further, the longevity of these our forefathers, did not onely depend upon their simple diet, but there was besides a speciall providence in prolonging their lives; and that as well for the multiplication of mankinde, as also by meanes of their long lives,Why the Patriarches lives were so long. they might the better attaine to the knowledge of the arts and sciences, mathematicall especially, and that part principally which concerneth the motion of the celestiall orbes, which required no small time. The Naturales causae fatalis interitus tres sunt, naturalis ficcita^, perenne triplicis substantiae ef^^uvium, and copia excrementorum.Idem Gal. loco nupet citat. internall causes of naturall and fatall death are, according to Galen, three; naturall drinesse, the continuall wasting of our triple substance, and the abundance of excrements. Now, naturall drinesse may be prevented by such things as moisten much. The wasting of our triple substance may be prevented by good ayre, meat and drinke, of a good and laudable quality, engendring but little excrementitious matter: and if notwithstanding, by reason of their condition or quality, they shall chance to ingender any excrement; they may either naturally, or else by artificiall meanes be voided out: And therefore conclude they, by this dieteticall art, may the naturall causes of fatall death be declined. But this is an uncontrolled truth: Contra vim mortis, non est medicamen in hortis. It is appointed for all men to dye, and then commeth in iudgement,Hebr. 9.27. saith the Oracle that cannot lie. True 'tis, and cannot be denied, that by vertue of a laudable diet, the life of man may be prolonged to an hundred, or an hundred and twenty yeeres, as hath beene published by Thomas Philologus de vita ad 120. amos producenda. Et nuper Claudius Deodatus de eodem argumento.Reasons why the life cannot be perpetuated for ever from the materiall;And from the efficient cause. some of our Authors: but for ever to be perpetuated, is impossible, and that both by reason of the materiall and the efficient cause. The matter is either first or second: the first matter, by reason it hath adjoyned privation, a maligne principle; therefore cannot alwaies continue the same. The second matter is of the elements, whereof the body of man is composed; the which, howsoever it conteineth in it the substance of the elements well united and compacted together; yet can their disagreeing qualities never so well be composed, but some discord and disagreement will arise, which is the cause of dissolution of the whole frame. The efficient cause is either remote or neerer: the remote is God himselfe, who hath placed severall and contrary motions in the heavens; Duo diversi sunt in C^^o m^tu^; (...) nempe ab ortu in occasum, qui dicitur m^^u^ deci^^^ coeli, and quo metu (...) inferiores coeli, atque adeo omnes planeta spatio Diei and noctis ab ortu in occasum circuner ^piuntur: alter vero motus est proprius inferioribus coelis, and imprimis spharis planetarum, quae motui isti decimi (...) veluti obnitentes, contr amoventur ab occasu in ortum, qui quid^m motus lo^ge est tardior quam motus ille primus decimi Coeli, etc. Kee^erm. System. astron. lib. 1. cap. 13. one from the East to the West, and is once every day accomplished; Another againe from the West to the East, which are at great length to be found in the writings of our learned Astronomers. Now, if God would have made the world to continue for ever

(faith Plato) he would never have placed these contrary motions in the heavens, because identity and unity is the cause of continuance, as contrariety the beginning of destruction. The neerer efficient cause is our naturall heat, which by little and little destroyes our naturall and radicall moisture, the which once failing, death undoubtedly followeth. And howsoever by the use of aliments it be in some sort repaired, yet this devouring heat getteth daily ground of it, till at length it giveth it the foyle; concerning which, more may be seene in the workes of the worthy Plato. It hath then sufficiently and plainely appeared, that the life of man, by meanes of a good and laudable diet, may be prolonged, and diseases prevented; howsoever death is unavoidable. But then here one may aske what is the ordinary period whereunto the life of man by meanes of art may be prolonged?Ordinary period of mans life, not reckoned above 100 or 120 yeeres. Our ordinary Authours, as wee have said, assigne 100 or 120: but wee have a certaine sort of people, who in shew, would seeme to transcend vulgar understanding, and tell us strange things of the prolongation of mans life for many yeeres, farre beyond this above-mentioned period; and that by meanes of certaine medicines made of metalls, of gold especially; and these be Quanquam and ipse Paracelsistae and qui corum medicinis utuntur brevis sint vitae, and morbis vexentur; tamen ia^^ant suum universale. Novimus aliquos qui metalla per lapide^ tinxerunt, sed qui nec se, nec alios a morte and morbis praeservare potuerint. De potentia arti^ multus est Rogerius, nec est ullus Paracelsicus quin ad oftentationem usque profusus fit promissionibus. Argumenta proferuntur a quibusdam longaevis sine regimine, quod impossibile est esse perfectum sine medicinis, ^t al. antimony, auro potabili, lapide Philosophorum, etc. Quid multis? deficis ar^ in ipsis p^ofessoribus; Si obijciaes hoc illis, pratendunt terminum naturae, defectum medicinae talis, and alia frivola Crollius ridicule Paracelsum ad vitam longam pervenire potuisse negat, quia veneno sit sublatus. At si promissa chy^ica sunt vera, debuit and contravenena fuisse munitus: ut Mithridates, etc. Andr. Libav. analys confess. fratrum de rosea cruce medit. 62.Memorabile hoc evenit quod Adamus a Bodenstein Paracelsicae sectae Coryphaem, cum libello edito se pestem pracavere, and curare posse sua theriaca, quam excbymicis concinnebat, divulgaret: Peste correptus, nemine tunc in ea platea ag^otante, peste penitus fere in ^rbe cessante, interierit. Plat. observat. medicin. lib pag. 309. pestil 6. Accidit tunc quoque hoc memoria dignum, quod impostor quidam Pseudomedicus circumforanem, globo quadam ex stibio, uti ex operatione illius potuiconjicere, composito, vinoque immerso, unicum illud exhibendo, omnes se curare posse peste infectos gloriatus est, peste primum uxore eius correpta, ipseque mox eadem perierit, poenasque audacia sic ambo dederint. Idem ibid. Paracelsus and his followers: And although this great miracle-monger (as his foolish followers would make him) died (not without tormenting arthriticall paines many times, notwithstanding all his secrets) before ever hee atteined the 60th yeere of his age, yet will not their folly depart from them if they were braied in a morter, affirming him yet to live in his grave by vertue of aurum potabile, writing great voluminous bookes, and inditing many profitable precepts to his disciples. I hope the Printers shall not want worke when they are ready. But Paracelsus tells us yet stranger tales (for, I doubt the reader will account them for such) Prateros vixerunt multi vitam alienam, idque iuxta praescriptum deltica naturae, inter quos fuit Syrus, qui cum de vita laboravit, robusti cuiusdam edolesecutis, qui tum forte adsistebat, vim atque naturam attraxisse dicitur; idque per imaginationem sic est consecutus, ut sensus, cogitationes, demique, animus ipse in alium transferretur. Per talem imaginationem Archafas uniuscuiusque eruditi, atque prudentis hominis scientia^s atque prudentiam attraxiss^ dicitur. Parac. de vita longa lib. 1. cap. 8. Est tertia velut quadam magica, qua quis vitam producit suam adminicule alienae. Modus antem attractionis tam vitae alienae a Syro, quam intellectus, seu prudentiae ab Archasa, seu Archel^o consisit in imaginatione, de qua multa Baco in hoc eodem argumento. Attractionem hanc, si vera est, seq^itur necessario transcorporatio animarum, quam Iohannes Picus perhibet omnes sapientes credidisse, Indorum, Persarum, Aegyptiorum and Chaldcorum, Leo Suavius scholio, ad idem cap. of attracting not onely life, I meane strength and vigor from a young man, but relateh of one who drew learning and knowledge from another; yea, that from any learned man he met, and kept company with, hee could easily by vertue of his strong imagination attract and draw unto himselfe the others wit and learning. The same non minus coarguitu^ ex Plinio longinquitas vita in Bachone and Paracelso, quam in Anacreonte aut Xenophonte, qui quidem Impetrim Mululcaciorum insulae Regem 800 annis vixisse scribit, and s^til^ ^ius 600. Qua omnia existi^nat inscitia temporis scripta esse, quod alii annu^ astate vnum determinaba^t, and alteru^ hyeme, etc. Id. ib. Author, and his expositor tell us strange things of the long life of some particular persons, where is likewise to be observed the great confusion he useth, as in all his writings, so in this particular, where

sometimes hee mentioneth mortall men, as the Patriarches, and others: Quantum autem ad longavitatem attinet, scite lunares populi ex Phedone Platonis introducuntur in altissimo terrae fastigio supra nubes habitantes, qui ob diuturnitatem aevi non tam mortales homines, quam immortales daemones habeantur. Puschre etiam a Ficino Arabes Astrologi producuntur qui ultra lineam aequixoctialem ad meridiem subtilissimos montes narrant, incolas, daemones quosdam, qui neque oriri, neque mori videantur: sicut scribit Paracelsus de Hildevio, etc. Idem Leo Suavius scholia ad cap. 1. lib. 4. Parac. de vita longa. Qui^ enim credet ad 1200 annum posse pervenir^? Adde inquit and Mathusalem exemplum propono. Et ex parte sub^ecti natura^em vigorem, de quo in Mose. lib. 1. Derude medicina^ praestantem. Tertio locum eum corpors convenientem; locum inquam in aere seu esse quinto, vel nubibus, ubi nulla est corporatitas, atque ubi habitant qui dicuntur somno sepulti, etc. Ide^ ibid. and againe, confounds this narration with a discourse of immortall spirits, who are neither to be confined with in his 1000. nor yet 1200 yeeres. And is it not a thing ridiculous, now in these later times, to extend the life of man-kinde to 1000, 900, or, at the least to 600 yeeres? And besides, may it not easily to an indifferent understanding appeare, how ridiculous this opinion is, that Adam, and the rest of the old Patriarches lived so long by vertue of the Philosophers stone? And what then became of this so rare medicine, when holy Iacob complained, that few and evill were the daies of his pilgrimage? And how came it to passe, that Abraham and Sarah lived then so short a while? That Isaacs eyes were dimme? Did their forefathers envie them such a medicine? all Arts and Sciences were transmitted from the antient Patriarches to posterity, and were they so envious, as to conceale from them so great a good? If these prattlers could by their owne experience make this appeare, there might be some colour for us, to beleeve they had knowne this Art, and concealed it from their successors. But the contrary hath already appeared, whatsoever they prate of one Human vitae spatium longe aliter est coercendum, licet (inusitato miraculo) Artephius dicatur a Bachone ope sapientiae suae ^000 annos vixisse, quemadmodum alie^ quidem primo mundi seculo. Artephius, who by meanes of his wisdome (as they say) lived 1000 yeeres. But now, it may be, some will here aske mee the question, whether I am not of opinon, that mens ages now daily decline, the world waxing old, and some holding that the Copernicus docuit Solem esse viciniorem terrae quam tempore Ptolomaei fuerat per miliaria Germanica vicies sexies mille sexconta, and sexaginta. Phil. Melanchton in physicis ipse queque statuit Solem ess^ viciniorem terrae, and ait, Deum veluti Solem terram versus retraxisse, quo natura effoeta egeat majori calore and fermento. Alii autem Astronomi, and Physici istam mutatam Solis vicinitatem penitus repudiant, inter quos est imprin is magnus ille Scaliger qui exercit 90. sect. 2. violenter Copernicum nostrum insectatur. Disputat autem de ista Solis eccentricitate Clariss. Mathem, Origanus cap. 1. prog. ad annum 1604. and docet esse quidem revera Solis eccentricitatem mutatam, sed non esse tantam quantam Ste. Florus ex sententia Copernici posuerat, sed vix dimidio tanta, ila ut in eo congruat cum sententia Melanchtonis; qui ia physica, ubi de Sole tractat, dicit Solem propiorem terrae esse factum quam fuerit tempore Ptolomei milliaribus Germanicis novies mille nongentis. Keckerm. systemat. Astron. lib. 1. cap. 13. Sunne, now, by that reason, to wit, of the age of the world, draweth neere the earth, as having more need now in this old age of a greater supply of warmth then heretofore: But as concerning this subject, because 23 Richard Hacluyt it hath beene of set purpose in a large volume handled at great length, I shall neede to say the lesse; yet something I must say concerning this subject now in hand, I meane the life of man. If this assertion were of an infallible truth, that the age of mankinde had proportionably still declined, then had the period of mans longest life beene by this time comprehended within a very small number of yeeres. But the contrary of this we see by daily experience confirmed: that in many places of the world, yea, and in most, Anacreonti poeta de iis qui 200 annos expleverint Damiatos astipulatur memora^s Pictorium pracipuum corpore viribusque. Etiam 300 Alexander and Cornelius Dandonem quendam in Illyrico dicunt vixisse. Leo Suavius in cap. 2. lib. 4. Parac. de vita longa. men live as long as in antient times; I meane, after the times of our first forefathers, the old Patriarches. This caution I would withall to be put in, that in our comparison with antiquity, we must alwaies put in this proviso, caeteris paribus, making the cases both alike. As they lived a sober and frugall life, free from excesse of meate and drinke, and such other things, as have so much abridged the life of man in divers parts of the world, so must wee suppose of our times. And that there have beene in severall ages and times, such long lived people

in the world, may appeare to those that will search into antient writers: and thus wee read of some that lived 200, some 300 yeeres; and the above-mentioned Writer relateth the long life of Iohannes de Temporibus, or Iohn of Times, and divers others; and late Writers tell us stories of the long lives of the people in The sobrietie of the Floridens doeth lengthen their dates in such sort, that one of their kings told me (saith Morques) that hee was 300 yeeres old, his father which he there shew'd mee alive, was 50 yeeres elder than himselfe; when I saw him, mee thoght I saw nothing but bones covered with skin. His sinews, veines and arteries (saith Landoniere, in descriptio^ of the same man) his bones and other parts appeared so clearely thorow his skinne, that one might easily tell them and discerne tho one from the other; hee could not see, nor yet speake without great paine. They shewed mee their off-spring to the fifth generation, and yet it was told them by the other Indians, that the eldest of them both might by the course of nature live 30, or 40 yeeres more. Purchas his pilgrim. lib. 8. cap. 7. Americus Vesputius saith, the Brasilians live 150 yeeres, and that they have alwaies an Easterly wind, which tempereth their aire. Idem lib. 9. cap. 4. Florida, where it is reported, that some there exceede the number of 300 yeeres, and that generally they live there very long, as living after that frugall manner, as did our fore-fathers of old. Besides, Macrobii in Africa, saith Herodot. lib. 7. live ordinarily 120 yeeres; their meat was boil'd flesh, their drinke, milk. Idem l. 4. cap. 14. a late Writer allegeth Herodote speaking of a people in Africa called Macrobii, living ordinarily 120 yeeres, which is much, if we consider the bad aire generally in most places of that vast part of the world; and it is not unknowne, that in these our Northerne cold climates, many people live to a great age, some comming to 100, some more, yea, some to 140. There are some of my acquaintance yet alive, who have told me they have knowne an instance of this last period, in each of these two severall kingdomes of great Britaine. To atteine to 100 is no wonder, having my selfe knowne some of both sexes. If I might dwell upon this point, I could produce many proofes to confirme this truth; but this I thinke may suffice, and such as are desirous to receive further satisfaction, may have recourse to this late Author, of whom before. The like objection is likewise made concerning the stature of men, which heretofore, as seemeth, hath bin very great; and have we not even in our daies seene some of a stupendious great stature? And if it shall be again replied, that such be not ordinary; I answer, that such great statures were not ordinary, and therefore in holy writ, we have Deuteron. 3.11. 1 Sam. 17.4, etc. 2 Chron. 11.23. Switzers tall and lusly men, especially in the Canton Zurith. such men singled out, and, as it were, pointed out by the finger. I doe not deny, that both among our selves, and divers other nations, it may be, in former times, men have beene both of stronger and health fuller constitution of body, and of taller stature; but this alteration proceedeth not from any sensible decay in nature, but by reason of our disorderly diet, luxurious lives, nice and effeminate education, so farre degenerating from our antient predecessours, who, thorow their valour and martiall exploits, were famous thorow the world; and we now are become contemptible to such as before stood in awe of this Iland. But that even at this day there are people of a very tall stature, whoso hath travelled into Switzerland, shall perceive by oculare inspection; where the people are ordinarily of a very tall stature, especially those of Zurich: and a Platerus observat. medicin. lib. 2. pag. 548. The inundation of the whole world by the deluge, was not the cause of the abbreviation of the life of man. late learned Writer maketh mention of the bones of a Giant, digg'd out of the ground, about Lucerne of Switzerland, which being orderly set together, that sceleton was 19 foot long, and 21 of measure by my feet, as it was drawne in the picture by him in his study, whereby I measured it, during my abode at Basil, for the finishing of my physicall studies. Now, before I proceed, I must speake a word or two concerning an assertion, affirmed by some, concerning the abbreviation of mans life, to wit, that, After the flood, the whole frame of the earth was so altered, and, as it were, poisoned, that people could not live so long after, as before. To this I answer, that if we compare lives with lives, wee shall finde this false; and beside, that this same abbreviation of mens lives was begunne before the flood, and that some lived as long after the flood as did before, at least within

a little; still comparing the declining of the age of man before the flood, with that which succeeded after. We see Genes. 3.27. Methusalem lived 969 yeeres; and his sonne Lamech came almost 200 short of his age: againe Genes. 9.29. Noah his sonne exceeded his fathers age almost 200 yeeres; and his sonne 11.11, Sem lived compleat 600 yeeres, and 500 of this after the flood; and so comparing one with another, we shall find that comparing this begunne abbreviation, Sem lived as long after the flood, as Lamech did before, although this abbreviation did not hold alwaies alike: For, Methusalem, we see, lived longer than any either before or after him; God, in this, manifesting his mighty and omnipotent power, lest wee should ascribe too much to the order of inferiour causes. But lest I heare ne sutor ultra crepidam, I leave this theme to the Divine. Howsoever, the daies of man were much abridged in the daies of Abraham, Isaac and Iacob, but especially in that age wherein Moses lived; and therefore we easily perceive this point to be cleare, that the time of mans age hath not sensibly declined since that time. It may be also some would aske what sexe is of longest life? I answer that the Man is ordinarily longer lived than the woman. And why, Arisi. lib. de longitud. and brevit. vita cap. 2. male, by reason of his superaboundant heat, and good temperature of body: howsoever, this must still be understood, with that parity we have heretofore mentioned: for, no question some women are farre longer lived than some men; a temperate woman, and of indifferent constitution of body, therefore may by many yeeres out-live a debauched swaggering, luxurious good fellow.What complexion longest lived. And the severall complexions are not here to be past over: the sanguine of all others being of longest endurance; and next to it the cholerick; the phlegmaticke succeed, and the melancholy are ordinarily shortest lived.In what Climat. The climat wherein one liveth, maketh also much for the long life of man, and therefore we see that in our Northern countries oftentimes people live long: and in one and the same country, the native inhabitants thrive better, and live longer many times than strangers; as may appeare by the Purchas li. 14. c. 12. inhabitants of S. Helena, where the naturall Negroes lived ordinarily 110 yeeres, although the aire of it selfe be very unwholesome to our Europeans, insomuch that few of them there exceed 50 yeers. And there are yet divers other things which may lengthen or abbreviate the life of man, as the particular influence of the superior powers, and to us unknowne, etc. But above all, there is a supreme over-ruling power in our great and omnipotent Maker, to lengthen and shorten the life of man at his good will and pleasure. It is naturally in-bred in all men to desire length of daies, and without doubt, it is in it selfe no small blessing, as being a reward of keeping Gods commandements, let those therefore, who would comfortably partake of so great a blessing follow the direction of the Spirit of God, uttered by the mouth of the Wiseman. Prov. 3.1.2. My sonne, forget not my law, but let thine heart keepe my commandements: for length of daies, and long life, and peace shall they adde to thee. And again, 9.10.11. The feare of the Lord is the beginning of wisedome, and the knowledge of the holy is understanding: For, by me thy daies shall be multiplied, and the yeers of thy life shall be multiplied. See againe the contrary denuntiation: Eccles. 8.13. But it shall not be well with the wicked, neither shall hee prolong his daies which are as a shadow, because hee feareth not before God. Againe, the

Psalme 55.23. bloody and deceitfull man shall not live out halfe his daies; Psalme 90.7.9. we are consumed by thine anger, and by thy wrath are wee troubled; for all our daies are passed away in thy wrath; we spend our yeeres as a tale that is told. And therefore it will be good for us still to pray with that holy man, Moses, in the same place Verse 12. So teach us to number our daies, that wee may apply our hearts to wisedome. Many old people brag of their old age, how fruitlessely, yea, how wickedly soever they have spent all their pretious time. Indeede, the Wise-man accounteth old-age for a prime ornament. Proverbs 20.29. The beautie of the old man is the grey head. But heare againe the same Spirit speake by the same pen-man: 16.31. The hoarie head is a crowne of glorie, if it be found in the way of righteousnesse. And therefore, if many old men and women had their blinded eyes opened, they had small cause to bragge of their so neere approaching eternall misery; but I will not here inlarge my selfe upon this point, but rather leave it to the Divines pen and pulpit, and so now proceed to that which followeth.


CHAP. III.

Of Climactericall yeeres, with their reasons assigned by antiquity, Numericall, Astrologicall and Physicall.

IT is a generally received opinon, that in these yeers commonly called Climatericall, great alterations befall the body of man, whereby his health is not a little hindred and impaired; and therefore my purpose is to say something of them, as concerning so much, both sicknesse and health; and first, what is the meaning of the word. It is as much to say,What is meant by climactericall yeeres. as a ladder, by the rounds whereof a mans life, as it were, climbeth up, untill it can climbe no higher, and the rounds of this ladder are our yeeres: and they are of two sorts; either sevens or nines, both decretory and determining the life of man. Some, as namely Censorinus lib. de saeculis. Censorinus, according to the doctrine of some of the Antients, would apply the seventh to the body, the ninth to the minde. Bodin deviseth a private opinion of his owne,Lib. 4. de Republ. concerning this subject, to wit, that because women grow faster, and become sooner old; therefore he affigneth to them the ninth for climactericall, as to men the seventh; But in this I thinke hee hath but few followers. But certaine it is, that none of our Authours assigne any more but these two, either to man or woman; from the very first beginning of our lives, unto the last period of the same. Now, these climatericall yeeres beginne at the first seventh yeere of mans age, asscending by degrees untill they come to 98, and the ninth beginning at 9, and ascending upwards to 99. Amongst these sevenths, some are reputed more dangerous then others, and amongst the rest

(saith Censorinus) such prove commonly more dangerous, which make up their full weeke of yeeres; and they be these following: the 21, 42, 63, and 84. But amongst all the rest, the 49 and 63 are accounted the most dangerous; the first arising by the multiplication of sevens, and the other by multiplication of sevens and nines jointly together Sunt autem duo a^norum numeri, septimus and non^o qui pterumque rerum vitaeque ^us, imrautationem, ac gravia pericula invebunt. Quo fit us sexagesimus tert^us, qui utriusque nameri multiplicata^, atque invicem sibi connexam summam continet non sine periculorum a^^rvo ingruat; nov es namque septem, and septies novem, sexa^inta eres constituunt, atque ob id climactericus is annus appellatur; quia a septimo orsus, vitam hominis, velut per gradus quosdam peragat. Itaque omnes qui per 7, aut 9 annos consurgunt, decretorii dicuntur in quibus magnam mutationem subeunt homines: nam vel calumnus ^mpeti^olent, vel gravissimus morbis divexari, vel pe^iculis objici, velaenique aliquod perpeti detrimentum ac ^actaram, velfacultatum, vel vale^uainis. ^os ergo annoram decursus, ac volum. na in omnibus etiam aetatibus observare soleo, sic ut impubere^, etc. Levinus Lemnius de occul^. naturae mirac. l. 2. ca. 32. Levinus Lemnius is very jealous of the 63, in the which, the life of man is liable to many alterations and changes: and Augustus Caesar did much rejoice when hee had escaped his dangerous yeere. And although In lib Hippoc. de septimestri ^ariu. Cardan seeme but to mocke and flout at climactericall yeeres, affirming, that hee never injoied more perfect health than in those yeeres, yet seeme they not altogether to be rejected: and At vero multeribus foetuum conceptiones and abortiones and partiones, eodem tempore judicaniur, quo and morbi and sanitas Sed istorum omnium, alia quidem diebus, alia menssbus, alia dierum quad^ agenariis, alia annuo spatio de se signifi^ationem prabent. Et paulo post. Eteni^^ medicum qui de aegroria^ salute recte consectare volet, animadvertere opertet, ut omnes dies in contemplationem adhibeat; ex paribus quidem 14, etc. Hippoc. lib. de septim. partu. Hippocrates himselfe acknowledgeth their efficacie and power; affirming, that both sicknesse and health, and such like other notable alterations and changes have their appointed daies, moneths, and yeeres in which they are produced. And againe, in another 2 Epidem. sect. 6. place, he affirmes, that the solution of any disease, cannot be safe, unlesse on a fit and convenient day; as also that there is a necessity that a man should die on a determinate day, moneth, and yeere. But an Averroes cap. 8.3. collect. Arabian Author doth yet much more magnifie these climatericall yeeres: The leprosie (saith he) is never cured by physicke, except it be administred in some criticall yeere, wherein nature of its owne accord doth attempt some renovation, and is such a time, as nature hath for this same purpose appointed; and this is yet further witnessed by the great Zacharie, and I my selfe have likewise tried it. Those who labour to render a reason of these climactericall yeeres, render a threefold reason: 1 Numericall, 2 Astrologicall, 3 Physicall. To beginne then with the Numericall, they much magnifie the number of 7. and that out of Plato, Pythagoras, and Macrobius. And first, say they, because it is composed of divers figures, it admitteth of divers formes; and therefore call it a virgine and number of perfection; and that by reason it is a full and compleat number, and may be divided into one and sixe; and againe, to two and five; and finally, into three and foure, which is not incident to any other number whatsoever. Againe, they say, this is called the holy number; for, it is certaine, that God himselfe sanctified the seventh day, and having made the whole frame of the universall world in sixe daies, hee rested the seventh. Againe, the same God appointed the Iewes a seventh Sabbaticall yeere, in the which it was neither lawfull for them to till their ground, to sow seede in it, or to dresse their vines: And seven weeks of yeers being past, which was the fiftieth, was their Jubilee. Again, to magnifie this number of seven, they allege that on the seventh moneth the arke rested on the Gen. 8.4.8.12. mount Ararat: on the seventh day, Noah sent out a Dove which returned, with an olive-branch in her bill: after other seven daies, he sent her out againe, and then she returned no more. 1 King. 8.65. Salomon celebrated seven festivall daies, and all Israel with him, and many other such numericall niceties. Againe, say they, the life of man imitateth the creation of the world, which was finished in seven daies; and so the little world man, is certainly conceived at furthest on the seventh day: and the childe borne before the seventh moneth, liveth not. And the same Lib. de carn seu principius, ubi multa de hos numero septenario. Hippocrates affirmeth, that the life of man is of seven daies continuance, that is, that without food he can hardly live longer, and so hee divideth the whole period of a mans

life by this number of seven,Infantia, and pueritia. and that according to the ages. The first is from the birth untill the seventh yeere, and is called the infancy: the second from that to the fourteenth,Pubertas. Adolescentia, iuventus, fluens and consistens. Virilia and proprie consistens aetas. which is called child-hood; from thence to one and twenty called youth, or stripling age; from thence to 35 is the consisting age, or staied youth: from this yeere, untill 45, is called properly manly, or consisting age; which falleth upon the seventh week of yeers. What remaineth of the life of man is called old age;Senectus. which is againe divided into other seven weekes, especially in temperate places, and such where men live longest; where the body is of a good and laudable temper and constitution, and the diet good and wholesome:Cruda viridisque senectus, seu primum seni^m.Aetas decrepita, seusenium secundumAstrologicall reason of these climactericall yeeres. and then this time is divided into two parts, the first being called fresh, or greene old age, Cruda viridisque senectus, from the end of the seventh weeke to the beginning of the tenth, to wit, 62 or 63. the later is called decrepit old age, continuing from this yeere to the fourteenth weeke, which falleth on the 97 yeere. Now, besides this numericall, others assigne an astrologicall reason; every seventh yeere Ranzenius in genethliace. vide de his annis eundem lib de sanit. tuend. cap 35. (say they) the planets returne in order to Saturne, who removes then to another signe, contrary to that from whence hee last departed; and therefore by reason of this maligne constellation, as also by the contrary place of the planet, it commeth to passe, that the maligne influence of Saturne is increased. But before wee proceed, it must be observed, that these events are not alwaies precisely confined to the very individuall climactericall yeere, but often to the yeere next insuing, and sometimes also a little before to the yeere immediatly preceding: And a late Claudius Deodacus Panth hygiast. lib. 1. cap. 7. ubi, and bi versus de hominis aetate reperiuntur.Infans septenos postquam compleveris annos, Producti dentermurus and oris erunt Post si septem alios deus huic co^^ess^rit annos ^ it pubes, nato semine, nomen habens. Est invenis cum septem altos compleverit annos, Et lanugo genas barbaque prima tegie. His addas septe virtutis nomine clarus Est vir, and haec aetas optima robur habet. A di^cias alios septem, vo^e^ esse maritus, Er memor utique posteritatu erit His alias ^ugas septe, prude^tia pectu^ Ornabit, studium non levitatis erit. Annumeres septem gravitas erit inclyta ^^ngua. Septem alios, linguae ^o^gruit ingenium. Additur his nonus cum septenarius ipse est, Perfectus, vires sed nimis interimit. Scitices his a^nis multi periere duobus, quoru^ laus celebru^ mar te togaque suit. Hi quoque nunc variis fortuna casibus anni, Subiiciunt multos, exitiumque parant. Accedunt a^^i septem, mors dura vocabit, a^d tamulum fessos, decrepitosque senes. Writer maketh the climactericall yeere, as it were the time wherein sentence is pronounced, although often execution come not till the next yeere after, howsoever the body be before disposed, prepared and fitted, either for sicknesse or death; although sometimes also the effect is accelerated, and falleth out before the climactericall yeere. And this is confirmed by instances of examples produced in that same place: as to wit, of Adam, having lived 930 yeeres, died in his climactericall yeere, 931, conteining seven times 133. Abrabam also died in his climactericall yeere, 175. King Cyrus in his 70, as likwise the Poet Ennius, and the famous champion Hannibal; and Ioanna, mother of that famous Emperor, Charles the fifth: and this Emperor himselfe in the ^63 being his climactericall. The renowned Augustus Caesar, survived his climactericall yeere 70, about some three moneths: And Edward the first, King of England, ended his daies about the same period: Solyman the Turkish Emperor, ended his daies in his 76 yeer, preventing this his climatericall yeere by one. Charles the 8, the French King, prevented his climactericall yeere 28, onely by the space of 22 daies; Many more instances might be to this purpose produced, and many other things out of many Authors, alleged for the magnifying of this number of 7, in these yeeres. Now, that many notable alterations are often observed to befall our bodies in these seventh and ninth yeeres, especially the sevenths cannot be denied: and with Hippocrates we may well say, that the seventh yeeres are no lesse criticall in the life of man, than are the seven daies and moneths in the crisis of acute and chronicall diseases; and yet these numbers have no vertue to produce any such

effect, nor prove any causes nor occasions thereof; which to prove, any able, yea, ordinary understanding, making no question thereof, were, I thinke, to spend my time in vaine. And as for astrologicall vanity, it hath been already by so many worthy, and learned men confuted, and something also shall be said hereafter of their foolish and superstitious opinions, so that at this present I passe by it. Onely this by the way, let it be kept in minde what hath lately beene said, that these great and notable events fall not alwaies out on the same yeere, but sometimes before, and sometimes after; and Saturne, to whom they principally impute these strange events, must keepe his set turnes in his regular motion every seventh yeere: besides, that by their owne assertion he is quite excluded from the ninth. And although some such notable effects fall out about such a time, and about the time of some great conjunctions; yet are they no more causes of such effects, than the shining of the Sunne is the cause of a mans intended journey, of him before resolved upon, whether the Sunne shone or no. Now then, there must be some physicall cause assigned, the other two failing. A Qua autem rat one per illus annorum circuitus morbi pler^mque incrudescant, a neminc hactenus explicatu^ est. Ego ideo evenire conjicio, quod certis an^orum periodis co^tu^ humanum magnam bumorum collectionem, ac redundantiam congesserit, quorum motu, atque excitatione morbi excitantur. Cum enim natura ad immodicam repletionem devenerit, conceptacula humorum plenitudinem perserre nequeant, in morbum erumperere necesse est. Qua^obrem omne fludiu^ omnemque operam conserre expetit, ne materia exuperant^a evacua^ionem, quam semper vere and autumno, vel incisione venae vel purgante medicamento molundu^ est. Idem Lev. L^mn^. loco prius citat.De bis annis climactscripserunt etiam Antonius Guevarra, Petrus Messias, Ioseph Roscius, Franciscus Iunius, Franciscus Pet^archa, Marsilius Ficinus, Ferdinandus Mena, Iohannes Lalamanizus, Federicus Bonaventura, Baptist, Godroachus, etc. learned late Writer labours to acquaint us with the reason of the prerogative these climactericall yeeres assume unto themselves. In the periods and revolutions of certaine yeeres (saith he) there is a great abundance of superfluous humours collected in the body of man, by the motion and agitation whereof diseases commonly are ingendred: For, when as the body hath collected such an abundance of superfluous humours, that the places accustomed to receive the same, are now no longer able to conteine them, diseases must of necessity follow, and, if not remedied, death it selfe. And therefore to avoid this danger, he adviseth people in the spring and fall every yeere, by purging and bleeding to unburthen their bodies of this masse of oppressing humours, by which meanes at the returning period of these yeeres, they may live more secure and free from feare. And certaine it is, there is a fatall necessity and disposition to die, from the very first birth, attending and unavoidably accompanying every man; and this was first procured by that wilfull and wofull fall of our first parents, and from them, as a legacie propagated to all their sinfull posterity: which fatall period is often furthered or hindered, by the good or bad order of diet, and divers other externall and inevitable causes, and yet nothing befalling us without the all-disposing and overruling providence of the Almighty. And in the interim, although many dangerous diseases do often, both about these especially, and other times also, ceize upon a mans mortall bodie; yet, untill this appointed period, nothing can cut the thread of this life. Now, that every one may be acquainted with these yeeres, I set them here downe to thy view: The sevenths are 7, 14, 21, 28, 35, 42, 49, 56, 70, 77, 84, 91, 98. Then ninths are 9, 18, 27, 36, 45, 54, 63, 72, 81, 90, 99. Who so surpasseth this number, let him reckon the rest himselfe.



CHAP. IIII.

Of things called not naturall; and first of the Aire.

Res 7 naturales sunt, Elementa, temperamentum, humores, membra vel partes, virtutes seu facultates, operationes vel actiones, spiritus.Res 6 non naturales, aer, cibus and potus; repletio and vacuation; exercitiun seu motus, and quies; somnus and vigilia; accidentia, seu animi pathemata.AS man by naturall composition partakes of all the elements, so in this life can hee not long life without the use of them all, especially of this ambient aire; and of the which, for this cause wee will speake in the first place. Now, the utilitie, and necessity of this element, doth in this appeare, that howsoever, sometimes, one may live without meat and drinke for divers daies, if not moneths and yeeres, (as some relate) yet, without the use of this element, was never any yet able to subsist and continue one day, no, nor yet one houre, there being so great an use for the body of man, both of perspiration and respiration. The whole body of man is composed of a triple substance; of an aire or spirituous, and next of severall humours; and lastly, of a more solid substance, flesh and bone. Now, these three, from the very first beginning to the end of our daies, are continually decaying, and therefore must daily be repaired, if life be continued. The losse then of the first is repaired by meanes of this aire; of the two later, by meanes of meate and drinke. Now, since the use of this element is so great, that it not onely cooles and refreshes the excessive heat of the heart, but also repaires our decaied spirits; wee will say something thereof.Quality of the aire. The proper quality then of the aire, is reputed to be warme, joined with moisture; I meane, in a temperate, and not in any excessive degree: howbeit, according to the severall and manifold alterations it is subject unto, it often altereth, not the body onely, but the minde of man also. A good laudable and temperate aire, is a great meanes to uphold the health; on the contrary, being corrupted, it proveth often the cause of many diseases: and that the aire doth not a little affect the mind,The aire doth not a little affect both the body and the minde. may from hence be evinced, that such aire as we most commonly breath in, such spirits are there ingendred. Of a thicke and cloudy aire, thicke and grosse spirits are most commonly produced. For this cause the Athenians were accounted wiser than the Thebans, by reason they lived in a purer and more refined aire. And all Scythia brought forth but one famous Philosopher, Anacharsis; and this they impute to the thicknesse of the aire of that countrey. Plato made choice of a Iu Academo, unde academici. Ficinus in vitae Platonis. moist and moorish place in the suburbs of the City of Athens to teach in; and that of set purpose, to blunt the sharpe edge of his pregnant wit. And Plato himselfe affirmeth, that Minerva being to build the City of Athens, did well before consider the nature and quality of that countrey, as promising no lesse then such famous worthy wits, as in antient histories are recorded. Now, the healthfulnesse and goodnesse of the aire, according to Galen, is determined by the purity and good temper thereof. A pure aire is called a subtill aire, infected with no corrupted vapours, nor noisome smells: A temperate aire is such a one wherein we neither quiver for cold, nor yet sweat for heat. Now, if

the aire of any countrey whatsoever, of it selfe naturally unhealthfull,What is meant by a pure aire. no art of man ever can amend it; and then the best remedy I know,A temperate aire. Aire naturally unhealthfull cannot be corrected. is with all possible speed to make choice of a better. If the aire be but accidentally bad, then there may be use of Art, and so it may, according to the excesse in any quality be corrected: as wee read that Hippocrates corrected the malignity of a pestilentiall aire,Alteration of the aire by meanes of the seasons of the yeere. by making of great fires of sweete smelling wood: as concerning that alteration of the aire occasioned by meanes of the times and seasons of the yeere, we are alwaies carefully to preserve the laudable temperature thereof by contrary remedies, as farre as in us lieth: as the sharpnesse of winter is to be helpt by good fires, and warme clothes. In the parching heat of summer, we are to coole and refresh our bodies by correcting the aire with contrarie coolers, especially within doores, as also by the use of thinner clothing. Now, that aire which any one hath suck'd in from his infancie, suteth farre better with that constitution than another, howsoever, perhaps, in it selfe, of a more laudable quality. It behooveth therefore every one, as far as in them lieth, to make choice of a good and laudable aire. But because most men must be contented with that aire they first breathed in; therefore this would chiefly be diligently and carefully considered of our new colonies,Advertisement for undertakers of new plantations. who transplant themselves into remote regions, that they first make choice of a country, whose naturall temper differeth not much from their owne; but with this proviso, that it be rather warmer than colder than their owne. In the next place, let the place of thy particular habitation be setled in a good place of the countrey, and that both in regard of the aire and water,Errour committed in the fitst plantation of Virginia. as also all other necessarie commodities. Our Virginian colonies therefore were at the first in this very farre over-seene, not being so carefull to build their townes in a good and laudable aire: and likewise my Lord of Baltomore was too confident in setling himselfe in so tempestuous and cold a place of New-found-land, which forced him at length quite to relinquish that land. And I wish all other undertakers may take warning by other mens harmes. Now, it is to be observed, that the aire is much altered in quality, according to the high or low situation of the place; and hence commeth it to passe, that there is a great difference betwixt the aire of the high hills, and that of the vallies, the aire being commonly exceeding cold on the top of those hills, yea, even when it is indifferent warme in the lower regions: and this travellers, that passe the Alps and Pyrenean hills, doe often finde true, where the snow covereth their high tops, when there is none to be found in the lower regions. A Acosta hist. Ind. l. 3, cap. 6. Spanish Iesuit to this purpose, relateth a strange story of such a high mountaine in the West Indies: There is (saith he) in Peru, a high mountaine, whereupon hee ascended, as well provided as he could, being fore-warned by men expert. But in the ascent, both he, and all his company were surprized with so sudden pangs of straining and casting, and some also of scowring, that the sea-sicknesse is not comparable thereunto. He cast up phlegme, choler, and blood, and thought he should have cast vp his heart also. Some thinking presently there to die, demanded confession; and some are said to have lost their life by this accident. The best is, it lasteth but for a time, and leaveth no great harme behinde it; and thus it fareth in all the ridge of that mountaine which runneth above 1530.

miles, although not in all places alike. In some different passages thereof, he found the like difference and distemper, but not so grievous as at Pariacaca. He ascribeth it to the subtilty of the aire in those hills, which he thinketh are the highest in the world; the Alps and Pyrenees, being in respect thereof as ordinary houses compared to high towers. In other places of Peru, men sometimes are found dead by reason of this sharpe aire, and yet their bodies putrifie not, which argueth an extreme pure cold penetrating aire. Now, this maketh it to seeme the stranger,Election of aire according to the severall constitutions of bodies. Peru being of it selfe situate within the Tropickes. Now, in the aire, this is likewise to be considered, that some aire better befitteth some bodies than others; a moist foggy body agreeth better with a good dry aire; and a dry constitution, with a moderate moist aire; and so of other complexions, simple or compounded. We are yet further, in considering the aire, to take notice of it according to the severall times of the day; and therefore although the aire admitteth of many alterations and changes upon divers occasions; yet that aire is commonly accounted in every country the best which we breathe in in the morning, the next about noone, the worst of all about night, and especially after Sunne-setting,Best aire according to the time of the day. which in many countries proves very pernitious; which that noble and valorous Knight, Sir Walter Raleigh, found too true on the coast of Africke,Night aire pernitious on most parts of the coast of Africa. with the losse and hazard of the lives of many worthy generous Gentlemen. And the French are very jealous of this night-aire, which they call la serene; Divers other things concerning the aire, especially of the sicke and diseased, together with the best and most commodious situation of houses, I reserve to its proper place hereafter, and now proceed to the winds for the affinity they have with the aire.


CHAP. V.

Of the severall sorts of Winds, and their various effects.

AS 1 Kings 18.44. Elias his little cloud no bigger than a mans hand, yet at length so over-spred the face of the whole heavens, that it distilled downe abundance of sweet comfortable showres, to the fructifying of the hard yronic earth, which had been so long deprived of these sweet refreshing showres: so these small dry exhalations, of how little esteeme soever they may at first seeme to bee,Winds are of great force. yet wee see what prodigious and stupendious effects they often produce, having their warrant sealed by the great God of heaven and earth. Now, whether thou please to call these vapors or exhalations by the name of wind, or whether this wind be an aire tossed to and fro, it is not much materiall for our purpose in hand, my desire being altogether averse from wrangling about words. Now, because the wind doth not a little alter the body of man, as well in sicknesse as in health, it shall not be out of purpose to say something concerning this subject: and the opinion of 5 De legibus. Plato is, that where the winds are very various and boisterous, the people of that countrey, for the most part, prove crabbed and untoward;

and the winds have ever beene esteemed to carry a great pre-eminence both over the bodies and mindes of men. Winds then in the generall, are of two sorts: common and sudden, or such as blow suddendly or at unawares, called repentini; such as wee call common, are such as blow out of certaine parts of the world, or else at certaine times or seasons. Such as we call sudden, are winds which neither blow from any one determinate or certaine quarter of the earth, nor yet at any one certaine and determinate time. These common winds are of foure sorts, answering to the foure corners of the world; and againe, betwixt each of these two extremes, are other two inserted, making up the number of twelve in all, and are very well Asper ab axe ruit Boreas, fugit Eurus ab ortu: Auster amat medium Solem, Zephyrusque cadentem. Hos inter binae mediis e partibus aurae, Expirant similes mutato nomine flatus. Manilius lib. 4. described by the Latin Poet. Tetrub. 2. sermone 3. cap. 100 sect. 3. Aetius out of the antient Mariners, reckoneth up the number of the winds, and yet mentioneth onely 12 in all, which he ascribeth to the 12 signes of the Zodiack. Our moderne Mariners have by their compasse observed 32 severall winds in severall tracts of the sea. Neither ought so great a number of winds seeme strange to any, since that the antients observed 24 severall sorts of winds, as witnesseth Lib. 1. cap. 6. Vitruvius; Whereunto Agricola rei metall. lib 3. Agricola doth also agree. And it may be more winds may yet be observed; so that the number of the winds may by this meanes be infinite; by reason these exhalations, when they are ingendred, may arise out of any region whatsoever; and so according to the nature and situation of the place, thorow which they passe, their effects are various:Properties of winds according to severall countries. and that wind which is propitious and benigne to one country or place, may in another place produce a contrary effect. The South wind (saith Lib. de Pest.South-wind best of al others to Africa. Holler) is very unhealthfull to all Italy, as also to most Northerne countries; and yet to Africa this wind is most comfortable, insomuch, that what refreshing other countries feele by the Etesian, or Easterly winds, the like benefit reape the Africans by the benefit of this South wind. Zephyrus, or the Western wind is generally with us reputed a milde and gentle wind:The West-wind most terrible to Gasconie. and yet in Gasconie (saith Scaliger) it never blowes without the great terror or amazement of the inhabitants of that country. Hippocrates therefore observing this variety and multiplicity of winds, wisheth Physitians onely to observe foure, and for the most part hee mentioneth but two, as being the principall, the South and the North. And so Hali abbas and Avicenne, when they have mentioned 12, yet at length pitch upon these foure principall winds, chiefly of a Physitian to be observed.Division of winds. These foure chiefe principall winds then are divided into land-winds and sea-winds; Land-winds I call such as blow from the land, and sea-winds such as blow from the sea.Division of Land-winds. The land-winds againe are of two sorts, either common, or else proper and peculiar to some one country; as the North-westwind to the Athenians, and the South-wind to Provence in France. Comment. 3. in 3 Epidem. Galen makes the South-wind of two sorts, one hot and moist, cloudy and rainy; and another hot and dry, clearing the cloudy and muddy aire. The former of the two proves often the author of great mischiefe to these our Northerne cold countries; as namely, of that fearefull plague of pestilence,The South-wind for the most part our greatest adversary.The Northerly wind our best friend. and divers other dangerous and epidemicall diseases, whereon in this place to insist, were too tedious: In generall, it is the most unhealthfull wind that blowes in our climat; as I hold the Northerly wind to be our best

friend;Etesian, Easterly, or anniversary winds. although some would have the Easterne wind, which bloweth directly from the Equinoctiall line, to be the healthfullest wind for our climat. It may be, because they blow in most countries in the heat of sommer, about the canicular daies, and so qualifie the extreme scorching heat of the time, whereof frequent mention is made by Jn libris Epidem. Hippoccrates, who doth often also prognosticate the approching of diseases, by the blo^ing of these winds, called Etesiae. Now concerning maritime, or winds blowing from the sea, Lib. 2. cap. 1. Maritime, or winds blowing from the sea. Celsus holdeth them to be very hurtfull to the health of man; the which opinion many others have imbraced. And the more they are confirmed in this opinion by Lib. de longitud. and brevit. vitae, cap. 3. Aristotle himselfe, affirming all those creatures which have their being and living in this watry element, to be of a shorter continuance, than those that live upon the land: but this opinion is againe contradicted, by Hicronym. Rubeus in Comment. in praedict. Celsi locum. others, his owne expositor being of another minde; for the sea being warme in winter, and cold in summer, yet alwaies temperate, yea, even in the opinion of the Philosopher himselfe, it must of necessity follow, that the wind which bloweth that way, Galen 1. de semine. Commendation of winds blowing from the sea. and often also hath from thence its originall, doth partake of the like qualities: Now, these qualities being temperately hot and moist, of all other are the fittest to maintaine in perfect health the body of man. And hence commeth it to passe, that Gal. in aph. 14. l. 3. Galen affirmeth, that the maritime parts of Thracia (in it selfe a cold country) are much warmer than the more inward parts of the land: and on the other side, againe, the maritime parts of Libya, and Egypt in Sommer, are farre cooler than places more remote from thence: Lib. de tuenda. valetud. Plutarch seemeth likewise to favour this opinion, who affirmeth, that it is not necessary to prescribe any remedies for the preservation of the teeth of such as dwell neere the sea; and that in regard of the dry quality of that aire and wind, strengthening and corroborating their heads. Againe, that the sea-aire is hot, appeareth in that Lib. 2. cap. 106. Pliny writeth that no snow falleth in the maine Ocean: but, what may then be the reason, that in may places of Italy the sea aire is so bad? Idem Rubeus loco nuper citat.Why the sea aire in Italy is so bad. The reason many be, in the first place, because, perhaps, this wind bloweth sometimes too violently, and so in too great abundance drawne in by the inhabitants; or else by reason, that by the sea aire, divers marshes, or stincking standing pooles and ponds; or yet salt water mingled with fresh, or any the like occasion, which causing the water to putrifie, sendeth forth such ill vapours and exhalations, as are altogether hurtfull to the health of man. And by reason this is ordinarie in most places of Italy, hence have we this evill report; and slander raised upon the sea aire and wind: which, notwithstanding, is onely accidentall, being in it selfe most healthfull, and without any hurt at all. Hence is it also, that the 10 Probl. 54. Philosopher affirmeth, that the sea creatures are farre more vigorous, and of a greater stature: and Averroes affirmeth that they are longer lived. As concerning that which was before alleged out of Lib de longitud. and brevit. vitae. Aristotle, seeming to maintaine the contrary opinion, was spoken of creatures living in the water,Venetians are vigorous and long lived. the word Water, taken in a generall sense; but is not meant of the sea in particular. Hence also commeth it to passe, that the Idem Rubeus. ibid. Venetians hemm'd in on every side with the sea, breathing in no aire, which doth not partake of the qualities of their so neere bordering

neighbour, are so lively and vigorous, that many of that republique attaine very nigh the hundred yeere of their age: and this was verified in that noble and renowned Champion, and sea Captaine Andrew Dore, Admirall of the fleet of Charles the fift, Emperor; and who spent in a manner his whole life upon the Sea, as the aforesaid Author averreth.Confirmation of this opinion by experience. And this opinion seemeth yet more probable, in that both the snow which falleth neere the sea-coasts; yea, even in the most Northerne parts of this Iland, both falleth often in a small quantitie, and lieth a shorter while, than in the places further remote from the same: and the corne is also sooner ripe, caeteris paribus, and no other let or rub come in the way: and yet further to confirme this truth, we see most commonly, that seafaring men, seldome need any sauce to provoke their languishing appetites. I have a little the longer insisted of set purpose upon these winds blowing from the sea, by reason of our new colonies, now planted and planting in these remote regions, that they may neither be afraid to settle themselves neere the sea coast, if all other things be answerable: nor yet any such as are there already seated, be by any needlesse future fears discouraged by reason of this aire. And now being arrived into these remote regions, ere we return, a word or two of the nature and property of som of these winds blowing in those far distant contries. Acosta the Iesuit relateth, that upon all the coast of Peru, it bloweth continually with one only wind,Of winds blowing in America, lib. 3. cap. 10. South and Southwest winds blow constantly in Peru. which is South, and South west; contrary to that which doth usually blow under the burning Zone: and being by nature the most violent, tempestuous and unhealthfullest of all other; yet in this region it is marvellous pleasing, healthfull and agreeable: insomuch that we may truly attribute the habitation of that place thereunto. Now,Northern winds noisome to some parts of Peru. the Northerne wind is not usually cold and cleare in Peru, and beyond the line as here. In some parts of Peru, at Lima, and on the plaines, they find the Northern winds troublesome and unwholesome; and all along the coast, which runnes above 300 leagues, they hold the Southerne winds for healthfull and coole, and (which is yet more) most cleare and pleasant: yea, with it it never raines, contrary to that we see in Europe, on this side the line. The Solanus, or Easterly wind is commonly hot and troublesome in Spaine, and in Murtia it is the healthfullest and coolest that is; for that it passeth thorow that large champian,Various qualities of the Eastern wind according to severall countries. and sweet pleasant orchards. In Carthagena, which is not farre from thence, the same wind is troublesome, and unwholesome. The Meridionall is commonly rainie and boisterous; and yet in the same Citie whereof I speake, it is wholesome and pleasant. In a region containing fiftie leagues in circuit (I put it thus for example) the wind which bloweth on the one part, is hot and moist, and that which bloweth on the other, is cold and drie. Lib. 2. cap. 49. And Pliny reports, that in Africke it raines with a Northerly wind, and that the Southerne wind is cleare: And Acosta tells us yet more, that there is a certaine wind of such a Idem. Acosta ibid^ quality, that when it bloweth in some countrie, it causeth it to raine fleas, and that in so great abundance, that they trouble and darken the aire, and cover all the sea-shore; and in other places it raineth frogs. There are winds which naturally trouble the sea, and make the water thereof looke greene and blacke; others make it looke as cleare as chrystall; some comfort and make glad, others trouble and breed heavinesse. Such as nourish silke-wormes, have great care to shut their windowes when as the South-westwinds doe blow, and to open them to that opposite to it, having found by certaine experience, that

their wormes die and languish with the one, fatten, and become better-like by the other. The same Idem ibid. cap. 9. Authour reporteth, that in some parts of the Indies, he hath seene grates of yron rusted and consumed, that passing it betwixt your fingers, it dissolved into powder, as if it had beene hay, or parched straw; the which onely proceeded from the wind corrupting it, and it having no power to withstand the same. But before we conclude this chapter, we must take notice, that See Purchas his pilgrimage, lib 4 cap. 12. ex Linch^t. l. 2. without the Tropicks from the twentie seventh to the thirtie seventh degrees, the winds are said to be for the most part Easterly (as some thinke) by a repercussion of the aire: even as we see waters being incountred with more force, returne with an eddie, in a manner, backe. This which is said of the Easterly wind, is to be understood of the sea: for, at the land, though winds be, as hath beene said, certaine, and set; yet, that which is the generall wind of one countrie, is not generall to all: yea, in the same countrie they have a set wind for the day, and another quite contrary bloweth for the night: also neere the coast, they are more subiect to calmes in this burning Zone, than further off in the sea; the grosse vapours which arise out of the earth, and the divers situation thereof, being the cause of these differences. Many other strange effects of winds may in these Authors be seene, which here I willingly passe by; having dwelt somewhat the longer upon this point, to acquaint such as shall travell into this new world, with the condition of the aire and winds of those remote regions.


CHAP. VI.

Of the foure Seasons of the yeere, and how they affect the body.

GOD of his infinit goodnesse to man-kinde, after that great and terrible deluge and inundation of the universall world, Genes. 8.22. made man a promise, that from thenceforward should not faile the severall seasons of the yeere; Sommer and Winter, Seed-time and Harvest; which hath hitherto accordingly come to passe. Now these seasons, according to severall climats and countries doe much vary and differ: Vnder the Line, and betwixt the Tropickes, they continue more constant, and lesse deviation from their ordinary course is to be observed. Without the Tropicks there is a greater difference and irregularity therein to be observed: Now these seasons therefore, according to their unconstant course, must needs diversly affect the body of this Microcosme, man, both in sicknesse and in health; and therefore will not be impertinent to say something of this subject. Wee will threfore begin with the naturall temperature of the seasons of the yeere,The naturall seasons of the yeere. as they are commonly seene and observed with us here in Europe. The naturall temperature of the Spring then with us here in Europe ought to be hot and moist; of the Sommer hot and drie; of the Autumne, or Harvest, cold and moist; of Winter cold and drie: These

among innumerable others, are the chiefe alterations incident to our aire, and by the which the seasons of the yeere are with us ordinarily divided and distinguished; and these seasons are occasioned by meanes of the exaltation, or declining of that glorious prince of Planets. Now, the further these seasons decline fro^ the afore-mentioned qualities, the more intemperate and greater enemies to the health of mankind they prove. Our Pracipue vero maxime anni temporum mutationes observandae sunt, ut neque medicamentum purgans lubenter exbibeau^us, neque partes circa ventrem uramus, aut secemus, antedies decem, aut etiam plures. Maxime tamen sufficient decem, ac maximi periculi plena sunt ambo aequinoctia, maxime vero autumnale. Periculosissima etiam sunt ambo Solstitia, praecip^eque aestivum. Syderum quoque ortus observandi, praecipueque caniculae, deinde arcturi, and vergiliarum occasus. His enim potissimu^ diebus morbi indicationem subeunt, and alii quidem perimunt, alii vero desinunt, aliique omnes in aliam formam and statum transeunt. Lib de acre, aquis and locis. Hipporcrates defines not these seasons after this manner; but according to the rising and setting of certaine starres; and the chiefe times by him observed, are these following: the two Solstices, the one in Sommer, about the eleventh of Iune, the other in Winter, about the eleventh of December: then next the two Aequinoxes; the one about the eleventh of March, the other about the eleventh of September. These times, because of dangers about these seasons, this old Father would have us to observe. The So^mer Solstice he accounteth most dangerous; and the Harvest Aequinox. The same Authour, againe, observeth the rising and setting of certaine starres; as namely of the Pleiades, Vergiliae, rising the five and twentieth of April, and setting about the first of November: and againe, the rising of Arcturus, about the one and thirtieth of August, and setting about the beginning of March. Besides, this same Authour observeth also the rising of the Dog-starre the ninteenth of Iuly, and setting againe the twenty seventh of August; and with these also he observeth the blowing of the West-wind: And this is all the Hippocraticall spheare, comprehending such starres and seasons as he thought fit for Physitians to observe. But now, againe, as concerning the temper of these seasons, whereas I say the Spring is hot and moist, it may be objected, that in it selfe it is rather temperate. To this I answer, that howsoever it be so accounted, yet in comparison of the other seasons, it may be called temperate. And againe, it may be called temperate, as some say, effective, by producing the best temper. It may againe be demanded, if heat and drouth be proper qualities befitting Sommer, and cold and drouth approptiated for Winter;Question co^cerning the temperature of the seasons, with the answer. whether the hottest Sommer be not the healthfullest? as likewise the coldest Winter? To this I answer, they are not so, simply and absolutely considered: Nam omne nimium vertitur in vitium. The extreme hot Sommer inflames the humours of the body, making it subject to hot and acute diseases: and the extreme pinching cold, accompanied especially with sharpe piercing Northerly winds, disposeth the body to rheumes, and rheumatecke diseases; as likewise to Apoplexies,The humours in the body of man, answer the foure seasons of the yeere, and the parts of our civil day. and many other such like dangerous infirmities. The humours in the body of man have pre-eminence and dominion according to these foure seasons: for in the Spring, blood most abounds; in the Sommer, choler; in the Harvest melancholy; and in Winter, phlegme: and the parts of our civill day, answer likewise to these seasons; the morning to the Spring, the noonetide to Sommer, the afternoone to autumne, and the night to Winter. Now, these anniversarie, or yeerely seasons,Seasons of the yeere differ acording to climats and countries. doe much differ according to the climat: For, within the Tropicks the seasons are much warmer than without; and under the Equinoctiall Line, then Winter is, when the Sorrow is perpendicular over their heads; by reason that then it doth more powerfully attract and draw unto it selfe divers

moist exhalations, which descending againe in great abundance upon the face of the earth, doth plentifully refresh and water the same; and this season they therefore call their Winter. But againe, when the Sun declineth a little, the beames not darting downe so perpendicularly as before, there not being now that forcible attraction of vapours; and by consequent, as fewer clouds, and lesse raine, so heat to the outward appearance, being then intended, and of greater force than before: and this time they call their Sommer, as being fairer and warmer than the former, quite contrary to that which befalleth us here without the Tropickes; as in particular may be observed in the country of Chili in the West Indies.Situation of places altereth the seasons: See Acost. in places alleged in the former chapter. Now the situation of places (as hath before beene mentioned) often altereth the nature of this ambient aire, and by consequent, altereth the seasons in those particular places, although the elevation of the Pole differ little or nothing: the which is evidently seen in Peru, whereas the whole breadth of the countrie not much exceeding forty leagues, in the plaine, it neither snowes, raines, nor thunders; and in the meane time, upon the Sierra, or hils, the seasons have their courses as in Europe, where it raines from the moneth of September, untill April, and in the Andes it raines in a manner, all Winter. And even here in Europe, no small difference may thus be observed, that oftentimes, the high hills are infested with terrible cold tempests, when as the adjacent vallies goe many times scotfree, as travellers can testifie. And of this,Historie of the difference of the season in the hills and vallies. my selfe was once an eye-witnesse, when as in the yeere 1610, travelling from Misnia towards Prague, and passing over the high hills which encompasse Bohemia round about; on Easter eve at night (falling then about the midst of April) as likewise all Easter day, and the three next daies after, it snew continually without any intermission, accompanied with so nipping a frost and North-Easterly wind, that I have seldome at any time observed a sharper season: the next day after, the snow fell no more, and comming downe into the plaine of Bohemia, about halfe a daies iourney from S. Annaberg, where I rested these foure daies, I found neither frost nor snow, nor any signe of the same; but both corne and grasse as greene and forward, as had ever beene observed about that season, together with a fine warme temperate aire: and inquiring there of the weather past, they assured me that they had seen neither frost nor snow, onely that morning had falne a small showre of warme raine, which was scarcely to be discerned upon the ground. But it is yet stranger, that within a few miles of ground, one place not exceeding another in height, should be Sommer in one, and Winter in the other, as appeareth by that which followeth: See Purchas his pilgrimage lib. 4. cap. 16. At the same time, when in the West part of this Peninsula (being neere Cambaia) betweene that ridge of mountaines and the sea, it is after their appellation Sommer, which is from September to April, in which time it is alwaies cleare sky, without once or very little raining: on the other side of the hills, which they call the coast of Choromandell, it is then Winter, every day and night yeelding abundance of raines; besides those terrible thunders, which both beginne and end their Winter: and from April till September, in a conntrarie vicissitude, on the Westerne part is winter, and on the Easterne part Sommer; insomuch that in little more than 20 leagues iourny insome places (as when you crosse the hill to S. Thomas on the one side of the hill you ascend with a faire Sommer; on the other side you descend with a stormy Winter. The like, saith Linschoten, happeneth at the

Cape Rosalgate, in Arabia, and in many other places of the East. But it is as great, if not a greater wonder, that in some places of the same elevation of the Pole, even upon the low levell ground, there should be such a disparity in the qualities of the ambient aire; as it is reported of the straits of Magellan. Idem lib. 6. cap. 14. In and about the straits of Magellan (saith a late Writer) (in as high an elevation of the Pole, as many parts of Spaine) the cold is yet there so violent, that besides the mountaine tops alwaies covered with snow, their very Sommer, in the midst thereof, freeth them not from yee. Yea, at that time of the yeere the Hollanders encountred an Iland of yee in the Sea. The trees yet there are generally greene all the yeere long. The cold is so extreme, that Henry Barwell became balld therewith, so continuing a yeere or two. One Harris a Gold-smith, blowing his frozen nose, cast it with his fingers into the fire; and our Authour himselfe going on shore, And returning wet in his feet, the next morning pulled off his toes with his stackings, from his benummed feet. Those countries wherein the aire is so continually warme, as within the Tropicks, and neere to them, prove not commonly so healthfull, especially to our Northerne constitutions; whose lives are better preserved in a Northern aire,Observations for undertakers of plantations. than any of those hot regions, which is diligently to be observed of those who undertake to transport colonies into remote regions, that they settle not themselves in too hot a climat. Now, that the distempered qualities of the aire are a meanes of producing divers diseases, appeareth by many places of that famous Hippocrates his works, where hee setteth downe divers distempered constitutions of the aire, whereupon ensued divers dangerous diseases, both pestilentiall and others. And among our selves the instances, I thinke, are fresh enough yet in our memories, of this last yeere, 1630. which deprived many of life, and many so pinch'd with poverty, that the wound is not yet healed up. It is then apparent that the severall seasons of the yeere, together with the alterations and changes thereof doe not a little affect both the body and minde of man; and therefore diligently and carefuly of Physitians to be considered.


CHAP. VII.

Of Water in generall: of Terrestriall VVater, or water passing thorow, or issuing out of the Earth; as Springs, Rivers, Wells and Ponds.

IT is now more then time that we come to this so noble and necessary element of Water, which can never sufficiently be commended. And in so high an account was it among the Antients, that Thales Milesius,The high esteeme the Antients had of water. one of the seven Wise-men of Greece, thought it to be the originall of all things, quasi aqua omnia, from whence all things have their first being and beginning; and this was also the opinion of the Greeke Poet Hesiod. But in briefe, both the antiquity and utility doe highly recommend it unto us. The Antiquity,Antiquity. as being that prime and principall liquour where with

our forefathers untill the time of Noah after the flood, yea, and even after the flood,Vtility. continued still to bee in greatest request. The utility appeareth in this, that it is the most common and naturall drinke to all living creatures; and withall the most familiar, and easiest to come by: and hence by the goodnesse of our God, have we this Element obvious every where, as well in the highest hills as in the lowest vallies. And that great Quoniam aqua alterum est ex duobus elementis quibus constat bominum vita, altera vitae parte Aegyptios spolians, optimo compendio usus est ad humiliandam eorum ferociam, nisi prorsus fuissent intractabiles. Calvin. comment cap. 7. Exo. vers. 19. Calvin saith, that God deprive the Aegyptians of the one halfe of their life, when as hee inflicted upon them that great plague of turning their water into blood. The utility and necessity of this noble Element was not unknown to Gen. 26.15, 16, 17. etc Isaac and Abimelec, which made their herd-men so strive for these fountaines of living water: and did yet more manifestly appeare in 1 King. 17.1. that more than triennal disastrous drought in Ahabs daies. And some late writers relate, that the like In one place Westward from Florida and Virginia it had not rained for the space of three yeeres; and therefore was there great scant of food there. Purchas lib. 8. cap. 7.In Mexico in former times had bin a drought of 4. yeeres continuance, which forc'd the inhabitants to forsake the country, Idem ibid. cap. 13. hapned of late yeeres in some parts of the West-Indies. And is yet more cleerely in this seene, in that it is the Basis, or foundation of all other liquors whatsoever; and giving, as it were, the essence even unto that king of liquors, Wine it selfe; as without the which, neither it, nor yet any other ever attaine to any perfection. Being therefore so usefull both for drinke, dressing of meate, and many other necessary uses, it will be requisite to say something of it: And first for the temperature, both Physitians and Philosophers have reputed water to be of a cooling quality. And Aristotle himselfe is of this opinion; and as for moisture, Galen holdeth, that it is an absurd thing to hold that any thing is moister than this Element. It is then generally held, that Water is very cold and very moist; And yet Lib. de Aqua. Division of water. Cardan thinkes it not to be cold, as it is commonly accounted, but rather temperate, and exclaimeth against his teachers who instructed him in that maner, which (saith he) hath done me great mischiefe.Temperature of water. And in very truth, it would seeme in its owne naturall condition not to be so very cold, howsoever actually, as many other liquors, it may partake of an intense frigidity. All water is either potable and usefull for ordinary emploiments; or else Physicall, and appropriated to divers diseases; or lastly venomous,Properties of the best waters. and altogether unprofitable for the use either of man or beast. My purpose is in this place to speake of such waters as be beneficiall for the life of all living Creatures. In the first place then, let us examine the qualities of the best water. Jmprimis itaque illa aqua ad potandum optima censetur, quae clara, pellucida, tenuis, pura, frusti lorum and saporum omnium expers, levisque reperitur: necnon quae igni admota cito califit, remota vero ocyssime frigescit, gustu iucundo: quae denque celeriter praecordia pertransit, and fine ulla ventriculi molestia labitur and secedit. etc Matthiol in lib. 5. Dioscor. cap. 14. de aqua. The goodnesse thereof is principally discerned by the lightnesse and thinnesse; the which, according to Hippocrates, is soone warme and soone cold againe; if it bee free from any smell or taste; if any kind of pulse bee quickly tender that is boyled therein; if put in a silver vessell it cause it no to rust, and leave no slime at bottome. It is also accounted a good signe of wholesome water, if a handfull of sage being throwne therein, it be presently dispersed: if it nourish good fish, and good and wholesome plants grow in it, we thinke well of it: but if it nourish toads, snakes, or other such vermine, it is utterly to be rejected. The weighing of water is not to be trusted to: for a venomous water may be as light, as that which is of a more laudable quality: and besides, one and the same water may be heavy in winter, and light in sommer; as for any other experiments, either by a linnen cloth or round piece of wood, as idle and

impertinent, I passe by, and come to the differences, and severall sorts of water. Water that is in request for the ordinary use,Hippocr. fusius de bi^ omnibus aquu agit. lib. de aere, aquis and locis. Gal. 1. de salut. 26. Aph. lib. 5. Avic. fen. 2. primi doct. 2. cap. 16 and 17. and alii multi, ut Lang. (...) 1. Epist. ^4.Division of (...) water.Raine-water. as well of man as beast; (as for Physicall waters we referre them to their proper place, and venomous waters we will not meddle with) wee will divide into Celestiall and Terrestriall. Celestiall are either snow or raine-waters. Terrestriall, is either spring or river-water, well-water, or of a pond and standing lake. Raine-water is engendred in the middle region of the aire, of certaine vapors, which the Sunne by his heat in the day-time draweth up. 2 Meteor. cap. 3. Aristotle is of opinion that some hot and dry vapors are therewith mingled, which causeth the saltnesse in the sea. In raine-water againe, we are to observe both the time and the manner of falling. Loco prius citato. Hippocrate^ rejecteth that which falleth in the wintertime, as being heavier and harder than in the Sommer.Best raine-water according to the time of the yeare. The best in his opinion is that which falleth in Sommer, and in the most temperate part of the same: not in the extreme heat of the canicular dayes; it being then farre worse. Rufus apud Oribafi, Columella, Plinius. Some, notwithstanding, hold that the winter and spring raine water are the best, and to be preferred before that which falleth in Sommer and Harvest; and that by reason it is not so soone putrified. But the opinion of Hippocrates is to be preferred, who measureth the water by the lightnesse and thinnesse thereof.What parts of the day are best. Of the parts of the day, that which falleth in the morning is accounted best. The manner of the falling is likewise of some moment;The manner of the falling. whether it fall with force or violence, or mildly and softly; with greater or smaller drops. That which falleth with smaller drops and with violence, Hippocrates esteemeth better than that which falleth more leisurely, and with greater drops: and that which falleth with great stormes of wind, is accounted worst. The substance of raine-water is most subtile and sweet, by reason that the most subtile and thinnest parts are exhaled and drawne up by force of the Sunne-beames. Snow-water is either of snow alone, or of snow mingled with haile or yee;Snow-water nothing worth. or else snow and yee are mingled with other water. Both these sorts are to be rejected, by reason that the thinnest and subtilest parts by congealing doe exhale and vanish away, the thicker and more terrestrious part still remaining behind. Of this a triall may be made by letting some water freeze in the night-time, and the next morning being dissolved by the heat, the quantity shall easily bee discerned to bee diminished. Now what harme insueth by drinking of these snow-waters, is by the testimony of Aph. 24 lib. 5. Hippocrates apparent:Hurt by drinking of snow-water. and such as doe inhabite the Alpes and Pyrenean hills, and Auvergne in France, are sensible of this hurt, being much molested with great throats, whom for this cause their neighbours call Goitreux. Cisterne waters are of a very neare affinity with raine-water; as being nothing else but raine-water conveighed into a cisterne, as a fit and convenient receptacle.Cisterne water. Pliny approves not of raine-waters, because by reason of their standing they putrifie, and ingender noisome creatures, harden the belly, and are hurtfull to the throat. But since raine-water is so usefull and soveraine, I see no reason why cisterne-water should be blamed.Correction of cistern waters. And since of raine-water there be some better and some worse, we must choose the fittest and convenientest time, to wit, that which falleth in the Sommer.

As for the slime and filth which often accompanieth rainewa-ter, being strained thorow gravel and sand, they easily leave al that behind the: as for the feare of putrefaction, it may easily be avoided, by casting in some small fishes,Quaity of cisterne water. which will keepe it in continuall motion. As concerning the quality of such water, it is by some Physitians beleeved, that it bindes; but that which is reserved in the middest of Sommer, rather looseneth then bindeth the belly. And by the same reason, boiled water rather looseneth than bindeth the belly, contrary to the vulgar opinion;A vulgar error. and that by reason that being boiled, it is more easily againe expelled out of the body.
Consideration of springs and spring-water.Best Springs.Laso prius citat^ de Aere, ^quis, etc.Now, as for terrestriall waters, among then, Fountaines or Springs challenge vnto themselves the prerogative of the first place above any others. In fountaines or springs, wee are to consider three things: their originall,Obiection. situation, and places through which they passe. The best springs,Answere. in the judgement of Hippocrates, are such as spring out of high places and earthy hills.In the situation of springs what to bee considered.The soile or place from whence they spring.Situation in regard of the Heavens.The ground or soile thorow which they runne.The manner of running.Whether water carried thorow pipes of lead may bee safely used. Such as spring out of rockes he mis-liketh, as also such as runne neere any hot bath, or thorow mineralls. It may be objected, that springs issuing out of rockes, are by some of the antients accounted wholesomest and best. It may bee, Hippocrates, in regard of their excessive cold, and that they are not so passible thorow the body, rejected them. In the situation of springs, wee are to consider the soile where it is seated, and next the aspect of the Heaven. As for the soile, the best spring out of high hilly places; but worse that spring out of champian and plaine grounds: for such water in Winter is hot, and in Sommer cold. In regard of the Heaven, such are commended that runne towards the Sunne rising, and have their aspect that way. Such as runne towards the West or other parts, etc: are not of that high esteeme, although not unwholesome to drinke. Now the ground through which waters runne is not to bee neglected: The best ground is a good firme clay, unto the which the filth and corruption of the water sticketh fast. Againe, it must runne a swift course; by which meanes it is freed from all smell and putrefaction. But heere ariseth a question, whether water carried through pipes, especially of lead, may safely be used. The reason may bee both in regard of Aqua quae per plumheas solenas deducitur fugienda est, sordes namque et limus plumbi ^i^ adharent, ob id qui illius subsi^entiam bibunt dyfenterci fiunt. Gal. lib. 7. de medicam. loco affect. appropr. Verum est ae omni metallo quod propter sulphuream substantiam oliquid habeat accuitatis; quamvis in flanno and plumbo saper id minime indicat: probatur tamen per illud, quod aqua quaedam currit vel stat in fistulis plumbei^, aut stanneis, efficitur in testinorum sive viscerum exceriatio Albe^t. Magn lib 3. de. metal. tract. 2. cap. 4 Aqua per plumbum ducta ideo videtur vi^iosa, quod ex cerusa fit and nascitur.Vit. lib. 8. Pallad. lib. 9 cap. 11 etc. Galen and others, antient Authors and famous in their generations: Now besides the closenesse of the passage thorow which it is conveyed, they alleadge another inconvenient; that by this passage the water draweth ceruse from the lead; and these drossie dregges thus drawne from this ceruse, say they, engender the bloody flixe. I answere, that daily experience evinceth this to bee most false and erroneous, as may bee seene in the Citie of Paris, where such water is in most common and frequent request. And if they bee sometimes subject thereunto, it is rather to bee imputed to the slimy river of Seine, than to these leaden pipes, as their owne Physitians confesse. Againe, in Montpeliers the water is brought into the Towne by meanes of such leaden pipes, and yet are they no wayes obnoxious to this disease, and this is likewise the case of many other

cities of that great and populous kingdome of France, who are notwithstanding as free as the former.Indeque Lang. Epist medicin. loco nuper citat. Confutation of this opinion. But that wee may come neerer home, what shall wee say to the noble City of London, whither that river of Ware is conveied, and by these leaden pipes distributed thorow that great body; and yet it is well knowne that this is not a disease that much troubleth ordinarily this great and populous City. And this Towne of Northampton maketh likewise use of these leaden pipes; and yet the inhabitants are but seldome troubled with this disease: and no doubt, many like instances may be produced to prove this truth. Againe, ceruse, which Vitru vius and others so much feare, cannot be extracted out of lead, except it be first steeped in strong vineger. If any can object any thing else against such water, the fire will make amends.
River-water partaketh of the same nature with Spring-water,River-water. from whence it hath its originall and beginning, yet commeth short of the former, in regard of the slime and filth they carry with them; as also in regard of the diversity of the natures of the springs whereof they are composed; and therefore Avicenne commendeth rather the water of small Brookes, than of great Rivers; as likewise,What river-water is best. the further they runne from their springs, the better he liketh them; by reason the further they runne, the more subtile and thinner they are: howbeit, Averroes his country-man is of another mind, by reason that the further it runneth, the more filth and corruption it gaineth. Such therefore as abound in mudde and slime are the worst to be liked.
Waters of Lakes being alwaies renewed by their springs,Waters of Lakes and Ponds. and tossed to and fro with the wind, are not to be rejected. Well-water being often drawne, standing in a free and open aire,Well-water. with a large mouth, may also be of good use: but that which is otherwise, declineth from this bonitie,Pump-water. and therefore pumpe-water is not so good as open Well-water is.
Standing pond-water of all other is the worst,Pond-water worst of all others. and very prejudiciall to health. Salt-water is not of ordinary use, either to drinke or dresse meat with; and this shall now suffice to have said of Waters in generall, as they are serviceable for the use of mankinde; reserving a more particular discourse of water, untill wee come to speake of drinke. As for the other two necessary and usefull elements, wee deferre speaking of them, untill wee come to the diet of the diseased. But before we proceed to speake of elements assumed within the body, wee purpose to discusse two questions: and first,



CHAP. VIIJ.

Whether any pure Element be able to nourish a mixt body, and whether any such compound bee able to live by the sole use of the same.

BVt before we enter upon the discussing of this question, it shall not be amisse to know what Aliment or nourishment is. It is by Quicquid substantiam nostri corporis auget and conservat, vel ut alii; Alimentum est quod vitales vires custodire natum existit, per refectionem triplicis substantiae, spirituosae, humidae and carnosae; quae in nobis quotidie perit, and vires imminuit. Mercatus tom. 1 lib. 2. quaest. 164. class. 2. Galen defined to be whatsoever increaseth or multiplieth the substance of our body, and conserveth the same. Now the substance of our bodie (as hath bin said) is threefold; solid, humid, and spirituous, or airy; from whence the differences of aliments are desumed. The solid parts are repaired by food; the humid by drinke; and the airie or spirits, by sweet and comfortable smells. Now that any thing cary the name of aliment or nourishment, it ought to be indued with these qualities following. In the first place it ought to be of quality hot and moist; that it may the better repaire the decay of our naturall innate heat. It is againe requisite that it affect our taste with a good rellish;Properties required in nourishment. Quod sapit, nutrit. for what pleaseth the palat in taste, often nourisheth well. Now that which doth most affect the taste, and is agreeable to nature, is in taste sweet (I meane not in excesse, as to feed on sugar and sweet meates continually, which being much used are more hurtfull than helpefull to health; but in a meane, not declining to any other; as sharpe, sowre, etc.) and so is most acceptable to nature; all other being rather Physicall than Alimentall, as I may say. And howsoever meat may in the taste be somwhat salt, bitter, etc: yet in the concoction there is made a sequestration of these qualities from the substance of the food, and that onely which is sweet remaineth for nourishment. Lib. de carnibus. Hippocrates writeth, that all manner of creatures are nourished onely with sweet things, which 2. Meteor. cap. 2. Aristotle also repeateth. Againe, that which nourisheth, ought to be mixed and compounded, and therefore pure elements are here excluded; according to that vulgar saying, Ex quibus constamus jisdem nutrimur. And lastly, it is required that there be a power of giving life; Potentia vitae and animationis: And such things onely nourish which once have lived, saith Lib. 2 de caus. plant. Theophrastus. And there is an easier passage and change of such things as have a communication, or symbolize in symbol or quality. And for this cause, the juyce which commeth of living creatures is farre easilier changed into our substance, than that which is desumed from plants: Now to the question. Although then it hath bin hitherto received for an uncontrolled truth, that no simple Element can nourish a mixt body; yet som things seem to crosse this opinion, and there is a common proverbial verse tending to this purpose. Quatuor ex purit vitamducunt elementis Chameleon, talpa, maris halec, and Salamandra. Halec unda fovet, etc. Quatnor ex etc. Now to discusse the truth of this

question, we will briefly runne thorow the foure elements: and first of the fire. It is reported by antient Arist. lib 5. de nat. animal cap 19. and Pliny lib. ^0. cap. 67. and li. 13. cap. 30. Theoph. lib de igne, etc. Authors, that a certaine worme, or flie, called therefore Pyrausta, is both bred, and liveth in the fire, which is notwithstanding, most absurd and false, and as concerning the vulgar conceit of the Serpent Salamandra, living in the fire, and with his cold frozen venomous moisture, extinguishing the firie flames, it is as false as the former, as witnesseth Lib. 2. cap. 56. Dioscoride: and the Salmandra continuing any space in the fire, is notwithstanding consumed to dust and ashes. Now come we to ^^e aire the next element: It is the opinion of some, that such as live altogether without any solid substance of food, may be fed with the aire. Indeed, if people were so contented, corne would be the cheaper, and people then would not be so destitute of food in a deare yeere, as was this last, 1630. Some relate strange things tending to this purpose, as namely A man living only upon the Sunne and aire: Olimpioderus, Citante Riolano ficio in praelect. of a man living only upon the Sun and aire; Fides sit penes Authorem: I never yet could see any such good husbands. Lib. 7. cap. 2.Men without mouths Pliny maketh mention of a certaine man, living without any thing else, save the attraction of the aire, being destitute of any mouth; and for this cause called Astomi. And the inhabitants of the new world, they say, will live 16 or 18 daies with the smoake of Tabacco only. Our Tabacconists here in England, are commonly as briefe with the pot as the pipe; and besides, many say, it procures them an appetite. And thus Tabacco, like aurum potabile, or that noble Elixir, is able to doe any thing. Athen. lib. 2. Diog. Laertius in eius vita. Democritus, wee read, being ready to give up the ghost, for a certaine time susteined his life with the only smell of hony, to the end he might be partaker of the Thesmophorian solemnity; and that not only the spirits, but even the solid parts also are fed by meats, Plinies Astomes (if it be true) confirme unto us, and Jn Epistolis.The Chameleon, Rhin. tax, Manu^odiata, avis Paradisi. Manardus seems to second it. The Chameleon also said to feed upon the aire only: and there is a certaine bird in the Indies call'd Rhintax, Manucodiata, or avis Paradisi, which being deprived of feet, is said to flie in the aire continually, and feed on the same only. But to answer the former objections; in the first place it is one thing to speake of the aire, as a simple Element, and another thing to speak of smels. Lib. de sensu, and sensib. Aristotle against the Pythagoreans tells us that neither the aire nor the water can nourish, by reason of the simplicity of their elementary bodies. As concerning Plinies Astomes they are meere fictions and fancies, never any such people having bin discovered by any traveller whatsoever;Confutation of these former assertions. no more than many other monstrous and prodigious narrations, by too credulous antiquity received for uncontrolled truthes;Many lies left us by antiquity and travellers. and so for legacies left to posterity, which here to confute would spend me more time than I can now well spare. As for the Chameleon, it hath bin observed to catch flies, which sticking to its slimie tongue,Chameleon liveth not on the aire. it did afterwards feed upon. As for that Manucodiata, it hath bin hitherto constantly and confidently beleeved, that it lived alwayes balanced in the aire,Nor the bird of Paradise. living upon no other nourishment, but the aire onely; howbeit now in our late navigations, it hath bin observed to feed upon cloves: and moreover,Notable imposture. that the inhabitants so artificially cut off their feet, that no print or marke of them can ever be discerned. Now as I deny that any creature can live upon the aire only; so againe, I will not deny, but by good and pleasant smells, the exhaust and spent spirits, may againe be repaired, a

smell being nothing else, save a certaine vaporous exhalation, or corporeall effluxe,Whether the bare element of earth can nourish or no. or sliding out. But that the solid substance of the earth should nourish, would seeme to savour more of truth, in that God himselfe seemeth to give the earth to the Serpent for food: and it is reported, that the Mole liveth on the earth only. Besides, we see many women with child troubled with the disease Pica, to eat earth, coals, chalk, etc. And we see birds to swallow peeble-stones, the Ostrich to eat iron. But to answer these instances,Answer. the Serpents and Moles live not on the simple element of earth, which with us being (...) farre from the center is mixed, and not a simple element; and therefore maketh nothing for the purpose. It is true also, that women often make use of such trash as wee have mentioned; but that they have no great cause to brag of this food, by their ill-favored colour, and the evill accidents accompanying them, may easily appeare: the which doth argue the evill nourishment that such food doth affoord: Besides, they feed not onely on this food; and it may be now and then they will afford themselves a cup of good liquour, as a lavative, to wash downe this rubbish. As for fowle, which either devoured peeble-stones or metalls, they deliver them back againe such as they received them, their appetites being to such things as for physick, rather than food; and therefore it is but an idle tale Paracelsus telleth us, of one that lived fifteen daies only with a turse applied to his stomack. 3 De temporum. Galen mocks and scoffes at them, who thinke that one might sustaine life with wine applied outwardly; since whatsoever nourisheth must first be attracted by, and concocted in the instruments of concoction. It is therefore a mere dotage of our Paracelsists, that tell us that metalls will nourish our bodies. Let some of these gallants, I pray you, be fed but for a weeke, or lesse, with their best aurum potabile, lapis Philosophicus, or what else you can devise, and I warrant you at, or e'r the weeks end, if he be alive, he will snatch at a crust of browne bread. Now, concerning water, there is no lesse controversie amongst our Authours, and seemeth to be back'd with better reasons. Homer thought it nourished by his epithete (...).The Iewes in their solemne feasts absteine from water, as did the Egyptians of old. The Iewes at this day, in their solemne feasts, abstaine from water, being of the minde of the old Egyptians, who thought the river Nilus nourished, because Moses turned the water thereof into blood. Lib. de Anima. Albertus Magnus reporteth, that he saw a melancholicke person, who lived not only many moneths, but yeeres also with the only use of this element. Comment. in lib Hippoc. de aere, aquis and locis. Cardan mainteineth this opinon, and seemeth by many reasons to corroborate the same. Comen. Aph. 13 lib. 4. and cap. 7. lib 4. de usu part. Galen notwithstanding, is of a far other mind, and proveth that water nourisheth not at all. And 4 Meteor. Aristotle is also of the same minde, who tells us, that water cannot at all thicken, and therefore cannot nourish. To decide the controversie, true it is, that pure elementary water cannot at all nourish, which neverthelesse thicke muddy and slimy water may sometimes effect, and so some fishes may live on the same; and yet it is well knowne, that many fishes either prey upon others, or live upon herbs and weeds; howsoever, they live not on mere and simple water; I conclude therefore this point, that pure elements, as they are in their owne sphere, especially neer the center, do not nourish; but the elements that are next unto us, being mixed and confused, may in some sort nourish.



CHAP. IX.

Whether mans life may be susteined without the use of food or no.

THis may, perhaps, to some seeme but a needlesse and superfluous question, and that I might herein have spared my paines. It is true, the matter may seem somewhat strange, and many will be of opinion, I doubt not, that never was there any man so foolish, as to mainteine any such erronious and false opinions. But because this hath not been mainteined by vulgar wits only, but men of transcendent understandings, and eminent parts, both Physitians and others, have not only left us multiplicity of instances in this kind, but even affirmed, and stiffely mainteined the possibility and probability of the same; therefore, for the readers recreation and satisfaction, before I proceed to the use of aliments,How long one may live without food. I wil say something concerning this question. Lib. de carnibus* Hippocrates circumscribeth the full period of a mans continuance without food within the compasse of seven daies. If any man (saith hee) for the space of seven daies neither eateth nor drinketh, he must die in that space: and although some do exceed this period, yet when they would returne to their food, their belly receiveth it not: for in this space of time, the iejunum, or hungrie gut is so dried up, and clunged together, that they die speedily. But Lib. 11. cap. 54. Pliny seemeth to controll this truth, affirming divers to have continued above eleven daies without food, or any kinde of sustenance whatsoever. Lib. 3. observat medicin. cap. de asili^, Schenckins telateth many strange stories, of such as have lived not onely daies and moneths, but even divers yeeres without any manner of nourishment: as namely, of one who lived at Rome the space of forty yeeres, without any sustenance whatsoever, and that by the testimony of Hermolaus Barbarus. The same Consili^ adversus famem. Author relateth out of Sylvius, the story of a young maid in Spaine, who lived two and twenty yeeres without taking any thing at the mouth, but a little faire water. And againe, of a German woman, who lived without food for the space of three yeeres, out of Ioannes Bocacius. And againe, of another whom Rondeletius saw, who had lived ten whole yeeres after the same manner; besides many others more. But amongst the rest, Idem Schenck. ex Bartholomaei Anull ficta poest circa finem. he relateth a pretty story of a fellow about sixty yeeres of age, who having digged a Well about forty foot deepe, the earth falling in upon him, thrust this good fellow thirty foot deepe, and so filled up almost all the hollow againe; the fellow, as he fell, held up with his armes as well as he could,History of a fellow living seven daie^ under the earth upon his owne urine only. some part of the scaffold, which bare the earth so off his body, that it gave accesse to some aire whereby he might breathe: and in this case he continued for the space of seven daies; when as they thinking to digge up the dead corps to bury, they heard some noise, wherewith at first affrighted, yet afterwards encouraged with some hope of life, they made haste, and after a draught of Wine, would neither suffer himselfe to be tied, nor use any other helpe but his owne to ascend out of that deepe dungeon.

At length being now ascended de profundis, he confessed that hee lived all that while without any sleepe, or any sustenance, saving his owne urine, distilled and redistilled in the alembicke of his owne bladder: adding, with all, this iest, shewing his purse; told his companions hee had met with a kinde Host, who had interteined him these seven daies, and as many nights, without one penny expences. More such stories, if thou be disposed, thou maist see there, and Vide Marcellum Donatum de historia medic. admirab. Claudum Deodatu^ Panth. Hygiast. lib. 1. cap. 20. Lang Epist medic. li. 2. Epist. 27. aliosque. else-where; as of the Maid of Spire, of Berne, etc. who were said to have lived divers yeeres without any food. Whether these relations be true or no, let the Authors answer for them. Now, what should be the cause of so strange and prodigious fasting? Now sure, if any such fasting be indeed, yet is it hard to find out the cause and reason thereof, although, as yet, the case is controverted. Some would ascribe the cause to the influence of certaine starres: yea, and Iulius Firmicus Maternus. lib. 4. Ridiculous reason of this strange abstinence. some have gone so farre, as to explicate unto us what stars doe conduce for the furtherance of this strange abstinence. But were these starres influences of no efficacie and power in antient times before this strange fasting came into the world? and the stars being generall causes, and therefore affecting all equally, what is now become of these influences in these later daies? Surely,Another more plausible. if these starres had any such efficacy or power, now in this last deare yeere 1630, it had beene time to demonstrate the same. But Laurent Ioubert. decad. 1. Parad. 2. some of our Physitians pretend a more plausible reason, desumed from nature it selfe, alleging for a naturall cause hereof, a cold and moist phlegmatick constitution; which, as they affirme (and experience and reason both confirme it) can best beare abstinence; and cold and tough phlegmatick humors abounding in their bodies, together with a debility of naturall heat, doth so benum and stupifie the sense and feeling of the appetite, that the partie is able for a long time to live without any sustenance whatsoever. Vlysses Aldreandus. lib. de exa^g. Some more absurdly faine, that there is some store of stony moisture in the body of man, which touching the guts, turne them presently into a stony hardnesse. Now, that some such stony juice or moisture may be ingendred in the body of man, seemeth to be no fable, by the history of that stony child of Sene; as also by the history of an Hen dying for hunger in an old castle, which was afterward found turned into a hard stony substance. It is true indeed, that of a tough and hard baked phlegme, with the concurse of a strong heat, stones may be ingendred; as wee see buckes made of clay: but that of these humours, so dispersed through the body, the guts should be turned into a hard stony substance, is not recorded by any antient Authour whatsoever. And it is to be observed, that most of these histories are of young women, of a cold phlegmaticke constitution, which humour without heat, and that of some strength, cannot be congealed into so hard a substance. And besides, it is recorded, that many of these parties returned afterwards to their former appetites againe. Now then, as there was a congeling humour within their bodies; so they must of necessity acknowledge a contrary dissolving, or degelating humour, as I may say, and so we shall play the foole in infinitum. Againe, if this opinion were true, the substance of the guts must needs be solid, and so without feeling; and without sense and feeling the inward parts were never able to subsist. The learned Loco supra citat. Ioubert is very confident in defence of this

long abstinence, and would seeme to make his assertion strong by the examples of some creatures, as the Chameleon, which we have already answered; and the Beare supposed to live all Winter without any food; and yet hath beene observed to provide store of apples in Autumne, and carry them to his denne; that I say nothing of others. But if there were yet any such matter,In antient Authour^ no mention made of any such strange abstinences. yet is there a great disproportion betwixt these creatures and man-kinde, the most temperate of all others. And if these miraculous fastings were so frequent in these later times, why read wee not of the like in former ages? In all the old Testament wee read but of two, Moses and Elias; which, howbeit they did neither of them exceed forty daies; yet were they undoubtedly miraculous. And the like may wee say of our blessed Saviours fast in the new Testament. It is also to be observed, that most of these strange abstinences are reported of sickly women; who being once recovered of their former infirmities, returned againe to their appetites. Howsoever, sure I am, we find none here amongst us that are able to indure any such strict abstinence, in sicknesse or in health: and I thinke foure, or five daies abstinence, either from meat or drinke,None can long continue without sustenance. will gravell most men and women; even in sicknesse it selfe; what shall wee then say of healthfull persons? And indeed, if wee consider the matter aright, wee may easily consider, that it is not likely, that any should long live without food; and that by reason of the daily decay of that triple substance, whereof something hath beene said heretofore, and therefore all these former narrations seeme to be but fabulous, and cuningly contrived, and for some private impostorious respects, set abroach. And whoso made any shew of such abstinences, their abstinence was not reall, but fraudulent to circumvent the world. And such was that Aelianus in varia historia. abstinence of Pythagoras, said to have fasted fortie daies; whose wants were, in the darke night, by his disciples secretly supplied. And to conclude this question and chapter, it is worth the observing, what is written, concerning Iovius Pontanus. Notable imposture of a cozning counterfit Hermite. one Antony an Hermite, who counterfeiting extraordinary holinesse of life, made likewise a shew of absolute abstinence from all manner of food: but after certaine daies, this counterfeit hypocrisie was discovered; it being observed that all his candles were made of the pulpous flesh of pullaine, well minced and mingled with cinnamon and sugar; and to conceale this fraud from the eyes of the world, artificially covered over with tallow, after the manner of other candles. But this need not seeme strange among such miracle-mongers, where many other such juggling trickes passe for currant coine, and are by them accounted but piae fraudes; as they please to call them.



CHAP. X.

Of Nourishment, and what therein is to be considered.

IF ever this was true in any age, Flures gula quam gladio periere, More perish by intemperance than by the sword, I thinke it may be found true in those times wherein wee now live. Lib. de legib. Plato esteemed in his time, that Citie intemperate, which mainteined many Physitians; and used alwaies to exhort his followers to sobriety. And both holy Writ and prophane Auhours are very frequent in their precepts of temperance and sobriety; and doe every where much abhorre and detest intemperance in meate and drinke.Intemperance not only hurts our selves, but propagates hereditary diseases to posteritie. And indeed, if we seriously with our selves consider the shortnesse of the life of man, together with the manifold miseries by sickenesse of all sorts, susteined, we may see good reason for us not to be so leavish of our lives: I meane, not to be so cruell, as by intemperance, not only to kill our selves, but even to derive a multitude of loathsome and noisome hereditarie diseases, as legacies to our posterity. But because I meane heereafter to say something of the loathsomnesse and hurt this sinne procureth to intempreate persons,Things to be considered in all manner of nourishment.Substance.Aliments of grosse substance.Of a slender substance. I will not here dwell upon it. In all manner of nourishment, then there are these things to be considered; the substance, quality, quantitie, the time, the preparation and order. In regard of the substance, some food is called grosse, and harder of digestion: as unleavened bread, pie-crust, bacon, beefe, etc. as hereafter shall more particularly appeare. Some, againe, are of a more slender and smaller nourishment; as wheat bread leavened, baked in an oven, then washed in faire water, barley bread, ptisan, rockie fish; and such as are of a soft substance; being especially prepared with vineg^r and opening roots;Of a meane substance. wild birds, young pigeons, etc. The meane, betwixt both, is best for ordinarie food and nourishment; to wit, such food as is neither grosse nor slender; such is good wheat bread, not too cleane drest, well leavened and baked; oatmeale gruell, reare-rosted egges, new milke of a young cow; amongst fish, the Pickerel, Carpe, Turbot; and the flesh of Hens, Capons, Turkies, Pigeons, Veale, Lamb, etc. of all which in their proper places. It is also to be observed by the way,Qualitie of aliments. that such meats are of easiest degestion: As for the quality, they ought to be of a good juice, euchymi; such as are those we mentioned last, and the like, which are also the best for nourishments as on the contrary, those of a bad juice, affoord but a bad nourishment to the body of man: such as are bread made of corrupted corne, of darnel, rie, panick, and millet; as likewise bread baked on ashes, or embers, So^mer fruits, which last not; and whatsoever is quickly corrupted

in the stomack, etc. As for the quantity,Quantity variable according to sundry circumstances. in regard of the variety of countries, complexions, customs, course of life, age, and such other considerable circumstances, it cannot certainly be determined. Old age must not feed so liberally, as lusty yong laboring men: and such as lead a sedentary life: as Schollers, women, etc. must not feed so liberally as husbandmen, sailers, etc. But although wee cannot certainly determine the due quantity of food; yet searching into antiquity, wee may find out the quantity of food ordinarily used, and allotted a man for one day, which will not be unworthy our consideration. In old times, wee read,Allowance of foode for one naturall day in old times. that the ordinary allowance for a mans diet, in one naturall day, was that measure which they called choenix, conteining about a quarter of a peck of our ordinary measure, or forty ounces, according to the computation of Budans lib. 3. de asse. Budaeus. And this quantity of Manna, did God himselfe allow his owne people of Israel in the wildernesse. This quantity was when they were deprived of any other sustenance: for this quantity is to be understood both of bread, flesh, or any other food; all which joyned together, did not commonly exceed, in sober men this aforenamed quantity; howbeit, no question, many sober people did then content themselves with lesse allowance: and the like proportion of drinke is likewise to be understood. Observe also, that all this while the people of Israels ordinare drinke, was nothing else but water; as likewise most other nations used this for their ordinary drinke, except the better sort, at festivall times, and some extraordinary occasions. As for us in these Northerne parts of the world, although all have not wine,Northern people, and living in cold climate are allowed a more liberall use of diet, than such as dwell in hot countries. yet doe wee ordinarily use a drinke answerable to it, which doth not a little nourish, and therefore may we be the more sparing in the quantitie of our food. And yet I doe not deny, but that our Northerne cold climats may be a little freer in the use of food, than the inhabitants of the Southerne parts and hotter countries, howsoever, it is alwaies good to use a moderation. Husband-men, and such as labour hard, have able bodies, and take great paines; we cannot well regulate nor accommodate this proportion precisely to all; Schollers, and such as have weak stomacks, and weake digestion, not being often able to overcome this quantity. Besides, that the quality of the aliment, of hard or easie digestion, doth often indicate an alteration of the quantity; and yet I thinke few of our people, although reasonable aged, and otherwise valetudinary, will content themselves with twelve, thirteene, or fourteene ounces of food for one day, unlesse their stomacks be exceeding weake; although Father See Sir William Vaughan his newlander cure, part. 1. sect. 2. Lessius the Iesuit, and Lodovico Corvario a Venetian could so content themselves. Custome, education, and out cold climats, doe hinder the effecting of that which otherwise in hotter countries may easily be brought to passe. Next followes the preparation, which is very various,Preparation various. according to the diversity of dishes; some being rosted, some boiled, some baked, some fried, etc. and some requiring one preparation, another must be ordered after another manner; whereof more hereafter in the particular discourse of diet. The order of ingestion is that which is next to be considered, concerning which point,Order of ingestion. our Authours speake at length, and wish us alwaies to take with us this rule of direction, that the lightest meat, and easiest of digestion ought first to be eaten, quite

contrary to our ordinary and usuall custome; and that both in regard, say they, the bottome of the stomacke is warmer than the upper part, and because the lightest meates being first eaten, sooner descend into the guts after concoction, which if last eaten, are by the other hindred to descend, and so putrifie, and ingender crudities, the originall of obstructions, and consequently of many dangerous diseases: as for mine owne opinion, I thinke the stomacke mingles all confusedly together, making thereof, that which Physitians commonly call chylus, and afterward converted into blood. To prevent, therefore, all disorder, doubts, danger, and feare, were best to eat but of one or two dishes at most at a meale; and if thou shouldst sometimes take unto thy selfe a greater liberty, keep this caution, that the dishes thou eatst of differ not much in quality, being all easie of digestion. And for the quantity, let the strength of thy concoction be alwaies thy best guide, and keepe rather within, than at any time exceed the strength of thy stomacke. Next followes to handle the time, upon which dependeth a question to be discussed,The time. concerning the number of repasts, whereupon we must insist awhile, not omitting likewise to handle this question, at what time of the day, at dinner, or at supper we may eat freeliest.


CHAP. X.

Of the times of Repast, how often wee ought to eat in a day, and when to feed freeliest, at dinner or at supper: Something concerning breakefasts.

MAn being made according to the likenesse and image of his Maker, and that for his service principally, it were not therefore fit that so noble a creature should make a god of his guts, and at all times minde nothing but his belly: and therefore not onely decency and good order, but even that sublime emploiment also for the which he was at first framed, requireth some certaine and set times for taking his refection. And both Anatomists tell us, and experience teacheth us, that man is of a farre different structure in his guts from ravenous creatures: as Dogges, Wolves,The structure of the intestinall parts of ravenous beasts differ fro^ that observed in man, and why. etc. who minding only their belly, have their guts descending almost straight downe from their ventricle or stomacke, to the fundament; whereas in this noble Microcosme man, there are in these intestinall parts many anfractuous circumvolutions, windings and turnings, whereby longer retention of his food being procured, hee might so much the better attend upon sublime speculations, and profitable emploiments in Church and Common-wealth. Now, if wee shall consider the fittest time for refection,Fittest time for refection in naturall reason. it will seeme to be when the

appetit doth demand it.Interrogatus Diogenes quando sumendum esset alimentum? H^benti inquit, quando ^surit: si non habeat cum habere poterit.Diogenes Laert. in cius vita. And therefore Diogenes being asked when was the fittest time for food, answered; to him that hath it, when his stomak calleth for it; and to him that hath it not, when he can come by it. But all our civilest nations have accustomed themselves to some set times for their ordinary repasts. And because nature proceeds orderly in all her operations, therefore Tu nunquam comedas stomachum ni noveris esse pureatum vacuumque cibo quem sumpseris ante.Shola Salernit. before wee make a new meale wee must see that the former be first concocted: and for this purpose there must intercede a certaine distance or space betwixt our two meales. Lib. 25. contin. Rhusis would have eight houres distance betwixt dinner and supper; and from supper to dinner sixteene. But here ariseth a question to be discussed, How many meales a day ought we ordinarily to use? This question hath beene variously tossed to and fro amongst our Physitians, some being of one minde, and some of another: Some hold it best to eate but one meale a day, and some twice. 2 De diaera acut. Hippocrates seemeth to favour one meale a day. Others hold that one meale a day maketh men more cholericke, by reason the humors by abstinence are too much sharpened, which by meanes of food are well qualified. Lib. 1. cap. 1. Celsus is for two meales a day; the which seemeth best to agree with reason: for hee that useth but one meale a day, is forced to eat as much at one meale, as another at two. Now the stomacke being oppressed with too great a quantity of food, it failes under the burden, and the strength of it is quite overthrowne: for by so great a distention it loseth much of its thickenesse and firmenesse;Cause of the weaknes of gluttons and belly-gods stomackes. which two make not a little for the retention and concoction of the food: neither is there any other cause to be inquired into of the weaknes of gluttons and belly-gods stomaks. It is further to be observed, that the stomacke being too much stuffed up with food, cannot so freely concoct the same; which may easily appeare in a pot full of meat, where the meate is not so easily boyled as when there is more roome. But let us search into antiquitie, and see what was their manner and custome. A Mercur. vari. lection. lib. 4. cap. 17.Foure names of repasts among the antient Greeks.Athenaeus lib. 1. citant. Stuckio. antiquit. conviv. lib. 1. cap. 11.(...) vocarunt veteres.No one man used all these foure repasts. late writer would by many arguments prove that the antients used but one meale a day. Others are of an opposite opinion. Amongst the Greekes of old, we read these foure names of repasts mentioned: (...); all these foure, saith Athenaeus, were used in the times of the Trojan warre. The first of these was used in the morning betimes, and was in stead of our breakefast; the next in stead of our dinner; and that after answerable to that refection, which some use in the after-noone; and the last answering to our supper. And it is to bee observed, that seldome any one person used all these severall foure meales, yea scarce three; and that chiefely in the warres; when as by their labour and toile, their bodies were more tired out, and their spirits spent; and therefore needed a more plentifull measure of nourishment than had beene otherwise requisite. Some used this manner of refection also of later times: but that this was not alwayes the custome of the Greeks may by that speech of Plutarch. in ejus vita. Leonidas appeare; Prandete commilitones, apud Inferos forsan caenaturi. Dine my fellow-souldiers, for you may perhaps sup in another world. The Greekes then ordinarily used but two meales aday, schollers and such as were given to sobriety, although they used two meales aday; yet one of them, to wit, that of the morning,

was most commonly but sparing; as witnesseth Lib. de sanit. tuenda. Galen of himselfe, that seldome he eate any thing till night; which if at any time he did, it was but a little bread in a morning dipped in a little wine: and this counsell 5. de loco affect ca. 5. he gave also to Diodorus the Grammarian, who if he fasted long, fell into fits of the falling sickenesse. By the premisses, as also by Hippocrates himselfe, it doth appeare, that the ancient Greekes had not all, and alwayes the same times and seasons for their diet, and this last order of diet Epist. 83. Seneca, seemeth also to confirme, whereas hee maketh mention of a morsell of bread onely for his dinner, without the use of a table. The Persians used most commonly two meales a day, as witnesseth De Cyri institut. lib. 8. Xenophon: although in the time of Xerxes it appeareth to have been otherwise, as witnesseth Lib. 7. Herodote; where Magacreon the Abderite gives Xerxes great thankes, that he and his company used but one meale aday: for saith he, if wee had beene commanded to provide a dinner like this supper, we had been all undone. The Iewes used commonly two meales aday, as may appeare both by that of Exod 16.10, 11* Exodus, where they had Manna for their dinner, and Quailes for their supper; as also by the manner of their fasts, which was untill the even; as may appeare by the practice both 1 Sam. 14.25. 2 Sam. 1.12. of Saul and David. Among the Romans we read of five severall names of repasts: Ientaculum, prandium, merenda, coena, and comessatio; the foure former answering to these foure already mentioned, and the last was used after supper: such are our possets here in England, made of drinke, milke, bread and egges, sugar and spice;Vnseasonable use of possets in England. very unseasonably often used after supper, and being a meere superfluity, which might well be spared. But two meales were ordinarily in most use among them, to wit, dinner and supper; and as for all the other they were but for children or labouring people.Two meales most ordinary amongst most Nations. And indeed in all civill and well constituted countries and common-wealths two set meales are most ordinary and frequent. I do not here mean precisely by any precept punctually to tye every person to the observing of this order; as not being ignorant of the variety of circumstances, which may easily alter the same: as namely the climat, the constitutio^, the sex, age, the time of the yeere, and the particular calling or condition of a man. In cold climats we must yeeld to a more liberall allowance than in a warmer. And children and chickens, they say, must not be long kept from food. Old men by reason of the debility of naturall heat concocting the aliment,Fa^^es and mora bilem in nasum conciunt Adagium. are not able to receive much at once; and therefore are allowed to eat little and often. Refert Appollonius in mirabilibus ex Arist. eos qui semel in die vescuntur iracundiores esse quia per inediam exacerbantur humores, qui cibo and potu mitescunt. Riolan filius in praelect. privatis. Cholericke persons finde much hurt by long abstinence; and so doe such as are subject to ingender wind in their stomackes. And sicke folkes are to bee exempted from these rules, as hereafter shall appeare. And here custome is neither to be neglected, nor yet suddenly altered, be it good or bad: if good, continue it still; and if evill, alter it by degrees, by little and little, all sudden alterations breeding danger. Now, as for the particular times of these two repasts, for dinner the best time is that which is most ordinarily in most places used, about eleven in the forenoone, a little before or after, and supper-time betwixt six and seven at night; so that by this meanes there may intercede about some eight houres distance; and betwixt supper and dinner sixteene.
Now as in the sea one wave begetteth another; so here, one question begetteth another. It being already granted that two meales aday are most commonly and ordinarily to be used, it may now be demanded, in which of these two wee may feed freeliest,Whether dinner or supper ought to bee more liberall. which concerneth not a little the health of mankind, and hath beene as much controverted, at least as the former question, and probable reasons produced on both sides. And first for the dinner, they produce these reasons.Arguments for dinner. First, for that in the day-time, our naturall heate is much helped to perfit concoction by meanes of the Sunne. Againe, exercise and motion, so much used in the day-time seemeth still to plead for a more liberall dinner than Ex magna coena stomacho fit maxima poena ut sis nocte levis sit tibi coena brevis. Schola Salernit. supper, after which we goe to rest. Besides, the day maketh a greater dissipation and resolution of the triple substance of our bodies; as by the like reason Summer should consume more food than Winter, and by consequent, the dinner being compared to Sommer, and Supper to winter, should doe the like. And lastly, that nature in the night time being intent upon the concocting of bad and superfluous humors, as also in the distribution of the nourishment for the whole body, is not to be disturbed with a liberall meale.Reasons for a more liberall supper. Others againe, and in my opinion building on a surer foundation, favour more a liberall supper; and that for these reasons: First, there is a far greater distance betwixt the time of supper and dinner, than betwixt dinner and supper, as witnesseth 7 Meth. Galen himselfe; and this was his owne practice. Againe, 1 Zaph. lib. 1. and 5. ac 6. Epidem. sleepe succeeding after supper furthereth the concoction, proved by many of our ancient famous Physitians: Now the time of rest is of all others fittest for concoction; as watching is most opposite, ingendring crudities, as witnesseth 2 dae vict. acut. Hippocrates. And whereas it may be objected, that labourers and husbandmen oftentimes use violent labor and exercise immediatly after meales: I answer, that the strength of naturall heat in their strong and rusticall constitutions, often overco^meth and concocteth many crudities, which other bodies of more tender education would produce many dangerous diseases: and yet many times escape they not scot free; but fall even often into many dangerous and desperate diseases, Besides, Aph. 15. lib. 2. Hippocrates telleth us, that in the Winter and Spring the inward parts of concoction are hotter, and therefore our sleep's longer; from whence he concludes that wee may use more copious aliments in those times. Now as the morning is answerable to the Spring, the middle of the day to Sommer; the evening to Autumne: even so, the night set apart for sleep, is compared to the Winter. And the better to cleere this point, which hath made many to stumble, we must distinguish betwixt concoction and distribution: the later of these two, distribution, I meane,Difference betwixt concoction and distribution. is more speedy in the day-time, than in the night; which is often, by violent motion, and disorderly exercise procured; from the which proceed crudities, and by consequence obstructions, the fountaine and spring of innumerable dangerous diseases. Concoction againe, which is a due, orderly and leisurely conversion of the aliment into the substance of our bodies to bee nourished, is farre better performed by meanes of rest and sleepe, which conquering and overcomming crudities, preventeth a multitude of dangerous diseases, And if we shall reflect

upon former times, we shall find it was most customarily received among most nations: as it appeareth to have been the custome amongst Gods owne people of the Iewes; who eating Manna for dinner, were allowed Quailes for their Supper, being of a more nourshing substance than the Manna used at dinner. And besides the premisses, the very Etymology of the word coena, intimating in the originall a communion, as the learned wel know, seemeth to plead for this preheminence; Plutarch. 8. sympos. probl. 6. and this, it seemeth, was the custome among most men, that they ate but little and in private at dinner: but at night they assumed unto themselves a greater liberty, to refresh and solace themselves with the society of their loving friends, together with a more liberall allowance of the creatures. But here I still understand a moderation in both to be used, and not exceeding the limits and bounds of mediocrity, a heavy supper much disturbing the nights rest, ingendring crudities and procuring troublesome dreames. And if there should any excesse bee committed, I hold it safer at dinner than supper; and that by reason that after some rest,Supper ought to bee sparing, and yet may be more liberall than dinner.What cases are here to be excepted. moderate exercise, and abstinence from supper, nature may overcome and concoct crudities; by this meanes preventing future infirmities. I conclude therefore this point, that caeterit paribus, setting all things in even balance, and both meales being moderate, my opinion is, the supper may exceed the dinner. Notwithstanding the premisses, this is principally to be understood of healthfull persons, and not subject to rheumes and defluxions, with great danger often distilling upon the lungs, ioints, and other parts of the body;Of Breakefasts, and whether they are to be used. for in such cases to eat a very small, and sometimes perhaps, no supper at all, will prove to thee a great gaine. Besides, if there be any particular individuall constitution, finding ordinarily more hurt by eating freelier at night than at noone, let such a person follow that course, which best suteth with the temper of his body; my meaning being to tye no man to that, which might in any sort prejudice his health. But here it may be asked, whether breakfast bee allowable or not? I answere, in the first place custome, together with the constitution of the body, must in this case give us direction, as hath partly been said already: for cholericke persons, and such as are much subject to wind, cannot fast long; no more than children and aged people. Paucissima natura mane exigit, tantumque refocillari pauxillo alimento postulat, ne calor naturalis flaccescat. Illorum itaque exemplum imitari par est, qui cum post aliquot horas luculentum ignem excitare meditantur elixandis, assandisque carnibus, prius nonnullo fonite, aridisque nutrimentis focum instruunt, ne ignis penitus sepiatur, qui cum sit opportunum, iustam ignem in cocturae usum e^citant: sic cum exiiguo fomento, ac velut succendiculo ventriculus paulo ante incaluit, in prandio avidius cibum appetit, ac di^atatis venis validius concoquit digeritque cum plaerisque qui in prandium vsque ^eiuni persi lant, appetentia evanescat, calore vel flaccido, vel tantum non extincto. Levin. Lemnius de occult. naturae mirac. lib. 2. cap. 21. Levinus Lemnius is of opinion, that a little eaten in a morning, providing it be but very little and easie of digestion, whets on the appetite for dinner. As for the time of these repasts I have said already, and expressed my opinion; and howbeit, I could here expatiat upon the division of the day naturall and artificiall, and how severall nations divided their daies, Hebrewes, Greekes, Arabians, Aegyptians, Romans, etc: as also concerning the difference of houres equall and unequall (the later being in use untill the first councell of Nice) yet all this I willingly here passe by, that which hath bin said, being sufficient for the purpose we have in hand: and that time I have already set downe being answerable to the times the antients used for their repasts howsoever, they reckoned their houres otherwise than we doe now; which arose by the divers manner of computing their daies, some beginning at one time, and some at another. And for this matter this shall now suffice;

whereon I have a little the longer insisted, by reason these points seeme to me very materiall for the preservation of health, and have not as yet beene divulged abroad after this manner; and withall, conduce not a little for the diet of the diseased, which is the principall scope I here aime at: and therefore, I now proceed to that which followeth.


CHAP. XIJ.

Of the matter of nourishment, and first of Corne, and Bread made thereof.

WHatsoever nourisheth and mainteineth this crasy body of man, is desumed either from the plants, and such fruits as the earth doth yeeld for the sustenance of mankind; or else from living creatures, and such things as are from them desumed, and yet are no parts of them: as milke, butter, cheese and blood.Mans first food. Mans first food was of the fruits of the earth, such as were produced without his industry and paines: but afterwards by reason of sin, man was appointed to eate his food in the sweat of his browes.Division of Corne. And by the meanes of husbandry, the earth brought forth several sorts of corne, very usefull for susteining the life of man. By the name of corne I understand whatsoever kind of grain is co^teined either in eares or husks. That in eares; as wheat, barley, rye, oates. That in husks; as pease, beanes, etc. As concerning bread made of Corne, Plin. lib. 18. cap. 7. Hordeum, quibusdant quasi nascituri cibi exordium.Divers differences of Bread1 Difference from the meale whereof it is made. some will have barly to have yeelded the first bread; but shortly after succeeded wheat, the noblest and most nourishing graine of all others; and therefore we will begin with this bread. Bread of wheat taketh its difference, either from the parts of meale or floure whereof it is made; or from the manner of preparing. Of the meale, some parts are finer, and some courser. Bread made of the courser nourisheth lesse, yet keepeth the body more soluble: but that made of finer floure, as it nourisheth more; so maketh it not the body so soluble; and is worse for obstructions and the stone; and as the bread partaketh more of the one or the other, so are the vertues thereof. The next difference is taken from the preparation.Second difference from the preparation. All sorts of bread were either leavened or unleavened; unleavened bread was commanded by Exod. 13.1, 2, 3, etc. God himselfe in the institution of the Passeover, howbeit not for their ordinary use. But such kind of bread, saith Lib. 1, de alim. lacul. Galen, is unwholesome for nourishment: and therefore bread indifferently leavened, and a little salted, is of all others most wholesome and convenient for mans use. The leaven maketh the bread lighter, and of easier digestion. To make our bread light,Bakers abuse the buyers by putting too much barme in their bread. there is with us a custome to adde barme, whereof the antients were ignorant: but the other is better and wholesomer. Many bakers thus abuse the buyers,

puffing up their bread with a great deale of bitter barme, which maketh the bread both more unsavorie to the taste, and unwholesomer for ordinary use. The French Nation doth parallel, if not exceed any nation in the world in good wholesome light bread of divers sorts; and yet never use any barme. Now the baking maketh or marreth the goodnes of bread: and that which is baked in an oven, not overheated, is of all others the best: the rest, by reason of the inequality of the parts of bread so baked, then externall parts being burt, and the internall raw,Third difference fro^ the age. are not to be ranked with the former in goodnesse. Another difference may be yet taken from the age of bread: hot bread 2. de victu acut. Hippocrates findeth fault with, by reason it increaseth thirst, and is not so easily concocted, and of the same opinion is Lib. 2. tract. 2. cap. 273. Avicenne. Mercur. varia^. lection. lib. 6. cap. 3. The excellency of Bread above all other food. A late writer out of divers places proveth that the antients used to eate hot bread; but at length concludeth, that the better sort used not ordinarily hot bread; but new baked bread after it was cooled. Now of all other food or nourishment, bread is the most noble; as being the staffe of mans life, and of all other foods most necessary for the use of man. And therefore, in that so absolute and compendious forme of Prayer, penned by our Saviour himselfe, under the name of bread all other necessaries are comprehended. The excellency of bread may from hence also be collected, that no meale is ordinarily without bread, if it may be had; according to that triviall, yet true verse.
Quando deest panis tunc est cibus omnis in^uis.
Besides, bread is that nourishment with which a man may longest subsist, and without loathing continue in the use thereof; whereas any other food, especially long continued, will weary and tire us out, which bread doth not. And the preheminence of this food may also from hence appeare; that whereas fish and flesh will in three or foure dayes putrifie, and send out an evill smell, bread, unlesse it be salted, may well grow mouldy at the worst, or dry; but never putrifie. By reason then of this prerogative,Inconveniences of feeding more on fish and flesh than bread. I advise all those who have a care of their health, at their meales to eate more bread than any other food. And such as feed more freely on fish and flesh, and eate lesse bread, have not their flesh so firme as those who feed most on bread: besides, that oftentimes their breath smelleth strong. And for this same cause, fish being prone to putrefaction,Bread to be used with Sommer fruits. and very moist, require a more liberall allowance of bread than flesh; and the moistest flesh, as veale, and lamb more than other. And this reason may also be a warrant for us to use bread with our Sommer fruits, cherries, plumbs, abricocks, etc. Now besides this most noble, and, of all others, most excellent and usefull bread made of wheat, there is yet bread made of severall sorts of other graine, and first of barley, As for barley bread, although it be inferior to wheat, yet it is not to be despised: and, howsoever, it nourish not so much as bread made of Wheat; yet being made of good barley, it nourisheth well, and looseneth the body more than wheat bread.Barley bread.Oaten Bread.It yeeldeth good nourishment. As for bread made of oats, it is a good wholesome and nourishing bread, and so is the grewell made of this graine, in great request in the south parts of this kingdome: and in the north parts therof, as also in Wales, and the Kingdome of Scotland, the bread of this grain

is much used: and it is likewise in request in many parts of Germany. But it is to be noted, that the graine they commonly make their bread of in those parts, is a fairer and bigger graine, and fuller of meale, than that which groweth further south, and is ordinarily given to horses.Rie bread. Rie bread is of a more glutinous substance, more windy, and nourisheth lesse than the former, and is more apt to ingender obstructions; and therefore it is best mingled with other graine, as is here the custome with wheat or barley. Rice is a good nourishing graine,Bread of rice, m^ panicke, etc. whereof in many places, as namely the East Indies they make bread: it is of an astringent nature, and drying, and of grosse substance. Millet and panicke are not unlike in quality; and howbeit in other countries they be in some request, yet with us not used.Bread of Maiz. Maiz or Indian wheat is a graine in great request in the West Indies, whereof they make their bread, which is of a grosser substance than that of wheat; yet befitteth well the bodies of the natives of that country. Now besides the ordinary sorts of bread, there are yet many other sorts made with the addition of divers ingredients, which doe often alter the nature and property thereof, and often prove more physicall than alimentall:Divers sorts of physicall bread. yet let this proviso alwayes be put in, that all forts of unleavened bread are hard of digestion, apter to ingender obstructions, and to stay fluxes of the belly than leavened bread: and yet to strong and labouring people may well be now and then allowed. Besides Corne, there is another sort of graine in great request in many places of the world, and commonly called by a generall name in Latine Legume^, and in our English tongue, pulse, In Galens time there was no bread made of these graines: but later ages have made use of the bread both of beanes and pease. The Lib. de euch. et cacoch. Of pulse and bread made thereof. same Author is of opinion, that all manner of pulse are of bad nourrishment: and both these are windy, yet beanes more. Greene beanes are with us here in England ordinarily fried with persley, and that to good purpose, it correcting this windy quality. And it is not out of purpose,Bread of pease and beanes.Greene pease and beanes to be sparingly used. that dry mints are in Winter and Lent used with pease pottage. Bread made both of pease and beanes is hard of digestion, of a drying and astringent quality; yet very strengthening; and well moistned is good to strengthen labouring people. Pease yeeld the best bread, but beanes the more nourishing. Now howsoever many people eate greene pease with a greedy appetite in the Summer-time, as also beanes; yet, I wish they be sparing in the use of them:Other sorts of pulse more used for physicke than for food. for howsoever prepared, yet used in any quantity, especially in sedentary persons and weake constitutions they may breed no small annoyance. There be yet some other sort of pulse, as chiches, red and white, lupines, lentiles,And in many places they make a bread of dried fish, ordinary among the Jchthyophagi or fish eatersPlin. lib. 7. cap. 2.Sic Aeg^ptii pastores e loti semine, milio simili maxime lacte, aut aquae subacto, panem conficiunt, quo pane negatur quicquam aut solubrius aut lantius dum calet. Idem lib. 22. cap. 2^. and som others; which are more in use for physicke than for food, and therefore we will not meddle with them. In divers places of the world besides the premisses, in defect and want of corne they make use of some fruits and roots to make their bread of: as in some places of France, as Limosin, and some other places, the countrie people use bread made of chestnuts, participating of the nature of the acorn, a course and grosse, yet a strong nourishment. And in the West Indies, they make bread of a root, called Cassani and others: but I will wade no further into this subject of bread, but proceed to the most frequent and ordinary use of roots in ordinary diet.



CHAP. XIIJ.

Of Roots usually eaten, and in most account for food.

AFter our discourse of severall sorts of corne, it followeth that wee should now say something of other vegetables, to wit, of Plants, usefull for the sustenance of mankinde: and that the rather, I joine those vegetables with corne, is by reason this was a food in request, at least before we read that flesh and other food were frequent: under the name of herbs and plants, therefore, I understand both the root, the seed and the leafe, and stem or stalke. And because in plants the root is answerable to the head in sensible and reasonable creatures, therefore we will begin our discourse with those vegetables, whose roots are most eminent, and in greatest esteeme: and first, we will beginne with the Turnep, as being so well knowne, that the plainest and ignorantest countrie-fellow is no stranger in the knowledge thereof.
Of the Turnep.The Turnep or Navew, which are thought to differ little or nothing, groweth sometimes to so great a bignesse, that Pliny lib. 18. cap. 13. some have beene seene of thirty, some of forty pound weight. As for the properties, 2 De aliment. fac. Galen thinketh this to be the worst of all other roots. Lib. 2. cap. 104. Dioscoride saith, it ingendreth a soft and foggy flesh. It is of a flatuous and windy quality, as most other roots, howbeit, some more, some lesse; troublesome to a weake stomacke, being hard of digestion. The best way of use is accounted, first to boile them, and the water being powred out, then to boile them againe with fat beefe, adding to them some pepper. The seed of Turnep is good in antidotes, and very good against the plague, and all other contagious diseases.
Of the Reddish.In the next place we are to say something of Reddishes, the which roote, contrary to the custome of other roots, is eaten raw. At what time of our meale it should be eaten, our Authours somewhat differ. Lib. 2. cap. 106.Dioscorides would have it eaten after meales, to strengthen the stomacke: but sure, in my opinion, it being of a nauseous quality and provoking to cast, hee had but small reason for him. But Lib. 2. de alim. facult. Galen is of another mind, to use it at the beginning of our meales, taxing both the vulgar errour, and some of Physitians also, who used it last. Simeon. Sith. Aloisius. Mundalla etiam Epist. 11. Some, againe, tooke upon them to moderate the matter thus: if the body be soluble, and free from any flatuous matter, it should be eaten first; but if the body be costive, last. We use them after a third, and different way, to wit, with our meales, as a sauce, and, as is thought, to excite a languishing appetite. Now, as I see small reason for either of the other two manners of use of this root, so see I farre lesse for this; and I thinke the controversie might be best decided, if this root were left for physicks use, it being good against the stone. It hath this inconvenient,

that often eaten, it wasteth the teeth, eating into them. Poncetus lib. de venenis. A late Authour giveth us warning, that after the eating of Reddishes, wee beware of milke-meats: for, saith hee, it turneth them into venome. There is a great antipathie betwixt this root and the vine, insomuch, that from hence, some thinke they have found a remedy against drunkennesse. Loco supra citat. Dioscorides writeth, that the leaves and roots of wilde-Reddish, which wee call horse-Reddish; was usually eaten as other potherbs. In high Germany, where they call it meer rettich,Wilde-Reddish, or Horse-Reddish. it is in ordinary use, the roote I meane. And I remember in Saxony, wee had this root first grated, and then boiled with our beeefe, which made us many times water our plants as well as the keenest mustard: but it is hurtfull both for head and eyes, whatsoever our palat-pleasers may allege for its commendation.
The Reddish is of a cutting quality, and hot; and therefore cutteth tough phlegme.
The Parsneps are indifferent good,The Parsnep. boiled and buttered with vineger and pepper. They are somewhat hot, and yeeld better nourishment than the Carrot is; it is somewhat hard of digestion, and flatuous, yet not so much as many others.
The Carrot differeth something,The Carrot. as yeelding in goodnesse to the former, being something moister, yet of an easier and freer distribution thorow the body. They are commonly eaten with beefe. In some countries they make sallets of them, especially of red, or rather purple-coloured.
The Skirret root in goodnesse farre surmounteth the others,Of Skirret roots. as being of indifferent good nourishment, and no enemy to the stomacke, a great strengthner of nature, and expeller of urine. It is somewhat flatuous, as the others, but not so much. Plin. lib. 19. cap. 4. Tiberius the Emperour, did so highly esteeme of these Skirret-roots, that hee sent for great store of them out of Germany, where they abounded, to plant them in Italy for his owne use, there growing none there before.
That out-landish root brought unto us from the West-Indies,Of Potato roots. called commonly Potato, and by some Batato, is of the same nature and property, or at least goeth a little beyond it; but that this pre-eminence it hath, that it is, according to the common proverb, Farre fetcht and deare bought, and therefore good for Ladies.
Another root, which hath beene sent from the same soile,Artichoake of Ierusalem. called by the name of Artichocks of Ierusalem; which in leafe resembling our Solanum, or night-shade, may therefore not without reason be called Solanum peruvianum esculentum radice tuberosa. These roots are very windy, and ingender melancholy; and therefore howsoever at first, they were extolled by fames open mouth; yet now, by reason of these aforementioned qualities, their credit is much crackt.
Iringo roots are also often used, both condited with sugar,Iringo-roots. and otherwise. They are of a thinne attennuating substance, being hot and dry about the second degree. They are good to cleanse the kidnies, and withall are esteemed to strengthen nature.
Now come we to our Bulbous roots, beginning with garlicke, which Galen esteemeth to be hot and dry in the fourth degree; and therefore

very sparingly to be used,Of Bulbous roots. Of Garlike. especially in hot constitutions of body, and the like seasons of the yeer. In cold constitutions and countries it may safeliest be use, especially being yong. It is accounted a great enemy to the eie-sight, and an antidot against all poison and contagious infection, called therefore,Vertues of Garlicke. Theriaca rusticorum, or the countrie-mans treacle. It is likewise good against the wind-colicke, and the stone in the kidnies, and pectorall infirmities, where tough phlegme obstructeth the pipes of the lungs. In many places of France, especially in Gosconie, although it be farre South, and next unto Spaine, yet use they garlick very ordinarily in their sauces; but when it is yet greene, and before the cloves come to their full strength and bignesse: and yet this simple is not so proper for so hot and salacious a people. It is also ordinarily accounted good against wormes, and all manner of vermine. And yet is it strange, that is reported of Arnulphus the Emperor, who, by the frequent eating of garlicke, at length had his body so full of wormes, that by no humane helpe could he ever be cured. But howsoever, he was indeed surprised with this disease, and with that likewise we call phthiriasis, or the lousie diseases, his body abounding likewise with this vermine; Mulier astuta cum desperata^ videret artis defensionem, per unum ex familiaribus Imperatoris auro corruptum, Pharmacum ei propinavit, quo ille hausto, statim profundo sopitus somne, ad diem xertium usque stertivisse scribitur Et paulo post. Sed quod venenivehemen^^a tetum insecerat corpus, pu^^efactione incurabili, (...) etiam accessis. Ita mortuus est, erumpentibus toto corpore vermibus, tertio Calend December etc. Ch^onic. Carion. a Peucero expositi and aucti, l 4 page 452. edition. 1617. in 8. apud Crispinium. yet the Historie maketh mention that he died of poison. The antients thought by caring thrice of garlicke in a morning, to turne away all evill from them that whole day following, as the Incussere deos inflantes pectora, si non predilium ^er mane caput gustaveris alli. Pe^si. antient Poet expresseth. It is also indued with this property, that Mirum est, allio delectari homines quod fugit Leopardus: na^ sicubi par^etes litu infeceris exibit protinus, nec resi^^ et ciuus odorem venenata fera non patitur; nos interuis visceribus infund^mus Ambros. lib. 7. Hexameri. some wild ravenous beasts, namely, the Leopard cannot abide the smell of it. And indeed, it is rather to be used as physicke, than otherwise. The evill smell of garlicke is helped by the eating of perslie in a pretty quantity; the like is promised by eating of greene-beanes; as likewise zedoary. And Promittit. l^nius all^um omni odore carere fi dum Luna est subterra seratur, dum est in co^tu colligatur. Lib. ^9. cap 6. some say, that if it beset when the Moon is under the earth, and gathered when she is in conjunction with her dearest spouse, it loseth all this strong smell.
Onions are also very hot in quality, insomuch, that Of onions. 7 Simpl. medic. Galen ascribeth unto them the fourth degree. Onion is an enemy to the cholerick persons, and to the eyes, and any inflammation of the head, and causeth trouble some dreames: but is good against the stone, provoketh urine, openeth obstrutions, and cutteth tough and slimy humours; especially the red, which is a great deale keener than the other. And this is to be understood of raw Onions; and yet if they be a little steeped in water, they lose some of this acrimony: but they are best boiled, and then they nourish somewhat, and may either be used in pottage, or otherwise in sallets. And as by this meanes they lose much of their medicinall vertue; so on the other side they lose as much of their noxious qualities, whereby they hurt the body of man.
Of Skallions and chiballs.That which hath beene said of the nature and vertues of Onions, may be accommodated also unto Scallions and Chibolls, which are often eaten raw in sallets: but let young and hot constitutions ever mingle store of cooling herbs with them.
Of Cives.Cives are somewhat of this temperature, howbeit milder, and may be used as a pot-herb, as Onions and Leekes, it being of an attenuating, opening and cutting quality, is good especially in phlegmaticke and cold constitutions.
Of Leekes.The Leeke is inferiour to the Onion in goodnesse, being hot even

to the third degree: it openeth the urinary passages, and other obstructions, but yet hurteth the head and eyes, and causeth troublesome dreames. Transplanted into a fat and fertile soile, they become both greater and milder in force and operation; and so boiled with other herbs, they lose their noxious quality: The root is most in request, the which being of a very bigge size, the French use ordinarily in their pottage boiled in slices, and often with a fat Capon, or other meate, and so are of a very good, sweete and pleasant relish. Vnset Leekes are most physicall, and of greatest vertue and efficacie.
As concerning Mushroms, or Toad-stooles,Of Mushroms or toad-stooles. as they are commonly called, although properly they be no roots, yet are they commonly ranked among them. It is a food (if so it deserveth to be called) in small request here amongst us: howbeit in France, Italy, and adjacent countries, it is in no small esteeme: and therefore I shall neede to say lesse concerning this subject.Caution for travellers. I advise therefore all our Centrie, who travell into those forraigne countries, if they be wise, altogether to absteine from such excrements of the earth; some of them (yea, the greater part) being venomous, as I could by true histories make appear: all of them being of an evill qualitie, and breeding no good nourishment at all. Lib. de historia stirp^um. Clusius writing the exact history of them, reckoneth up three and twenty sorts of such as may be eaten; and five and twentie sorts of venomous Mushroms. Who then that is wise, will venter on a doubtfull dish, when God of his infinite goodnesse hath affoorded us such plentie of profitable and pleasant food? Amongst these, are also ranked those roots commonly called Puffes, or Truffes, Tubera terrae,Of puffes, or Truffes, Tubera terra. and in the Northermost parts of this Iland, by some called Arnuts; growing under the earth, but in the spring of the yeere bursting forth. They ingender tough, clammy and melancholicke humours; being apt to ingender the stone, and all manner of obstruction: they are also hurtfull for the stomacke; further, and procure the Apoplexie, Strangurie, and many other dangerous diseases: and therefore heere I will leave them, and proceede to speake of more profitable simples, namely, of such herbes as are in most ordinary use and request for the use of man.



CHAP. XIV.

Of herbs in most ordinary use for diet, and first for such as coole most.

AFter roots, wee come now to such herbs as are in most ordinary use for daily food, either for sallets, or the pot: and wee will first beginne with such herbs as are of a cooling quality.Of lettice. And among all our herbs, none is of more use in our ordinary diet than the lettice, taking its denomination from a milkie juice wherewith it aboundeth; and is by Galen preferred before all other herbs; who used it both in his younger yeeres, to coole the great heat of his stomack, and in old age to procure sleep. The antients for religions sake, absteined from lettices: Suetonius in eius vita Plin. l. 19. cap. 7. but Augustus Caesar having by the advice and counsell of Antonius Musa his Physitian, by the use of this herbe recovered his health, brought this herb in no small esteeme among the Romans. It is cold and moist in the second degree, and ingendreth no evill juice within the body, and by this meanes carrieth a great pre-eminence above most other herbs, In antient times, it was wont to be eaten at the later end of the meale* but now quite contrary, at the begining: and this moved the Claudere lactuca caenas solebat averum: ^ic mibi cur nostrat inchoat illa dapes? Martialis. Poet to aske the reason of this alteration: which probably is this; that eaten after meales, it represseth the hot vapours of wine, by this meanes both resisting drunkennesse, and withall procuring sleepe, being especially used at night; and as it would seeme, being then most ordinarily used. And this was the reason, why Flavius Vopiscus in eius vita. the Emperour Tacitus in his feasts, above all other dishes, used this herb most liberally. Custome notwistanding hath now so farre prevailed, that to whet on the appetite, it is with oile and vineger used at the beginning of our meales; and unto it most commonly are added perslie, and some other hot herbs, which doe well allay the coldnesse and moisture thereof. It hath beene received by tradition for an uncontrolled truth, that lettice hurteth the eye-sight: but since neither Galen,Whether lettice hurteth the eye-sight. nor our antient Physitians have left any such quality upon record to posterity, I wonder from whence this slander should first proceed: I know all the colour they have, is, that it too much thickneth the blood, and by consequence breeds an incrassation in the opticke spirits, conveied to the eyes. To this I answer, in the first place,Answer. it is not indued with any transcendent incrassation beyond many other simples, which neverthelesse, were never so reputed, this plant not exceeding the second degree in either quality. Againe, admit this were a truth; that it were indued with such a specificall incrassating quality; yet must it both be eaten in great abundance, sole, and of it selfe; and withall must meet with some answerable cold and moist complexion (for as for hot cholericke bodies, especially hot stomackes

it is for them a most soveraine alimentary medicine) and that without addition of other things, which correct such a quality,It may safely be eaten as it is ordinarily used. if any there were. And therefore being used, as commonly it is with oile, vineger, and ordinarily some hot herbs, as said is, what hurt can there be in it? As for the oile, although it doe somewhat loosen and relax some weake and choice stomackes; yet is this by meanes of the tartnesse and sharpnesse of the the vineger well corrected; and the oile also, being of a temperate heate, doth in some sort correct the others cold quality: and of this temper, is the sugar also, which is often added; howbeit in my opinion, a little salt, as the French use, would farre better correct any superfluous moisture, it correcting also any cold and crude quality.
Endive and Succory, are moderatly cold, and somewhat drying,Of Endive and Succorie. and are ordinarily used as other pot-herbes; are good to open obstructions of the liver, as also for the heat thereof, and of the stomacke: They are best for young hot-blooded people; if they be used in sallets, the younger they be the better, used especially with addition of hotter herbes. The French, they keepe Succory buried a long time under the ground, which maketh it both white and tender;A way to whiten Succorie. which they call Cichoree blanche, and so use it in sallets, with addition of other herbs. There be divers sorts of these herbes which grow wilde, participating of the same qualities, yet, I thinke, scarce so cold, but rather inclining to some temperate heat, and prove more forcible against obstructions; although not so pleasing to the palat as those which grow in gardens. Among these kinds, there is one most commonly taken notice of by the name of Dandelion, corrupted from the French, dent du Lion, or Lions tooth, and may well be used in all obstructions of the liver, as the others, and in such other cases.
Spinage is an ordinary pot-herb, cold, and withall moist,Of Spinage. yet this more than the other, being cold in the first, and moist in the second degree. It best befitteth hot and dry bodies, and such stomacks especially, nourishing very little, loosening the belly, and ingendering wind: In France this herbe shred and made up in balls, fried with oile and vineger, in the time of Lent, filleth up the roome of an ordinary dish.
Beets are of three sorts, which are commonly used for pot-herbs,Of Beets. especially the white and green, the red being more physicall. They all are moderately cold, not exceeding the first degree at most; yet moister, to wit, about the second. They open obstructions, and loosen the belly, as most of these cooling and moistning simples doe. In some places they make sallets of the red-beet root, boiled and sliced, adding thereto oile and vineger. For the insipidity of taste, the antients, as seemeth, were wont to eate them with wine and pepper; as may by the antient Vt sapiant fatuae fabrorum prandia betae: O quam sape petit vina piperque coquus. Martialis.Of Blites, or Bleets. Poet appeare.
Somewhat like unto them in name is that herb, commonly called Blite, or Bleet, and not much differing in vertue, howbeit something inferiour. And Orach is not unlike, differing little in operation.Orach. They loosen the belly, and rather hurt than helpe the stomacke, unlesse it be strong, or cold and dry, and the temper of body cholericke.
Pricke. madame.That herb commonly called Prick-madam, is yet cooler than any of the former, and withall very moist; yet used both for a pot-herbe and in sallets. It is best for hot stomacks, and cholericke complexions, as also for younger people.
Of Purslaine.Purslaine is a herbe with us in great request in the sommer season; but especially in sallets. It is accounted cold in the third degree, but wanting one in moisture. It is best for such complexions and stomacks, as we have often mentioned. It is good against all internall heats and inflammations.Vertues of purslaine. It is good against all manner of fluxes. The leaves and seedes are good against wormes, against the immoderate menstruous fluxe, spitting of blood, and running of the reines. If it be pickled up with salt and vineger, it acquireth some heate, strengthening the stomacke, and whetting it on for food, and cutting tough phlegme.
Of Sorrell.To Sorrell may also bee referred Bloodwort and Souredock, called Oxalis acuta. Vertues of Sorrell. Sorrell du bois.Among all our pot herbs, none I know more usefull and profitable, both for physicke and food than this so noble simple, Sorrell I meane. As for the qualities, it is esteemed cooling and drying in the second degree. The very vulgar can tell that it is very soveraine in all hot distempers and diseases of that nature. In contagious, maligne and pestilentiall fevers, it is a soveraine good simple, especially the wood-sorrell, called therefore Sorrel du bois. And by reason of the aciditie in taste, it is not unwelcome to the palate, in this particular farre exceeding other cold simples: for the which cause it is not unfitly used in Sommer for greene-sauce. Being young and tender, it may be used in sallets with the addition of some hot herbs.
Of Borrage and Buglosse.Borrage and Buglosse, and that sort called commonly Lang de beuf (for I take it to be nothing else) although they doe partake of some heat, yet are they by the vulgar accounted among cooling herbs, their heat, as likewise their moisture being so moderate, that they exceed not the first degree. It hath ever beene, both by Galen, and other Physitians since his time, esteemed good against melancholy, and may safely be used both in sicknesse and in health. They be also ordinarily used for pot-herbes. The flowers are sometimes used in sallets, and sometimes steeped in wine; and, notwithstanding all this that hath beene said, some have not so high a conceit of these simples. So hard a thing is this to practise, Omnibus placeto.
Of Mallowes.Hither wee may also referre the Marshmallow, call'd Althaea, or Bismalva.The Mallow is reckoned also among our ordinary pot-herbs, which loosneth the belly, as being of an abstersive quality, and the heat so small, that it is scarce discernable. The curled, called the French Mallow is most esteemed; they are not to be used in sallets, as other herbs, being offensive to the stomacke. But indeed, the Mallow is fitter for Physicke than for food. Our antients, for the high esteeme they had of it, called it omni-morbia, that is, good against all diseases. It is thought to be good against melancholy, to further the menstruous fluxe, and good against all oppilations and inflammations of the kidnies and bladder: and by reason of the temperate qualities, good to be used in cataplasmes for outward paines.
Of Groundsell.There is an herb called Groundsell, ordinarily used to loosen the belly, being boiled in pottage, and withall, sometimes it will procure casting, if taken in any competent quantity. But boiled in broths, it

loosneth the belly as many others do, being of somewhat a cooling quality, and somewhat drying, of a bitter taste, and openeth obstructions, especally in womens diseases. It is not good for weake stomacks to use.Of Mercury.
Amongst our loosening herbs, there is one ordinarily used, called by the name of Mercurie; for the which, here in the country is in common use, an herb called by the the Latines, Matthiol. in libr. 2. Dloscor. cap. 161. Bonus Henricus, having leaves like that herb, commonly called Wake-Robin, and is somewhat hot and drie, howbeit not in any excesse: and is of somewhat an abstersive faculty; and is much used in pottage and broths, to make the body soluble, and is by Matthiolus accounted to participate of the nature of Lapathium acutum, being a certaine kind of dock. Mercuriali^ est eam mas quam foemina, Dioscoridi Linozostis dicitur. Idem Matth. in lib. 4. Dioscor. cap. 183. But there is another true Mercurie so called, by the antiens Linozostis, and by the Latins, commonly Mercurialis mas and foemina, Mercury, male and female. And this is that right Mercury so much mentioned by Pliny, and Hippocrates; and ordinarily appointed and prescribed by our Physitians, for glisters. The leafe of it is not unlike to that of Pellitory of the wall, and doth farre excell the other, commonly called Mercury, as may be seene both in that place of Pliny, of Dioscoride and Matthiol and others: of this therefore I thought to give some warning.
Wee use often also in broths strawberrie leaves and roots,Of strawberry leaves. which are something cooling, and withall drying. They are good against all fluxes, good in greene-wounds and ulcers, and inflammations of the bladder and kidnies; and is also good to strengthen the gums, and fasten loose teeth, being gargled with a little claret wine, or plantaine water, or both. Of Strawberries in their owne place.
The herbe commonly called Cing-foile, or quinquefolium,Of Cing-foile. from the number of leaves, is much of the same nature with the former, being of an astringent corroborating faculty, with so small a heat, that, if any, it is not discernable. It is very much used in broths, and not without great reason. The roots are most drying. It is exceeding good, both for food and physicke.
Violets are not of smallest note, nor in least request,Of Violet-leaves and Violets. both for physicke and food, being both leaves and flowers of a moderate cooling, and moistening facultie. The greene leaves of the herbe are ordinarily used among other pot-herbs, and sometimes in sallets, and are good in all hot diseases, fevers, or inflammations whatsoever. But the sweete and pleasant flowers are the principall in this plant, being used both in sirup, conserve, candit, and in cakes, etc.Vertues of Violets. They are very effectuall in diseases of the breast, especially where cooling and thickning of sharpe humours is required. The sirup also is a gentle purge for young children and weake constitutions; and properly, it is rather to be esteemed a loosener of the belly, than a proper purger.
The Rose is also in no small request, both the red, white and damask.Of Roses. The damaske rose is most of all the other sorts esteemed.Sirup of Rose^. The sirup of it is much used for a gentle purger of choler, without heating the body in any fever, wherein it may safely be exhibited and to any age.Rose-water. The water is used for many uses, being very delectable and comfortable to all the principall parts, both head, heart, and all the senses, and so is the

smell of the flower it selfe. There is yet a Muske rose which doth excell in the purging faculty.The muske rose. And these three, damaske, muske and white doe most abound in airie and watrie parts; the red more in earthy: for the which cause it is more astringent, corroborating the stomacke, liver, etc. And although a sirup may be made of these red roses new gathered, yet is the purgative faculty farre inferiour to the others.Conserve of red-roses. The conserve of it is good in thinne and sharpe rheumaticke distillations, and to stop fluxes. The sirup of the drie leaves is likewise astringent,The wilde rose, and conserve made thereof. and therefore good against all fluxes of the belly. The wild rose is most astringent of all the rest, and therefore the conserve thereof is esteemed by some more efficacious than of the former. The roses participate of a small and moderate heat, testified by their sweet smell and bitternesse, as witnesses De simpl. medic. facult lib. 7. Matthiol. li. 1. Diosorid. cap. 113. Galen; although this be but in a very remisse degree; and therefore are comparatively accounted cold, in regard of other simples apparently hot to any indifferent understanding: and this is diligently to be considered, especially in regard of the sicke, when there is any use of this simple, or any thing made thereof.
Of Cabbage and Coole-wort.But I had almost forgotte Cole-worts and Cabbage, which may well be ranked among our loosening herbes, partaking of a certaine nitrous quality, which maketh it soluble. This plant was much beholden to old Roman Cato, who used no other physicke for his whole family; and came in so high an esteeme among the Romans, that for the space of 600 yeeres, it was the chiefe drugge they used. It is now esteemed to be of an evill nourishment, and to ingender melancholy. It is not any waies hot to the sense discernable. Lib. 7. simpl. medic. Galen ascribeth unto it a drying quality, used either inwardly or outwardly, and helpeth hard tumours left behinde after inflammations; and consolidateth and cleanseth ulcers, as well ordinary, as of a maligne nature. Matthiol. in libr. 2. Diosc ca. 115. ubi multa de Brassicae viribus. Some use it for an outward medicine to cleare the sight, mingled with honie. Many more vertues some ascribe to this simple, whereon I will not insist. That it should hurt the eye-sight, being eaten, I know no reason. Being boiled, and the first rejected, and it boiled againe, it becommeth much better for the use. It is commonly boiled with fat beefe; and by reason of the flatuous and windy quality proceeding from the grossenesse of the substance, it is ordinarily eaten with pepper or other spice. Weake stomacks may easily be offended with the use thereof. Cole-worts and Cabbages are best in the winter after they have beene frost bitten, as wee use to say: I hold the Cole-wort to be lesse hurtfull than the Cabbage. Claudius Deodatus Panth. Hygiast. lib 1. cap. 22. ex Hippolito Guarinovio. A late Writer mentioneth another Physician, who, in a worke by him published, highly extolleth Cabbage, being pickled up with salt, cumine-seed and bay-leaves; and; next unto bread, giveth it the highest commendation that can be given to any simple. And thus prepared, hee relateth, that Iulius Alexandrinus medic. Caesareu^. another famous Physitian, who attended on an Emperour, used this dish very frequently in his old age. They pickle it up in all high Germany, with salt and barberies, and so keepe it all the yeere, being commonly the first dish you have served in at table, which they call their sawerkrant. They make also there a sallet of Cabbage small shred, with vineger and oile, and all set about the dish with red-herrings, and hard rosted egges; the which

who so is in love with, let him have his liking; and I thinke wee might well spare our hard rosted egges out of our sallets, and use them after a better manner.


CHAP. XV.

Of herbes hot in operation, and in most ordinary use. As also of Artichocks, Gourds, Cucumers, muske-melons.

HItherto have wee discoursed of herbes of a cooling faculty, or at least of so small, a heat, that it is scarce to the senses discernible. Now we will speake of those that are known to be hotter, beginning with the Marigold.
Among other pot-herbs the Marigold,Of Marigold. as well the leafe as the flower, is in no small account, but the flowers especially; which may also well be kept drie till winter. These flowers are somwhat hot, yet not exceeding mediocrity, inclining also to drinesse*The flowrs and their vertues. These flowers are esteemed to be very cordiall, and good against the plague and other contagious diseases. It is also esteemed good against obstruction, especially of a womans fluxe, as also against the Iaundize. The stilled water of the plant and flower is esteemed good for red eyes, and any inflammation thereof. The greene leaves of the plant it selfe are not so effectuall as the flowers, being onely as ordinary mollifying herbs, helpefull to make the same soluble.
There is a pot-herbe in use with us here in the countrie, commonly called Columbine; the leaves whereof are ordinarily used as others,Of Columbines called Aquilegia or Aquilina. having some resemblance unto the leaves of great Celandine, howbeit the flowers have no resemblance at all. This herbe is not very hot, and therefore ordinarily reckoned among cooling herbs; as the vulgar account all herbs cooling, which doe not evidently evince their senses of the contrary. Although some would ascribe great vertues to the simple; yet because I finde no certainty, nor any such things recorded by antiquity, I leave it as I found it.
Asparagus, or as we call, it Sperage, is an opening herbe,Of Sperage. temperately hot and moist, and for food, the tops or tender sprouts first springing out are in most request, and commonly boyled in faire water, and afterwards with oile, vineger and pepper, eaten as a sallet by themselves; or else, as in some places, set round about the dish wherein meat is conteined, and so eaten with it: and sometimes it is eaten last with banqueting stuffe. That this was an ancient custome amongst the Romans to beset their dishes round with them, may appeare by an Aspice quam magno distendat, pectore lancem, Quae fertur Domino scilla, and quibus undique septa, Asparagis. Iuven. ancient Poet. They are good for the stomacke, yeelding no bad nourishment to the body, loosen the belly gently, provoke urine, cleanse

the kidnies, open obstructions, and helpe the eye-sight. They must be but a little boiled; and if thou wilt boile them againe, they lose much of their bitternesse; but withall some of their vertues. The roots are much used by Physitians in opening Apozemes and syrups.
And after the same manner may the first yong and tender Hop-buds be used, and produce the same effects with the former.
Avens Cariophyllata.Avens is also used as an ordinary pot-herbe, being somewhat hot, yet not exceeding the first, and dry, yet not exceeding the second degree. The leaves are most ordinarily used in brothes; and yet the roots are most effectuall against obstructions of the liver or other parts, and are of themselves abstersive, and are very fit to bee used in Physical broths, as being both opening and strengthening.
Of Persley.No herbe in more frequent use than persly, both the leaves and the roots. It is no wayes hurtfull, agreeing well with the stomacke, openeth obstructions, discusseth wind, and provoketh urine. But I advise none to eate it raw, being best dressed with meat or in pottage. The severall wayes of using it are so well knowne, that it were superfluous for me to speake of it. The roots are very usefull in Physicall broths, especially the inward pith taken out: and thus we use fennell roots also. It hath been an inveterate opinion among many, that Persley was hurtfull for the eye-sight: but let it be used as we have set downe, and I warrant thee from any harme: but if any will eate great store of it raw and often, let him looke to himselfe* It is both hot and dry, yet not exceeding the second degree of either.
Of Alysander or Alexander.Some use in the Spring to make use of the herbe called Alexanders or Alysander in pottage; and some againe use the young leaves and tender stems, first bioled for a sallet with some other herbes as they please, or else, of it selfe with vineger. This hearbe hath the same operation that persly hath; but yet more forcibly, as being of it selfe of a hotter quality.
Of Clary. Sela^ea.The herbe Clary is in great use also, especially among women, which they esteeme soveraine good against their immoderate fluxes, and strengthening of the backe, howbeit I cannot find any such thing recorded by antiquity. They use commonly here with us in the countrie to fry it with egges.
Of Penniroyall.Penniroyall, an hearbe well knowne both in towne and countrie, is of very good use, and very wholesome for the body of man and woman; especially, it is best for phlegmaticke constitutions, and ancient people, and is very good for women, such especially as are any waies troubled with any manner of stoppage. Some call it pudding grasse; by reason it is often used in puddings, being small shred, and mingled with the blood,Vertues of penniroyall. which in my opinion is very good, and would wish none made without it. It is good for a weake waterish stomack, against the wind colicke, provoketh urine, and cleanseth the urinarie passages; it is good in obstructions of the pipes of the lungs, and others also. It is comfortable in all cold diseases of the head and nerves. It is hot and dry about the third degree; howbeit our ordinary garden penniroyall, I thinke, commeth somewhat short of this intense degree.
There is yet an other herbe in frequent use amongst other pot-herbes, and called here in the countrie Pot-marjoram,Pot-marioram. which is nothing else save a sort of Organy, called Origanum. The qualities and properties in Physicke, because I thinke they differ not much from the former, therefore I need not to insist upon them.
If I should passe by this so soveraine and noble a simple,Of Mints. I should much wrong the publike, it being of so excellent an eminency.The vertues. All sorts of Mints are good, howbeit, that wee commonly call the garden Speare-mints is of all others the best. It is hot and dry; howbeit, I think our garden mints doth not exceed the second degree. It is very good to comfort the stomake, both greene and dry, being good against vomiting and all manner of immoderate fluxes of the belly, or other in women, which both the red mints and this speare-mints effect. Their smell comforteth both the animall and vitall spirits. Besides, it cleanseth the kidneyes, killeth worms, and stayeth the effusion of blood. It hath beene an inveterate opinion among the antients, that this plant procured barrenesse; and therefore was not to bee sowne in time of warre; as Hener. Meth. ad praxim. lib. 2. cap. 9. ex Arist. probl 20.2. a late writer allegeth out of Aristotle. But this opinion is most false and erroneous, if we shall attribute any specificall quality to this plant, whereby it should cause sterility. I doe not denie but in hot and dry wombs, especially excessively used, it might bee some hinderance. But the like may by other plants of a hot or hotter and drier quality, as easily be effected. But since that mints not onely strengthen those parts of generation; but consume also and dry up all cold, raw, and uncocted crudities; (ordinarily proving the greatest hinderances of conception) I see no reason why this plant should not rather be esteemed a great furtherer and friend to generation. This herbe being yong may bee used also in sallets with other herbes. And the uulgar doe well in using this herbe very frequently in their pease pottage, both greene and dry. It is of all other most proper for the use of the stomacke.
Rosemary is, and that not without good reason,Of Rosemarie. in high esteeme among all sorts of people. It is hot and dry in operation, at least in the second, if not touching upon the third degree. It is exceeding comfortable in all cold infirmities of the braine, comforteth the senses and the spirits, especially the animall, as also all the noble parts, and corroborateth all the nervous parts. It is best to bee in most frequent use in the Winter, and cold and aged constitutions of body. Of the flowers of it is made a comfortable conserve for all these uses. And of the same is made a very soveraine good water. And of this simple there is a spirit, quintessence, etc; distilled. But beware of imposture, if thou beest not well acquainted with the preparation.
Marjoram is a sweet, pleasant and well smelling herbe,Of Marioram. hot and dry in operation, and little inferior to the former in this respect. It comforteth all the noble parts, especially the stomacke, and may with good successe be used to further concoction, comfort the stomak, and discusse wind. It much comforteth the brain also: and as the precedent, so is this good against all cold diseases of the braine and nervous parts. But this, as all other hot plants excelling in strong smell, are most appropriate

for phlegmaticke constitutions, cold and moist braines and stomacks.Strong hot smells of fend hot braines. Hot cholericke bodies are thereby offended. And very hot braines are offended with any strong smell. I have knowne some, whom the smell of a Damaske rose would presently make their heads ake.
Of Sage.Of the soveraine vertues of Sage few are ignorant; and the singular good opinion the world had alwayes of this simple, did minister occasion to aske the question, why any man dyed that had sage growing in his garden?Cur moritur homo cui-Saluiacrescit in borto? Contra vim mortis non est medicamen in hortis. To which it was as truely againe answered, that against death no Physicke was to be found. The qualities for heat and drouth doe much accord with those of the plants last spoken of. It is above all others most effectuall against all cold diseases of the braine, and nervous parts: and therefore good for those who are obnoxious to Palsies and Apoplexies. It is good also to strengthen all the noble parts, and very good against wind. It is very good to comfort and cleanse the cold and moist womb, and fit it for conception. And being of an astringent and corroborating quality, it is good to prevent abortion in such as be thereunto subject: as also good against womens immoderate fluxes. The country people in Germany thinke themselves free from poyson all that day after, if they eat in a morning three leaves of sage with a little salt, well dried, and taken in a pipe, as is usuall to take tobacco; it would produce a farre more safe and certaine effect in cold and moist braines; and so might prove an excellent preservative against Apoplexies, Epilepsies, and all manner of cold rheumaticke defluxions, commonly called by the name of colds. And I am perswaded, that if it were to us unknowne,Sage very good and usefull taken as Tobacco. and brought from the East or West-Indies, or som other remote region, and so begunne to bee taken by some of our Shagd or Slasht Mounsieurs, we should quickly have it thus used in the country: for we are all now for the new cut.
Of Bawme.Bawme is a soveraine good cordiall herbe, and is very good against melancholy, strengtheneth the braine, and helpeth the memory, where the defect is from a cold cause.Bawme-water. It is more used for Physicke than for food, and yet it may wel be used in broths, and in sallets mingled with cooling herbs, especially when it is yet tender and young. There is a strong water stilled out of it, very good in palpitation of the heart, and other such infirmities, especially where there is no great heat. It is hot and dry in quality about the second degree.
Of Be tonie.Betonie is no lesse hot and dry than the former, a very good herbe, howbeit in greater request for Physicke than for food; and yet may it well be used in broths. It is a soveraine good herbe for many both outward and inward diseases. It is esteemed principally good for the braine,Vertues. and cold infirmities of the same. It is likewise good against inward obstructions: and is good also to cleanse the kindneies, and all the urinary passages, with many other vertues which were heere too long to relate, and shall suffice to have reckoned up the principall.
Of Tarragon.There is an herbe called Tarragon, as hot as any we have yet named* of a pleasant and delectable smell, and comfortable both to head and heart, whereof is also sometimes made use in the kitchin, and is used in sallets, being used with cooling herbs. It may be used of cold and phlegmatick nauseous stomacks, and so it both warmeth the same, and furthereth concoction.
Hyssop is sometimes used in broths or pottage,Of Hyssop. although in a small quantity, being hot and dry about the third degree, or not farre off it; being also of a thinne, attenuating and cutting quality. It is good for the head; but principally for the breast, and obstructions of the pipes of the lungs, and singular good for attenuation and expectoration of tough phlegmaticke humors. Phlegmaticke cold obstructed bodies may freeliest use it.
Time a soveraine good and usefull herbe, is as hot and dry,Of Time. if not more than hyssop, and is in no small request both for food and physicke; being especially good in cold infirmities, and phlegmaticke constitutions, against the wind colicke, weakenesse of stomacke, and may also conveniently be used against melancholy, and for many other infirmities, which for brevity I here passe by.
Savourie is much of the same vertue that Time,Of Savory. and appropriated for the like infirmities. It is used amongst other pot-herbs, howbeit alwayes in a small quantity, and mingled with many cooling herbes. And this is alwayes in the use of pot-herbs to be observed, that there be a small proportion of these hot and dry herbs used to a greater quantity of those of a cooling quality.
Besides the herbes themselves, some of them bring forth a fr^ut^,Of Artichokes. which is in no small esteeme among many. We will beginne with the garden thistle* which although it beareth not properly any fruit, yet is it answerable thereunto: for before it flowre it sendeth forth, as it were a fruit, which is in no small request, and used by most people. It is most commonly eaten boiled with butter, vineger, pepper, and salt. The young and tender stalkes used after the same manner are nothing inferior to themselves. The Italians eat Artichockes raw, while they are yet young and tender with pepper and salt, which is a food nothing worth, ingendring crude grosse and evill nourishment. 2 de alim. facul. Galen saith, it ingendreth but bad nourishment boiled and dressed; much more than raw. But being used moderately, they will not offend the body. They are accounted hot and dry; howbeit I thinke ours doe not exceed the first degree. They are esteemed flatuous, and to excite lust: and are with all diureticke, provoking urine, and cleansing the passages of urine.
There are three sorts of these fruits of herbs which have som affinity among the^selves, especially two of them.Of the Gourds. The first is by the Latines called Cucurbita and Citrullus, by the French Citroulle, and in English a Gourd, and by som a melon. It is cold and moist, ingendring no good humors in the body, and never to be eaten raw; but boiled, or rather fried with butter or oile, and onions, or the like, which may correct this cold and moist quality. It is of it selfe insipid, and therefore the French use to adde to it vinegar or ver^uice, as some use here in England also. It may be best used of young and hot bodies* but is an enemy to such as are molested with raw phlegmaticke humors or wind. The seeds, as of all the others are good to provoke urine, and qualifie the sharpnesse and acrimony thereof, and therefore of them, as of the seeds of cucumers and muske-melon, with an appropriate liquor, wee may make not onely emulsions to provoke urine, and cleanse those passages;

but even in burning diseases of the brest, lungs and other parts. Of this, as also of Cucumers, may bee distilled a water very good against burning Fevers, and other hot acute diseases.
Of Cucumer.The Cocumer, as they commonly cal it, challengeth unto it self the second place; Authoritatem eis dedic Tibetius Caesar qus nullo non die eos (te^te Plin) mandebat. which came chiefly in credit and estimation by the means of Tiberius Caesar, who scarcely ever either dined or supped without them. The best way of use is, as is the co^mon custome, sliced, and with vineger shaken betwixt two dishes, and then with vineger, oyle and pepper eaten as a sallet. They are very cold and moist in themselves, exceeding the gourd. They minister no good nourishment at all to the body of man; and are best for the hot and dry constitutions, and deadly enemies to the cold phlegmaticke body, and such as are subject to wind. Before they be big, they use to pickle them up with vineger and salt, and use them in Winter as a sallet, and so I hold them best, as having then lost a great deale of their crude and unconcocted moisture. Nos ^ic gravitate medica decernimu^, a Cucum^^um pepo^umque esu abstinendum: quoniam in venire corrupti succum pariunt proximam ei, qui a laeta^ibus medicamentis proficiscitur. Et eodem capite, Galenus cibis hominum perpe^uo abdicandos censuit, ut caetera ^i aria in^qu^oris su^c^ vivunt, Autore (...), in stomacho in po^^erum diem, nec persici qu^ani. Quod si ^i^cantur a v^^tricuto (id enim p^ssunt qui^am peculiari quadam natura) nibilominus longiori tempore in eo durant, atque si immodice haurtantur, gel. dum simul ac crassum in venas diffunaunt suc^u^; quem po^ea venae sua oncoquendi facultate vix in probum sanguinum valent commutare. Compertum est eos qui eu diut^us liberalinsque vescuntur, morosis febribus, morbisque alijs difficiboribus opportuniores fieri. Audio Venetos in perniciales pe^titentesque ob ij^ cib^s aegritudi^es ^ncidere: Forenles in Gallia, propter esum frequentiorem Cucumerum, obnoxios fieri f^bribus non est dubitanaum. Si quis valctud ni consuluere velit, neque seret neque edet, cum lantum fit in eorum e^ca periculi. Bru^er. de re ciba^ia lib 8. cap. 89.O^ mu^k-melons. 8. de simplic. medicfacultat.^lutt by them procure^ to the body.Caution for travellers.How to discerne the best. But a late writer rejecteth the use of them how curiously soever prepared; and imputeth the raigning of many contumacious Fevers, and other diseases in France, amongst other causes, to the too frequent use of this unwholesome fruit.
There is yet another fruit called a melon, and with us commonly a muske-melon: the French call them Melons, and the Poitevins in France Poupon, from the Latine Pepo, which is thought, was only a great ripe cucumer. This is the best of the bunch, as is the Proverbe; howbeit in this our cold and moist climat I hold them nothing worth. This fruit moistneth very much, and is by many esteemed to be cold in quality: but for my part, the sweetnes of their taste (and therefore by the French called sugar melons) make me rather of opinion that they partake of som heat, or at the least that they are temperate. Galen esteemeth them far better than any of the former, as being of a more solid substance, and nothing so miost. They stir up the appetit, provoke urine, and moisten the body. They are pleasant to the taste, but are easily converted into choler, and so produce both putrid Fevers, and the bloudy fluxe; as I have observed in France, where they abound; and therfore let our yong Gentlemen travellers take heed, lest sweet meate at length prove to have sowre sauce. They are to be eaten before meales, as many Sommer-fruits, and some counsel a cup of wine after them. But whither that wil not too speedily carry those crudities into the small veines, may be questioned. The best grow in France, Italy and Spaine, and such hot countries: and in France, from Tours southward. In and about Paris they are nothing so good, the ground being so forced by art, they growing, as it were on dung-hills. They may be discerned to be good by these properties following. First if they be heavy, of a pleasant smell; if they have thicke stalks, and the outward skinne greene; and withall they must have the inward pulpe firme without moisture, and the seeds sticking fast to it. I have somewhat the longer insisted upon this point, to acquaint travellers with the nature, use and danger of such things as are not so common with us here at home.



CHAP. XVI.

Of Fruits of trees, especially of shrubs, ordinarily used for food, and often for Physicke: and first of Straw-berries, Raspes, Mulberries, Goose-berries, Currants, (commonly so called) red and black, and Whortles, and Bil-berries, of Barberies, of Cherries, Plummes, Abricoks and Peaches.

IT is more than time wee come now to the fruites of trees which ministred unto mankind both in the state of innocency,Fruits rare and deare in antient times. and after also his food for a long time. But after varietie of other food was found out, they were commonly served in for after-courses; or as the French call it, for desert. But after a while when men beganne to neglect this point of good husbandry, fruits became so dear that gold could scarce buy them. In the time when Varro lived, they were equalled with the weight of gold. In Plinies time a Peach was ordinarily sold for three hundreth pence.Division of fruits. We will divide all fruits according to the usuall manner, into those of a shorter, or of a longer continuance. Those of shorter continuance, are by reason of their short continuance, so termed; called therfore fugaces, or flying away; as also Horarii, as it were, during but for a short season: and such are Mulberries, Cherries, Peaches, Abricocks, etc. The others againe are called of a longer continuance such as are divers sorts of Apples, and som sorts of Peares.Nourishme^t of fruits. All sorts of fruits minister but small nourishment to the body; and most fruits yeeld but bad, especially those of shorter continuance. The cruditie is corrected by preparation; whether by boiling, rosting or preserving.Whether good to eat bread with fruits or no? And some for this purpose use a draught of wine after them; of the which something hereafter. But here is a question moved by a Aleisius Mundella Epist. 34. learned late writer, whether it be good to eate bread with those short continuing fruits or no? He answereth, that if they bee used as Physicke, they are then to bee used without bread or any other food: but if used for food, then bread is to be eaten with them.
Amongst all these fruits we will first beginne with the Strawberry,Of Strawberries. although no fruit of any tree; yet because of the affinity and resemblance of it to the fruit of some trees and shrubs, I follow other mens method. The antient Greekes, it seemeth, were ignorant of this plant, although Plinie mentioneth it, howbeit deceived in the description thereof, while hee ascribeth unto it five leaves,

which is the right Pentaphyllum or our ordinary Cingfoile. The Strawberrie cooleth,Vertues of Strawberries. moistneth and qualifieth hot distempers; and therefore good in Fevers, all maner of inward inflammations, hot and cholerick constitutions. They are of themselves no enemy to the stomacke, unlesse it be very moist and phlegmaticke. Their stilled water is very usefull for all internall heates,Straw berries with creame not to be ordinarily of every one used. and to cleanse the kidnies and urinary passages. In hot stomacks and like constitutions of body, they may safely be used with rosewater or the like. Some use them with creame, whereof I advise weake, cold and phlegmaticke persons beware. And yet this is a dish wherein our Gentle-women doe much delight, howsoever not so agreeable to their constitution of body. Some use them againe with a little claret wine and sugar; which in such constitutions is to be preferred before the former. The Strawberry is also accounted cordiall, for the which cause it may well be used in all cordiall juleps; where cooling especially is required. They are to bee eaten before other food; the which is in all these short-lasting Summer-fruits to be observed.
Of Raspes or Framboeses.There is yet another small fruit, not much unlike the former either in forme or operation, and in no small request both for food and physicke. And although some preferre the Strawberry before the Raspe, yet is not this the judgement of all; this being accounted more cordiall than the Strawberry. And indeed the smell and taste, me thinks, doe insinuate no lesse unto our senses; which occasioned most of the Apothecary shops of Germanie to be alwaies well furnished with the sirup of this simple, in imitation of that great Gesner, who had it in so high an admiration. And although it bee accounted as cooling as Strawberries; yet I incline rather to thinke it temperate, if not inclining to some moderate heat. Howsoever, neither of these fruits nourish much, and moisten apparently, their siccity being very small. This fruit is also esteemed good against the inflammations of the mouth and tensills, and fluxes of the belly. If either of these fruits be eaten in excesse, they ingender Fevers.
Of Mulberries.The Mulberry, as well as the former fruits, is of two colors red and white,Ovid. 7. Metam. the white is of an unsavory taste, and therefore we will leave this tree to the silke-wormes. The Poet reports, that Mulberries were at the first all white; but that afterwards, they were died red with the blood of the two true lovers, Pyramus and Thisbe. They are also to be eaten before meales, or with an empty stomacke; although antiquity used them after meales, as witnesseth an antient Jlle salubres Aestates peraget, qui nigris prandia moris Finierit. Horat. serm. 1. sat. 4. Poet. If eaten with a full stomacke, they ingender many dangerous diseases. And because of their cooling and moistning quality, they are best in hot and cholericke bodies, young persons, and the Summer season, and they loosen the belly also, much moisten the inward parts, are good against thirst, and roughnesse of the throat; and by some are thought to provoke urine, especially our Arabian Physitians; and besides, are thought to cleare the blood from all corruption, for the which cause, some have been of opinion they were good against the gout. And a learned late Iohan. Bruyer de re cibaria lib. 11. ex P^thernio apud Athenaeum. Physitian relateth a story out of an old Author, that in his country, for the ful space of twenty yeers together,

the Mulberrie trees bare no fruit at all; and that for this cause, during all that time, the gout did so rage, that not only men and women, children and eunuchs (contrary to Hippocrates his rule) but even whole flockes of sheepe and goats also were so therewith assaulted, that scarce the third part of them escaped free. But what should be the cause that Mulberries should either cure, or yet prevent the gout; I confesse, I could never yet finde out: and all the colour I can finde for it, is, that by meanes of loosening the belly, they may scowre away superfluous humors, the cause of this disease; and so may many other simples, farre more effectually; so that in this, it will come short of many others; so farre is it from obteining any prerogative above them. And why may not this learned mans opinon (granting that this story were yet true) be a fallacie, a non causa pro causa; assigning that for a true cause which is none at all? Mercur. variar. lect. libr. 1. cap. 4. Another learned Physitian troubleth himselfe much to find out a cause of it; but is faine to leave it as he found it: even so must we where none is to be found; as I am of opinion there is none. Of this fruit is made a sirup for sore throats, called Diamoron. It is best that is made of Mulberries before they be full ripe, which are both more cooling and astringent, in this case much requisite.The Blamble-berry. There is a bramble growing every where wilde in the fields, the berries whereof, before they be full ripe, may be used in defect of the former.
The Goose-berrie was not knowne, it seemeth, in antient times,The Goose-berrie. howbeit now with us, in frequent use.Greene Goose-berries. Green Goose-berries are of a cooling and astringent facultie, and in stead of verjuice are used as a soveraine sauce to divers sorts of meat: and although they yeeld small nourishment to the body, yet are they good to sharpen the appetite, and against thirst and choler, much resisting putrifaction, Goose-berries full ripe,Ripe Goose-berries. are not so cold as the former, yea, rather inclining to a meane temper. The full ripe are not usefull for sauces, and being eaten in abundance, they ingender corrupt humours, and in hot cholericke constitutions, are quickly converted into choler. The unripe eaten raw of hot stomacks, keeping within compasse, will coole the same; but are safelier used, being boiled, and as they use to speake, scalded, and a little sugar and rose-water with them, they prove a dainty dish for this effect. Of Goose-berries not yet full ripe, our Ladies and Gentlewomen know how to make a daintie marmalade, and many other things, fit to refresh the appetite of a weake and languishing stomacke, which for brevities sake I here passe by.
That little berry, which the vulgar call Currants,Ribes, commonly, but falsly called currants. although it have no affinitie with them, and by the Arabian Physitians, called Ribes, is of two sorts, both red and blacke; although the red is most with us in request, best knowne, and most effectuall, both in Physicke and food. It is indeed, most ordinarily used for physicke, although it may well be used also for sauces. The ripe Ribes agreeth much in vertue with the unripe sowre Goose-berry; howbeit I thinke, it rather exceedeth the same. It is cold moderatly, not exceeding the first degree, but exceeding the same in moisture, participating of some siccitie, and a notable astringent qualitie; whereby it strengtheneth a weake stomacke, and exciteth a weake and languishing appetite. It is exceeding

good as the other, against all fevers, inward inflammations, maligne diseases proceeding of putrefaction of humours: as also in hot cholericke constitutions, and young age. But in old age, cold constitutions, and diseases in the breast and lungs, it is not so good: the which is also to be observed in other acide and sharpe liquours and fruits. Of it with sugar is made that composition, commonly called Rob of Ribes.
Of Barberries.Of the like nature and vertue is that berrie, which is commonly called Barberries, and in vse for the same purposes, as fevers, hot stomackes, fluxes, etc. They are used both in conserves, and also preserved.
Lib 3. cap. 69 Of Whotts and whortle-berries.Gerard in his Herball maketh mention of severall sorts of whorts, or whortle-berries, blacke, red and white, all of an astringent faculty, and are called by a generall name Vaccinia. They stop fluxes, and casting of choler, coole the body; for the which purpose the black be the best.
Bilberries, or Bleaberries.There is another berry, which, at London, they commonly call Bilberries, and in the Northermost part of this Iland, Bleaberries, well knowne by the blewish violet colour, wherewith they die the lips and teeth of the eaters. They use commonly to eat them with creame and milke, whereof I allow not in cold phlegmaticke constitutions and stomacks; nor yet in the aged, as was already said of strawberries. This is cold and dry, not exceeding the second degree, and is very astringent, especially before it be full ripe, and therefore may serve for the aforesaid uses, and will helpe well the former infirmities. And this benefit they also bring us, that they may be used in stead of the out-landish myrtle.
Of Cherries.Now, from the fruits of shrubs and the like, we proceed to the fruits of taller trees, (howbeit these next following differ not much from shrubs) beginning first with the Cherry. Of Cherries there be divers sorts differing both in colour and in taste; some being of a pleasant, as it were mixt taste betwixt sweet and and sowre; some, againe being very sowre; and some yet of a loushous taste, being blacke in colour; the former two red.The best Cherries. The first is the best, and of safest use. Cherries are cold and moist, howbeit some more and some lesse. Those we first mentioned agree best with the stomacke, and provoke appetite, cooling a hot stomacke, liver, and like constitution of body; and are good in hot cholericke diseases,Caution concerning preserved fruits. and against thirst. Being preserved, their cruditie and superfluous moisture is well corrected, howbeit in fevers, and cholerick complexions, I wish the use be moderate, as also of all other such preserv'd fruits, for feare of increasing choler by reason of the sugar. The sowre Cherries are nothing so good as the former.The Blacke Cherry. The blacke Cherry looseneth the belly more than the other, and is more for the use of physick than food, not good for the stomacke, and are quickly converted into choler, especially in some bodies. These be the sorts here with us in greatest request; although there be yet some other sorts, by meanes of grafting, which, neverthelesse, all partake of these former tastes, some more, some lesse; and by consequent, their faculties are accordingly to be judged of. In France especially, and hotter countries, there are great diversity and varieties of this, as of divers

other sorts of fruits: and in France, they use to drie them in an oven,Dried Cherries. and keepe them all the yeere, and so they bind the belly. They must be eaten before other meats, as we have said of others already,Cherries, and other such fruits, when to be eaten. and would have it understood of Plums, Peaches, and Abricocks after to be spoken of. And withall, that such fruits best befit hot cholericke bodies, the contrary whereof ^w see commonly practised: but by this meanes, women should have the least there in them, which might, perhaps, prove more prejudiciall to the Physitian than to themselves. Cherries are best new gathered, or eaten off the tree.
Of no other fruit is there greater variety than of plummes:Of Plummes. and they are of two sorts, either wilde, called sloes, or slane; and bullases all, of a very astringent and binding faculty, used ordinarily for physicke, rather than food. And this is to be understood also of any sowre or unripe plumme. The ordinary and domesticke plummes, are used both when they are newly ripe, and dried and kept all yeere.The best Plummes. They differ both in colour, taste and bignesse. The damsons of all sorts (there being both blacke, yellow, and neere unto blacke; called by the French, damas vioolet) are esteemed best among plummes. Those of a firme and dry pulp, and withall somewhat tart, and of a winie taste, as it were, betwixt sweete and sowre; as peare, plummes black and white, date plum etc. are farre better than others, and in my opinion, are nothing inferiour, if not superiours, to the damson. What hath beene said concerning the tastes of Cherries, and the answerable faculties, together with the use and convenient time of eating them, may well and fitly be applied to plummes, that we need not repeate againe the same things.Prunes, or dried plummes sent us from other countries. In France and Spaine, and hot countries, they drie their plummes, from whence wee have them sent hither: and they are either sweet, and come commonly out of Spaine; or else are tarter in taste, and come out of France. All these kinds wee commonly call by the name of prunes, and are all farre better and wholesomer than the others, and are much used of sicke people. The sweeter loosen the belly best, the other coole more in hot diseases, and cholerick constitutions of body.
Peaches and Abricocks differ not much in their faculties,Of Peaches and Abricocks. being both apt to putrifie in the stomacke, and to produce divers dangerous putrid fevers, and other diseases. Peaches are of divers kindes,Peaches of divers sor^^. and in France, especially the South parts thereof, they are very pleasant to the palate, being many of them of a pleasant winie taste, betwixt sweet and sowre. All of them are somewhat cold, and with all very moist; yet some more, some lesse, according to the soile they grow in. In our cold and moist climat, they are little or nothing worth, as seldome comming to perfect maturity. Some doe advise, to correct their cruditie, to wash them downe with a cup of wine, acccording to the old Verse: Ronsard.Petre quid est Pesca? Est cum vino nobilis esca.
But by this meanes the crude juice thereof is quicklier conveied thorow the mesaraicke veines, and so distributed thorow the whole body.Whether wine be to be used after Peaches. The better way were to boile them in wine with a little sugar and cinnamon, and so eat them. Or if they must be eaten raw, let them be

first steeped in a little sweet Canary wine, or muscadine, which will not so speedily passe thorow the capillary veines.The kernell within the peach stone. The kernell within the stones eaten with them, being somewhat hot and drie, will helpe to correct their crude and cold moisture. The like may be said of Abricocks, Cherries and plummes; the kernells within their stones being used after the same manner. And what is said here concerning the use of wine with Peaches, is likewise to be understood of Abricocks and all other such fruits as abound in such cold and crude waterish moistures.
The Abricocke.The Abricocke, with us is farre better than the Peach, both in regard it atteineth to the full ripenesse in the heat of Sommer; as likewise,The kernells of Abricockes and Peaches kill wormes. because it is of a more firme and solid substance. They are to be eaten before meales, sparingly. The kernells in the stones are farre better than themselves, and open inward obstructions.


CHAP. XVIJ.

of Grapes, Rasins, Currants (properly so called) Figges and Dates; and of Apples, Peares, Quinces, Oranges, Citrons, Lemmons, and Pomegranats, Services, Medlars and Corneilles: of Walnuts, Haslenut, Filberds, Almonds bitter and sweet, Chestnuts, Pineapple, and Fisticknnut.

IN the beginning of this chapter, we will take these pleasant and delectable fruits following, beginning with that so noble fruit, the Grape.Of Grapes. Grapes, if they have atteined to perfect maturity, and be sweet in taste, doe nourish and fatten the body, howbeit they ingender wind and crudities, and the flesh procured by that nourishment is soft and foggie, and not firme and solid. Bruyerm. de re cibaria libr. 11. cap. 10. ex Plutarch. Probl. 39. The antient Greekes therefore did inhibite, that Grapes should not be tasted before the Aequinox in Autumne after mid September, and so the body might by this meanes be least indangered. Sweet Grapes are somewhat hot in faculty, and loosen the belly, yet some more than other; and the best Grape is that which bringeth forth the best wine. That which is called the Muscadine Grape, is sweet and pleasant to the palate.Best Grapes. They are much better when they are kept a great while after the gathering: as in France, they will keepe them untill the next Spring, and so they lose all crudity and superfluous moisture. The sowre Grapes are the worst to eate, ingendring no good humours within the body, and wrong concoction; and alwaies the sowrer and harsh in taste,Their use. the worse they are for ordinary eating; howbeit made into verjuce, as the French use greene unripe Grapes, they may helpe a dull appetite, and coole inward hot distempers. Most of our Grapes

here in England, seldome atteine to perfect maturity, and therefore,The best way of use. doe for the most part offend the body, especially phlegmaticke and cold complexions and stomacks. But, if they be boiled and sweetned with sugar, and some cinnamon, or the like added, they will not be offensive. They are to be eaten with an emptie stomacke.
Raisins, which are nothing else but Grapes dried,Of Raisins. are farre better than any of the former, yeelding a good and wholesome nourishment to the body, especially those that come out of Spain, sweet and fair and pulpous,Raisins of the Sunne. which wee commonly call Raisins of the Sunne; and are very good for the liver, lungs, and the infirmities of the same, and of the brest windpipe; and withall loosen the belly, the stones taken out. Other raisins that are neither so sweet nor fat, great and pulpous, how f^^^e soever they are inferiour to the other in taste, etc. so farre doe they also come short of them in their alimentall facultie, and loosening the belly, as being more astringent, and lesse nourishing.
There is yet another small Raisin, brought unto us here ready dried,Of Currants. out of the Straits, called Currants, and is in very great request in all parts of this Kingdome. They are of a temperate qualitie, participating of some heat, and are of good nourishment, a good friend to the stomacke, exciting appetite, and nourish well, especially the red. But let a moderation, as in all other things, so especially in those sweet meats be used, which, by too much intising thy taste, may make thee at length finde by experience, that sweet meat hath sowre sauce. I speake this the rather, for that I finde a very great excesse in this kinde,A great excesse in the use of Currants, and other sweete meats. thorow this whole Kingdome. The teeth, as they make the first onset, so are they often accordingly rewarded for their paines.
As other fruits, so doe Figgs differ in their faculties, according to their age. New ripe Figs are not so hot as the dry barreled Figs;Of Figges. they nourish well, but withall ingender crude and flatuous humours in the bodie, being therefore enemies to the wind-collicke, and other flatulent diseases; and the flesh they ingender is spongious, foggie, and not firme and solid; but withall loosen the belly, which maketh some part of amends. But this fruit is not very frequent here in England, it seldome comming to any maturity:The vertue of Fig. but drie barrelled Figs are with us here in frequent use. They are to good purpose used in pectorall diseases, being of an abstersive facultie: they cleanse also by a diuretick vertue, the passages of urine; and by old Jn libiis de morbi^ mulierum pasiim and alibi. Hippocrates, are much commended for the infirmities of the womb, where cleansing is required, as hee witnesseth in many places of his workes: they expell likewise serosities and superfluous humours from the inward parts to the circumference; usefull therefore to expell poxe, measells, and such like venomous matter to the skinne: And for this cause much used. They are esteemed to further the itch, and often lice also. Let those that abound in choler, be sparing in their use, lest they finde in a short space those humours get the mastery over them. They are farre better for the phlegmaticke and old age, than for the younger sort and hot complections.
The fruit of the Palme-tree, called Dates,Of Dates. is sent us from Syria and Palestina, which are the best: this fruit, especially the sweet fat Date,

nourisheth much, and corroborateth and strengtheneth nature, is of a hot and astringent faculty, and is very good in all weaknesses and fluxes, boiled in broths and liquid substances, and are not to be eaten raw. The greene ripe Dates are moister and colder, and yet neither exceeding in heat: it is good for the brest, and no enemy to the stomacke, and some say, good to provoke urine. But such as are subject to the headach, or feare obstructious, let them be sparing in the use thereof.
Of fruites used after meales.Of Apples.Differances and varietie of Apples.Having spoken of such fruits as are used before meales, now proceed we to such are ordinarily used after; beginning first with the apple. Now of Apples, there are as many sorts, and as great variety as of any other fruit whatsoever: their differences are divers, both in regard of substa^ce, colour,In regard of the substance. taste and duration. As for substance, some are of more firme and solid substance; and some againe of a softer. The firmer in substance are the best for use, and will keepe longer: as the Pippin, Pearemaine, Harvie-apple,In regard of the taste. etc. Againe, they differ not a little in the taste; some being sweet, some sowre; some mixt, and partaking sometimes more of one than another; some againe are insipid, Their faculties are also answerable:Their faculties or vertues. the sweete partake of some small heat; the sowre are cold; the mixt, of mixt faculties, more or lesse, as they incline more to the one or the other.Insipid Apples. The insipid are ful of a crude, superfluous and unconcocted moisture,Sweet Apples. and therefore worst for use, being very windy, and bad for such as are subject to wind: the sweeter and firmer the substance is, the more they nourish,Apples of a mixt taste betwixt sweete and sowre. and are harder of digestion: the middle taste, betwixt sweet and sowre, is the best, and agreeth best with the stomacke; as Russetings,Sowre Apples. Queen-apples, Pearemaine, Pippins, etc. and these are also most cordiall and usefull in physick. The sowre, although they nourish lesse, yet are they more proper for hot and cholericke bodies; but worse for phlegmaticke and aged people. It is also to be observed, both in apples and other fruits,The best way of use. that for the most part, they are not so good eaten raw, as otherwise; But especially when they are new ripe, or before, worst of all.Quodled Apples. Raw Apples before they be ripe, if used, are best quadled, adding afterwards some rose-water and sugar, which cooleth young hot, and choleticke bodies: but it commeth most commonly to passe, that the contrary constitutions, women I meane, have often the better share. But in truth, if reason might beare rule, their share should be least, especially (as they often use) to adde creame to them. Apples are best, that are suffered to come to maturity, naturally, and not forced by art, laying them in straw or hay to mellow,When best to be eaten raw. which is no right and proper maturation. They are best to be eaten raw in winter, and afterwards; but especially of young people, hot and cholericke bodies. It is no bad custome to use with them Carroway Gomfits, as in many places they use to eate them. And rosted and eaten with sweet Fennell seedes, is a very good and wholesome way to correct their flatuous facultie: But I advise those that love their health, to beware of raw Apples, or other fruit before they be ripe; and after observing these former directions, they shall finde some benefit thereby.
O^ Peares.Of Peares, as before we said of Apples, are divers and sundry sorts, differing likewise in substance, taste, colour, and greatnesse. As we

said before of Apples, so may wee here apply to the taste of Peares, that the sweetest are the hottest, howbeit they are none of them tart as Apples. Peares are esteemed more windie than Apples,Faculties of Peares. and withall, of an astringent facultie, and lesse durable; being for the most part to be spent in Sommer, abounding with a crude and superfluous moisture, the cause of their short continuance.The Warden the best The Warden is of the firmest and solidst substance of all others, and therefore the best. It is not to be eaten raw, being then hard of digestion, and ingendring crude and evill humours within the body. Baked or rosted they become farre better, and a wholesome food, in sicknesse or in health. The custome of baking them, stucke with cloves and cinamon, is very commendable, where rose-water and sugar is commonly added. The Bruyerm. de re (...) ^rial^. i^. ex Athe^. (...) antient Greeks were wont to bring Peares to the table in water, that by this meanes, the guests might choose the ripest, which would swim on the top of the water. In France they drie Peares in an oven, and so keepe them all the yeere, and then they are not so windy,Dried Peares. but very good against all fluxes.
Quinces are also in no small request, as well for physicke as for food,Of Quinces. and are of an astringent faculty, and somewhat cold and dry, and are not to be eaten raw; they are so hard of digestion, that a strong stomacke will hardly be able to overcome them: and therefore they are commonly either baked or rosted. They are good to strengthen a weak stomack. Being used before meales they binde the belly; but eaten after, they loosen the same, and represse fumes and vapours ascending up towards the head; and therefore to strengthen the stomacke, and further concoction, this is the best way of use: they are used both preserved, in marmalades, red and white, etc. of which I shall not need to speak, our Gentlewomen in the countrie, every where being so well acquainted with all these preparations. Besides the premisses, there are some other fruites which are sometimes, howbeit seldome, used as food, and yet more as physick, and these are Medlars and Services, cold and dry,Of Medlars, Services and Corneille^. and of an astringent faculty, and therefore to be used after, and not before meales: they must be soft before they be eaten: their greene juice is most effectuall in fluxes. There is yet another fruit, or berry partaking of the same faculty, commonly called a Corneille.
Before wee passe from those kindes of fruits, wee will make mention of some outlandish fruits, in no small request, both in the Kitchin and in physicke; howbeit I am not ignorant, that they are rather to be reckoned among sauces than otherwise; and these are the Orange, Lemmon, or Citron and Pomegranat, which last is rather appropriate for physicke.
The Orange differeth in taste, some being sweet, some sowre,Of Orange^, some more and some lesse, and so their faculties differ accordingly. And the find and the seedes differ from the pulpe or juice,Difference of Oranges acording to the taste. being farre hotter than the sweetest Orange, and yet the sweet partake of some heat; the sowre againe cold, and the sowrer the colder. The sowre are best for the stomacke, used with any meate: the sweete is no wise fit for this purpose. The sowre and tart Orange being cold and drie, is very good for young hot cholericke

bodies, and very cooling in burning feavers and hot diseases; but care must be had in the diseases of the brest, that neither this, nor any other acide or sharp things be unadvisedly used; such things being utter enemies to those parts; and withall, they bind the belly, for the which cause circumspection must be had, even in that regard, where sugar must sometime qualifie the excesse. Those that are of a meane, betwixt those two extremes of sowre and sweete, are the sittest for use, and will agree well with the stomacke.
Of Lemmons and Citrons.The Lemmon is much of the nature of the sowre Orange, but that it is tarter, and of a more cutting and attenuating faculty, exceeding good for hot cholericke constitutions, and very cooling and cordiall in all burning fevers, and a great enemy to all putrefaction; and for this cause, singular good against pestilent and contagious fevers: the excessive aciditie thereof may be corrected with sugar; and for the sicke, we use with good successe the sirup made of the juice thereof: and the whole pulpe of this and the Citron (which, I thinke, differ little but in forme, howbeit some thinke the Citron more cordiall) are preserved for cordiall uses. The rind of all three preserved, or candit with sugar,The rind of these fruits. is good to strengthen a weake stomacke, and comfort the heart. The feedes of Citrons and Lemmons are also very cordiall, howbeit both these and the rind are hot, and the juice very cold, as hath beene said already.
Of the Pomegranat.And although the Pomgranat, taking its denomination either from the multitude of graines, or the countrie Granada in Spaine, be used commonly for physick, rather than food; yet speaking of the others, we will say a word or two of it also, some of them being also by some used sometimes for sauces: they are of three sorts, sweet, sowre, and of a mixt or winie taste, betwixt both: the mixt is the best, and most usefull for a weake stomacke,Of three sorts. the sweete being no wise usefull to this end: the sowre Pomgranat is cooling and drying, and of an astringent facultie; yet not so much as the Lemmon. What hath beene said of the Lemmon may be applied to this fruit, the juice I meane, with some qualification, the acidity not being so great, and by consequent the effects from thence proceeding, being more remisse: the rind of it is very astringent, and therefore much used against all fluxes, as also in putrid and foule ulcers. The flower is also used for astriction, and boiled in decoctions for this same purpose.
Of Nuts.Now we proceed to the severall sorts of Nuts in most ordinary use for food and physicke. All such fruits then that are covered with hard shells, we commonly call by the name of Nut; and amongst all these, the Wall-nut, or Walsh-nut, beareth away the bell. The Wall-nut being new gathered is the best for use,Of Walnuts. being of a temperate facultie, howbeit after becomming older, it groweth hotter; and afterwards being long kept, it becommeth oilie, and then is not to bee used: All Wall-nuts are accounted hurtfull for the pectorall parts, especially the elder they are. Old Wall-nuts require strong stomackes to digest them. They have even before Galens time beene esteemed as a good antidote against poyson, who also maketh mention of that famous antidote made of this same Nut with Rue and Salt; and hee giveth it also

an astringent faculty. Claudius Deodatus Panth gia^. lib. 1. cap. 3. 1^. A late Writer giveth it some commendation in furthering womens menstruous fluxe. They preserve them ordinarily in France and Italy, about mid-sommer before they be ripe, cutting off their greene coat, and after boiling them while they bee tender, sticking them with cinamon and cloves, and afterwards preserving them with sugar, and so they become very comfortable for the stomacke, and good for the heart. The oile of walnuts is not only used for lights in lamps, and by painters for vernice; but is of a great use also for dressing of meats, and in many parts of France, supplieth the roome of butter, and is ordinarily used in sallets: and in my opinion it is better than butter, and wholesomer for use. Lib, 2. ca^. 14^. Dioscorides holdeth this nut hurtfull for the head and stomacke, to be ill of digestion, and hurtsfull for the cough; which must be understood of them when they are old, as hath been said already. The shaddow of this tree is hurtfull to them that shall sit under it in Sommer, and thought to bee called Nux a nocendo, from hurting. Nuts according to our Arabian Physitians, are chiefely to be eaten after fish, according to that triviall verse.
Post pisces nux sit, post carnes caseus adsit.
And this I thinke in regard of their astringent and drying faculty.Of Hasell-nuts and Filberts.
The Hasell-nut is not so good as the former, hard of digestion, especially being any thing old, and hurteth the breast and lungs, and therefore sparingly to be used, especially of weake stomackes. They are best used when they are young, and newly gathered. When they are old, they are of a terrestrious substance, hot and dry, whereas yong and new gathered, they are farre moister, and rather temperate than hot. The best are those we call Filberds, especially those that have red skins. The astriction I, thinke, of all nuts proceedeth chiefely from the skin.
The Almond both bitter and sweet is reckoned among nuts.Of Almonds. The bitter are for the use of Physicke, and not for food. Sweet Almonds are good for the breast and lungs, they fatten and nourish much, espeally their creame or milke. They are of an opening and abstersive or cleansing facultie, and withall participate of some narcoticke vertue,Vertues of Almonds. whereby they further sleepe, and send many vapors up to the head, whereby in some weaker dispositions head-ach is sometimes procured. They are rather temperate, than of any great heat; howbeit the new ripe Almonds are much moister, and somewhat colder. If they be very old and withered, they are not good to be eaten, but onely for oile.The use of Almond^ The older they are, the harder they are of digestion, and offend the stomacke more. Blanched, their skins being taken off, and eaten with rose-water and sugar, they are easilier concocted, moisten and nourish more; but eaten too liberally procure head-ach. They use also to eat them with Raisins in Lent and some other times. The yonger they be, and before they be full ripe the moister they are, and the more appropriate for hot and dry constitutions, and worse for phlegmaticke;Oile of ^ sweet Almonds. the riper may be indifferently used of any age or constitution. The oile of sweet Almonds is exceeding good taken inwardly, being exceeding good in infirmities of the lungs, helping gently to concoct and expectorat

that which was descended upon those parts; but especially it is good for young children with a little sugar candy for this purpose. It is also exceeding good in outward paines and griefes, being of an anodyne faculty, by reason of that temperate discussing and concocting faculty wherewith it is endowed.
Of the Pine-apple or Nut.There is another Apple or nut, call it as thou wilt commonly called a Pine-apple, which is much used in pectorall diseases, and therfore used in compositions for that end and purpose, being good to cut, cleanse and expectorate tough and Phlegmaticke matter out of the pipes of the lungs. These kernels are moderately hot, and somewhat moister, yeelding good nourishment to the body, howbeit hard of digestion, and no good friend to the stomacke. The newest are the best, and easiliest digested. But because this is not a food frequent with us, and not every where easie to come by, nor yet much used for food, I leave it here.
Fisticke-nut.Fisticke or Pistach nuts are more used in Physicke than in food, and are much of the facultie of the former, and are very wholesome, good for the stomacke, helpe obstructions of the liver, are good against consumed or weakened and wasted bodies, and esteemed forcible to procure lust, good to cleanse the kidnies, and strengthen the same. They are better for the aged, cold and phlegmaticke constitutions, being somewhat hotter than the pine-apple kernels. This nut is sent us out of Syria, Persia and Arabia, and groweth also in some places of Italy and other countries, howbeit the best and most we have come from those parts.
Of Chestnuts.There resteth yet one Nut, which some ranke among the glands, which we commonly call a Chestnut, which are not very frequent with us, especially in most places. This nut is thought to bee very nourishing: but it is hard of digestion, and the nourishment thereof is but grosse, and fittest for strong rusticall bodies: This Nut bindeth the belly, stoppeth fluxes of the belly, breedeth obstructions, and hurteth the head. They are used in many places of France for a desert after dinner or supper, either boiled or rosted, together with other fruits.Bread of Chestnuts. And what they can spare from their owne use they bestow on their hogges, which doe exceedingly fatten them. In some parts of France where they abound, and other provision, come especially, is scant; as in the country of Limosin, Perigort, and some others, the country people make bread of them.



CHAP. XVIII.

Of the severall sorts of flesh, especially of foure footed beasts, with their appurtenances and parts.

OF all food flesh is most agreeable to the nature of man, and breedeth most abundant nourishment to the body.Division and differences of flesh. Now flesh is of two sorts; either of foure-footed beasts or of fowle. The flesh againe of foure-footed beasts differeth in quality, not only one kind from an other; but even the same kind from it selfe, according to the age, etc.Differences according to severall circumstances. And of foure-footed beasts some are wild and some are tame, which makes some difference in their alimentary faculty. The tame are of a more nourishing faculty than the wild: and among them the male of such as be gelded is commonly better than the female of the same kind: and so is that of middle age wholesomer, than that which is either very old or very young And againe, among the young, some are better than other; as yong veale (providing it be not too young) is better than lamb or pigge. Besides, very fat meate cloieth the stomacke,Too fat meat is not good. and quickly overthroweth the appetite; howbeit the leane of fat meat is better than that which is altogether leane; but the meane betwixt both is the best.Difference according to the preparation. There is againe some difference in regard of the preparation: for rosted flesh and fried is harder of digestion; yet nourisheth better, and is drier than that which is boiled. And this is still to bee understood of one and the same kind: as rosted mutton is drier than boiled mutton, etc.Baked meat. Salted meat. Baked in an oven, smothered and suffocated within picrust is esteemed for health the worst of all others. Salted meat, and afterwards hung up in the smoake, is farre worse than fresh meat, and ingendreth melancholy, and is very hard of digestion, howbeit a good shooing horne for a cup of good liquor: although beefe and porke a little powdered are good and wholesome food for good stomacks, and wholesomer than altogether fresh. And the moister the flesh is, the more dayes may it endure to be thus corned or powdered: and it is properly for daies, or a weeke or two at most, not for moneths or yeeres to bee salted; I meane for ordinary use, and wholesomest diet. But now we will proceed to the severall sorts of flesh, and will first begin with Hogges flesh, for the likenesse and resemblance it hath to mans flesh, and for the high commendations the antient Physitians gave of this flesh.
Hogges flesh of a middle age, neither too fat nor too leane,Of Hogges flesh, a little salted, hath alwaies beene accounted one of the best nourishers amongst all other forts of flesh. By reason of the superfluous moisture

it is better rosted than boiled. It is best for strong stomackes, and such as use exercise; but not so fit for students, and such as lead a sendentary life, and aged people. Bores flesh, of a middle age, reasonable fat,Bo^es flesh or Brawn. and killed in a convenient season, to a good stomacke is no evill food, especially accompanied with a cup of muscadine, as is the common custome. But in my opinion it were farre better to use it, when there were fewer other dishes on the table, than, as is the ordinary custome, to use it at the beginning of great feasts. A pigge, the younger it bee,Of Pigges. the worse it is for health, and ingendreth more glutinous and and phlegmaticke humors, and by consequent is a great furtherer of obstructions; and is not to bee eaten unlesse it be of some indifferent age: and is the best way of dressing according to the common custome, to rost it, and make a sauce with sage and currants: and if the skin were not eaten, it would be far easier to digest by a weake stomacke; although I am not ignorant, that this is ordinarily of highest esteeme. Pigges, in regard of their moisture are best for dry and chelericke bodies. And for the same reason, it is not so good a dish for phlegmaticke people, moist bodies, and old age.
Of Beefe.^ de alim facul. lib. 3. This assertion of Galens must bee understood of leane old beefe.Next we are to speake of beefe, which hath been by Galen branded with an aspersion of an evill meat, and ingendring grosse and melancholicke humors, and so hath raised an evill report upon this noble dish, so usefull for every man. This flesh, as divers others, differeth according to age. Beefe that is young, indifferent fat, and a little corned, either of an oxe or Cow, is very good and wholesome meate for any indifferent good stomacke, a savory nourishment, and with the which, the stomacke will long agree, without any loathing. It is best that exceedeth not two yeeres or three at most. Old Beefe, especially long salted, is both harder of digestion, and ingendreth grosse melancholike humors, being no wise fit for choice weake stomackes, students and such as lead sendentary lives. And therefore that which is called Steere or Heyfer-beefe is the best. Besides, this is yet to be observed, that the younger the beefe be, the better it may bee rosted; and the older better to bee boiled. Very old tough leane beefe, is only for strong labouring people, that in a manner can turne Iron into nourishment; especially Bull-beefe, which is the worst of all others.
Of VealeVeale being indifferent fat, and of a reasonable age, above a moneth at least, is a meat of very good nourishment, and yeeldeth not to kid it selfe, how highly soever commended. The best way of preparation is to rost it, howsoever it be also often boiled, especially with bacon, which to a good stomacke may not be hurtfull; howbeit a weak one may therewith be offended. Veale is especially good for those who are not of a very moist and phlegmaticke constitution of body, that which is very young, especially within the moneth, is in no case to bee used,Very yong Veale is not to be used. if wee either regarded health or policy, and the good of the common-wealth. Otherwise, Veale, such as we have described it, is a very good wholesome nourishment, and is of easy digestion, not being burdensome to the stomacke at all. And as for excellent good Beefe and Veale, there is no countrie in the world that can parallel,

farre lesse exceed our beeves and veale here in England;English Beeves surpasse others. whatsoever some talke of Hungary and Poland.
Goats flesh yeeldeth no good nourishment to the body,Of Goats. but rather a tough and melancholike: for the which cause they are not with us in use. Their young ones, called kids are notwithstanding every where in very great request, and yeeld to the body a very good and wholesome nourishment, and nothing so moist and excrementitious as Lamb. The Arabian Physitians did so highly esteeme this flesh,Of Kids. that they would have it farre exceed any other. Wee are content to give it the due commendation, but yet we will not yeeld too farre to superlative comparisons. They are best in the Spring and beginning of Sommer.
Lamb, if of an indifferent age, and not too yong,Lambs flesh. is a good and wholesome food. It may seeme strange perhaps to some of our dainty palats, that I should insert this, not too young, it being now ordinarily accounted the best that is yongest; and many great folkes think nothing of that which is common, and ordinary people easily may come by. And therfore the youngest sucking Lambs are by them in highest account and estimation. But by their leaves they are farre deceived that so thinke: For beeing so young they are very moist;Very young sucking Lambs are hurtfull to health. for the which cause they ingender crude phlegmaticke humors, wherewith they pester the stomackes, and bodies of such persons, apt enough of themselves, by reason of ease, idlenesse and dainty fare, to accumulate superfluous humors. This flesh would not at least be eaten before it be six weeks, or two moneths old, if not more. And therefore it were a very good policie, if neither Lambs nor Calves were killed so young as most commonly they are. And as such flesh is hurtfull, so to the phlegmaticke constitutions especially, and old people, and such as are of a moist constitution of body, and is best for cholericke hot bodies, and in the midst of Sommer.
Mutton of a middle age, especially of weather,Of Mutton. Weather mutton. not above two yeeres old, reasonable fat, is a very good nourishment for any age or sex, and is very wholesome for the body of man. Ewes mutton obtaineth the next place in goodnesse, howbeit it is somewhat moister.Ewes mutton.Rammes mutton. Rammes mutton is worst of all other, and very old and tough mutton is hard of digestion, and only fit for extraordinary strong stomackes: especially for labouring people. And it is here to be observed, that the greatest, and fattest pease-fed muttons, and in rankest pastures, are not the wholesomest for ordinary food, howsoever most profitable for the masters purse, muttons of a middle size, and feeding on shorter commons, as the Fuge pabula lata. Virgilius in Georg. Poet well described them, are the daintiest, and wholesomest for food.
After our discourse of tame and domesticke beasts,Of Venison. Fallow and red decre. wee come now to the wild; and here in the first place, we must say something of our Deere, both Red and Fallow, which we, as the French also, call commonly venison. All venison is thought to ingender melancholy, and to be very hard of digestion. Young Fallow-deere, reasonable fat,Young Fallow deer a reasonable wholesome dish. in in my opinion is a very good wholesome dish, and ingendreth not melancholy, more than a peece of good yong tender beefe. It is commonly

attended with a cup of claret, for the opinion of hard digestion. It is a custome to bake it,Baked venison. inclosed within a thicke crust, the eating much whereof, I thinke, doth more hurt to the body, and more offendeth the stomacke than the Venison it selfe. And againe, I thinke, if the Venison be too fat, it more offendeth the stomacke, especially being hot, than by any evill quality in the flesh it selfe. That which is not too fat, nor yet too leane, is the best. It is commonly excessively seasoned with salt and pepper; and in my opinion, oftentimes too much.Red-dee^e (...) to the former. Red-deere, I confesse, is farre harder of digestion, and cannot be freed from the former aspersion of breeding melancholie; and therefore had need of all helpes of correction and preparation, and would be eaten but sparingly like cheese. And such Venison is the better and tenderer,Erroneous opinion. the more it be hunted before it be killed. It is the opinion or some, that Venison is never good untill it be mouldy, and may be found out by the smell. But I love not to dine with so good husbands, that will keepe their meat so long till none can eat of it. And I wish every one that love their health to beware of medling with such putrid mouldy stuffe, and let them feed on wholesomer food.
Of Hares flesh.Hares flesh was among the ancients in so high esteeme, that some ascribed unto it the preheminence above all other flesh, as witnesseth the Inter quadrupedes gloria prima lepus Martial. Poet. But certainly hee was unfit to be a Physitian, who was no better skilled in the nature of diet: for certaine it is, this is a very hard flesh, and of no good and wholesome nourishment, being very hard and dry, and therefore hard of digestion, and ingendring melancholy, and the seldomer they be used, the better it is for health. The fattest are the best,Leverets. and are better boiled than rosted; and being baked with store of butter, or well larded, they are the moister. Yong Leverets are far better, and of easier digestion.
The Rabbet or ConyThe Rabbet or Cony hath some affinity with the Hare, and is somewhat dry in substance, especially the old ones. But yong rabbets, providing they be not too yong, are a good and wholesom dish, in sicknes and in health.
Wild Swines flesh.Wild Swines flesh is esteemed better than the tame; by reason it is nothing neere so moist and excrementitious: but it requireth a good stomacke to digest it.Hedge-hogge.
In many places of Germany the country-people use commonly to eat Hedg,Of the parts of beasts hogges, as we doe other food, which are pleasant to the palat, strengthen the stomacke, loosen the belly, and provoke urine.
Before we leave foure-footed beasts, we must yet say something of some parts of beasts. Among all the parts of the beast, the musculous or fleshy part is that which affordeth the best, and most laudable nourishment,Fat of all sorts as being of a most temperate faculty. Now there bee divers other parts, both inward and outward, much declining from this golden mediocrity. In the first place, all maner of fat of beasts yeeld but little, and that but bad nourishment to the body of man, swimming on the top of other meats, provoking a loathing to the stomacke, hindring concoction; and therefore hurtfull for weake, moist and nauseous stomacks. It is used more for seasoning than for food, and helpeth well dry meats. The fat of Hogges and Geese is of all other the moistest.
The braines of foure-footed beasts are of a clammy and glutinous substance, howbeit not altogether cold,Braines. and ingender the like nourishment, are hard of digestion, overthrow the appetite, eaten especially in any abundance. And the moister the creature is, the moister commonly are the braines. And yet Calves braines, as also of Pigges are with us in great esteeme; as likewise of Rabbets,Preparation of brains which are not so moist as the former. It is good to use with them, when they are used, pepper and vineger, sage and such hot and dry herbs. Such food, as also of the eyes and other glutinous, cold and clammy nourishment, doe best befit young and hot cholericke bodies and dry constitutions.The Eyes.
The eyes are of a clammy and glutinous substance also, howbeit not so much as the braine, and are fit for the like constitutions; and the fatter the beast is, the more clammy and glutinous the eies are, as of fat Calves.
The marrow is better than any of the former,The M^r^ow and being used with moderation* it nourisheth much, and strengtheneth and fortifieth nature, and is good for the throat and pectorall parts. Immoderately taken, especially by a weake and moist stomacke, it overthroweth the appetite, and overturneth the stomacke.
The Tongue yeeldeth a good and laudable nourishment to the body, and easy of digestion, being of a thinne and spongious nature.The (...), The nourishment thereof is more or lesse according to the nature of the beast whereunto it did belong. A little corned I hold them good; but salted and hung up to dry, they are best to commend a cup of good drinke, and make drinke descend more freely.
Hogges cheeks use to be kept soused in sowre drinke and fried,Cheekes. howbeit they yeeld no good nourishment, are hard of digestion, as being of a clammy and glutinous substance. And so these externall parts, as the eares also and the feet partake much of this nature,Eares, snowt, feet. and therefore it is not amisse, that such things are fried with onions and mustard used with them. The like may be said of other beasts, which are also better or worse according to the nature of the beast.
The bellies of beasts are much of the same nature,The Belly or Tripes. yeelding a like nourishment, and are hard of digestion; and therefore wee eate tripes with mustard. A Calves belly is better than others, and that also of a sheepe. But of strong stomacks of labouring men, and such as take great paines, neither this nor any food lightly commeth amisse.
The heart is of a hard digestion, and requireth a strong stomacke,The Heart especially of elder beasts; but yet yeeldeth indifferent good nourishme^t.
The Lungs are of a spongious substance, nourish little, and that nourishme^t they yeeld, is but phlegmatick, and not of any laudable condition.The Lungs.
That Livers, especially of beasts of full age, are of hard digestion,Liver. and ingender grosse humors, and are apt to breed obstructions, howbeit such food nourisheth much. Livers of younger beasts, especially when they suck, are far better, and of a moister substance; and yet are not free from offending weake and tender stomacks, and withal from ingendring obstructions.
And what account can we make of the Splene, the cisterne,Milt and as it were, the very magazin of meclancholick blood, but that it will produce such a nourishment.
The Kidnies.The Kidnies are of a very hard digestion, yea harder than the Liver it selfe, and ingendreth no good nourishment: yet the kidnies of the youngest beasts are the best, and that of a fat Calfe especially. And the older the beast is, the worse they are.
The Vdder.The Vdder of a young Cow, if it be not too fat, although somewhat hard of digestion, yet to a strong stomacke, it will not be offensive. It is not indeed so good for weake stomackes, and phlegmaticke constitutions. And all Vdders are inferior to other flesh, and the worst are those of elder beasts; and therefore the best is to use them but sparingly.
Stones.The Stones ingender a thicke and grosse flatuous blood, and nourish well; yet of the younger beasts they are best.
Blood of beast.Blood of beasts ministers but a grosse and course nourishment to the body; yet some better and some worse. Bulls blood was a poison among the antients. The blood of an Oxe or Cow, howbeit in some place they make use of, yet in most places it is altogether rejected. Hogges blood is now in greatest request in most countries, as being the sweetest, and pleasing the palat best. And because Blood is of a grosse and course nourishment, and withall somewhat dry; it is therefore a good custome to mingle with those puddings some fat of the same beast, some salt and pepper, and penniroyall, or other hot herbs, which helpe well other defects.
Of Milke and what it is.There are some things that come from beasts, yet being no part of the same, as Milke, whereof is made Butter and Cheese. Milke is nothing else save a second concocting and refining of the Blood, drawne up into the dugs, and there by vertue of naturall heat refined, and by a proper faculty of that part, converted into a white milkie substance: and therefore, according to the quality of the Blood, so is the milke also.Best Milke. Milke seemeth to bee temperate in regard of heat or cold; but withall very moist. That milke is best which is of a sound beast, and that both for whole and sicke persons, and that feedeth in good pastures. To nourish well, milke must be new milkt, white and of a good smell; of a meane substance betwixt thicke and thinne; sweet in tast, and free from either sowrenesse, bitternesse or saltnesse; and the beast should bee of a middle age, and feeding upon greene grasse, and in the Spring, or beginning of Sommer. Such milke ingendreth a good and laudable Blood, and very fit to nourish the body. Now for what bodies it is best, together with the manner of the right use, shal hereafter appeare. In milke there is a triple substance observed: the first a thinne waterie substance, called the ferositie or whey,In Milke a triple substance observable. Whey. Butter, being of good use both in sickenesse and in health; and is of a cooling faculty. There is another which swimmeth on the top, called the creame of the milke, being the most airie part of the same; which after it is separated from all the other parts, is called Butter; and serveth us for the same uses that oile doth in hotter countries, being hot and moist: and moderately used, it agreeth well with the stomacke, looseneth the belly,Cheese. and is good against divers diseases of the breast. The third part of milke is that which is most terrestrious; the which beeing prest out, and quite separated from the other two substances, wee

commonly call Cheese, the which is somewhat cooler than Butter, yet lesse or more, according as it partaketh more or lesse of the substance thereof.
Cheese bindeth the belly, is harder of digestion, ingendreth obstructions, and is a great enemie to the stone: Cheese is distinguished according to the milke it is made of, the age, the art is used in the making. Of all others that which is new, somewhat salted,Best Cheese. and made of good Cowes milke, ingendreth the best nourishment; and moderately now and then used will doe no harme to any. My meaning is, of such as have not the creame much skimmed off: for such as are made of milke much skimmed, are farre drier, unwholesomer, and lesse worth than the others. But of this, and other things concerning this purpose, more hereafter in the diet of the diseased.


CHAP. XIX.

Of Fowle both tame and wilde, their severall sorts, as also of parts of Fowles, and of Egges.

THe flesh of Fowles is of easier digestion, hath a speedier passage thorow the body; but yeeldeth the lesse nourishment than the flesh of foure-footed beasts. In all sorts of fowles,Fowle best for use according to its usage. they are best that exceed not a yeere in age, To make them tender, if need be, they are to be hung by the heeles two or three daies; providing alwaies they hang not till they smell.
Among all our tame fowle, our Cocks, Hens, Capons, and young Chickens, are with us, not without good reason, in greatest request, and ingender a good and laudable nourishment, usefull and very wholesome for the body.Of Capon^. A young fat Capon of all others is the best, and yeeldeth best nourishment, and is easie of concoction. Next unto them are Hens indifferently fat and young,Hens. yeelding little unto Capons for good and wholesome nourishment.
Chickens are very good, light,Of Chickens. wholesome and nourishing meate in sicknesse and in health. They are good for weake stomacks, and such as lead a sedentarie life, and use but little exercise. It is not good to use them too young, as is the ordinary custome, having hatched unto themselves this false and erronious opinion, that the younger any thing is, the btter it is in diet. And because such things are not for the most part so common, therefore partly for this same reason,When best for use. and partly out of an affected singularity, many are contented to dwell still in this errour. But when they come to be best, to wit, little pullets, then doe our palate-pleasers esteeme them nothing worth.
Of Cockes.Cocks are inferiour to any of the former, yeeld worse and lesse nourishment, but are hotter than any of the other, and loosen the belly.
Turkies.Turkies of a middle age, and reasonable fat, are a good wholesome nourishing food, and little inferiour to the best Capon, especially the brest and fore-parts, and breedeth very good nourishment. But their fat is somewhat fulsome.
Caution concerning cramming of tame fowle.And here it is to be observed as a caution in all our tame fowle, that it were farre better to let them feed themselves with good graine, then to cramme them with dough, close cubd up, as is the custome. It is true that thus they prove often the fatter: but too much fat makes them too fulsome, and nothing so wholesome.
The Peacocke.The Peacocke is of a very hard, solid and firme flesh, and hard of digestion, being of a hot and drie substance, ingendring grosse and melancholicke humours, and therefore need a strong stomacke. After they are killed, they are best to hang some daies, to make them the more tender. The younger pullets are tenderer and easier for the stomacke to overcome. Others, againe, esteeme this to be of as good a nourishment as a Turkie. It was esteemed a dainty dish among the antient Romans, as likewise of late yeeres, as witnesse Macrob. Saturn. libr. 3.13. our Writers. And De civit. Dei. lib. 2^. cap 4.Of Pigeons. Saint Austine saith, hee had made triall of it, that the flesh of it would not putrifie.
Pigeons are hot, and nourish indifferent well, especially fat, young plump ones, being blooded under the wing, and stuffed with cooling herbs, and sowre Goose-berries or Grapes. It is a preposterous kind of cookerie, which is most commonly used to bake Pigeons with so much pepper, that it is sufficient to set on fire all the stomackes of those that eat them. It is belike conceived, that Pigeons are of themselves exceeding cold. Boiled they are coolest and moistest, and fittest for hot and cholericke constitutions, and Sommer-time.
The Stock-dove.The Stocke-dove is a kinde of wilde dove, or Pigeon, greater in bodie than our ordinary doves, called in French, Pigeon Ramier, from the branches of trees whereon they sit, most commonly in great companies. They are esteemed indifferent good nourishment, howbeit somewhat hot and drie: and therefore in France they often boile them, which is the best way. The younger are the best.
The Turtle.The Turtle is another wilde kinde; but lesse than the tame, or dove-coat Pigeon, and being young and fat, they yeeld good nourishment. In France after they are caught, they keepe them commonly up a pretty while in cages, feeding them with millet seed, by which meanes they become exceeding fat, and good to eat.
^ Goose.The Goose is of no small account among our tame fowle, howbeit it yeeldeth but a grosse nourishment, and nothing so good as the former, harder of concoction, and ingendring more excrementitious humours. The young Goose, called a greene-Goose, is farre better, easier of digestion, and ingendereth better nourishment, howbeit not so good as others.
Wilde-goose.The wilde Goose is drier than the other, breedeth not so excrementitious an aliment to the bodie; yet nourisheth lesse, is hard of

digestion, ingendreth melancholie, as other the like doe.
There is yet a certaine sort of water-fowle,Solan Goose. called by the name of Goose, howbeit not properly, which for this cause, notwithstanding, we here mention: and this is that Solan-Goose, breeding in a little rockie Iland in Scotland, called the Bast, and in one of the North-west Ilands of the same Kingdome, and no where else that I could heare. This fowle or Goose is called Oysan du Bas, by that famous Du Bartas: and indeed it is lesser than our Goose, rather of the bignesse of a good bigge Ducke; and yet for some resemblance called by this name. This fowle is of a fishie taste, like unto the taste of Herring, whereon especially it feedeth. It is all fat, scarce any leane to be seene in the whole carkase. They are found ready in their nests round about this rocke (the young I meane, for the old ones are not eaten) about the later end of Iuly, or beginning of August.The manner of the eating of the Solan-Goose. They are eaten as we eat Oysters, before they sit downe to table, piping hot off the spit, accompanied immediatly with a cup of good claret wine. If they were not eaten thus hot, none were ever able to eat them: for their nourishment, I cannot much commend it; howsoever it be there (for the raritie it seemeth) in no small account, esteeming it in steed of physick (and indeed it ordinarily loosneth the belly thus eaten) and that they shall injoy their health the better a long time after. The nourishment can neither be great nor very good, as is the nature of other water-fowle, wherof hereafter: but this pre-eminence it hath above others, that it slippeth quickly thorow the guts, and so offendeth the lesse.
Among wilde fowle, the Pheasant, without all controversie,The Pheas^n. beareth away the bell: and it is, no doubt, a very daintie dish. They nourish very well, and are wholesome for any age or complexion whatsoever: they are much of the nature of our tame Pullaine, howbeit nourish not altogether so much; yet their nourishment is very good, and easie of digestion, and befit such stomacks as most ordinarily use them: they are esteemed the more excellent by reason of their rarity, Omne rarum carum. It is a dish that doth adorne great mens tables: if ordinary people can come by them, I hope I shall not need to bid them use a moderation in the use of them.
The yong Partridge being fat,The Partridge. is a very good and wholesome nourishment, and of easie digestion; wherefore it is good for dainty stomacks, for weake and valetudinary people: for it strengtheneth nature much: the elder are drier and harder of digestion, and therfore in bounty yeeld to the former. Some, notwithstanding, in winter, esteeme the elder better than the younger; I meane, if both were to be had. It is true, indeed, that in Winter the stomacke, by reason of the redoubling of naturall heat, is farre better able to deale with them, and digest them. They are then to be hung up for two or three daies, which is also in other wild fowle to be observed: It is to be observed, that generally, all wilde fowle is drier than the tame,Wilde-fowle commo^ly drier than tame. and yeeldeth lesse nourishment; yet most of them are easily digested. Againe, in some countries this drinesse is well corrected by preparation; as in France, where they lard them, the which cookrie, as I cannot but commend in wilde fowle, providing the lard be good and sweet; so I think it very superfluous and

needlesse, if not worse, to our ordinary tame fowle, as fat Capons and Geese, yet are they there ordinarily in use.
The Quaile.Among wilde fowle, the Quaile is one of the moistest, and is fattest in Harvest, and nourisheth much; but is easily putrified in the stomack. They need no addition of lard, or butter; but are rather to be baked with spices; being much used, they ingender Fevers, Convulsions, and the falling sickenesse. But I hope the seldome using of them will make amends for all. Their rarity makes them in greater request: but were they as common as our Capons, their credit would quickly be crackt.
The Powt.That wilde fowle, called in Latin Attagen, and by some a Woodcock, but falsely, being bigger than a Perduch, spotted on the backe, like a Jugge, but of of a browner colour, and some call a Powt, the flesh blacke without, but white within; is by some accounted of all wilde fowle the best; is very tender, easie of digestion, good for all ages and conditions, ingendreth good nourishment, agreeing well with the stomacke.
The Moore-cocke, or Heath-cocke.There is also a great Moore-cocke or Heath-cocke, called uro-gallus, or uraga, and greater than our ordinary Cocke, yeelding little in goodnesse to our Turkies, howbeit, somewhat drier, and harder of digestion.
There be divers sorts of little Birds in no small esteeme for ordinary use,The Larke, some of them very good, and some againe, not worth the eating: the Larke is of a good and laudable nourishment, and best and fattest in coldest weather: they have ever beene dignified with a certaine vertue against the wind-colicke. And for this purpose, some wish to stuffe them with Garlicke; but then they lose much of their reputation, Garlike of it selfe being able to bring this to passe. Some to make them eat plump and fat, rost them with their guts: every man as hee likes.
The Thrush.The Thrush is counted little inferiour to the former, yeelding indifferent good nourishment, but that it is somewhat hotter: and as Larkes, so are these also best in Winter, and cold weather. It was in high esteeme Jnter aves Turdus* siquis me iudice certet. Jnter quadrupedes gloria prima Lepu^.Ma^^ial^s.Sparrowes. among the antient Romans.
Sparrowes nourish much, and increase both blood and sperme, and yet are they hard of digestion, especially rosted; but the best way is to boile them; and then hast thou the benefit both of their bodies and their broth, which is restorative.
Linnet.The Linnet yeeldeth good nourishment, and is easier of digestion than the Sparrow; and may safely be used of any.
Black-bird.Blacke-Birds, although esteemed by some a good nourishment, yet others are of opinion they are better to delight the eare with their musicke, than to feed the belly, being bitter in taste, and hard of digestion: but if eaten, the fattest are the best.
The Ster^ine.The Starline is rather worse, and therefore utterly to be rejected.
Whatsoever opinion some have of the Wood-cocke, and would parallell it with the Partridge; yet affordeth it but a dry, melancholick nourishment, being withall hard of digestion: the Winter is their season.
The Snite, or Snipe.The Suite, or Snipe is worse than the Wood-cocke, being more unpleasant to the taste, harder of concoction, and nourisheth lesse; and is very apt to ingender melancholy.
And the like may I say of that little bird called Fildfare,Frid-fare, so common and frequent here every where in the Winter season; and therefore all such as are any waies disposed to melancholy, let them be very carefull and circumspect how they adventure on such meats:
Rails are of very good use, yeeld good nourishment,The Raile. and are easie of digestion.
The Plover hath purchased a great reputation,The Plove^. and high esteeme of a dainty dish; and although it be none of the worst, so is it none of the best neither, being somewhat hard of digestion, and not so good for melancholicke persons.
The Lapwing, by some called the greene Plover, is by some likewise in high esteeme, and yet is it inferiour to the Plover:The Lapwing. and therefore I thinke them wisest that make no use of it at all, especially when they are well supplied with store of other good food. Such as are in want must make use of anything.
Some of those already named, live in Moores,Fowle living in and about waters. or watrish and fenny places: but besides these, there are a many more, both greater and smaller fowle, that live both in and about waters; which, for the most part, are nothing so good, nor yeeld so good and wholesome a nourishment as other fowle which live most commonly in drier places, and feed on better food. Amongst all these,Swanne. the Swan is the biggest, and yet not the best. It ingendereth melancholy, and is very hard of digestion, affording but bad nourishment. And howbeit it agree somewhat with the Goose in the nature of nourishment; yet is it farre inferiour, and of harder concoction. It is accustomed to be served in for a dish at great feasts, with the first course: but those that feed well on this dish, I warrant them need no second course, or else they have better stomacks than their neighbours.
Of Duckes, there be both wilde and tame,Duckes, wilde and tame. all which frequent waters, and live most therein. They are ranked amongst food of good nourishment, being hard of digestion, and ingender store of excrementitious moist nourishment, especially the tame ones: the wilde are of a more solid and firme flesh, and will indifferently nourish a strong robust body that can well digest it. But of choicer stomacks these and all water-fowle are to be avoided; as also of melancholicke persons, and such as use but little exercise; as students, etc. But Ducklings being fed with good food, are easier of digestion, and ingender indifferent good nourishment: yet they are farre fitter for hot and drie bodies, than for phlegmaticke and moist complexions.
The Heron, Storke, Crane, Bustard, Bittour,Heron, Stork, Crane, Bustard, Bittour. afford no good nourishment at all; but are all very hard of concoction, and ingender nothing but melancholy, and abundance of bad humours, Caveat emptor. And indeede, such fowle give no approbation to the palate of their worth and sufficiencie; no more than doth the Sea-meaw, or Sea-gull, and many other such fowle of an unpleasant fishie taste.
The Teale, notwithstanding, hath procured unto it selfe a good reputation, (and not without cause) above his fellow-water fowles.Teale. It is easie of digestion, nourisheth indifferent well, and will not offend a weake stomacke, seldome in water-fowle to be observed.
Moore-hen, or Fenducke.The Moore-Hen, called also by some, a Fenne-Durke, although somewhat more co^mendable than many other water-fowle, in regard of the fatnesse; yet are they not freed from the faults wherewith other wilde fowle frequenting waters are charged. There be yet many more both water-fowles, and which live neer, and in the water and fens, and watry places, which either are not so much in use and request as the former, or if they be, yet differ they not in nature from the former, by the which one may easily judge of their natures and properties. And among such as live in drier places, some are sometime accustomed to eat some other kindes of fowle; as Rookes, or young Crowes, and some others: the which, notwithstanding, are neither so usefull, nor yet of so good and laudable an aliment, as others in more frequent and ordinary use. But these be the chiefe, and which most frequently furnish our tables.
Of the parts of fowle, daintiest, and in most request.But befor wee finish this discourse of fowle, I will say something of some parts of them; as also of things which proceed from them, namely, their egges. In fowle, both wilde and tame, some parts are preferred before others: In fat Capons, Hens, Turkies, the wing is esteemed the best and daintiest; in Geese, Duckes and water-fowle,The wing. the legges, as being in perpetuall motion. And for the same reason in Partridges and other wilde fowle,The legge. the wing is esteemed the best.Pulpous flesh about the brest. But the pulpous flesh about the breast, by reason of the hearts neighbourhood, being drier, declineth from that degree of goodnesse.
The braine.The Braines of the great water-fowles; as of Swanne, Goose and Ducke, which are themselves none of the best nourishment, cannot be much worth. And the moister the creature is, the brains must needes be the worse, being so much the more moist than others. The braines of wilde fowle, themselves of a good alimentall qualitie, and somewhat dry (as Partidges and the like) are the best. But of Pigeons they are starke naught: as among foure-footed beasts, Cats braines are esteemed poison. Howsoever the braines are alwaies farre worse than the rest, especially in water-fowle, where themselves yeeld no good nourishment, even those of the smaller kinde also must needes be of no esteeme at all
The Maw or GussordThe maw or Gufford of yong Hens, Capons, Pullets, Turkies, Geese, or Ducks, although they are hard of digestion; yet if well concocted, and meeting with a strong stomacke, they yeeld indifferent good nouishment. And some have opinion, that the inward skinne thereof prepared, is good to strengthen the stomacke, and to be good against the stone; whereof I am not as yet so well perswaded.
The wings of young fat fowle are easily concocted, and yeeld the bodie indifferent good nourishment: but as for those of old leane fowle I wish-weake and tender stomackes to beware, and rather feed on better food.
The Live^The Livers of ordinarie fowle, although they be somewhat harder of concoction than the Musculous flesh it selfe; yet in young fat fowle, as of the Capon, Henne, Pullet, Turkie or Goose it selfe, they yeeld indifferent good nourishment. The Liver of the Goose among the Romans was in high esteeme above all others: and for

this purpose they fed their Geese in such a manner,The Goose liver in great esteeme among the antient Romans. that the Liver would grow to an exceeding great bignesse. And this the Iewes practise even now in our daies. Their meate they eate mingled with milke, is thought is a great meanes to bring this to passe.
The stones of Cockes or Cockerrells; as also of Turkies, Geese,The stones. Drakes, especially of Sparrowes, are commended for good strengthning meat, and to ingender sperme.
The Egge, although it be not properly a part of the fowle,The egges. yet doth it proceed from the same. The Egge is a good wholesome and temperate food; yet better or worse, according to the Fowle that laid it. Hens and Turkies Egges are most familiar to mans nature, and best and wholesomest for ordinarie use. The white of the Egge compared with the yolke, is cold and moist, and is somewhat harder of concoction than the yolke. But concerning Egges, more herereafter.


CHAP. XX.

Of strange and uncoth Diet, which some people have in ordinarie use; as of Dogges, Cats, Horses, Mules, Asses, Rats, Locusts, Frogges, Snailes, and man flesh.

BEfore we enter upon our Fish, wee will say something of some strange and uncoth kinde of diet, especially flesh, as also some other things not usuall among us: that by this meanes wee may the more be induced to laud and magnifie the great and extraordinarie bountie of our great and gracious God, in affording us such plentie and varietie of good and wholesome food for susteining these fraile bodies, that by this meanes in all moderation and sobriety, and without excesse, we might the better be enabled for his service. And besides, that travellers, which shall by any occasioned necessity be cast upon any such places, may be somewhat acquainted with the nature and faculty of such uncoth food. It hath been already plainly proved how usefull and necessary a food bread is, and how agreable to the life of man, and without the which, all other food whatsoever giveth but small content: and yet there is a people (saith a Purchas his pilgrimage lib. 4. cap. 12. late Writer) that live upon flesh only; and these be certaine Indians, under the command of the great Mogere, and bordering upon China; which also hold all manner of corne to be food for beasts, and not for man: and yet those people live 100 yeeres. I have seen with mine eies (saith Caesar Frederick) that the inhabitants of Pegu or Brama, have eaten Serpents, Scorpions, and all manner of herbs and grasse. This I meane (saith he) not of their extremity, or famine, but ordinarily. Mr Fitch saith the same, that they eat roots, herbs, leaves, Dogs, Cats, Rats and Snakes; they refuse almost nothing: Idem cap. 4. and this is also the custom in Florida, where they eat such vermin; as also ants egs, wood, earth,

and dung of wilde beasts; and keepe the bones of Serpents and fishes to grinde afterwards. Jdem libr. 8. cap. 4. The Guineans diet is strange, as raw flesh, handfalls of graine, large draughts of Aquavitae, Dogs, Cats, Buffles, Elephants (though stinking like carrion, and a thousand magots creeping in them:) and that Lib. 6. cap. 14. Vipers flesh was in use to be eaten, appeareth by Dioscorides. And Pliny relateth,Lib. 2. cap. 16. that the Aethiopians, and Indians, called Seres, and the inhabitants of the hill Athos, (called by Isigonus, Macrobii, or long lived) lived on the like food; and by reason thereof neither in their head, nor whole bodie, were bred any kinde of vermine whatsoever.Of Rats. And that Rats were in request, as an ordinary food among the antients, as also that they had warrens for this same purpose, is apparant; and therefore Lib. 3. cap. 65. and lib. 36. cap. 1. Pliny mentioneth, that Marcus Scaurus, in his Censorian law, abolished and banished from their tables, both Rats, Shel-fish, and fowle fetcht from forraigne parts. But it may, perhaps,Horses, Dogges and Cats flesh. be asked, whether Horse, Cats and Dogges may not be eaten? I answer, that indeed, such creatures not being in ordinary use with us, and being supplied with other variety of usefull creatures, and exceeding any of them in bounty, good and wholesome aliment, I see no necessity of their use. But because in some staits and extremitie, as sieges of townes, and other occasions, there may be sometimes a necessitie of using such food; howsoever, not to be compared with our ordinary flesh; yet doe they not partake of any evill or venomous quality. Indeed, such creatures, as also Mules and Asses,Mules and Asses. especially old and leane, are hard of concoction, yeelding a bad and melancholicke nourishment to the body. The young ones that be fat, are of farre better use, nourish better, and are easilier digested. And as for Dogges and Cats, especially being young and fat, many have often fed upon them, and found them good food. In Italy,Cats flesh no uncoth food. it is no uncoth thing to eat Cats; and even here among our selves Cats have beene sometimes eaten by some of purpose, and by others unawares, who never found any offence by this food. And this same last hard pinching yeere, 1630, some in this same towne, ate the flesh of Cats, and made good pottage thereof. Beside, even Hippocrates himselfe appointed whelps flesh to his sicke, as may in divers places of his works appeare: whereby it may plainly appeare, that such creatures may in time of need be eaten. But besides these, in divers places Pars quaedam Locustis tantum vivit, fumo and sale duratis in annua alimenta. Ii quadragesimum vita annum non excedunt, Plin. lib. 6. cap. 30. and libr. 7 cap. 2. lib. 11. cap. 29. Diod. Sicul. libr. 3. cap. 3. Leo African. descript. Afr. lib. 9 cap. 3, etc. Locusts, which wee commonly call Caterpillers, (a creature whereby God often scourged the inhabitants of hot countries, and wherewith hee also often threatned the rebellious and stif-necked people of the Iewes) have beene, and yet are at this day much used for ordinary food among many Nations, especially the Africans. And this is both by Pliny, and many other Authors, witnessed. How the Aethiopians catch them with smoake, and salt them up, may be seene in Authours; this being their chiefe food whereon in these countries they most ordinarily feed. They use either to boile them, or else to dry them in the Sunne, and beat them to powder, and make meale of them. And that they were used of the inhabitants of Arabia Foelix, whereunto Iudea adjoined, or was not, at least, farre distant from it, is apparent by Iohn Baptist his diet. Now, by the way by occasion of mentioning Iohn

Bapttist, it is to be observed, that Iohn did indeed feed upon such beasts; and not upon the buds of certaine herbs, as Michcaell Taxates and Leonabardus Thurnheyleus, in Onoma^tio suo super Theoph^ Parac. de mellescribentem. Vide Sturbrium antiq. conv^^ l^b. 2. cap. ^. some would have him, drawing the Greeke word (...) to their owne interpretation; which notwithstanding in any antient Author is not found in such a signification as they would have it. And it is againe reported by Epiphanius contra Ebienaeos. Ibid. Ep^phanius, that some Iewes desirous to be lye the truth, (...) read, (...) signifying thereby certaine junkets made of hony or oile, whereof mention is made, Exod. 16. and Num. 11. But these, and many others which for brevity I passe by, are but frivolous and farre fetcht; and therefore let us rest upon this, that Iohn Baptist did indeed feed upon such a food, contenting himselfe with this austere kind of diet, Locusts and wild hony. Now this same late alleged author tells us that this need not seeme so strange untous, since that even of late yeeres some Germane souldiors, even in so great an abundance of all manner of provision, yet used ordinarily to fry Silke-wormes, and eate them with no small delight; and that not without good reason: Nam quae innoxia sum, and sapore and odore tetro care^t, sola opinione constant. Idem ibid. for such things as are indued with no noisome smell or taste, depend onely upon opinion; which is a good rule to be observed in the use of uncouth food. And the Italians eat another worme, differing from the other but in colour to outward appearance, it being black, and the former of a reddish colour; and yet are such with them esteemed as greatest dainties, although ingendred of putrefaction, and not of Egges, as both the Locusts and Silke-wormes are. Now that the Locust was a food, and used to be eaten, even among the Iewes themselves, at least some sorts, may by the 11. chap. of Levit. appeare, where foure sorts of Locusts were allowed to be eaten, and therefore called cleane, and other three sorts forbidden, and called uncleane. Of these creatures I could make a long and large discourse, relating their severall names and natures, together with divers histories of their hurt done in severall Countries at several times, with many other things to them belonging, which I willingly passe by. Whoso desireth to know more concerning these creatures, Let him read Pliny and others, even our late alleged Author.
But besides all the sorts of creatures usefull for mankind, as though this were not yet sufficient, and that our bountifull God had abridged us of necessary provision for the sustentation of this fraile life, Alranarum quoque and coch^earum esum pervenit hominis audaci^, quosi vero tam inops fuerit natura, ut non opulentissimos ad vivendum thesauros, quovis in loco, ubi vita peragenda foret, disposuisset. Ars enim inventa est teste Libav. lib. 1. Batrach. cap. 15. Non quo pacto gallinas, aves, oves, juvencos, brassicam, ^etam, frumen^^a and Cyprinos recte mensis imponeremus, sed prodigiosa andacia portentosoq, ingenio undarum limo vesceremur, ranis; and telluris sordibus, cochleis; silvarumque scabie, fungis, and stagnorum putredine, ostreis, ut aterna sapientiae arcem and domiciliun^ eo praecipitaremus ma^is, quam ista sunt in perniciem procliviora. ^^os artifices mittere oportuit ad Indorum Gymnosophistas, ut discerent stercoraceis cibis utent^^ homines ad speratam vitae diuturnitatem pervenire hand posse. Et tamen dum haec facimus, summi potius quam imi, ferream nobis aetatem, and multos vita annos audaciter promittimus. Claud. Deod. Panth. Hygiast. lib. 7. cap. 45. ex Andr. Libav-Barrach. lib. 1. cap. 15. mans boldnesse hath yet extended it selfe to strange and prodigious dishes. So that now we are not contented to feed on Sheep and Cattell, Hens and Capons, and other such creatures usefull for the maintaining of the life of man; and fit them for our tables: but prodigious gluttony hath now devised to feed upon the excrements of the earth, the slime and scum of the water, the superfluity of the woods, and putrefaction of the sea; to wit, to feed on frogs, snailes, mushroms, and oisters. And that this custome hath beene very antient, may by Pliny appeare;

who writeth that they used to feed snailes in warrens, as they did other creatures. And it seemeth that such creatures were at the first used either as Physicke, or in the defect and want of better food. And it seemeth that some antient Physitians used frogs in Consumptions and wasting away of the bodie, as also in that oppilation of the pipes of the lungs called, isthma. But this was never their meaning that they should be either of them, or any other as an ordinary food, but rather Physicke, or at least physicall food, alimentum medicamentosum. But to speake the very truth, both frogs and snailes are now adaies rather used for wantonnesse, and to please our curious palats, than for any necessity, or defect of other food. And thus are they ordinarily used in France, and some other countries, although yet not in frequent use with us; howbeit, one of these daies these dishes may become as common as our new French fashions of apparell. To enter upon a large discourse of the nature, properties, and preparation of frogs, and the manner of using them, is not here my purpose; and therefore leave it to them that have more leisure, and purpose to feed upon them. If any have a purpose to use them, let them beware of those that are venomous. And my advice shall bee rather to abstaine from such things, wherein there may be either danger or doubt, and to make choice of that which is free from either, where there is such choice and variety. And this I would have also understood concerning mushroms (whereof some thing hath been said already) and the like. As concerning Snailes, they are used for food both in France, and other neighbouring countries: and for this purpose, as the Cochlearum vivaria instituit Fulvius Hi^pinus in Parquiniensi, paulo ante civile bellum quod ^^um Pompe^o magno actum est: distinctis quidem generibus earum; separatim ut essent: albae quae in Reatino agro nescuntur: Separatim Illyricae, quibus magnitudo praecipua: Africanae, quibus facunditas: Solitanae quibus nobilitas. Quin and saginam earum commentatus est sapa and ^arre, alijsque generibus; ut c^chleae quoque altiles ganeam implerent. Cujus artis gloria in eam magnitudinem producta sit, ut octoginta quadcantes caperent singularum calices, Auctor est Marcus Varro. Plin. lib. 9. cap. 56 Verum hoc raninae escae inventum potius surd^scenti libidinibus palato, semper aliquid novi, tanquam per certamen exigenti tribuendum est, quo sopita vis, delitiarum multitudine revocari possi^. Relinquantur ergo ista del^tiae vel extremae necessitati, vel de^iti^sis Italis, Gallis and Hispanis quibus and ^^maces (quas gregatim destina is ad id hortis, et nutrint and impinguans) delica^^ssimus and gratissimus est cibus, quae in delitijs, and mensarum ^uarum la^titijs, ra^arum cl^nes, seu coxas, modo frixas, cum origani and menthemodico assumunt, modo elixas, and cum o^ phacio aut agresta conditas mensis apponunt, nulla necssitate, sed gulae libidine impulsi. Idem Deod. Ibid. antient Romans fed them in their warrens, so doe some even at this day feed them in their gardens. Now some are of opinion that Snailes are of a very nourishing faculty; and for this cause, our women doe often ordinarily indifferently exhibit them in Consumptions of any kind whatsoever; sometimes in milke, and sometimes in broth, even as their owne fancie leadeth them. But by the way, if Snailes be so nourishing, I wonder why our Papists use them so ordinarily in the time of Lent, when as they will not allow so much as a bit of Porke or powdered beefe! They may well answer, they may as well be allowed as wine; and I thinke so too, and farre better, and nourish farre lesse, and with lesse speed, I am sure, than wine and divers other things they use. The reason why they are esteemed of so alimentall or nourishing a nature, is by reason (say som) that in Winter they are able to sustaine themselves with their owne substance: and that for this same cause, Galen appointeth them in Hecticke Fevers and consumptions. But the truth is, that these creatures, by reason of their viscidity, and glutinous tough substance, and the imbecillity and want of naturall hear, loose little or nothing of this their tough and glutinous substance, and by consequent need no reparation of the same. And as for the exhibition of them in Hecticke Fevers, it is rather by way of humectation and refrigeration, than for any strong alimentall quality hee acknowledgeth in them. Etjam fi^entis involvamus, viscidum ^entum, tenacem, ac glutinosum limacum mucorem, artis Spagyricae beneficio, eo perduci, ut levissimo negotio in levissimum lapidem conge^etur: quo vel solo argumento omnes ab ca^^m alii (...). l^berent, qui and ve^tr^cul^ (...), and (...) osis, po^agr^ci^^, ^o o^ibus and vi^ crum (...) ^nibus obn^ (...). Ide^ ibid.Anthr^^o^ (...) men^, eaters. And that they participate of such a slimie glutitinous substance, may from hence also evidently appeare (saith the late alleaged Author) in that by Chymicall art and industrie, this

slimy substance may with small paines be converted into a stone. This might therefore in my opinion deterre any from the use of such an aliment, especially such as are of a weake stomacke, are troubled with the stone in the bladder or kidnies, arthritical infirmities; as gout, s^hi^cira, etc. As also any obstructions of the inward parts, liver, spleen, etc. I have somewhat the longer of set purpose insisted upon this kinde of food, because it is growne an ordinray custome here in the countrie, as I have said, in any consumption; nay in any supposed, and but surmised weakenesse, or frivolous feare thereof, indifferently to exhibit this dish in manner as I have said. Besides, this is done without any consideration of circumstances, either of age, strength, time of the disease, etc. And therefore I leave it to the understanding and judicious Reader to judge, whether this be a legall and laudable course or no. And withall, let the judicious and ingenious Reader judge of the necessity and utility of handling the diet of the diseased. Besides all the former sorts of diet, there hath a barbarous and inhumane custome of killing and eating mans flesh, not of late onely; but even many yeeres agoe, crept into the world; insomuch that wee know for a truth, that now there are divers of those Anthropophagi, or men-eaters in divers places of the world. And truely, I thinke, there is scare any among vs that would easily have beleeved, that any that bare ingraven the stamp and image of his Maker, could ever have harboured so barbarous a thought within his breast; farre lesse to have acted so tragicall and inhumane a crueltie, unlesse it had been by divers true histories testified unto us, and related by word of mouth by those, who, to their great griefe, have been spectators of so barbarous and inhumane a cruell custome. The late histories of such as have travelled of late yeeres into those parts of the Westerne world doe evidently witnesse the truth thereof. And it is yet further recorded, that in Beyond the countrey of Loango are the Anziges, the cruellest Caniballs which the Sun seeketh upon, etc. They keepe o^^en shambls of men^ flesh. etc. Pureb. lib. 7 cap. 10. some of those places they keepe ordinarily shambles of mens flesh, as we doe of beefe and mutton and other flesh: and besides, if they thinke their Slaves will yeeld them more mony, cut out by the joint than sold alive (if there were but a halfe penny saved) they will bee sure to send him to the shambles. I doubt not but that the very reading of these things will strike a certaine horror and amazement in the minds of many men, with an horresco legens, when they consider of the customes of these cruellest Caniballs of all others; and iustly so they may. But have we no such devouring Caniballs here at home among our selves? The law would take hold of so barbarous a fact. But if there be not as bad, if not worse Caniballs among our selves, let the world judge. I could instance in many several sorts of extortioners, and daily grinders of the faces of the poore, if this were a theme befitting my person and profession. But there is one particular kind, which not in my private opinion alone, but of many both of the most judicious and honest, hath beene alwayes accounted and reputed as horrible and cruell an oppression, as any other whatsoever; if not far crueller. My meaning is of depopulating inclosure, wherby many wealthy townes, who before maintained a number of able people, and fit in time of need to doe their country good service, have

now for the most part left only a sheepherd and his dog. But the judgements of God upon their Persons, or at least upon their posterity (most of them I meane) are yet so recent in the memories of most now living, that I need say no more, but wish that others may take warning.


CHAP. XXI.

Of severall sorts of Fishes, both of the Sea and fresh waters, and the various and divers nourishment they breed in the body.

AS in the land we may not without wonder and admiration, behold the great bounty our gracious God; so in that liquid element of water is no lesse to bee seene the rich liberality of our great Lord and Maker, in affording us for food so great variety of severall sorts of fishes. All fishes are of a cold and moist temperature, but some exceeding others in bounty, according to the nature of the water,Division of Fishes. and places wherin they live. Now all fishes live either in the salt-water, which we call the Sea; or in fresh-waters; as Rivers, Lakes, Pools or Ponds.Division of Sea-fishes The Sea-fish are accounted the best; as being of a firmer substance,Best Sea-fish. hotter and drier, and not so clammy and slimy, as the fresh-water Fish: they are also more savory, and nourish better. Among sea-fishes againe, such as have scales and firme substances are the best; and such as are inclosed within shells, divers of them, as Lobsters afford the body good and solid nourishment. Others of a softer and slimier and cartilaginous substance,Nourishment of fish inferior to tha^ of flesh. are not so good. That fish that liveth in a pure water, tossed to and fro with waves, is better than that which hath lesse agitation and motion, and liveth in a more muddy water. And such as live most neare a rocky or sandy shore, are better than where there is much slime and mudde: and therefore were Pisces saxatiles, or rockie fish, for this cause so called, in so high an esteeme among antient Physitians. And so among fresh-water-fish such as live most commonly in cleere, rockie or gravelly Rivers, and which are of a swift course, are the best, an of best nourishment. Such fish againe, as live in slimy and muddy waters, in the fens, marshes, Ponds, Pools and motes, are nothing so good, nor yeeld any good and laudable nourishment to the body. And howsoever, Fish have beene in use and great esteeme among the ancients, especially the Romans, and sold at a very high rate; yet if wee compare their nourishment with that of flesh, it is in many respects farre inferior to it; as not yeelding so wholesome and laudable a nourishment to the body. And it is to bee also observed, that fish are greatest enemies to cold the moist phlegmaticke bodies, and old age, especially the moistest and slimiest. Now something of some sorts of fish. And first wee

will beginne with the Sturgeon, called of the antient Romans, as is supposed, Acipenser and by some, the sea-peacock, which was in so great request among the antient Romans, that not onely was it served in to the table with musicall Pomp; but even they also who carried it in,Sturgeon. were to weare garlands on their heads. The Sturgeon is of a reasonable good nourishing substance, if it be not too fat, which will easily cloy the stomacke; and then take heed of surfetting with this dish, which hath indangered some, and cost some their life, for want of good take heed. We have it commonly brought to us barrelled up, from the Easterne countries, being commonly used at great feasts: and then by reason of the salt and vineger, (although it please the palat) yet must it needs be of hard concoction, and ingender melancholie, and bad humors; being especially mingled with so many severall sorts of food. The young Sturgeon is farre better, and of easier concoction than the old; but if thou be wise, eate as little of the fat of either as thou can. The belly of the Sturgeon is accounted the best.
The Conger, or as some for the resemblance call it, the Conger-Eele,Conger or Conger-Fele. is by some had in no small esteemed; howbeit others againe, as the French, care not for it; and in my judgement in this they are the wiser: for whatsoever account men make of it; it is of hard concoction, and breedeth no good nourishment, and to digest it well, requireth a strong stomacke, and a body free from infirmities; and yet let them use this Fish but a while, and they may perhaps make some worke for Physitians.
Turbot is a good firme fish;Turbot. and yeeldeth good and wholesome nourishment to a good stomacke; and is called therefore by some the Sea-pheasant.
The Plaice is not unpleasant to the Palat,Plaice. and howsoever by some esteemed a dainty Fish; yet is it in very truth very waterish and phlegmaticke, and of too soft a substance: it is best when it is growne to a good thickenesse, being then somewhat more firme.
The Flounder is much of the same nature and nourishment,Flounder. yet somewhat firmer.
The Sole is without exception a good and dainty Fish in sickenesse and in health; of very easie concoction and distribution,Sole. yeelding a very wholesome and good aliment to the body: it is for this cause called the Sea-partridge; or as others say, the Sea-capon. Of this there are divers sorts differing but little in nature and nourishment. This is among all others of prime use for the sicke.
Cod-fish is by some esteemed hard of concoction,Cod-fish. and of a clammie and glutinous substance: but by others againe it is esteemed quite contrary, of very easie concoction, and of a laudable nourishment. I confesse the substance of this Fish is of a moderate firmenesse, and not too hard; and therefore fresh Cod, a little salted, is an indifferent good nourishment. When they are salted and dried, they are far harder to be concocted, and nourish farre lesse. Of these kinds, Haberdene and Ling are accounted the best and daintiest; as againe Stock-fish the worst, concerning which it was not ill said, profecto non magis nutrit quam lapis. It yeelds no more nourishment than a stone. And therefore wee will

leave it with biscuit bread to sailers strong stomackes, when they are unfurnished of better food.
Haddocke.The Haddocke hath some affinity in nature and nourishment with the Cod-fish, howbeit easier to be concocted, and not altogether of so firme a substance.
Whitings.The Whiting is easily concocted, nourisheth but little; yet yeeldeth that which is good, and well suteth with a weake and choice stomacke.
Smelt.The Smelt is a very dainty fish, of a very good nourishment, and free from any exception either in sicknesse or in health, and is pleasing to the palat.
Gournard.The Gournards red and gray are of a firme and solid substance, and yeeld^ indifferent good nourishment, and not so phlegmaticke as many others doe.
Hallibut.The Hallibut, called Vmbra marina is of a firme white substance, and in great request among great ones, as is the Sturgeon; and thought to be nothing inferior to it, and is a good wholesome fish to an indifferent good stomacke, although some thinke it is very easily cococted. It is somewhat a bigge fish, and hath beene in great account in Italie.
Mackrell.The Mackrell is sweet and pleasant to the palat, of a reasonable firme substance, and yeeldeth indifferent good nourishment.
Mullet.The Mullet living neare a stony or gravelly shore, although it be of a firme and solid substance, is easily concocted, and yeeldeth indifferent good nourishment.
Scat and Thornbacke.The fish called Scat, Thornebacke, and all the kinds that have any affinity or neate resemblance to this Fish, are all utterly condemned, as breeding very bad, grosse and putrid humors in the body; and withall is very hard and uneasy to be concocted, and therefore utterly to be abandoned of all such as would live in health; especially such as are of a moist and phlegmaticke constitution of body.
Cuttle fish.The Cuttle-fish is for strong labouring stomackes, mariners especially, being of very hard concoction, and ingender grosse and bad humors.
Wolfe-fish.The Wolfe-fish although it be indifferent easie of concoction, yet is it a very moist, waterie and phlegmaticke fish, ingendring no good humors at all.
Vast and great fish.The great fishes of Vast bulke and body; as all sorts of Whales Porpuises, and many other such afford the body no good nourishment, are very hard of concoction, and are onely for strong stomackes, and time of necessity, where there is want of better food.
Herings.Hering is a reasonable sweet pleasant fish, and moderately eaten is of indifferent good nourishment. Of these Herings there are many sorts, some better and some worse. The best are sweet and pleasant in taste, firme in substance; and indifferent fat; and such being a little corned with salt eate very pleasantly, and are no bad food for an indifferent stomack, and easily digested.
Pilchards and Sprats*Pilchaards and Sprats participate of the same nature, howbeit they are a little sweeter in taste, and eaten in too great abundance will easily cloy the stomacke, and so a dangerous surfet may ensue. But

these and Herings use to bee salted up, and sent from one countrie to another. And some are salted, and afterward hung up and dried: and then wee call them Red-hering and Dry-sprats. But all salt-fish both nourish little, and ingender bad humors in the body, and are hard of concoction.Red-hering. And these being dried are enemies to dry melancholicke and cholericke bodied; but very good to make a cup of good drinke rellish well.
There is yet another sort of small fish of this same nature,Anchoves. called commonly Anchoves, being never used but pickled up, and afterwards used as a sallet before meat. I can give them no greater commendation than their fellowes went before them, as being both of one and the same facultie, and may well bee called the drunkards delight. They cut tough phlegme in a phlegmaticke stomacke, and provoke appetite.
Rochet is accounted a good wholesome fish in sickenesse and in health,Rochet. yeelding indifferent good nourishment, and not offensive to the stomacke.
Besides these, there are yet a great number of other good and wholesome fishes,Shell-fish which this great vast Ocean produceth for the use of mankind, these already named being but some of the principall, in greatest request and best knowne. And as for others not named, their nature and nourishment may by that which hath beene said of the former easily be found out; and no other but have some affinity with some of these already named.
But there remaine yet an infinite number of Shell-fish,Division of Shell-fish whereof we must say something before we come to the fresh-waters. In generall, Shell-fish for the most part ingender crude, viscous and phlegmaticke humors; howbeit some more, some lesse. Of these some are of a farre softer substance, and others of a firmer. Oisters, Mushells, Cockles, and the like are of a soft substance. Lobsters, Crevices, etc: are of a firmer and solider substance. And in nourishment and concoction they differ also accordingly.
Oisters, among all others are in greatest request,Oisters. and for the softnesse of their substance and easinesse to be concocted, they are commonly eaten raw, and before meales, by which meanes they are good to loosen the belly. And although they better befit some constitutions of body than others; as namely, hot dry cholericke bodie: yet are they indifferently used by all constitutions, sexes and ages. But they helpe themselves with the correction of pepper, vineger and onions, and a cup of good claret wine for the most part. But I wish a moderation in the use of this Sea-excreme^t (for it is nothing else, hath bin shewed already) is in divers others, so especially in this and others of this nature and kind.Cockels, mushells, etc
Cockles, Mushells, and such others not much unlike them, are far inferior unto Oisters, as being harder of concoction, and yeelding worse nourishment to the body, especially Mushells. All are enemies to obstructions.
Pranes and Shrimps to an indifferent good stomacke prove good and wholesome nourishment, exceeding any of the former,Pranes and Shrimps. and being indifferent easy of concoction.
Crabs.Crabs and their kinds, Lobsters and the like Shell-fish are of a farre more solid and firme substance, nourish much; but are hard of concoction. The Crab is the colder, and worst for cold and old complexions.
Lobster.The Lobster is better than the former, and may better bee used of colder complexions, provided the stomacke be strong, it being also hard of concoction.
Tortoise.The Tortoise, as living most in the water, deserveth well to bee ranked among fish. It is of a firme and solid substance, being in forren nations often used as an ordinary food. The wood Tortoises are accounted of all others the best. Tortoises have not an evill taste, and yeeld to the body abundance of strong nourishment, howbeit hard of digestion, used liberally they are esteemed to loosen the belly. They ingender tough and clammy humors; and therefore unfit for the wind-collicke, obstructions, stone, etc. They use to prepare them with great art and industrie against Consumptions and Hecticke-fevers. And for this purpose the Wood Tortoises are the best.
Fresh-water-fish. SalmonAmong all our fresh-water-fish, the Salmon in all ages hath borne the bell away, even in the dayes of Pliny. It is very sweet, and pleasant to the Palat, easy of concoction, and yeelding a good and wholesome nourishment to the body, howbeit it quickly filleth the stomacke, and taken in any quantity will not so easily be concocted. The Salmon-trout,Salmon trout, or Salmon-Peale. young Salmon, or Salmon-peale are yet better and easilier concocted than the great and older Salmon. Eaten with vineger they are not so burdensome to a weak stomacke. Many use to keep this Fish sometime in such sowre liquor, although it then nourish lesse. They are taken in great abundance in many places both of this Iland and Ireland. Salt salmon looseth much of its former bounty,Salt-Salmon. as nourishing lesse, becomming harder to be concocted, and ingendring worse humors in the body, as is the nature of salt-fish.
River-trout.The little River-trout among River-fish challengeth the second place, and unto it by some is assigned the first place. The best are such, as are bred in cleere and rockie Rivers. The others that live in great Lakes, and more muddy waters, although in greatnesse they may exceed, yet in good wholesome nourishment they are farre inferior to the others. The Trout yeeldeth a dainty, moist and cooling nourishment, especially to hot and dry complexions.
Perch.The Perch that liveth in pure Rivers, I ever held for as good a Fish, as the fresh-water bringeth forth. It is of good taste, pleasing the palat, of an indifferent firme substance, and may safely bee used of the sicke.
Pyke and Pyckerell.The Pike is of a firme and solid substance, yeelding to none in good wholesome nourishment; that especially, I meane, which liveth in pure Rivers, and not in muddie ponds and pooles. The Pickrell or yong Pike is easiest of concoction. Those of middle age are best for ordinary use, for most people in sickenesse and in health. It may as well be allowed the sicke as any other fish.
Gudgeon.And the Gudgeon is as good as the best River-fish both for sicke and healthfull people, and will easily be concocted with a weak stomacke,

affording the body a good, laudable and wholesome nourishment, and may be called the River Smelt.
The Roch is an indifferent good fish, and affordeth the body no bad nourishment, howbeit it be farre inferiour to the Gudgeon.Roch.
The Allowes yeeldeth good store of nourishment to the body,Allowes. although it be hard of digestion. Take time and leisure to the eating of it, and take heed of bones.
The Barbell is easily concocted, yeelding but small nourishment,Barbell. and that not very excellent, and somewhat muddie in taste; the greater are the best. It is to be observed in the use of this fish (Barbonoa antimonii vitrificati instar totum corpus perturbant, alvum vomitumque horrende, non sine vitae discimine ci^nt, ideoque a^ eorum esu sedule cavendum D^o^. Pant^-Hygiast. libr 1. cap 42. lib 1. Epist. Famil. ad Attitum. saith a late Writer) that the spawne thereof worketh as violent effects in the bodie, both upwards and downewards, as either Antimonie or Sneesing powder, or the like; and therefore wisheth every one to take good heed that they eat none of this stuffe. This fish was in so high esteeme among the antient Romans, that one cost sometimes neere threescore pounds Sterline. And Cicero himselfe maketh it plainly appeare in what high esteeme it was then among great ones at Rome.
But me thinkes I heare the Carpe complaine,The Carpe. that hath beene all this while neglected, being neverthelesse so highly esteemed, and reckoned one of the chiefest fish that furnisheth our fish meales. The Carpe then howsoever in so high an account yet scarce deserveth so high a praise and commendation. It yeeldeth to the body a viscous and clammie nourishment, apt to ingender obstructions, wind-colicke, stone, etc. and therefore I wish the use thereof to be but sparing.
The Brame is better, and of easier digestion than the Carpe, howbeit inferiour to the Perch, and some others.Brame.
The Tench delighteth commonly in slimie and muddy waters, in which it ordinarily liveth:Tench. and although it yeeld abundance of nourishment; yet it is naught, ingendring obstructions, and many dangerous diseases; being especially much used by such as use little exercise, and are used to feede daintily. Strong robust labouring people are better able to overcome the harmes from thence ensuing.
The Lamprey, not onely among the antient Romans, was in no small esteeme and account; but is even at this day accounted an extraordinary daintie fish; but especially among the greater sort,Lamprey. the poore not being able to reach to so costly a sauce. And I may well say of it, that the sauce is farre better than it selfe. The Lamprey, although pleasant to the taste, yet ingendereth it tough, viscous and slimy humours, obstructions, and divers diseases. They use to correct their evill qualities, to make for them a costly and daintie sauce, of wine, sugar, atd cinnamon: but truely in my opinion this cost is but badly bestowed.
Eeles are yet worse than the former, and yeeld a tough, clammie,Ecles. glutinous nourishment, apt to ingender obstructions, the gout, stone, etc. They are of a very sweet pleasant taste, and please the palate well; but their fat, especially, is very loathsome to the stomacke: Eeles living in purer and clearer waters, are yet better than those that live in muddy and foule waters, especially in the fennes. They are best rosted with sage leaves, as they are used, and then eaten with a little

pepper and vineger. A little salted, they are better than fresh; strong labouring people may be bolder with such a ^^od. Let others, as they love their health, be sparing in the use of such a dish.


CHAP. XXII.

Of seasoning meat, of Salt and of Sauces of severall sorts: of Spices used in diet, both in sicknesse and in health.

ALthough bodily labour, moderate exercise, and abstinence from food, untill our stomacks crave it, be the best sauces that can be devised: yet because the world is not contented with that frugality and temperance,Reasons for the use of sauces. which produced the lives of our forefathers to a great number of yeeres; and sicke folkes have many times neede to have their dull appetites quickened and sharpned with some such whetting sauces: besides, that custome, a sedentarie life, choice and tender education, and the qualitie of some such sorts of food thereby corrected and bettered, doe often challenge unto themselves a necessary use of them: That the qualitie therefore of such sauces be not altogether unknowne,Vertues of salt. I will say something of them ere I proceed further. And in these, as in the aliments themselves, I wish a more moderate use than is customed by many. I will beginne with the most noble, most necessary, and of all others in most use and request.
Sa^t, and the excellency, vtility and necessary use thereof.Salt then, which may most justly be called condimentum condimentorum, Sauce of sauces, in generall, is hot and dry, yet drier than hot; and yet participateth more or lesse of these faculties according to the nature thereof, there being so many sorts of Salt, as shall hereafter appeare. Besides, it doth attenuate, cut, and penetrate tough, grosse and phlegmaticke humours. It preserveth moist meats from putrefaction, exhausting their superfluous moisture; and giveth a good relish to many, otherwise unsavory meats: so that it may appeare, that with many excellent vertues is this noble creature indued; insomuch, that it were forme an easie matter to spend much time in the due commendation thereof. But in the use of Salt, wee are to observe, first, that all sorts of food need not the use of Salt:Cautions in the use of salt. And againe, some neede more, some lesse, according to the superfluitie of moisture, the unsavorinesse, or the time we intend to keepe the same.To what bodies most hurtfull. It is againe to be observed, that it is more contrary to the hot cholericke, and verie leane people; and such as are molested with scabs, itches, and whose bodies abound with such humors. The excessive and immoderate use of Salt drieth up the humours of the body, and overthroweth and destroieth the radicall moisture which upholdeth nature. I saw in Saxonie a young maid about

16 yeeres; of age, who would emptie the Salt-seller on the table to eat,History. as she would doe with as much as shee could come by; insomuch that she looked as old and wrinkled in the face as any other at the age of 70. But yet the moderate use of Salt, is for most sorts of meats very necessary; and besides that, it pleaseth the palate, it helpeth also concoction and distribution; by which meanes, divers diseases proceeding from crudities are often prevented. Now, it is to be observed, that some salt is of greater efficacie and power than some other; and for the same cause, some sorts of salt are more usefull and efficacious for some things than other.Severall sorts of salt. There was a kinde of salt among the antients, digged out of the ground under the sands of Liby^, called from thence Sal ammoniacus,Sal ammoniacus. whereof frequent mention is made amongst our antient Physitians, whereof there is now none to be found with us. We have now some salt digged out of hills, in great lumps like stones; called Sal gemmae,Sal gemmae. and answerable to the former before mentioned: and this kinde of salt is found in great abundance in Poland, and many other places; as in Calabria in Italy, and in the county of Tirole in Germanie. There is againe a salt made of salt wells: as at Nantwich, here in England, and at Hale and Luneburg,Salt of salt wells. both in Saxonie. Some, againe, is made of the Sea-water; and that either naturally by the heat of the Sunne in Iuly and August: as at Rochell,Sea-salt naturall, of Bai-salt. Brouge and Marenes in France, and some places of Portugall*Salt of Sea-water by boiling. or else artificially, boiled by the heat of the fire; as in some places here in England, and in Scotland also. And it is to be observed, that where fewest rivers runne into the Sea, the best salt is made. Now, for keeping up fish or flesh for a long time, for some Sea-voiage, or other use, that which is digged out of the earth, made by the heat of the Sunne, called Bai-salt, or of wells, is of greatest force. The other is milder, and well befitting our ordinary use, at table especially.Best salt. Out of these naturall salts by refining is made a fine white salt for ordinary uses. And besides all these, there are yet infinit other sorts of salts made of severall sorts of vegetables and mineralls, and usefull for many diseases.Salt of simples, vegetables and mineralls But howsoever, the use of salt moderately used be excellent; yet would I advise thee, let the use of saltmeats be sparing, for feare of scabs, scurvie,Dangers by immoderate use of salt-meats. itches, and many other diseases.
Next unto Salt, Honie shall succeed,Of Honie. which in all ages hath ever bin of high and great esteeme. It is hot and dry, not above the second degree at most: It is a soveraine preserver from putrefaction, and withall of an abstersive facultie. Cholerick constitutions and young people ought to be carefull and circumspect how they use it, and rather leave it to others, especially to old age, which may safely use the same.Hony for whom most hurtfull, or helpfull. And this is confirmed by the benefit Gal 5. de san t^uend. Antiochus the Physitian, and Telephus the Grammarian found by it. And Plin lib. 22. cap, 24. the Roman Pollio being asked by the Emperour, Augustus, by what meanes hee had prolonged his life to an hundred yeeres? Answered, that hee had used honie within, and oile without. I^ it best for phlegmaticke and cold complexions, being moderately used: for in hot complexions it is quickly converted into choler. It is farre better boiled than raw, and so ingendreth not wind,Boiled hony best fo^ use. especially where the bodie is predisposed; and so it is also more nourishing, easier of digestion, and lesse it looseneth the belly than the

raw; and new honie is better than old, as being somewhat moister and pleasanter in taste. The best honie ought to be very sweet, pleasant in smell,Notes of best hony. of a cleare yellowish colour, indifferent stiffe and firme, yeelding but little scumme on the top when it is boiled. Garden honie is the best,Clarifying of hony. and gathered of sweet flowers; it is clarified by adding a little water unto it, about the fourth part, so scumme it while any froth ariseth or while the water be euaporated, which is known by the bubles rising from the bottome: and if thou wilt have it more pure, put into every pound of honie the white of one egge,Vertues of hony. and afterwards scumme it againe in the boiling. Honie is good in divers pectorall infirmities, the cough, shortnesse of breath, pleurisie, etc, as also in the stone: and of it with divers liquours, are made divers drinkes for this same use and purpose; whereof more hereafter in the drinkes for the diseased. And although honie moderately used, openeth obstructions, being of an abstersive and cleansing facultie; yet immoderatly used, it ingendieth obstructions, and so procureth many diseases, arising from thence. Mercur. variar. lect. libr. 2. cap. 23. A late Writer allegeth, that there was a certaine people in Africa, which out of flowers made abundance of good honie, nothing inferiour to that made by the Bees. There is made of honie, both a water, a quintessence,Metheglin. and divers other drinkes. Amongst divers others, there is one that hath ever beene in no small request amongst our antient Britons, and now known by the name of Welsh, which is that famous and wholesome Metheglin; the which I will here set downe, as I found it in a Butler his booke of Bees and hony. late published booke of Bees. This then is nothing else but a generous kinde of hydromel, bearing an egge, the breadth of a groat or six pence, and is usually made of finer honie, with a lesser proportion of water; namely, foure measures of water for one:Metheglin, how it is made. receiving also into the composition, as wel certain sweet and wholesome herbs, as also a larger quantity of spices: namely, to every halfe barrell, or sixteen gallons of the skimmed must, Eglantine, Marjoram, Rosemary, Time, Wintersavory, of each halfe an ounce; pepper, granes of each two dragmes; the one halfe of each being bagg'd, the other boiled loose, so that whereas the ordinary mede will scarce last halfe a yeere; good Metheglin the longer it is kept, the more delicate and wholesome it will be; and withall, the clearer and brighter. There are yet divers other sorts of descriptions of this famous drinke, and may be altered and accommodated to severall seasons and constitutions and ages. There is to be seene in the same Author a long description of a Metheglin, which Noble Queene Elizabeth of famous memory had in frequent use.
Of Sugar.Sugar hath now succeeded honie, and is become of farre higher esteem, and is far more pleasing to the palat, and therefore every where in frequent use, as well in sicknesse as in health. Whether the antients were acquainted with Sugar or no, may justly be demanded? Certaine it is Gal. 8. Meth and 7. ^mpl. Drosc. lib 2. cap. ^5.Plin. lib. 12. cap 8 etc. Solm. cap. 65. they knew Sugar-canes, and some Sugar they had, which naturally was congealed on them like salt: as likewise a certaine kinde of liquid Sugar they expressed out of Canes, which they used in stead of honie: but that they had the art of preparing it, as now it is in use, and the severall sorts of it with us in our age used, doth no where appeare. Sugar is neither so hot nor dry as honie. The coursest,

being brownest, is most cleansing,Sugar, for what dis. ca^es most ^it.The immoderate (...) of Sugar and sw^^^^ meates breed i^ ^y disenses in the (...). and approacheth neerest unto the nature of hony. Sugar is good for abstersion in diseases of the brest and lungs. Th^ which wee commonly call Sugarcandie, being well refined by boiling, is for this purpose in most frequent request, And although Sugar in it selfe be opening and cleansing, yet being much used produceth dangerous effects in the body: as namely, ^accharum in (...), s^ee^s, ^ob (...) ^il^m abit, ideeque ab f^cque^t^ore, illius p^tiss^mum. quod cal^^ vivae laxavio, and condidius, and si ^um magis red i^tu^, usa arcendi invenes, quibus nocentissimum [History]e^t Sa^charum: dum enim freque^ter and saccharo, and sacchara^^ co^sectionibu^ utuntur, p^ssima scal^^^t, Italorua, Hispanorum and Gallorum, (ad^^ Anglorum imprimu) consuctuaine mes^at^, perpetua siti v^^antur, sa^gainem contrabunt re^orridam, u^ and (...), Cachex^am, cum refraxa^^ vis^^rum internorum (...), and con^^ (...) rh^^ matism^, (...) p^^lore, etiam anhel^tus f^etore, and dentium nigrad^ae sere vexantar. the immoderate use thereof, as also of sweet confections, and Sugar-plummes, heateth the blood, ingendreth the landisc, obstructions, cachexies, consumptions, rotteth the teeth, maketh them looke blacke; and withall, causeth many times a loathsome stinking-breath. And therefore let young people especially, beware how they meddle too much with it. And if ever this proverbe (Sweet meats hath often sower sauce) was verified, it holdeth in this particular. I remember, living in Paris, 1607. A young Clerke, living with a Lawyer in the City, procured a false-key for the closet where his Mistresses sweet-meat lay; and for many daies together, continued thus to feast with her sweet-meats, and loafe-Sugar (whereof there was there no small store) untill at length, hee became so pale in colour, leane in bodie, and withall so feeble, that hee was scarce able to stand on his legs; insomuch, that the skilfullest Physitians of the Citie, with the best meanes they could use, had much adoe to restore him to his former health again. And to what, I pray you, may we impute a great part of the cause of so many dying of consumptions in the weekly bills of the Citie of London? Surely, often admiring at so great a number dying of this one disease, to the number, for the most part, of thirty at least, and often upward; I have ever esteemed this one of the principall causes. Before I leave this discourse of Sugar, I must give the world notice of one thing, to wit, that there is great store of our finest Sugar, and which is most sought after; Nam etsi candido illo colore, and dulc^^^s suavitate m^au os decipiat; fi tamen interior c^us anatomia ob o^ulos ponatur sub ilia albedne deterrimam nigredinem sub eoque dulcore, acerrimos, acutissimorque spiritus, vel eum aquis Seygi^s, seu fortibus certantes partibus vitalibu^ and respirationi dicatis infenfissimos, is facile repererit qui in ossi-[Vineger.]cina chymica sese exercuerit, etc. Claud. Deodat. Panth. Hygiast. lib. 2. cap. 1. Vertitur in bilem praesertim in aestate, and in naturis biliosioribus. Quin and obstructionibus viscerae ^nplicare creditum, quanquam vi^ obtineat obstersoriam. Caterum dentibus, siquid aliud inimicissimam: affert enim and nigredinem, and rubiginem, and mobilitatem, quare ab ejus usu os collui diligenter prudentiores docent. Nos medica severitate pronuntiamus usui^ Saccari mensis nostrae aetatis plus justo familiarem: prastantissimos enim escas putamas, quae suapte natura placent. Nec audiendi sunt qui sapares ciborum dulcedine sacebari fucari praecipiunt. Millia gentium sine s^ccharo, eleganter, ac falicter vivunt, Iohan, Bruyerm ^ere cibar. lib. 10. cap. 8. refined and whitened by meanes of the lee of lime, the which how prejudiciall it must needs prove to the health, may appeare: so that here it may well be said, Sub melle dulce venenum. The toothsomest is not alwaies the wholesomest. Our forefathers in former times; found honie very wholesome; but now nothing but the hardest Sugar will downe with us in this our effeminate and gluttonous age. I say no further, but let those that will not be warned, stand to the perill that will fall thereon, I have discharged my duty in giving warning to the wise, sober, and temperate; I know there are some intemperate apitian palates, who preferre their bellies before health; yea, before heaven it selfe. Verbum sat sapienti, A word is enough for a wise man.
Vineger is a sauce in no small request for seasoning of meat. It is, as the word importeth, nothing else, but a sowre wine, used both to season and to keepe meats, howbeit farr inferiour to salt. For, although it preserve meat from putrefaction, yet will it not keepe it so a long time, unlesse it be often renewed. That it is very dry, even as farre as the second degree, is true; but as for the other qualities, Galen saith, it is

composed of hot and cold. It is of a piercing nature, and apt to dissolve hard stones, wherof Hannibal had a sufficient proofe, while he made himselfe a passage into Italy thorow the Alps, in dissolving the hard rocks by meanes of hot vineger, with the losse of one of his eyes. It is good to attenuate grosse, tough and phlegmaticke humors; it is not so good for leane, cholericke and melancholick people; and the too frequent use of it is an enemy to the nervous parts, the stomacke, guts, the womb; as also the liver and lungs, and all the pectorall parts. Let women, such especially, as think to make themseves look leane and faire with the use thereof (young maids especially) take heed what they doe, for feare of a late repentance.Wine-vineger is the best and most forcible. These strong and forcible effects of vineger, are especially to be understood of that which is made of good strong wine; that which is made of our Beere or Ale, being farre inferior to the other, both in the one and th'other qualities; drying, I meane, and heating and cooling. And that of Wine differeth also, according to the nature and quality of the Wine whereof it is made; that of white Wine being more opening, and of claret more binding. Vineger strongly resisteth putrefaction; and therefore is good in the time of the plague of pestilence, and other diseases proceeding of putrefaction of humours, and strengthneth the gums, and dissolveth soft, phlegmatick and rheumatick tumors thereof. With the addition of some herbs we may make vineger participating of the like vertues, as of Roses, Elder, and many others. That made of red Roses with claret Wine vineger is very good, and most strengthning for the stomack, etc. Vineger made of Cider or Petry, is liker unto the nature of Verjuice made of Crabs, than to wine vineger.
Ver^uice.Verjuice, as it is a generall name agreeing with any sowre green juice; so is it most properly taken in Wine-countries, for that which is expressed out of greene sowre grapes; and with us, we call by that name the juice expressed out of our sowre Crabs. It is neither so drying, nor penetrating as vineger: it is also, without controversie, cold, and is good to stirre up a dull appetite, for hot and cholericke young bodies: but enemie to age, moist and phlegmaticke bodies, and cold diseases. Our Crab verjuice is not so forcible as the other.
Oile.Oile which is expressed out of the Olive berry, hath ever bin both for inward and outward use in no small account and esteeme. Outwardly, it hath bin much used by way of inunction;Vse of oile very antient. but in hot countries especially: and therefore our gentlewomen in this age, which dirt-dawb their faces with their severall slibber-sauces and paints, are nothing warranted by this antient custome, as being by them onely used by reason of the parching heat, which did much dry up and wither that tender part of the body.Oile of two sorts. Oile of Olives is either expressed out of the yellow ripe berry of the Olive, or else before it be full ripe, being of a greenish colour; and therefore call'd oile Omphacine. The first maketh the body more soluble; but is more fulsome for the stomacke, and cloieth the same.
Oile Omphacine.The other agreeth farre better with the stomacke, as being of a more astringent facultie; and therefore farre better to be inwardly used. And this is the best for sallets, and dressing of meat, in such

countries where it most aboundeth. There is yet another oile in no small request, in France especially, oile of Walnuts;Oile of Walnuts very wholesome. which being fresh, and not too old, I hold to be nothing inferiour to the other: the Walnut, as said is, being esteemed an antidot against poison; and this, as well as the other, is good for this purpose, expelling by vomit what is hurtfull. And for ordinary use, either for dressing of meat, as also in sallets it may well be used.
The Olives themselves are ordinarily pickled up for sauce,Pickled Olives. to stirre up the appetite. It is of a temperate heat: they are either full ripe, being then yellow in colour; or else not fully ripe, and greene in colour. The first weaken the stomacke, and ingender but bad humours, the others are more cooling and astringent, and therefore to better purpose, used for sauces, as being fitter for corroboration of the stomacke, exciting of the appetite, staying of casting, etc. They are pickled up with salt, or salt and vineger: the later are the better, howbeit, no great goodnesse in either, ingendering but grosse melancholicke humours, and binde the belly.
Among many other sauces,Mustard. Mustard is none of the meanest esteeme among most people, and is hot even in the fourth degree: and therefore with us, it is commonly prepared with vineger; and in hot countries where wine aboundeth, with must, or new wine, whence have we this name Mustard, from this Must, and ardor or heat. It is much used with the grosser sorts of meats, both fish and flesh, especially, it is most usefull with those of a glutinous and viscuous substance. It is best in Winter-season, in cold and moist diseases and constitutions of the braine. It very forcibly cutteth and attenuateth tough phlegme in the head, brest, etc. For young people, especially, hot and dry cholerick people, and diseases of the like nature, it is worst. If immoderately used, especially by these persons last mentioned, it hurteth the eye-sight, besides many ill offices it performeth to the rest of the body.
Capers are pickled up after the same manner, in salt and vinger,Capers. which is the best way, and doe very well excite the appetite, cut tough phlegme, and cleanse it; as also open obstructions of the Spleene, especially. If dry or leane melancholicke bodies use them, let them be sparing, and wash off the salt, and after they have steeped them awhile in faire water, they may use them, especially with a few Currants, alone, or with oile if they love it.
The young buds of Broom flowers, are used also after the same maner,Broom^ b^ds, Ashkeies. and produce the like effects: and some use ashkeies pickled up in salt and vineger after the same maner, for the same uses, and provoking of urine.
Sampeir, or Sea-fennell, is pickled up, and used in sauces after the same maner, being somewhat hot and dry, exciting appetite,Sampei^. and opening obstructions, and every diureticke, or forcibly provoking urine, and cleansing those urinary passages.
The pleasant flowers of Clove-gilliflowers is often also with vineger and sugar pickled up for a pleasant and dainty sauce, the which,Clove-gilliflowers. besides that they excite the appetite, they are also of a cordiall faculty.
Cowslip-flowers comfortable,Cowslip-flowers. especially for the head and animall spirits, are by some after the same ma^ner pickled up, and used for sauce.

and the like art may also be used with divers other flowers or herbs, according as to every ones minde shall seeme best; and therefore I surcease speaking any more of them.
Of spices in most request and use. Pepper.It is now more than time I come to our spices, which are in no small use, as well in physicke, as used for seasoning of meats. Amongst all these, Pepper, in regard of the generall use, may be accounted one of the chiefe. It is a very hot and drie spice, even towards the fourth degree:Sorts of pepper, and the most in use with us. It is of three severall sorts, and all of them are very hot, and brought to us out of the East Indies, especially the kingdome of Caleent. The white is esteemed hotter than the blacke; and the long most of all, and is of least use; Blacke Pepper is with us in most frequent use; heateth much, cutteth tough and grosse phlegme, helpeth the concoction in a cold phlegmaticke stomacke; is also good against crudities, wind-colicke, and cold in any part, sinewes, or others. It is not to be too small beaten, for feare of inflaming the blood, and other profitable humours of the body; it is safelier used in old age, than in younger people; for whom the too frequent use of it is exceeding hurtfull. And therefore it ought not to be so ordinarily,Caution in the use of pepper. without any consideration had either to age or season of the yeere, as it is, used of every one. Let youth therefore take heede how they use, too liberally, Venison so much peppered and salted in the Sommer-season; and to mend the matter after, make it swimme in wine. It is thought, pepper heateth lesse than other spices:Whether pepper heateth lesse than other spices, and how. and this I doe not conceive, that other spices are indeed actually hotter; but by reason the heat of it is lesse durable, and it is not of so terrestrious a substance. And for this same cause, I suppose, long Pepper, by reason of a more terrestrious substance, and more durable heat, is accounted hotter, by reason of this durable, biting and abiding heat. And this, I suppose, gave the vulgar occasion to call Pepper hot in the mouth, and cold in the stomack. But let the dullest taste try a small quantity of Pepper, and I will appeale to his senses, whether it be hot or cold; so that I shall need use no other argument to proove it.
Ginger.That little hot root, which we call Ginger, commeth in the second place of spices to be considered. And although it be not so intense in heat as Pepper, I meane in the degree, yet heateth it more by reason of its terrestrious substance. It is brought over unto us either dry, or else preserved greene in sirup: and it is sometimes, yea, very often, preserved after it commeth over, being first steeped and boiled in water, which, notwithstanding, yeeldeth much in goodnesse to the former. Dry Ginger is very hot and dry,Vertues in Ginger, and for whom best. and is used to season cold and moist meats, as pepper is; howbeit Pepper be in far more frequent use, either for fish or flesh, especially for fish. Ginger is good to helpe digestion, and to open obstructions, to cut and attenuate grosse and tough phlegmaticke humors, to discusse winde, and helpe to expell it out of the bodie. It is better for aged than for young hot cholericke bodies, or the like diseases.Greene Ginger preserved in the Iudies. Green Ginger preserved in the Indies when it is yet moist and succulent, as it is pleasing to the palate, so is it nothing so hot and dry as any other sort; and therefore may safelier be of younger people used, than any of the other sorts; and is good to eat fasting for a waterish or windy and weake stomacke, and comforteth the head,

being good for diseases of the braine proceeding of cold. Ginger here with us at home is both preserved in sirup, as hath been said already; and sometimes also candied to be eaten dry. This last approacheth neerest to the nature of dry Ginger, and is fittest to bee used of the elder, colder and moister age and stomacke.Ginger here preserved for inferio^ (...) that which is brought us from Iudies. That which is heere preserved in sirup, is farre inferior in goodnesse to that which is preserved in the Indies. And thus prepared, they are hardly concocted by a weake stomacke, and continuing long there, are converted into a tough glutinous substance; of the which,Historie. a late writer bringeth an instance. A Bishop of Basile (saith he) having by the too frequent use of a certaine Minerall water, acquired a very cold and moist stomacke; to correct this crudity, used much this so prepared Ginger, notwithstanding his Physitians counsell to the contrary. At length he fell into a desperate disease whereof he died. His body being opened, in the capacitie of his stomacke were found about two pounds of putrified water, together with a petty quantity of the aforesaid Ginger; some part of it yet continuing still in its owne nature, and some part of it converted into a tough, blacke, glutinous substance, sticking to the sides and cels of his stomacke and guts; some part whereof, hee did also before his death now and then, yet not without fainting and swounding, often cast up. Let others then take warning to use it more sparingly.
The Clove is a spice brought us from the Molucks in the East-Indies, being hot and dry in the third degree.Cloves. It is very much used in the kitchin both for sauces, and sticking of meat. Cloves comfort the head, heart, stomack and liver; helpe the eye-sight, and concoction, and strengthen nature. They are good against fainting, swounding, as also against the plague, and any infectious disease. Besides, they are good against all fluxes of the bellie, proceeding of cold humors, strengthen the retentive faculty, and make the breath sweet. Of this, as of other spices, are extracted water, oile, and other things usefull for the health of mankind, whereon I will not now insist. But I advise young people, hot and cholericke complexions to bee sparing, as in the use of all other spices, so of this also; and of any thing extracted from them.
The Nutmegge is the fruit of a tree growing in the East-Indies,Nutmegge. being covered with that spice we call Mace. They are accounted hot and dry in the second degree, and are good for the same cases for the which Cloves were commended; and although they be not altogether so intense in hearing and drying, yet are they very astrigent, and comfort the noble parts, being also very good for moist, cold, phlegmaticke bodies and cold diseases, fluxes, etc. But still let young, hot, dry and melancholicke persons carefully take heed what they doe. The Nutmeg being yet greene, covered over with a greene huske, as are our Walnuts, is preserved in the Indies, and brought us over: the which is nothing so hot nor drying as our dry Nutmegges; and therfore very comfortable for the head and stomacke, especially, and may be either eaten fasting in a morning or after meales. Mace covereth the Nutmegge, partaking of the same nature, strengthening all the noble parts, being good against cold diseases, and against fluxes, and spitting of blood.
Indian nut.There is yet another great fruit brought to us from the same Indies ready preserved, called the Indian Nut, which is very good likewise to comfort all the noble parts, and strengthen nature.
Cinamon.Cinamon is the inward rind or barke of a tree growing in the East-Indies, hot and dry about the third degree; and yet in regard of the tenuity of its parts (as was before said of blacke pepper) is thought not to heat so much as some other spices. This noble spice, both in regard of the fragrant smell,Vertu^s of Cinamon. and pleasantnesse to the palat may justly challenge the first place of excellency. It comforteth all the noble parts, cheereth spirits, openeth obstructions both of men and women, furthereth the expulsion of the birth, sweetneth the breath, helpeth concoction, and expelleth urine. But still let the same cautions be observed,Cinamon water. which have beene mentioned in the use of other spices. There is out of this likewise distilled a noble water, and in great request for the aforesaid purposes, in the use whereof, notwithstanding, I wish everyone, especially women, to be wise and circumspect.
Saffron.Saffron, although it be a simple growing with us here at home, and in our owne soile; yet is it nothing inferior to any of the former, in regard of the excellency thereof for use. It is hot in the second, and dry in the first degree; and much comforteth and cheereth the heart, and reviveth the vitall spirits. It is exceeding good against all obstructions both in man and woman; against all obstructions of the liver, against the Jaundize, and stuffing of the pipes of the lungs; good also to further the menstruall courses, and facilitate the birth: and therefore let women with child beware of the use thereof. And I advise all to a moderate use of it, by reason that taken in too great abundance it much offendeth the head and braine, and oftentimes procureth the head-ach.
And this shall suffice to have said in briefe concerning the matter of diet in generall both for the whole and sicke, as also of some sauces and spices in most frequent and ordinary use: and concerning divers other things, as yet here omitted in the diet of the diseased, shall hereafter bee somewhat said at greater length. And as concerning our spices, although now we be well supplied from forraine parts; yet are we not here at home unfurnished of many excellent and wholesome aromaticall plants, very wholesome both in the use of physicke and food, and whereof we have frequent and often use; such as are, Rosemary, Lavander, Time, Savorie, Sage, Mints, Penniroyal, Basil, sweet Cervill, Avens, Angelica, and many others. And a Mirandum interim quod nost^^ Germani, relictis muitis egregi^s Plantis, patrio and coelo and solo natis, atque insigni facultate aromati a p^aed^^s; ad exo^icas plantas, aromati^ o^que tum f^uctus, tum semina, cortises atque eodices, non ^olum peregrino and exotico tum Coelo tum Climate; acre ac solo productas; sed etiam ob locorum distantiam, vectura difficultatem, and mercatorum incuriam, dolum, fraude^^que marcidas, putrescentesve ac verminosas confugiant; cum tamen (...): Germania non (...) aromaticas planta^ condiendis cibis and oppo^tu ^^ssimas, and salunerrimas, tam e^dome^^ (...), quam sylv^sis, monto^^^^a campestrious locis indies subministrent; quales sunt Amaracus, Rosmarinus, Sal^ia, lavendula, Sp^ca, Co^us. Nardus, Da^^us, ^asilicum, Mentha Hortensis, Palegium, Origanum, Serpillum, Thymus, Na^^urtium, Piperina, (...) Lep^dium; Pip^r item Germanicum seu Hispanicum, Ceresolium, Aaronis item, imperat Levistici, ac Angelicae radices, and aliae sexcentae, quae insigni suo ardore, mordicatione, and acrimonis, ita saep^^os, linguamque and palotum vellicant, feriunique, ut cum quovis Zinzibere, Pipere, Cardamomo, macere, aut Cinamomo, etc: certare videantur. Deodatus Panth, Hygiast. lib. 2. cap. 3. Germane Physitian much wondreth at his owne nation, that being so well supplied at home with so many excellent aromaticall simples, his country men are so eager of out-landish spices; which both by reason of the remotenesse of those regions, the difficulty of transportation, the carelessenesse of the merchant, and divers frauds and impostures, are often brought unto us rotten, worme-eaten, or at least, that have lost a great deale of their vertues.



CHAP. XXIII.

Of Gluttony, and excesse in the use of food.

HAving now discoursed of severall sorts of Aliments, and the right use of them, I thinke it not amisse to say something of the abuse of these creatures, and the great damage and danger doth from thence insue: and this excesse we commonly call Gluttony, and such as doe thus exceed, we call Gluttons and Belli-gods. Now if ever this saying, Plures gula quam gladio perire; More perish by intemperance than by the sword; I thinke, it is verified in this age wherein wee live. Plato in his time esteemed that citie intemperate which mainteined many Physitians; and used alwaies to exhort his followers to sobriety. Inter epulandum (inquit Epictetus) memineris te duos conviva^ excipere, amniam and corpus, utru^que crapula and inpulvia ob^ut, non re^reari. Riolanus fitius in privatis praelect. Stuck antiq. convir. lib. 3. cap. 9. And remember (saith Epictetus the Philosopher) that at thy meales thou alwaies interteinest two guests, the soule and body; and that both these are by gluttony and intemperance oppressed, and not refreshed. Proverb. 22.2. The wise man wisheth thee to consider diligently what is be before thee, and put a knife to thy throat (saith he) if thou be a man given to thy appetite. Be not desirous of his dainties: for they are deceitfull meat. And since the life of man is since the first age of the world so much abbreviated, why wilt thou by intemperanee abbreviate that small portion of time allotted thee here to live? And if it be forbidden to kill another, what barbarous inhumane cruelty is it for thee to lay violent hands upon thy selfe? Now Gluttonie and intemperance weakeneth the naturall vigor and strength of the whole body, together with all the senses, and hindreth the right operation of the soule, maketh the body crasy, the life short and uncomfortable. Whosoever therefore loveth his life, and is desirous to injoy the benefit of health, let him use a moderation in his meat and drinke; and so let him use these good creatures to comfort and strengthen nature, and not to give the full swinge to his disorderly appetite. To reckon up all the diseases procured by this Gluttony, were too tedious: but let it suffice, that in a word few diseases there are, which are not by this belly-god sin of Gluttony procured to the body: as Apoplexie, Epilepsie, Incubus, called Night-mare,Diseases procured by Gluttony. all manner of distillations or rheumes, oppression of the stomacke, Crudities, Vomits, Lasks of severall kindes, putrid Fevers of severall sorts, disquietnesse and watching; together with a multitude of other more. And some who have been for a long time tormented with that mercilesse tyrant the Gout, which contemned most generous remedies,Harmes procured to the soule and minde* by means of abstinence and spare diet, have at length recovered their perfect health. The mind also, and that reasonable soule, which maketh a man differ from unreasonable creatures, is not a little also by this odious sinne of Gluttony interessed and damnified. Is it not apparent

that it blunts the edge of the understanding? Dulls and deads the intellectuall and reasonable part of the soule? and breeds a sluggishnesse, drowzinesse and stupiditie in the whole man? and doth it not by this meanes make a man altogether unfit for any noble or excellent imploiment? Let no man then esteeme this a small sinne, which is also so antient, that it had its originall in Paradice; and joined with pride, Haec fuit origo humanae miseria, hoc malorum omnium seminarium, hinc mortis mitiu^ natum est, quae crudeli dominatu omnes postea homines oppressit. Stuck antiq. conviv. lib. 3. cap. 9. was the first originall and beginning of all the misery that ever befell mortall man. Besides, this Gluttony proveth fatall to a mans fortunes, and in a few yeeres, moneths or weekes wasteth that which might have mainteined many, a multitude of yeeres. And therefore we see daily by woefull experienee, that many young gallants, having in a very short space galloped out of great estates; as having never well learned that golden lesson,
Non minor est virtus quam quaerere parta tueri.It's no lesse courage to mainteine, than things at first to get and gaine.
Fall at length into penury and poverty: and then being brought up in idlenesse and ease,Excesse and riot of our times. in affluence and abundance, and without any lawfull calling (the bane and breake-necke of many a young Gentleman) before they will wrong their backe and bellie, will rather betake themselves to some such unlawfull courses, that will at length bring them to a tragicall and shamefull end. Now because, by reason of sinne, the nature of man is so apt to exceed in the too too liberall use of the creatures; therefore as well the sacred Oracles, as prophane writers have shewed their dislike of this odious sinne, and exhorted us to sobrietie. And if the wise man commend sobriety in Princes, whose prerogative royall might seeme to beare them out in excesse far beyond ordinary people, what shall wee say of others? Eccles. 10.16. Blessed art thou O Land, when thy King is the sonne of Nobles, and thy Princes eat in due season, for strength and not for drunkennesse. Woe unto thee, O Land, when thy King is a child, and thy Princes eat in the morning. Haere againe the counsell of Ecclesiasticus 31. another wise man: A very little is sufficient for a man well nurtured, and he fetcheth not his wind short upon his bed. Sound sleepe commeth of moderate eating, he riseth early, and his wits are with him: but the paine of watching, and choler, and the pangs of the belly are with an unsatiable man. It is againe in Ezek. 16.49. another place recorded, that idlenesse and fulnesse of bread, that is, excesse in diet, was the sinne of Sodom. And the Luk. 16.22, 23. rich Glutton, who fared delitiously every day, descended into hell, when poore Lazarus was carried into Abrahams bosome. Among the Heathens of old, it will seeme no strange newes to heare of such Belly-gods: as for one Idem Stuckius ex Livio and Aulo Gellio. Sergius Aurata; Abidius a Citizen of Rome; Fabius, who for his great Gluttony, was metaphorically called gurges, a gulfe or deepe pit: Aesop the stage-plaiers sonne, is to posterity recorded for a notorious and extraordinary glutton; who to the end hee might the more easily overcome his great patrimonie,Gluttons and belly-gods among the Romans. dissolved faire orientall Pearles, and served them in at table for ordinary dishes; and besides, provided great store of Parrats, and other singing birds, purchased at a high price, and had them likewise served in at table as though they had beene but ordinary Guat snappers. I need not instance

in any more of these antient and notorious Gluttons, but would wish that the Christian world, yea, our owne countrie yeelded us not too many instances; in so much that of this one subject I might write whole volumes. But I think there is none but can find instances enough, without fetching them from farre, which may save me a labour. But let us heare how the very Heathens had this sin in detestation. That noble Orator Tullie hath this golden sentence. (...) ^ummum esse bonum, vox mihi pecudum (...), non homi^um, etcCicero in Parodoxis. To say that sensualitie or voluptuousnesse is that chiefe happinesse to be sought after, seemeth to me a speech better beseeming a beast than a man. The same Author againe relateth, that when that famous Philosopher Aristotle had read the Epitaph of that Epicurean Assyrian, King Sardanapalus, which himselfe had commanded to be set over him after his death,
Haec habeo quae edi, quaeque exatura libidoHansit, at illa jacent multa and preclara relicta.What I have eaten that I have: this doth me grieve and gall,That good things left my belly paunch cannot devoure them all.
What other Epitaph (saith he) couldest thou have set over the sepulchre of an oxe, and not of a King? But heare a little now the heathen Herat. lib. 2. serm. (...). Poets upon Belligod-Gluttons.

-- Quum corpus onustum
Externis vitijs animum quoque praegravat una,
Atque affigit humo divinae particulam aurae.
When as the body burdned is with outward sinne and vice,
It also loads the inward mind, and weyes it downe likewise;
And fastneth unto th'earth that little part of heavenly breath,

Heare yet againe Pers. sat. another speake to the same purpose.

Qui pote? vis dicam? nugaris cum tibi calve,
Pinguis aqualiculus propenso sesquipede extet.
O bald head shall I tell thee true? to write it doth not boot,
So long as thy fat lericum-panch hangs out full halfe a foot.

And Iuven. sat. 11. another speaketh yet in the language.

Et quibus in solo vivendi causa palato est
Egregius coenat, meliusque miserrimus horum,
Et cito casurus (in paupertatem lapsurus) jam perlucente ruina
Hoc est, egestate apparante.
Talibus a Dominis (luxuriosis) post cuncta novissimus exit
Annulus, and digito mendicat Pollio nudo, etc.
And those to whom the cause of life doth in their Palats rest,
Who sup and dine most sumptuously, still faring of the best,
Yet such men are most miserable, and soone fall to decay,
When they have made their guts their god, and spent their wealth away,
From such like Prodigalls as these, when all things else are sold,
Off from their thumbs and fingers goe their rings of purest gold.
Which being sold and spent for food, they still remaine full poore,
And are constrain'd without their rings, to beg from doore to doore.

But heare yet a lively description of such a spend-thrift set down by another Ovid Metam^rph. Poet.

Nec mora quod Pontus, quod terra, quod educat aer
Poscit, and appositis queritur jejunia mensis:
Quodque satis poterat popalo, non sufficit vni;
Plusque cupit quo plura suum demittit in alvum.
Vtque fretum recipit de tota flumina terra,
Nec satiatur aquis, peregrinosque ebibit amnes,
Vtque rapax ignis non ulla alimenta recusat,
Innumerasque faces cremat, and qua copia major
Est data, plura petit, turbaque voraeior ipsa est:
Sic epula omnes Erisichthonis ora prophani
Accipiunt, poscuntque fimul, cibus omnis in illo
Causa cibi est, semperque locus fit inanis edendo.
There's no delay; what from the Sea, the earth, aire doth proceed
This man requires, blames fasting when tables are furnished,
He among dainties, dainties seekes, and what is fully able
To satisfie great multitudes, will not suffice his table:
The more he sends into his paunch, the more he still would have,
Even as the Sea from the whole earth, all rivers doth receive,
And yet with water is not fill'd, nor with no rainie showres,
All floods that flow from forren lands it drinkes up and devoures;
And as devouring fire we see no fewell doth forsake,
But all the fagots cast therein, doth dust and ashes make,
And still the more you cast therein, the more it still desires;
Such is the nature as we see of all outragious fires:
Even so Erisicthons greedy gut receives and craves withall,
In him one dainty dish of meat doth for another call.
This Glutton alwayes hath a place still emptie in his bellie case.

Now I will make it appeare that great Princes, even of the Heathens themselves have had this vice in great detestation. Alexander in Persarum regia prandium Regis legebat, and coenam in aerea columna inscr^ptam, in qua caetera quoque leges inerant, quas Cyrus scripserat: de triticea farina pura quadringentae artabae. Artaba autem medica modium atticum conficit. De secundaria po^tea farina post puram artabae 300. and de tertia aliae deinde artabae 300. de omni triticea farina artabae ad coenam mille. Grani avenarij artabae ducentae Pol^inis in polentam admixtae, pro offis artabae decem. De berdeacea farina purissima ducentae artabae; desecunda posteam 400 atque etidem de tertia 400. Nasturtij incisi signatique tenuis ptisanae artabae 10: de semine sinapi tertia pars unius artabae. Oves masculi quadringenti, hoves centum, equi triginta, anseres saginati quadringenti, turtures trecentae, aviculae omnis generis sexcentae, agni trecenti, pulli anserini 100, damae 30. lactis recentis decem maries. Maris autem decem valet Choas atticas. Oxygalactis dulcorati decem marios, alli^ talentum, caeparum semitalentum. De asperiorum genere, folij artaba liquioris silphi) duae minae, cucumeris artaba, silphij talentum ponderatum. Favi ex cucumere facti quarta pars artabae Grana panici tria talenta pondere, melanthii tertia pars artabae. Musti ex vino quinque maries. Aethiopici cucumeris sex capetes. Capetis autem est che^nix attica. Anethum arid uin triginta minerum pondere, de apis semine 4 capetes. Oleisesamini decem maries, Olei lactei quinque maries, Olei terchutini quinque maries, Olei acanthi quinque maries, Olei de amygdalis dulcibus tres maries, amygdalarum aridarum dulcium tres artabae. Vini qumgemae maries (quod si Babilone aut Susis caenam faciant, dimidium vinum de palmis praebet) ^ignorum ducenti currus. Mellis fluentis centum paluthae quadrangulae, quae circiter decem minas capiebant. Cum in Media haec praestat, semen cuici ad tres artabas, Crocum duas minas excedentem pondere. Haec in coenam and prandium. Consumit autem largiendo triticeae farinae purae quingenas artabas, hordeaceae farinae purae mille artabas, sitiginis quingencas artabas, chondri ex farre quingentas maries. Hordeum pro iumentis vicies mille artabas, siliginis quingentas artabas, patearum decies mille currus. Olei sesamini ducentas maries. Nasturtis incisi tenuis artabas trigenta. Haec omnia dispertit copiis quae sunt enumerata. Rex autem cum tantum in hunc apparatum quotidie insuna, reliqui Macedones haec legentes, tanquam beatum admirabantur: Alexander tanquam miserum and infoelicem deridebat, atque multis negotiis impeditum. Itaque columnam etiam in qua haec scripta extabant, convellere iussit, diceus ad amicos; nequaquam utile esse regibus tam intemperanter and prodige caenare discere. Necesse enim est, ut magnum luxum ac prodigalitatem eximia timiditas atque mollities consequatur. Videtis autem eis qui tantis coenis impleri solent, in pugnis etiam celeriter hostibus victoriam dare. Polyaenus stratag. lib. 4. ex interpret Latina Iusti Vulteii Hermanni patris. Histories record that Alexander the Great being in the Palace of the Kings of Persia, read what was written in a pillar of brasse concerning the Kings dinner and supper, and the ordinances concerning that businesse set downe by Cyrus; wherein was set downe of pure wheat-floure about 400 bushells; of a second sort of courser floure* 300 bushells, and of another third sort 300 more; in all 1000. Of barley floure, a 1000 bushells. Of Oates, 200 bushells: Oat-meale

for pudding, gruell, etc. 10 bushells; and so of all other things proportionably: as 400 fat hogges, a 100 beeves, 30 horses, 400 fat geese; and so proportionably of divers other kinds of fowle, and other provision both for ordinary food and sauces. The Macedonians reading all this great provision for one day, admired this great Prince as a most happy man. But Alexander deriding all this prodigality, accounted him most miserable and unhappy; as being intangled with too many affaires: and for this cause, caused to pull downe the pillar wheron all this was written, saying to his friends about him, that it was not fit for Kings to learne to sup so intemperately and prodigally: for it cannot be (said hee) but that great cowardlinesse and effeminatenesse must of necessity accompany such excesse and prodigalitie. And now you manifestly see, that those who use to fill their bellies with so great suppers, basely yeeld the victory to their enemies. And in this, this mighty Monarch spake the truth, although afterwards mastered by this Persian prodigality.
The same (...) priu^quam (...) ^et, dix (...) commodo^ fe^um du^re, nemp^ m^tuti^^ la^ore ad condiendum pr^ndium, ad (...) vero prandu (...), Cra^on (...). Alexander, before he gave himselfe over to excesse of diet and drunkennesse, was wont to say, that hee carried about with him curious cookes to provide sauces for his meat: to wit, his morning labor and travell to season his dinner; and againe a spare dinner to season his supper. (...) que^ (...) eibum su^^ersussit ^ ebriosos capuali ^upplicio mut^avit. ^uchan, rerum Scotiae. lib. 6. pag. 166. It is recorded of Constantine the sonne of Kennethie, and 71 King of the Scottish nation, that hee compelled all the youth of his Kingdome, at that time much effeminate and drowned in delights and pleasures, to lye on the bare ground, and to eate but once a day: and as for that Swinish sinne of drunkennesse, it cost them no lesse than their life. David 91. (...) Rex, luxuriam lat u^ proserpentem patris exemplo coere^^t: art. sices and inventores (...) illecebrarum quae galam ^eritant regno esceit. Idem lib. 7 pag 113. David the 91. King of the same Nation, according to his Fathers example, suppressed all riot and excesse, which then began to increase and creep abroad; and expelled out of his Kingdome all inventors of any dainties and curious sauces, wherby the appetite might be starred up. By the which, it may plainely appeare that in former times, divers of the Kings of that Nation bent themselves against the abuses of their times. And would to God we had now some course taken for the suppressing of excesse in all his Majesties dominions: I am sure, those who have but one eye may easily see how necessary a thing this were. Among the ancient Romanes, Longum f^at si c^^merare velim quod instrumenta gulae inter illos vel ingenio cogitata sunt vel studio consecta. Et hae nimirum causae fuerunt propter quas tot numero leges de coenis and sumptibus ad populum ferebantur^ and imperari c^pit, ut patentibus jan^is pra^sitaretur and caenitaretur: sic oculis civium testibus factis luxuriae modus si ^et. Prima autem omnium de coenis lex ad populum Orchia pervenit, quam tulit C. Orchius Tribunus plebis de Senatus sententia, tertio anno quam Cato censer fuerat: cujus verba quia prolixa sunt, praetereo: summa autem ejus praescribebat numerum convivarum. Post annum vicesi^^um secundum legis Orchiae, Fannia lex lata est, anno post Romam conditam, secundum Gell^i opinionem quingentesimo ^^luagesimo octavo; de hac lege Sammonicus Serenus ita re fert. Le^ Fannia Augusti ingenti omnium ordinum consensa pervenit ad populum, neque eam Praetores aut Tribuni, ut ploerasque alias, sed ex omni bonorum consilio and sententia ipsi consules tulerunt, cum respublica ex luxuria conviviorum majora quam credi potest deirimenta pateretur. Siquidem eo res redierat, ut gula illecti plaerique ingenui pueri pudicitiam and libertatem suam venditarent: plaerique ex plebe Romana vino madidi in comitium venirent, and ebrii de salute reipublicae consulerent. Haec Sammonicus. Fanniae autem legis severitas in eo superabat Orchiam legem, quod in superiore numerus tantummodo coenantium cohibebatur, licebatque secundum eam unicuique bona sua inter paucos consumere Fannia autem etiam sumptibus modum fecit assibus centum. Vnde a Lucilio Poeta, festivitatis suae more centussis votatur Fanniam legem post annos decem and octo lex Didia consecuta est: ejus fere^da duplex causa fuit; prima and potissima, ut universa Italia non sola urbs lege sumptuaria teneretur, Italicis aestimantibus Fanniam legem non in se, sed in solos urbanos ci^es esse conscriptam. Deinde, ut non soli qui prandia coenasve majore sumptu fecissent, sed etiam qui ad ea^ vocati essent, atque omnino interfuissent poenis legis tenerentur. Post Didiam Licinia Lex lata est a P. Licino Crasso divite: cujus ferundae pro^andaeque tantum studium ab optimatibus impensum est, ut consulto Senatus juberetur, ut ea tantummodo promulgata priusquam trinundino confirmaretur, ab omnibus observaretur, quasi iam populi sententia comprobata. Lex vero haec paucis mutatis in plarisque cum Fannia co^gruit: in ea enim ferenda quaesita novae legis auctoritas, exolesente motu legis antiquioris, etc. Sed legis Liciniae summa ut Kalendis, nonis, nundinis Romanis, cuique in dies singulos triginta duntaxat asses edunai causa consumere liceret: caeteris vere diebus, qui excepti non essent, ^e amplius appo^eretur quam carnis aridae pondo tria, and salsamentorum po^do libra, and quod ex ^erra, vite, arboreve sit natum. Macrob. Saturnal. lib. 3. ex Tito. Livi. and Aulo Gellio. this was

for a while very carefully looked into, and many sumptuary lawes then made for this same end and purpose. And it is well observed, that before these lawes were made, that people was exceedingly given to excesse and riot: for the which cause, it was commanded that they should dine and suppe, their doores standing open, that thereby better notice might bee taken of their excesse, if any committed. And besides, Gluttony was then come to that heighth, that many youths, to please their palates, and satisfie their greedy guts, did not onely sell themselves for slaves; but even abandoned their bodies to be in most beastly maner abused by those who were addicted to this unaturall and unlawfull lust. The first of these lawes was called Orchia, from the Author Orchius: and in it was set downe the number of the guests which were to be invited to any great meeting, the which number they should not exceed. The next was that, called Fannia lex, made by the consent of Augustus Caesar, and the whole people of the City, and this limited the expences which might be spent at any feast, which to exceed, was not allowed. And afterwards followed that, call Lex Didia, extending the former Law, (which before was most injoin'd to be observed in the Citie) to all Italy. And againe, adding this likewise, that not onely such as invited their guests; but even the invited guests also themselves should be accounted transgressours, and breakers of this law. There followed yet another after, called Lex Licinia, appointing smaller prices, upon divers things they were before sold for: but this was not in that esteeme, as the former.
Now in Stuck. antiquit. conviv. libr. 3. cap. 4. ex Thoma Aquin. in libr. quaest. disput. quaest. 14. idem ibid. ex Gregor. meral. 30. Gluttony, there is a trible fault committed: First, in the substance of the meat, when it is too curious and delicate: Secondly, in the quantity, when it exceedeth in the same; and thirdly, in the quality, if it be too daintily seasoned, and too curiously cooked. And then is it not properly called (...) nourishment, but (...) cupediae, junkets, or wanton fare. Another saith, we transgresse in Gluttony five manner of waies: First, sometimes we prevent our need: Secondly, in providing too dainty fare: Thirdly, when wee are too curious in the preparation of our food: Fourthly, we often exceed in the quantity: Fifthly, wee often erre in the too earnest and immoderate desire of dainty fare; all which are comprehended in this verse following: Praepropere, lante, nimis, ardenter, studiose.
The remedies against this sinne, are set down both in holy Scripture, and prophane Authors. The Proverb. 22.2. wise Salomon gives us good counsell in his Proverbs: And to this same purpose, see some precepts in Ecclesiasticus: And a E de citra cruditatem: bibe citra ebrietatem: nec praesentibus delitiis inhaerebis, nec desiderabis absentes. Victus tibi ex facili sit, nec ad voluptatem, sed ad cibum accede. Palatu^ tum fames excites, non sepores. Desideria tua parve redime qui hoc tantu^ curare debent, ut desinant. atque ad exemplar quasi compositus divinum, a corpore ad spiritum quantum potes te fastina redimere. Idem Stuck, ibid ex S. Martin Duminensis Episcopi libello ad Mironem Gallia Regem. worthy Bishop sendeth these golden rules to a King: Eat so as thou maiest avoid crudity: drinke so as thou maiest shunne drunkennesse. Be neither too much addicted to dainties present; nor yet too much desire those thou wantest: Let thy diet be ordinary and homely; sit downe to wholesome meat, and not to delight and pleasure: Let hunger, and not exquisite sauces provoke thy appetite etc. The heathens, from the dignity, excellency, and eminency of this noble creature above all others, doe dehort us from this

Gluttony Omnes homines qui sebudent prae^tare cae^eri^ animantibus, ^^mma ope n^ti decet ne vitam silentio transigant veluti pecora, quae natura prima and ventri obedientia f^uxit. Salus^-de bello sug. All men (saith one) that would excell the rest of the creatures, should doe their best endeavour, not to passe over their life in silence, as the brute beasts, whom nature hath made to looke downe-wards, intending onely to supply the wants of their bellies. And the very structure of a man should put him in minde of his creation; and therefore not to live the life of a beast.


Ovid Metamorph.
Os homini sublime dedit, Coelumque tueri


Iussit, and erectos ad sidera a tollera vultus.

God did give man to looke aloft, and bad him cast his eye,
To view me heaven, that golden globe, the Sunne and starry skie.

The same Poet in another place giveth us very good counsell:
Neve diu praesume dapes, sed desine citra,Et capias paulo quam cupis esse minus.Make not long meales, but ever stay thy great longing desires,And see thou alwaies ear lesse food, than appetite requires.
And Idem Salust. de bello Iugurth. another late alleged Author, witnesseth that the antient Numidians used meat and drinke, onely as antidotes against hunger and thirst; and not for riot and excesse. And therefore it is Merito Diogenes Cynicus eos ^rridere solitus est, qui pro bona valetudine dus rem atvinam facerent, and deiude cibo potuque con^^a sanitatem se ingurgitarent: afferens insanum esse ea a dus petere, quae in nostra sunt potestate. Diog. Laert. in erus vita. recorded of Diogenes, that hee was wont to scoffe and mocke those, that sacrificed to the Gods for their good healths, and then quite contrary to the rules of health, would stuffe up their guts; affirming withall, that in vaine doe we aske chat of the Gods which was in our owne power. Socrates suadere solitus erat illes eibos potusve esse vitan^^os qui ultra sit^m famemve^^dandam preaucant appetentia^, Macrob. Saturnal. libr. 7. And a famous antient Authour gives us warning, that such meats and drinkes are to be avoided, which, besides the satisfying of hunger and thirst, did yet provoke the appetite to more meat. It were an easie matter for mee to bring in many more both heathen Poets and other Authors inveighing against this vice, but that it would take me up too much time. But there is In secretis secretorum Aristotelis ad Alexa^dium legitur de quibusdam Philosophis a quodam rege congregatis, ut de sanitatis conversatione saniorem and meliorem proferrent sententiam. Pluribus vero sententiam intellectam proserentibus, unus suam pro^ulit, dicens, quod melius conservare non potest quam si digestus comedatu. Tales enim qui seipsos pejoris non faciunt conditionis, quam falcones, ve^ accipitres suos facerent, qui cibum non darent nisi digestis. Qui etiam seipsos non minus quam animaliae sua diligunt, sententiam sequuntur sapientis q^i dicit, non vivo ut comedam, sed comedo ut vivum: Et paucis intercedentibus lineis. Desiderium ergo talium (Epulonum) simile ea desiderio Daemonum, seu Inserni: quia sicut infernus multos devorando co^sumit, desiderium tamen semper manet insatiabile, doletque quod plures ^evorare non potest. Et ideo vias, and modos Inferni ministri excogitant, quibus plares devorare po^^unt; Ita Gutosi licet multa devorent, desiderium tamen non satara^ur, quibus, dicitur, Agg. 1 comedistis, and non e^i^s faturati; scilicet quo ad desiderium quo dolent, quia plu^a devo^are non possunt; and ideo vias and modos diversos exquirunt in cibariis and potationibus colores, and sapores, and serculorum diversitatem, ut sapor, odor^tus, color, and diversitas visa appetitu^ provote^t ut ad plura devorandum provocentur. Jnde est secundum Bernardum apologia, quod grandia carnium sercula duplicantur, quibus ro^aliter intenti modum nesciunt in edendo, ne^pe ^is prioribus fuerint sac^ati si secundos attigerint, videbi^tur nec dum a^tigisse cibo^; fitque ut nec prima impediant novissima, nec sa^ietas minuac appetitum: palatum quippe dum novellis seducit condimentis, pautatim disfuescere cognita ad cibos exiraneos, velut adhuc ^e^unum revocatur in desideria, venter quidem oneratur, sed varietas tollit fastidium. Sic insuper ut dum gula variis provocatur coloribus, suavibusque d^lectatur odoribus, transitur nimium meta necessitatu. Et paulo postea. Qui vero omnibus praedictis non retrabuntur tribulationibus, and persuasionibus, saltem mortis cogitatione, quales videlicet erunt post mortem, retrabuntur timore: mortem namque gulosi and omnes percatores timere solent, quam gula, nisi evitetur, velociter introducit. Ex Iohannis Bromiardi summa praedicantium, cap 5. Num. r. Par. 1. pag. 358. de gula. Plura de hac re ibidem, and in Agrippa de vanit, scient, cap. de arte coquinaria. Macrob, Saturnal lib. 7. Gregor 30. Moral. Thom. Aquin. in lib. disput. quaest, disput^ ^. Stuck. antiqu. conviv. lib. 3. cap. 4. and alios. a late Writer, who, among many things set downe against this vice hath this which followeth. A certaine King caused assemble many skilfull Philosophers (I thinke it should have beene Physitians) to consult about his health, and some advising one thing, some another; one among the rest, delivered his opinion thus, that hee could never better inioy his health, than never to eat untill such time hee found his former food digested. And such as will have but that care of themselves that they have of their Hawkes, and many other creatures, to whom they will give no new food untill they have concocted the former; follow the advice of the Wise man, I live not to eat, but eat to the end I may live: and againe, the same Authour hath these words: The greedy desire of such gluttons, is like unto the desire of the Divell, or of hell it selfe: for as Hell swallowes up many people, yet never is satisfied; yea, rather sorry it cannot swallow more; for the which cause these hellish ministers leave no wind unsailed: even right so fareth it with Gluttons who are never satisfied, to whom it is said, Agg. 1. You have eaten, and yet are not satisfied, to wit, according to their disorderly appetite, being displeased with themselves, that they are able to devoure no more. And for this cause, they invent all the waies they can, to please their palates, both in the colour, taste, smell, and in the various multiplicitie of meat and drinke. And hence commeth it to passe, saith Saint Bernard, that they double their great dishes, upon the which, being totally intent, they can

keepe no measure in eating, etc. Is not this then a great blurre and disgrace to our Christian profession, that we should be farre inferiour to so many heathen and meere morall men? But especially, is this a time for riot and excesse; for chambering and wantonnesse, when many of our neighbours and brethren by Christian profession, lie groaning in grievous affliction? The want of this sympathising with the afflictions of the Church, is that which God reproacheth his own people, Amos 6.4. They drinke Wine in bowles, and stretch themselves upon beds of yvorie; but no man remembred the afflictions of Ioseph. And as at all times, so more especially in the times of penury and scarcity, wee ought to be sparing in our diet; and those whom God hath inabled, ought to be the more helpfull to the poore; whose pinched bellies often would be glad of the scraps and crums, which fall from many a rich Gluttons table. Againe, I could wish, that many did not so profusely spend upon unreasonable creatures, and that onely for sport and recreation, that which would fill the bellies of many a poore Christian, who scarce can have a bit of browne bread to satisfie their hungry appetites, while their beasts have abundance of the best. If any shall here againe reply, may not I doe with mine owne what I list? Let mee then be so bold againe, as to demand what is their owne? And if they will not, I will answer for them, that is, just nothing: they are but onely Stewards, put in trust with their Masters goods, the great God of heaven and earth, and there will come shortly (and how soone they know not) a messenger to discharge them of their Stewardship: thou maiest be no longer Steward, and then if thou hast been a good and faithfull Steward, and canst make thy Master a true account, thou maiest expect with comfort that Euge bone serve, Well done faithfull servant, enter into thy Masters ioy: but if otherwise, let them looke to it. I will conclude with the words of the late alleged Author: Now, who so will not by all the former inconveniences and dangers be reclamed, neither by afflictions and troubles, nor yet by faire perswasions; yet let this one thought and consideration, what they shall be after death, affright them: for all Gluttons, and generally all sinners and wicked people are usually affraid of death, the which Gluttony, if not avoided, will inevitably hasten and further. I have somewhat the longer insisted upon this point, in regard this sinne is so frequent in this Kingdome, which hath been thereby with our neigbours, the French, reproached, Les Anglois sont grand mangeurs, English are great eaters. But wee have eaten more than enough, it is time wee now proceed to drinke.



CHAP. XXIIII.

Of Drinke, and what things in the use thereof to be considered: of morning draughts, drinking betwixt meales, beginning or ending the meale with drinke, and drinking to bed-ward.

AFter meat it is seasonable, now, to come to drinke, the one being as necessary, if not more than the other. This liquid substance helpeth the distribution of the food thorow the whole body; withall, quencheth thirst: and as without food, so likewise without drinke,Veility and benefit of drinke. the life of man cannot be prolonged. And although wee read of some, who without any drinke at all, have spunne out the whole threed of their life; as namely one Schenck. observat. medicin. lib. 2. pag 36^. Lasyrtas Lasionius, Andrew of Argos Mago of Carthage, and Iulius Viator, a Roman Knight; yet is it most certaine, that without drinke, or some moisture to conveigh the meat thorow the body, man cannot subsist: and such persons were not of a sound constitution of body; and that because they did not sweat at all, their bones being all solid without any marrow. And our stomack is not vnfitly compared to a pot with meat boyling in it, which without moisture, must needs be burnt up. Besides, drinke seemeth to be of a greater profit and utility to the body than meat it selfe, and the want thereof hardlier to be indured, it allaying both hunger and thirst, in man especially: and therefore the old (...).Aphor 11. lib. 2. aphorisme holdeth here true: It is easier to be refreshed with drinke than with solid food. Drink is a thin liquid substance, quenching thirst, furthering the concoction and distribution of the food thorow the whole body, and often also apt to nourish the same.Definition of drinke. Drinke is two-fold, either that common liquor, whereof all living creatures are partakers as well as man: or else it is desumed from beasts and plants; from the which a wholesome liquor or juice is expressed,Certaine rules in the use of drinke to (...) observed. fit for quenching thirst, and nourishing the body also. Now, some rules concerning drinke are carefully to be observed; and first wee are not to indure too much thirst, but moderately to drinke in time of need, especially  at our meales. In the next place it is good to drinke little and often  at our meales; to the end there may be an exact mixture of our meat and drinke in the stomacke: neither are wee to follow the custome of the people of the East, to drinke most after meales, as is also the custome of our beasts. Thirdly, wee are not to beginne our meales with  drinke, but rather with solid food. Fourthly, wee are not to drinke betwixt  meales, for feare of disturbing and interrupting the concoction of the stomacke; except a very hot and dry stomacke, sometimes for feare of burning up the meat, plead privilege for a cup. Fifthly, after bathing, running, or any other violent exercise, it is not 

good suddenly to drinke either water or strong drinke; but especially water, or small drinke. 6. Epidem. Hippocrates maketh mention of wrestler, wh^ after violent motion and agitation of his whole body, and all covered with sweat,Historie. drinking a great draught of cold water, died suddenly: and this was also the fatall end of the famous Physitian Valerius Cordus. Many more such histories are related by the Observat. medicin. lib 3 loco prius citat. learned Schenekius. And in France, my body being then in the like case and had almost bin made an addition to the former examples. For after a draught of col^ water in the heat of Sommer,Historie I was immediatly after surpized first with a single, and after with a double tertian fever: and to adde yet unto my former mis^rte^^l was shortly after, about the beginning of the canicular daies surprized with the blody flixe, (at that time epidemicall, and for the most part mortall in most places of France, especially Southward) the which, together with the former infirmities, did adhere unto me almost a quarter of a yeere; and recovered not my full strength againe for the space of a whole halfe yeere and upwards. Now as meat, so is drinke not to be excessively and inordinatly used, but stinted and limited to a certaine determinate quantity. And howsoever, I confesse, it is impossibe to regulate, and determine how much every particular and individuall person ought to drinke; and that by reason of the difference of countries and climats,Quantity of drinke. of divers and various constitutions, and severall obseruable circumstances; yet may we still aime at a certaine decorum, or golden mediocrity alwaies, as in other things, so in this diligently to be observed. The antients, as it seemeth, observed even a set number of draughts at their set meales, which Ter bibe vel to^^ers ter^o^ sic mystica lex est. Autonius. were 3, as witnesseth the Poet: and the same number was determined by the Synod of Nants. Democritus, as witnesseth Pliny, wrote a booke, wherein hee averreth, that no man ought to drinke foure draughts at one meale: and it was a saying of the antients, the first draught is good against drougth, the second is for mirth, the third for pleasure and delight, and the fourth made one madde. But because the number of draughts is nothing, the quantity of the draught, being that wee are to build upon; therefore that was also regulated among the antients.
(...) ordinary measures of drink among the Romans.There were among the antient Romans three usuall measures for drinke, called by these names, triens, sextans, deunx: The middlemost was the least, being under foure ounces, and with the which, sober people contented themselves: that called triens was about a quarter of our wine pint, not above foure ounces: the last was above our wine pint. Sober people contented themselves with the smallest measure; and such as assumed some more liberty, proceeded to the other: but intemperate persons would adventure on the last and biggest measure. ^ere re^^ica Cato allowed to labouring men, and such as wrought hard, about three English pints of wine aday; which, perhaps, was then ordinary for such kindes of people.
But mee thinks I heare some, by reason of that which hath beene already said,Whether it be good to ^rink in a morning fasting: aske mee a question, whether a draught of drinke in a morning fasting, be not, in the rules of wholesome diet, to be allowed of? Their colour to cleare this their custome, is this: a draught in a morning (say they) washeth downe all ill humors, that lie in the stomack, or places adjoining, and withall, is good against the stone. I answer,

thy draught is either strong drinke, or small: if strong, then have I the authority of our famous antient Physitians on my side, that this is very hurtfull to the health. Indeede, during the Empire of Tiberius Caesar (saith Lib. 14. cap 20. Pliny) the Physitians some fortie yeeres agoe, appointed that people should drinke fasting; and that onely by meanes of some cunning Physitians, willing by some plausible novelty to skrew themselves into the favour of the people. And it seemeth there is some recent authoritie, at least to beginne our meales with drinke. But Galen is flat against this preposterous custome of drinking thus fasting;Comment ad d^i 28. lib 6. averring, that to drink strong drink fasting, is very hurtfull for the nerves and nervous parts, and withall, hasteneth and procureth to the body many dangerous diseases, as Epilepsie, Apoplexie, and many others.Strong drinke i^ no^ to be drunke (...) It is therefore farre better for thy health to eat a little before thou drinke. But some will say, I will take but a draught of small drinke,Nor small drinke. which is good against the stone. To this I answer, that howsoever this be a seeming reason, yet to mee it is none at all: for, by this meanes thou causest the more speedie descent of those glutinous and feculent humours toward the kidnies and bladder; and by consequent, rather furtherest than hinderest either the generation or increase of the stone: as the like is also, by the unseasonable, and too frequent use of diureticall medicines often procured. But if thou wilt drinke,Best to eate before one drinke in a (...). then the best will be to eat a little before thou drinkest, and this, like a Sponge, will drinke up this liquor, and afterwards these superfluous excrements will at great leisure be thorow the guts expelled out of the body. Some hot and dry bodies, may, perhaps, plead for some privilege, who, of all others, are most to be excused, especially, if they be not rheumaticke; and in such a case, let not the drinke be too strong. And as for antient people, and cold constitutions, who, perhaps, will take it ill to be abbridged of their morning draught; of wines, muscadine, sweet canary, and the like, with a tost soked in them and eaten, are the best, and a cup of good wholesome ale, with a tost, some nutmegge and sugar may be allowed. But the ordinary use of morning draughts, being indifferently of every one used, is not so good for the health of the body, whatsoever our tost pots prate to the contrarie. And now I proceed to the next.
In the next place it may be demanded,Whether it be good to beginne our meale with a draught? whether it be good to begin our meales, as likewise to end the same with a draught? As for the first, it hath beene by mani holden as an oracle to beginne the meale with drink; which was also held by the Vt vites paenam, a potibus incipe coenam* Schol. Salern. Salernitan Schoole, and with us it is holden for an ordinary and inveterate custome to beginne our meale with a cup of sacke. Now, as in many other things, so in this particular also, can we set downe no certaine precise rule, which may fit every particular individuall constitution. But this, according to my opinion, and of our Physitians of the best note, is the best for health, in ordinary constitutions, and the most part of people, to beginne their meales with solid food.Answer. And from this rule none is to be exempted, unlesse some hot dry constitution; and in such bodies, the pot may be washed, (as some use to say) or rather moistned before the meat be put into it; providing alwaies there be no pottage,Best to beginne the meale with solid food

or other liquid meats; in which case they may well supply the place of drinke. And besides, as concerning the use of such moist and liquid food, the more an ordinary stomacke useth thereof, the lesse drinke is needfull;Caution in the use of drinke and liquid or moist meats. and not, as too many use needlessely and foolishly to drinke immediatly after hot pottage. And as concerning rheumaticke persons, I wish them to be sparing both in the use of pottage and drinke; especially when rheume is most busie. And as for a cup of sacke, it cannot be indifferently good for every one at the beginning of meales; but onely for feeble, phlegmaticke, cold and old constitutions, and that immediately before meales: for otherwise it may even hurt such constitutions, especially, if subject to any diseases of the head and nerves:Drinking of sacke at the entry of the Table is not ordinarily of every one to be used. as Epilepsie, Apoplexie, Palsie, etc. Now to the next, whether it be good to finish our meale with meate or drinke? To finish the feast with a draught of good drinke hath beene alwaies a very ancient custome,Whether it be better to finish our meale with meat or with drinke. as by many antient Authors appeareth, which I could easily here make good, if I feared not to trespasse upon the Readers patience. Scal^g. de emendat. tempor. lib. 6. citante Stuckio. The Iewes, it seemeth, were accustomed both to beginne and end their feast with such a draught; and of the beginning therewith, the practice of our Saviour Christ in Luk. 22.27. Luke maketh it cleare. The English have long continued this custome, as witnesseth the learned In a dagijs. Erasmus; and is so used among the Germans, and many other Europaean people, even at this very day, being commonly used after the washing of the hands, which in Scotland they call the grace drinke: and from the washing of the hands, this drink tooke the name, and was called (...), or (...). The Germanes call it Saint Iohannis segen, or Saint Iohns blessing. Erant enim tres crateres; primus lovis Olympij, seu Olympiorum ac coelestium; secundus Heroum, tertius lovis Servatoris perfecti, a ternario numero, in quo sit principium, medium and finis. Alij sanitatis sive valetudinis poculum nominant. Dictum est item poculum boni Daemonis, quod ab initio coenae, and in extremo convivio antequam surgerent asportarenturve mensae a convivis usurparetur. Moris enim erat, ut omnes in conviv^is mensae post ultimam i^lam Daemonis potationem removerentur, vel ex impio and sacrilego Dionysij tyranni facmore videre est. Is enim cum Syracusis in Aesculapij famo aurea ante simulacbrum mensa reposita esset patera mero repleta, propino, inquit, tibi, Aesculapi boni Daemonis calicem, and cum dicto auream statim mensam auferre ^us^it. Stuck. antiquit. com iv, lib. 3. cap. 22. ex Polluce and Athenzo. Now by antient Authors it may appeare, that there were cups called after three severall names used about that time: one was drunke in honour of Iupiter, called Olympius, or in honor of all the gods: the second was in honor of deified men, whom they called Heroes; such as be our Popish canonized Saints: the third was in honor of Iupiter Saviour, called perfect, from the number of three, wherein is the beginning, the middle and the end. By some also this was called the cup of health or good lucke, which they dranke one to another: and by some also it was called the cup of their good spirit or God, which was used both at the beginning, and ending of their supper before they rose from table. And after this last cup was once drunk, then all the guests rose, and all was taken away; as may by that sacrilegious pranke plaied by Denis the tyrant appeare: who comming into the temple of Aesculapius within the city of Syracuse, where was the statua, or image of Aesculapius, with a table of pure gold standing by it, tooke a cup full of wine, adding these words, I drinke to thee Aesculapius, the cup of the good God or spirit, and with this word caused presently carry away this golden table. Among the Indians it was called the cup of Tantalus. But now to the solution of the question, whether is it better to close our stomacke with meat or drinke? I answer, that for the generall, and for the most part, it is holden, that it is best to close it up with meat; yet with a limitation,

that such as are hot and dry,Who are allowe to drinke last at their meales. and are troubled with thirst may drinke a little at the latter end of their meale. And of such is Celsus to be understood, when hee willeth us to close up the stomacke with a cup of cold water (a custome I am sure would not be very welcome to the Swill-bowles of our times) and that of Hippocrates, who in feare of fumes and hot vapors arising up, and fuming into the head, adviseth us to use this water or else very thinne waterish white wine. But there are many pleasant astringent meanes which in such cases may better bee used; as namely, marmalad of quinces, of goose-berries, preserved quinces, conserve of barberries, of rasps, and many other such things astrigent and acid in taste. Howsoever, it is the best course ordinarily to close the stomacke rather with meate than drinke, according to this verse:
Sit tibi postremus semper in ore cibus.Let a morsell of meat be ever last in thy mouth.
Now the answer to the other question, whether it bee good to drinke to bed-ward, or going to bed, is concluded to the negative,Whether wee are to drinke going to bed. Answer. that we are not at all to drinke at that season, for feare of hindering concoction. But if the body be hot and dry, the stomacke especially, and the partie thereunto accustomed, and sometimes in extraordinary great thirst, heere something is to bee yeelded to necessity: in which case it is good to be sparing, and when concoction is almost finished, as foure or five houres after meales, a more liberall draught may then bee allowed. And this may likewise serve for an answer to that question, whether one may drinke betwixt meales? So that I shall not need to make any repetion,Not good to drinke betwixt meales. concerning this point. As for very aged people, of cold windy stomackes, I shall not find fault with them, if they take a little draught of sacke, or such liquor at the end of their meale.



CHAP. XXV.

Of Water as it is used for drinke, and severall waies of cooling the same, and correcting bad Waters.

HAving discoursed of Drinke in generall, as wee have done in meats, so must wee here come to the particular sorts of drinke; amongst which, Water offereth it selfe in the first place,Water the most common, and most antient drinke of all others. as the first and most ancient; so the most common to all living creatures, most obvious and easie to come by. And although after the flood, wine came in request for mans use; yet by many passages, both of holy and prophane Writers (whom for brevities sake I here passe by) it may appeare that water was the most common and ordinary drinke, and wine used more at festivall times, and solemne meetings, than for their daily and ordinary use; and it is even at this day so used in many places. As for the division of waters, their variety and diversitie, I have already said sufficient, as also concerning the qualities: whereas, I shewed, that water was not of so cooling a qualitie, as hath beene by many, both Philosophers and Physitians hitherto deemed. A late Aquam quidem sua natura frigidam dixerunt Ocellus, Hippocrates, Empedocles, Aristoceles, and potior medicorum pars: imo Strato Philosophus, omnium frigidorum primum esse venit. At Bernardius Telesius, Franciscus Patritius, Franciscus Mutus, and veterum recentiorumque non pauci, ab inditu a natura principiis, lumine, calore, stuore, mobilitate, etus essentiam, constituentibus, a viribus, ite^ astionibus, generandi multiplici potestate, a perspicuitate, raritate, sapore, item tam dulci, tamamaro and salso, etc. audeater, and confidenter, omnes aquas, ipsum scilicet mare, seu Oceanum, quod and loci magnitudine, and aquarum copia, and molis immensstate primatum obtinet; omnes item lacus, stagna, flumma, sontes, puteos, tum and ipsas subterraneas aquas, Platonis Tartarum, aliosque ingentes speluncas and cavernas adimplentes, ut and fluvios subterreneos a metallorum fossoribus, alijsque curiosis hominibus tum auditos, tum visos, etc. sua natura calidos, eosque tum salsos secundum magis and minus, tum and dulces esse astruxerunt. Omnis erum aqua, tam subterraneae quam superterranea (de aquis enim supercoelestibus hic nobis non est sermo) vel amara and salsa est; uti maria; vel dulcis, uti flumina, fontes, lacus, etc. Nisi per accidens alieno s^pore, aliarum rerum accessione tingantur. At cum omnes aquae, fontes and flumina, ab uno Oceano, seu aquarum universitate, and abysso oriantur: neque enim ullos habet fontes, sed ipsum fons est and scaturigo reliquarum omnium aquarum teste Moyse; lussit enim conditor omnes aquas quae sub Coelo erant in unum locum congregari, quam postea congregationem mare; and abyssam vocavit Maria autem aquae sunt amarae, ita ut omnes aquae a primordio fuerint amarae, ac salsae, quas post modum qualitates, aquae terrarum anfractus subeundo, and fontes constituendo, amiserunt, etc. Claud. Deod. Panth. Hygiast. lib. 1. cap. 18. Writer confirmeth this same opinion by the authority of divers other writers, by valid and probable reasons thereto perswaded. The chiefe and principall reasons are desumed from the inbred principles of this element; as light, heat, agitation and mobiltie; which constitute and make the essence or being thereof: as also from the actions; as the manifold generative power, perspicuity, raritie; the taste also, bitter, salt and sweet, etc. Of the other quality of moisture there is no controversie. Now, concerning the drinking of water, wee are herein to consider three things, the good quantity, the quality, and the order. The qualities of the best water have already largely beene described, and that among all waters, raine water was the best; and next unto it, the best spring water, or good river-water. In quantity, it must not exceed: for so it would hinder the concoction of the stomacke. And as for the order, it must be drunke, as is already in the generall directions of drinke set downe; little, and often at a meale. Vsed before meales, it moistneth much dry bodies, and cooleth more than sacke, or any wine whatsoever, be it never

to small; and therefore fitter for hot and drie bodies, than wine or strong drinke. Vsed after meales, it inhibiteth and hindereth the hot vaporous fumes of strong drinke to ascend into the braine; and so is said to resist drunkennesse: but I advise weake stomackes to looke unto themselves, for feare of too much debilitation, proceeding from too much humectation. And howbeit in hot countries, their water, by reason of correction by the splendor of the Sunne-beames is accounted wholesomer than ours; yet might ours be farre more used than it is, especially by hot and dry bodies, especially such stomacks, and yonger people especially: but this is the mischiefe, that such commonly powre downe most strong drinke, by this meanes adding fewell to the fire, untill Fevers, inflammations, and such furious diseases, in the very Aprill of their age bring them to an untimely death. And the poorer sort, I am sure, might make more use of the same than ordinarily they doe; which would better become them than go a begging strong drinke; or which is yet worse, steale, to procure mony to buy it. And notwithstanding this our nicity, I know som honourable and worshipfull Ladies who drinke little other drinke; and yet injoy more perfect health than most of them that drinke of the strongest. Two things do most deterre people from the use of this noble antient drinke, the coldnesse and the crudity. As for the coldnesse, howsoever it doth often actually to the palat appeare such; yet have I shewed that there is no such intense cooling quality here to be feared. The other is the crudity; which is indeed nothing else but the abundance of moisture, wherewith it is indowed; and most offensive to weake and moist stomackes: and all is notwithstanding ordinarily imputed to the coldnesse of water. Some to correct what they deeme amisse in water, use to adde some sugar to it, and so thinke all is well amended, and is most practised by the female sex. But this is no good correction: for of this they cannot be ignorant, and experience teacheth no lesse, that sweet things doe rather hurt than helpe a weake and tender stomacke. And besides, Sugar being but temperately hot could adde but a little heat to such a drinke, if it were as cold as is supposed. Againe, sugar having no drying quality ascribed unto it; but rather a meane moisture, it will rather adde to, than detract from this moist quality. But in my opinion, the best correction is by boiling it first, and then if thou wilt, adde thereunto a little hony or sugar, and a little wine vineger (which well correcteth the moisture, and joined with the other sugar or hony, giveth it a pleasant rellish) thou maiest make thee a pleasant and wholesome drinke.
Now as concerning the boiling of waters, there is a controversie about the quantity, or how much should be boiled away;Correcting of bad watersfirst by boiling 2. By distillation. some willing to boile water to the wasting away of the third part, others of the halfe, which others againe thinke too much; and indeed a meane is the best, Againe, some would have water corrected by distillation;3. By straining. which I must needes confesse to be best, if not too costly: besides,4. By boiling with sand. that it is not so easy every where, and at all times to be effected. Some straine it thorow a cleane linnen cloth;5. By Corall beaten to powder. and some againe boile it with sand. Some with corall beaten to powder correct the bitternesse of

waters; and some attribute a correcting qualitie to Penniroall. Pliny reports,6 By wheaten floure or meale. that bitter waters are made sweet and potable by casting into them a little meale or flowre of wheat; so that they may bee drunke within two houres after. I doubt this triall would hardly answere our expectation. And I am sure the practice of the 2 Kings 2.21. Prophet Elisha in healing the water with salt, was miraculous. It is familiar with mariners after the use of evill waters to eat garlicke. The Arabian Physitians advise him,9 By carrying some of the earth of the place. who is to remove his habitation to a place where waters are not good, to carry with him some of the earth where hee lived before, and mingle with his water, and being well strained, drink of it.
Invention to coole water.Now because oftentimes water is either somwhat warme, and therfore quencheth not the thirst so well; or else is not so cold as to please some nice and curious palats: therefore partly for pleasure and wantonnesse, and partly for necessity; especially when all manner of riot and excesse began to reigne, amongst many other things, were devised severall waies to coole both their water and their wine. And it cannot be denied that cold water doth better further the concoction of the stomacke than warme. And Lib. de cibis boni and mali succi. Galen, in Sommer alloweth of very cold drinke; yea, even cooled with snow, and to such especially as labour hard, and use much exercise: but others that live idly, leading a sedentary life, and free from imployment, either of body or mind, he adviseth to drinke water, as nature hath produced it, without any alteration. Avicen wisheth alwaies to eat before they drinke water, and to drinke sparingly and often at our repast, and out of a vessell with a narrow mouth;Sixe waies of cooling water.1 By the Aire. that so the draught may be the more moderate. There were six several waies the antients used to coole their water, by means of the aire; which was familiar to the Aegyptians, as witnesseth 6 Epidem* comment. 4. Galen. In the Sommer (saith he) the Aegyptians of Alexandria, having first well warmed their water, and put it up in close earthen vessells, exposed it to the night aire, and before Sun rising, set them in some shadie places of the ground, environed round about with cooling herbes. Sailers have beene seene sometimes to expose their water to the night aire, and afterwards cover their bottles with many clothes: and thus it is very certaine it reteineth still the cold quality. The reason why they thus boiled their water, was because that water once boiled receiveth sooner and easilier the impression of the cold aire; as witnesseth the Arist 1 met e^r. cap. 12. Prince of Philosophers. And therefore in Pontus, where they fish alwaies in frost, they besprinkle their angling-rods with warme water (which afterwards congealeth and freezeth so much the harder) which serveth them in stead of glue. The second way of cooling water, is, by letting it downe in an earthen bottle into a deepe well:2 Way, letting it downe into a deepe well.3 Way, by salt peter. howbeit others are of opinion it receives some evill impression from this close water; and therefore thinke it better to draw up the water, and so set it in it. The third way, is by injection of some salt peter, which afterwards for a while is stirred about with a sticke: howbeit this is not so well approved of, with whatsoever present satisfaction it may seeme to sooth us up. The fourth way,4 Way, by ice or snow is by meanes of ice or snow. It was the invention of the Emperour Nero to boile water, and then let it downe into a pit of snow.

Lib. 2. Athenaeus saith, it was an old invention, howbeit others affirme it first found out by Nero. Bellon. observat medicin. lib 3. cap 22. The Turkes at this day familiarly use this kinde of cooling their drinke. The fift way,5. Way, by deepe cellers. is by meanes of deepe cellars, wherein in antient times, some were wont to set bottles full of hot water, and take them out againe colder than any snow. In Paris there are some such deepe cellars, wherein the smallest wines will seeme to the taste, twice as strong as they are in very truth. Besides all the premisses, water falling from a high place, acquireth unto it selfe a greater coldnesse than that which runneth softly in a river;6. Way by motion and agitation. and the agitation and much stirring of the water furthereth not a little this cooling qualitie. And this for the present concerning the use of water shall suffice; what resteth shall be discussed in the diet of the diseased, which doth something also concerne them.


CHAP. XXVI.

Of wine: the various and severall sorts, with the right use, and for whom it is most fitting.

IT may be my former discourse of water was to some unwelcome, who would more willingly, perhaps, heare of some more noble liquor; and therefore now from the water-pale to the wine-pot. Now although this same subject of wines alone might well fill up a larger discourse than this in hand; yet will I content my selfe with such things as shall be of greatest use for the health of mankind. And because al wines are not alike, differing in divers respects, it will therefore be for us very usefull to set downe the severall differences.Divers differences of Wines1 From the age. Wines therefore differ not a little one from another, and that in these respects following. The first difference then is desumed from the age; for some wine is called Mustum,Mustum or new wine. or new wine; and others of longer continuance, one, two or three yeers, etc. New wine, before it be well purged from the lees, howsoever it may seeme to please the palat, by reason of a sweet pleasant and delectable taste; yet is it most dangerous for the health of the body. Gal. lib de cibis bor^, and mali succi. for by reason of the thicknesse, grossenesse; and (as some call it) a tartareous substance, it is very windy, and apt to ingender all manner of obstructions, wind cholicke, and the stone it selfe, etc. But among all such wines, the white and Rhenish doe least harme; and that in regard they make the body soluble, and so all corruption is evacuated, and so in regard of their short abode within the body, they are least of all others offensive unto it. New wine pressed out of tart and sowre grapes is of all others the worst. The Qui properant noua musta bibant, mihi fundat avitum, Consulibus priscis condita testa merum. Ovid 3. de amore. Poet Ovid could well tell whether new or old wine were better, when he wishes to drinke wine of

the continuance of certaine Consuls; that is, so many yeeres old. And as the new wines are not to be allowed for ordinary use; no more are the very old wines better to be liked of: for then they become farre hotter, sharper, and sometimes bitter also. As for the certaine determinate time orange, when wine might safeliest be drunke, no man can certainely determine, for some lasted twenty, some more, some fewer yeeres.Very old wine. Cicero at a supper with Damasippus was served with wine of 40. yeeres old. But the Emperor Caligula was presented with wine of 160: yeere old. Now the nature of such wines was this, that they were not to be drunke, unlesse mastered with much water. Our wines now a daies differ much from those in frequent use among the Ancients, the Romanes especially: for few of our ordinary wines will continue good for yeeres, as theirs did; yea a yeere, and sometimes lesse, will put them to the period of their longest endurance. Although I deny not but some of our sackes, and some such strong wines will continue good farre beyond this prefixed period.2 Difference from the substance. The second difference is taken from the substance; some being thinne, perspituous and very small, needing no admixture of water, called for this cause (...) such as grow plentifully about Paris, Rochell, and divers other places; as along the river of Rhene, in Thuringia, Misnia, etc. And yet Cardan thought no such wine grew in those regions. Others againe were of a thicker, and grosser substance, and may therefore be called (...), or bearing much water, as being of farre greater force and strength than the former.3 Difference from the colour. The third difference may be taken from the colour; some being white in colour, some pale yellow, some sadder in colour, or of a high golden yellow colour; some againe of a blackish intense red, and others of a pale red colour. The yellow wines are the hottest, the red lesse; and the white least of all. And it is to bee observed, that mingling grapes of divers colours, the wine becommeth of a mixt colour: as the white and red grape mingled together maketh a claret; and the more red grapes be in the mixture, the higher coloured is this claret; and the more white grapes, the paler coloured it is; approaching both to the colour and quality of white wine; as is to bee seene in that wine called from the colour of peach flowre, couleur du pesche. The fourth difference is taken from the taste,4 Difference from the taste. sweet, sowre, sharpe or bitter. The sweet are most nourishing, such as are commonly the high coloured red wine, and some sweet sacks brought unto vs from Greece, and other parts: such as are our malmesey, muscadine, browne-bastard, Canary, and some others of that colour; and our high coloured red wines, called vin de Graves. Some againe are of tarter taste, as most of our white and claret. Galen was of opinion, there were no sweet white wines; howbeit divers Provinces of France can now witnesse the contrary. And I doubt not but the Wine-brewers of the City of London have so well profited in their profession, that they are able to furnish any with as sweet wine of any colour as any other place whatsoever. The fift difference is desumed from the smell,5 Difference from the smell. which in wine is also not a little to be regarded, and the wines of best smell are also ordinarily the hottest. Among our ordinary wines, that which smelleth like the raspe, as the French say, sent la fram boose, is esteemed the daintiest. But here

my meaning is not of any artificiall smell procured by the wit and invention of the vintner, no more than that which already hath bin spoken concerning the substance, colour and taste. Another difference may yet be desumed from the soile, and the naturall temper of the aire where such wines grow. And thus in one and the same country are so many severall sorts of wine to be seene, differing in goodnesse one from another; and yet far more those of one countrey from those of another. And thus we may apparently perceive what a great difference there is in the wines of that one kingdome of France. The wine of Orleance, although farre to the North, yet doth it exceed in goodnesse many others more to the South. And we see severall countries produce divers and severall sorts of wine, and some againe produce none at all: and that partly by the unfitnesse and coldnesse of the soile and climate;6 Difference from (...) soile and naturall temper of the aire. and partly in some places, by meanes of the neglect and ill husbandry, or ignorance of the inhabitants. And there is yet another difference desumed from the faculties:7 Difference from the faculties: thicke red wines. for the thicke red coloured wine tending to blacke, especially the sweetest, are of all others aptest to nourish and fatten the body. But whosoever useth them much, let him take heed of obstructions, the stone, the dropsie, etc. Such wines grow plenteously in Gascony, and from thence conveyed to their chiefe citie Burdeoux, and so to divers places of the Christian world. All sweet wines loosen the belly more than any other kind. The other sweet wines,Strong sweet wines of a yellow colour. such as we named heretofore, are hotter than the former, and yeeld somewhat to them in this alimentary facultie; and are rather of the antient, and married people, yet sparingly to be used; than of the yonger sort. In France alone many severall sorts of wine,French wines of divers sorts. differing not a little in strength one from another. The wines of Orleance are of prime note for goodnesse; as also the wines of Aniou and adjacent places are in no small esteeme: and those wines in so great request at the French court;Small wines. called vin de Coussy and D'Hay, are very wholesome and dainty wines. But the wine about Paris, Rochell, and many places of Xaintonge are but poore small wines in comparison of the former. Againe, in Gascoigne; but especially in Provence, Languedoc, and the south parts of that Kingdome are many strong and generous wines, equalling, if not exceeding divers wines of Italy it selfe. But it is now more than time, wee come to the temperature of wine, the knowledge whereof doth not a little make for our purpose.
Concerning the temperature of wine, there hath been some controversie among the learned, which we will leave to the schooles,Or (...) and briefly declare that which we conceive to bee most profitable for our purpose. Wine then of all sorts, whatsoever, is undoubtedly hot,(...) howbeit some more and some lesse; and new wine is at first colder, and in time acquireth a greater heat; insomuch that must or new wine is by Galen accounted cold; which must be understood comparatively* having respect to that it is afterwards. Now this heat acquired by (...) ebullution is of a great latitude and extent, according to the severall natures and ages of wines. Thinne small wines, especially white,(...) participate of least heat: old strong wines are very hot: that which is betwixt both these extremes, is also of a meane heat betwixt both.

But now concerning the second quality,Wine is dry in the second quantity. and joined with this first, whether it be moist or dry, is in like manner controverted. In a word, I thinke it to be actually moist, howbeit potentially dry, as we speake in the schooles. For howsoever it moisten, as is the nature of all liquors; yet hath it a certaine faculty of drying up superfluous moisture; as we see come to passe in many other liquors extracted out of hot simple, vegetables or mineralls: and yet this drying faculty differeth not a little according to the strength.Ou^ wines differ much from the wines of the antients. It is moreover to bee observed, that our wines much differ from the wines used in antient times, in regard of their strength. With us our new wines are hotter than our old, which by little and little, their heat decaying, grow dead: Vappescunt. Contrariwise, the wines of antient times being new, that is, not exceeding five yeeres age, were not so hot as those of greater age, which perhaps had atteined to ten or twelve yeeres. The longer they were kept,^ Caeterorum vinorum tanta cura fuit medicaminu, ut ciner^ apud quosdam, fe^ gypso al^b^ quibus diximus modu instaurentur, etc. Qui and marinam aqua^ ejusdem rei gratia ex alto peti ^ubent, etc. Pix in Italia ad vasa v^^o condienda maxime probatur Brytia, etc Tot benefici^s piacere cogitur; and miramur noxia esse in vitium inclinantes. Plin. lib. 19. cap. 20. the greater heat they contracted, which was not naturall; but procured by art: for they were accustomed to mingle with their new wine, pitch, rosen, brimston, plaster, ashes, etc; to adde smell and quicknesse to their wines. Some used also to smoake their wines: and for this end, had certain places in their houses built for this same purpose. Others againe mingled therewith sea-water fetcht superstitiously from the deepest Ocean. By so many poisons cause we wine to please our palats (saith Pliny) and yet wonder at the woe they procure us, yet inclining still to vice. Let Londoners, and others that frequent the city much, looke about them, and moderate their insatiable wine-bibbing humor, lest withall they drinke downe some of this stuffe, whereof Pliny here complaines. Sure I am our Vintners are as cunning, and witty in invention for their owne profit and commodity, as ever were any of the antients. But concerning the hot facultie of wines, it may perhaps be replied, how commeth it to passe, if all wines be hot and dry, it produceth cold and moist diseases in the braine:Co^^ diseases produced b^ the use of wine accidentally. I answer in a word, it commeth nor so to passe properly by reason of these faculties; but by accident, these exhalations being by the braine quickly converted into such a substance. And that this is true may by this appeare, that the excesse of drinking of the strongest wines are aptest to ingender such diseases.
Vertues of wine moderately used.Now this noble creature moderately used, is a most soveraine meanes to restore and renew our decaied and dead spirits, and to preserve the naturall heat of the body: and for the great affinity it hath with the nature of man, and sympathy with the heart, it is as it were in a moment conveied thither; and so produceth that famous effect of Psalme 103. Iu^g. 9 Ecclesiast. 31, etc. cheerefulnesse, so often in holy writ ascribed unto it. But the use of this so noble a creature is not indifferently to be permitted to every age, person and complexion. Plato would not have children to drinke any wine before the 22. yeere of their age. 7 Politic. Lib. de salubri diata. Aristotle forbiddeth wine to nurses and children. f Hippocrates permitteth the use of it to some cacochymicall dispositions, and to women of a soft and foggy, or spongious flesh. 3 de sanit. tuenda. Galen setteth downe what constitutions it best befitteth. To those of mature and ripe yeeres he permitteth wine, but well watered; but to hot and dry constitutions, hee forbiddeth it altogether,

water better befitting the state of such bodies,What person it be^^ befitteth. to whom assenteth also Hippocrates. As for old age, especially if very phlegmaticke by constitution, vvine is not to be denied them; it being for them a wholesome milke, and withall a convenient food for the preserving and cherishing of the radicall moisture, and innate balsame of their bodies.
But from hence ariseth some doubt, in that I allow wine to old men; My doubt may seeme so much the stranger, in that it seemeth this opinion hath alwayes gone currant without any controll. But there is ^am vero (...) larvitr^ si ultius quam (...) ca^oris au e^d gratia, vinum abundanter, meracum praecipue indulgere Quanto enim vinum calidius est per se, tanto ma^ore ven^ris ac viscerum omuium c^^ ore opusest ut superetur: aliaqui a mino^i acessic, crudamque succum auget, unde and calorem naturalem suffocat, and morbos innumeros ^arit, ac mortem properat. Quare vinum esse lac senum non valde proho^ censeo, potius senibus sensim esse dandum aiturius, usque dum in extremo senio constitutis toto vino detracto de ur pro eo mul^a, aut dec^ct: aqua: satius enim est p^rmittere catori n^turali sensim venire au na^ura^em interi^um, quam vine obruere, and ^enectam facere mis rabi^torem, and breviorem. Va^^^. de sacr^ philos. cap. 20. a late writer, who hath contradicted this opinion, and would have them when they grow in yeeres, to use wine well diluted with water, and afterwards vvhen they are novv atteined to decrepit old age, to give them onely hony-vvater, or boiled vvater to drinke. But I thinke fevv that read this, but vvill thinke this too rigid; and so am I of their mind. His reason is because (saith hee) hot strong wine drunke in abundance hath need of a like proportion of naturall heat to overcome it, otherwise it sowreth in the stomacke, oppresserh naturall heat, ingendreth crudities, and proveth the cause of many noisome diseases. But by his good leave, although a learned man, yet he delivers his opinion too lavishly and without limitation. Wine in old age moderately taken cheereth the spirits, furthereth concoction, and overco^meth crudities. The chiefe hurt befalleth old age by the too liberall use of strong hot vvines, in my opinion, is by way of ex^ccation, their bodies howsoever replenished with an accidentall and excrementitious moisture; yet the naturall Crasis and constitution of their bodies get, inclining to siccity. The excesse in the use of any sort of wine I allow not of. But I see no sound reason, why the moderate use of our Muscadines, sweet Canary sackes; and sweet nourishing red wines may not safely and to good purpose be allowed this age, which besides the former benefits may likewise by their mild fumes and vapors so irrigate the braine, that it may procure them quiet and comfortable sleepe to this age so acceptable. And by this moderate use I see not but it may likewise communicate a gentle warmth to all the parts of the body; although I am not of opinion this is the only use, as this Author seemeth to allege.
And in the use of wine among the antients this is yet to be observed, that they were either to drinke this or water, there being no other in ordinary use among them; and therfore, wheras they allowed youth at the age of 22. to drinke wine, this is not a precept for us to practise, being furnished with so fit and wholesome drink, and so appropriated and fitted for this climat, and our complexions; and the which may safely to any age or complexion be exhibited; and being in our owne power to make it weaker or stronger, there is no danger in the use of our ale or beere. And besides, we must also withall consider that in the hot seasons of the yeere both wine, and other strong drinkes must more sparingly be used; but in colder seasons we may be bolder. Now againe,Wine either drunk^ pure of it selfe or mingled with water. among the antients wine was either drunke pure of it selfe without any mixture; or else diluted and mingled with water, and is used also in this our age. In antient times some added the water to the wine, and some againe wine to the water. Water was, and is used to be added

unto wine, to allay and qualifie the heat and fumes thereof, and is more frequent in those countries, where wine is their ordinary drinke. This mixture differeth according to the diversitie of the natures, of the parties drinking, the wine drunke, together with the severall times of drinking: all which points are learnedly and largely set downe by Mercur. variar lect. libr. 7. a famous Italian Physitian; and which were too long for mee here to insist upon. But this I must advertise in briefe, that as young people, especially, hot and cholericke constitutions, ought not to drinke wine; so if they doe at any time drinke thereof, they ought to delute, or mingle it with a greater quantity of water than others: and the like I wish to be understood of the heat of Sommer, when as both smaller drinke, and wine more deluted is best. Some in stead of ordinary spring water, use rose water, and a little sugar, which is not amisse: and the like may be practised with Strawberry, Sorrell, Succory, or Endive water. But to determine the quantity of water, which differeth according to circumstances, is very hard: but the best will be for people to consider of that proverbiall speech, Every man is either a foole, or a Physitian. The meaning is, a man should observe what best befitteth the state of his owne body, and so accommodate all things accordingly. Many in hot countries where the wine groweth, sometimes use wine so sparingly, that they adde but a little quantity of wine to a great quantity of water; it may be not the fifth or sixth part. But with us, where wine is not our naturall and ordinary drinke,How we use to dilute or mingle our wine. this deluting, or mixture of wine and water is not so frequent; except sometimes in Sommer, where often, and most commonly sugar is also added thereunto, with some Borage flowers, and a sprig of Rosemary, which are not out of purpose; especially, if the wine be any thing tart, or sowrish.
Of the use of Sugar with wine.And by the way I must here say something concerning the use of sugar with wines: It is a common custome thorow this kingdome, to adde sugar to all wine indifferently sweet or sowre, or whatsoever sort. I doe not deny, but sometimes, to helpe a tart taste, or to inhibit the hot fumes of a vaporous or strong sacke, apt to flie up into the braines, a little sugar helpeth well: but to use it indifferently, with all sorts of wines, and without any consideration of circumstances whatsoever (which is the ordinary and common custome) and that merely for wantonnesse, and to satisfie their lustfull desires, I hold it not convenient. Our neighbouring Nations, who abound in all sorts of wine, and most somewhat tartish in taste, yet never use this addition of sugar. And therefore, as I advertised already, so wish I all, especially our women (aptest in such cases to exceed) to use a moderation in the use of sugar. As for wines thus to be mingled with water, they must be indifferent strong, and withal, of an indifferent thinne substance. Wines of a grosse and thick substance, are not thus to be mingled with water; but rather moderately and sparingly drunke without any addition. And as for our Rhenish and small white wines, they need farre lesse water than other stronger. Arnoldus de villa nova tractatu de vinis. Some wish that certaine houres before the wine be drunke, water be mingled therewith, that by this meanes there may be a more perfect mixture of the one with the other. There is to this purpose a certaine antient speech recorded: Vinum lymphatum cito potatum generat lepram, Wine

mingled with water, suddenly drunke, ingendreth leprosie. But concerning wine this shall suffice. Of the use of wine in the sicke, in what diseases usefull, and how to be used, hereafter in the diet of the diseased.


CHAP. XXVII.

Of Beere, Ale, Cider and Perry serving us in stead of Wine.

NOw, because all countries are not furnished with this noble liquor of the grape, therefore our gracious God besides this element of water, with man-kind, common to all living creatures, hath furnished these our Northern Regions with other drinkes, which might to us supply the place of wine. This drinke hath for its principall ingredients water and corne,Ingredients of our Beere. and to season it, and make it keepe a long time in stead of salt, hath hop added to it. And that this is no new invention to make drinke of corne; but hath beene in frequent practice in antient times, may by the relation of our antient Physitians plainly appeare. The The antient Egyptians made drinke of corne.Herod. in Euterpe. Egypptians, it would seeme, were the first authours thereof. But it may be objected, that the antients doe likewise condemne this drinke, as most unwholesome for the body of man. Lib. 2. cap. 80. and 81. Dioscoride ascribeth to this drinke, which hee there calleth Zythum and Curmi, differing but little one from another a noxious quality against the reines, nerves, and nervous parts; as the membranes, of the head especially: and affirmeth that it ingendereth wind, filleth the body with corrupt humours; and leaveth the body using it much, the leprosy for a legacie.Lib. 6. simpl. m^lic. Galen singeth also the same song, and confimeth his assertion. But whatsoever was the opinion of the antients concerning that drinke, and that it was of that nature,Our drinke made of corne, differeth from that of the antients, and is a very wholesome drinke.Divers differences in our drinke to be observed:First, from the adding or withdrawing of hoppe.Secondly, from the corne it is made of. I will not deny; yet I am sure, the drinke wee make is both wholesome, and very agreeable to our nature; and besides, is farre otherwise prepared, than that of antient times. Now, of this drinke, there are two sorts, one brewed without hop, commonly called Ale; the other with hop, and commonly called Beere. In Beere then, as in wine, there are many differences to be considered, where the first is taken from the corne it is made of; it being sometimes made of one grane, sometimes of another, and sometimes of more granes mingled together: but with us, most commonly malt is made of barlie alone, which doth also with us heere most abound. Some doe also mingle some oats with this drinke, and so make it more cooling for Sommer, very quicke to the taste, and wholesome for the bodie; the oat being of it selfe a daintie, wholesome, and nourishing graine. Some to adde strength to their Beere, especially that called March-Beere, then brewed to last all the yeere, adde thereunto a few pease. In some places beyond seas, they make

Beere of Wheaten malt: as in some places of Saxony and in Bohemia; which much needs be good: and wholesome, if no errour in the making be commited.Third difference fro^ the age. Another difference againe is taken from the age and duration of this drinke: some being very new, some very old, and kept a long time. Very new drinke is very hurtfull for the health, ingendring both wind and crudities with obstructions, and many diseases from thence proceeding; as hath beene said of new wine. That which is very long kept, must needs be strong; as our March Beere, and some others; and yet are not so good for ordinary use, but rather now and then as physicke. The best and wholesomest, is that of a middle age. A maine and principall difference is taken from the strength, and is esteemed by the proportion of the malt to the liquor:Fourth from the strength. and this varieth much, according to severall circumstances; as the place where one liveth, the persons who are to use it, the season and time of the yeere, etc. This neverthelesse is to be observed, that in Winter and cold weather, strong drinke is more tolerable than in Sommer, and warme weather; and to old age, there is a greater liberty allowed, than for younger people. Another difference is taken from the substance, thick or thinne, and perspicuous or cleare.Fifth from the substance. Thicke and muddy drinke is altogether unwholesome, and the mother of many diseases: and that which is cleare, is best and wholesomest; providing alwaies, that water be not too much master. Thicke beere ingendreth wind, all manner of obstructions, the stone, strangury, and many more dangerous diseases. Againe, that difference taken from the taste is not to be neglected; some being bitter,Sixth from the taste. some sweet, some sowre, etc. And this the age will often alter: for very new drinke, if much hopt, must needes be bitter: and very small drinke, if long kept, especially in Sommer, will grow sowre. A meane is best, that it be not too bitter, too hot and heady, nor sowre at all:Seventh difference from the quantity of the hoppe. and therefore another difference may be taken from the quantity of hoppe, that a due proportion thereof be observed; it being hot and dry in the second degree, and sometimes weaker, and sometimes stronger: and too bitter drinke is more physicall than is for our ordinary use fitting. The best course then is to let the hoppe rot in the drinke (as the vulgar people) before wee drinke it. There is another difference taken from the colour;Eighth the colour. some being of one, and some of another colour; some pale; some of a reddish, some of an amber colour, etc. The highest coloured drinke is not alwaies the strongest and wholesomest. That which looketh of a pure transparent yellow amber colour, like a pure sacke, is reputed the best. The best March beere, if well brewed, and no error committed, is often of this colour; and the goodnesse of the malt whereof it is made, and the fewell wherewith it is dryed, maketh yet another difference,Ninth fro^ the goodnesse of the malt. and often altereth both the colour and taste of the drinke. Straw is thought better than wood for drying of malt. In some places of this Iland, in the Northerne especially, they dry their malt with ling, or heath, called there hadder, which maketh very good malt; some also use furres, or whins, as some call them; and some againe, broome. But straw, and heath, or ling are the best; the solider the substance of the fewell is, the worse it is, there being the more danger of over-drying the malt, which may make both the drinke taste

worse, and sooke with too high a colour. The Barlie whereof the malt is made must be good and fresh, not light, lanke, or worme-eaten, fusty, etc. And besides, it must not be made of Barly too new, before it hath sweat in the mow (as husbandmen use to speake) and is also to be made in a convenient season; I meane not in a hot season of the yeere, and therefore commonly called in the countrie, cuckow malt. The last difference is taken from the water whereof the drinke is brewed; and the best, if it may be had, is to be preferred before the other,10 From the water wherewith it is ma^e, and the fewell wherewith it is boiled. and in defect of the best, the next best is to be chosen. And what is the best we have already at large related: and we find here that many times our well water maketh the drinke looke of a higher colour than is sutable to the strength thereof. And to the water we may adde the fire wherewith it is boiled, which I thinke is best to be wood, and such as we allowed of in making of malt. And yet I confesse good drinke is, and may be brewed with sea-coale, as wee see in all the city of London: and the fewell is not so materiall here as in making of malt, where the smoake toucheth it immediately. Now all these differences, except that taken from the hop, are common both to ale and beere; the which in our Ale here is but little, and in the Northerne parts of this Iland is none at all. And because the hop maketh some difference in these two drinkes, therefore it will be usefull to say somthing thereof. Of the temperature of barley, a very wholesome graine,Hop and the vertues thereof. somthing hath beene said already, and something yet more shall bee said hereafter. As for the hop it openeth the obstructions of the liver, spleen, and kidnies, cleereth the blood, and cleanseth choler, and therefore this drinke must needs be very wholesome. But if there bee too much hop in it, or yet drinke very new, the hop will wrong the head,Vertues of Beere. by sending up to it hot exhalations, and so procureth rheumes; and the bitterer the Beere is, the lesse it nourisheth.
Ale againe is of a grosser substance, and nourisheth farre more;Of Ale. but is of a more oppilative and stopping faculty: and therefore such as are obnoxious to obstructions ought to bee sparing in the use of this drinke. Such as are leane, and free of this feare, may freelier use it. And although hop added to beere would seeme to make it hotter than ale, yet when the strength of it wasted, and not much discernible in the drinke, in regard of its penetration, and scowring away of choler, and the ale having a like quantity of malt in it, I thinke there will be but little or no difference in their heats. Howsoever both Ale and Beere are good wholesome drinkes; the which if any one will deny, I will appeale to our owne experience: for where can you find stronger, healthfuller, and lustier people, than in those countries, where this drinke is most ordinarily used? And in this I dare be judged by Valeriola loco communi. forren Writers, who lived in countries where this drinke is not used. Who so desireth to know more of these drinkes, and their severall sorts, according to severall countries, may have recourse to Eibro de cerevisis. Placotonius, who hath written at large of this subject. And what was said before concerning the use of wine, may here bee understood of our strong Ale and Beere, that they are not good for young people, hot and cholericke complexions, and hot seasons of the yeere. And this shall suffice concerning these drinks.
Of Cider.There are yet some other drinkes expressed out of fruits, and in no small use among many people, called by these two names, Cider and Perry. Cider is the juice expressed out of Apples, and sometimes attaineth to that excellency, that it emulates wine in strength and vertue. The sweet is more windy, as when it is new; and therefore is not to be used untill it be 4. or 5. moneths old at least.For whom it is best, Vertues. It is better or worse according to the fruit it is made of; and is best for hot and dry cholerick bodies, hot livers, and melancholicke persons: they are of an opening and penetrative nature, opening obstructions notably.
Of Perry.Perry is sweeter than Cider, and withall windier, taking its denomination from Peares whereof it is made, and differeth little in vertue from the former. These dtinkes are very frequent, and used for ordinary drinke in the Province of Normandy in France; as also in the shires of Glocester, Worcester, and Hereford here in England. They are both very good to quench thirst, and to cut tough phlegme.
Divers other sorts of drinkes in divers countries.Besides these drinkes in most frequent and ordinary use among us, there are yet many other sorts of drinkes in frequent use among many nations: as in many places of the Indies, and other countries they made a wine of dates; and others againe, make a dainty wine or drinke of rice. And many nations of the West-Indies make drinkes of certaine roots and herbs. And no question wee might make drinke of divers other fruits and plants, if we pleased. It is reported that that antient and warlike people called Picts, inhabiting in former times a part of the realme of Scotland, made a dainty drinke of the herbe or shrub, ling or heath; the making of which notwithstanding, neither for love nor mony (as we use to speake) nor any other meanes could ever from them be extorted.


CHAP. XXVIII.

Of Drunkennesse, and the mischiefes thence insuing to the soule, body, and good.

THE more excellent any creature is, the more pernicious is the abuse of the same; which as in many other things, so especially in this so usefull a creature which we cal drinke, may plainely and evidently appeare. I have at large already discoursed of severall sorts of drinkes, their excellent vertues and right use; and because the abuse thereof, which we commonly call drunkennesse, is so prejudiciall to health, besides the detriment and damage both of the soule and substance; I will say something of this subject, before I enter upon the diet of the diseased. And therefore although it bee a fitter theme for a divines pulpit than a

Physitians penne; yet, both by reason this vice now so reigneth, and hath by other Physitians in the like case beene touched, therefore I will intreat thy patience, courteous reader, but for a short space, that I may give this beastly sinne a lash or two, and then I shall proceed. And as sinne is no upstart, not of yesterdaies hatching;Drunkenne^ no new sinne. so this swinish sinne of drunkennesse in particular, hath beene no stranger in the world, both in antient and later times. Hence is it that wee have the drunkennesse of certaine nations recorded by prophane Writers: as of the Thracians, Assyrians, Parthians Grecians, and in the time of Tacitus, the Germanes, it seemeth, were taxed with this vice:Nations of old taxed with drunkennesse. even as at this day it is among them in as high esteeme as ever. It may be thus in briefe or generally defined.What drunkennesse is. Drunkennesse is an excessive and unseasonable powring downe of strong drinke; and therefore it doth plainly appeare, that one may be a drunkard, although his braine were made of brasse, that it were insensible of any weaknesse, or other inconvenient whatsoever, and no apparant prejudice either to his sense or reason; whenas some weake braine may be deprived of the use of both with the third part of that which such a Swil-bole will easily swallow downe. And unto this have relation Isaiah 5.22, 28.7. Habac. 2.13. Amos 6.6. Prov. 31.4, etc. many of those places out of holy Writ, and others hereafter to be alleged. But because there is most commonly with the excesse of the creature some indecent action or gesture adjoyned; and many times also after this gulletting downe of strong drinke, there insueth surfetting, or heavinesse, called crapula; therefore an antient Greeke Writer compareth all three. Clemens. Alexand. Paedag lib. 2 cap. 2. A large definition of drunkennesse. Drunkennesse (saith he) is the excessive use of wine, or other strong drinke. Rage or fury, in latin debacchatio, in greeke (...) is that unseemely carriage from thence proceeding. The surfetting, or heavinesse called crapula, is the trouble and and loathsome nauseous effect following the same. The genus, or generally word in this definition is ebrius, or ebriosus, concerning the difference whereof thou maiest see something in the Ebrius, and ebriosus a se invicem differunt ut amator and anians Ebriofit as proprie est affectatio, cum quis biben^er, cito, saepe, and facile fit ebrius: Ebrietas vero est ebriosi status, eum scilicet quis actu est Ebrius: sic ira differt ab iracundia, invidia ab invidentia, Cicero 4. Tuscal. Quest heathen Cicero, where it is apparent, that he maketh him a drunkard, that wittingly, and willingly often followeth this trade of drinking, and gulletting downe of strong drink, although they neither reele in the streets, nor will easily be overreached in a bargaine; which is the common plea of strongest drunkards. Now holy Scripture is every where full of invectives against this wicked sinne. The Prov. 20.1^ Wise man in his golden Proverbs, hath many excellent precepts to this same purpose. Wine is a mocker, strong drink is raging, and whosoever is deceived thereby is not wise. The 21 17. same Wise man hath these words also. He that loveth Wine and oile shall not be rich. And 23.21* Verse 29.30, 31, 32* 33, 34, 35. againe, Be not among wine bibbers, riotous eaters of flesh: for, the drunkard and the glutton shall be clothed with ragges, and a little after; Who hath wo? who hath sorrow? who hath contentions? who hath babbling? who hath wounds without cause? who hath the rednesse of eyes? They that tarry long at the wine, they that goe to seeke mixt wine. Looke not thou upon the wine when it is red, when it giveth colour in the cup, when it moueth it selfe aright: at the last it biteth like a Serpent, and stingeth like an Adder: thine eyes shall behold strange women, and thine heart shall utter perverse things. Yea, thou shalt be as hee that lieth downe in the midst of the Sea, as he that lieth downe upon the top of a mast. They have strucken mee shalt thou say, and I was not sicke: they have beaten mee, and I felt it

not, when shall I awake? I will seeke it yet once againe. And the Proverbs 31.4: same spirit of God in the same booke, by the mouth of a woman, forbiddeth Kings (who, if any, might seeme to challenge unto themselves a greater liberty) to be given to this vice. It is not for Kings, O Lemuel, it is not for Kings to drinke wine, nor for Princes strong drinke: lest they drinke and forget the law, and pervert the iudgement of any of the afflicted. Give strong drinke to him that is ready to perish, and wine to those that be of heavie hearts, etc. Againe, Ecclesiast. 31.25. another Wiseman giveth us good directions against this same sinne. Shew not thy valiantnesse in wine: for wine hath destroyed many. And a little after;Verse 29.30. wine drunke with excesse, maketh bitternesse of the minde, with brawling and quarrelling: drunkennesse increaseth the rage of a foole till hee offend, hee diminisheth strength, and maketh wounds. A number of other places of holy Writ might be to the same purpose produced. And whereas mention is made of wine, wee are withall to comprehend under it all manner of strong drinke whatsoever. A Stuck. antiquit. conviv. libr. 3. cap 8. late Writer proveth a drunkard to breake all the ten Commandements: For, first, saith hee, in stead of the true God,A drunkard breaketh all the commandements. hee maketh a God of his guts: and againe, mancipating and making himselfe a slave to his idoll drinke; hee neglecteth, and often contemneth, yea, even mocketh at the pure worship and service of the Almighty God. And as for taking of Gods name in vaine, and tearing and rending his glorious attributes, by whom more frequent than by drunkards at their drunken meetings, and where are more bloody oaths belch'd out, than by these swil-bolls and tos-pots, upon their ale-house benches. As for the prophanation of the Sabbath, that drunkards are most commonly impious in this point, I thinke will not be denied; and as for the duties due to our neighbor, a drunken man maketh little difference betwixt superiour, inferiour, equall, as being injurious unto all. And not onely doe they deny their superiours, that reverence and respect due unto them; but even often mocke and deride them. And as for quarrells, murthers, uncleannesse, and adulteries, who so ready to perpetrate any such sinne as a drunkard? And their theft in this appeareth, in the first place of their sacrilegious robbing God of the time due to his worship and service; their wives and children and neerest kindred, the poore and publike of that portion due unto them. Againe, who so prone to perjury, lying, slandering, backbiting, and taking his neighbours good name from him? and are not their lustfull eyes now inflamed with the fire of strong drinke, set a lusting after strange flesh? And are not their eyes full of adulterie? etc. Ebrietatis vitium fugiendum est, primo prop^er damnum, and ^e ^ulum, quod affert ipsi in mae, ipsam insatuando, prodendo and spoliando. ^ Quia multa peccata secum ducit. 3 Quia famam aufert. 4 Quia poenam promerein^ tempo-alem. 5 Quia ad penam ducit eteruam. 6 Quia in rebus exterioribus depauperat. 7 Quia corp^u^ damnificat, etc. D^x^t Diabo. us cuidam quem saepe ad poccandum tentaverat; elige consentire uni extribus peccatis (nimirum ebrietati, adulterio and himi^^iaio) and nunquam te tentabo; qui elegit potius inebriars. Et postea ad utrumque, adulterium, videlicet, and homicidium adjecit vinum: quia virum cum cujus uxore ebrius peccavit, supervenientem occidit. Quando vero de ebrietate reprebandatur, quidam cor^m se excusant per societatem and amicorum instantiam, Sed in hoc defectum proprium potius ostendunt, quam se excusant, minus scientes in hoc fa^^o se offendunt quam irrationabilia animalia, quae od nullius regatum ultra potum necessarium s^mu^t. Vnde fertur quod quam quidam paterfamilias habuit quendam cervum demesticum in domo sua, qui ad prandium cervisiam de sciphis solebat hibere, and quada^^ vice tantum bibit, quod inebriatus erat, and saliens in curia inter ligna crus suum graviter laesit, nunquam postea cervisiam, re^^al quid praeter aquam bibere voluit. Ex Iohan. Bromardi summa praedicantium, cap. 9. Nu. 2. pag. 229. de ebrietate. Ebrietas flag^^ orum mater, cu^parum materio, radix criminum, vitiorum omnium erigo, homines ad Dei imaginem fictos and formatos non modo b^lluis, atque feris, sed imman ssimae furiosissimaeque illi bestiae infernali, hoc est diabolo quam simillimos reddit, sicuti quotidiana experientia ^atis su^erque testatur. August. lib. ad sacras virgin. cap 1. ubi multa alia de hac re fusius explicantur. Epistol. libr. 12. Epist. 84.1. de legibus ^lorat. ode 21 libr. 3. and libr. de arte poet. Another Writer giveth us warning to avoid this sinne, for these seven ensuing reason: First, for the dammage and detriment it procureth to the soule,

by infatuation of the same, and by betraying and despoyling of all its glorious ornaments: Secondly, because this sinne seldome commeth alone, but accompanied with others: Thirdly, by reason it bereaveth one of his good name and reputation: Fourthly, because it deserveth a temporall punishment: Fifthly, because it leadeth a man to eternall punishment: Sixthly, because it weakeneth and impoverisheth a man, even his personall estate: Seventhly, because it damnifieth the body by diseases, etc. The same Authour againe, The Divell said to a certaine person whom he had often tempted to sinne, Make now thy choice, I pray thee to yeeld to me, but in one of these three sinnes, (to wit, adultery, murther, or drunkennesse) and I will never tempt thee any more; who chose rather to be drunke. But afterwards the same partie to his drunkennesse, added both the two other sins: for, being drunke, he committed adultery with another mans wife, and withall killed the womans husband, who, by hap came into the roome at the same time. Some, againe, (saith the same Authour) when they are reproved of their drunkennesse, excuse themselues by reason of their companions, their solicitation, and importanity. But in this they rather bewray their owne want of understanding, than excuse themselves; and in this particular, shew themselves inferiour to the very brutes themselves, who by no meanes will be urged to drinke more than need requireth. And to make this good, it is reported, that a certaine house-keeper, kept a tame Hart in his house, which would often drinke of their drinke, drawne for dinner or supper: but at a certaine time drunke so liberally, that he was drunke; and after, skipping in the court, among some logs of wood lying there, at length hurt his leg; who after that time would never drinke any other drinke but water. The holy Father, St Austine, calleth it the mother of all mischiefe, the matter of all offences, the root and originall of vices, making men (at first mad^ after the Ima^e of allmightie God) not like unto brute beasts, but like that cruell and ravenous infernall Fiend himselfe, that is, the Divell; as wofull experience doth daily more than sufficiently witnesse. But heare what epithites the very heathen give this swinish sinne. Seneca calleth it the cause of all publike calamities* and the same Author compareth wine and strong drinke to a poison, Optum and Hellebore. Plato calleth it a torment; and so doth a heathen Poet: But let us a little consider what mischiefes befall both man in particular, and the common wealth in generall,Mischiefes following upon drunkennes in the mind and understanding. by this loathsome sinne. In the first place then, it unmans a man; and of a reasonable man maketh him worse than an unreasonable beast, expelleth all vertue out of the mind, troubleth the understanding, overthroweth reason, destroieth the memory, and inciteth man to many mischiefes. And whereas the brutes by helpe of their senses onely are able to avoid imminent dangers; these men oftentimes deprive themselves even of the use of their senses, making themselves by this meanes, as senselesse as blocks; and contrary to the common course of nature (alwaies carefull and sollicitous to preserve it selfe) either rush upon their owne ruine, or by their in discreet carriage bring ruine upon themselves. And of this I need not, I thinke, produce any instances,Loathsome diseases procured to the body by meanes of drunkennesse. there be few, if any; that cannot instance in some particulars of his owne knowledge. And as for diseases of the body procured thereby, they are not a few: as namely, the Apoplexy, Epilepsie, or falling sicknesse; Incubus or nightmare, Palsie, giddinesse, lethargy, and the like soporiferous diseases; besides sudden death, losse of memory and understanding,

red and watery eyes, a corny face, all beset with rubies and carbuncles, accompanied with a copper nose. Besides, it is often after attended with rottennesse and roughnesse of teeth, a stinking breath,Dangers from with out attending a drunken man; often preventing repentance, and so overthrowing the soule. a stutting and stammering tongue, rotten lungs, filthy and stinking, belching, vomitings, Fevers, inflammations, defluxions on the joints, procuring gouts of all sorts; Dropsies of all kindes, the stone, strangury, with many more: yea to speake in a word, it may prove a meanes of most diseases which befall mankind. And besides all these, how many dangers from without attend a drunken man; which without one minute of an houres time to repent him of his former wicked course,Drunkennesse overthroweth a mans temporall estate. often suddenly send him into another world? Moreover it is not to be omitted, that drunkennesse overthroweth also a mans temporall estate, lavishly and prodigally wasting that substance in a very short space, which had by honest industry and paines beene a long time a purchasing; by which meanes many times besides a crasy and rotten body, they pull at length poverty, not upon themselves alone, but upon their wives, children and posterity also; leaving likewise a many beggers behind them to be a burden to the common-wealth: besides,1 Timoth. 5.8. that in this is also transgressed the Apostles rule, if any man provide not for his owne, especially those of his owne house, he hath denied the faith, and is worse than an Infidell: Besides, they prove also in this pernitious plagues to a common-wealth by mis-spending and wasting so much graine in drinke, as might feed a number of poore people. Against this beastly sinne a many worthy writers both Christian and Heathen have much inveighed. And the heathen Poets have not failed to play their parts.
Propert. cel. 4. lib. 2:Vino forma perit, vine corrumpitur atas.By wine is spoiled quite the beauty of the face,By wine our life corrupted is, it cutteth short our race.
And againe Lucretius. another describeth some effects following this vice.
Consequitur gravitas membrorum, praepediunturCrura vacillanti, tardescit lingua, madet mens:Nant Oculi, clamor, singultus, jurgia gliscunt.Hence follow the vnweldinesse, and weight of members weake,The shaking thighes are hindered, the tongue is slow to speake,The mind is moist, the eyes doe swimme, clamors and noise increase:Deepe sighes and sobs, chidings and brawles from such do never cease.
Heare yet Inven. sat. 6. another speake to the same purpose.
Quum bibitur concha, quum jam vertigine tectumAmbulat, and geminis exurgit mensa lucernis.When men are whitled with their cups, when now their giddy braine,Thinke that the house doth walke about, and judge one candle twaine.
It were no difficult matter for me, to produce a multitude of such invectives against this vice out of these and other Poets, but that I must husband my time. It is therefore worth the observing, how carefull

many of the heathens were, not onely in shunning themselves this vice; but by wholesome lawes, suppressing the spreading of it abroad into the common-wealth. And no small commendation was it for that great and potent Sueton in ejus vita Emperour Augustus Caesar, that during all the time of his warres, he never drunke above thrice at a meale. On the contrary, wee read of that Q. Curtius. great Conqueror of the then knowne world, Alexander the great, unconquerable by all the Persian forces, was, notwithstanding, at length Alexander Magnus schypho Herculano victus est antea invictus. Seneca lib, 12. epist. 84. overcome with their wine; which made him imbrue his hands in the blood of his dearest friends. And by divine punition in the aprile of his age, by a draught from the hands of Proteas, ended his daies. The like it were easie for mee to instance in many others of high and eminent ranke: as likewise of a multitude of others of inferiour degree, if time would permit mee. Eusebius, Plato, Aristole and Galen, greatly commend the lawes of the Carthaginians, whereby was forbidden any man during the warres, to drinke any thing but water. Athen. lib. 12. cap. 11. Among the Indians, it was not lawfull at any time to be drunke. And among the Persians on that day onely when they sacrificed to the Sunne, it was lawfull for them to be drunke, and to dance after the Persian manner. I have already in the chapter of Gluttony, made mention of a Scottish King that made a law, that the drunkard should be put to death. Now as this swinish sinne is odious to all ages, sexes, and conditions; so it is more odious in some than in others.Wime forbidde^ youth And therefore wine Plato 2. de leg. Clem. Alexand. Paedeg. lib. 2. cap. 2. Gal. 5. de sanit. tuend was forbidden youth, untill certaine yeeres, and then permitted with moderation. And Leont cap. 87.188. Athen lib. 10. cap. 13. Valer. Max. lib. 2. etc. women were forbiden wine among the Massilians and Milesians; and at this time is not usuall for women in France, to drinke wine before they be married, but water onely. Valer. Maxim. lib. 6 cap. 3. And among the Romans this same law against womens drinking of wine was in force. To this purpose it is very memorable which is recorded, that one Ignatius Melentius a Roman, killed his owne wife for being drunke: the which fact of his was so farre from being punished, that there was not so much as one to accuse him for the same; every one accounting her justly punished for exceeding the bounds of sobrietie. Now, as this sinne of drunkennesse is unseemely,Drunkennes unseemly in a Churchmen* and odious in all ages and degrees of the laity; so it is yet farre more odious in a Church-man, Math. 5.16. who as a light, ought by his life and conversation so shine before others, that men seing his good workes, holy life, and good conversation, may glorifie our heavenly Father. This being well considered of the antient Fathers of the Church, was the occasion of so many canons and constitutions against this so loathsome sinne in the Clergie. And that this Isaiah 28.^* same sinne reigned even among the Clergy of the Iewes, may by some places of Scripture appeare. God forbad Aaron and the other Priests under the paine of death, when they were to offer up sacrifice, to drinke either wine or strong drinke. The Nazarites were also all forbidden wine and strong drinke. The Apostle Paul reckoning up the qualities wherewith a Minister of the Word ought to be indued, among the rest, reckoneth up this, that hee must not be given to wine, nor strong drink. And wee see that holy 1 Tim. 3* 3* Tit. 1.2^ Timothy was so observant of sobriety, and so fearefull to fall into this sinne, that hee indangered his owne health, and needed by the Apostle to be put in minde to regard

it a little more. It was a care worthy of commendation, those antient Fathers had in former times, in constituting so Concil. Agathens. (...) di^^inct. 35 ^em ex conc^^. Nanneten^i. di^^. act. 44 etc. many worthy Canons in their counsels against this odious sinne. And hence came it to passe, that as well in So^om. lib. 3. cap. 6 S^crat lib 5. cap. 18. Tripart. hist. lib 6. cap. 29 Sic in can. decret. distinct 35. Jt^m can. Apost. 42. Citante Stuck. antiquit conviv. lib. 3. cap 9. all the Churches of the East, as also in Greece it selfe, it was forbidden Clergy-men to enter into Tavernes or victualling-houses, except in trauailing. And that even the heathen Priests, at least many of them, did either wholly, or at least some daies before their sacrifices abstaine from strong drinke, may by antients histories appeare. The Aegyptian priests abstained all their life long from wine and flesh, as witnesseth Lib. advers Jovinianum. S. Ierome. And concerning Volater. lib. 13. cap. 4. Alexander ab Alex. lib. 6. cap. 2. other Priests, by many other places it may appeare. And concerning the Esseans, it is by De antiquit. Iu^aic. and libro peculiari de eorum vita. Citante Stuckio. ibid. Iosephus recorded, that they abstained altogether from wine. Since then the holy fathers in former times were so vigilant and carefull to prevent this loathsome sin of drunkennesse in the Clergy, as appeareth by the former canons and constitutions, what care and circumspection ought there now to be had therof in this our age, when as the light of the Gospell is not now set under a bushell; but with its bright beames shineth overall this our Goshen. I hope the reverend Fathers of the Church in a laudable imitation of antiquity, will narrowly looke into this so enormious and swinish a sinne. If the watchman bee overtaken with strong drinke, what shall become of his charge he is set over? If the minister bee a drunkard, how shall he reprove this sinne in his Parishioners? Or if hee doe, may they not reply, Medice cura teipsum. Luke 4.25. Physitian heale thy selfe.
Cato.Turpe est doctori cum culpa redarguit ipsum.
It was a worthy saying of a Petrus Raven. graviter sane vercque hac de re ita dissent. Eb^ietas, inquil, in la^^o crimen est, in sacerdote sacrilegiam, quo alter anima suam praesecat, alter se prop^anat, and spiritum sanctitatis extinguit. Ebrietas enim mater est litium, suroris genetrix petulantiae magistra. Huic qui obnoxiu^ est, homo non est, hac qui laborat non modo peccatum facit, sed ipse est peccatum. Haec enim est rabies voluntatis, invitatus bostis, pernicies honestatis, and pudoris injuria. Vbi enim regnat, ebrietas, ratio exu^at, intellectus obtunditur, consilia deviant, and udicia subvertuntur. ^^dem Stuck. ibid. learned man that Drunkennesse in a Lay man was a great and hainous sinne, but in a Clergy-man a sacriledge; whereby the one suffocats and kills his soule, the other (the Clergy-man) quite extinguish the holy Spirit. It were therefore to bee wished, that as David would have no liar to dwell in his house; so a drunkard should not have the charge of soules in Gods house. Too much moisture will extinguish a light; wherefore, if this cannot be amended, I wish such might bee removed, and better burning lights set up in their roomes. And if any shall thinke this too sharpe a censure, I answere, that sometimes for lesser matters, some have been as sharply censured. And whereas men are often so Eagle-eyed, that they can espy a broken pane in a glasse window, or a stone broken up in the Church pavement; I wish there might be the like vigilancie and circumspection in presenting and punishing of drunkards, especially the Minister, if such ^ parish; I speake not here against the keeping of Gods house in that orderly decencie becomming the same; but I would not have Matth. 23.23. Luke 11.42. mint and cumin tithed, and weightier matters of the Law neglected. It is a true saying Vivimus exemplis, non regulis. People are are apter to imitate the life and conversation of their minister (especially in any sinne whereunto all Adams sinfull off-spring are prone enough by nature) than his doctrine. And I wish these two golden sentences were deepely engraven in all Clergy mens breasts. Ezek. 3.17^ Sonne of man, I have set thee a watchman,

etc. And that of the new Testament: Matth. 15.14: If the blinde lead the blind, they shall both fall into the ditch. Clergy-men often complaine that they are not in that esteeme and account, as the eminency of their calling requireth: and I confesse it to be too true: but withall I advertise them, that many times this proceedeth from themselves; and besides, they are often the cause that many honest ministers have the same aspersion, howbeit undeservedly, cast upon them. But because I purpose not to uncover my parents nakednesse, I leave this point, which I have onely touched occasionally and by the way. Since then drunkennesse is so loathsome and detestable a sinne, so hurtful both to the soule and body; leaving both liable to Gods curse; so hatefull to God and man, and by which all Gods commandements are broken; it being so great an enemie also to the common-wealth, and so great an enemy to the health of the body, is it not fit that such offenders should be condignely punished? And if many yeeres agoe,Idem Stuck. ibid. and nuper Claud. Deod. Panth. Hygiast. lib. 2. cap. 17. som Germane writers did even then acknowlege some judgements, which had then befalne that Nation, and others then threatned (which neverthelesse were but flea-bitings to that hath since befalne them) was, by reason of this beastly and swinish sinne of drunkennesse, what may we say now? But this I leave to them, whom it most concerneth to handle such a subject. I confesse indeed, we have good and wholesome lawes enacted against drunkennesse, and I praise God for it: and withall my wish is, there were no neglect in the execution. I could likewise wish, that the superfluous number of Ale-houses, the very nurseries and upholders of this swinish sinne did not so much exceed. It seemeth, that howsoever drunkennesse is no new-upstart, yet in antient times people were not come to that height of brazen-faced impudency to bee drunke in the day time; but as it is a worke of darkenesse, so was it the custome to be most used in the night-season, as may by the Apostles speech appeare: 1 Thess. ^.7. They that are drunke are drunke in the night. But now people are come to that height of impudency, and have so steeled their fore-heads against all shame, that they dare even in the sight of the Sun; yea, in the open view of the world; yea, even before God, and all his heavenly host of Angels, reele drunk up and downe the streets. It was againe wont to be a proverbial speech, Drunke like a begger: but now many of the Gentry (alas the more is the pitty!) doe assume this as a prerogative to grace their gentility. And what a pitty is it now, to see Gentle-men of faire estates,Drunkennesse doth much derogate from the dignity of gentility. of antient houses, descended of noble parentage and pedegree, so farre to wrong themselves, as in Tavernes and Tap-houses to become a companion to any base varlet, swill-bowle, tosse-pot and pot-companion? If their noble predecessors, of martiall courage and invincible valour, men famous in their generations, among whom many spared not their blood for the defence of their countrie, and to purchase peace to the publicke; should now behold these their degenerate successors, with their busie heads, long love-locks, slasht sutes, Italianised, Frenchised, Espaniolised, and what not: and besides, should yet see their excesse in gluttony and drunkennesse, chambring and wantonnesse, in taverns, ale-houses, play-houses and whoore-houses, and neglecting that antient

hospitality and good house-keeping which heretofore hath been so common in this kingdome, I leave to the judicious reader to judge what they would say to such a sight. But if I should proceed in this point, I should lose my selfe, and too much inlarge this discourse. Onely this counsell I shall be bold to give to some that are most exorbitant, that wheras they are often so punctual in their points of precedency, and such other things, as they suppose, concernes their credit, that they wil sometimes, rather than come short an inch of their owne due, take an ell of another mans right: yet by such carriage make themselves base and contemptible in the face of their countrie; howsoeuer, some of their flattering claw-backe parasites, and some others for some sinister respects, may with cap and knee, seeme to honour and worship their worthlesse greatnesse.Such as are betrusted with matters of Iustice ought to be free from this fault. Howsoever, my wish is, that such as are betrusted with matters of justice, and have the oversight of Alehouses, may be free from this fault, or else what reformation can wee looke for at their hands? As for his Majestie, he hath alwaies expressed himselfe and his good affection for the suppressing of this and such other enormities: it remaineth therefore, that such as he hath therewith betrusted this businesse, be careful. Now, in many great cities and corporations of this Kingdome there is often too much neglect even in this fame particular; and that often by reason of a meere relation unto and dependance one upon another, every mans private so overswaying him (quite contray to the 1 Cor. 10.24. Philip. 2.21. Apostles golden rule, Seeke not every man his owne, but seeke yee one anothers good) that it is a hard matter to have justice executed as it ought. And in such societies there is a certaine triumivrat combination betwixt the Master, and the Baker, and Brewer (Innes and Alehouses especially I meane) having neere relation one to another, and indeede a mutuall dependencie one upon another. Some trades-men againe, for feare of losing some custome, are contented to sit still, and keeping the formality of the place, and what credit may thereby unto themselves accrue, goe on still the old pack-horse pace, lest they should be thought too stirring and pragmaticall. And by the way, I cannot but highly commend one laudable constitution of late yeeres made by this corporation: That no Victualler, or Innekeeper should be elected Governor or Major of this corporation;Laudable constitution of the Towne of Northampton. which hath also beene above these twenty yeeres by-past inviolably observed. But my speech is not here against the lawfull use of these so necessary places for the reliefe and comfort of travellers; my speech is onely directed against blinde and unnecessary Ale-houses, which might well be spared; and others made to keepe the statutes made to that end and purpose. I therefore earnestly exhort all those with whom God hath betrusted authority, and the sword of Justice; that as they would avoid, and turn away Gods heavy judgements from themselves, and from the whole land; and as they will give a good account of their stewardship at that last and dreadfull day, they would be carefull to draw the sword of justice against both these active and passive offenders; the Drunkard, I meane, and the disorderly Ale-house. And whereas by a laudable late law; there is a pecuniary mulct inflicted upon the Drunkard, I pray you robbe not the poore, but let the offender be punished, and the

poore have his due. And as concerning Gods heavie Judgements inflicted upon great Princes, whole kingdomes and common-wealthes and many private persons, by reason of this same, it were easie for me to compile a whole volume. But this I can say of mine owne knowledge, that for the space of about twenty yeeres at least, since my first comming into this place, I have observed few of those who kept such tipling houses, and died since that time I mentioned, ever attaine to the period of old age; and died for the most part of dropsies, consumptions, palsies, or the like diseases. My purpose is not here to enter upon a large discourse against drunkennesse, the multiplicity of dehortatory arguments against it, being so various, so many, and handled by so many, both prophane and divine Writers; what I have said, is but by the way, being an abuse of that good creature, wherof I have at great length set downe the right use, and therefore shortly and briefely have touched upon it, and how hurtfull it is to the body (that being most prevalent with most men) with a little touch of some other hurts. As for that forced kinde of drinking by measure (commonly called drinking of health) I thinke it a Satanicall invention, to rob men both of health and heaven. The multitude of strong unanswerable arguments, both against this and all maner of drunkennesse; as also the authorities, both divine and humane, Christian and heathen, lawes and constitutions, both civill and ecclesiasticall, as they are many; so are they learnedly, and at great length set downe by a learned religious Gentleman,W. Prin. in his book called. Health^ Sickenesse. whose booke I wish those who desire to be satisfied in this particular to peruse, and there, no question, they may receive full satisfaction. Now, since by some it hath beene prescribed to be drunke to drive away an ague, and some have deemed it good physicke to be drunke once a moneth, it may be demanded, whether this practice be allowable? I answer, it may as well be demanded, whether wee may not sinne, that some future good may thereon ensue, and I doubt not, but all sound Divines will answer with a negative voice. And besides, there is no benefit can this way be proved, but we may farre safelier, both for soule and body, effect it by other meanes. But this assertion is so absurd, that it needeth no further confutation.





The Diet of the Diseased. THE SECOND BOOKE.

THE ARGVMENT.
IN the second Booke wee descend to the handling of the Diet of the Diseased, and in what manner all the premisses are to be used by the sicke: and first of the aire fit for sicke and diseased persons, and in excesse how to bee corrected: where also something concerning fire, and what fewell is the best: and something also concerning the situatian of the house, where the sicke lieth, the chamber and bed, the sickes apparell on his body and bed; next we proceed to some generall directions and rules of the diet of the diseased; concerning abstinence, a thinne and spare, a liberall or full, and a meane diet betwixt both. Afterwards we proceed to the particular preparation of the diet of the diseased; and first of that afforded by vegetables, bread especially; and what is the best, with some preparations therof for the use of the sick. Then followeth flesh of several sorts, the various and divers preparations, together with divers liquid substances thereof prepared; as broths, co^lices, conserves, gellies, etc. And next concerning fish, fowle and egges; and whether fish may bee, and what best used by the sicke, and with what cautions. After is discussed the drinke of the diseased, both naturall and artificiall, alimentall and Physicall Of water, whether and how it may be safely used of the sicke. Of severall sorts of Physicall drinkes; as aqua vitae, usquebath, and divers sorts of strong waters; together with their right use and abuse* as also of divers drinkes made of honey, oximel, hydromel, mulsum or mulsa, divers drinkes made of barly, ptisin, creame of barly, etc. Of milk, whey, butter, cheese, and severall sorts of possets usefull for the sick* and something also concerning the use of emulsions, or almond mikes. And lastly, of the several sorts of exercise usefull in sicknes and in health.



CHAP. I.

Of the diet of the diseased in generall something, the utility and profit thereof. Of the aire in particular, and how to bee corrected in times of sickenesse, and what fewell is the best.

WHat hath been hithero handled, hath beene chiefly in regard of that which now hereafter ensueth; to wit, the Diet of the Diseased, which is the principall end I at the first aimed at. And I cannot sufficiently wonder, this being a worke so profitable, so necessary and usefull for all sorts of people,Diet of the diseased hath beene hitherto much neglected. that it hath beene hitherto so long neglected. And so much the more am I hereat amazed, in that so many both antient and late writers have so copiously handled the diet of healthfull people: yea, even here among our our selves, some such tractats have beene published in our vulgar tongue. Among the antients this part of Physicke hath scarce by any of set purpose been touched, but scatteringly here and there some few things have been said concerning this subject. Hippocrates first beganne this subject. Hippocrates is the first we read of, that ever set upon this businesse, and wrote some thing concerning the diet of acute diseases against the Guidian Physitians of his time, above 2000. yeeres agoe, and which differed not a little from the diet used in our daies. And besides, his witing is so short and succinct after his Laconicke manner, that they are not obvious to every vulgar understanding. Since his time I know not any that hath published any tractat concerning this subject, excepting onely one Brudus Lusitanus scripsit de victu febricit. lib. 3.Strictnesse of the Locrians in the diet of the diseased. Brudus a Portugall by nation, who hath written but slenderly of the diet to bee used in fevers. And yet we read the ancients were so carefull in the observation of diet, that among the Locrians, it was death without the Physitians prescription to drinke a draught of wine. Q Curtius. Alexander the great commanded to put to death his Physitian Glaucias for allowing his favorite Hephaestion to drinke too much: or as some will have it, that seeing him drinke wine abundantly, he did not inhibite or hinder him.Among the Aegyptians. Among the Aegyptians it was strictly commanded they should fast till the fourth day. Since therefore, this part of Physicke concerning the diet of the diseased is so much neglected, what marveile, if diseases prove so fierce and furious? And there is no remedie so effectuall (saith Lib. de theriaca ad Pisonem. Galen) which can produce the expected effect, if either not furthered by a due and convenient diet, or at least not hindered by disorder. And therefore it is the opinion of the Meth. med. lib. 11. same Author in another place, that people of inferior ranke, and smaller meanes, are often easilier and sooner cured than many of greater eminency and ability: and that by

reason of their willingnesse to be ordered by the Physitians presciption; whereas the richer sort often oppose them, desiring commonly to be cured with slight and triviall medicines, not able to expell so strong an enemy. And sometimes this is againe occasioned (saith 1 Meth. he) by the assentation and indulgence of the Physitian, who will give them drinke as much as they desire, let them drinke wine when they demand it, and suffer them to doe whatsoever they list: and finally, in every thing carry themselves in a slavish maner towards their patients, quite contrary to that which becommeth such as are descended of Aesculapius, who ought to command his patients, as a Generall of an army commandeth his souldiers, or a King his subjects.The office of the physitian among the antients divided into three parts, and consequently there were 3 sorts of physicians, 1 Clinici. 2 Architectonici. 3 Pepaedeumeni. Aristot 3. polit. It is moreover to be observed, that among the antients, the office of the Physitian was divided into three parts, and by consequence there were three sorts of Physitians. The first were such as assisted the sick observing all their actions, and seeing them observe the diet, and other things prescribed by the chiefe Physitians, called Architectonici, (answerable to our rationall Physitians) when they came at their accustomed houres to visit them. The third sort were called Pepaedeumeni, who taught this art in the schooles, and brought up others in the same profession: to which are answerable the Doctors of the chaire in our Vniversities. Now, such as assisted the sicke, by reason they sate by their bedsides, were called Clinici; and from thence this part of physicke handling the diet of the diseased, was also called Clinice. The two later sorts of Physitians, wee have here in our countries; but with the first sort wee are not acquainted. And in truth this is a great defect,The care of assisting the sicke most commonly committed to women. and the prejudice thereby redounding to the publike not small, for as much as this charge is most commonly committed to ignorant women, with us called nurses, a people for the most part so wilfull, and wise in their owne eyes, and so selfe-conceited, that in stead of furthering the Physitian in his course, by keeping the patient strictly to his prescription, they are often the readiest to overthrow whatsoever they ordaine, unlesse it please them very well. And many other women also (the judicious, discrete and better bred, I alwaies except) who take chiefely this charge upon them, are much of the same stamp. And this was the reason why that famous Ex his intelligi potest ab uno medico multor ^non posse curari, eumque (si artifex est) idoneum esse qui non multum ab aegro recedit Et iterum paulo post. Ille assideat necesse est, qui quod solum opus est visurus est, qua^do minus imbecillis futurus sit nisi cibum acciperit, Cels. libr. 3. cap. 4. Celsus wished an able and understanding Physitian never to be farre from his patient. Of this same diet of the diseased, my purpose is with the aid of the almighty to discourse. Now, howsoever the matter of this diet be the same with that of healthfull people; yet the manner of preparation, use, and other circumstances doe not a little differ, as hereafter shall more plainly appeare. And first, I will begin with the aire:
As then the aire is that elemenr without the which, in health the life man of cannot subsist, and a sweet, pure, temperate aire a great meanes to preserve health: so is the aire, endued with the same laudable qualities a great means to further the recovery of health already lost. In sicknesse therefore, it is a matter of no small consequence how the aire is ordered. Now, as it will not of any be denied, but that the best aire is to be made choice of, so againe, all are not able to change their owne naturall aire; some for want of ability, and some in regard of the nature of the

disease. In acute diseases (Fevers I meane, and such diseases as have Fevers for their continuall attendants; as Pleuresies, Squinancies, etc.) it is not safe to transport the sicke: In chronicall, and diseases of longer continuance; as dropsies, consumptions, etc. thou maiest be bolder. The aire then is in a double respect to be considered, either as the common ambient,The aire considered in a double respect. or as it is included within some particular roomes. The aire, as the common ambient, which is of a laudable qualitie, neither too cold and piercing, nor too hot and foggy, if it be possible, and thy disease will permit, is to be made choice of. Now, the properties of the best and most laudable aire, together with nature and properties of severall sorts of winds, have beene heretofore at great length related. True is it indeed, that acute diseases seldome suffer the patient to remove his habitation, after he is once ceized with the same; for the which cause, we must use art to alter and correct the quality of the aire contrary to the disease,In chronicall diseases the aire is to be exchanged for a better if it may be, but seldome in acute. as wee shall shew anon. In chronicall and long lingering and continuing diseases, such as are dropsies, consumptions, quartanes, and the like, one may easily exchange the place of his abode for a better. And that this was also the practice of the antient Physitians* doth by that of 6 Epidem. Hippocrates plainly appeare, who wisheth the sicke in long continuing diseases, to retire themselves into another aire. And 5 Math med. Galen himselfe, sent such as were sicke of consumptions, by meanes of ulcerate lungs, to a place not farre from Rome, called Tabiae, being a pretty high place, where was a pure dry aire, the which is even at this time also much frequented by such diseased people. And for this same cause in Plinies time,Custome with us to send the sick into another aire. many, upon the same occasion sailed into Egypt. The like custome in these our countries wee likewise observe, to send the sicke either into a better aire, or else into his owne native soile.Qualities of the aire whither one is to retire himselfe. Now, the aire whither they are to retire, ought to be a pure, sweet, and fresh aire, not infected with any noisome and evill smells, nor yet neer any fennes, and standing pooles. But before I proceed, I must needs give an aduertisment to the reader, concerning the place for burying of the dead, on the which, if I insist a little, I must needes crave pardon, the matter being of some consequence for the health of mankinde. I say then,Inconvenience in burying of dead bodies in the Church-yard. that the inveterate custome of burying the dead in Churchyards, but especially in Churches, proveth often very pernitious and hurtfull to the health of the living. And this inconvenience in populous cities and townes, (especially in the noble City of London) may not seldome be observed: and that in such places principally, where the Church and Church-yard are so little, that often times new graves are digged for new guests, before the old inhabitants be quite metamorphosed into their mother mold; the which how inconvenient it is, especially where the corps must stand unburied untill the sermon be finished, let the unpartiall reader judge. Sure I am this great Church of All-saints, in this towne, was already this last Sommer so fraught ful of dead corps, that it was a hard matter to finde a place to digge a new grave* and yet since that time, how many have there beene buried, there are a many witnesses. And so good Church men would many be after their death, who in their life time cared but little for comming at the Church assemblies; that if they be of any ranke or means, they must

needs lye in the chancell at the least;Against policy to bury in Churches. and then after a Popish superstitious conceit, many it may be, thinke they shall be the wel-comer to heaven. But they will finde I warrant them, that they reckoned without their host. And that this is not mine owne private opinion, it may appeare that it was accounted a matter of policy, not to bury within cities and townes; as may by a Curet etiam ut loca sepultu^arum and monumentorum sint extra frequentem coetum hominum, eo nempe loco, quo vivis non possint nocere.Expostio.Nempeid vult canon, lo^ ^a sepulturarum debere esse extra urbes; in o and extra templa, in quibus homines frequente^ conve nunt, id quod probatur ex perpetua consuetudine popu^i Dei qui mortuos suos sepel^t, non in urbibus and templis, sed in campis; sicut videre est in historia Patriarcharum, qui omnes in campis sepeliri voluerunt, and imprimis manifeste testatur Evangelista Lucas. cap. 7. Vbi narrat filium vidua habitantus in u^be Naum, cum mortuus esset, deportatum fuisse extra urb^m adse ulturam* ^d qu^m lo^um vide quae an^otet ^octi interpretes, qui id omnes uno ore profitentur, non tantum Iudaeorum, sed etiam gent^^m (...) remfuisse, ut mortuos suos esserrent extra urbes. Vide etiam ^^martyr loco commuclall. 2. loco de s^ pu^t.2 Ratio aucitur ex charitate proximi, cu^ plane aduersatur iste mos sepeliendorum mortuorum in urbibus and templis, dum nempe valetu^^ni and vitae vivorum nocetur, per haelitus qui exc^daveribus mortuorum in urbibus and temp^s tanto copiosiores exhilant, quanto locus est conclasi^r, and ob hominum frequentiam tepidior; quos quidem balitus, praesertim ex eorum cadave^^bus, qui peste e^^^^cts sunt evaporantes, venenatos ac contagiosos medici testantur: inter quos Le^in. Lemn. 2. De mirac Nat cap ^. Vt non dicam hoc loco de (...) and terr^^ in qui (...) plura (...); quam (...) ea ^o a (...) nata quasi quam materiam (...) m^nument^^ (...) istud mov. a^ and effo^^tur 3 Ratio e^ a caus^ (...) and or^gine estius consu^tud^nu sepeliendorum ma^tu^rum in templ^^; quam originem (...), vel id testimoniam est, quod nempe Mon^^m, and prae^itim ^^a^ c^^cani. ac praeser^m (...) a^^untes ex ist^ (...) ra mor^u^rum quae in temp in temp i^ fiant, non nisi lucrain^ qu^lium quaesiverint tur^^ ^mum. and quidem ita suae si^ erint, ut n^^ ^xpe^^^rint templa (...) quae aqua (...) c^^at (...) ac con^amin^ri, cum Deut ipse di^^rte in (...) ^andum ea (...) and pu^ (...) ai (...) summo altare viciniora. Acce (...), and aliud argumentum ex testimo^io ^uris ci^ilu, de quo^ ure pl^^^t annotare verba: Francisci Ripae extracta de peste, cap. 4 ante citato, ubi iuquit, ad removencum ^oe^or^^m ex cadaveribus provenientem a maioribus nostris inventa sunt sepulchra non defunctorum causa, sed viventium gratia instituta: Nam quia sepulchra ut plurimum foetent, staruit D. Adrianus poenam ^0. aureorum in eos qui in civitate sepulchrum ^ociunt locumq publicati iussit, and corpus inde transferri, eadem Magistratibus patientibus imminente. 3. @ Divus Adria^us F. de sepulchrorum violatoribus Huc accidit and lex 12. tabularum, quae jussit humari corpora extra urbem ^^verbis: Mo^tu^m hominem in urbe ne sepelito. Quam legem citans Franciscus Patricius and ipse homo Pontificius lib. 5. de institutione reipubl. tit. 10. in^^r alia haec etiam addit verba: Nullum genus sepulturae megis laudandum puto, quam hum^^ones sub di^, (...) flores and herbae na^cuntur; tam id in sepulchris vetustissimis inscriptum sit Sparge rosas lector, vel can^id a lilia pone stem Manibus date lilia plenis, Item purpureos spargam flores. Et addit Patricius Pulchrius est and optabilius Germinatiti teriae ^^^di hoc corpus, cum ex tali terra factum sit, and ut aequum est, ut f^lius in gremium matris revertatur. Denique etiam a edit hodierna consuetudo laudatissimarum rerum publicarum, Argentinensis Norib^^ensis, Lipsensis, in quibus vel rara, v^l nulla etiam mortaliorum cadavera in templis urbanis humantur. De Spartanis m^ror, quod permiforint mortuos in urbe sepel^i: de quo ^m consuetudine, vide Era^um libr. 3. pag. 110. Interim tamen vetuerunt ne monumenta in templis fierent, sed ^uxta, Vide i^idAnte annos cir^iter 400. haec execrabilis consuetudo coepit, cum ante haec tempora. etiam Martyrum cadavera extra urbes sepulta (...). Franciscani enim and Dominicani cum viderent numerum fraterculorum angeri, nec tantos sumplus ipses su p^^ere, (...) em^ugendae pecuuia artem invenerunt, ut homines in cucullis Monacborum, and prope altare sepeliri deber, (...) duent, ita ut recte quis dicat, Nullam artem acquitendae pecuniae esse probatiorem quam mortuorum, Vide ibedem plu^^ Ca^. 10. learned late Writer, who proves that the dead should be buried without cities and townes, and not in Churches; where are frequent assemblies and great concourse of people, which he there proveth by divers arguments and reasons. 1. This is proved, saith he, by the continuall custome of Gods owne people, who buried their dead not within townes and temples, but in the fields, as by the Patriarchs may appeare. And this is yet made more manifest by that place of S. Luk. 7. where mention is made of the son of the widow of Nahum, who being dead, was carried out of the towne to be buried: upon which place, all the learned interpreters doe observe, that, not among the Jewes onely; but even among the Gentiles also, it was the custome to bury their dead without their cities and townes. 2 Reason is taken from charity towards our neighbour, against which is this custome of burying the dead in townes and temples, the health of the living by this meanes being hurt, and that by meanes of vapors and exhalations arising from these dead carkasses; and the which must needes exhale and rise up in greater abundance, by how much more the place is close, and warmed by the multitude of people. And that such vapors and exhalations (especially if they proceed from bodies dead of the Plague) are venomous and contagious, our Physitians doe witnesse. And besides, this earth being thus embrued with those venomous vapors, when it is moved, and cast up to bury new bodies, must needs send out evill and venomous vapors to the living. The 3. reason is taken from the originall of this custome, which was evill, and at first introduced by the Monks, Franciscan Friers especially, and that for their owne profit and gaine. And whereas God himselfe affirmed to the people of the Jewes, that the very touching of a dead corps made them uncleane, and that the place where it was laid, was thereby polluted: yet, those holy begging brothers hold that the sepulchers are the cleaner and purer, the nearer they lye unto the high Altar, howsoever their churches have before beene consecrated with their holy water. 4. The civill law it selfe condemneth this custome; and to this purpose are there cited the words of a learned writer: that to prevent the stincking and noisome smell proceeding from dead bodies, by our ancestors sepulchers were divised, not for the dead, but for the good of the living: for by reason of this noisome smell where dead bodies are buried, therefore the Emperour Adrian inflicted a mulct or fine of forty crownes to bee taken of such, as should bury any dead body within a city or towne, the place likewise to be confiscate, and the body likewise to be from thence removed; the magistrate permitting to be likewise punished. And the law of the 12 tables commanded likewise dead bodies to bee buried without the cities and townes. And some haue beene of that opinion, that no buriall place was to bee compared

with that of the open fields whereas grasse and flowers grow in great abundance. And 5. This is the laudable custome of some commonwealths: as of Strasbourg, Nuremberge and Leipzig, whereas either very seldome, or never bury they any dead bodies in their Churches. Besides, this same point concerning the buriall of the dead, among other things was thought a matter worth the reformation: and therfore at this day they have ordinarily other convenient places deputed for the buriall of their dead. And if we will yet more narrowly looke into this businesse, considering this is Gods house, the which, wee ought at least to keepe as cleane and sweet as those of our owne ordinary abode; I thinke, we shall find it but a matter of equity. And I will yet appeale to any, whether they would have their owne houses, especially their parlours or roomes, where they are most frequently to be made places of burying the dead. And the Papists would yet make a man wonder more, who were so carefull and curious in contenting the outward senses, that not onely would they please the eyes of the spectators with curious pictures and images, and by melodious musicke of organs and other instruments of musicke besides vocall, give so good content to the eares that notwithstanding, they were so carelesse of this other sense of smelling, that they would not spare to bury the dead even under the high Altar it selfe. But I thinke they may reply, there was another smell which did more affect them, to wit, that which did so much affect that Roman Emperour, Vespasian, the smell of gaine. And this pleasant smell was that which first forged purgatory, indulgences, consecrating of Agnus Dei, Episcopall palles, and innumerable other things, sent to Princes and great persons, and sold at a high rate: and this same bred first this burying in Churches, in S. Francis his habit, yea, caven hard by the high Altar; the which was little above 400 yeers agoe brought into the Church, whenas this begging brother-hood began to increase to a greater number than their almes and ordinary allowance would well maintaine. But on this particular I will not dwell any longer, but wish that things might be so carried, as injury might be done to none: and withall, that a publike good might be alwaies preferred before any private or personall respects: neither were it a hard matter for mee to answer whatsoever could be objected against this so

laudable a custome of burying the dead in some place set apart for this purpose in some out-part of Townes and Cities, or rather without the same. Howsoever I have discharged my dutie as a Physitian, giving warning of the inconveniences from hence arising, and prescribing a sweet and wholesome aire, especially for the sicke. But of this, ^^us much shall suffice. Now, when there is any fault, either by excell^^^ defect in the aire, wee may safely correct the same.^^^^ectio^ o^ (...) In the Sommer time, when the aire is too hot, wee are to use all meanes to coole and refresh it; by strowing our roomes with cooling greene herbs: as lett^ces,(...) to coole the aire in Sommer. vineleaves, violet leaves, sallow and the like, by sticking the roome with greene boughes, and letting in some aire by opening the windowes, if any, that looke towards the North. There may also great pales full of cold water be set in severall corners of the house, and sometimes water powred out of one uessell into another. If the aire againe be too cold,Warming of the cold aire in Winter. as in Winter, then the best way is to warme the roome with a good fire. And because fire is so necessary and vsefull, wee must have a speciall regard, especially being for the use of the sicke, of what fewell it is made. In the first place then, it must be made of drie wood, and not of greene smoakie sticks, very offensive both in sicknesse and in health. The fire of coles is not so good for the use of the sicke,The fewell whereof the fire is made.Sea coale and pit-coale ^re naught.(...) ^^ndled in a close ^^ome dange^ou^.History especially such as are digged out of the bowells of the earth. And those wee commonly call char-coale, if either new kindled, or yet be in a narrow roome, are very hurtfull for any sicke, yea, will offend a healthfull person. And it is reported that Iovinian the Emperour travelling towards Rome in the Winter-season, by the way was lodged in a roome newly whited with lime, in the which, to aire the roome, was made a great fire of char-coale, and the next morning this Emperour was found dead in his bed, being stifled by the venomous vapours of these coales and lime. I remember, that living in Paris, 1608. A young Gentleman of Poictou in France, my chamber-fellow set a great pan of char-coale within his studie in the Winter time, shutting both doore and window,(...) and within a little space came running out of his study halfe stifled, whenas being in mine own study within the same chamber, ^ marvelling, and much amazed, came to him, asking him the cause of this sudden fright; who scarce able to speak, related the truth of the matter, and how that being almost suffocated with the venomous and suffocating vapours of these coales, hee was scarce able to open his study doore. Sweet wood, without all controversie, is best fewell; as Rosemary,Sweet wood i^ th^ best. Juniper, Bai-tree, if they were as frequent with us as in the south parts of France, and many other Countries. With us our ordinary wood of Ash, Elme, oake,Good fewell (...) Worse fewell. sallow and beech are good fewell for the chamber of the diseased. But the poplar, the elder, and all sorts of thornes are farre inferiour to the former, by reason they trouble the head more, as witnesseth De conservanda valetud. cap. 7. Ranzovius: and what if we adde to these the walnut tree, which hath beene ever reputed an enemie to that principall part? Besides, there is a fewell in the northerne parts of this Iland, called heath or ling, whereof there is great use made,Heath or ling wholsome fewell. as well for ordinary uses of baking, brewing and drying malt, as for burning in the chambers sometimes, both of sicke and healthfull persons* the which in my opinion is exceeding good, especially for the sicke, without any offence or hurt to any part of the body, being very good in

all manner of defluxions,(...) of (...) wa^e^. and diseases from thence proceeding, and good to corroborat the sinews and nervous parts. If the aire of thy chamber be infested with noisome smells, if otherwise unavoidable, then art thou to correct the same with sweet smells: as of vineger, roses and rose water, sanders, etc; in hot diseases: and in cold diseases, with juniper,Hot and (...) woods (...) whom (...) and many hot aromaticall smells. It is also to be observed, that such hot woods are best for the sickes chamber in cold, and not in hot acute diseases, unlesse the roome be large and spacious. If there be no other meanes to correct the aire, we are, if it be possible, to exchange it for a better, as hath been said already. But it is now time to come to the habitation of the sicke.


CHAP. II.

Of the particular Aire wherein the sicke liveth, to wit, his habitation, and the best situation thereof: As also, whether a countrie-aire, or that of townes or cities be best; where something concerning the situation of the towne of Northampton.

Consideration of the particular aire about the sicke.THe ambient aire wee considered in a double respect, one generall, of the which already in the former Chapter; now in the next place wee come to consider of it in a particular relation to the sicke, considered in the habitation, or place where the sicke dwelleth. And since it is seldome so safe to remove the Diseased, there is therfore no small care to be had in the choice, of the place wherin any one is to live.(...) situation of the (...) station. The healthfulnes of the house is by the situation and structure thereof esteemed. That house is by many esteemed the best, which is situate somewhat high, and on a dry firme ground, sandy rather than any other: the house it selfe being of an indifferent and competent height, and looking towards the south principally; from Sommets heat well shaded, yet not deprived of cooling winds, and in Summer receiving the benefit of the Sun-beames in abundance: the which ought also to bee accommodated with divers roomes, differing in bignesse and situation, where the sicke may solace himselfe according to times and seasons.The next best situationThe worst. It is also here to bee understood that there bee no fennes, marshes, or any such noisome and stinking places neare to the sickes habitation. Now next to this situation is that which is towards the Sun-rising: but worst of al towards Sun-setting, in Sommer especially: for in such places the morning light is more unpleasant, in which time, notwithstanding, the sicke should finde most solace. And the morning Sunne doth purge and rectifie the ambient aire, provided it be not admitted within the house, untill it hath first a little cleansed the aire, and dissipated and driven away the

thicke vaporous night exhalations, in moist times especially. And it were to bee wished also there were some pleasant springs, or some little cleere brooke, or swift running little river not farre from this habitation. Many great houses are now a daies so built both in cities and townes, and in the countrie that there may be choice of roomes, which way one will. Low roomes, especially vaults, or caves under the earth are the fittest for Fevers, spitting of blood,Low ^oomes in what diseases best. and faintnesse of heart; by reason of the coolenesse of the aire, which better upholdeth and mainteineth strength than higher roomes.Great and spatious roomes. Great and spatious roomes are fitter for fat and full bodies, by reason they draw ever in fresh aire, which discusseth and resolveth collected humors. In narrow roomes the aire is suffocate and stiffled up. And therefore we read that that great and memorable plague of the Athenians in the time of Thucidides, did first of all set upon the poore mens cottages.Narrow and close rooms in contagious and pestilentiall diseases are not good. And common experience doth even so farre testifie unto us, that in any Epidemicall, contagious, or pestilentiall diseases, the meaner sort which live in little close roomes, are sooner and in greater number, than those who live in more spatious houses therewith surprized; as I my selfe could instance. And I beleeve, many are able to say something to this purpose, the alleies, and other close places of the city of London,Close roomes when best. at this last great and memorable plague. But in cold frosty weather, I confesse, especially where is no feare of any such infection, a close roome is not to bee refused; provided it bee not made too hot, and too many people be not suffered to be in it at once.Stones and hot-houses not wholesome. And by the way, with Locoprius citato. Ranzovius, I cannot but reject the use of the aire of stones or hot-houses, as they are ordinarily used throughout all the Germane countries, which are ordinarily made so hot, that in the coldest frost of Winter one is not able to sit in them without sweating,Of Light, and how it maybe used about the sicke. as I have often, howbeit sore against my will, experimentally tried. And by this meanes the Pores of the body are so relaxed and dilated, that they easily receive the impression of the first occurrent cold aire. Now to this discourse of the aire and habitation belongeth also to say something of the light, wherwith the patient is often not a little affected.Alium enim lux, alium tenebrae magis turbant, reperiunturque nullum discrimen deprehendi, vel hoc, vel illo modo possit. Optimum itaque est utrumque experiri, and habere eum qui tenebras horret in luce, eum qui lucem ut tenebris. At ubi nullum tale discrimen est, aeger si vires habet, loco lucido, si non habet, obscuro continendus est. Cels. lib. 3. cap. 18. and Hippoc. lib. de medico. If the sick be weake, then the light often offendeth, and is therefore to bee kept darke; especially if the eies be weake. If the sicke love the light, let him enjoy it; if no apparent danger be thereby procured: if both be troublesome, keepe a meane betwixt both. Where the sicke is not offended with the light, if the time and place concurre, especially in Winter; the beames of the glorious Planet Phoebus will not a little correct the ambient, and comfort the patients weake spirits. The colour of the walls come also here within our consideration; which if whited with lime or chaulke, are likewise offensive;The Colour of the walles.Hangings of the roome. but especially if the roome be of it selfe full of light. Hangings also of severall colours doe much trouble the eye-sight of the sicke, especially if they be mad. To this place may we also reduce that which writeth Hippocrates. (...) Aph. 1. lib. 1. That it is not sufficient for the Physitian to play his part; but the sicke and the assistants, tending upon the sicke: and besides, all outward things must be accordingly accommodated. Such as are about the sicke ought to bee gentle and couteous, not peevish and froward, observing the sickes

humor and disposition, and in reasonable and lawfull things ready to fulfill his just desires; to cheere up and cherish the sicke, and to give them good words; but especially carefully and diligently to observe the Physitians prescriptions. The Physitians (saith Liv. ut anima (...). Aristotle) cannot alwaies cure the sicke, because it is in the hand of another man that he cure according to art, and not in the power of art it selfe. Besides, in the roome where the sicke lieth there should be heard no noise, nor ought the sicke be troubled with much talking; and therefore much company is to be avoided; especially in hot diseases and the like seasons, and narrow roomes, which are thereby over heated. And (...) cap 3. P^^nie writeth, that it hath been observed, that wounds have beene the worse by much trampling and stirring with peoples feet. But concerning the aire, there remaineth yet a question to be discussed, whether the aire of townes and cities, or that of the countrey be better?
Now this hath been an antient question among Physitians; and it seemeth it was by the antients decided on the countries side, in that the Temple of Aesculapius was built without the city of Rome; intimating thereby the prerogative of the country-aire above that of cities and townes, as witnesseth In quaestion Romanis Plutarch: and not for the gaine of Physitians, as (...) 29 cap. 1.Country aire in generally an^ (...) the most part to bee prefer^^d. Pliny prateth. It is true indeed that in the generall, and for the most part the countrie aire is more open and free, than that of cities and townes* which oftentimes by reason of multitudes of people, nearenesse of buildings, narrownesse of streets (especially if they be not kept sweet and cleane) must needs bee farre inferior to the other. And yet are there herein divers particular cautions and limitations to be observed.Great diversitie in countri^ (...). Some country-aire is farre inferior to that of many townes: witnesse the hundreths in Essex, and the fennes in Lincolneshire; by which it plainely appeareth, there is great diversity in the qualities of the country-aires. There is againe some country-aire in its qualities simply considered, especially for the naturall inhabitants healthfull; and yet for some constitutions very dangerous: as many places of the North parts of this kingdome and Iland, where the aire is very sharpe and penetrant, and therefore might easily offend thinne and weake constitutions, and consequently procure distillations, from whence arise many dangerous diseases.Diversitie in the aire of seve^all townes and cities. There is againe a great difference to be found in divers cities and townes: for some are very great and populous; as Paris and London, etc: and therefore in such cities, the aire must needs be grosser and thicker, and not so sweet and wholesome as that of the countrie: and therefore in such populous places, it is good for the patient, if it be possible, especially in chronicall, or diseases of long continuance, to remove into a sweet country-aire. Againe, some townes are so well situated, and so free from the aforenamed annoyances, enjoying so free an aire, that they often equall, if not exceed sometimes a country-aire: for as I have already said, some country-aire may be too sharpe and piercing, whereas a city or towne well situate in a temperate aire, and freed from these former inconvenients,Good and wholesom aire of the towne of Northampton. may prove farre fitter for indisposed persons. Of such divers may by found within this noble Iland, amongst whom, in this respect, few exceed this antient towne and corporation of Northampton. This

towne hath for its soile whereon it is seated, a ground gravelly for the most part, and under this digging a little is to be found a good firme tough clay, producing good store of good stone, fit for buildings.Situation of this Towne. It is situate in a fruitfull country, on the side of a hill, looking towards the South Sunne (the best situation as wee have already proved) the streets faire and spatious; and by the care and industrie of good governours, kept sweet and cleane; the buildings faire and beautifull, and adorned with such a market place, as few corporations in this kingdome exceed it; yea, very few that come neare or equall it. It is not my purpose to discourse of that old strong castle, together with the first founder, and the famous Churches and religious houses have been in and about this towne. And as the aire is good and wholesome,(...). so is that other element of water, neither within nor without the walls wanting. Within are divers wholesome wells and springs: and without the walls, besides many wholesome and pleasant springs, that famous River of Nine (so called from the nine springs, from which it hath its first orignall) which runneth all along the South side,River of ^^ne, and good (...) breeding ^^erin. and the West directly under the Castle walls, and with many serpentine windings and turnings, thorow a pleasant medow ground above 30 miles in length, and conveighing its silver streames by the antient city and sea of Peterborrow, at length marrieth it selfe with the great Ocean, being every where furnished with many good and wholesome fish: such as be, Perches, great Jacks, Pickrells, Roches, Genious, little inferior to smelts; Chubs, silver-eeles, and divers others.^^stures and (...) about (...). And as for sweet and pleasant walkes of pastures and meadows, it is almost ever^ where with them environed. And all beyond the towne for many mi^^ North-ward, it is a dainty light gravelly ground, yet very profitabl^ and commodious both for corne and cattell. My purpose is not here to set downe a particular and exact geographicall description of this antient corporation; but onely by the way and occasionally discoursing of the aire, tooke occasion to acquaint the reader with a touch of the commodious and healthfull situation of the same.Decay of (...) this, com^ (...) many other con^^^^^tions of this kingdom But this famous corporation hath now for a long time lyen lingring under the burden of wasting and consuming sickenesse, which hath eaten up, and consumed the bowels, not of this onely, but of many other famous cities and corporations of this flourishing kingdome: my meaning is decay of trading, the which to supply, as a feeling member of the publikes wants, I wish, it were as well in my power, as to be moane and bewaile the same. It is not unknowne to many of the inhabitants, what great trading by meanes of clothing hath been here in former times; as the ruines of some great buildings, imploied to that purpose, doe yet evidently witnesse. And I know nothing to the contrary,(...) wood of Nor^hamp^o^ shire. why this might not as well now bee followed, as it was in former times. This countrie is furnished with as good wooll as any other,Good water for dying. and affordeth this commodity to some of those countries where clothing is in greatest request. The water is likewise very good for dying, and no other conveniency, that I know, wanting, except good will,This towne commodious for enterta^nment for great meetings. and an earnest desire to promote a publike businesse. And in so high esteeme hath this towne been had in former times, that besides Parliaments

here kept, and other solemne meetings, it was once accounted one of the fittest places for founding an Vniversity: and now for these many yeeres hath beene accounted the fittest and most convenient place for publike meetings, as well of assise and sessions, as of any other importance: and that in regard of that entertainment and content which all things in even scales well weighed, may be better had in it than in any other towne in the whole Countie. And besides, this corporation yeeldeth as much to his Majesties exchequer, I thinke, as any other of that bignesse and trading. Neither yet hath this Towne come short of any in expression of dutifull and loyall affection to their Princes, according to the possibility of their powers. My wish therefore is, that a mother in Israel may not decay, but some regard may be had to the re-establishing of the former flourishing estate of this antient corporation. And this by no meanes, in my opinion, might sooner be effected, than by setting up this antient trade of clothing againe: for this purpose it were a worthy worke,Clothing wold make this corporation flourish. and deserving great commendation, if such as have had their first being in this place, God having now made them his Stewards of a great substance, would helpe to uphold their aged, and weake decaying mother. And this were a pious worke (at least in a large acceptation) and a part of that honour the childe oweth to an aged, and decayed parent. Remember that the very heathen held this tenent, that men were not only borne for themselves, but that their common countrie claimed some interest in them. To incourage others in the prosecution of so laudable a worke,Master Iohn Denbigh, one of the Aldermen of Northampton hath begun to set up clothing. one Alderman of this same corporation, hath now of late broken the yce, and againe, like a good Patriot, minding the publike good (whereof now most are unmindfull) hath at his owne cost and charges, begunne to set a foot this laudable trade of clothing: the which, if well followed, and seconded by others, and neighbours in the country would further to set forward so laudable an enterprize; it would in a short time, prove no small benefit both to the towne and countrie; and by this meanes, many poore might well be set a worke, who now are forced either to begge their bread, or else labour hard at knitting stockings, which will not furnish them with browne bread to fill their hungry bellies, especially in these hard pinching times: besides, some other inconveniences on which I cannot spend time. I adde onely this, let us follow and imitate the laudable industry of the Dutch, in providing for their poore,The river of Nine made navigable wold prove beneficial both for towne and countrie. and setting them a work. They suffer no straggling beggers among them, and why may wee not as well? Another thing there is, which would much further and advance this businesse, and prove beneficiall, not to this corporation alone, but to other market townes also: to wit, Owndel, Thrapstone, and Waldenborrow, together with the whole adjacent country, and other neighboring shires: and this is by making the river of Nine navigable from Peterborrow to Northampton. Now, let every one seriously consider the need, and they shall find more than enough; if it were but even in regard of the scarcity and decay of fewell in this Westerne part of the shire, besides many other benefits would from thence arise: as preserving the high-waies (now chargeable to the countrie in regard of much carriage by cart) keeping

the meddowes from so frequent overflowing; and that by meanes of scowring the chanell, and raising the banks: besides the importation of corne, and other commodities in time of dearth; and againe, exportation of the same commoditie of corne in time of greater plentie and cheapnesse; besides many other benefits whereon I may not now dwell. As for any objections to the contrary, they may easily be answered, and the worke knowne to be faiseable, having been long since surveied, and the charges cast up, and an act ready drawne to be put up in parchment divers yeeres agoe; and this same Alderman lately mentioned (as hee hath ever manifested himselfe a good Patriot, in furthering any publike good) at that time followed the same businesse. I hope, when time and opportunity shall serve, good Patriots will not be unmindfull of promoting and furthering the publike good; and those whom it more neerely concerneth, even this same in particular. And although, I shall perhaps, by some be censured for this digression; yet, because I thought it not impertinent, I must needs crave the curteous reader pardon, and so I now proceed to the prosecution of the businesse I have begunne.


CHAP. III.

Of the clothing and covering of the sicke, as also concerning shifting of the diseased, and of the error of the vulgar practising the contrary: Something concerning the bed wherein the sicke lieth, and whether the sicke ought to have his haire cut.

NOw, because among other uses of clothes, one is to keepe and defend us from the injuries of the ambient aire; therefore after our discourse of aire, I thinke it materiall to say something of the clothing and covering of the sicke. Now, our meaning is of such clothes as cover the sickes bed, and lie upon him: and the sicke are either covered with many and thicke heavy clothes to defend them from the injury of the cold aire, or else with thinne covers, for feare, lest they be by multitude of clothes oppressed, and internall heat increased. Lib. de intern. affe^^. Hippocrates in cholericke diseases, covereth the sicke with thinne and soft clothes. And Asclepiades the Physitian, saith Lib. 25. cap. 3. Pliny, did abrogate this troublesome custome of covering the sicke with so many clothes. In that great and fearefull sweating sicknesse it was observed, that most died by reason they were covered with so many clothes: for, their opinion was, saith Cornel Gemm^ lib. 2. cosmo^^^t. a learned Writer, that the disease was to be helped by sweating, which by all meanes they laboured to further. In the beginnings of the paroxysmes,When to cover the sicke* or fits of fevers, we ought to cover the sicke with many clothes, that the sicke

may quickly grow warme, and the cold be driven away: and for this purpose, the parts which are cold are to be rubbed with warme clothes. After they beginne to be warme,More clothes to be used in the night than in the day. the clothes are to be taken off, and toward the declining of the heat to be laid on againe, the better to provoke sweat. Moreover, it is to be observed, that more clothes be used in the night-time than in the day, and that by reason the Galen comment in eam par li^. 6. in epid evidenter vigilans calic^or e^tertus, etc. night aire is colder than that of the day. But if it should so fall out that the sicke could not sleepe with a multitude of clothes, then were it good to wait while they be asleepe, and then to cover them. Now, the bed wherein the sicke lieth, is not to be neglected: as for the forme of the bed, a high headed bed, such as is now in greatest request, and we commonly call French beds,Best form of beds for the sicke to lie in. (especially in Sommer-time, and in hot acute diseases) are the best for the use of the sicke, and afford him most aire: and withall, I would have the ascent, or going up to it low and easie. In Sommer and hot weather, in hot acute diseases, the curtaines would be thinne,Bed he lieth on, and whether feather beds be best. in Winter, and colder weather thicker. As for the bed he lieth on, downe beds are the hotest of all others, and next to them ordinary feather beds; yet both doe much heat the sicke, especially in Sommer, and hot acute diseases. And therefore I can in no wise approve of the preposterous German custome, to cover them with one feather bed,Wood-beds and mat^^^ces. and lay another under them. Wooll beds and mattrices are cooler* and fitter than the former, if the sicke would be perswaded to indure a little hardship for a future benefit.Beds of straw and c^affe. But straw and chaffe, especially of oats, are coolest of all other, and fittest for sicke folke, if people would prise more their health than their ease. In Babylon (saith a late Writer) great men used in Sommer to lie upon beds of leather*Bed filled with water. With (...). filled with cold water, which I would not advise our new fashion-mongers to imitate. And they say in Italy they use even at this day to lie upon leather-beds filled with wind, as we doe here our foot-balls, and the French their ballownes. Our low field beds and canopy beds, are not so good in the former cases as high beds. The best of all others are accounted such as hang by cords, whereby this benefit may be reaped,Hanging beds. that the sicke may be rocked asleepe; as is the custome of the Brasilians, to have their beds hung betwixt two trees, for feare of venomous vermine.
Now, from the covering of the bed, to the covering of the sickes body in bed, and immediatly touching the same; and first wee will beginne with the head-peece, his cap I meane. It is an inveterate and radicated custome, in all diseases, to cover the head with thicke caps or other clothes;Erroneous custome of too much covering the ^ead. esteeming all manner of defluxions and diseases to proceed from the head, and as it would seeme by their practice, to proceed of a cold cause: whereas by this meanes they rather increase, for the most part this paine, if any there be already; the head like a ventose, or cupping glasse, attracting vapours from the neather parts. Avicen warneth us, that too much covering of the head weakneth it. And yet it is thoght by many that the head can never be sufficiently coverd. I confesse, in this case it is hard to set down and determine all the particular circumstances; as of the time of the yeer, the sex, the nature of the disease, the age and constitution of the diseased, according to which

circumstances, the Physitian is forced to accommodate his particular prescription of clothes. And heere I must needs give warning to younger people, that they would not so much in their health oppress themselves with such a multtiude of cloths, who keep themselves so warme in their younger yeeres, that they become farre infirmer afterwards when they come to age, and apter to receive harme by the least blast of cold wind. There is a great difference to bee had both in our clothing and diet, according to the severall seasons of the yeere.Difference of clothes according to the seasons. The apparell in Sommer and warme weather, ought to be thinner than in Winter; and among these, the hotter constitutions ought to goe thinlier clothed than others. And as on their body, so on their bed the clothes ought to be thinner. But few, if any, observe the difference to bee observed of the beds they lye on; it being for an uncontrolled custome received, both for young and old, hot and cold complexions, to lye both Sommer and Winter on the softest feather-beds they can.Downe and feather-beds hurtfull for hot livers, kidnies, and the stone. And yet for hot constitutions, especially the younger sorts, and such as have hot livers and kidnies, and molested with the stone in the kidnies, especially in the Summer time, this custome cannot but be hurtfull. And as for this covering of the head, as it is indifferently used, alike in Sommer and Winter, of young and old, and all complexions whatsoever, I hold it a very pernicious custome, especially in the younger sort, and very prejudiciall to their health.Parents much to bee blamed for the toe too nice and tender education of their children. It is a great fault in many parents, that they are too carefull in the nice and choice tender educating of their infants, who in their tender yeeres might be easily accustomed to goe thinner in their apparell; and custome would afterwards make this easy. And this wee may see apparently in many of our Gentle-women, who both young and old, both Sommer and Winter, go with naked breasts, wrests and necks; and yet never complaine; in this verifying the old proverb to be true, Pride is never painfull. And yet those parts are, according to Physitians prescriptions, most carefully to be kept warme. And yet all this notwithstanding, as also all our best Divines preaching to the contrary, and oppugning this pride by their pens, we see, how carefull many are to accustome and inure their children with this kind of pride; whenas for the most part (alas more is the pitty!) there is but small regard had of their vertuous education in the feare of God. But I leave this Puritanisme.
Another point in the clothes and covering of the sicke to be considered, is the quality, that they be cleane and sweet.Qualitie of the clothes about the sicke, that they bee sweet and cleane.Lib. de medico.The sicke ought to be often shifted. Hippocrates would have the Physitian to bee neatly and decently apparelled, and perfumed with sweet odours, that by this meanes, he might bee the more acceptable and pleasing to his patients. How much more then ought the sicke himselfe to be neat and cleane in his apparell? And it is no small contentment to the sicke, when hee seeth himselfe neat and cleanely in his clothing. Againe, it much discourageth and dejecteth the sicke, when he is suffered to lye stinking like a hogge in the mire, in dirty and foule clothes. And Eib. 1. de sanit, tuend. Galen advertiseth us, that young children, who after much crying, could neither by the teat, by rocking nor singing be quieted; by changing of their foule and stinking

clothes, and exchanging them with cleaner; were presently stilled.Obiections of the vulgar. But, me thinkes, I heare some of our wise women, at least in their owne conceits, with open mouth cry out against me, by reason, I wish, the sicke should be often shifted, objecting in the first place, that by this meanes the sicke may catch cold; and next that it weakneth the sicke to bee thus shifted. To the first I answere, it is but a foolish feare,Answere. the vulgar often fearing where there is no cause: but howsoever, if it be in cold weather, it may by meanes of the fire easily be prevented; and if in warme weather, their feare is frivolous. As for the other feare, which I have heard some women object, of weakening the sicke, it is very absurd, and as frivolous as the former: And so farre is it from weakening the sicke, that on the contrary, it is rather a meanes to further and increase strength. And to make this more plainely appeare,Three concoctions in the body of man, with their severall excrement^* we are to take notice that in the body of man, there are three severall concoctions: the first, in the stomacke or maw, called chylification; having for excrement, the fecall ordure, or ordinary egestions. The second, in the liver, veines, called sanguification; and hath for excrement, the urine. The third, is called nutrition, and is performed in the whole body; and hath for excrements, certaine fuliginous vapors, which by insensible transpiration breath out by the pores of the body; and the sweat, which is apparent to the eye. Now in time of sickenesse, especially in all sorts of Fevers, these excrements doe most abound, and make foule the linnen they lye in, and that they weare next their skinne; for the which cause, sicke folkes should have their linnen often shifted, especially when they sweat much. Besides,Inconveniences and harmes by not shifting the sicke. if they bee not shifted, this danger yet insueth, that if the sweat continue about the body, it will bee drawne in againe by the same way it went forth; and then judge whether thou likest that better, or sweet cleane linnen. For this must be well considered, that the arteries of the body have a double motion, one whereby they expell these excrements already named; and the other whereby they draw in the ambient aire to refresh the blood. Now whatsoever aire is next unto them, be it good or bad, sweet or stinking, they draw it in. And therefore, if thou let this dung-hill lye about thee, undoubtedly the arteries will draw in these noisome excrements, which will suffocate naturall heat, and by consequent, prolong thy disease. And a Laurent. loubert. des erreurs populaires partie 2 cap. 5. learned French Physitian who doth much inveigh against this nastinesse (that so also it may appeare, this is not mine owne private opinion) to prove this truth bringeth in an instance: Let any person come newly out of a heat hath, where there is great store of dust newly raised, he shall presently feele a pricking over his whole flesh; which is nothing else but this small dust drawne in by the arteries. The case then thus standing, all filth and corruption ought to be cleansed from the skin, and all the pores and passages thereof kept open and cleane, by removing whatsoever might let or hinder the same, And for this end and purpose, the Romans and Greeks in antient times had so frequent use of their frictions and hot bathes. Let this then be a warning to all those who attend the sicke, that they have a speciall care of shifting and keeping them cleane and sweet, as hath beene said already, and let the contrary erroneous custome

be hence forward^for ever buried in the dust.Whether the ^ed ^ee to be warmed. An^w^^e One thing yet remaineth concerning warming of the sickes bed, whether it be to bee used? I answere, in weake and aged people especially, and the Winter time in others also, there is no doubt to bee made of altering the cold aire of the bed with a warming-pan: but in young people, in hot acute diseases, and the Sommer time, when all tendeth to heat, I see no necessity, yea rather hurt than any good; unlesse some cold constitutions, or decrepit old age doe plead for a continuance of this custome, and then I shall not bee against it. But whether this be so convenient for such as live in health, may with better reason be demanded?Wh^^ or it ^e fit for healthfu^^ people. Answere. I answer, that for young people I wish, they were not so daintily brought up, and accustomed to this warming of their beds, which maketh them afterwards the more unfit to undergoe any hardship. But for the antienter sort, tender women, and such as have heretofore accustomed themselves thereunto, I am not against the airing of their bed in cold Winter weather, that so going to bed, they may still finde the bed-clothes somewhat warme about them at their first downe-lying.Whether in sickenes the haire is to be ^ut. To this place also belongeth to say something concerning the haire of the head, and whether in sickenesse it ought to bee cut, or no? My purpose is not here to insist upon the generation, utility, and proper use, and the material cause, and differences of haire with many other things; this onely know, that haire is but an excrement, and properly no part of the body, in the esteeme of all our Physitians; and yet appointed for a speciall use to cover and adorne that part wherunto it is appropriated. In women, it hath beene alwaies a comely ornament and cover of the head. And to men, (saith the Apostle) doth not even nature teach you that it is a shame for a man to weare long haire.Answer^. But I come to the question, whether in the Diseased, it bee safe to cut the haire of the head or no? Long and thicke haire keepeth in fuliginous excrements of the head, and suffereth them not so well to breath out of the pores; from whence rheumes are ingendred, the originall almost of all diseases. Hence was it that the Aegyptians painted Aesculapius bald; thereby signifying thus much, that the haire was to be cut short; yea, if it were even shaven, it were better for a mans health than to weare long haire. It is therefore best in all diseases of the head, especially in long continuing defluxions of sharpe rheumes, to shave the head, according to the opinion of antient and late Physitians. In a word, it is better both in sickenesse and in health to have the haire rather short than long; howbeit the too often cutting of the haire is not so good, and the often shaving of the beard and face is evill, and not to be used. I enter not here upon particulars, in what diseases the haire is chiefely to be cut, yea even shaven; whereof something may perhaps more largely be spoken in any another place.Effoeminate custom^ of our age. But this which hath already been said, may easilie convince the more than mad effoeminate custome of our effoeminate age,Disguising of the head with perwigs. wherein men are not now contented with that portion of haire, which their Maker in his wisedome thought fit for them; but besides, must have their head covered with a great bushie perwig, both to the great dishonour of Almighty God, and with no small prejudice to their health, as by the premisses

may easily appeare. I deny not, but some of them have scalded their haire in the fire of the Barber-surgeons purgatory, and therefore have the more need to cover that deformitie: but let others take warning by their harmes. But as for women, they being commonly of a colder constitution than men, and their heads weaker, their haire is not commoly so hurtfull for them: besides, that 1 Cor. 1^.1 their haire was given them for a cover and ornament. But as for their curles, false and sophisticate haire, either not content with that colour which God gave them, or else because they would not seeme to yeeld to old age; as I do not much mervaile at such tricks in a stewes strumpet, or a co^mon curtisan: so I think, they no waies beseeme a sober, modest and grave Gentle-woman, especially in the state of wedlocke, and now attained to some competent number of yeeres. I wish both sexes to call to mind that saying of a French writer, speaking against the pride of women, painted faces, and many other particulars, almost 80. yeeres agoe. Fra^ca^^ Grand^u, Cure de l'(...) degrate de (...) S. Ioan ^aptistee a^gers an liure da de ^ruition de ^ orgued ^oada^^, etc. That when as they shall stand before the Tribunall of the great GOD of Heaven at that last and dreadfull day, it is to be feared that the Judge of all the world will say unto them, get you out my presence into everlasting damnation: for I doe not acknowledge this colour, haire, etc; to be of my making. But as concerning the abuse of this excrement of haire both in men and women, directly crossing the Apostles rule, men wearing side and long haire, and some wearing it longer on one side than the other, by them now called a love-locke: women againe, quite contrary to womanly decency and modesty (that I say nothing of Gods command) cutting and clipping their haire, and the great injury they heerein offer to Almighty God, it being daily by our learned Divines preached against, and a M. Prin. of Lovelocks learned religious Gentleman having lately of purpose written a tractate concerning this same subject in both sexes, where at great length he proves both the unseemelinesse and unlawfulnesse of this custome, I will not insist upon it. I will onely tell you of a I (...) pilorum aff^^^u, (...) aliud est a^^m (...) o vel (...) def^^xiou^ ad a^^a^ nartes (...) gravissime tar queri. Maximam partem foeminas invadit. Eos etiam qui porriginem capitis, quam vulgus tineam vo^a^, medicamentis repe^^utientibus represserunt. Praeterea foeminas quae menstruis temporibus non satis purgantur. Quis non novum, mirab^^e, and horridum putei, capillos ex propria natura planos, demissos ac simplices, sponte sua, sub coelo admodum frigido inc^^spari, paulo post erigi, involvi, atque indissolubiliter conjungi, varias recipere figuras, quandoque maximi cuiusdam anguis, aliquaudo plu^^um and minorum serpentum, u^dique vermes, spurcitiem, foetoremque redolere: quodque omnium maximum est, and a seculo in ^^ditum, ac^ perpu^ctos, vel transfixos sangumem effundere. Hercules Saxonia praxeos suae lib. 10. cap. 1. Horridum quoddam, i^^pexum, adeoque intricatum capitis atque barbae capillit^um, apud nostros haud infrequens, caeterum veteribus cuiuscunque aetatis medic^ incognitum o^servare li^et: Quo affecti praelongas capillorum tricas and cincinnos mirifice intricatos, digitisaepe crassitiae, ex re^ (...) capi^^ and barbae capillitio, ad bumeros, pectus, and aliquando ad umbilicum usque demissos, propendere videas, aspectu plane mon^^ ^ico, and Gorganeum caput praeserente. Quos illi magna religione incultos, nec ferro praescindere, nec pectine explicare sustinent. Persuasi omnino, gravissima capitis morborum fomenta, velut Apoplexiae, Paralyscos, Maniae, and comprimis Cephalalgiae pertinaces, consimiliumque ma^eriam i^sdem alen^is absumi. Qua sine superstitione, sine multa hominum observatione ducts, quidvis petius, quam corundem culturam, aut perfectionem, velut prorsus infaustam and lethalem admittunt. Factisque de experimento and historia perteulis, sententiam suam mordicus tuentur. Ioana. Georg. Schenckius, Schenck. E. Hagenones. medicus observat. m^dic lib. 1. observ. De Tricis I^cuborum. monstrous and strange disease in the haire, heard of but of late yeeres, and not recorded by any antient author that ever we read of. And this is nothing else but an agglutination, or inviscation of the haire of the head and beard, by which meanes it acquiteth sometimes the forme of some great adder, or snake; and sometimes of lesse serpents: and these horrid and hideous serpent-like locks doe often occupy the whole superficies of the head and beard; insomuch, that who so beholds this

strange serpent like sight, may the easilier be induced to beleeve that monstrous Gergonean head, the Poets attribute to Medusa. And as the author affirmeth, may it not seeme a strange thing, that plaine and smooth haire in so cold a climat (meaning Poland and a part of Germany) should so curle and balter, and contract such hideous and strange shapes: besides, that they should bee of so loathsome and putrid a smell. And which hath never yet been heard of, that these baltered locks being prickt with a pin, should presently yeeld blood. And it hath been observed, that such as have cut off these locks, have either suddenly become blind, or else a great defluxion of humors hath falne downe upon some other parts of the body. This disease hath of late yeeres runne thorow a great part of Poland; and entered also into some parts of Germany. If God should send it here over among us to punish this prodigious pride in the use of this same excrement, were it not just with God, to punish us in the same part wee offend in? This Author affirmeth, it is most frequent in women: but another affirmeth, it as often frequenteth men, and that they let both these prodigious locks of haire and beard hang downe over their shoulders, and many times downe to their breast and navill, a strange and prodigious thing to behold.


CHAP. IIII.

Of abstinency, either from some, or all sorts of food, for a short, or a longer time; and of severall sorts of abstinence.

AFter the aire, and such other things thereon depending, I now proceed to the Diet of the Diseased. But before wee come to discourse of the particular sorts of Diet, wee must permit some generall rules and directions concerning the Diet of the Diseased. Now all manner of Diet is of a threefold nature, a thinne spare diet, a liberall or full, or a meane betwixt both. A thinne or spare diet we call, either a totall abstinence from all food for a certaine time; or else a very sparing use of one or more sorts. Now of all other Diets this is the most sparing, when the sicke for certiane daies takes no sustenance at all. And this abstinence among some of the antients, the Greekes especially, was often very rigid and strict; insomuch that many times the patient was suffered to take no kind of sustenance for the space of three, foure, five or six daies. But because we are now falne upon this point of abstinence, it will not, I hope, be unwelcome to the reader to make a particular enumeration of all the sorts of fasts whatsoever. Now then as repletion and

gluttony is the cause of manifold mischiefes in the body of man; so this abstinence seemeth to make amends for that which is don amisse.Abstinence fourefold Naturall. In health. In sickenesse; Now this abstinence is of divers sorts, and may be reduced to these foure; naturall, voluntary, miraculous, and violent or forced. Naturall I call, when as nature in her full strength and vigour, and health; or yet foiled with some sickenesse, abhorreth the use of some certaine kindes of food, and therefore abstaineth from the use of the same. Another abstinence againe is in diseases, when as the appetite is either quite lost, or else smal or slender, loathing food for the most part: which refusing and loathing is called by the Greekes, (...) and (...), and by the Latines, Nausea a navibus and navigatione, quod navigantibus praesertim in marinausea oberiri soleat.Voluntary abstinence fourefold. nausea and fastidium cibi. Voluntary abstinence I call that, which is by mature advice and deliberation willingly and freely undertaken: and this, according to the severall ends and scopes it propounds to it selfe, is also of divers sorts. For either it is physicall, politicall and civill, religious or superstitious.Physicall Physicall abstinence I call that, whereby people whether sicke or in health, either for preserving and mainteining this healthfull estate, or else for recovering of the same being now lost, by the appointment and prescription of the Physitian, doe either abstaine from all manner of food, or else from some certaine kindes, contrary to their health and constitution: and this either for a certaine and determinate time, or for ever; and which is therefore called Diet.Politicall or civill abstinence. Politicall or civill abstinence is that, whereby people upon certaine occasions, as profit or others, for a certaine time, abstaine either from all, or some certaine particular kindes of food, being then it may be, imploied about som earnest busines; as when 1 Sam. 14.25. Saul followed hard after the Philistines, he discharged any to eat till the evening.Our Lent fast a politicall, not religious nor superstitious fast. And of this nature is our Lent fast or abstinence in this Iland both in England and Scotland, according to the expresse words of the statute (howsoever some a little to symbolize with our neighbour-Romanists would faine have it a little to smell of religion) and was no doubt upon very good grounds and considerations injoined to be observed.5. Q Elizab. 5.Religious fast and is either moral or ceremoniall. The third sort of voluntary abstinence, is called religious, and had its originall from God himselfe; which is againe either morall or ceremoniall.Morall, ordinary or extraordinary. Ordinary. Morall againe is either ordinary and daily, or else extraordinary, and ordained but for a certaine time. Ordinary and daily abstinence is nothing else but temperance and sobriety, which as it hath been in no small request even among the heathens; and that not for their healths sake alone, but that they might thereby also the better wait upon their contemplations and philosophicall studies: how much more then doth it become us Christians?Extraordinary. Religious extraordinary abstinence at any time undertaken, is that which wee commonly call a fast; and being not onely a bare abstinence from food for a time, but from all other delights also; that thereby we may the better bee fitted,Extraordinary religious t^st publike or private. to pray either for the removall of judgements present, or keeping off judgements imminent, and like to overwhelme us. And this was very frequent among the people of the Jewes, and was either publike or private. Would to God we were made more acquainted with this noble ordinance of Almighty God, when as both in regard of our owne selves, and our distressed neighbours abroad, our need hath been

so great.Ceremoniall abstinence. Ceremoniall abstinence is when we abstaine from certaine kindes of meats, and that for religions sake: the which kind of abstinence was by God himselfe strictly injoined the Jewes, and lasted till the comming of the Messias, Matth. 15.11. Acts 10.34. Colost. 2.14. 1 Timoth. 4. etc. Superstitious abstinence or fast. which tooke away that partition wall; as may by divers places of the new Testament appeare. There was lastly, and is yet, a certaine superstitious kind of abstinence, whereby som people, without any warrant of the word, abstained from certaine kindes of meat: and such were both some heathens, and some hereticks also, and bastard christians. Among the heathens, Pythagoras of Samus, who lived during the Babilonian captivity, abstained from all manner of flesh, and that for feare lest some mens soules might bee conveied into such beasts as he might eat of, as witnesseth Lib. 7. de civit. Dei. cap 2. and lib. 18. cap. 25. Plutarch. 8 sympos. probl. 7. S. August. and Lib. 2. advers. Jovin. S. Ierom. tells us that the antient Aegyptian Priests, after they were once initiated into that superstitious worship, abstained from wine and flesh ever after. The Babilonians also lived onely upon fish, and the Persian Magi lived onely upon meale and herbs. Lib. bello de Jfide and Osyride. Plutarch also reported that the priests of Heliopolis abstained from all manner of diet that might increase lust and wantonnesse, and never wine to come within their temples. And it is Caesar. comm. a^ bello Gall. lib. ^. reported, that the antient inhabitants of this Iland abstained from the hare, the hen, and the goose. And others againe abstained from certaine vegetables, fruits, flowres, etc. Some abstained from all manner of flesh. The Joseph. de bello Judo. lib 2. cap. 7. Philo. lib. peculiari de eorum vita. Esseans among the Jewes eat neither flesh, nor yet drinke wine; nay eate not of any creature that ever had in it any blood. In the time of the primitive Church, especially a little after, many heresies sprang up, amongst whom, som forbad the eating of flesh; and some both that and wine. Epiphanius tom. 2. lib. 1. The Eucratite who came out of the schoole of one Tatianus abstained from all flesh; withall so strictly abstained from all wine, that they would not so much as use it in the holy Sacrament, but in stead thereof used water. The Ebionites also condemned altogether the use of flesh. The Tertul. in catalog. haeres. Marcionites were so farre from eating of flesh, and placed holinesse in the eating of fish. And the Idem lib de ^eiunia adversus Psychos, and lib. de cultu foeminar. same father affirmeth, that the Montanists lived on bread, salt and pulse, and dranke onely water: they abstained at certaine times from flesh and wine. The Maniches, of one Manes a Persian hereticke so called, about the yeere of our Lord 247. among many other and destestable errors, brought in this also of abstaining from certaine meats; as all manner of flesh, egges, milke, and all things made of the same: the reasons see in Lib. 6. contra Faustin. cap. 6. and lib. 3. cap. 5. and lib. de haeres. S. Augustine. They forbad also the use of wine, were it never so new, and yet permitted the use of grapes. The same hereticks forbad also the use of marriage. It is also to be observed, Idem contra Faustin. lib. 30. cap. 5. that all this abstinence was only forbidden their elect ones, and such as they tearmed perfect and initiated into their sacred mysteries: but to their hearers, who were but novices and beginners such meats were permitted. Bernard. sermon. 66 in Cantica. The same heresie was againe about the yeere of our Lord 300. by one Priscillianus in France and Spaine renewed, from whom it received also a new name. And this same heresie, as by many fathers it was spoken against, so was it by many Synod ancyrana circa annum Domin. 318. can. 14. Total. 1 can. 21 Eraccarensi prima celebrata in Hispania anno 690. can. 14. and 32. Gangrensi. can. 2. damnara fuit. councels condemned, Sigismund. Baro in comment, rerum Muscovit. Among the Russians or Muscovites, the Metropolitans, the Arch bishops and Bishops alwaies abstaine

from flesh: and yet when they invite any lay-men, or other priests to their table, they set flesh before them: and yet may neither an Abbot nor Prior eat any. Besides, the Russians never eat of any thing killed by the hand of a woman, esteeming it altogether uncleane: and therefore in the absence of all mankind out of the house, if they have any pullaine or other creature to kill, the women stand in the house-doore, holding a knife in their hands, intreating any that passeth by to performe this kindnesse for them. Now besides these afore-mentioned severall sorts of abstinence,Voluntary, miraculous abstinence. there is yet another voluntary abstinence, which is miraculous; as that of Christ, Moses and Elias, which is beyond the reach of any ordinary person; although we read of many strange stories of such as fasted not onely many daies, weekes and moneths; but even many yeeres also, as hath been declared already. The last kind of abstinence is involuntary,Involuntary or forced abstinence. when as any one is forced against his will to fast, and is divers waies procured, whereon I will not now insist.True abstinence, and the excellency of the same. The excellency then of a right abstinence may evidently appeare, which is not properly an abstinence from any one particular kind of food, either totall or for a time: but a sober and moderate use of all the creatures at all times, especially in sickenesse; as it is sometimes necessary for a time to abstaine from all, and sometimes from some sorts of food. In health, moderation and temperance are never out of season, and totall abstinence at sometimes required; and that both for preventing infirmities, and sometimes a religious abstinence is to be observed,Abstinence from certaine k^nds of meates by Scripture condemned. as hath been said already. As for religious abstinence from certaine kinds of meats, not I, but the 1 Tim. 4.1, 2, 3. holy oracle it selfe, which cannot erre, doth plainely evince to be a doctrine of devils. And here by the way, if there were no other marke, it may easily appeare, that the Church of Rome is an apostaticall and hereticall church, and jumpeth just with the Hereticks of antient times, whom the Fathers of the Church have confuted. They would beare the world in hand, they abstaine from flesh in Lent and some other daies.Popish abstinence or fast as they use it a meere mocking of God. A great matter indeed, when they are fed with the best fish they can come by, dressed with the most curious sauces, and afterwards well washt downe with the best wine or other strong drinke. Besides the variety of banqueting stuffe, march-panes, and varieties of other junkets, all which notwithstanding, this must needs be accounted a strict abstinence and fast, especially,Popish fasting, Diet as nourishing as ours and iuciceth as much to lust as ours, if not more.Wine nourisheth and cherisheth more suddenly and speedily than any flesh. if these things come but in the name of a drinking. Now would I willingly aske one of their wisest prophets, whether a peice of powdered beefe, or other meat, such as wee ordinarily use; or a dish or two of dainty fish well dressed, it may be with wine sauce, and divers good spices, and afterwards made to swimme in the belly with good wine, be more inciting to lust? It is well knowne that wine yeeldeth a more speedy nourishment, and is farre sooner distributed through the body, and a little quantity therof more cheereth and cherisheth the drooping spirits, and with lesse oppression, and withal inciteth more to lust, than a great quantity of flesh; which must lye a long time heavy in an ordinary stomacke before it bee concocted, and thorow the body distributed, and then by assimilation and agglutination converted into aliment. And this is the judgement of all our both antient and later

learned Physitians: yea doth not even ordinary experience instruct us in this truth? And yet here is no small quarrell, because we will not assent to their Pharisaicall superstition, and will not in every thing jumpe with them in their erroneous judgement. And I pray you,Great gluttony and disorders among the Romanists at Shrovetide. is not this a meere mockage, that a little before Lent, especially on Shrovetuesday, (by the French called Mardy-gras, or fat tuesday, and by some here in former times gut-tide) they let the reines loose to all manner of lasciviousnesse, and all excesse of riot: pampering their bellies with the best cheere, the most exquisite wines and strong drink is to be had; assuming to themselves liberty of doing what they list; addicting themselves to dancing, dicing, drabbing, and all manner of other insolencies: insomuch that one would thinke all the divells in hell, and all these foule fiends were then set at full libertie;Insolency in Rome it selfe; ^qualling o^ exceedin^ the heathenish Ba^c^^na^^a. in this equalling, if not exceeding, the heathenish Bacchanalia. And which is yet more, their Romish god the Pope, must that day depart the citie of Rome, and then all manner of insolencies and outrages (greater than which, if as great, were scarce ever by any heathens committed) of all sorts, without any controll there committed. And in this is verified the saying of that And although Jtaly be the country of al Christendome nearest to the Romane church, yet is it most certaine that in ^t there is of all others least religion and piety to be found, and that by reason this holy court doth nothing else but sow distention, and breed all manner of disorders. And if any make a doubt of it, and that he may assure himselfe that all this mischiefe proceedeth from the church of Rome, let him but transport for a certaine time the Papall chair into the country of the Switzers, an honest and peaceable people, and in a shore time thou shouldst see them as bad as any of their neighbours. Machiavell in his booke of the Prince, part. 1. maxime 4. intituled. That the church of Rome is the cause of all the calamities that have befalne Jtaly, Florentine Secretary to bee true; that if the court of the Pope with his Cardinalls were translated from Rome, and placed among the Switzers (a people in those times most ingenuous, and freest from all manner of exoticke vices) they would in a short space become the most wicked, factious people in the whole world: in so great credit was then this court of Rome, even in the esteeme of those who made profession of the same religion. But these, and a thousand more of their pranks are better knowne to the Christian world than I can relate them. My purpose is onely here to let the world know, how senslesse and absurd is this superstitious kind of abstinence from flesh onely, whereof like proud Pharisees, they make so great an ostentation, and would put out the eyes of the world, that they should see nothing in the cleere Sun-shine. And yet what is all this but a renuing of the antient heresies lately mentioned? and renuing heathenish superstition? Nay it doth plainely and evidently appeare, that the antient hereticks and heathens did farre surpasse in this point, many of our Romanists. If they would, as they pretend, subdue the lust of the flesh, why doe they not then abstaine from wine, in that point farre surpassing any flesh, as hath been proved? And why doe not their Priests and clergie-men abstaine from wine, and forbid it the people, at least in Lent and on fasting daies? I have already instanced in the like abstinence both in heathen and heretickes. If Sir Iean and his generation will reply, that they must serve at the altar, and therefore must both drinke for themselvs and the people, who by their Canons, are debarred from the cup: I cannot deny, but as in many other things, so herein likewise, their clergy have been too hard for the laity: yet good Sir Iean, if you have purchased such a privilege above the people, mee thinkes, you might the better abstaine from wine at other times, especially those of your strictest abstinence; and might likewise abstaine from many flatuous meats, as many sorts of bulbous roots, which all our Physitians doe hold to be irritamenta and incitamenta lib^dinis.

The Abissine Priests and religious persons so strictly observe their Lent fast, that it is reported of them, that they eat nothing but roots, and drinke water during that time; yea, and stand often up to the chinne in cold water: and the Laity, during that time onely eate bread and drinke water. If our supercilious Pharisaicall Romanists would imitate this rigid austerity, the Clergy I meane, it would coole their courages, yet withall purchase them a great deale of more praise and reputation, than many of them have hitherto attained unto. I am not ignorant, that some of the simpler sort of their religious orders are more rigid and austere in their manner of living than many others: but this I confidently avouch, that for the most part, their Clergy, especially the greater sort, are as licentious and luxurious, as any sort of people this day living under the face of heaven, upon which point I will not here digresse. Now to conclude this point of abstinence, we are so farre from rejecting, and far lesse from finding fault with it, that we wish it in farre greater request than hitherto it hath been: I meane, not onely that ordinary and customary abstinence, or sobrietie in meat and drinke, and other delights; but even that other sort of fast also, which we have wished might bee more in practice. But I hate and abhorre these counterfit and hypocriticall, heathenish and hereticall-like fasts of our Pharisaicall Romanists, with their many idle repetitions of their many mumpsimus upon their beads, making a shew of prayer, where there is nothing but a little lip-labour, without any true religion, or any true devotion indeed. But having said more than I doubt I shall be thanked for, I leave this point, and proceed.


CHAP. V.

Of Aliment or Diet of the Diseased in generall: whether a thinne and spare Diet, or a full or liberall be better?

FRom the Elements wee are now comming to the aliments, of nourishment and food fit for the sicke. Now as by the moderate and timely use of aliments the diseased reapeth no small benefit; so againe by the immoderate and unseasonable use of the same, the diseased is much indammaged and indangered. And for this cause no small care ought to be had of the Diet of the Diseased. We made mention of three sorts of Diet, of the which we have Comment. in lib. Hip. de victu acut.Three sorts of Diet. Galen for our warrant: a thinne or slender, a full and liberall, and a meane or middle diet betwixt both. Now these two extremes have a great latitude and extension. In the first place, a thin and spare diet is either simply thinne and sparing, more sparing, and

most sparing of all. So againe, the like by way of opposition is to be understood of a full and liberall diet.Absolute thinne and spare diet. Now an absolute thinne and spare diet, called victus tenuissimus, is nothing else but an absolute abstinence from all manner of food whatsoever: or at most, permitting onely the use of a drinke made of water and hony, called by the antient Greekes, melicratum. And this manner of abstinence did the antients use in most acute diseases, which were terminated on the fourth day. And when they did a little exceed this first so thinne and slender diet, or abstinence, they did then allow the sicke some barly-water, ptisan or creame of ptisan at most. This was usuall among the Greekes, which strict and rigid kind of diet the Arabians were not able to undergoe. And it may bee the Greekes,Thin and slender diet either because they were thicker skinned, or else surprized with sharper sickenesses, did more easily endure this kind of diet. It may be also the Arabians fared better than the Greekes, and were not therefore able to endure this kinde of diet. And in this wee adhere more to the Arabians than to the Greekes.Hippocriticall Diet too rigid and strict for our climat, And therefore, if Physitians should now imitate the Hippocraticall course of dieting, they should be utterly shent. Galen was not so rigid and strict in his diet: for he often suffereth the sicke to use some sustenance in acute diseases, and often findeth fault with certaine Physitians called diatritarij, who pined their patients with abstinence, in the beginning of their disease made them fast untill the fourth day, and after againe exhibited something on the sixt, and againe on the eight; and so consequently after the first foure dayes, they fed them but every other day. And Mercur. variar. lect. lib. 6.A full and liberal die^ this manner of cure is by Celsus Aurelius called a circular cure. To this manner of cure was quite contrary that manner of diet, which used that antient Physitian Petronius, who abbridged his patients of no kind of diet, but filled them with wine and flesh. And this is that we call a full or liberall diet, according to the extensions and latitude therof. To this manner of diet ours approcheth nearest: and it is the co^mon opinion of our people, of our vulgar women especially, that unlesse the sicke be crammed with all manner of food, he is quite starved. And this commeth often to passe by importunitie of those about them, and sometimes by meanes of the Physitian, saith Comment. ad partic. 1 lib. 1. de vict. acut. Whether a thinne and slender, or a full and liberal diet be better? Galen; who to give satisfaction to the sicke, and assistants, oftentimes giveth way to such a diet. Followeth now in the next place a question to be discussed, whether a thinne or slender, or a full and liberall diet be the better? Now as almost all diseases have their originall and beginning from gluttony, and abundance of humors; so would it seeme the cure thereof required principally abstinence and hunger: For by this meanes the body is dried up, and superfluous humors exhausted. And it is reported, that the Emperour Aurelian in his sickenesse used no other Physicke.Flavius Vopiscus in eius vita.Aph. 4. and 5 lib. 1. Hippocrates seemeth in some places to allow of a full diet in all diseases; and Lib. de victu acut. againe in other places to stand for a thinne and slender diet, finding fault with the Guidian Physitians, who in the beginning of the disease, permitted the use of a more liberall diet. Comment. in eundem lib. and alibi. Galen often preferreth a slender diet before a full and liberall: and that by reason a full and plentifull diet breedeth innumerable dangers in the body, which a thinne and slender diet

doth not, the which, if to the body troublesome, may easily by addition be amended.Answer to the former question. This question cannot absolutely be determined, by reason both are alike, and equally necessary, all circumstances well and seriously considered, but especially having a due regard to the strength of the patient, together with the nature of the disease. (...) Apo. 9 lib. 1. We must conjecture, saith Hippocrates, whether the sicke be like to hold out with such a diet or no, or whether the disease will not first give over, before there need any alteration in the diet. But with us wee need never be afraid that there be any fault committed in the defect; wee are most commonly inclined to be faultie rather in the excesse. And howsoever, I confesse indeed, our bodies are not able to beare that antient strict and rigid Grecian thinne and spare diet, yet I wish there were a more moderate course taken for moderating the diet of our diseased. But riot and excesse haue so ceized upon us in our health, that it is a hard matter to regulate our desires according to reason, when wee are diseased. Now, wee proceede to other circumstances according to this subject.


CHAP. VI.

Certaine Rules and Lawes from whence the Diet of the diseased is desumed.

AS in the structure and building of houses, we must lay a good foundation, before ever we beginne to build: so no lesse carefull ought wee to be this case, where the Diet of the diseased is to be handled, to lay a good and firme foundation, whereon our building may stand the firmer; wee are therefore in the first place to take notice of certaine rules or lawes (call them as you list) which in the ordering of the diet of the diseased are carefully to be considered:Rules or Lawes from whe^ce the diet of the diseased is desumed, reduced to two principall heads.In the diseased, what things to be observ'd. and they are all reduced to these two principall heads, being all desumed or fetcht from the party diseased, or from the disease. In the party diseased, or the sick himselfe, we are to consider, the strength, the temperature, the disposition or quality of the body, the age, custome, particular, or individuall disposition or propertie of each person (expressed by this word idiosyncrasia) the time of the yeere, and the region where one liveth. Now, the first and principall rule, law or judication,1 Rule, or iudication from the strength. is taken from the strength of the sicke person; which by a due and convenient diet, answerable to requisite necessity must be sustained, to the end the diseased may the better be inabled to overcome the contumacy of the disease: for here nature must play the physitian in curing of the disease, both food and physicke receiving their power and efficacie from our naturall heat, and from divine benediction

principally, which we ever would have to be understood. This one thing is alwaies, saith Vnum illud and semper, and ubique servendum est, ut aegri vtres subtude assidens in al^us inspiciat, and quair diu sapererunt, abstinentia pugnet: si imbecillitatem vereri coeperit, cibo subveniat, Cels. l^br. 3. cap. 4.2 The temperature of the body.3 The structure of the body, Habitus. Celsus, to be observed, that the Physitian present, diligently observe the strength of his patient, and so long as it holdeth out, to cure him by abstinence: but if feeblenesse be feared, let food then supply what is wanting. In the next place, the temperature of the body is to be considered: for this, wee may easily observe, that cholerick complexions are not long able to indure long abstinence, although in perfect health; and if they be at any time ceized with any diseases proceeding from choler, they are by a thinne and slender diet much offended. In the third place, wee are carefully to consider of the frame and structure of the body, called Habitus; for such as are of a thinne and slender constitution of body, are more by a thinne and slender diet offended, than others of a thicker. Wee are not also to neglect the age, for old people are best able to indure abstinence;4 The are. Who best indureth abstinence. and next unto them, those of a consisting or middle age: but children, and little infants, are with fasting most offended. By old age, I here vnderstand greene old age, as it is called, cruda viridisque senectus, and not decrepit old age, which by reason of the languishing and decaying of the innate naturall heate, as the oile of a lampe, unlesse it be frequently by good and comfortable food, and good drinke refreshed, will quickly faint under the burden. And this must be done frequently, and often, not confertim, or abundantly at once; lest this small fire be by too much fewell suddenly suffocated and oppressed.5 Custome, And since custome often carrieth so great a stroke, that wee see, even poisons by long continued custome converted into food; it is not slightly in ordering the diet of the diseased to be past over. And experience it selfe doth even teach us, that things wherewith we were formerly accustomed, doe lesse offend us. The prerogative of custome Lib. Galen well describeth by the example of Arius the Peripateticke, who being much molested with a great weaknesse of stomacke, that he durst neither indure the cold aire, nor once so much as taste a drop of cold water; falling into a fever, and forced to drinke cold water, died suddenly. And therefore if any were in their health accustomed to eat twice or thrice aday, not onely are we to yeeld to this custome in their sicknesse; but even to permit unto them their accustomed houres, unlesse some sudden accident (as the fit in a fever or the like) doe hinder us. Now, besides the premises, every one almost hath some certaine peculiar property, or condition,6 Jdiosyncrasia, or an individuall property and condition. called idiosyncrasia, whereunto belongeth often some peculiarity in appetite, and other things, and to the which sometimes wee are forced to give way: and wee finde often, by common experience, that when the stomacke is whetted on, and eagerly longeth after some particular food, howsoeuer, it may be in it selfe not so fit, having injoyed it, greedily imbraceth, and with great facility concocteth the same: and this (...) Hippoc. Aph. 38. lib. 2.7 The season of the yeere. ^. Hippocrates in his aphorismes, did very well expresse. But herein I would not that any one should, at randome, let loose the reines of his appetite, but carefully, and with good counsell regulate and moderate his desires. We are in the next place to consider the time of the yeere, howsoever, many may, perhaps, thinke it to small purpose. But as in health this is to be observed, there must then be like correspondency in

the time of sicknesse. And certaine it is, that in Winter, the internall heat of the stomacke, and inward parts, is farre intenser, and greater than in Sommer, and the concoction easilier performed; and therefore no question is to be made, but that the quantity of aliment must needs be answerable, and in greater abundance than in Sommer, when as by the heat of the ambient aire the internall is extracted, the pores of the body rarefied and dilated, and sweat with fuliginous excrements more copiously expelled. And therefore a lesser quantity of food, of a laudable quality and easie of digestion; as also a more liberall allowance of drinke is then to be permitted. And this was the opinion of Aph. 18. libr. 2. Hippocrates, and so hath beene held by all our Physitians, that in Winter wee are to feed most liberally, in Sommer very sparingly, and in the Spring and Autumne, to keepe a meane, betwixt both the former, whatsoever any say to the contrary.8 The region wherein one liveth. The region wherein any one liveth, is likewise not to be neglected: for in cold countries, where people feed more plentifully, there the sicke is to be allotted a more liberall allowance,9 The calling, or course of life. than in hot countries: as Spaine, Egypt, and the like. And mee thinks, that besides all the premisses, the calling, or course of life one leadeth is worth the consideration: for the which cause, schollers, and others accustomed to a sedentarie life in their health; as then their diet ought to be more sparing and easier of concoction than for other people: so falling sicke, the like caution must be observed. And here women come also to be considered, who, for the most part use lesse exercise than men, and have the pores of their bodie lesse perspirable, and often a colder complexion: and this is chiefely of the better sort, who live in ease and idlenesse, Influence and abundance of all things, to be understood. In the next place wee come to rules of diet desumed from the disease it selfe, which was the second head wee here proposed to handle.Rules, or indication desumed from the disease it selfe. And these rules must be understood by dividing them into their proper ranks, and must be illustrated by accommodating them to fevers; few diseases without a fever ceizing on the body of man; and therefore in this discourse wee have of them a speciall regard, though other diseases also shall not be neglected. All diseases then are either acute and of a shorter continuance,All diseases, either acute or chronicall. and for this cause called acute; or else chronicall, or of longer continuance. Acute and short diseases, require a slender and sparing diet, and the shorter and sharper the disease be, the more sparing should be the diet. Againe, in chronicall and long continuing diseases, the diet must be allowed more liberall; lest in a long journie nature being toiled and tired out, before shee be at her journies end, faint and succumb under the burthen of the disease. Now, of chronicall diseases, some are of a longer continuance than others;The Diet to be accommodated according to the continuance of the diseased. and therfore as to them that continue long, wee allow liberall allowance, so to the longer wee still allow the more liberall allowance: and on the contray, since among short and sharpe diseases, some are shorter and sharper than others; as the acute and sharpe requireth a sparing, so the sharper a more sparing, and the sharpest of all, the most sparing diet of all; which approacheth neerest to that strict diet of Hippocrates: having all this while a principall regard to the strength of the patient, and other cicumstances already nominated. Now, besides,

the difference of the nature of the disease,Diet to be a ministred according to the times of the disease.The time general and particular. no lesse carefull and circumspect ought wee to be in the observing the times of the disease, both generall and particular. The generall time, I call the whole course and continuance of the disease: the particular, the paroxysmes, or exacerbations of the same, and in fevers commonly called fits. Now in both these times, as well generall as particular, wee are diligently to observe the beginning, the increase, the heighth, and the declining: many in the beginning of the disease, if they foresee the disease, like to be of long continuance, doe use to feed the sicke liberally. But according to Lib. 2 cap 16. Celsus, in the beginning of the disease, the sicke should suffer hunger and thirst: for if corrupt humours abound, the best food is but by them corrupted. Foule bodies (saith Aph 9 lib. 2. Hippocrates) the more thou feedest, the more thou hurtest. Wherefore in the beginning, if strength permit, wee are by degrees to withdraw their food, untill the heighth of the disease, in the which, if it be an acute disease, they are more sparingly to be fed. In diseases therefore,Diet in acute disease^ how to be ^^pen^ed. that very speedily come to their heighth, a very thinne and slender diet is to be used. But where it maketh not so great hast to the heighth, then are wee in the very time of the heighth, as also a little before, to withdraw some part of their diet, and before permit to them more liberall allowance, that the sicke may the better hold-out. But there being so many severall circumstances herein to be observed, and the severall and individuall constitutions being so various, it is very hard to set downe any certaine rule concerning this particular. In diseases which give no intermission; as continuall fevers, beware of feeding the sicke in the exacerbation or worst time,In continuall fevers. but wait for some remission, when the sicke findeth some alteration.In intermitting fever^. In intermitting fevers; as tertians, quartanes, etc. except their fit should prove very long, and their strength feeble, feed them not in their fit, but wait for the remission or declining of it: or else prevent the fit certaine houres, lest it surprize the sicke with a full stomacke, and so prolong it. But if it should come to passe, that the sicke were not able to attend this appointed time, then were it better to take something in the beginning, or increasing of the fit, and no waies towards the heighth of it: and yet if strength should faile, it were better to yeeld to an inconvenience, than to a mischiefe. And there 10. Meth. and sequenti de diata aegrorum agit. Galen diligently observing the strength of his patients, fed some of them in the beginning, some in the vigor and very heighth of the fit, which occasioned some to mocke and deride him. But with us, women, many times, must have their will, although it cost the patient his life; and what they apprehend to be right, the Physitian may often spend his breath, but doe little good. I wish people therefore to be wise, when they see especially it lieth them upon their lives; and if they will learne wit of no body else, let them learne some of Satan: Iob ^. Skinne for skinne, and all that a man hath will he give for his life.



CHAP. VII.

What things in prescribing Diet for the diseased are to be observed.

OF the three severall sorts of Diet fit for the diseased; to wit, a sparing, slender, or thinne, a liberall or full, and a meane diet betwixt both, wee have already discoursed. Each of these diets is so called in relation to the aliments which nourish sparingly, liberally, or in a meane maner. Now, in each of these aliments, we are to consider the substance, quantity, quality, the fit time for feeding the sicke, the order, and the preparation, or manner of preparing the same. The substance of food is either solid or liquid, of easie or hard degestion, yeelding to the body good or bad nourishment.Properties of nourishment fit for the use of the sicke. That aliment which is appropriated for the sick, ought to be easie of digestion, of a good and laudable juice, and nourish much in a small quantity; and liquid or solid, according to the nature and variety of the disease. Lib. de victu acut. and alibi passim. Hippocrates used to feed the sicke of fevers with suppings. And Probl. 32. sect. 1. Aristotle, wisheth us to feed the sicke in fevers, with suppings at the beginning, especially, by reason or their lightnesse, and facility of concoction and distribution. The quantity or measure of the Diet of the diseased, must be ordered according to the sense and feeling of the sicke, and nature of the disease, as Lib. de veteri medicina. Hippocrates well expresseth it. Now, it is not unknowne, that whole and sicke folkes are not with alike quantity of food to be fed. And this by the practice in Hippocrates appeareth, where 7 Epid. Cratolaus being sicke Dimidiata chaenice contentus erat. Lib. de victu acut. contenteth himselfe with the one halfe of his former allowance. To the quantity wee may also referre the number of repast, which must be measured according to custome, which is consonant to Hippoc. aph. 16. lib. 2. and 6. Epid. Hippocraticall prescription. And this according to many severall circumstances, is also variable. The next is the quality, which we are not to neglect, nor slightly to be past over. Healthfull and sound people ought to use a diet like unto their owne temper and constitution: but the sicke are to use a diet contrary to their disease. A hot distemper requireth a cooling diet, and rest from motion. Neither are wee in the diet of the diseased, onely to consider the first qualities; as hot and cold, moisture and drinesse, but even the second qualities also; as opening and astringent, etc. If the humours be tough, then have they need of opening diet; as all manner of obstructions: defluxions need astringent and strengthening diet. As for the time of feeding the sicke, as witnesse Lib. ad Thrasib. de deaeta, cap. 57A double time of feeding the sicke; of election and necessity. Galen, it is very hard to define, and that in regard of the diversity of fevers, requiring divers times for diet. In diseases, wee may consider a double time of feeding the sicke, one of election, another of coaction, or necessity. That of election I call, when as the disease gives the sicke some truce, and

leaveth the sicke sometime free for food. That of necessitie and coaction, when as for preserving strength, we are forced at uncertaine times to feed the sicke. Now, for feeding the sicke, the day-time is alwaies the best, as witnesseth Lib. 3 cap. 6. Celsus, and many other Physitians. Des erreurs populaires, part. 2 cap. 8. Ioubert, a French Physitian, much inveigheth against that perverse and preposterous custome of feeding the sicke in the night time, and giveth this reason for his assertion: The day is ordained for our nourishment, as the night for rest and sleepe; now, by sleepe the noisome and noxious hunmour, cause of the disease, is concocted, the naturall heat now by reason of sleepe being recalled into the center: now, if by nourishment in the night time,Preposterous custom of feeding the sicke in the night. thou make a distraction of naturall heat to helpe concoction, it must needes have the smaller force to subdue the disease, and from hence arise many crudities, the cause of much evill in the body. But if, perhaps, the sicke cannot sleep, and have bin sparingly dieted in the day time; then may wee give the sicke some supping, as a little broth, almond, milke, or the like: but in no case let the sicke ever be wakened out of his sleepe to take any food; it being farre better to let the sicke take his rest, than unseasonably to waken him for food: for Hippoc. lib. de vict^ acut. watching suffereth not the disease to come to maturity, making all sustenance harder to digest. It may then be asked what time of the day is fittest to feed the sicke? and in what time of the day may the diseased feed freeliest? If it may be with conveniency, the morning is the best time, or towards noone, and worst towards night. It hath been already proved, that in healthfull people a larger supper is allowed:What time of the day fittest for feeding the sicke, and when hee may feed freeliest, at dinner or supper. but in the sicke it is not so, as hath been already proved. Besides, experience it selfe telleth us, that toward night, and in the night time, diseases most commonly afflict most: what reason then is there to oppresse the body with a double burthen? And this is principally to be observed in all defluxions and diseases of the head, yea, even in health it selfe, much more then in sicknesse to be observed. The order of diet in the diseased is then chiefely to be observed, when there is variety of dishes;The order of the sickes diet.Whether variety may be allowed to the sick which, whether fit for the sicke or no, would be considered. A single diet is alwaies most profitable, agreeing best with health, and in sicknesse is easiliest concocted. The multiplying of many severall lusts, Cibus homini simplex: acervatio saporum pestifera, and condimenia perniciosiora, libr. 12. cap. 54. saith Pliny, is pernicious, and a multitude of sauces is yet farre worse. And yet some would have the sicke use variety of dishes, especially in a weake and queazie stomacke, that by tasting a little of every dish, his weake stomacke might the better be whetted on. But if it be possible, and strength subsist, the sicke is not to be incited to such variety,Preparation of the diet varieth much. for feare lest he eat more than hee can well overcome. But in the diet of the diseased, the preparation is not of smallest moment: as whether it be better rosted, boiled or baked, the which is, according to divers circumstances, varied, as wee shall heare more hereafter. Sometimes also sauces are not unseasonable for the sicke; and for this cause some Physitians have written tractats concerning this subject: and to speake the truth, they are the fittest for the sicke, to excite and stir up their weake and languishing stomacke, which often by all our art, wee can scarce indure to take so much sustenance, as will support their weake strength for a few daies. Now, as there is a preparation required in the diet, so is there also in the diseased, who is to wash his mouth

with faire water,Preparation in the sicke in himselfe required. or water and vineger, with a little wine, or other fit and convenient liquor. And is principally in Fevers, where the mouth is often so furred, principally to be observed, to wash away that slime, and other stuffe that sticketh to the tongue and palat of the mouth, and giveth a bad rellish to all that is eaten. Besides, The sicke should sit up to eat. as Avicenne saith, the sicke, if it be possible, should sit up in his bed to take his food, and so for a while after continue: for by this meanes concoction is farre better, than any otherwise performed. Now to the particular Diet of the Diseased.


CHAP. VIJ.

Of fit Diet for the Diseased, and that of severall sorts, and first of that which vegetables affordus, as bread, herbes and fruits.

THe matter of Diet for the Diseased, as wee have already said of the Diet of healthfull people, is either taken from vegetables, or plants and fruits: or else from living creatures and their parts: as from beasts, fowle and fish. Among plants or vegetables, corne, and among corne, wheat, whereof the best and wholesomest bread for the use of man is made, challengeth by right the first place. That bread then is best for the use of the sick which is made of the best wheat,Best bread for the use of the sicke. not fusty, mildewd, or of any other evill quality; and withall made of new ground meale, which is better than long kept. This bread would be a little salted, and moderately leavened: for so it becommeth more pleasant to the taste, lighter and easier of digestion, and lesse stopping. In our countries here we have a custome to adde barme to our bread, which other countries, as France, Italie and Spaine, etc. use not; and therefore I give warning, that this be sparingly used in the sickes bread, very bitter barme especially; which maketh both the bread unpleasanter, and hotter in acute diseases, and hot bodies. As for salted bread, 7 Meth* med. Galen himselfe doth not reject it, even in Fevers; and besides, even in the cure of a dry stomack alloweth the use of it. Bread for the sickes use is to be used new, and not old; especially not above two or three daies at the most. New bread is two manner of waies used, either simply as it is of it selfe, or else artificially prepared. Simple bread I call such as it is baked,Two sorts of bread. Simple bread. Prepared bread. Crummes. Crust. when it is so administred to the sicke. Bread is againe prepared after the baking, and that divers wayes. Now whether the one or the other be used, the crummes are the best, the crust being of an evill quality. Ordinary simple bread was used either hot, or after it was cooled. A Merc. variar. lect. l. 6 late writer sheweth that the antients used hot bread. And Hippocrates used hot bread in the cure of that kind of Dropsie

which wee call anasarca or leucophlegmatia, which neverthelesse elsewhere hee Lib. de diaeta acut. alloweth not of. Hot bread filleth suddenly, is hard of digestion, and drieth much; and this later reason might move him to exhibit it in that kinde of Dropsie.Cold bread best, and not too stale. But cold bread was ever most in request, and is also the best, especially if not too old, as hath beene already proved. As for the preparation of bread,Preparation of bread for the sicke. the antients used either to wash it in faire water, or else to mingle it with flesh broth. Elb. 22. cap. 25. How the Antients washed their bread. Pliny affirmeth that wheat-bread being washed either in cold or warme water, is a very light food for the sicke. Now they used to wash their bread two manner of waies: either they soaked and steeped their bread in warme water, which they often shifted untill such time as it had quite lost all the taste of leaven and salt: or else they grated and punned it small, and so steeped it in faire water, and strained it through a cleane linnen cloth; by this meanes making a seperation of the solid from the subtilest parts, which subtile thinne part they afterwards boiled untill it grew thicke. This washed bread both Hippocrates and Galen used to coole in all kindes of Fevers. Wee use rather to wash it in rose-water, adding some sugar and currants.Our manner. Neither was it the custome onely to steepe bread in water,Bread soked in wine. but in wine also; where they were free from any Fever. Wee use rathe to toste bread at the fire, and so steepe it in wine,In flesh broth. And that sometimes also they mingled bread with fresh broth is apparent out of the same Lib. de affection. Hippocrates. There are also divers artificiall preparations of bread which may be usefull in some diseases:Biscuits and the like. as biscuits prepared with divers ingredients; as yolkes of egges, annise and fennell and coriander seeds, with a little sugar, and may be usefull for weake stomakes, and rheumatik persons. But because few of our Gentle-women are ignorat of the preparation of these and the like,March-panes. I shall not need to insist upon their preparation. Besides these, there are divers sorts of march-panes made, partly for superfluity and adorning great feasts, and great mens tables; and partly also sometimes for physicall uses: as in hecticke Fevers, and some pectorall diseases, which here to particularize, is neither the particular place, nor my purpose. But before I finish this point concerning bread, I must advertise all diseased people,Vnleavened bread unwholesome. that since unleavened bread, as pycrusts, many sorts of cakes and the like, are not so fit even for the use of healthfull people; how much more then are they unfit for the sicke? Such bread is alwaies very hard to be concocted, and apt to ingender obstructions and the stone.
Now in the Diet of the Diseased there is no small use made of herbs,Herbs usefull in the Diet of the diseased. whereof we have spoken already. Herbes minister but small nourishment, and serve rather to alter than to nourish the body. And therefore they are of good use to coole, to open obstructions, and keepe the body soluble: of the which both juleps, apozemes, and divers decoctions are made, according as the nature of the disease requireth. We use them likewise in the sickes broths, according as we see occasion. Now that herbs nourish but little, Lib. de facult. natur. Galen himselfe avoucheth, affirming, that men cannot live upon herbes, although beasts are therewith nourished. And Hippocrates affirmeth, that those who use this kind of food much, live a shorter while than others. And Comment. ad eam partic. lib. 6. Epidem. imbecilliora cibaria breviorem vitam habent, Galen



upon that place expoundeth the word imbecillis cibus, or a feeble food, to bee such as yeeld little or small nourishment to the body: such are herbes, and many sorts of fruits growing upon trees: and such, saith Hippocrates, are both of a short continuance, and make them short lived who use them: by reason such food maketh but short stay within the body. Out of this place then is confuted the opinion of Lib. de sanit tuend. Cardan, affirming, that such as lived on fruits and herbes were longer lived than those who lived on flesh, which hee would prove by the antient fathers, and by Eremites living in deserts onely upon such food. But this may easily be answered,Those who live on herbes and fruits live not longer than such as live on flesh. that it was our forefathers frugality, free from all manner of excesse and riot, and not the quality of their food which prolonged their lives. Besides, their lives were for other necessary and usefull ends then prolonged, as we have heretofore touched. As for Hermites, and others who live long by the use of such diet, I doubt not but with the moderate use of flesh, and keeping a moderation in all other things, they might have lived longer, and in as good health of body, whatsoever Cardan say to the contrary.
Whether fruits may be admitted into the Diet of the Diseased. Answere.Now it may againe be demanded, whether fruits may be admitted into the Diet of the Diseased? I answere, it would seeme that by reason of their waterish juice they should bee excluded: yet no doubt they may safely be used, at least some sorts; as apples for melancholy,What fruits best. capers for the spleene, pomegranats for hot and cholerick stomacks, the quinces in fluxes of the bellie; in costivenesse, prunes and cherries; raisins and currants for the liver: and so of divers others according to severall occasions. Lib. 12. Trallian tells us that the Aegyptian Physitians fed their sicke of Fevers with cucumbers and melons; and that by reason they cooled much and nourished little. But Lib. de abusu med. Cardan altogether disalloweth of any such diet. And it were farre more tolerable to use the distilled water of such fruits. I doubt not, but fruits may sometimes be exhibited to the sicke, provided they be first rosted, that by such meanes, the moist watery juice may either be corrected or dissipated.How the antients rosted their fruits. Now the antients had another fashion of rosting their fruits than we have, as may by the same late alledged Author appeare; who speaking of the use of peaches in a tertian, saith, that being hung up, they are to bee rosted by the onely heat of the fire. Lib. 2. (...) and initio lib. (...) Galen in two or three places explaneth this manner. They tooke (saith he) a high pot, which they filled ful of water, and within the pot above the water they set in grate, on the which they layed their fruits, and so rosted them at this vapor. And Epist. 83. St. Ierome writeth, that cookes were wont after this manner to rost their phesants,Preserving of fruits. which made them farre daintier to the taste. Our age hath in use to preserve divers sorts of fruits in the Autumne, and so to keep them both for necessity and delight.Sparingly to bee used in Fevers. But I wish they bee sparingly used of the sicke, especially in Fevers and hot cholericke constitutions, by reason that sugar wherewith they are preserved, is quickly in such turned into cooler; besides, that the too frequent use of such things quickly cloggeth and overthroweth a weake stomacke, whereof we are to have alwaies a principall regard.



CHAP. IX.

Of Flesh, and what sorts of flesh are fittest for the sicke, and how to be exhibited.

ALthough wee have already spoken sufficiently both of the nature and nourishment that severall sorts of Flesh efford the body of man; yet will wee now say something more of this subject, as it hath relation to the sicke. That flesh was a strong nourishment, Pythagoras was not ignorant, saith Pliny, who changed the wrestlers diet from pulse to flesh; their fat and gluttonous substance, having neerest affinity with mans radicall moisture: and therefore, as well in sicknesse as in health, it yeeldeth strength and vigour to the party that useth it. But all sorts of flesh are not promiscuously and indifferently to be used of the sicke: for, among foure-footed beasts,Flesh fittest for stro^g nourishment.What foure-footed beasts are best for the use of the sicke. some for goodnesse and wholesomnesse, are farre before others to be preferred. And here for the use of the sicke, are principally recommended Weather mutton and Veale. Among fowle, young pullets, Hennes, Cocks and Capons, Pigeons, Partridges, Phesants,What fowle. thrush and some others: and all these kindes of flesh are common to all diseases; and besides, there are yet some certain sorts of flesh proper to some particular diseases. Such flesh is in a double manner adminstred unto the sicke; either in substance, boiled or rosted; or else their juice drawne out by decoction, called broth; or else expressed and strained; called commonly colices or gelees: or, lastly, distilled; and so called destilled restorative water of Capon, or any other flesh. Besides these aforementioned, Hippocrates accustomed to feed his sicke with other sorts of flesh; as with the flesh of Hares, Hogges, Horses,Antient Physitians dieted their sick with flesh, uncouth to us. Asses and Whelpes, which with us are now altogether out of request. But a question may be here asked, whether flesh be in diseases a fit and convenient food. And it hath beene by some Arabian Physitians called into question, who forbid flesh in all sorts of fevers;Whether flesh may be used of the sicke. and that by reason it is easily, by the distempered heat of the fever, putrefied and corrupted. And by the fame authority was it denied in the inflammation and consumption of the lungs. And in the Ile of Crete, it was not permitted to feed the sicke with flesh. Lib. de carn. Hippocrates himselfe, in fractures of the skull, forbiddeth flesh, untill the tenth day. But there he must be understood of solid flesh, by reason hee forbiddeth any mastication or chewing. But to forbid broths, colices or gelees, and the like,Answer. I see no reason: and therfore with the same Hippocrates, and the generall current of all our best Physitians, wee allow of the use of flesh for the sicke. Ewes flesh is often used by Hipprocrates, and commended by Galen:Ewes flesh used by the antients. but wee to better purpose, use Weather mutton, to them altogether unknowne; and the which we have from the Arabian Physitians, who first

used it.Flesh of gelded creatures better than of others.Veale seldome used in antient times. And in this flesh, it is also to be observed, that it is colder in quality than either Ewes or Rammes flesh: and it is to be observed, that the flesh of gelded beasts is both sweeter and cooler than of the ungelded. As for Veale, the antient Greeke Physitians seldome used it, and wee read not of it above once in Lib. de ratione victus. Hippocraters. And for this are wee also beholden to the Arabian Physitians, and Lib. 4. collect. Averroes in particular, who averreth, that it may safely be used in all diseases. Lib. 1. ad Glancon. Another antient Physitian, would not have the sicke to meddle with it, although in health he holdeth it to be a singular good nourishment. And some thinke it too moist, and that it was therefore in the Easterne countries quite forbidden. But it is now without any doubt by all our Physitians admitted into the Diet of the Diseased. Hogges flesh was both by Galen and Hippocrates, had in high esteeme for the sickes use, howbeit it be now altogether banished from the Diet of the Diseased. And wee read, that Lib. de diaeta acut. and Gal. in comment. Galen gave to the sicke in a tertian, Hogges braines and feet: as also gives Hogges feet boiled in ptisan for a restorative diet. How would this rellish our dainty palats? And that Hogges flesh, as also pigges to bee eaten without the skinOf fowle, and what nourishment they afford. Hippocrates himselfe did use it, may also appeare, by that hee warneth us to eat it without the skinne: and Galen in his commentary, taketh it for granted, that Hogges flesh and Pigges ought to be eaten without the skinne, quite contrary to our custome, who hold that the daintiest of all the rest: but I warne weake stomackes to looke to themselves. Young sucking Rabbets are for the sicke, with us, in no small request, yet let them not be too young. Now, as concerning fowle, 3. de alim. facult. Galen affirmeth, that if compared with foure footed beasts, their nourishment, as it is farre lesse, so is it farre easier of digestion; especially the wings of such fowles as are in perpetuall motion, and affoord the body a wholsome and subtill nourishment. All manner of wilde fowle, saith 2 de diaeta. Hippocrates, are of a drier substance than foure-footed beasts: and whatsoever creatures yeeld no spittle at the mouth, are of a drier substance than others. And the wilde fowle are drier than the tame of the same kinde. And therefore the flesh of the stocke-dove is drier than that of our ordinary Pigeon:Among all fowle, pullaine most familiar for the use of the sicke. among all manner of fowle, our Hennes, Cocks and Capons for the sickes use beare away the bell. Neither was it without a mysterie that the Cocke was consecrated to Aesculapius. As for the Goose, Ducke, and other water fowle, they are seldome allowed the sicke, especially in acute diseases. And it is to be observed, that in antient times the comparison was betwixt the flesh of the Cocke and the Henne, which of their flesh was the best,Capons unknown to the Antients. some preferring that the Cocke: as for Capons, which wee acknowledge both in sicknesse and in health to be better than both the former,Pullets best for the sicke. they were to the antients unknowne. Above all sorts of pullaine, pullets, or pretty bigge Chickens are accounted the best for the sickes use, especially if they be of a white colour: for such are not so hot as the others, and therefore fittest for fevers and hot diseases. The antients used especially the stones and wings of pullaine, as may by Lib. 1. ad Glauc. Galen appeare; and this must be understood of young pullets, and not of old Cockes. Now, as for

old cocks, they were of old chiefely used to purge the belly,Old Cocks how used of old. being for that end and purpose stuffed with divers ingredients; which is even usefull with us at this day also. As concerning Capons, a question may here be moved, whether they ingender not the gout: and that this question seeme not strange, it hath beene by some of later times,Whether Capons ingender the Gout. called into question: and howsoever it hath beene held both of Vide Crat. consil. me^icin. consil. 229.225, etc. Answere. Cocks and Hens also, yet principally and chiefely of Capons; and that principally if they be old: the reason whereof is pretended, that these creatures are obnoxious to this disease, witnessed by certaine knots growing sometimes on old Capons legges. But in my opinion, this is but a needlesse and frivolous feare, it being a thing most certaine, that in a good and strong stomacke, they will be converted into a good and laudable nourishment. As for those who feed every day daintily upon that or any other delicate food, using little or no bodily exercise, nor keeping a good moderation in their diet, be they young or old they shall find they shall either ingender the gout, or as bad, if not a worse disease. So that I cannot adhere to their opinion, who hold any specificall podagricall qualitie in this kind of fowle more than in any other food.Turkies. The young pullets of Turkies may be ranked among our pullaine, and may likewise bee safely used of the sicke.Phesants. As for Phesants, I forbid them to no body that can come by them.Pigeons whether safe to be used of the sick. As concerning pigeons, it may be demanded whether they bee safe for the use of the sicke? The Arabian physitians, by reason of their heat, utterly rejected pigeons from the use of the sicke, which we understand of the elder. As for young pigeons, they are nothing so hot,Temperature of pigeons. especially well blooded under the wing. And therefore, all the controversie betwixt the Arabian and Greeke Physitians concerning the temperature of pigeons may easily, by distinguishing the ages, be composed. Old pigeons are hot and dry, and the young rather temperate, participating of some heat. Arist. de hist avium. lib. 5. cap. 7. Wild pigeons by reason of their drinesse accounted better (especially in moist diseases) and their young ones hatched in the Spring, better than those in Autumne.Pigeons good against the plague. Others hold that ordinary pigeons hatched towards Harvest, when corne beginneth to ripen, are best, and feed fattest. There are some which hold an opinion that pigeons are good against the plague, and that such as eate of them often in such seasons, free themselves from pestiferous and contagious diseases. And for this cause, if the plague at any time had been in Persia, Plinius, secundus the Physitian was wont to make pigeons his chiefe food. It is moreover to be observed, that pigeons never bee rosted with their heads: for it hath been observed,Pigeons to be rosted without their heads. that such as have often eaten them thus, have by degrees falne blind: and it is moreover held, that thus they ingender the leprosie. Lib. ^ Rhasis also relateth a history of a certaine Casipha (as he calleth him) who having thrice in one day eaten of pigeons rosted with their heads,History. the same day died suddenly. As concerning Partridges, Lib. de euch^m. Galen writeth, that the flesh of young Partridges is of a laudable nourishment; but the elder of a more solid substance, and harder of digestion, which neverthelesse being two or three daies hung up, becommeth tenderer. Now concerning this flesh betwixt the Greeke and Arabian Physitians, there is no

lesse controversie than was about the former, and by distinguishing the ages,Thrushes. may as easily be composed. As for Thrushes they are by Galen accounted among good and laudable nourishment, as ingendring neither too thicke nor too thinne humors: and it seemeth, it was accustomed to be prescribed to sicke persons, by the ancient Romane Physitians: as may appeare by the prescription of them to Pompey in his sicknesse, Plutarch. in vitae Pompe^^. Larkes. who would rather venture his life, than be beholden to Lucullus for them. The larke is of very good nourishment, and easy of digestion, and good in moist diseases, especially commended against the wind-colicke. It is somewhat dry, and therefore not so fit in Fevers; and if used, they are best boiled, by this meanes becomming moister. The Larke with the tuft on the head is the best. And it is to be observed that in Fevers, wilde fowle, by reason of the drinesse, is not neere so good as the tame.


CHAP. X.

Of Egges, and ^^^ir use, whether they may safely be allowed the sicke? Of divers liquid substance made of flesh; a^^roth, colice, gelee, restorative distillations, etc.

NExt to fowle, for the affinitie, wee are to say somethings of Egges, as being their proper birth and off-spring, as I may call them, and will withall subjoine next after them, for the affinitte, some liquid substance made of them. This then is a light, liquid and laudable nourishment for the sicke. There is no food (saith Lib. 29. cap. 3. Pliny) that nourisheth more in sickenesse, and burdeneth lesse the stomacke, supplying the place both of meat and drinke. And yet is this food by some called in question, whether it may be allowed the sicke or no?E^^es whether good for sicke folke? and that for a double reason, both in regard of the plentifull nourishment it yeeldeth in Fevers, and by reason also of a supposed exorbitant heat in this aliment more than in another. And this hath beene not a feare among the vulgar onely, but even some learned Alois. Mundella epist. 29.Latinus Henricus in quaest. medictnal. Physitians have held the same opinion. And if at any time, say they, the antients did allow of egges in Fevers, it was never in the beginning, but in the declining of the disease; unlesse it were in extreme weakenesse, which overturneth and altereth all order in Diet. Lib. 1. ad Glanc. Galen in tertian Fevers alloweth both the yolkes of egges, and rocky fishes; but withall giveth us warning, that this diet was onely for the daintier and nicer sort: but that in others it were better according to the Hippocraticall rule, to use the juice of ptisan untill the crise. And againe in 18 method. another place, in a Fever with swounding he alloweth of egges before the fourth day, and afterwards flesh. And Li. de ras, vict in aecut. Hippocrates

where there is no Fever permitteth the use of rere-rosted egges,Egges permitted b^ Hippocrates. which in a Fever, it is like hee would not have permitted. But it might be proved, that sometimes in the inflammation of the liver and of the lungs, where there is alwaies a Fever conjoined, he permitted the use of egges. But what talke we of antient times, when as people lived more frugally, and used not so liberall and plentifull a diet as now adaies, and we were never now able without danger of life to sustaine so strict a diet, as did the diseased in those daies? And therfore in our daies to give the sick egges to eate,Egges may safely be used even in Fever or any acute disea^ yea even in acute diseases, we see no danger at all. As for the feare of heat in egges it is very frivolous, they being very temperate, allaying the acrimony and sharpenesse of humors, and withall moisten much. The Diosc^n. (...). 2. cap 43. yolke of an egge applied to any part grieved with paine, easeth the same: and according to the co^mon consent of Physitians such things as ease paines, called properly anodyna, are of a temperate facultie. Besides, the white of an egge cooleth, as daily experience teacheth us.The white of the eg^e co^leth. And although the white of the egge be cooler, yet is it withall harder of digestion than the yolke: and therefore Galen in the aforementioned place in a tertian admittteth of the yolke onely. And a late writer condemneth much the vulgar erroneous opinion of the heat of egs, affirming withall that the Italian Physitians doe ordinarily exhibite them to their patients, even of hot constitution of body, and the like diseases, and that even in the heat of Sommer.To nourish much in a smal quanti^y is a singular good property. As for the feare of nourishing too much, we esteem that to be a singular prerogative in egges above many other meats, that they nourish much in a small quantity; as being that which we cheifly aime at in great weakenesses, and which we may easily regulate according to our pleasure, exhibiting a quantity answerable to present necessity.Hens egges best. My meaning all this while is of hens egges, as being of all others the most temperate, and most appropriate for the sickes use.Of a hen troden with a cocke a^e best. Such egges also are esteemed best, which are laid of a hen troden with a cocke: for others nourish lesse, are of lesser quantitie, and moisten lesse,Preparation of egges. if wee will beleeve Aristotle. In egges also the preparation or dressing is of no small consequence. They are commonly either boiled in water with the shell, or rosted likewise with the shell, or boiled a little in seething water or other liquor without the shells, called potched egges;Boiled without the shell, called p^^ched egges. or fried in a frying-pan with butter, and sometimes with an addition of herbes or others things. Of all these preparations the boiled in water without the shell, or potched are best and fittest for the sick, and potched in vineger or verjuice, as some use to doe, they coole,Boiled with the shell. and withall corroborate a hot and weake stomacke. The next in goodnesse are accounted those are boiled with the shell in water,Rosted egges. by reason they are all alike and equally bo^^^d. Egges rosted in the imbers or otherwise are therefore held inferior to the former, because they are not so equally rosted: howbeit if care be had in the rosting, I hold them nothing inferior to the other, if not better. But for the use of the sicke a speciall care must be had, that they be not hard.Fried egges Egges fried are worse than any of the former, and therefore altogether to be forbidden the sicke. Sometimes they have mingled with them divers sorts of herbes,Tansies. tansey especially, (whereof this composition taketh the name) and creame;

which howsoever used, are no waies to be allowed sicke folkes, being heavy of digestion even for the healthfull, especially for weake stomacks, Of Egges also are made caudells, which being made of drinke that is not too strong may without any danger be allowed the sicke; of the making whereof there is hardly a woman in the countrie, I thinke, that is ignorant.Markes of good Eg^. But that we may discerne the good from the bad, it is materiall for us to know some certaine markes which may make this appeare. The Priests, it seemeth, in former times, as they ever loved their belly well, so set they us downe three marks whereby we may discerne the best: that an Egge be new laid, long in figure, and white in colour, according to the Regula presbyteri jubet hoc pro lege teneri, ut bona sint ova, candida longa nova. old proverbiall verse. But to know the new laid from old, stale and addle, wee must yet finde out some more markes. New laid Egges are commonly full, and the stale empty towards the broder end, which is also the cause that stale and addle Egges swim in the water, when as the new laid fall to the bottome. Besides, new laid Egges, betwixt thee and the light looke brighter and clearer than the stale and addle ones, which looke more darkly and obscurely. Another signe is, that when it is opened, an old and stale Eg, the yolke especially disperseth it selfe, whereas the new and fresh laid clingeth close together. I have the longer insisted upon Egges, by reason it is so usefull an aliment for the sicke, and the vulgar is so possessed with a needlesse feare of a supposed excessive heat in this food, and therefore thought good to remove all such rubs.
Of the iuice of flesh of severall sorts.Having heretofore sufficiently spoken of solid flesh, as also of egges, I come now to speake of some liquid substances made of flesh, and fit for the use of the sicke. The juice of flesh nourisheth more speedily and easily than the solid substance it selfe. It is farre easier, saith (...).Hippoc. Aph. 11. lib. 2.Hippocrates, to be refreshed with drinke, than with solid food: which is not onely to be understood of drinke, but of liquid and supping meats also. Whosoever have need of a sudden and speedy refection, Lib. de aliment. saith the same Author, humid or moist diet, is the best to repaire strength. And whosoever have yet need of a speedier way, it may be effected by smels. The antient Physitians therefore, taught by experience, that oftentimes the sicke was not able to concoct solid food, found out this way of suppings. The Lib. de affection. same Authours counsell is againe in another point carefully to be observed: that such as are able to digest and concoct solid food, to such, suppings are to be denied: for they exclude the use of other food: but to such as cannot make use of any other, to such,In the preparation of these liquid substances made of flesh, care must be had of the cleanlinesse of the persons, and the like care of the vessells they are made in. suppings are to be allowed. Moreover, in the preparation of these liquid substances, there must be an especiall care had of cleanlinesse, both in the persons that prepare them, and in the vessells wherein they are prepared. The persons must be neat and cleanly* skilfull in such preparations, and carefull in skimming off skum and fat, offensive to a weake stomacke. The vessels wherein they are made must be cleane and free from all filth,Earthen and iron vessells best, brasse the worst. evill smell or taste. The matter of such vessells are best of earth, yron, or silver: but brasse is the worst of all other, and what is made therein is likeliest to offend a weake stomake, especially if it stand any space in it, as experience daily teacheth us. Some brasse, I confesse, is better than other, and yet the best bad enough.

Of all these liquid substances, that which we commonly call broth, is most ordinary, and made after various and divers waies,Broth made after divers manners. according to the nature of the disease, and party diseased, and the patients palate. Some is made with herbs, some without; some with plummes (as they call them) raisins of the Sunne, or currants, or dried prunes, and some without any. The variety therefore of broths being infinite, it were a tedious taske to enter upon this subject. But one sort of broth was wont to be made by the antients of an old Cocke to purge the belly, being for that end stuffed with many such ingredients fit for that purpose, which is even usuall with us at this day also. I will instance in one fit to be used in pectorall diseases. Take an old Cocke,Broth made of an old Cocke in pecto^all diseases. and after a long combat with another Cocke, kill him, pull him, and cleanse him of all his intralls; then fill his belly with barlie prepared as it ought, raisins of the Sunne stoned, violet leaves, maidens haire, a little hysop and peny-riall, with a little salt: boile him till the flesh come from the bone, then bruise him well, and squeeze out all his moisture, and of this broth take a good draught. There are yet many sorts of broth used for severall ends and purposes; some to coole, some to strengthen and cherish nature, etc. Amongst restorative broths, there is one in frequent use, especially in consumptions and great weaknesses,China broth in consumptions and great weaknesses. made with the outlandish root, fetcht us from beyond sea, called from the soile, China-root. The proportion of this root to the liquour is not alwaies the same in every sicke person. The China-root must be heavy, and not worm-eaten, and being thinne sliced, must stand about twelve houres by a soft fire, not boiling at all, but simpering by it; and afterward provide a good bigge young red Cocke-chicken well dressed and cleansed from his intralls, bruise him and put him to thy China,It may also be made with Veale, or other meate, howbeit in weake and sicke people, a chicken is commonly best lik'd of. adding ingredients, as the nature of the disease and other circumstances shall permit: as in pectorall diseases, such as wee nominated already, more or lesse, as occasion shall require, which cannot be determined: and in other cases, the ingredients may be altered accordingly. It must boile till little above the fourth part remaine, and it looke red in colour, being still well skimmed as it boileth, and towards the later end adde to your broth the bottome of a manchet, and two or three chives of mace: and when all is sufficiently boiled, bruise your chicken in a stone morter, and squeeze out the juice, and adde to your broth; whereof, being sweetned with sugar, the diseased may take a little draught an houre or two before dinner, supper, or both, if need be. In my opinion the quantity of China would not be under an ounce, and seldome exceed two. Howsoever, in time of need it is safest to be directed by learned counsel, which may direct the right preparation and use according to severall circumstances. Againe, sometimes meat is first well rosted,Expression of the iuice of rosted meat, called expressum. and afterwards pressed out in a presse or otherwise, and seasoned with sugar, or made a little tart with a little juice of a lemmon, or otherwise appropriated to the patients palat, as particular occasions shall require: which they call in latin expressum, or a juice squeezed out of flesh. And this is best given by it selfe without any other broth or liquor: and this is better for cold constitutions than for hot, and consequently for the like diseases. Now, when the flesh is let boile untill all the substance of the

meat be boiled away in the broth, and then strained thorow a clean linnen cloth;Colice called cousuptum. it is called in latine consumptum, and in the English a colice, and may likewise be seasoned and salted according to the liking of the sicke. This colice is either taken of it selfe, or else mingled with other broth. Another liquid substance there is yet extracted out of flesh, which we commonly call a gelee, which is made of a capon or a big cocke-chicken,Gelee. and a couple of calves feet, and so let boile untill it fall to pieces, and being sufficiently boiled, the skum and fat being carefully taken off, it must bee well strained thorow a cleane linnen cloth, and the juice so strained is to bee sweetned with a little sugar, and seasoned with a little cinamon, and so set on the fire againe to boile a wame or two, adding thereto, if thou wilt, two whites of egges the better to clarifie it. After all is done, straine it through an Hippocras bagge, which being cold will turne to a gelee, and may bee coloured with a little saffron or red sanders, and with a graine or two of muske or amber-greze, if the patient please, this may also acquire a pleasant smell. This gelee may also bee used either by it selfe, or else mingled with broth. If there be a Fever, it is best to boile it in faire spring-water: if there be neither Fever, nor yet feare of any, then the one halfe, or yet lesse, may be of white wine, which will make it both pleasant to the pal^t,Gelee of harts horn. and very comfortable to refresh weake nature. Our Gentlewomen have in frequent use a gelee made of harts horne, which I hold very good, especially in pestelentiall and contagious diseases, or in pox and measels is very soveraine. Those of ability may adde to it a little of confectio alchermes or de hyacintho, and then it will bee very soveraine. And if thou wilt have this or any other gelee tart, thou maiest adde a little juice of Lemmon or the like to it. Besides all these, there is yet in use for sicke folkes, a forme of restorative distillation made of a capon,Restorative distillations of capon or other flesh. or other restorative flesh with an addition of cordiall ingredients for that purpose. Some find fault with this distillation, because of the impression of fire left in it, and may bee distastfull to the sicke. But this may easily by a glasse still in balneo mariae be prevented. But the truth is, that by this meanes the phlegmaticke and watry part is onely extracted, which hath but very small nourishing power in it: since that which nourisheth (as witnesseth Lib. de mercur. cap. 9. Galen) ought to bee of a tough, thicke and glutinous substance, to the end it may bee the more firme and permanent. These kinde of distillations are very frequent it France and some other countries; insomuch that they are to bee found ready distilled in many Apothecaries shops; which a learned Rondlet. lib. de fabric. cap. de causo. French Physitian findeth fault withall, as being fusty, and of no value at all; if they be kept but a litle while. With us these are not so in request; yet to speake mine opinion also, since they retaine both some taste and smell of the meat they are distilled of, (if carefully done) although their nourishment be but very small, yet see I not, why in great weaknesses, and a loathing of all food, these may not sometimes bee admitted, especially, since thereby no damage or detriment whatsoever redoundeth to the stomacke, or other part, it passing so speedily

thorow the body. There are also some restoratives made of flesh bruised and minced, made up in solid formes, and may be used in chronicall diseases, but are not for Fevers, nor other acute diseases. But at this present, I will dwell no longer on this, not this subject of flesh, but will say something concerning fish.


CHAP. XI.

Of Fish, and whether they may be allowed the sicke.

NOw, because sicke persons are not all and alwaies to be fed with one and the same food, and some in their sicknesse loath flesh; it may then be demanded, whether Fish may not be permitted sicke folke, although they be not so nourishing, and are also indowed with another manner of juice? and therefore whereas flesh is forbidden in Lent, yet Fish are permitted. It may by many places both of Lib. de victus rations in morb. a^utis, etc. Hippocrates and Galen evidently appeare, that the antient Physitians fed their patients more with fish than flesh. Besides, when as the sicke loathed their hony water and ptisan, Galen allowed them rockie fish boiled in water, prepared with leekes, dill salt, and a little oile Lib. de sanit. tuend^ Cardan, in the Diet of the Diseased, preferreth fish before flesh; and that because they are of a cooler quality, moisten more, and nourish lesse. And that the Arabian Physitians allowed to their patients the frequent use of fish, it may by Lib. Averroes appeare. Their manner was to fry them in oile, by which manner of food their opinion was, that the liver was much strengthened. Mercur. v^^iar lect. libr. 2. cap. 25. A late Writer is of opinion, that most of the antient Physitians used to feed their patients with fish rather of custome, than that they esteemed them better than flesh. And this may yet the better appeare to be true, in that the Easterne people, and the Greekes especially, used, and doe yet at this day, very frequently use fish; as is by Pellonius observat. libr. 2. a learned Physitian, who, of late yeeres, travelled into those countries, well observed. But if wee shall in even scales weigh both flesh and fish, we shall finde that flesh doth farre surpasse fish in good and wholesome nourishment, and that even by the testimony of Lib. de affection. Hippocrates himself. Fish indeed, saith he, in the same place, are a light meat, both boiled and broiled, both by themselves and with other meat. And yet they differ thus among themselves: fish of ponds and pooles, the fattest especially, as river fish also, are harder of digestion: but Sea, fish living neere the shore, are lighter; and easier of digestion: and among them againe,Different nourishment which fish affoord. fish boiled are easier of digestion than rosted or broiled. And therefore in case of restoring strength, feed the sick with the former: but if thou wilt either keepe the sicke at a low ebbe, or yet abate some of his strength, feed him with the

latter, which are lighter and nourish lesse. Flesh therefore beeing wholesomer than fish, yeelding a more laudable nourishment to the body, they are rather by way of permission, to satisfie their languishing appetites, then otherwise allowed sicke people; and that even in Fevers,What fish best for the use of the sicke. where we affect a moistening diet. But then if may in the next place bee demanded, what fish are best for the use of the sicke? All fish are either bred in fresh waters or in the Sea. Sea-fish againe, are either such as frequent the shore, called littorales: or else live most among rockes, called Pisces saxatiles; or else they live in the depth of the maine Ocean, callen therefore Pelagici. Lib. de euch. and cach. Galen preferreth sea-fish before fresh-water fish: and againe among sea-fish, those who live among rockes; as the sole, sea-perch, and the like, he accounteth best. Neither yet are such as live in the maine Ocean and neare the shore to bee misliked. That kinde of fish, saith Lib. 2. cap. 18. Celsus, is lighter that liveth among the rockes, than among sand; and againe, that which liveth among the sand is lighter, than that which liveth among mud and slime. And therefore fishes living in lakes, ponds, pooles, or rivers, must needes bee inferior to the former.What river-fish best. And yet notwithstanding fishes living in cleere and rocky rivers, and which have a quicke current, are not to bee misliked: such as are the Pyke and pickerell, the Perch and carpe. The Gonion especially, called the river smelt, may as safely as any fish be allowed the sicke. Galen would have all his fish prepared with his white broth,Preparation of fish in antient times. as he termeth it, being made, as wee mentioned before, with faire water, dill, leekes, and a little salt. But since Galens time the case is much altered, and our European palats have since that time well improved their sense of tasting.Preparation in our times. In acute diseases especially, a tart sowre taste gives our patients best content. And for this purpose we use, not without good reason, the juice of a Lemmon, as also of a sowre Orange, a soveraine good sauce in all Fevers, infections and contagions especially, both unknowne in Galens time. And for a corrective in all fish sauces, pepper and salt are with us in most frequent use and request, the former not then so much by him used. In France,Mushell broth made with the yolke of an egge. I remember, there was a frequent use of a broth made of mushels with the yolke of an egge, made tart with verjuice of sowre grapes, which pleaseth the palat well, and is not impertinent for a weake stomacke, whereof in my fever I made now and then a triall.



CHAP. XII.

Of the Drinke of the diseased, and first of Water, with the frequent use therof in antient times, whether, and how now to be exhibited, and how before to be prepared, and how to supply the defect thereof, where it is not to be admitted.

WHat cruelty it were, after so many and various sorts of meat, it may be, scorched with sealding heat in the heighth of a Fever, without a comfortable refreshing with that so much desired drinke, those who have beene scorched in this purgatory can best tell: and therefore with the assistance of the Almighty, I purpose to dwell a little upon this so usefull and profitable a point.(...). And how usefull and profitable the handling of this point is, may from hence easily appeare, that many times the stomacke refuseth all manner of sustenance whatsoever, especially in great weaknesse and acute diseases, and yet drinke is seldome out of season. And in this same particular, we see by experience, it is a hard matter to make the sicke keepe within compasse. But because all times are not alike fit for drinke, therefore must we be a little more circumspect in the choice of the time when it is fittest for the sicke to drinke. And therefore when the time is not fitting, wee must acquaint the sicke, saith Decendus est aeger, (...) in potione (...) ^bo indugere, (...) cap. 6.Most opportu^e time for drinke. Celsus, that when the fit is over hee shall drinke, and that as abstinence from food will shorten the fit, so when the fit is over past, the lesse he now drinke, the lesse desire shall he have after to drinke. But because often times little or no food serveth the sickes turne, therefore must wee be the more carefull to gratifie them in their drinke. Now, as for the time, if election may have place, wee are to make choice of that time when he goeth to rest. Lib 8. cap. 9. Sitis mendosa. A fal^e thirst. Celsus in another place, would have the sicke in the night time to rest, and neither to eat nor drinke, if it be possible, and drouth be not too urgent, in which case hee would not have the sicke too much tormented with thirst. But because sometimes the mouth and the throat are drie, and crave drinke, when as the internall and inferiour parts are plentifully supplied with moisture; which is that we call sitim mendosam, or a false thirst, as there is also a false appetite; therefore it wil not be amisse sometimes to wash the mouth and throat with a little cold drinke, sometimes with a little faire water, and a few drops of wine vineger, or some such other liquor; and sometimes some preserved or conserved barberries, raspes, ribes, some lemmon sliced and sugred, or the like acid things; and sometimes a stewed acid prune, keeping the stone in his mouth, as the manner is, or any other like art may be used to deceive this counterfeit thirst. But when the house is now all on a fire, we must needs have some liquour to quench this heat, and extinguish the fire: even so when this house of mans body is all on a fire,

wee must needs have some moisture to quench the same. Now what this must be,Water the most antient and common drinke. is our purpose here to discusse. The most antient drinke, and most common to all living creatures is water, of the which, as in generall usefull to all, and in particular, as serving for drinke in healthfull persons hath beene already spoken. Now we are to speake of it as it serveth for the use of the sicke, and whether it bee usefull for all or not?Water very frequent among the antients. The use of water we read to have been very frequent among the antients, and especially the Guidian and Rhodian Physitians used it much, and that chiefly in acute diseases; whom therefore Lib. de diaeta acut. Hippocrates reproveth for not distinguishing the causes of diseases, which may often alter our purpose of exhibiting water to drinke in acute diseases, especially where there is a burning Fever proceeding of choler. And this he there illustrateth by the example of the inflammation of the lungs, where he affirmeth, that neither staieth it the cough, nor maketh spit up eafilier; but in a cholericke constitution is altogether converted into choler: and besides, is hurtfull to the nether parts about the stomacke, overthrowing the whole body, especially if dranke fasting. If there bee any inflammation of the liver or spleene, it increaseth the same, swimming and floting in the stomacke, descending slowly, being hard and not easy to bee concocted: for the which cause also it looseneth not the belly, provoketh not urine, nor futhereth any excretion. And Gal. in commen Galen himselfe also confirmeth this same opinion, adding, that when as Hippocrates perceived the harmes and mischiefes proceeding from the drinking of water, abstained from the use of it in all acute diseases, and betooke himselfe to drinks made of hony and water, of honie and vineger, and sometimes to wine. And with them yet agreeth Augerius Ferrerius in castigat. pract. a late Writer, who out of divers places of both these Authors compared and parallelled together, mainteineth, that in acute diseases water is altogether hurtfull. And of the same opinion is likewise Mercur. variar. lect. lib. 2. another learned Physitian, yet with this qualification, that if a small quantity of water be added to a great quantity of choler, it is quickly converted into choler: but a great quantity of water drunke, tempereth and allaieth the heat of the choler, and so overcommeth it, whereas a small quantity increaseth this humor, being turned into the same. Trallianus. Another antient Physitian notwithstanding controlleth this opinion of Hippocrates,How water is to bee exhibited without hurt. and affirmeth the quite contrary. But to compose this controversie, our Authors meaning is to be understood of water actually cold, which indeed in pectorall diseases, and for the breast it selfe is very hurtfull, and hindereth expectoration: but being once boiled, it groweth thinner and more subtile, and then onely fit in pectorall diseases to further expectoration. And it cannot be denied, that cold water is very profitable and usefull in acute diseases, as may even by divers other places both of Hippocrates and Galen appeare:What things in the use thereof to bee considered. and besides, most of our antient and moderne writers with one unaminous consent approve of the same. But in the use thereof wee must diligently consider, both the nature of the disease, and constitution of the Diseased. And it is the saying of the same Lib. de acre, aquis and tocis. Hippocrates; whose bellies are hard and apt to bee inflamed, they are to drinke the lightest and purest water: but whose bellies are soft, moist and phlegmaticke, such are to use hard, thicke and somewhat saltish waters, subsalsis is his word. Now water is not in all diseases

to be used after one and the same manner. In burning Fevers, water is to be drunke cold, in pectorall diseases, a little warmish. Now, that it was familiar in antient times to give cold water to drink in hot acute diseases, I shall make it appeare. Lib. 9 meth, etc. Galen himselfe findeth fault with Erasistratus and his followers for denying cold water in burning Fevers. And againe, for the same cause 7 Meth med. reproveth Thessalus, and braggeth, that hee hath often cured distempered hot stomackes with drinking cold water, yea, even sometimes cooled with snow it selfe. And againe, in 10 Meth. another place hee cureth that sort of Fever, called Ephemere or Diaria, that is of one day, by this same meanes. And in the same booke, by this onely meanes hee preventeth this same disease. And in Lib. de victa in acut. comment. 4. another place giveth us yet warning, that this is a remedy fit for any sort of Fever, providing it be drunke in great abundance. Erastus Antipara^. Part. 4. A late German Physitian also braggeth how many fevers hee hath by this meanes cured; and I know it will seeme no strange thing to heare a Amat. Lusit. centur. 4. curat. 14. centur. 1. curat. 3. Portugall relate what cures he hath by this meanes performed, as in his centuries is at length to be seene. Neither is it my purpose to spend time, and increase the bulke of this booke by relating of such stories. And it is not only commended in all ordinary acute diseases, but even in maligne and pestilent Fevers also, as witnesseth Lib. 3 cap. ^. Celsus, and is the opinion of the Arabian Physitians, who all seeme to have borrowed it of Lib. 7. epid. in aegrot^ 7. qui suit meton. Hippocrates, who relateth the story of one sicke of a pestilent Fever, who having drunke great store of cold water, and cast it up againe, recovered presently his health. And besides, the same Libr. 1. cap. 6. Celsus in fluxes of the belly, and in all defluxions proceeding of choler, commendeth this as a soveraine remedy. The point then being reasonably well cleared, it resteth to be considered, how it is to be exhibited.6. Epidem. How water is to be prepared for the use of the sicke.Hippocrates, in that hot countrie would have the drinke for the diseased to be exposed to the night aire, that so it might receive the morning dew, which might increase the coldnesse thereof: but because this procureth to it some acrimony, some would have other meanes tried; as salt-peter, snow, etc. Concerning the which, wee have sufficiently spoken heretofore. But I would not have any such extraordinary actuall frigidity by any such meanes in this case procured, it being so prejudicial to heath, howsoever, peradventure at the first not so sensibly perceived. Now, in the exhibition of water to the sicke, two things are to be considered, the fit and convenient time when, and the quantity thereof. The time is either generall,In the exhibiting of cold water, what things to be considered to wit, the course of the disease, or particular, the exacerbation or paroxysme, which we call the fit. Concerning the generall time, all are not of one mind: for 11 Meth and commen. lib de victu acut. Galen, and our Greeke Writers, would have us wait for signes of concoction in the urines and other excrements. The Rhas. libr. 1. divis. ca. 148. Averih. collect. lib. 7. cap. 8.The generall time. Arabian Physitians are of another minde, and would have us give store of cold drink in the very beginning of the disease. It is indeed very certain, that better it were to wait for signes of concoction, if the fever were not violent: but in extremity of heat, and for feare of further inconvenience by meanes of too long absteining, it is better to yeeld to an inconvenience than to a mischiefe. True it is indeede, that drinking of cold water before signes of concoction, may somewhat prolong the disease, and make the humour grosser, and more crude: but againe, this scalding heat

would parch up the humours of the body before these signes of concoction. And therefore 10 Meth. Galen sometimes fore-seeing this danger, was forced even in the beginning of the paroxysme to take this course. As for the particular time,Particular time. in intermittent Fevers, it is by Lib. de diaeta acut. Hippocrates himselfe determined, while as he willeth us in the fit to absteine from all manner of food: and if hee forbid food, why not drinke also? since that by much drinking in the beginning of the fit, wee see it prolonged. While the feet are yet cold, wee are to absteine not from suppings only, but from all manner of liquid substances, saith the same Hippocrates, and so the common currant runneth, that the sicke should not drinke during the fit, and yet are not all of this minde. And there is a Ioubert des erreurs populaires partic. 2. cap. 7. Contre ceux qui ne permetient aux f^bricitans de boire durant, leur acces, etc. learned late Writer, who would not have the sicke altogether debarred from drinke during the fit. And although, saith hee, Hippocrates willed us during the fit to absteine from all food, even from suppings also, yet must not this be extended to drinke. And Galen himselfe, in the heighth of a burning Fever, ordeineth a good draught of cold water: and the fit of an intermitting Fever is correspondent and answerable to the whole duration and continuance of continuall Fevers. As for my part, as I would not be too rigid in denying any reasonable gratification which might not prove prejudiciall to the patient; so would I not be too servile and obsequious without some great necessitie, it being most commonly seene, that if wee give an inch, they will take an ell. Besides, there is difference betwixt our bodies here, and the French in the South parts of that Kingdome where this Author lived: and both in regard of the ambient aire, and their ordinary diet and drinking of wine, their bodies in any fever must needs admit of a higher degree of cooling, than our moist foggie phlegmaticke bodies in this our climat. But if any particular individuall patient should be thus by excessive heat scorched up, as I should not my selfe be too rigid,The quantity. so I wish others to be wise. It resteth in the next place to define the quantity, which would seeme to be controverted, some allowing of a great draught at once, and some againe, would have drinke taken by degrees. It is by the most, both Greeke and Arabian Physitians mainteined, that the sicke may drinke, ad satietatem; even to satiety. But Proct. 57. sect. 1. Aristotle seemeth to be of another minde, and it seemeth, it was the custome of some Physitians of his time:Obiect. for, saith he, Physitians use to give cold drinke by degrees, whereof he rendreth this reason; that being thus drunke by degrees it moisteneth more than drunke plentifully and at once: even as wee see soft showers moisten more than great dashes of raine.Answere. I answer, that wee intend not here so much humectation, as sudden extinction of this exorbitant scorching heat: for even as we see in Smiths forges, that a little water kindleth the fire, and maketh it burne faster; even so doth a little drinke rather increase the heat of the fever, than extinguish it. Now, because so great a quantity of cold water, if it should long lodge within the body, might breed some inconvenience, it is therefore by Physitians appointed, that the sicke should cast it up againe, as both by De d^^ta acut. Cels. lib. 3. cap. 7. Hippocrates, and many other Authours may appeare. And Lib. 5. epid. in another place relating the disease and death of the wise of one Antiochus in Larissa, to the end of his long discourse subjoineth this, that it seemed shee might have lived, if shee could have drunke

store of cold drinks, and cast it up againe. But now, to come home to our owne country wherein we live, and to see how the premisses may agree with us, I thinke it will not be impertinent. It is then to be observed,Accommodation to our owne countrie (...) climat. that all those countries wherein the Greekes and Arabians lived, were very hot, and the inhabitants thereof much naturally addicted to drinking of water, their wine being there too strong for ordinary drinke, as it is in many parts of Europ even at this day, where the vulgar drinke most water, or mingled with a little wine, and therefore in time of sicknesse cannot so much offend them. But with us water is not so usuall for ordinary drinke, and therefore might more wrong our bodies. Besides, water is hurtfull to weake stomackes, whose bodies abound not with blood, or yet are troubled with any tumour, or inward inflammation, and oppressed with tough and crude clammy humors.Small beere with i^ in stead of water allowed the sick, and so to be used. And therefore wee safely permit the use of small beere, which neither indangereth the body, if not cast up againe, neither can it much wrong the body by sudden overcooling of the same. Besides, the boiling correcteth the crudity; the barly is good in all acute diseases, as after shall appeare; and the hoppe openeth obstructions of the inward parts. If the patient, after a good draught can cast it up againe, it will doe him good: and if not, it will finde a vent some other way, as being farre more penetrant than water. And as for the benefit might by casting it up againe be procured, it may by meanes of a convenient vomit easily be effected, which may by a discreet Physitian be according to severall circumstances accomodated. But if the heat were yet very violent, and more cooling drinke be yet requisite, we are not unfurnished of variety of distilled waters, whereof we can easily compose such variety of cooling juleps, with the addition of tart acid juices and liquors, as may give content to the nicest and daintiest palats. And wee are not unfurnished of barly waters, posset drinkes of severall sorts, and many others, whereof we purpose shortly to make mention. And yet, if wee would make use of water in fevers, I see not but it might be very well,How water may safe liest of us be used. and to good purpose used. I would have then pure spring water well boiled, and afterwards well cooled againe, and then made tart with a spoonfull or two of good white-wine vineger, or some drops of the acid spirit of vitriole, some barberries, or the like. This would prove a soveraine good cooling and wholesome drinke in all hot fevers whatsoever, contagious or others: and the poorer sort might reap as much benefit by this, as any other drinke.



CHAP. XIII.

Of warme Drinke, and whether it be usefull or no.

WHat hath hitherto beene spoken concerning cold water, and the many waies were used to coole it its hot countries, to please the palate, wil easily finde credit with a vulgar understanding,What thirst is: Hot drinkes have bin in use of old. hot drinke being of no living creature whatsoever desired, and cannot therefore be naturall: for thirst is nothing else but an earnest desire of a cold and humid substance. Now, de facto, that there were such hot drinkes in use among the antients, if we should deny, yet many Authors will make the truth thereof appeare. But whether this now used in sicknesse or in health, or both; as likewise de iure whether usefull for the body or no, resteth now to be discussed. It hath beene an usuall speech among people, that wee ought to drinke as hot as our blood, and that for feare, lest naturall heat by cold drinke be quite extinguished. And it would seeme that the antient Romans had this custome in frequent use: for wee read that Dio (...). in Rome there were shops where such hot drinkes were sold; called therefore Thermopolia,Thermopolia in Rome, place^ where hot drinkes were sold. as may appeare by that the Emperour Claudius discharged this custome, and tooke quite away all such places. And againe, Caius Caligula put to death a Master of one of these shops, for selling of this warme drinke, during the funeralls of his wife Drusilla. And from this warme drinke was the Emperour Tiberius nick-named Biberius Caldius mero.Fiberius Cal^ius mero. And in great families, one of the servants had the charge of fetching such warme water, which was alwaies in a readinesse to be sold, the which, if he brought too late, his punishment was 300 stripes. And that the Romans had it in ordinary use, especially at their suppers, when as they fed most liberally, may also by many places of the old Quando vocatus adest calid^ frigidaque minister. luven.Caldam poscis aquam sed nondum frigidalenit: Alget adhuc nudo clausa culina soco, Mat. Poets appeare. And the old comicke Poet In Vers. in Trinummo, Rudente, in pseudolo. Plantus make thereof frequent mention, and many other Authors, whom for brevity I here passe by. Stu^k Anntiqu con^^^. libr. ^. cap. 6. ex (...). Iud. A late Writer rendereth a reason why some of the Easterne nations, as namely the inhabitants of China and Iapan use warme drinke, and yet live long, and in good health, to wit, that by reason of the extreme heat of the ambient aire, their stomackes and inward parts are cold, and therefore, to warme them within, use this warme drinke. (...) ex (...), tem ex Athen. 8 Di^noso^. Others againe, used this warme drinke onely for wantonnesse, to make them cast up their meat, and so fill their stomacke againe with fresh food: the which, the same Authour also out of some antient Writers relateth, and that this was a common custome among the Rhodians. Mercur. ^ariar. lect. (...). 1.Frigida non d^crit, non decrit (...). Some againe were of opinion, that the antients never dranke warme water of it selfe, but mingled with their wine. At least, it seemeth it was the custome of some, as likewise that nothing

might be wanting at a great and sumptuous feast, as the Poet intimateth unto us. Idem Stuck. ex (...). Some againe thinke that although they warmed their water, yet that they let it coole againe before they either drunke it, or mingled it with their wine: at least it seemeth it was the custome of some, as of some others, to warme both their water and their wine, and then to coole them being so mingled before they dranke them. Lambi^. and Turne^. in praed. Plauti loc. referente eodem Stuckio ibid. Some learned men are also of opinion that these warme drinkes were not alwaies water, but some other sweet artificiall drinkes, and which people out of wantonnesse were wont to drinke: as is the custome both in high Germanie and the Low-countries to repaire in a morning to certaine shops where strong waters are sold, whereof they drinke some, being mingled with sugar or sweet sirup.Cold drinke is best and most usefull. But certaine it is, the best course is to drinke our drinke cold, as it is in its owne nature: and if in extreme cold, as in frosty weather, or any otherwise be by extreme cold drinke offended; then may they qualifie this extreme quality, either by putting a warme tost into it, or otherwise abate the extremity of the cold, but in no case to drinke it hot. And yet we see, that even among our selves we have a custome sometimes to drinke warme wine, burning it with spices, as is supposed,Burning of wine whether better for use than other wi^e* to qualifie the heat and strength of the wine, and so drinke it warme. But in my opinion, this is a wrong both to the wine and themselves also: burning away the spirit, which is the life of the wine, they procure unto it an accidentall and adventitious heat, more hurtfull to the body, than the naturall heat of the wine it selfe. And besides, although it be often used in cold weather, yet to drinke it so actually hot is nothing so good, the wine howsoever it be actually cold, yet doth it alwaies by a potentiall heat warme the inward parts.
But let us now see whether warme water were in use with the sicke or no?Whether warm drink be useful for the sicke It would seeme to bee more usefull for the sicke than for the whole, and the Arabian Physitians administer it in pectorall diseases, by reason cold drinke is an enemy to all the pectorall parts. And an Cels. lib. 3. cap ^. antient Roman Physitian commendeth it in all Fevers. Trallianus and Paulus Aegineta. Others commend it in that Fever called diaria, or of one day. Besides, the Greeke Physitians used it ordinarily in diseases of the reines. But yet that it is not so good for the stomacke, cannot bee denied.Warme drinke in use with us also. And although it be not now the custome with us to give our patients warme-water to drinke, yet upon divers occasions we use also warme drinks* as warme posset drinke to further the operation of vomits, and others to provoke sweat. And howsoever we use not to exhibite this warme water, as did many of the antients; yet because we are accustomed for the sickes use and benefit to boile our water with addition of some simples, something I will say concerning this point. Water boiled is more subtill and of a more sudden penetration,Boiled water. than crude as it commeth naturally out of the earth. The antients boiled it either with the heat of the Sunne, or of the fire. And the Persian and Aegyptian Kings were wont to boile their water at the he at of the Sunne, were it never so thinne and pure in it selfe. With us we have in use a double boiling of water: the one by the heat of

the fire in ordinary vessells,Distillation (...) us in frequent use, to the antients unknowne. the other by way of distillation to the antients unknowne. Which of these two wayes is the best, we are now to inquire. Our Physitians are for distilled water, and must needes be the best. Indeed boiled water is to bee preferred before the crude, and is farre more familiar for the stomacke: but in this, distillation hath the preheminence,Distilled waters to be preferred before others. that whereas by decoction many thinne parts are evaporated, this is here avoided. And indeed by distillation all uncouth taste, if any, is removed, and by reason of this refining and attenuation, it will also keep a long time without putrefaction. But this point is so cleere, that I shall not need to prosecute it any longer. And although we are not accustomed to distill ordinary water, yet is it very frequent with us to distill waters out of simples of all sorts, both hot and cold, whereof here to speake is not now my purpose. Onely this one thing I adde, that whereas some object that waters distilled in stills made of metall, either are not so good by reason of some relicks of the mettall communicated unto them, or else have some smoakie or firie impression left behind in these waters: I answere, the first feare is frivolous, and builded on a false foundation, and the other may by care and diligence be much prevented. But if any be so curious and fearefull, they may have their waters distilled per balneum Mariae, in glasse stills, if they will be at cost. But it is the custome of many people,Needlesse feare of som conceived in the use of distilled waters. that they would fare well and pay little for it. Now before I finish this point, I must give warning to such as attend the sicke, that they doe not unseasonbly too much obtrude upon the sicke these their warme drinks, or suppings, wherein women doe very much exceed, and many times quite debilitate and overthrow their weak stomacks. And this shall for this particular now suffice: as occasion shall offer it selfe, I shall now and then touch upon some particular abuses and failings in this kind; and now I proceed to some other drinks, and first concerning wine, and whether the sicke may be suffered to drinke any.


CHAP. XIIIJ.

Of wine, and whether it may safly be administred to sicke? Of artificiall wines; of aqua vitae, usquebath, and other strong waters.

OF wine we have already spoke^ at great length and of all the severall sorts thereof, the right use and abuse, resteth now to say something thereof, as it hath relation to the sick. Of the excellent vertues of this king of liquors there is no doubt to be made; but yet the event is often doubtfull, whether it may prove a profitable medicine, or a deadly poison. And therefore Androcide^s sapientia claruo ad Alexandrum Magnum scripsit intemperantiam eius ^ohibendam sic scripsit. Vtinam potaturus rex, memento te bibere sanguinem t^rrae. Situti venenum est hominicicuta, ita and vinum. Quibus praecep is si ille obtemperavisset, profecto am^cos in temutentia non interemisset Plin lib. 14. cap. 5. Pliny relateth, that a famous wiseman called Androcides wrote good counsell to Alexander the Great, as an antidote against his intemperance: when thou art to drinke wine, O King, remember that thou drinkest the blood of

the earth: For as hemlocke is to man a poison, even so is wine. To which precepts if he had hearkened, he had not in his drunken fits imbrued his hands in his deerest friends blood. So that of it may truely bee said, there is nothing more conduceth to the strength of the body, not yet more dangerous delight than this, if not regulated according to reason. No mervaile then, if there ought to bee great caution and circumspection in exhibiting this to sicke folkes: and indeed there hath beene some alteration among Physitians, whether wine might safely bee exhibited to sicke people? For si^^e diseases are cured by contraries, and wine in the estimation of all Physitians is reputed hot, it will follow that to drinke wine, especially in hot diseases (for of others there is no controversie) is to increase the disease. In vita Alexandri magni. Plutarch writes that Alexander the great falling into a Fever, and drinking wine liberally, by that meanes died; howbeit we are not ignorant, others hold an other opinion concerning his death: and yet it cannot be denied, but wine might hasten his end. It may be then admired and wondered at, why De victu in a^utu. Hippocrates in Fevers and hot diseases permitteth the use thereof. Neither yet did In comment and alibi Galen in like cases deny his patients the use of wine. If the like care and caution they used in the exhibiting of it were observed, no doubt, it might be without feare yeelded unto. The wine they used was thinne,Wine may safely somtimes be exhibited the sicke. weake white wine, called by him vinum aquosum, or watery wine, much degenerating from the nature of strong hot wine: and there he findeth fault with the Guidian Physitians, who were altogether ignorant of the right use of wine; affirming, also that we may safely, even in a Pleuresie or inflammation of the lungs, exhibite such wines: providing, still there bee neither great headach; nor deliration or perturbation of mind; as likewise that the spitting up of tough phlegme bee not hindered, nor urine suppressed, etc. And a little after, thou must know that it will be lesse hurtfull to the bladder and upward parts, if it be thinne and waterish, as he termeth it: but better for the guts if it be stronger. It appeareth then plainely, that even in the opinion of Hippocrates such small wines might be used of the sick. And therefore these wines, which in comparison of others may bee called Vide Gal. sub finem lib. de euch and cacoch Circumstances considerable in exhibiting wine to the sicke. cold (of the which both Hippocrates and Galen are to be understood) are often without danger administred to sicke persons. But in the use thereof wee are diligently to consider, besides the quality, whereof we have already spoken, the quantity and opportune time of offering the same. The quantity cannot well be determined, yet must it be by moderation regulated, and severall circumstances not neglected. The fit and opportune time is by the same authors assigned, when signes of concoction appeare, or in the declining of the Fever. As likewise in a pleuresie or inflammation of the lungs, the matter being now concocted, and the inflammation abated; and by this meanes expectoration is furthered, not hindered. Something notwithstanding, is to be yeelded to custome and old age. If any from their youth bee brought up with wine, they will hardly admit of any other drinke, neither will the stomacke commonly admit of any other liquor. But heare what Pliny saith concerning this same subject. Quod ad febrium aegritudines attinet, certum est non dandum in febre, nisi veteribu^ aegris vinum, nec nisid ^ clinante morbo. In acutis vero periculis nullis nisi qui manifestas remissiones habeant, and bas noctu potius. d^midia enim pars periculi est noctu: hoc est spesomai bibentibus, nec a partu abortuve: nec a libidine aegrotantibus, nec in capitis doloribus, nec quorum accessiones cum frigore extremitatum fiant: nec in febri tussientibus, etc. Et paulo post, dari utique non nisi in cibo debet, nec a somno, nec praecedente alio potu: hoc est utique sitienti, nec nisi in desperatione summa, etc. As concerning Fevers, saith he, it is certaine we ought never to give wine in that disease, but to such as bee of good yeeres, and that in the declining of the disease onely.

And in acute diseases to none but such as have manifest remissions, especially in the night time, the halfe of the danger being in the night time, that is, hope of sleepe to such as shall then drinke. It must therefore be given onely with meate, neither after sleepe, nor yet after any other drinke, that is onely taken when the diseased is dry, and almost in the case of greatest extremity, all hope almost now failing us. In such places then where such smal wines grow, as in the Ile of France about Paris, and in the countrey of Xantonge, especially about Rochell,Plin. lib. 28 cap. 2. they may freely give the diseased such smal wines without any danger at al. And of such a thinne acid, and somwhat tartish wine, composed of most white grapes, and a few red, I my selfe made a triall in a double tertian during my abode in France. This they cal couleur dupesche, or peach coloured wine from the colour of the peach flowre or bloome:Wine called couleur du pesche. and this wine mingled with water did both quench thirst without any apparent heat, and provoked both sweat and urin. But let us now draw nearer home, and see whether wine may be allowed our sicke? It is not unknown that our cold moist climat bringeth not this noble liquor of the grape to any maturity or perfect ripenesse, so that whatsoever wine we use,Accommodation to our climat. we are beholden to our neighbour countries for it: besides, that wine not being our naturall drinke in time of health, is neither in time of sickenesse of us to be used, especially in hot acute diseases. And our wines are commonly so strong, that it is not fit to administer them to sicke folkes;VVhat wine with us fittest. howbeit if any, I thinke our Rhenish were the safest and fittest, if it were free from brimstone, or such other trash, wherewith our vintner,Beere better for our sicke than wine. wine-brewers doe oftentimes marre our best wines. But God of his singular goodnesse hath furnished us with a wine befitting our owne countrie and climat, which being also in ordinary use in time of health, may freely and without any danger be allowed the Diseased in time of sicknesse, But because in imitation of wine, this our northern wine (for so I may cal it) wee are likewise furnished with divers sorts, differing in strength one from another, we may, according to the nature of the disease and constitution of the diseased, allow the sicke such as shall be thought most fitting. But in acute diseases the smaller the beere be,In acute diseases the smaller the better. it is so much the better; provided it be neither too new, too stale, nor taste too much of the hop, which will make it more heady and hotter. Let people therefore beware of their march beere and strong ale in all such infirmities, which may as much offend their bodies,Erroneous opinion of the vulgar, esteeming strong drinke a Panacea or catholick medicine against all diseases. as strong wines doe others in hot countries. But in any case, let this beere be very cleere, and not thicke and muddy. Most of our ordinary people, in the country especially, are perswaded, that wine and strong drinke will recover all diseases whatsoever, bee they never so hot and acute. And a bottle of good wine is commonly the first physicke they send for to the next market towne. But many times before their recovery, they are forced to their cost to recant their former erroneous opinion, and often cry a too late peccavi.
Artificiall wine.Now besides naturall wines made of the juice of the grape onely, there bee also severall sorts of artificiall wines made for divers uses: some made with purging ingredients to purge the body, and so for divers dayes to be drunke, according as the Physitian in discretion shall thinke fit, and the strength of the patient, and nature of the disease

shall suffer. Some, againe, are appropriated for other uses: as for strengthening of the stomacke, opening of obstructions, and innumerable others. But because these artificiall wines are commonly to best purpose made with new wines, when they are new prest out of the grape, therefore wee are deprived of the benefit of making such artificiall wines. In stead of them, wee use to boile in our new wine,Diet drinkes made of ale or beere. our wort I meane, such ingredients as we thinke fitting for that we intend; either purging simples or others: as sage, wormewood, etc. And thus wee make severall sorts of diet drinkes, and ales, for severall ends and purposes. But amongst many others,Scurvy grasse ale. Scurvy-grasse is good a^ainst obstructions of the spleene, and accidentally cleareth the blood, and i^ therefore good against the Scurvy.Of Aquavitae, and other strong sublimated waters. there is a drink made with scurvy-grasse, much used by our Ladies and Gentlewomen in the spring of the yeere for clearing of their blood. Many, I am sure, make use of this drinke without any use or need at all, but only out of a wanton custome, and a certaine preconceived opinion of making them looke faire.
Out of wine is also extracted a noble liquor or spirit, called for the noble effects (as being esteemed the true balsame of a mans life) Aquavitae, or water of life. This liquour by many hath been much magnified, and no small commendations ascribed unto it, for the preserving and mainteining the life of man for many yeeres. Among many there is Savonatola tractati^ de aqua vitae. an Italian Writer, who doth exceedingly extoll and set forth the praises thereof, and relateth many histories of such as have by meanes thereof prolonged their lives for many yeeres.Historie. As one Physitian called Antonius Sapelius, who, after hee had atteined to 80 yeeres of age, by the use of this liquor, lived yet 22 more.Another. The like hee relateth of another famous Physitian called Iacobus Parmensis,Aurum potabile produceth but few witnesses of its efficacy. who attributed his long life of 90 yeeres to the use of this noble liquor. But what? me thinks I heare some secret complaints of aurum potabile, as though it were somewhat thereby disparaged; by meanes whereof, notwithstanding, they say men may live multitude of yeeres. But I heare nothing but words, their smoakie promises not being seconded by answerable events, as I have already proved. But I wish people to be wise, and cautelous in the use of this or any other such hot fiery liquor. Those of whom this late alleaged Author made mention,Srongwaters sparingly and warily to be used. were Physitians, and of a good age, and no strangers to the state of their own bodies, and well able to judge what might best make for the preservation of their own healths, and so might find that benefit therby, which another might long seek, and at length, perhaps, for his labour,For whom most usefull. find a late repentance. If it be usefull for any, it is especially for old and cold moist constitutions; and so no question, moderatly used now and then, it may produce a marvellous good effect in spinning out of divers yeeres, the thred of mans life. And therefore let youth, and hot and dry constitutions, be very wary in the use of this, or any other such hot waters. There is also a spirit extracted out of our Northern wine, beere or ale, I meane,Spirit of ale or beere. the which, although inferiour to the former, yet may it well in time of neede, with good successe be used. That which is most commonly sold under this name of Aquavitae, and in most frequent use,Ordinary aquavitae pernicious to the health of man. is nothing else but a liquour distilled out of the dregges and washings of ale and beere barrells, and might rather from the evill it breedeth in the body, be called, Aquamortis. The right spirit of wine, if it be as it ought,The right spirit of wine how to be discerned. will suffer drops of oile to sincke to the bottome, and will dissolve Campher:

besides, being once set a fire, it is quickly all wasted away. And such a liquor would be used onely in extremity, in swounding, and the like, and then but a very small quantity at a time. I deny not but it may be of good use also, which commeth somewhat short of this absolute perfection: howsoever, I advise thee, as thou lovest thy life and health, know well what water thou medlest with, and especially shunne such stuffe as I have already disclaimed. Somewhat milder than this Aquavitae is that strong water, wee commonly call Vsquebach, so much in use among the Irish, having for this same purpose some Liquirice and raisins of the Sunne, and withall some Cloves, Mace and Ginger. This is likewise cautelously to be used, and especially of cold phlegmaticke constitutions, and in a cold and moist constitution of the aire. But still beware of excesse, even in those whom it best befitteth. There are yet an infinit other varieties of strong waters, both simple and compounded,Great variety of stro^g waters. destilled both with wine, ale and beere, and take the denomination from that simple or simples wherewith they are distilled: as Wormwood-water, Balme-water, Cinnamon-water and the like; and they reteine the vertue of the simples whereof they are distilled, whereof we have at large already discoursed. Some of these waters againe, are compounded of many severall simples; and take the denomination either from that which is most predominant; as the Theriacal-water: or else from the sublime and extraordinary effects; as aqua coelestis, aqua mirabilis, etc. and sometimes from the Author also; as Doctor Stevens his water.Great danger in the too frequent use of these sublimate waters, especially in the yonger sort. But whosoever is too busie, or bold with any of these hot waters in ordinary use, either for furthering concoction, or otherwise, shall at length finde them produce the like effect, as lime laid to the roots of trees; which howsoever it hasten the fruit for the present, yet killeth it the trees in a short time. And this I have in some of my very good friends and patients often found too true; with whom I wish sound reason might have more prevailed than their owne disorderly appetites. I have observed in some, who had these hot liquors in too frequent use, as they pretended, to warme their stomacks, that at length they came to this pitch, that whether they drunke any of these sublimate waters, or the best sacke or other wine whatsoever, they found no more heat in it than of a cup of cold water powred downe their throats. But this was not all the harme from thence ensuing, but was after accompanied with an extraordinary great distempered heat, both in the liver and kidnies; and in some an irrecoverable scirrbus in the liver, a disposition to a dropsie, and in conclusion, an untimely death. I could easily, at great length, dilate and discourse largely upon this one point, but that I hasten to the other matters which yet remaine to handle.



CHAP. XV.

Of divers drinkes made of hony: mulsum, mulsa, or hydromel, and oxymel, with the various waies of composition, and their excellent vertues.

ALthough wee have already handled hony with the vertues thereof, and divers other things concerning this subject; yet now wee are to speake of it againe at more length, at least of some drinkes made thereof, of no small use in the Diet of the Diseased. And the praise of it may from hence appeare, in that the Land of Canaan was commended, and that by the Authour of truth himselfe, to be a Land flowing with milke and hony. Of this many excellent drinkes were made by the antients, which with us at this day are not in so great request. Howbeit even at this day, some nations, where hony is plentifull, make thereof some drinkes very usefull both in sicknesse and in health: as namely, the Polonians, Lituanians, or country of Lettow, and other territories subject to the Polonian Crowne, where good wine is scant, and good hony plentifull; and therefore in stead of wine use this drinke. And wee have already made mention of Metheglin, made in Wales. Now,Three sorts of drinks made of hone in use among the antients. of hony were made three sorts of drinkes, differing one from another: The first of those was called Mulsum, or a drinke made of hony and wine: another Mulsa, or Hydromel, a drinke made of water and hony; the third of hony and vineger, water sometimes being mingled therewith, and by them called Oxymel; at this day with us in no small request, in pectorall diseases especially. The first of these then is that which the antients called Mulsum, and so celebrated by that Roman Pollio, as wee have already mentioned. And that this was a very antient drinke, may by a Mercur. variar. lect. lib. 6. late learned Writer appeare, who proveth the same against Plutarch, who held it in his time to be but a new invention. His opinion hee proveth both by the authority of Homer and Hippocrates, who call this drinke (...). Of this drinke Plin. lib. 7. cap. 56. Pliny maketh one Aristeus a Thracian the author, and the which drinke he brought into that credit and reputation, that in these daies there was no sort of drinke in greater request, howsoever, now in our daies neglected. It was made of tart or sharpe wine and hony, taking its name a mulcendo, from mitigating and qualifying the sharpnesse and tartnesse of the wine. Pliny would have it made of old wine, as being easiliest incorporated with the hony. That this is that Oenomeli mentioned by Dioscorides, may by comparing that place of Pliny with his, easily appeare. 4 Sympos. Pro^^ ^. Plutarch writeth, that honie spoileth and corrupteth the wine, and may therefore be questioned, whether it be wholesome or no? I answer, that being new made, it is windy; but being well boiled, and

kept a good while, it becommeth a most wholesome drinke. And many, saith the same Pliny, have by the continuall use of this drinke, atteined to old age, as hath been already in Pollio instanced. This drinke is in some places of Hippocrates prescribed in pectorall infirmities. The likest to this drinke, is that famous Metheglin, so much used in Wales. Piacotonius lib. de cerevisia and mulsa. In some sea-cities of Germanie, they make this Mulsum, and mingle therewith many aromaticall simples. There was another drinke made of the same hony and water onely,Hydromel, and divers compositions thereof. and in no small request among the antients, called therefore Hydromel. Of this drinke, there were divers manners of composition: Libr. Dioscorides maketh it of two parts of old river water, and one part of hony boiled together, and set a long time in the Sunne. Loco nuper citat. Pliny composeth it of hony and raine-water long kept, boiling the water with the third part of hony, untill the third part of it were wasted away. There was also another drinke made of hony, in request among the antient Greekes,Apomell. called Apomeli, and was made of the hony-combes, washed and boiled in faire water. 4 De san. tuend. Galen maketh yet mention of another manner of composing this drinke; taking of vineger one part, of hony two parts, of faire water foure parts, and so boiled them, where no mention is made of the combes.How Hydromel or Mulsa was made among the Arabian Physitians. The Arabian Physitians made their Mulsa or Hydromel after this fashion. They tooke one pound of very good yellow hony, and not too old, which they boiled with eight times as much spring-water in an earthen or stone vessell, skimming them well, and boiling altogether at a great fire, and then straining it thorow a cleane linnen cloth. In Lib. de victu acut. Two sorts of it among the Greekes. Hippocrates, wee read of two sorts of this Mulsa, or Melicratum, one ravv, another boiled. The former was made of three parts of spring-water, or old raine-water, and one of very good hony well mingled together, and set a long time in the Sunne. The second sort which was boiled, was composed of the same quantity, but presently boiled to the wasting away of the third part. Besides, he maketh there two sorts of this drinke, according to the predominancy of the one or the other of these two: for when the quantity of water exceeded that of hony,Melicratum Aquosum, and sincerum. it was called Melicratum aquosum, but when there was greater store of hony than water, then it was call Sincerum Melicratum, or pure and plaine hony-water. In our daies, some make this drinke of good pure hony one part, and six times as much good spring water, well boiled and skimmed, till the fourth part be wasted away. To know whether it be sufficiently boiled or no,To know when it is boiled enough. put into it an egge, and if it swimme on the top, it is sufficient, but if it sincke to the bottome it is not. When it is tunned up, for better defecation and purging, in hot weather, especially in hot countries, it may be set into the Sunne for certaine daies. It may be about a quarter old before it be drunke. When it is very old, the use of it is condemned, even by Lib. 31. cap 6. Pliny himselfe. This drinke might be of good use in many infirmities of the body, of the brest especially, excepting alwaies hot and cholericke constitutions. It might be made tarter by meanes of some vineger, or some other acid or sharpe juice, provided alwaies it exceed not.
Oxymel, or sirup made of vineger.There was yet another drink made of hony, in no small request among the antients, called Oxymel, or sirup of vineger; the which is even at this day in no small esteeme and account. This drinke is both by

Lib. de diaeta acut. Gal. in commen and 8. meth and 11. m^th. Hippocrates and Galen highly commended and esteemed of; affirming it to bee of an opening and cleansing faculty, without any danger of heat; and that increaseth not the Fever, and yet openeth and cleanseth effectually, and that it is very usefull for all ages. A Augerius Ferrer^us in castigat. pract. late Writer affirmeth, that this is a very wholesome drinke, and may safely be used in all Fevers, and that there is no better drinke to quench extreme thirst. And Thaddeus Dunus in epist. medicinal. another saith no lesse in the commendation of it. Some differences of opinions there are concerning the composition of this drinke. Hippocrates maketh it of hony, vineger and water, not expounding the quantity of any one. 4 de san^t. tuenda. Galen mentioneth a threefold manner of compounding this drinke,Divers composition of Oxymel. but to none of them addeth he salt, as doth Dioscoride: Take of veneger one part, well skimmed hony two parts, let them boile with a gentle fire untill their qualities be well united together. With water it is thus made: for one part of hony, take foure parts of faire spring water, and let them boile over a soft fire, untill it yeeld skumme, and when a great part of the water is wasted away, then adde thereto halfe as much vineger as remaineth of the water, and boile them well, untill there be a firme union of all their qualities together. Thirdly, it is thus made: al the three are at the very first mingled together, taking for one part of vineger two parts of hony, and foure parts of faire spring-water, boiling them untill there remaine a third. This Hippocrates often mentioneth, though not alwaies under one name. We have the composition therof set downe in our late dispensatories. Iohann. Renod. institut. Pharmaceut. lib. 3. cap. 4. Some take one part of vineger, two parts of spring water, and foure of pure hony, letting them all boile untill they attaine to the forme of a liquid sirup, I meane not so high boiled as some sirups: for it will thus keepe well enough. Val. Cordus ex me^ antidoterio. Some againe make it after this fashion: take of good hony foure pounds, faire spring-water two pounds: let the water and the hony be boiled together untill the water be quite wasted away, and the hony well skimmed, and then adde thereto two pound of good sharpe wine vineger, and boile it to the thicknesse of an ordinary sirup. This oxymel or sirup of vineger is a very excellent medicine for expectoration, or cleansing and cutting tough phlegme stuffing up the pipes of the lungs, and exceeding good in many pectorall diseases. But many, by reason hony is not so pleasant to their palats, therefore they use in stead thereof sugar, which indeed is not so forcible, nor effectuall as the former: but we are falne into such times, wherein people are all for toothsomnesse, and little for wholesomnesse.Choice to be made of the ingredients of this drinke. In the composition of this drinke, there must a speciall care be had of the hony it is made of, that it be of the best, such as we have already described. The vineger would be of the best sharpe white wine vineger, if it can be had, and the water must be pure spring water, and approaching as neere as may be to our description of such water of best note.Divers compounded Oxymels are made of hony. Besides these ordinary Oxymels, there are yet some other compounded with divers ingredients, both purging and others: as with hellebore, with squills and the like, all which here to set downe were both tedious and needlesse; such as would make use of any such, may, as occasion and necessity shall require, have them prescribed by the learned and judicious

Physitian.Great error in the ordinary use of Oximel, and other expectorant medicines, But in the use of this, as in many other medicines, there is a great error in the ordinary use of it committed; and that by reason, the vulgar use it promiscuously in any matter whatsoever, distilled or falne downe upon the lungs, be it thicke or thinne; whereas in a sharp thinne tickling rheume this can doe no good at all, but rather harme. But because this is not the proper place to convince and confute these errors, this being spoken but by the way, I will here leave this point. Neither yet will I insist at this time upon any other compositions made of hony, it being only my purpose in this place to discourse of such drinkes as are made of hony, and by the way to give a taste, what was the opinion of antiquity concerning hony, and the high esteeme they had thereof, and how usefull a thing it is both in sickenesse and in health, howsoever in this degenerate and wanton age, wherein we now live, it be too much contemned and despised.


CHAP. XVJ.

Of divers drinkes made of barly, very usefull for the sicke, and in frequent request, as ptisan, barly-water, creame of barley; and wherein our formes differ, from those of antient times. Some thing concerning emulsions both almond milke, and others.

THis graine (barly I meane) in Greece hath been in no small esteeme and request, and that by reason of divers drinkes made therof for the use of the sicke.Temperature of barly. It is temperate in quality, in all likelihood and probability, howbeit 7 simplic. medica. 1 de alim. lib. de in victu a^ut. Galen maketh it cold and dry in the first degree. Howsoever, it is very fit and proper in Fevers and hot diseases, and that after severall sorts and fashions prepared. And besides, it participateth likewise of an abstersive or cleansing facultie, whereby it is to good purpose used in pectorall infirmities. Of this graine the antients made a water for the sicke, from thence called barly-water. And of the same graine was there yet made an other composition, which they called Ptisan. Of this Ptisan, Lib de victu in acut. and alibi.Ptisan what in old time, and what with us. Hippocrates maketh frequent mention. Of this now wee reteine the name onely, ptisan being nothing else (saith a Rond. instit. pharmaceut lib. 5. cap. 11. Pti^a^ made of divers graines. late Writer) but a drinke made of licorice, and a little barly, and sometimes without it. The ptisan in use among the antients, especially with Hippocrates, was nothing else, but that which we commonly call creame of barly, and served the sicke in stead both of meat and drinke. It was made of divers sorts of graines, both of wheat, rice and barly, etc. But that of barly for the sicke was alwaies in highest esteeme. And this diversity ministred occasion to Problem. 27. sect. 1. Aristotle to aske the question, whether Ptisan made of wheat or barly were the best for the use of

the sick?Whether ptisan made of barly or wheat be better? And Ptisan made of wheat was for these reasons preferr'd before that made of barly: first, by reason that such as eat bread of wheat are co^monly more vigorous and sound of body than those who use barlybread. Againe, say they, barly is harder of concoction than wheat. And thirdly, barlybread was never in so high an esteem, as that of wheat, but alwaies esteemed of farre meaner account. The answer is easy,Answere. that the comparison here is not absolute, but relative; having relation to the sicke. Indeed absolutely compared together, wheat doth excell the other; but in relation to the sicke barly is farre better, especially in Fevers and pectorall diseases, being more cooling and cleansing than the other, which indeed is rather harder to be concocted, and apter to ingender obstructions. And for this cause Hippocrates useth this most commonly in restorative diet, and that of barly in acute diseases. The manner of preparation of this antient ptisan or creame of barly, as we may call it, Gal lib de ptisana. How the antient Greeke Physitians prepared this ptisan or creame of bar^y. was after this manner: they tooke graines of barly full, perfectly ripe, neither too old nor too new; this they steeped a little in water, then beat it in a morter, to cleanse away the chaffe and husks, afterwards washed it and rubbed it with their hands, and afterwards let it dry: when they made use of it, for this ptisan, they tooke one part of barly thus prepared, and twelve parts of faire water, which they let boile at a soft fire while it swelled, and was boiled to a thinne pap, having lost all the windinesse, and being so boiled they gave it their sicke. Some added to this messe sweet new wine boiled, which they called sapa, and some a little hony, wheat or flowre; and sometimes a little oile, vinegar or salt. In many places of this kingdome there is commonly in use for this purpose, a certaine kind of ready prepared barly, to be sold in shops, called French barly, whereof both this cream of barly is commonly made, and whereof wee make use in our broths also, and barly-water.Manner of preparation with us. This barly we use to boile and shift twice or thrice the waters untill it colour them no more, and then boile it with a sufficient quantity of faire spring water (the proportion of the antients may be observed) and then straine it through a clean linnen cloth, adding thereto a little sugar or sugar-candy, and a little rose-water. To correct the crudity (especially in a weake stomacke, and it bee often to bee used) wee may boile with it some whole mace: or else when it is strained, we may adde thereunto a little small cinamon-water, which will both correct the crudity, and not overheat the body If some acid juice of lemmon or other shall be added thereunto, if need so require, thou mayest use thy discretion; in acute and maligne Fevers especially, but not in pectorall diseases. In defect of cinamon-water a little powder of cinamon may be used. In this decoction who listeth may also boile other cooling or pectorall herbs, according to the nature of the disease and party diseased: as violet leaves, strawberry leaves, succory, endive, agrimony, or the like. But beware the taste be not marred, lest the patient reject all; and boile no sorrell nor other acid or sharpe thing in it, especially if it be to be kept for oftner than once or twice: but the fresher it be, the better it is. This is very soveraine good in all Fevers and pectorall diseases, especially for young people, for hot and dry cholericke constitutions. But I will advertise

thee of one thing, that whereas there is an opinion held among many that no barly but this, they call French,How to prepare our owne barly to make this and other drinks made of barly. will serve the turne; our owne barly may bee easily so prepared, that it may very well serve our use. And to this purpose it may either be beaten in a bagge, as wheat is commonly ordered for frumenty; or else, which is the cheaper and lesse chargeable, provide a deep stone or wodden trough, wherein put a little quantity of rough barly with a little warme water, and then with a beetle with a long head for the purpose, beat it untill the husks come off: afterwards winnow it, still rubbing it with thy hands, and then let it dry, and when thou wilt use it, wash it in warme water, which thou maiest shift untill it looke cleane and white, and colour the water no more. And this may with a small labour, and I am sure with lesse charges, be made ready as often as need shall require. And this may be used whensoever we need the use of barly, either for this we have spoken already, for broth, barly water, almond milke, or any like use. And thus they prepare it in the north parts of this kingdome, in all the kingdome of Scotland, and in Ireland also, where they use much barly in their brothes, and for other uses also; and yet never make use of any but this.Orgemond, and what it is. And besides, in Scotland of this graine there is made a dish, which they there call orgemond; and is made of barly thus prepared, together with milke and hony, and is answerable to our frumenty here; but in my opinion farre wholesomer: and this is a dish, at most of the country merry meetings in no small esteeme there among them.
Barly-water.There was yet besides this they called a ptisan, a barly-water in use among the antients, wherof Lib. de diaeta acut. Hippocrates indeed maketh mention, howbeit setteth not downe the manner of preparation, no more then doth Galen explaining that place.Gal. in comm. To the Arabians therefore for this barly-water are wee most beholden, who used it much. Collectan lib. Oribasius maketh particular mention of the same, where hee would not have the barly prepared, as we have already set downe, but onely a little bruised, and twice washed in warme water, and afterwards boiled in a gallon of water till it was burst, ad crepaturam hordei. This liquor being strained was reserved for the use of the sicke,Barly-water of two sorts. and was called barly-water. Barly-water was in very great request among the Arabian Physitians, both made of whole barly,Of prepared barly two sorts. and of barly prepared and cleansed. That of prepared barly was of two sorts, as may bee collected out of Cap de pleurit. Preparation. Mesue, first thus: take of barly prepared and cleansed one pound, boiling it in twenty times so much faire spring-water, in an earthen glased pot, untill the halfe, or two parts of the water were wasted away: this they called a physicall barly-water. The other was thus made: take of barly as before well prepared, often washed in warme water, one pound which they let boile a wame or two in twenty times as much faire spring-water, and after this was cast away, they added againe as much more water, and let it boile untill the halfe of the water was wasted away; and this they called a physicall food. But the immoderate use of this barly-water is dangerous,Caveat concerning the use of barly water in cold and windy stomacks, especially, and in hypocondriacke melancholy, being it selfe also somewhat windy.Our barly-water. But by correction this may easily be amended, as wee have

said already. We seldome now use the decoction of barly alone, but with addition of other simples; as divers sorts of cooling herbes, and sometimes of opening roots and some prunes, sweetning it with sugar to liking: and wee may also adde some juice or sirup of lemmon, or some other acid juice; as some drops of the acid spirit of vitrioll or sulphure.Barly water for the poorer sorts. The poorer sort may make for themselves a decoction of ordinary barly a little bruised, boiling therewith some cooling herbes, and a sticke of licorice or two, and after it is strained adde thereto a little white wine vineger, and a sticke of cinamon; or else some whole mace may bee boiled in it. Or they may boile faire spring-water with some mace,Another drinks to be used in any Fever. or without, and afterwards adde a sticke of cinamon, and a little vineger and sugar, or else boile in it a little hony; and so may they make for themselves a wholesome and pleasant cooling drinke, which they may safely use in all hot diseases.
Besides these drinkes made of barly,Of emulsions or almond milke. wee have yet amongst us the frequent use of a drinke which was not used among the antients, made of sweet almonds in manner of a milke, and is therefore commonly called by the the name of Almond-milke. This milke is much used, in Fevers especially,In what cases most usefull. and in pectorall infirmities, being often also called by the name of emulsion. This drinke is sometimes made of water and almonds alone without any addition, and after sweetned with sugar; or else are boiled in the decoction many other ingredients. And howsoever Almonds bee in themselves a little hot, or rather temperate, yet being prepared, and made into an emulsion after this manner, they qualifie and moderate the heat of the body, and withall doe cut and attenuat tough and phlematicke humors in the breast,The quantity of the Almonds must be according as it is made thicke or thin, howbeit the vulgar make it co^monly too thick and fulsome, and further expectoration. And this emulsion serveth often in stead both of meat and drinke, and is often used, when as all other food is refused. And I thinke it often with us, supplieth the roome of that Ptisan so much and so often by Hippocrates commended; although wee have it also in use with us. But for the most part we use a decoction made with barly, cooling herbes, raisins of the sunne stoned, and sometimes in pectorall infirmities, a little licorice, and so make a decoction, whereof we make our almond milke. The barly may be of our ordinary barly without any other preparation,The manner of preparation. save a little bruising. The almonds are to bee blanched in warme water, and cleansed from their thinne skinnes (unlesse in some loosenesse, where we require astriction) and then beaten in a stone morter with a wooden pestell, the liquor by little and little added, and severall times squeezed out, untill all the milkie substance be expressed. And take heed the almonds be not too old, as being then too oilie; and withall let the liquor bee warme, when it is added to the almonds. Sometimes wee adde some seeds unto this emulsion,Addition of certai^ne seeds, and how to be used. as lettice or poppy-seeds, especially in long watching, where sleepe is wanting, and so give a draught of it towards bed-time. Sometimes we adde also some other cooling seeds, as melon seeds, cucumber seeds, especially in diseases of the kidnies; and then the greater seeds

must be cleansed from their skums, and so mingled with the almonds ready blanched, and beaten with them, and the other seeds mingled and beaten without any other preparation: and of these greater seeds we mingle sometimes a greater, and sometimes a smaller quantitie, and so of the others,Cautions to bee observed in emulsion. as necessitie requireth. In the sweetning of emulsions or almond milkes we are to observe this caution, that in Fevers we adde alwaies lesse sugar, for feare of increasing choler: but in pectorall diseases,They must not be too fulsome not too frequent. where there is no Fever, we may be the bolder. It is also in the use of these emulsions to be observed, that they be neither too frequent, nor yet too fulsome or thicke of the almonds; and it is best after the expression of the almonds, to give it a wame or two upon the fire, and then adde some rose-water to it, if thou wilt. The richer sorts,Some use to make the emulsions or almond milks with the decoction of flesh; but if the partie bee weake stomacked, it may make him loath both that and all other food. if they please, may make their emulsion all with rose-water or strawberry-water. If any acid thing, as juice or sirup of lemmons or the like be added, it must onely bee added to the draught the patient takes at one time; otherwise it would quickly sowre it all. The poorer sort may use a milke or emulsion like unto this made of the kernels of haselnuts or filberds blanched as are the almonds, and made with a convenient decoction of cooling herbs or other things, as wee have said already. There are yet besides these, divers other sorts of emulsions made without almonds, for divers intentions; as in pestilent and contagious diseases, made of many severall cordiall ingredients:Divers sorts of emulsions in time of need may be prepared. as namely, of the aforenamed seeds and others; as also of corall, pearle, amber, harts-horne, all extracted with appropriated decoctions or distilled waters, fitted and appropriated for that purpose, on the which I cannot particularly insist. And I have so much the longer dwelt upon these drinkes of the Diseased, in regard it doth so much concern the sick, as also in regard of the great neglect in this particular point, and the wrong and injury is thereby offered the sicke. Now concerning milke, and what is made thereof, if, and how it may bee administred to the sicke? and so I will finish this point of their meat and drinke.



CHAP. XVIJ.

Of milk of divers kinds, whether fit to be used of the Diseased? and what is the best, how to be used. As also of whey, posset-drinkes of severall sorts. Of butter and cheese and white meats.

FRom artificiall milke it is high time we come now to natural, there being at this time more frequently used both to nourish the body, and to alter and change the quality of the humors. Milke is milked from divers beasts: as from mares, asses, goats, ews,Several sorts of milk. cowes, etc. And womans milke is both used for the nourishment of her owne infant, and sometimes also sought for thein consumptions, as a principal restorer of decaied nature.Asses and Camels milke in use for some diseases. In Spaine they use Camels and asses milke both in consumptions and dropsies: and in old time sowes milke was also in request. Asses milke is yet in great request in those countries, where such beasts abound: as in France, Spaine and Italy. At this day the Tartars,Mares milke in great request among the Tartars. as well as the old Scythians, use little other diet either for meat or drinke but mares milke. The Leo Africanus* antient Numidians also used for their chiefe diet mares milke. And some particular persons have lived all their life time on nothing else but milke; as Sympos. lib. 4. probl. 1. Plutarch reporteth of one Sostrates. And Bruyer in lib. 1. de re cibar cap. ^4. a late Writer maketh mention of a maide living then in the Low-countries, sixteene yeeres of age, who from her nativite had never tasted of any food but milke. And Forest. schol ad observat. 5. lib. 4. another instanceth in a country-fellow in Holland, who in all his life time never used any sustenance but milke, and yet was very lusty and healthfull in body.Womans milke best and most temperate. The milke of all others most temperate, and best, is womans milke, which is used to bee suckt out of the breast, the which is the best way: for if it be but a little kept, it sowreth, and is not so apt to nourish. Of this milke Hippocrates maketh no mention, which may seeme somewhat strange. The best excuse wee can for this pretend, is to say, that he regarded not so much in milke this alimentary power, as the abstersive faculty, in cleansing the ulcers of the lungs. In goodnesse of nourishment next to it is thought to Ewes milke by some,Ewes milke. Goats milke. Cowes milke. Vse of asses milke in ulcers of the lungs. as being thickest and most nourishing, then next goats milke, after which followeth cowes milke, and after it mares milke, asses and camels comming in at the last. In abstersion and cleansing of the lungs, asses milke hath alwaies challenged the first place, and with us, next to it is goats milke, for camels milke wee cannot come by it. But of all others Cowes milke both in sickenesse and in health with us is most usuall and ordinary. And goats milke moisteneth much,Cowes milke with us most ordinary and familiar. and is not so hot as some imagine, who hold that the goat is never without a Fever. As

for asses milke it is thinner,Commendation of asses milke. more cooling and moistening than any of the other, and ingendreth no obstructions, as other milke doth; and is therefore more physicall. And concerning this milke, this much upon mine owne experience I can testifie, that during my long sickenesse in France,Historie. I found more benefit by a moneths use of this milke, than by all the other coolers I used: in so much that whereas before no drink could satiat my unsatiable drouth, I was with my mornings draught of this milke so refreshed, that I little regarded any other drinke for all that day following. But because cowes milke is with us in most frequent and common request, wee will bend our speech most to this kind of milke.The beast from whence the milke is milked. And because the goodnesse of the milke dependeth not a little upon the goodnesse of the beast from whence it is milked, we are therefore to consider the estate and disposition of the creature. A browne womans milke is accounted the best, even in the judgement of Hippocrates. The beast from whence milke is to bee milked, ought to be of an indifferent size of body, neither too fat or corpulent, nor yet too leane.The colour. And here the colour commeth also to bee considered. A blacke Cowes milke is by most esteemed the best, howbeit some like as well of a red or kindled coloured, as they call it. Some againe esteem browne beasts milke the best, as being of a strong constitution of body. But indeed none of these can come amisse, howbeit I thinke that of a blacke cow rather best than otherwise: but of white beasts, the milke is worst and weakest. The difference in the goodnesse of the milke is likewise taken from the goodnesse of the food the beast feedeth on.The food on which it feedeth. In the beginning of the Spring therefore, by reason the herbs are then moist and waterish, therefore the milke is then also thinner, and nourisheth lesse: it is better towards the latter end of the Spring and beginning of Sommer, and yet better in the midst of Sommer. In Autume it is thicker,In what time of the yeere best. and nourisheth farre more, although then, especially in Winter, it is not so physicall. The worst milke is that which is milkt from beasts feeding on graines, in such places where they brew much: as in some populous townes, where in the Wintertime they feed their beasts with graines; the which, although by this meanes it is more copious,The place where the beast feedeth. yet is it thinne, waterish, and of small value, as the beast likewise feeding on this food is the worse. Beasts feeding on high and hilly places yeeld farre better milke, than they that feed in vallies and moist places. In the goodnesse of milke wee are likewise to observe the age of it; that is, how long after the birth. For milke after the birth,The age of the milke. but a small space being betwixt them, is thicke, uncleane, and not so wholesome for use. Neither yet is that so good, that is very old, being too waterish, and therefore not so nourishing. That then betwixt both these extremes is the best. In the next place we are to consider the qualities and markes of the best milke. It ought then to be white in colour,Best m^l^e how to be discerned. of equall consistence, which being dropped on the naile standeth round and firme without dispersing, or spreading abroad. All which properties if they bee found in any milke, we may freely pronounce that it is good and wholesome. Asses milke wee must here except, which by reason of the thinnesse, cannot obtaine all these aforenamed properties.

In the next place wee are to consider for whom milke may be fit (since for all it is not so usefull) and for whom not?For whom it most sit. ^ac non propinand^m flatulentis, aut vent^^s ^arboruginis laborantibus, non siticulosis, n^c febriculosis, nec eruda and nidorosa rubiantibus aut ventriculi debilitate and impuritate donatis, Hippoc. aph 23. lib. 5 Diolcor. lib 2. cap. 4. Gal. lib. 11. simpl. It is therefore no waies good for such as are much subject to wind, and rumbling in their bellies, who have the forepart of their belly stretched out, and as it were pulled up, and obstructed; nor yet for such as are very thirsty, or are much inclined to head-ach, nor in Fevers, to weake stomackes, and such as use to belch up crudities, and often of an evill taste, or that are oppressed with weaknesse or impurity in their stomackes: but to such as are accustomed to this liquor, whose stomacks are strong and themselves free from any obstruction of liver, and spleene, etc. being free from the burthen of bad humours, and their stomackes neither too hot nor too cold: for in the former, the milke is quickly converted into choler, and in the later it is quickly curdled. But howsoever,H^rmes proceeding fro^ the too frequ^nt use of milke. it is good to be sparing in the use of it, unlesse thou have beene long accustomed to this food: for it is hurtfull to the eyes and teeth, and if the use thereof be too frequent, it ingendreth the stone in the kidnies and bladder. The diseased then, who is to use it,How, and with what preparat^on to be vsed. must first have his body by purging prepared, and then it must be taken in a morning fasting, lest by the admixture of other aliments, it be corrupted in the stomacke. After the taking of milke,After the use there^ what to be done. the patient is to absteine from all manner of other sustenance, untill such time as it be voided out of the body, if given to loosen the belly: or else untill it be turned to nourishment, if given to that purpose. Now, whether the patient reape any benefit thereby or no, may be discerned, if he cast it not up againe,To know whether the patient reape any benefit thereby. and if he feele no raw evill favoured belchings. After the drinking of milke the sicke is to rest, lest by the motion and agitation of the body, the heat be attracted from the center of the body to the circumference, and so the concoction thereof be hindred. But it may be asked whether the sicke may not sleepe after it? I answer,Whether the patient may sleep after milke that it is onely to very weake persons permitted, and not to others, for whom it is very hurtfull, especially if drunke in any great quantity; lest head-ach, heavinesse and drowsinesse of the whole body follow after.Womans milke (...) to be used. Womans milke is best suck'd out of the brest, which if the sicke refuse to doe, then it is thought expedient that it be milked in a cleane vessell,Milke how to be corrected before the use. standing in water a little warmish, and so presently drunke up. Milke of beasts is to be drunke warme immediatly after the milking, with the addition of a little sugar rosat, or other ordinary sugar in defect thereof.How the antients ^sed it. The antients added hony and a little salt to it, especially when they would have it to purge: and so might wee well at this day, if our palats were not now adaies growne so dainty and nice, that no sweetning now will serve our turnes, unlesse fetch'd from Madera, Barbary, or Brasill. Howsoever,The quantity or measure to be taken at a time. the poorer sort may use it after this manner. The ordinary measure to take at once, some would have it to be three or foure ounces, or about a quarter of an English wine pint, according as the nature of the disease and diseased shall indicate to vs. Meth. med. lib. 10. Galen in a Fever hecticke, beginneth with two ounces, and then addeth halfe as much more, increasing the quantity, untill such time as hee saw it sufficient for the sicke. Physitians of old, were wont to give milke to the sicke in a very great quantity: and Lib de intern. affect. and 7 epid and a^bi exhibet interdum ad 16. beminas, interdum sesquicongium quandoque etiam duos congios lactis alinini. Hippocrates gaue at once almost five quarts of Asses milke, and

sometimes lesse. But hee giveth onely Asses milke in this abundant quantity, so farre as we can read: and elsewhere, he giveth sometimes above a gallon and a halfe, and sometimes above two gallons of this same milke. Lib. de ponder. and mensuris. Rondeletius addeth this caution in the use of Asses milke, that if it be used to cleanse and purge, wee may use an English pint at a time, but if it be used for aliment, then a lesser quantity will serve the turne, lest it trouble the stomacke. I dranke as much as was milk'd from the Asse at a time, the quantity I remember not. But such as have in their health beene accustomed to the use of milke, may drinke as much as they please. Sometimes the antient Physitians, and Hippocrates himselfe also,Water boiled with milke. in benigne and milde Fevers, and in internall heats used to boile good store of water with their milke, and so gave it their sicke to drinke.
But because milke in its owne entire substance is not alwaies so safe for the sicke; besides, there being so many cautions to be observed, and so many cases wherein it is not safe to exhibite it; it therefore being composed of three severall substances, the mercuriall or waterish part, called serum,Whey, and the use thereof. and in English whey, may farre safelier in any disease be exhibited than any of the other. This serous substance doth cut tough humors,The faculties of whey cleanse and loosen the belly: and therfore whatsoever milk most aboundeth with this moist substance, is most wholesome, and although often used, yet hurteth least. Such are Womans, Goats, Asses and Camels milke: for the whey of such milke is accounted good against the Iandise, dropsie, arising from the obstructions of the inward parts, as also against Scabs, Morphewes, Tetters, Freckles of the face, and Cataracts of the eyes.Best whey. Of all other wheyes, that of Goats milke is esteemed the best: for it participateth of a sharpe nitrous quality, whereby it cleanseth; a thinne and subtile quality, whereby it openeth obstructions; cold and moist,Whey of Goats milk, in what diseases most usefull. whereby of cooleth and moisteneth in all Fevers: it is good against Dropsies, Iandise, the Spleene, melancholicke diseases, obstructions from choler, diseases in the kidnies, and all inflammations. The antients used also often to infuse their medicines in whey, made especially of Goats milke; although sometimes mention be also made of whey of Cowes milke, which now is most in request. Mesue lib. 2. distinct. 1. cap. 4.Gal. 10 de simpl. medicin. facult, etc. Antient Physitians make mention of two sorts of whey; one of the whole substance of the milke as it is, and another of milke already skimmed: but the first is the best, and loosenth the belly most. Both these sorts were prepared after a double manner; one without commixtion of any other substance, called a simple manner, and was thus prepared: the milke being very hot, they suddenly set within it another vessell full of cold water, and so by this sudden concurse of hot and cold, was made this separation. Some would have this vessell of Dioscor. li. 2. ca. 64. silver, some of brasse, others care not what the metall be. Boiled with a very hot fire, it often also quickly curdleth, and then by straining, one substance is separated from another.Separation called compound. Another way of separation, was called compounded, by addition of some other substance, rennet, juice of the figge tree, etc. And many other things,Qualities acquired by preparation. as well hot as cold, will easily curdle milke. It is moreover to be observed, that whey acquireth unto it selfe divers qualities according to the various preparations thereof: for that which is made

with rennet is sharper than that which is made without any addition of any other substance. That which is made with sowre juices, as of lemmons and the like, is more cooling and pleasing to the palat, and more appropriate, and fitting for hot and maligne diseases; howbeit more hurtfull for any internall ulceration, or excoriation. Now,The quantity or measure. for the quantity, it must be measured according to the nature and constitution of the patient, observing also these cautions following: to wit,Cautions to be observed in the use. that it be drunke blood-warme in a morning fasting. Some give above a pint, if for the qualifying of sharpe humours; but if to purge, then about three pints, and Hippocrates to almost two pints more. Wee follow rather the Arabians directions, who give it from halfe a pint to a wine quart and upwards; and this quantitie must be taken by degrees, not all at once, and the patient must walke a turne or two betwixt, as is the manner in drinking of minerall waters. And as did the antients,Clarified whey. so doe we likewise, often boile in our whey divers sorts of simples, and with us is much used in the Sommer-time, for cooling and clearing the blood. We use Endive, or Succory, fumiterre especially, dock-roots, etc. According to the particular occasion, and the parties constitution, etc. Who useth it. And this is often used even of healthfull persons.
Wee make our whey for the sicke after a farre other manner,Of posset-drinke. Severall waies of preparing posset drinke for the sicke. which we commonly call posset-drinke, and is made after divers manners. In fevers, and hot diseases, we turne the milke only with the juice of a lemmon; and this we call lemmon posset,Le^mon posset drinke. being both cooling and cordiall: and in the absenee of lemmons, wee may make use of the juce of sorrell, or some wine vineger, which the poorer sort may use, whensoever they have need. And in the use of posset-drinke* this is to be observed, that it be alwaies made cleare for the sick; and if it be not so at first,Caution. with an addition of some such acid juice, as wee have already named,So^rel posset-drinke. it may easily be effected. That made with sorrell is in very great request, especially of the wood-sorrell, or sorrell dubois is the best, and differreth in shape and forme from our ordinary sorrell. We use often also to boile holy thistle in our posset-drinke, in fevers especially.Posset-drinke in contagious and pestilentiall fevers. Posset-drinke made after this manner, is good in all pestilentiall and contagious diseases, and are with us every where in great request. Againe, wee use another manner of making this posset-drinke; when as wee mingle some cold beere, ale or wine with our hot milke, and so make a posset-drinke not altogether so cooling as the former, yet safely used in many infirmities. In diseases that are not of so hot a nature,White wine posset-drinke. wee may make our possets with a little white wine, as also in the declining of fevers, which is good both to provoke urin and sweat. And this I thinke be the fittest and safest way to use wine for the sicke, unlesse in chronicall and long continuing diseases.Plaine ordinary posset drinke. Wee use also sometimes plaine and ordinary posset-drinke, made of ordinary drinke, which is much used for the furthering of the operation of vomits, and sometime used as a lavative after the taking of purges; in which cases I wish the milke be not skimmed, but even as it commeth from the Cow: as for the curd,The curd. I wish sicke folkes especially, altogether to absteine from it. And as for our eating possets (although many country people are of opinion,Eating possets used most for wantonnes. that a posset, a cup of wine, or strong water, will cure any disease) I advise the

sicke altogether to absteine from them. And to speake the truth, in best health, they are used rather for wantonnesse than need, being altogether superfluous, being used especially after a good meale, as they are often used after supper.Best posset-drinke in in health. In Scotland, the better sort make their posset onely of milke and white wine, with a little sugar and cinnamon, which they drinke, and give away the curd, which is the best way of using it, and least hurtfull to health.
Now, in milke, the next substance to be considered, is that which swimmeth upon the top, and is called the creame of the milke, or flos lactis,Butter, and the best use thereof. which we commonly call butter, and use it for dressing of meat, and many other uses, as in other countries they use oyle. It is a very wholesome dish for healthfull people, moderatly, and in due season used; best in a morning, at the beginning of dinner, or at breakefast. If immoderatly and unseasonably used, it swimmeth on the top of other meats, hindreth concoction, fumeth up into the head, dulleth the senses,Whether it be usefull for the sicke, and how to be used. and hurteth the eye-sight. In sicke folkes it is seldome to be used, especially in a weake stomack, as it is most commonly: and their meat dressed with much butter oftentimes, so cloggeth their stomackes, that it maketh them altogether unfit for any other food, and especially butter much boiled, as it is not good in health, so is it yet farre worse for weake and sicke people: and therefore I advise all those who dresse the sickes meat, to be very circumspect in the use of butter.
Of cheese.The third substance in milke, is the terrestrious substance, which we commonly call cheese, and concerning this, it may be demanded, whether the sicke may safely eat cheese,Whether the sicke may safely use cheese. Answer. or no? I answer, that in acute diseases, where solid food is not allowed, farre lesse are we to give way to this solid and terrestrious substance. But in the declining of the disease, and when the sick beginneth now to feed more on solid food, if especially it be earnestly desired; and in chronicall diseases, if the sicke hath before bin accustomed to this food, then a little sometimes, to satisfie a longing appetite, may be allowed: provided it be good cheese, made of unskimmed milke, neither too old, nor too new, and in a small quantity. Others, I wish to be sparing in the use of this aliment. In all manner of laskes and loosnesses, the use of it is most safe, if there be no other impediment.Cheese sparingly to be used. Old hard cheese is neither good in sicknesse nor in health; nor that which is made of too cleane skimmed milke, whereof I have seene some in Saxony which might well have served in stead of chalke; and to mend the matter, was well seasoned with blacke poppy seeds. And what good can any expect from the use of rotten putrified cheese, crawling full of maggots, so greedily, notwithstanding of some gluttons gaped after? Now, whereas I say, that too new cheese is not to be used, I doe not exclude the use of new cheese, after it is a little kept, as is the custome in many places of this Kingdome, and none better than in Northampton shire, without any disparagment to other places. And of such cheeses, I thinke, is hee to be understood, who wrote these Baptista Pieria. verses following:
Caseolos nisi lactantes and ab ubere PressosNe crebro comedas consuluisse velim,Inde putri mordax vesice pondus adhaesit,Gutta nec inde boni sanguinis ulla venit.To eat cheese oft, I would not wish that thou should make a trade,Vnlesse it be some new milke cheese, new from the udderne made.For from thence to the bladder doth a smarting paine proceed,And not a drop of wholesome blood from thence will in thee breed.
Cheese is most ordinarily eaten after other meats to close up the stomacke, which is indeed the best way. And by this meanes it openeth the belly; howsoever, cheese in it selfe bindeth: and yet taken at the beginning of the meale, it produceth a contrary effect, and best to be used in fluxes, according to this vulgar verse.


Caseus ante cibum confert, si defluat alvus,


Si constipetur terminet ille dapes.

If thy body be laxative, cheese before meat is fit:
If costive, then thou shalt doe well to end thy meale with it.

Howsoever, cheese is to be used sparingly, especially in weake stomacks, and such as lead a sedentary life, and use but little exercise: for in such, too frequently and too liberally eaten, it wil breed the stone, and all manner of obstructions, the colicke, and many other diseases. And therfore it is a good caveat which was included in this verse following:
Caseus est sanus, quem dat avare manus.A sparing hand in the use of cheese I hold alwaies the best.
And in making of cheese this caution is to be observed,Caution in making of cheeses: that it taste not too much of the rennet, which is nothing so pleasant to the palat, and maketh the cheese hotter. And therfore the Italian Parmesan cheese is for this cause in farre higher esteeme, by reason they say it is made with thistles, only, without any rennet at all. As for strong stomackes, and laboring people, with Ostritch stomacks, which would overcome yron, and whose best meales are often made with cheese, these rules doe not so much concerne them.
And now in generall, concerning the use of milke in healthfull people, I deny not, but for many people it is very soveraine good and wholesome aliment, especially for hot bodies, and in Sommer time, and so it moisteneth very much, and may be corrected with sugar or salt from curdling in the stomacke, or with some spear-mints put into it. Sometimes milke sowreth of selfe, especially in the Sommertime;Sowre milke. and sometimes it is also of purpose suffered to sowre, and that for the serum or sowre whey it aftewards yeeldeth, which is very pleasing and usefull for a hot and dry body, and exceeding good to quench thirst, and allay the extremity of heat in any hot disease, being an easie and cheape drinke for the poorer sort, especially. This kinde of drinke is in very great request in the Northerne parts of this Iland, where it is called of some whigge, and of others wigge. Butter-milke,Whigge, or whegge. Butter milke. which remaineth after the chirning, is cooler than other milke, yet not so good for nourishments, and being a little sowrish, it is best for hot and dry bodies. For sicke people, it is best to make with this milke a posset,Butter milke. Posset drinke. with a little white wine, which will be a very pleasant and wholesome drinke, the curd being separated from the drinke. And it is to be observed, that that whey which is last prest out of the cheese is the thickest, aptest to

ingender obstructions, and not so usefull as that which is thinner. Milke is best, as we have said, for hot and dry bodies, and good strong stomacks, and if used of moister and more phlegmaticke bodies (for whom it is not so good) it will be best to boile it, adding thereunto a little sugar or some hony and salt,When milke is to be eaten. and a little powder of cinamon and other spice. And it is alwaies best to eat milke by it selfe, a pretty distance from other food, and after the use of it, wash well thy teeth and gums with beere, wine, or vineger. As for the proverbiall speech, If thou wilt live ever, wash milke from thy liver, it is most absurd and erronious; this being a meanes to make it curdle the sooner,Of white meats. which is that wee labour here to avoid. But of milke are made many other dishes, which wee commonly call white meats, whereof a word or two before wee conclude this point. White meat is not only here, but in many other places of Christendome in very great use, and in no small esteeme among many; of all which, to speake, were here too tedious. In generall then, all manner of white meats are apt to ingender obstructions, to fill the body with grosse, crude, and phlegmaticke humours: and therefore altogether unfit for weake stomackes,For whom unfit. and such as are subject to any kinde of obstructions, either in the brest or nether belly: and are worst for old age, cold and phlegmaticke constitutions, and all such as lead a sedentary life, although I shall hardly perswade women that they receive any harme by the use of them. Of all other white meats, there is here with us one sort of white meat made of milke and wheat,Of frumenty. called frumentie, in greatest and most frequent request, which is a strong nourisher, and therefore requireth a strong stomacke, it being hard of concoction, and a great enemy to any oppilations, especially if it be thickened with flowre, as most doe ordinarily use it; howbeit corrected with cinnamon or other spices, it is so much the better, and some adde also sugar and currants, wherewith I can finde no fault. Rice pottage made after the same manner, of Rice and milke,(...), or (...). is much of the same operation, howbeit the later, I thinke, is more binding, and therefore may both be very well used in laskes and fluxes of the belly. And of the same nature is that which the French use much,Dum (...), or pottage, o^ wh^te meat made (...). made of millet. And besides, of milke there are no small variety of dishes made for ordinary food, and for feasts and great banquets, the which were here too long to relate. But all white meats, especially the more liquid they be, would be eaten before any other meat, or betwixt meales:When to be eaten. and all suppings, or liquid meats, brothes, or the like, must be used at the beginning of our meales; and so ought crustards,Crustards. although custome hath much prevailed to the contrary. But all these white meats must be left of our sicke, especially of acute diseases, as being hard of concoction, apt to ingender obstructions, and by consequence like to prolong the disease. In some chronicall diseases, as in fluxes, some of them may with discretion, to good purpose be used. And this shall suffice to have said of milk, as also concerning the whole drink and Diet of the Diseased; now come wee to certaine other things belonging also to this subject.



CHAP. XVIII.

Of exercise, which terminateth in rest: the necessity and utility thereof; together with the divers and various sorts of exercise, as well generall as particular, with severall circumstances to be observed.

HAving handled somewhat at large both the elements, the aire especially, and the relation they have unto the body of man in sickenesse and in health: as also aliments of all sorts, conteining the whole matter of the diet of whole and sick persons: there remaine yet, notwithstanding, divers other things concerning this subject, of Diet to be handled. In the next place, therefore, wee are now to say something concerning motion or exercise, and rest from the same. To prove the utility and necessity of exercise, and agitation or motion of the body, it being so undeniable a truth (yea, even among vulgar judgements, with whom, neverthelesse, other truth in this profession, find oftentimes but hard entertainment) I hope I shall need to spend the lesse time in proving the same.Necessity and ut^it, of exercise. But that in the mouth of two or three witnesses, the truth may the better be established; Besides some reasons, I will produce some authorities of antient Physitians and Phylosophers, that so it may appeare this is not mine owne bare assertion onely. Now, the utility of exercise duely and orderly used as it ought, is threefold: the increase of naturall heat, a more speedy motion and distribution of the spirits thorow the body, and addition of strength to all the members therof: and besides the cherishing of naturall heat, fuliginous excrements are expelled, concoction furthered, and strength added to the nerves, and all the parts of the body. And of these, Exercitatione tria co^moda ^r^mum adveniunt. ^. ea membrorum namque alli tu illorum dar^tic^: tum vero spiritus fit con^^tatiore, calo^que innatus u^etur. Galen 2 de ^anit. tuenda. Galen discourseth at great length; and not onely he but Qui comodit nisi etiam la^oribus vtatus, sanus esse non potest de vict. rat. (...).(...). Idem Hippoc. 6 Epid sect. ^ Hippocrates himselfe. Whosoever eateth, saith he, unlesse he use bodily labour and exercise, cannot long continue in health. (...) Idem ibi^. sect. 4. And againe, in another place, It ought to be the care of such as will be carefull of their health, not to satiate themselves with food, and not to be averse from exercise. And the (...) same author averreth, That Nature her selfe, without the counsell or advice of any other, hath sound out certain motions for the better performance of her actions. Sanitatis tutula a labore est incipenda, Gal. 2 de sanit. tuenda. And labour and exercise. saith he, are very usefull for the ioints and musculous parts, but food and fleepe for the inward parts of the body. And Galen in many places of his workes, doth not a little extoll and magnifie exercise, as in these words following. ad sanitatis tutelam mirum in modum praestat moderata corporis exercitatio at contra quies and diuturnum otinmu^ aximo est nocume^to Gal lib. de Eucb. and Cacoch. To mainetaine our bodies in good health, we must beginne with labour and exercise. And elsewhere. To maineteine the body in good health, the moderate exercise of the body is marvellous usefull and necessary: but on the contrary, rest, ease and idlenesse are very hurtfull. And in the same book hee affirmeth, That both himselfe, and a companion of his, for the space of many yeeres, lived in very good health, hee attributed to the moderate and seasonable use of their exercise: by meanes whereof crudities were avoided.

And of the same minde is the learned Ignavia corpus habetat, stimat labor: illa naturam senectutem, hic longam adoloscentiam reddit, Cels. l. 1 c. 1 and 2. Celsus, Sluggishnesse, saith he, dulleth the body, exercise and labour maketh it firme and strong: the one hasteneth on old age, the other prolongeth the time of youth. And the opinion of In Timeo. Plato, is, that exercise strengtheneth, but ease and idlenesse corrupteth the body. But fearing to trespasse too much upon the readers patience in the enumeration of more Authorities, I come next to the time, and then to the several sorts of exercises, of us seriously to be considered. The fittest and most opportune time for exercise is agreed upon among all our Physitians, in the generall, to be best before meales, when concoction is accomplished, to be seene in the urines. And as for the particular time of the day, the morning is both by Hippocrates, and of others preferred before any other time of the day. Howsoever, let this alwaies carefully be observed, that thy exercise be not undertaken before thy food be well concocted, and that now the time of thy next repast approach. And this a late Writer proveth both by reasons, and the example of Alexander the great. And Hippocrates mentioning the moderate use of divers things, which concerne the life of man, ranketh labour and exercise in the first place. (...) Hippoc. ^. epid. sect. 6. Let labour or exercise, and meat and drinke, carnall copulation and sleepe, all be used with moderation. And Quem interdiu vel d^mestica, ve^ civilia officia tenuerunt, huic tempus aliquod servandum curationi lu^ corporis est: prima autem e^us cura est exercitatio, quae semper antecedere cilium debet, etc. Cels. lib. 1. cap. 2. Celsus wisheth those who in the day time have been busied, either with their owne private, or else with the publike affaires of the Common-wealth, to set apart sometime wherein they may take care of their owne body. Now, the principall care thereof consisteth in the use of exercise, and ought alwaies to be used before meales: and hee that hath taken lesse paines, and his food be well concocted, may use it more freely: but he that hath beene toiled out with labour, and hath not well concocted his food, let him use exercise more sparingly. And this was the sauce the noble Cyrus used in all his warlike expeditions: for saith Lib. 2. (...). Xenophon, he never supped before he had sweat, or had performed some warlike exploit, or some rusticall and country imploiment, and by this meanes, inioyed his health perpetually. And besides, being not only sollicitous of himselfe, but also of all his souldiers and servants health, he had an especiall care that they were never admitted either to dinner or supper before they had laboured hard. And the Hetodor. Egyptian youth by the command of Amasis, did not eat before they had run about 180 stadia. 20 miles: and Tully relateth, that Denis the Tyrant, having supped with the Lacedemonians, said, hee cared not much for their blacke-broth, which was, notwithstanding, the principall dish of the feast: whereunto the Cooke replied, that it was no marvell: for, saith hee, the sauce was wanting. What sauce, saith the Tyrant? Labor in venatu, sudor, cursus ab Eurota, sam^s, sitis: hisce enim epulis ^acedaemoniorum condiuntur epul^, Cice^o ^. Iuscul Labour and exercise, saith hee, in hunting, sweating, running, hunger and thirst: for these be the sauces wee Lacedemonians use. And (...), 6 Epid. sect. 4. Hippocrat^^ hath one particular precept to this purpose, to use exercise before our meales. Labour and exercise, saith he, must goe before our meales. But to use exercise, especially if it be violent, immediatly after meals, is altogether unfit for the health of man. And that by reason it filleth the body full of crudities; from whence proceed strong and often invincible, and incurable obstructions, the orignall, and as I may say, the mother of most Fevers, and a multitude of other diseases: for the foode being before concoction violently expelled out of the stomacke, must needes much annoy the body.Violent exercise immediatly after meals hurtfull. Let such therefore looke to themselves, and be warned, who, immediatly after meales give themselves

to any violent exercise; as jumping, dancing, and the like violent motions, and agitations of the body. Having now sufficiently discoursed of the time, wee come next to the place.Of the place where exercise is to be u^ed. Now the place where exercise is used, is not of small consequence: as whether it be in a towne, or in the country: and in particular, whether within doores or without; in a warme aire, or in a cold; whether in a blustring windie, or in a calme and quiet aire. We are againe to consider the place wee tread on, or whether it bee hard or soft; grassie, dusty, sandy, wet with water or snow; or whether hard or dry. And againe, we are to consider the Mer^atus tam. (...) lib. (...). 166 time of the yeere, whether in Sommer or Winter, etc; which doe intend or remit the manner of exercise. Violent exercise in Sommer in the heat of the Sunne, heateth much, dissolveth and melteth the humors, and procureth distillations: and where the braine aboundeth with humors, the head weake, and the stomacke stuffed with crudities, it occasioneth sometimes death, or at least very dangerous diseases. And in Winter exercises in the Sun, being violent, cause wearinesse, inward impostumes, as pleuresies; in hot countries, I thinke especially, such as is Spaine, where this author lived. In the shade it is safer, yet ought it to be shorter in Sommer, and lesse violent: but in Winter it may bee more violent. In the use of exercise, againe we are to consider the persons to be exercised: as whether men or women, young or old, weake or strong: for according to these and other the like circumstances, the manner of exercise must bee ordered and altered. The strong may use stronger exercise than the weake; and the man other exercise than the woman: and againe, the same patient is to alter his exercise according to the seasons of the yeere and other circumstances. Children againe are not to use such exercise as able young men; and old age must use such exercise as becommeth that age. Cholericke persons also are not so much to exercise their bodies as the phlegmaticke and other constitutions,The persons to be exercise^ and withall their exercise must be gentler: and the like is to bee said of thinne, extenuate, dry bodies, who by strong and violent exercise are much in damaged. And exercise in the quality must also bee accommodated according to severall circumstances, as hath beene touched already, and shall more particularly hereafter appeare.The quality of exercise. And in it we consider first the manner of exercise; whether violent or no? whether by lifting any great weight, a lighter, or of a middle size: and whether it bee continued or interrupted; whether the motion bee swift or slow. Wee are againe in it to consider the site and posture of the bodie moved: as whether it stand upright, bee crooked, or turne and winde about in a circular motion. Exercise of the body standing upright, is more beneficiall, and easier; bending and stooping is more laborious and painfull: but circular motion or turning round is of all others the worst, procuring giddinesse and casting, especially where the body is thereunto most prone. As for the time of duration or continuance of the exercise, which we comprehend under the name of quantity, it is likewise various according to the nature of the partie exercised:The quantity or time of duration. and is either great, small or a meane betwixt both. That Physitians call great,

which soonest causeth lassitude or wearinesse; that small which neither increaseth the heat of the body, nor causeth a more frequent respiration: a meane betwixt both, which both increaseth the heat, and maketh a more frequent respiration. It is notwithstanding a very hard matter to determine to any the quantity of exercise he is to use, Hippoc. 3 de diaeta. there being such a variety and difference in the individuall constitutions of particular persons; and withall, so many severall circumstances to be considered; the exercise being to be accommodated to the nature, strength, age, and necessity of the partie to be exercised. And as there ought to be a due proportion betwixt the quantity of food, and the duration of exercise, so is this not so easy to find out. But in the use of exercise we must observe this rule, that the respiration grow more frequent, or else it deserveth not the name of exercise: and in some exercises we somtimes cease not untill Hippoc. 1.6. Epid. sect. 3. we sweat; which is also variable according to the constitution of the body, time of the yeere, etc. Howsoever, whensoever thou seelest any lassitude or wearinesse, and the alacrity and vigor of thy body any white abated,Order of exercise. know for a certaine, it is then high time to give over. Now besides the premisses, the antients observed an order in their exercise, using in the first place frictions and inunctions, as a preparative for other exercises, as may at length in 2 de sanit. tuenda Galen appeare. Now these frictions were in very great use among the antients, and now among us in little or no use,Differences of exercise.1 Difference, some exercise the body, some the mind, some both.2 Difference, some exercise the whole body, and som a part.3 According to the end. howbeit in some particular cases they might bee yet of good use among us; but here I will not insist upon them, but proceed to the division of exercises. Of exercises, therefore some exercise the body alone: as jumping, dancing, digging, etc. Others againe exercise the mind alone: as all manner of serious cogitations and study. Some exercise both the body and the mind: as playng at hand-ball, at tenice, etc. Againe, some exercise the whole body; as playing at tenice, and many others: some but one part; as singing, speaking, and reading aloud, exerciseth the lungs; ringing, the armes especially, and pectorall parts; digging the reines and loines, etc.4 According to the quality. Another difference of exercise there is also according to the end some being onely exercises; as wrestling, running, walking, and the like, our end in them being onely our pleasure, recreation, or exercise of the body: but in others there is more labour and toile, and in the which we propound to our selves some profit, at which we principally aime; as in digging, plowing, harrowing, and divers other sorts of husbandry; and the like may be said of divers manuall trades and handicrafts.Strong and violent exercises sparingly to be used. And according to the quality, some exercises are valid and strong, and some more mild and easy. Strong and violent exercises are wrestling, foot ball play, and the like, which are sparingly to be used; howbeit tennice play used with moderation, I thinke hath scarce its fellow, as exercising the whole body, and that without any hurt. Hunting and hawking howbeit they exceed many other exercises, yet are they more obnoxious to hazard and danger than many others; and being exercises and recreations chiefly appropriated to the gentry, they doe not so well besit trades-men and people of inferior condition. And in these same recreations I wish the gentry

would use a moderation,Hunting a^d (...) modera^y to be (...). and not make of a recreation a trade and vocation, and mis-spend so much pretious time, which was alloted them for a better end, and whereof they must one day give an account. And I wish them seriously to consider, that the end why they were placed in this world, and adorned with so great dignities and preheminences above the inferiour ranke of people, was not to Exod 3^.6. eate and drinke and play, as was reproached to the people of the Jewes: but the more God hath graced great ones, the more honour and service he requireth at their hands. But to our purpose againe.5 Difference, from the principall agent. There are againe some exercises, wherein sometimes the party exercised is the principall agent and mover himselfe; as in walking, running, and the like: and sometimes the motion dependeth on an other; as in sailing, riding, travailing by coach or waggon, by ship, etc.One and the selfesame exercise differreth sometimes from it selfe by reason of circumstances. And the kinds of exercise differ both one from another, and sometimes even one and the same kind of exercise from it selfe: as namely, the motion of a coach or waggon is farre more unequall than that of a horse, and the more uneven and rugged the way is, the more unequall is the motion: as riding on a hard trotting horse is farre more violent and laborious than riding on an easy ambler. And therefore it is not without good reason, that such as ride post use to sweath themselves about the midle,Hard trotting horse for whom hurtfull. and eate little: for by this meanes they become subject to the lesse danger. And it is to be observed, that hard riding is hurtfull for a weake backe, and sometimes is the meanes of breaking some small veine, whereupon often insue incurable ulcers in the kidnies or bladder, being also an enemie to weake legges; and besides* hard riding often overturneth the stomacke, especially if it bee weake and full, and yet more if the partie be not accustomed to ride.Sailing, and the difference thereof. Sailing differeth likewise according to the water whereon one saileth. On the Ocean where are great waves, and good gales of wind the motion is more unequall, and sooner maketh a weake and full stomacke to vomit, and so proveth a good helpe for our health. But to saile on a fresh-water river on a calme day, is far easier, and troubleth the body far lesse.Carrying on (...) shoulders. Next to this is the carrying of one in a chaire on mens shoulders; and carrying in a litter is a meane betwixt the two former. Now besides the premisses, there are yet a multitude of exercises; both universall, which exercise the whole body; and also particular, which exercise some part thereof. The whole body was exercised in that play with a little ball, which De insu parvae pilae. Galen so highly commendeth in a booke made in the co^mendation therof, which, as appeareth, differed much from our tennice play, in that there was in it mutuall imbracings and graplings. But in my opinion, as I have said already, tenice-play moderately used yeeldeth to no other exercise whatsoever.Tennice-play a good exercise. We may here take in walking, which used with moderation, is hurtful to no age, sex, and may (contrary to other exercises) be even used after meals. Besides these, football play, wrestling and cudgell play exercise the whole body, (howbeit the taste lighteth many times on some one part) and many more which I willingly here passe by. There are also som particular exercises,Exercises of some particular parts, which exercise some one part of the body or more: and some of those againe, besides the part moved, move the whole body also. And againe,

of these some are appropriate and peculiar to some particular part onely; as namely, the voice to the brest and lungs, mastication to the jawes, seeing to the eye. And therefore all such members as have a free motion, and for some proper utility and use, ought to be exercised; as the lungs, brest, armes, legges, etc. But the head, because it obtained not motion from any proper utility or profit, but onely to avoid dangers, therefore needeth it no exercise. Crying therfore or reading with a loud and audible voice is very beneficiall for the lungs,Crying, reading loud speaking in what diseases helpefull or hurtfull. if they be not too weake, and no ulcer either present or imminent, either there or in the brest; and therefore very good for preaches that have strong lungs. If it continue long, it heateth the whole body, helpeth the shortnesse of breath, wasteth the superfluous moisture in the muscles of the pectorall parts, concocteth crudities in those parts, and furthereth expectoration: but withall, if violent and of long duration, it hurteth the head, if weake already, cacochymicall,Crying aloud, singing and playing upon instruments. replete and bursten bodies. Great, loud, long, crying and singing, sounding the trumpet, playing on pipes, and the like instruments, are hurtfull to schollers especially, in that it attracteth the heat upwards. To row with oares exerciseth the armes and upper parts strongly. Ringing of bells, swinging with a rope, playing at shittlecocke,Mixt particular exercise. and the like, exercise the armes and upper parts especially, and consequently the whole body also. And so doe shooting with bow and arrowes, gouf-playing, and the like. But cleaving of wood, sawing, drawing of water, howbeit they exercise the armes and pectorall parts, yet communicate they not so much motion to the rest of the body as the former. Cleaving of wood shaketh the head more than the rest.Commendation of walking Digging exerciseth the kidnies and the backe. Walking exerciseth the feet and nether parts principally, but consequently the rest of the body also. This exercise as hath been said already may bee used of any age or sex, and may at pleasure be intended or remitted according to pleasure. After meales, if moderate, it may safely be used, especially after supper. It helpeth too concoct crudities, is good against the wind colicke, helpeth infirmities of the stomacke, is good to prevent the stone in the kidnies and the bladder, besides many other benefits it procureth to the body of man; and is very usefull for such as lead a studious and sedentary life.Observation of exercises according to the trade of life. Some professions there are, who ordinarily use some parts of the body more than others; as Tailors and Shoomakers, their hands and armes; Weavers, their feet; Smithes, and such professions as handle the hammer, their hands and armes. Such persons therefore, when they are to exercise their bodies, let them exercise those parts which are most deprived of motion. Such persons as exercise little, must detract somewhat from their ordinary diet, and feed more sparingly.



CHAP. XIX.

Of the exercises of the mind: whether at our meales wee may discourse and deliberate of serious affaires, and what was the custome and practice among the antients. Accomodation of exercises to the sicke, and how safe it is for them to use exercise.

AS there are exercises of the body,What are the exercises of the mind. so are there likewise exercises wherwith the mind is busied and imploied: and such are all manner of thoughts, serious cogitations, cares, and all manner of imploiments, wherewith the mind of man is imploied. This must also be moderate and seasonable,Caution for schollers otherwise it overthroweth the whole man. And this of all others concerneth most such as lead a contemplative and sedentary life; as Schoolers, and such as are imploied about weighty affaires in Church or common-wealth: and therefore it is with an unanimous consent of all our Physitians agreed upon, that wee are at meales to banish farre from us all sad and serious thoughts and cogitations, as hindering and distracting the worke of naturall heat, which is to concoct the aliment in the stomacke. And for this cause was it that Physitians did inhibite study for the space of certaine houres after the repast, according to this triviall verse.

Nec propere a mensa studijs vacaveris unquam,
Sed tribus aut horis quatuor inde vaca.
Haste not from study to thy booke, from study still refraine.
Three or foure houres, then thereunto thou mayest repaire againe.

But this is not of any ordinary, but of very serious and weighty study to be understood, which is not a good while after meales to be undertaken. Now it would be well considered, what bodies are most hurt by much serious study and intent cogitations of the mind. Dry bodies, especially such braines are most indammaged and indangered thereby. And therefore hot and dry bodies, or yet cold and dry melancholicke bodies must use a moderation in this particular, or else they will repent when it is too late. I cannot here enter upon particulars concerning this point, but advise every man narrowly to have an insight into the temperature of his owne body, and to order it accordingly. Phlegmaticke and sanguine constitutions are freed from this feare, this exiccation which wee so feared in the former, being for them beneficiall rather than any wayes prejudiciall.Whether at meales we may discourse of of any serious marter or discusse any serious affaires.
But here ariseth a question from that which hath been said concerning serious and intent cogitations at meales, whether we may not during meales discourse or deliberate about serious and weightie

affaires, or discourse of any serious Philosophicall or other grave question? Now that this was an antient custome both to deliberate of serious affaires in their feasts, as also to discourse of divers philosophical questions,Answer. is by divers antient authors apparent. And therefore Nestor in Iliad. 1. and Athen in dip^^soph. Homer is brought in at a great feast, all the Peeres of Greece there assembled, perswading Agamemnon to take some speedy course to helpe the then distressed Gre^ians against the Trojans. And the Persians in their great feasts being full of wine; were wont to consult of warre, and every man thus full of wine was suffered to give his voice for the warre. But the next day after they were wont to meet againe, and not till then being sober, to make a full conclusion of all affaires. This same probleme is of set purpose handled by some antient authors, and the affirmative by them mainteined, that during feasts and great meetings we may freely talke and discourse of serious affaires. And this is the opinion of two famous antient Writers, (...). probl. 1. Plutarch and Maecrobius, the one a Greeke, the other a Romane Writer, who have both of set purpose,^ Saturnal. lib. 7. handled this same question. If Philosophy bee banished from banquets (saith the aforenamed C. Macrobius) then let her nurce also, to wit, honesty and modesty, packe them hence: and then let both piety and sobriety also be gone:^imitation of conviv^a^l speeches. for which of these discerne greatest commendation, I can hardly discerne. But the same Author in that place setteth downe at great length many directions concerning this same point: Amongst others, that we are to not enter upon the depth of any philosophical point, but such as may be both easy and profitable. And of the very same opinion is Plutarch also. And indeed in a publike meeting such things are to be discussed, as the whole company may understand,Faule of the Fox and the Crane. and may, if need be, reply to the purpose; lest it fall out, as it did with the Fox and the Crane. Idem Plutarch. ib. The Fox at a certaine time invited the Crane to dinner, and set upon the table a messe of thinne pottage, which the Crane with his long bill could not take up to satiat his hungry appetite: the Crane therefore in requitall inviteth the Fox to a feast, where was set upon the table a vessell full of food, having a long narrow mouth, into the which the Cranes long bill could easily entex, and eat up his food, when as master Fox went home almost famished. And besides, it is by Lib. 6. cap 13. Aulus Gellius also apparent, that these philosophicall discourses were at such meetings in very great request, and by Plato himselfe. This limitation then being carefully observed there is no doubt, it seemeth, but we may often discourse of honest serious matters, and such as may be profitable to the hearers. And therefore a Po^ra si retores illi Philosophi ve^ae philosophiae sapientieque ignari ie imperiti, non in Cholis tantum, sed etiam in (...) de ^ebus ^ravibas atque se^^s ad in ac beateque vivendum lissere^e fuerunt (...) ti, quant magis nos Christianos vere solidaque sapientin cognitione imbutos decet in nostris symposijs sermones inter nos conferre ^rave^ honestos, ^uios, re^ig^osos, (...) ad aedificationem, ut Apostolus Paulus loquitur, hoc est, partim ad Dei gloriam, partim ad mu^^^ si (...) confirmationem spectent. Et ^amen sunt nonnulli qui omnem sermonem de Deo, de religione, de rebus divinis atque (...), de Christiani hominis officio in convivio valde indecorum, eique minime convenientem esse existiment Itaque ut (...) nonnutti Phi^osophie illi huminae: sic hodie plurimi Christianorum divinae illi nostra atque coelesti Philosophiae, hoc est, Theolo^^^ i^ convivus nullum volunt locum esse relinquendum. Sales tantum, jocos atque dicteria non modolevia, n^getoria atque ridicula, ^ erumelu^m blasphema in Deum, atque contumeliosa in proximum in convivijs voluni locum babere. Verum longe alia fuit summi illius (...) sapient^^^^sque magistri atque Domini nostri Jesu Christi meus, sententia ac consuetudo: Is namque teste Evangelica historia, non modo: ^^^mplo, in scholis sive sinagogis, alusque in locis; verumetiam in tri^linijs, in ipsa mensa non dubitavit, tum hujusce vitae pi^^^visi (...) transigendae, tum aeternae illius adipiscendae optima saluberrimaque tradero, ut Luc. 11.14. and alibi passim (...) ^est. Idem. (...). late writer discoursing of this subject, hath these words. Who (saith hee) at such a solemne meeting could indure a Physitian prescribing strict rules of meate

and drinke? A divine to enter upon that profound point of predestination? A lawyer upon some intricate case of law? or a philosopher to enter upon a discourse of the first matter, or any other intricate point of metaphysicke? an Astronomer to discourse of his circles, epicycles, and the like? But that there was a custome of handling and discussing of some serious matter, which might even exercise the wit, among many nations, by the practise of the Philistines may plainely appeare, to whom Sampson (no doubt according to their ordinary custome at such meetings) propounds his riddle. Now (saith the same author) if these antient wise philosophers, altogether ignorant of the true heavenly philosophie, did notwithstanding, not onely in their schooles, but even in their parlours; thinke it not unseemely to discourse of serious matters, conducing to the leading of a comfortable, quiet and happy life, and of letters and the liberall arts: how much more doth it then become us Christians, instructed in the true knowledge of heavenly wisedome, in our publike meetings to accommodate all our discourse to honest, pious, profitable and religious matters, and such as might tend to edification, according to the Apostles rule; that is partly for the Glory of God, and partly for the strengthening and confirming of our mutuall faith, hope and charitie. And yet, saith he, some there are, who thinke it a thing very absurd and unseemely at such publike meetings, to admit of any speech of God, of divine matters, or a Christian mans duty: howbeit, on the contrary they admit and allow of the free use of scoffing, flowting, of unseemely jesting, quips and satyricall tants, not only vaine, idle and ridiculous; but even oftentimes blasphemous against God, and contumelious to our neighbors. But farre different from this was the custome of our most wise Lord and Master IESVS CHRIST, who, as in the whole Evangelicall history may appeare, not onely in the Temple, in the Synagogues and other places; but even at table tooke all occasions of giving good and wholsome precepts, not onely for leading an honest and civill life here among men, but even to atteine to eternall life also. And this same custome was also in the primitive Church imitated, as witnesseth Tertullian. Ita fabulantur ut qui sciunt Dominum audire, hoc e^, sermones inter se conferunt, ^astos, pudicos, pro^, religio^o^, quorum noverunt se a^ritum havere testem ipsum Oeum ^^ncta videntem atque audientem. Facit ibidem mentionem centionum atque pr^cationum, quae Agapas illas antecedere atque consequi solebant. Idem e^ Tertul Apolog cap. 39. Vtinam in Tabernis vinariis, in comessationibus and balneis; imo and ubique de Gehenna disputaretur: non enim sinet in Gehennam incidere Gehennae meminisse. Propter hoc ipsum quispe illam and paravit and minatus est ne in ipsam incidamus, timore ipsius meliores sacti, Idem ex Chrysost. Homil. 13. in Epist ad Roman. Ab hujusmodi eum Christi tum Christianorum primogeniae ecclesie sermonibus convivialibus quantum discrepent nostri sermones conviviales quotidiana experientia satis testatur. Erant illi graves, modesti, casti, pudici, pii, religiosi, nostri contrasunt leves, nugatorij, mendaces, scurriles, ^urpes, obscani, blasphemi, contumeliosi, quibus Dem patiter atque homines gravissime offenduntur. Sancte profecto veteres Hebraeorum sapientes dixerunt, eos qui in conviviis sermonem de rebus divinis non habent perinde se habere, ac si de sacrificiis mortuorum comederent. Contra vero, qui Dei verbum, legem and divinae sapientiae opera celebrant, super hos quiescere divinitetem, and non secus eos habere, atque si de mensa ipsius Dei comederent. Contra hodie plerique Christianorum sacrum sermonem plane (...) conviviu maxime existimant, quem siquis inferat, illum seu hominem incivilem, rusticum and agrestem exp^odunt atque ^ubsannant. Tamei si proh dotor! tanta est hodie nostrorum convivierum luxuria atque intemperantia, ut fiquis sacrum aliquem and a^vi^um sermonem tis inferat, ille tanquam margaritas canibus atque porcit objiciens reprehensione digum esse videatur. Idem ibidem, ubietia^ plura de hac materia fusuis scripta videre est, ex antiqui^ scriptoribus and patribus, ut ex Plinia Iuniore, Cicerone, Iulio Capitolino, Seneca, Clemente Alexandr. August, Chrysost, etc. excerpta. So they talke (saith hee) as knowing that the Lord heareth them; that is, their discourse is chast, pious and religious, of the which they know they have an eare-witnesse, even the allseeing, and all-hearing God himselfe. In the same place he mainteineth certaine hymnes and praiers, which did both proceed and follow these love-feasts. And S. Chrysostome hath to this same purpose a worthy speech, not to be past over in silence: Would to God (saith he) that both in the wine Tavern, at their merry meeting in their feasts, in their hot-houses, yea, and every where men would discourse of hell-fire: for the often remembring of hell, would prove a meanes to keep men out of hell. And for this same cause was hell made and threatned, that by the seare thereof being battered,

wee might not fall therein. Besides these ordinary grave Philosophicall and religious discoureses during their meales, they had oftentimes also others, who, during their meales, read to them some antient history, or some other memorable matters, as the same Author out of many antient Writers, maketh it evidently appeare. And it is recorded of Alexander Severus the Emperour, that during dinner or supper, or else, after, either he himselfe read something, or else gave diligent attention to others while they read. And of the same Emperour it is also recorded, that whensoever hee dined or supped in private, then hee admitted into his company Vlpian, and other learned men, by whose learned discourses, hee confessed he was both refreshed and fed. The like is also recorded of Charles the great, that during dinner and supper, hee had some histories or exploits of antient Kings read unto him. And not onely the Christians of the primitive Church, did in laudable imitation of antiquity accommodate this custome unto themselves, in causing read some portions of holy Scriptures during meales; but is now become customary in some Colleges of our Vniversities. I will adde yet but a few words out of this same Author, they being so pertinent, before I finish this point. Now, from these conviviall conferences, as well of our Saviour Christ, as of the Christians of the primitive Church; how farr doth our table talke differ, daily experience sufficiently doth testifie unto us. Their speeches and conferences were grave, modest, chast, pious and religious: ours againe, are light, vaine and idle, filthy and obscene, blasphemous, contumelious and opprobrious both to God and man. And it was a holy saying of the antient Hebrewes, that such as in their festivall meetings had no talke of divine matters, were as if they had eaten of the sacrifice of the dead. But on the contrary, such as doe magnifie the Word of God, his Law, his workes of divine wisedome, upon those resteth the divine benediction, and are as if they had eaten at Gods owne Table. But now with us the custome is farre contrary, many Christians being of opinion, that all religious speeches are then altogether out of season, and if any one shall speake any thing tending this way, hee shall be esteemed an uncivll and unmannerly person. And now (alas, the greater is the pitty) our feasts are so full of intemperance and gluttony, that if a man should insert any holy and pious speech, it will be but as pearles cast to Dogges and Swine. I need no comment to explaine these words; the text is plaine enough, and I leave the explication.
Accommodation of that which hath been said of exercises to the sicke.It resteth now, that I should say something of the exercise befiting the sicke, it being the thing I here principally aime at; howbeit it was necessary I should make an enumeration of them all; and as the matter of the diet both of the whole and sicke, is one and the same; so are their exercises also,In the exercise of the sicke two things to be observed. not differing so much as their diets doe. In the exercise then of the sicke, two things are to be observed: first, in what diseases exercise may be used, not being usefull in all; and the moderation thereof in such diseases where it may safely be used. Some diseases then are acute, and others againe, chronicall. Of the former, some are called simply acute, some peracute, and some perperacute; which are certane degrees of sharpe diseases. Of these two later sorts, the accidents are commonly so violent and fierce, and the diseases so dangerous, that in a very short time they are terminated either to life or death; and by reason therof, they are not to use any exercise at all. Of the first sort

againe, to wit, of acute diseases, some are of longer continuance;What kind (...) diseases (...) it (...) and some of shorter; some give some intermission, some scarce any remission. Such as give intermission, admit of exercise also, and in that time when they find most ease, and such as they were in health accustomed unto, and if it may with convenience, about the same time, especially when the intermission is of any long duration: provided alwaies, that the exercise be answerable to their strength and other circumstances. Where there is no intermission, and the accidents not very violent, with some remission, some gentle exercise may in the remission be allowed. Now, where any exercise may be either in acute or chronicall diseases admitted, walking may safely for the most part be used: provided still there be not a great debility in the nether parts, which yet by the helpe of a staffe, or leading by the armes may be helped, and the defect supplied. As for chronical diseases,Some chronicall ^^^eases admit not (...) ^^ercise^. although they are commonly of longer continuance than acute, yet unto some of them is denied the use of exercise which consisteth in motion, their nature requiring rest and quietnesse: such as are ulcers in the lungs and brest. As for other chronicall diseases, most of them may admit of walking, unlesse in great debility of the legges; as in violent paroxysmes and paines of the gout, or some such other infirmities. And in many diseases where the sicke is not so well able to move himselfe,Hanging (...) usefu^ for the sicke. yet may he be moved by another, as in a chaire: and if hanging beds were here in use for the sicke, they would proove of very good use, and with more facility procure sleepe to the sicke, as I have touched heretofore. And frictions,Frictions in frequent use among the ^^^^ents. although they be now almost out of use with us, yet were they among the antients of very good use in many diseases by way of diversion; as also ligatures of the extremities are for the same purpose of very good use: as in swounding, in immoderate fluxes, of blood and other humours. In violent fluxes tending downewards therefore,Ligatures of extremities. wee are to use frictions and ligatures of the armes, wrists and fingers: and in the suppression of any wonted evacuation, we use these meanes, neere and tending to the part affected, to further this evacuation. But to enter upon particular exercises befitting severall particular diseases, this is neither the proper place, nor yet my purpose, where I can onely insist upon generall directions. And as for exercise of the minde, the anxiety and trouble of mind by reason of the sicknesse, and the manifold, painefull and troublesome accidents, as individuall companions attending the same, together with many future (howbeit sometimes needlesse and frivolous) feare doe often so wholly possesse the mind of the sicke, that he needeth no other imploiment: besides, that many times there is somewhat to doe about the disposing of a mans temporall estate. I wish therefore that the sicke (especially in acute diseases, fevers, and the like) be troubled, as little as may bee with any serious or weighty affaires, either studies or others. I except alwaies the care of the soule, which is never unseasonable, which neverthelesse, I wish, it be not put off to the last, as is too common with the most part. It is now, I confesse, thought sufficient, if the sicke (death especially being apprehended; or else be sure of silence) send to the Parson of the Parish, and sometimes to some other, whom perhaps he fancieth best,

to say some good prayers by his bed-side, although all his life time he never cared for praier or any other good exercise; and then after opus operatum, this formality being now performed, with a Lord have mercy upon us, whatsoever the former life hath been, without any more adoe, thinketh to goe straight to heaven in a feather-bed. And here is the greatest miserie, that many times they meet with some Empiricke divine (for there are many Empiricke devines as well as Physitians; the more is the pity!) who after a formall confession of their sinnes in the generall, apply presently their plaister of mercy to all indifferently, without any further searching into the wound, and like a skillfull spirituall Physitian laying first before them the terrors of the law, searching into the sore, humbling them for their sinnes, and then powring in the oile of mercy.In time of health every one ought to prepare for death. Therefore as in bodily health, I advise every man to looke narrowly to his Diet, to refraine from such things as may prejudice the health of his bodie, and prevent diseases, or at least make them farre more easy to bee endured when they come: so I wish every one to bee warned to have a speciall care of the spirituall estate of the soule, in feeding it with the wholesome food of Gods Ordinances, the Word and Sacraments and other good meanes; and in any case not to surfet thy soule with sinne (that so thou mayest prevent many dangerous diseases) which will never with a formall Lord have mercy on us, and some prayer booke of thine owne, thy minster or others (for with many to pray without booke smelleth ranke of puritanicall precisenesse) without a true and serious Repentance from the bottome of thy heart, ever bee expiated. If this were carefully observed and practised, and people would make their reckonings ready in their life time, and not post off all to the last, but often too late repentance, the sicke would not often be so much dismaied at the pronouncing of his finall sentence; nor the Physitian oftentimes so much troubled, how and in what manner to deliver this unwelcome message. But I know some will say now: Suitor ultra crepidam, and therefore since the pens and pulpits of our learned Divines give daily warning of this danger, I will cease from digressing any further; but among many other worthy workes published concerning such subjects, I wish the reader to bee acquainted with two, published by a Robert Polton preacher of Gods Word at Brougton in Northampton shire reverend Divine of Northamptonshire: the one a Comfortable walking with God, and the other, Instructions for comforting afflicted consciences.
Cessation and rest from exercise.Now after all exercises and motion and agitation of the body, there must be in due and convenient time a cessation and rest, and into this must all motion and exercise terminate and end, and alternatively succeed each other. Now as motion and exercise is accounted usefull for all men, and after to succeed; so would it seeme that no person, in health I meane, and able for exercise, is to bee freed therefrom, and so to live in ease and idlenesse. And yet ^. Epid. sect. 4. Hippocrates seemeth to command the contrary, wishing hot and cholericke constitutions to rest, and not to use exercise. And 5 de (...) ^^venda. Galen hath likewise something tending to the same

purpose. This is not a little to bee admired, saith he, that whereas Hippocrates is of opinion, that it is farrebetter for hot constitutions to live at rest than to use exercise, yet many Physitians there are who scarce are able to discerne such constitutions, and therefore indifferently appoint every one exercise alike. But wee are not here simply and litterally to understand Hippocrates of a meere idle sluggishnesse, which was never of any wise Physitian yet allowed;Hot and dry constitutions are not to use ^o viol^nt exercise as others. but whereas he denieth such constitutions exercise, hee is of strong and violent exercises to bee understood, and such as may safely bee allowed to other constitutions. And indeed, hot and cholericke constitutions, by meanes of violent labour and exercise, especially in Sommer and hot seasons, fall often into hot and choloricke diseases, which by avoiding this violent motion might bee avoided.




The Diet of the Diseased. THE THIRD BOOKE.

THE ARGVMENT.
THe residue of the sixe things called not naturall, and such things as thereunto belong, are here in this last booke handled, the first whereof is repletion and inanition; and in the first place of repletion in generall, and the division thereof, as likewise of inanition or evacuation, and the divers kinds thereof: afterwards is phlebotomy handled in particular, and the diversity thereof, where is set downe the utility therof, the persons fit to be phlebotomised, the veins to be opened, the quantity, quality, convenient time, together with the preparation before, and the ordering after phlebotomy are plainly and largely set down, where something concerning the signe, whether in phlebotomy to be observed, with a confutation of that and some other points of judiciall astrology: after follow purgations, whether or no we ought to purge? what persons are to be purged, of the nature of the humors to be purged, and concerning their preparation. Of purging medicines, reiteration of them, their qua^tity, quality, time of exhibition both generall and particular. Of vomits, glisters, and suppositories. Severall formes in which medicines are exhibited, together with the manner of governing the sicke, in and after physicke. Of sweating, and meanes to further the same. Of bathing and baths, both naturall and artificiall: of the nature and properties of divers minerall waters, both in this Iland, and other parts of Europe, and in what infirmities most effectuall. Also concerning urines, the fecall excrements or ordure: of spittle, spitting, or salivation, and of Tabacco, and the use therof, as also of snot or snevell, and of rheumes and distillations descending upon the nether parts, the lungs especially, and how remedies are for this to be used. Of carnall copulation, the right use and abuse thereof: of watching and sleeping, and dreames in sicknesse and in health: of the soule and the chiefe passions thereof: of love, and love potions, and whether they can procure love or no? of effascination, and something concerning Mandrakes, and the erronious opinion of some concerning this simple: of anger, joy, sadnesse or griefe, and the effects that follow thereupon. The conclusion of this whole discourse.



CHAP. I.

Of Repletion and inanition in generall, what they are, and the variety of particular circumstances therein to be considered.

HItherto have wee discoursed of the nature of the aire and other elements, and other things pertinent to that purpose, as well in sicknesse as in health; as also of severall sorts of aliments; and lastly, of severall sorts of exercise: there remaine yet some things to be discussed, which concerne not a little both the sicke and the whole: and among these wee are now to speake in the first place of those things which our Physitians commonly call excreta and retenta;Excreta and retenta. or such things as are to be reteined within the body of man, and such as ought to be expelled out of the same. The Hippocrates libr. de flitibus. old Father of Physitians according to his Laconicke manner of speech, includeth the whole body of physicke within these two words, adiectio, and substractio: that is, in adding or supplying that which is wanting, and detracting that which is superfluous, or superabounding. Now, as in all living creatures there must be a daily addition of aliment, so must there be something also reteined for the nutrition and preservation of the body nourished. Againe, by the continuall addition of aliment, it is not possible but there must be some excretion of superfluous excrements,Repletion, and (...) ingendred. or of such humours as abound in quantity only. That which doth thus so superfluously abound in the body of man, we commonly call repletion, the which is remedied by evacuation. If there be accumulated within the body of man a greater quantity of humours, good or bad, of one kinde, or more than is usefull for the mainteining of health, and performing of such functions as become the state and condition of such a creature, they become a burthen to the body, and by consequent to be expelled. Now, in the body of the daily addition of aliment for the reparation of that radicall moisture (which neverthelesse by degrees, doth still insensibly decay and waste away) there are continually some superfluities or excrements ingendred, which must be expelled: and for this purpose the great and wise Creator and Governour of all things,Emunctories and passages in the body of man whereby superfluities are evacuated. hath appointed certaine emunctories, or passages whereby the body might of them be unburthened. It commeth, notwithstanding, often to passe, that these humours, whether abounding in quantity, or quality, are by some meanes still reteined within the body, and so either threaten some disease, or else have already produced it; and then wee are by such physicall helpes as are fitting, to further the excretion of such humours. This oppression, or over-burthening of nature,Plethora, or repletion in generall. if generall through the whole body, commonly called repletion, is either of all the humors jointly, and called by the name of plethora, and is to be remedied

by phlebotomy; or else of some corrupted humours; as phlegme, melancholy,Cacochymia, and of what humours. choler, jointly or severally, and called by the name of cacochymia, the which is to be expelled by purging medicines. There is yet besides the premises,Profitable excreme^ts a retention of certaine profitable humors abounding onely in quantity, and ought at certaine time, for the benefit and better being of the body, to be expelled: as the seed of generation in both sexes, and the menstruous fluxe in women: and sometimes more excrements; as sweat, urine, ordure, etc. are deteined within the body. All these in their due seasons are by fit and convenient meanes, by the counsell of a judicious Artist prescribed, by their emunctories and proper passages to be expelled.Evacuations do sometimes too much abound. And sometimes these evacuations either naturall, or procured by art, by their too great abundance, threaten danger; and then wee are to use our best art and skill for the speedie and safe suppressing of any such evacuation. Of all these in order, by the helpe of the Almighty, I purpose to say something, after some generall rules permitted, which concerne all sorts of evacuation; for the which purpose it shall not be amisse to beginne with the definition of evacuation.What evacuation is. Evacuation is an expulsion either naturall, or procured by arts industry, of such humours as abound in the body of man, and that by fit and convenient passages, whether it be universall, whereby the whole body is evacuated; or particular, whereby some part is purged. Now that this may be, safely and profitable undestaken, divers things are first to be considered:What things before evacuation to be considered. as namely the fulnesse of the bodie, the strength, temperature, the plight or state of body, occurring accidents, the age, the time of the yeere, the former custome, and the part itselfe to be evacuated, and the place by which we are to evacuate, together with the quantity. Among all these, the fulnesse of the body, together with the strength of the party, have the pre-eminence. Now, this fulnesse exceeding measure and mediocrity, alwaies indicateth evacuation, whether it come by the abundance of blood, or other humours, and that both in sicknesse and in health: howbeit some particular individuall bodies there be, for whom either abstinence, a slender diet, or frictions may suffice.The stre^gth diligently to be consid^red, especially of the vitall parts. The strength is here likewise diligently to be considered: to wit, the animall faculties in the braine, the vitall in the heart, the naturall in the liver: and among all these, the strength of the vitall faculties doe chiefely indicate evacuation: as on the contrary, the imbecillity of the same inhibiteth evacuation.The plight and temperature of the body. Habitus and constitutio corporis Againe, wee are to consider the temperature and plight of the body to be purged, for thinne cholericke bodies indure more easily evacuation by vomit and sweat; but melancholicke and phlegmaticke constitutions, having hard and thicke bodies, are more easily evacuated downeward.Custome. Custome doth also often indicate the manner of evacuation, nature it selfe often inclining that way, to which it was wont and accustomed in former times.The quantity* Againe, the quantitie of evacuation is not to be neglected, which may by a skilfull and wise Physitian easily be atteined unto. In great repletion of what sort soever, great evacuation must be answerable, and in the lesser small evacuation; and a meane repletion requireth an evacuation in the same proportion;The time.Cum indicans turget vel urget. of all the which more hereafter, when we shall come to discourse of each evacuation apart. The time fit for evacuation,

is when that which doth indicate is swollen up, and increased, forceth us to evacuation. The time of the yeere, day, and other things thereunto belonging shall in their proper places hereafter be discussed. Besides the premises, wee are yet diligently to consider the waies and passages most convenient for our evacuation:Conv^nient (...) passag^^. and that is performed if we have one eye intent upon the pronenesse and forwardnesse of nature, and the other upon the part by the which the evacuation is to be conveied. Now, since all and every one of the humours may be conveied by severall passages and waies; as choler by vomit, sweat or urine; wee are therefore to looke into the inclination and propensenesse of nature, and so if we perceive it incline upward, manifested by a nauseous inclination to cast, it is then to be purged by vomit upwards: but if it take the course downewards, and we perceive any propensenesse that way, then wee are likewise to follow natures direction, according to the golden precept of (...). Apo. 21 (...) 1. Hippocrates. And hence it commeth to passe, that wee often cure excessive casting by the same meanes, and fluxes of the belly by glisters, or some gentle abstersive purges, howbeit the vulgar often wonder at such proceeding, and out of their stupid ignorance often traduce this so laudable and warranted way.Convenient wor^^ of eva^ua^^^^. The convenient places or passages by which humours are evacuated, are such as receive these noisome humours without any hurt to themselves; in the which, neverthelesse, wee are to consider as well the nature of the part whereunto wee expell the humour, as the consent and affinity it hath with the other parts. To this end wee must consider,The nature of (...) part to be cons^^e^ed that it be no principall part (by which we can never purge without prejudice to the party purged) and besides, that it be a place for this same end and purpose of nature for apart, as the guts, bladder, wombe, the pores of the skinne, etc. Now, although nature sometimes attempt some such evacuation; as in criticall excretion of blood by the nose, the blood passing by the braine; an impostume of the lungs by the urinarie passages, the guts, and the hollow passages of the heart; yet the Physitian is not to take this course, unlesse when of two evills, we are to chuse the lesser. By the consent and sympathy of the parts, the way of evacuation is also found out,The sympathy o^ consent o^ the par^s (...) considered. and hence is it, that the hollow part of the liver by reason of the sympathy it hath with the stomacke and guts, is purged by those waies: but the backe, and bossed part of the liver, for the connexion it hath with the kidnies and bladder, is by them for the most part evacuated. And sometimes when great store of grosse humours conveied thither from the mesentary and hollow parts of the liver are there seated, then the skilfull Physitian is carefull (lest by their abundance and thicknesse they stop up the narrow passages of the kidnies and bladder) with fa^re greater conveniency to convey them to the large passages of the guts.The sense and (...) of the pa^^s to (...) considered. The passages by which the humours are to be purged, must not likewise be of too exquisite feeling, lest by this meanes insue swounding, fainting, gnawing of the stomacke, and a sudden overthrow of strength. We must likewise beware, lest the matter to be purged be conveied by the part already surprized with the disease.Evacuatio^ must not be by the part affected. But if nature of it selfe should attempt any evacuation a wrong way, then this were suddenly to be suppressed, and the matter to be drawne backe againe another

way, except some other rub come in the way, And Loco nuper citat 12. epid. sect. 2. Hippocrates testifieth, that many thicke grosse and tough glutonous humors are easilier evacuated downewards by the guts: but thinne, sharpe serous humors more easily by urine and sweat. Aph. 9 lib. 4. And againe, elsewhere he testifieth that cholericke humours are easilier purged upwards, and melancholicke downewards. And Aph. 4. lib. 4. againe, that in Sommer, it is best to purge upwards* and in Winter downewards: as concerning acute diseases, they are most ordinarily purged by vomit, by sweat, by the guts, and by bleeding at the nose: except in contagious, maligne, and pestilent diseases where antidots and cordialls, expelling by sweat, are of most use; and where humours abound, or ill accidents occurre, some of the aforenamed evacuations may be of good use. And this shall suffice for evacuations in generall, now come we to particular evacuation, and first, of phlebotomy, so famous a remedy both in antient times and in this our age also.


CHAP. II.

Of Phlebotomy, what it is, the severall sorts, and sundry things therein to be considered.

IN the body of man, of the aliment he receiveth is ingendered blood in the liver, and conteined in the veines and arteries, and by nutrition communicated to the whole body. This blood, as it conferreth no small benefit to the whole body; so from thence are many mischiefes thereunto procured;Many diseases proceed from the abundance of blood. and that not onely by the excesse thereof in quantitie, in quality, or both, but also by the multitude of superfluous excrements from thence proceeding; which often proove the fountaine and well-spring of a multitude of diseases in the body of this miserable microcosme. Now, according to the repletion of this or that humor, so is the evacuation of the same answerable. All evacuations then are either naturall or artificiall.Evacuations are naturall or art^ficiall. If naturall and withall beneficiall, we are so farre from suppressing any such evacuation,Artificial evacuations two told that we are rather to further it. Artificiall evacuations, of which at this time I intend to speake, are either generall or particular.Generall evacuation, what it is. Generall or universall evacuations I call, such as doe in generall evacuat all the humors indifferently both good and bad; or such as doe evacuat the bad humors of all sorts, and that jointly or severally: and thirdly, which doth evacuat indifferently from all the parts of the body. The first is effected by phlebotomie, the second by purgation, and the third by sweating. The first of these then is phlebotomy, the which as it is an instrument used by the Physitian, we thus define.Definition of phlebotomy. Phlebotomy is an aritficiall evacuation of humors abounding in quantitie, and that by the opening of a veine or artery, to this end, that the vessells

distended and oppressed with the multitude of humors may be relieved, or else that noxious humors may be averted from the part affected. Phlebotomie and purgation doe both in this agree, that both are universall evacutions, are great and generous remedies, and appropriated to great diseases. They differ againe not onely in the instrument,Difference betw^xt phlebotomy and purgation. but also in the manner and forme: and againe, that purgation draweth forth by election, humors distinguished by their qualities: but phlebotomie neglecting the quality, respecteth the quantity onely. The nature therefore of phlebotomy is to draw indifferently any humor whatsoever is conteined in the veines, not making any election of this or that particular; and although it draweth from the whole body, yet doth it draw immediatly from the next veines, and the part next adjoyning to it; and secundarily it doth evacuat the whole body. Now for our orderly proceeding in this particular, it being a matter of that moment, we are to consider these five heads. 1. In what infirmities of the body, this generous remedy is to be used,In phlebotomic five things to be considered. and the severall kinds thereof. 2. What veines or arteries are to be opened. 3. What bodies may best beare this remedy, or are not able. 4. How much wee may evacuate, how long, or how often this remedy may bee reiterated. 5. The time, when it is to bee used. As for the first, we have already mentioned a double repletion in the body of man; one called Plethora, wherein we make use of phlebotomy; an other cacochymia, wherein we use purging medicines. This Plethora againe is double,Plethora or repletion twofold.Plethora quo ad vase; what it is. or of two sorts, quo ad vasa, and quo ad vires. That which we call quo ad vasa, or according to the capacity of the veines, is that fulnesse, wherein by reason of the abundance of blood, the veines are so distended, and stretched out, that the party himselfe may feele as it were this distention, with no small danger of disruption of some veine, or sudden suffocation. Plethora, or repletion quo ad vires, according to the strength, when as there is such abundance of blood conteined within the veines,Quo ad vi^es, what* that nature is not well able to governe the same, but oppresseth the strength, by that meanes inducing as it were, a heavinesse and certaine weight. Both these repletions are incident, as well to the whole as to the sicke; but in health cannot long continue: for in a short space the humors are either putrified, some veine burst, or some defluxion procured, the cause of infinite infirmities in the body of man. Againe, all repletion or fulnesse in regard of the humors conteined, is twofold, either exquisite and single,Repletion in regard of the humors twofold. proceeding of the abundance of good humors onely; or else declining from this purity, when as with the good some bad are also intermingled, called therefore plethora cacochymica: as againe, when as with abundance of bad humors some good are intermingled, we call it then cacochymia plethorica.Single plethory twofold. This single Plethory or repletion againe is twofold, one properly so called, when all the foure humors doe equally abound; another called sanguinea, or of blood, when as pure blood is increased in too great a quantity. Againe, plethora,Plethora or repletion in regard of the body affected twofold, (...) or repletion in regard of the body affected, is either universall, or diffused through the whole body; or particular, when as this fulnesse is setled and impacted upon some part of the body. Againe, there is one fulnesse in the vessells or veines, another in the whole bulke of the body. There is

also a repletion or fulnesse present actu,Plethorie, actuall or potentiall. actually in the whole body, or some part thereof; another potestate, onely in power, which is likely shortly to ceize upon the same: as when by the suppression of any wonted evacuation of blood, we feare a fulnesse in the whole body; or when as by the affluxe of some humor to som determinate part, we feare some inflammation, putrefaction or paine, etc. Now phlebotomie doth evacuat this fulnesse in the whole body, or any part thereof, either in any great disease already present, or yet imminent. A great disease I here understand, not onely that which by reason of the greatnesse; as some great inflammation or would is esteemed to be such; but even in regard of the excellency of the part, and some malignitie of the disease: for a small inflammation in some ignoble part of the body, although arising from the abundance of blood, doth not require phlebotomie or any other great remedy. In great plethoricall diseases we are to use this remedy, especially, if the strength bee answerable, which is the chiefe indication to be regarded. And here we are to observe,Indication of phlebotomie. that the indication of this evacuation is sometimes desumed from the disease it selfe: as in an exquisite Tertian, we open a veine for eventilation, not for any great evacuation. Againe, in regard of the cause wee are often undoubtedly to use this remedy: as in the suppression of the piles in men, and menstruous fluxe in women; and sometimes in dysentericall and lientericall fluxes proceeding from excessive heat of the liver.The use and end of phlebotomy two-fold. The use and end of phlebotomy is not alwaies one and the same: for the most part indeed, wee use it as a remedy against repletion, and then we use it for it selfe. Sometimes wee use it for an other end, when as we would bring some thing to passe, which without this cannot well bee effected: as, when in the beginning of any disease wee use this remedy for ventilation, or breathing of the blood, and not for any copious evacuation, that thereby concoction may the better be procured, putrefaction of the humors may bee inhibited, and all other remedies may more commodiously be exhibited. Of it selfe, and for its owne worke we use this remedy in a double respect. First, that this double repletion, of the which before, consisting either in the whole body, or in some part of the same, may be evacuated, and that the humor may bee diverted or turned backe from the part affected, or for preventing of a particular repletion. The humor is recalled or turned backe two waies: first, when as it hath a sudden influxe upon any part, it being from thence againe pulled backe to the contrary part: and againe, if the influxe of the humor be without any force,Phlebotomie threefold. or this fulnes be partim in facto, partim in sieri, or partly in being, and partly already bred, if it be then derived to the next place. Hence have we three sorts of Phlebotomy,Phlebotomia evacuant, revellem, and derivans. evacuans, or evacuating, revellens, or pulling backe, derivans, deriving or diverting, as it were turning aside. That which evacuateth, doth either simply evacuat from the whole body, or else from some one determinate part onely; if the humor be inherent without any new affluxe. But if withall there bee any affluxe of humor, then requireth it some derivation to be joined with evacuation.Evacuating phlobo^^^y whom and when to be used. Evacuation, or evacuating phlebotomie wee use both in sicknesse and in health also, if we perceive any plethoricall disposition,

or disease imminent; as in the Hippoc. aph. 2. lib. 2 athleticall disposition, especially, if the strength doth not hinder. Single plethory or repletion of all others is safeliest cured by this remedy; the false and bastard not so safely; and the more admixtion there be of all other humors, the more sparing ought we to be in the use thereof. Plethory or repletion proceeding from choler may safelier thus bee evacuated, than of melancholy; and againe, of that safelier than of phlegme; by reason that phlebotomy not onely evacuateth the abundance of humors, but cooleth the body also. The second sort of phlebotomy is, that we call revulsio, or revulsion, (...),Revulsio, (...) taken two waies. and is taken either in a large or strict sense: in a large and generall sense it is taken for any aversion, or turning away of the humor, whether to the contrary part, or that which is nearest; but Gal. 6. epid. sect. 2. comm 31.5 and 13 meth properly it is a retraction of the humor flowing unto any part, to the contrary place. Now all such may be called contrary parts, as have a sufficient distance from the part affected.Contrariety and wh^^ is thereby meant. And by contrary we understand not onely the contrary part to that which is affected, but also to the contrary motion, or the terme from whence the humors flow (...), as Artists speak, observing as much as may be, the rectitude and communion of the veines. This is apparant in a Pleurisie, where we open the Basilica of the same side, which is a branch of vena (...), or without a fellow. Contrariety in motion wee call up and downe, behind and before, inward and outward the right side and left. But on this I will not insist; as not being usefull for us to insist upon all these particulars,The use of revulsion and in what cases to be used. whereof Galen and our other Physitians discourse at great length. This kind of phlebotomy is chiefely used in diseases, where the affluxe of is humors is great and violent, and the humors in great abundance; as especially in the beginning of inflammations: and is therefore to be used in the Squinancy, Pleuresie, Phrenesie, Ophthalmy, inflammation of the liver, lungs, and the like infirmities, ingendred of blood, or the eruption of hot and sharpe humors. Neither is it onely of use in humors already flowing with impetuosity, but by way of preservation also, when they have been accustomed to fall u^on any part, or yet when as we feare any such influxe; as also in wou^ds, luxations* fractures, etc: having especially, respect to that which wee feare will follow; to wit, some inflammation of the part affected.
Gal 6. epid, comm 2. sect. 7.Derivation is an aversion, diversion,Derivation what.or turning away of humors falling without force or violence upon the part affe^^ed, or of such as have already fal^e upon it, but are not yet impacted, or setled upon the same; to the place next adjoyning to it, to the end that the part affected may be freed from the noxious humor. Derivation then principally regardeth the part affected, and differeth from evacuation and revulsion, in that we derive or divert humors yet in the fluxe, and not yet impacted into the part;Difference of this from other evacuations. not by the parts remote, as in revulsion; neither by the the part affected, as in single evacuation, but by the parts adjacent, and such veines must of necessitie have a communion with the part affected.In what cases to bee used. This kind of phlebotomie we commonly use in infirmities, having their originall from long continuing defluxions, and after universall evacuation from the whole body by revulsions; as in great inflammations after the great affluxe of humors is staied: we use it also in some infirmities, where

other evacuations have not prevailed, and that two manner of waies: one, that by them that which is conteined in the veines of the parts affected, may bee evacuated; and that that which is collected in the part transmitting, by the veines next adjoining to it, may be expelled. Againe, in some healthfull persons it is usefull, although the humors now be still and quiet, yet being accustomed in times past to seize upon any weake part, although without any violence. Now because mention hath been made of a plethory or fulnesse, we will briefely set downe some signes or markes of both the sorts.Signes of repletion quo ad visa. Of that which we call ad vasa, or according to the vessels or veines, these bee the chiefe signes: a fresh ruddy colour, arising either from externall causes; as the heat of the Sunne, bathing in a hot house, great labour and paines taking: or from internall causes, as a conspicuous tumor or swelling up of the veines, together with a notable tension and largenesse of the same; a pulse also very full, firme, quicke and very great. Signes againe of fulnesse quo ad vires,Of repletion quo ad vires. or according to strength, be these: there is a naturall or voluntary wearinesse and a lazinesse; so that notwithstanding, there may easily be seene such causes as increase blood, together with some conspicuous tumor or arising in the veines, there following in the body, as it were some acrimony and sharpenesse to the sense.Phlebotomy in what infirmities is fitt est to be used. To draw therefore this Chapter to a conclusion, phlebotomy is a most soveraine and excellent remedy, not onely in the aforenamed infirmities, but also in many other: as in all Fevers, proceeding of blood, as well without as with putrefaction, and of any other humor putrified, and that both in continuall and intermitting; even of Quartanes and head-aches proceeding of blood; in the Dropsie, proceeding of suppression of blood, in Strangury, retention or difficulty of urine proceeding of a hot cause, and in the Palpitation of heart in health comming without any manifest cause, and in divers sorts of obstructions; as the Jaundize, etc. Where these are wanting, the strength weake, and in the presence of any great evacuation; as fluxe of the belly, vomits, much sweating in young children, women with child, (unlesse in great extremity) we are not to use this noble and generous remedy. And withall let this rule alwayes be observed, that it is alwaies better to use this remedy by way of prevention, in the approaching rather than in the presence of the disease. Let every one therefore beware how they trust ignorant Empirickes, and desperate, bold Barber-surgeons, to rely, I meane, upon their judgements in so weighty a matter, when there is question of losing this noble elixir of life.



CHAP. IIJ.

Whether in contagious, maligne and pestilentiall Fevers, and in the small Pox and Measels, as likewise in the Iaundize, phlebotomy may safely be administred?

BY that which hath been said already concerning Phlebotomy it is apparent that Phlebotomie in Fevers is a soveraigne and approved good remedy, which is confirmed by the common consent of all our judicious and learned Physitians. And Saluberrimum aut (...) ut praed ^ mus ^st in febri^u^ venam ^ne^^ere, non continu^ (...) se, verum ^am omn^^us qua^ pu^^^ cens ^um^a (...) nec a^a^, (...) ^ohinent levata (...) qua orpus nost^^ (...) ^git natura e^o^ (...) eo quo (...) pr^mitu^, (...) quod reliquum e^, vincet. Gal. 11. meth. Galen himselfe is of the same opinion, where hee alloweth of this remedy, as well in continuall as in intermitting Fevers; provided alwaies the strength hold out, and the age be answerable. But then here ariseth no small doubt, whether in contagious, maligne and pestilentiall diseases so noble and generous a remedy may be used? And it would seeme that the negative is to be holden, in that in such diseases commonly the heart, the fountaine of life is assaulted, the spirits also infirme; and for this cause it would seeme wee should rather use alexipharmaks and cordiall remedies in this case most proper, to strengthen and corroborate the vitall spirits* and to expell, if it be possible, this poison from the heart: whereas any great evacuation, especially of this so usefull for mainteining of life, may by the evacuation of spirits, rather hinder then helpe forward the cure of such diseases. The answere to this question must be by distinction:Answere. for we must consider, that the Pestilence it selfe (for I will beginne with the most dangerous) setteth upon the body of man after divers manners* as sometimes striking suddenly without any shew, or at least it is scarce discernible, in which case it were a desperate course to attempt any such evacuation; but then the onely cure is, with antidots to oppugne the disease, and by all meanes possible to underprop and uphold the decaying spirits of the patient. Againe, often and many times, and more frequently, especially in these our Northerne and cold countries, this infection is accompanied with a Fever, and often meeteth with plethoricall bodies as living in ease and idlenesse,This hath alwaies bi^ the opinion and practise of the lea^ned ^hysitians^rac^ ib ca^sil medic. tractatu d^p^^ss^ (...) H^ller. li^e ^d p^ste Horest obser medic. lib. 6 ob^er. 17 ex Aetio, cass etc. and then I see no reason, why phlebotomie should or ought be denied unto such bodies; if especially administred in the beginning, strength, age, and other circumstances then concurring. And that this hath alwaies been the b practice of the learned both antient and latter Physitians, I could make it easily appeare, if I were not afraid to spend too much time, which by reason of divers matters, yet to handle, I must husband. Now if this hath place in the pestilentiall Fever, of all others most dangerous; then much more hath it place in other Fevers, participating indeed of a certaine malignity, howbeit not pestilentiall. Of this nature

is that Fever, which hath now divers times, especially of late yeeres, swept away many lusty people out of this Iland. This Fever is of the nature of putrid continuall Fevers, and yet not tied to any one particular kind. It is called, by reason of the evill quality, Febris maligna,Mali^ne Fever and the nature of it. approaching neare the confines of the pestilentiall Fever, howbeit commeth farre short of it in malignity, this disease being indeed contagious per contactum onely,How it is contagious when as such as are yet free, are infected by touching the body that is sicke, especially in their sweat, and sometimes also by being too neare their breath: and therefore wee see it often come to passe, that a whole family is one after another infected with the same, when as others who come to the sicke by way of visitation goe free, provided they be not too busie about them. But the pestilentiall fveer infecteth often by inspiration of the ambient aire, although they have no commerce with the sicke of the same disease. This fever is also called febris petechialis,Names. from the little blacke or blew spots like unto flea bits, which notwithstanding differ from those of the pestilentiall fever. It is also called morbus hungaricus, or the hungarian disease, by reason it hath been, and is very frequent among the people of that nation. It is now become a free denison in these our countries,Whether phlebotomy be here of u^e. the smart whereof hath been of late yeeres experimentally felt here among us. Now it may here be demanded, whether Phlebotomy may be of any use in this maligne fever? The reason why I take upon me to discusse this question, is, because of the ignorance and error of many people, who have conceived so hard an opinion of this so noble and generous remedy in this disease, that if the patient die after the use thereof,Vulgar fearefull of phlebotomy, especially in this Fever. they impute this successe to the use of this remedy, and the vulgar often are affrighted at the very mentioning of it, and as they are commonly jealous of the best actions of the Physitians, and apt to interpret every thing in the worst sense, so commeth it to passe in this particular.Answere. It is true indeed, that many after the use of the best meanes doe many times miscary, the Almighty who first made man having set downe a period of time for every one, which no man can passe: and because the skillfull Physitian not being able to dive into the secret counsell of his Maker (as being a man and no God) useth the likeliest meanes, which by reason, and his owne and other mens experiences he thinketh fittest to grapple with this strong champion; in the which combat, the violence of the disease being so great that it will not yeeld to any meanes,(...) o^ the patient, the (...), or the (...) Physitian, (...) many times the (...) of the miscarying of the patient. is it reason that the Physitian for all his care and diligence should be so sharply censured? I doe not deny, but that they had need to have their eyes in their heads who deale with this disease: but againe many stand in their owne light either protracting time and irrecoverable occasion, which as in all, so especially in this disease, is speedily to be laied hold on; or else using the counsell of such ignorant and unskillfull persons, who although they assume unto themselves the name of Physitians, and are so by most reputed, are notwithstanding altogether unfit for so weighty an imploiment. By these meanes an error may be committed in the carriage of the businesse, and yet will this be but vitium personae, non rei, a fault in this ignorant person, but not in the profession it selfe. And it is by an unanimous

consent of all our best practitioners agreed upon,Phlebotomy by an unanimous consent allowed of (...) this d^sease. that in this same fever phlebotomy is a most soveraine remedy, and may safely be used, if in time, and with due circumspection of circumstances it bee administred. The famous Co^sil^or med^cin. lib. consi^ ^^4. Crato, Physitian to foure Emperors, is of this opinion, and did so practise it, as likewise a famous ^iercat tom 2. cap. 2. (...) de ^ebrib. incurat. f^br. maligna Rutand de morbe vngar and alij (...) Spanish Physitian, and divers others doe all subscribe to this practise. And therefore let women content themselves with their owne affaires, and conteine themselves within the precincts of their owne callings, and not take upon them to passe sentence in matters of so high a nature, whereof they are altogether ignorant, and let every man (as is most reasonable) be beleeved in his owne profession. I doe not here averre, that the fever of it selfe in regard of the malignitie doth indicate phlebotomy, but onely in regard of repletion. Neither yet am I so ignorant, but that I know there are divers such constitutions which admit not of Phlebotomy, which may severall waies come to passe:Phlebotomy not alwaies (...) ab^olute necessity in this Fever. either in the absence of any such repletion, or else in regard of the sexe, age, some ordinary evacuation supplying the place thereof, a thinne or rare structure of the body, the individuall and particular constitution of some bodies, and the like circumstances. And indeed the various manner of the invasion of this disease, and the diversitie of bodies it assaulteth (few being surprized after one and the same manner, as Raro aut nunquaem eisdem ac^ (...) and co^^i^onibus in (...) appare, hu^u mea^ febris sed pro varietate ^orpore^ apparatus, and a^^raum r^rum quib^^ corpus umanum muta^ri habent, variant (...) inde ipsum (...) ^dem Mer^at^ loco nuper citat Crato etiam loco nuper (...). writers doe witnesse, and I may selfe have, as very often, so especially this last yeere, and 1617. observed: in both which yeeres the constitution of the aire, humid and austrine, was much alike, doth require a divers, and not alwaies the same manner of cure. And therefore as in all diseases, so in this more particularly, people had need to consider with whom they deale, and not, as it the too common and ordinary custome, to be trust their lives with such as are unfurnished often either of skill or honesty. It is true the patient often dieth after the use of this remedy, and so doth he also often recover after it; and so if the case be to be judged by issue and event, why take they not this with them then, and set the hares foot against the goose gibblets?Obiections against phlebotomy in this disease. And whereas it may bee objected, that phlebotomy in this disease occasioneth a sudden evacuation of the spirits, so carefully here to be preserved. I answere, that the former cautions carefully being observed, there is no such feare: nay it is more agreeable to reason, that a breathing of the blood by eventilation, should rather refresh the spirits, and by that meanes the better enable nature to subdue the residue behind. And as some have died after the use of this remedy, and others recover, so have I likewise observed divers, who without either this or any other meanes, died. And many againe, especially of the poorer sort, who after a long endurance of much misery by reason of this disease, have at length without meanes recovered. This ministers sometime occasion to some of the ignorant sort, especially of our too busie women, to say it is in vaine to use the advice of any Physitian; which opinion is so absurd in it selfe, that I thinke it needeth no confutation.Answere. But I reply to these pragmaticall busie bodies, that many poore women are in their lying in hard pinched with poverty, lying upon a little straw, scarce able to come by a morsel of good meat to refresh their hu^gry appetites,

and by this necessitating poverty, are often constrained within two or three daies after their delivery to goe about their domesticall affaires; and yet these people (the blessing of the Almighty supplying the want of that he hath otherwise denied them) all this notwithstanding doe well live, and recover their former strength againe. I would willingly aske any of these so wise women, if they would in imitation of those poore people betake them to their straw-bed in a raw earthen floore, forsake their warme eawdells, plum-broths, almond-milkes, and many other dainties, their downe-beds well warmed, and couches well accommodated, and betake them in so short a time to bussle about their houshold businesse.Histori^^ There was a neare kins-woman of mine once delivered of twinnes in the fields, a great way from any towne (she not thinking her time of delivery then so neare) accompanied onely with her two men, the one performing the office of a midwife, while the other posted to the next towne for this same intent; but ere her comming, the Gentlewoman was delivered, and lived till she was above eighty yeeres old. Of these swinnes also, the one was afterwards a captaine in the Low-countries, and died afterwards at home in his bed: and the daughter was married to a gentleman of good meanes, and lived to be a mother of many children. By these and the like these foolish and idle objections are easily answered, and yet, sure I am, many of those poore people would be glad to injoy such comforts as those of the better sort doe; Howbeit, I thinke, they would scarce exchange their condition with that of those poore people, nor yet imitate this last or the like example, howsoever the party sped well. Many of these poore people, I am sure, would be glad to have the counsell and directions of a good Physitian, and would be willing to follow his directions, at least in diet, if they were able. And howsoever many in this extreme poverty through the blessing of the Almightie, who is able both with small meanes,Many poore people although they recover of their disease, yet often endure much misery, and are long a recovering. and without any meanes at all to bring his owne purpose to passe, yet doe many of those poore people also miscary and die; and many of those who recover, for want many times of a small helpe, as of a glister, etc; often undergoe a great deale of misery, and especially for want of good, comfortable and wholesome Diet, lye often languishing a long time. Now the judicious well know and understand, that the Physitian many times neither useth phlebotomy nor purging medicines, where hee sees no use of the same, but when he sees nature able of it selfe to doe the worke, lets it alone, doing nothing but as he sees need: and many times there is need only of som directions for diet: and yet is this a thing of no smal moment, as hath been proved already. Besides, that the presence of the skilfull and expert Physitian watcheth and espieth the fit time and opportunity of doing, that which in his discretion he shall thinke fitting. The vulgar indeed thinke the Physitians skill consisteth all in purging and bleeding, and where either that is not to be done, or they conceive it ought not so to be, they thinke there is no use of the Physitians counsell.
Whether Phlebotomy may bee used in small Pox.But now I proceed to the small poxe, wherein wee are to discusse this question, whether phlebotomy in this case may be admitted or no? the which may be also understood of the measells. Of this remedy in the

diseases, not onely the vulgar sort, but some of better breeding are also very shy, whether there be any just cause, let us inquire. To discusse this question, we are to distinguish the times of this disease, whether before the eruption of the Pox or after. It hath beene held hitherto by most people, a great absurdity to let blood, or administer any manner of physicke in the least feare, or suspition of any such disease, and many, especially of the more ignorant sort, are still of this old erronious opinion: but others have of late yeeres, by the judicious proceeding of learned Physitians, atteined to some better understanding and are better satisfied in this point. It is then the opinion of all our best Tempestive igtur detrahemius langui^ est ex intern^^ achii. Verum u^i iam maium invests inhabitum corporis periculo^a est ph^^botomia. ^olle^ de ^orb, intern libr. ^. tract de exanthern. Physitians, that before the eruption of the poxe, consideratis considera^dis, all circumstances duely considered, it may be safely administred, if wee see neede: and this I could both out of mine owne, and other Physitians experience plainly make appeare. The late practice of the Physitians of the City of London 1628, where this remedy was used, both in this disease before eruption, and in many young people for prevention, I thinke, hath rectified the erring judgement of many people. This last yeere, 1630. a Lady then living in this I owne, had a chamber-maide,Historie. who falling sicke, within three or foure daies after, I was sent for to her; but perceiving some beginning of either pox or measells, and for this cause abst^ined from phlebotomy, at first, by reason of the fever by mee intended: but inconclusion, the disease getting the upper hand, the fever increasing, the Maide died. The same day, a little after, having hired another chamber-maide, within a little space shee also fell sicke of a fever, for whom also my presence and counsell being craved, at my first comming, finding a plethoricall body, with an intense Fever, yet without any eruption of poxe or measells, although a feared some such matter, I caused open a veine in the arme, and the next morning after the poxe came for thin great abundance; and so through Gods blessing upon the meanes, she in a short time recovered her former health. And yet after the use of this remedie, shee confessed, that before her bleeding, shee was not sensible of any thing that was either said or done to her: and yet immediatly after, shee confessed shee found great ease and allevation of former accidents. If this party had died then, many of the vulgar would undoubtedly have said, phlebotomy had beene her bane, and yet the former died without it. Citerum perpet^^^ non (...) ^o^omia cum iam ^^pulae in ^uperfi ie (...) extite^^nt Etenim fit ^liquando prae^op^^ viti, ^t and (...) rel^quum fit (...), vt ^eat v^^^ementer diffic^ltas s^^^andi, gra^is fi^^e ris ^ quo tem^o^^^ si ni^^l repugnat vena s^cunda est ^lioqui san^u^ sagis utendum erit Idem ibid. Some Physitians proceed yet further, to the use of phlebotomy, even after the eruption, in some cases, as in a great plethory, or abundance of blood, accompanied with a Fever, difficulty of respiration, etc. especially, if there be no other impediment or contra-indication. And in case this could not conveniently be effected, then doe they advise leaches, or else scarification with application of cupping-glasses. But herein it will concerne that Physitian that shall follow this course, to be verie warie and circumspect, for feare of hindring the laudable course of nature, as also for preventing the clamour and calumnie of such as are alwaies readie to censure the Physitians best actions, and to interpret all in the worst sense, especially if so it come to passe, that the patient die of the disease. But because my purpose is not, in this place to dwell upon particular diseases, I will speake but a word or two of phlebotomie in the Iaundise, and so conclude this chapter.
Whether in the Iau^dise we may use phlebotomy.As in many other points, so in this particular concerning phlebotomie in the Iaundise, the vulgar are much mis-taken. They are alwaies of opinion, that some ordinary womans medicine will doe the turne, how unfit soever, and without any consideration of the cause. Now, whether the use of phlebotomie be here sometimes necessary, let us inquire a little. Wee are then first to consider of the cause, and then shall wee be better able to proceed to the right cure. This disease then commeth either of it selfe alone, without any other disease, and that of divers causes; or else as a symptome, an accident, or reteiner to some other disease, a Fever, especially. Vide hac de re Mercatum Tom. 3. libr 4. cap. 5. de intern. morb. curat. Holler. de morb. intern. lib. 2. cap. 37. de liter. If then it be conjoyned with a Fever, the Fever of it selfe, if no impediment, doth indicate phlebotomie, and the Iaundise doth not at all hinder our course. And if it come primarily, and of it selfe, blood abounding, or being the chiefe cause of the disease, it is in no wise to be neglected, as the authorities of our learned Physitians doe evidently witnesse, as I could prove by a cloud of witnesses, if I had undertaken of set purpose to handle this subject, and withall had not said some thing of this subject in Anatomy of urines, libr. 2. cap. 9. another place, this being here spoken onely occasionally, and by the way, this being often an accident accompanying Fevers, as wee have said alreadie. Hence is evinced the mad temeritie of many, indifferently exhibiting their ordinarie Iaundise medicines in every sort of Iaundise, without any respect, either to age, sexe, cause, or any other circumstance whatsoever, of the which to judge they are altogether unable; thus often trifling away irrecoverable occasion, untill the party be ready to be imbarqued into Charons boat. And thus it befell a young Gentleman of Northampton-shire, some few yeeres agoe,History. and little above thirty yeeres of age, in whom, about the later end of the Spring, the Jaundise was apparently to be seene, of the which a woman (as it commonly the custome) tooke upon her to cure, and thus was the time trifled away, untill at length, in the Harvest, the Gentleman came over to Northampton, to finde some better counsell than this womans skill could afford him, and did continue here for a certaine space. At my first comming to this Gentleman, I perceived besides his Jaundise, a double Dropsie of the worst kinde, together with a very hot obstructed liver, whom, a learned Physitian then living in this place also, and my selfe, doing our best indeavours to cure, yet had this enemy taken so strong possession, that all our writs of remove could not serve the turne, nor would any meanes serve to bribe this grim sergeant, death. Let people therefore be warned by other mens harmes, and learne to be wise in that which concerneth them so neere.



CHAP. IIIJ.

Of the veines to be opened in the body of man, together with the manner.

IT followeth now in order, that wee say something concerning the veines to be opened in the body of man. Vnder this name, veine, wee understand, besides the ordinary veines, the arteries also, which by antient Physitians were often opened for divers infirmities; the arteries have their originall from the great artery planted in the heart, and sending branches thorow the whole body, filled with a pure, thin, subtile, and more refined blood than that of the veines, and full of the vitall spirits. These arteries are not with us usually opened, as they were in antient times, and that both in regard they are not so easily found, also for the difficultie in the solidation, there being danger of gangrene, or at least of a dangerous tumour, called ancurysma, which are hard to be cured: of these therefore I will say no more.
The liver is the fountain and wel-spring of blood, from whence by the veines, as it were so many pipes, it is conveied thorow the whole body. The two principall, or master-veins, taking both their being and beginning, are the great hollow veine, called by our Anatomists vena cava,Two great ans^^^ vern^s in (...). and the other vena porta, or the porter-veine. From these two especially vena cava, are many great branches ful of blood, distributed thorow the whole body. Of these branches, a^ need requireth, either by way of prevention,Veines opened for d^vers ends. or curation, we open sometimes one, sometimes another, as well for generall evacuation; as in great repletions, and prevention of diseases; as also sometimes to evacuate blood abounding either in quantity, in quality, or both, in some great and dangerous diseases. It is againe sometimes used for revulsion, and sometimes for derivation, as hath beene said already. Sometimes also we use more particular evacuation of the veines: as by leaches, scarification, with cupping, as afterwards shall appeare. The veines usually opened in the arme, are sixe:Veins usually opened in the arme. Cephalica, Basilica, Mediana, Axillaris: and besides these, yet two other; the one running downe the arme like a cord, passing betwixt the thumbe and the formost finger, and another runneth out betwixt the ring-finger and the little finger. Among all these veines of the arme, none more safe to be opened than the Cephalica, or humeraria,Cephalica, or humeraria may be opened with least danger. as having neither nerve nor artery under it, as the others have. These three first mentioned are most usually opened in the arme: and sometimes the smaller veines upon some occasions: to wit, either when the great veins are not conspicuous, or perhaps when we feare the strength of the party; in which case the salvatella,Small veines sometimes ope^ed. running betwixt the ring finger and the little finger is opened. For these great master-veines send

downe small branches, which are distributed among the fingers. All these veines are branches of the great ascendent truncke of the great hollow veine.Cephalica upon what occasion to be opened.Basilica, orliver-veine Mediana. Salvatella. The Cephalica, we open to evacuat and pull backe from the head and parts above the necke. The Basilica, or liver veine, to evacuat and pull backe from the liver, and all parts beneath the necke. The mediana or middle veine drawes as well from the parts above as beneath the necke. The Salvatella, as well right as left are used to be opened in infirmities of the liver and spleen.The veine betwixt the formest finger and the thumb.Divers veines in the head opened upon severall occasions. That which runneth out betwixt the formest finger and the thumb is not so often opened. In the head there be divers veines which vpon occasion may bee opened, howbeit not all in use, there being few Surgeons so skillfull as to open them well. There is one in the forehead usually opened for a paine in the hinder part of the head; as also for the numnesse and heavinesse of the head, and for the inflammation of the eyes, called Ophthalmia. The veines of the temples and in the corners of the eyes helpe the megrim, old inflammations of the eyes, scabs and inflammations of the eie lids. But wee proceed now to veines usually opened in the foot, howbeit there be divers more veines in and about the head, which might upon occasion by a skillfull Artist be opened;Veines opened in the foot.Ischiadica seu vena poplitis.Saphena.De his fusius Galenus lib, de ven^ sect. howbeit there is in frequent request phlebotomy of the veines called ravinae in a Squinancy, and internall inflammations of the almonds, Tensills and Tongue. In the foot then there are two veines usually opened; the one called Ischiadica or vena poplitis in the out-side of the foot, usually opened in inflammations beneath the kidnies, especially after the Basilica of the arme hath been once opened. Saphena in the inside of the foot we open especially in infirmities of the womb: as in retention of the menstruous fluxe, etc. And these veines are branches of the great truncke descendent of the great hollow veine. Many ignorant Surgeons doe indifferently oftentimes open the wrong veine in the foot in women, that in the outside for the other in the inside,In phlebotomy a rectitude to bee observed. and so doe them wrong. In phlebotomy we are likewise to observe a rectitude, or answering of the place affected, to the place by which we evacuat, and this in revulsion is the best way, and giveth speediest ease: as in a Pleurisie, to open a veine in the arme of the same side; as if in the right side, the right arme; if in the left, the left arme. And Galen himselfe witnesseth, that the parts of the body which have this relative situation, have likewise a great communion or sympathy one with another: as likewise eruptions of blood proceeding from any part of the side affected, bring no small profit; whereas that which proceedeth from the contrary side bringeth but small benefit, or if otherwise, it is after a long time. But upon many other particulars concerning this point, and many other alterations concerning the veines to be opened, I thinke it not pertinent now to insist. The manner of opening of the veine, and the orifice are not to bee passed over.The manner of the section. Now as for the manner of the section, it is of three sorts: oblique or slopwise, when as wee reiterate this operation the same day, transverse or overthwart, when as wee purpose no reiteration: downe-right, when we intend reiteration the next day. Sometimes also we make a larger orifice, and sometimes againe a narrower. A large orifice we use when the blood is cold, thicke, clammie

and melancholicke, in Harvest and Winter, and in strong and able constitutions. And therefore in all diseases proceeding from melancholicke or phlegmaticke blood, as in the Fever, quartane, quotidian, madnesse proceeding from melancholy in the braine, Apoplexie, suppression of menstruous fluxes in women, we are to use a large and ample orifice,A smaller orifice. as likewise, when we are to make use of a plentifull evacuation. Sometimes againe, we are to make a smaller orifice, and that both to prevent weaknesse, to evacuat the thinnest blood, and to avoid the dangers which might insue upon immoderate evacuation. If the party likewise prove unruly, as in Delirations or Phrenesies; or yet fall out in the night time, the same course is to be taken, and the sicke to bee watched, lest the opening againe of the orifice should procure a dangerous, if not deadly evacuation.


CHAP. V.

To what persons this remedy may safely be administred? And whether a woman with child may safely be let blood, where some thing also concerning the age fit to be phlebotomised.

NOw in the next place we are to consider what persons may safely use or not use this so noble and necessary a remedy.In diseases (...) are not alwaies to use the remedy by them indicated. And we are not alwaies when we deale with the sick to set upon that remedy, which the disease doth indicate; but must alwaies in the first place carefully consider, whether their strength will endure it or no? A great disease present or imminent doth indicate phlebotomy, if strength, age, the time of the yeere, etc, do permit. But every weaknesse and debility doth not inhibite the use of this remedy. The strength then is weakened two waies: first, when it is oppressed, and againe when it is quite dissolved and overthrown.Strength weakened two waies.Oppression of the streng^h. Strength oppressed doth not alwaies inhibite evacuation, but onely that which is dissipated and prostrated or overthrowne, either by the abundance of humors or by their stuffing up, ab infarctu: as in that Plethoricall disposition whereunto the Wrestlers of old were obnoxious, and by interception of the veines, in fierce fevers,Stren^th prostrated or overthrowne. etc. the strength is dissipated or prostrated by the dissolution of the substance of the spirits of the musculous or fleshy parts of the body, of the spermaticall parts, or by the overthrow of their temperature: as commeth to passe in Consumptions, Hecticke and maligne fevers, in great crudities and the like.Strength is to be considered according to the triple faculty, animall, vitall and naturall. The strength is to be considered according to the triple faculty, animall, vitall and naturall, and are discerned by their severall functions: the animall by the functions of sense and motion, the vitall by the pulfe; and the naturall by the signes of concoction and cruditie: although

Galen mentioneth onely the vitall, as that on which all the others doe depend. Strength is altered by meanes of things naturall; not naturall,What constitutions of body admit of a large and plentifull evacuation; and what constitutions admit no^ of it. and such as are besides nature. So then in the first place the temperature of the body hot, of a solid and firme substance, with large and ample veines, may sustaine a large and ample evacuation: the contrary constitution either admitteth of a very small, or no evacuation at all. Againe, a hot and moist constitution of body, of a soft and thinne substance, and often induring great dissipation, doth in no wise sustaine any great evacuation. A temperature of body, hot and reasonable dry, with large veines, will indure a more liberall evacuation, than a body either cold and moist, or cold and dry; by reason that both these constitutions have but small veines. And let this alwaies carefully be observed, that such bodies as have small veines and little blood, can spare but little, if any at all, of this so noble and necessary a humor. And for the most part in fat folkes the veines are small: but if they be larger, they endure phlebotomy better than the former.What age fittest for Phlebotomy, and what not. Againe, severall ages have their strength and naturall vigor for the most part answerable. Middle and flourishing age is ordinarily and most commonly lusty and strong, abounding both in blood and spirits, and by consequent is more able to endure a more copious evacuation of blood. But old age, decrepit I meane, by reason of the defect thereof, is to be exempted from this evacuation. And children before 14. yeeres of age, although their strength in the substance doe abound, yet by reason of their soft and tender bodies, and by meanes of much evacuation, endure a daily dissipation, doe therefore either admit of little or no evacuation at all by phlebotomie; howbeit we take not alwaies our indication from the age, as hereafter shall appeare. Againe,The sexe. we are to consider the sex, for men generally and most commonly are for the most part better able to beate this evacuation than women, such especially as are of a thinne and foggy constitution, with small narrow veines. And during the time of their menstruous fluxe wee are to abstaine from this evacuation, unlesse sometimes in case of necessitie,Custome to be considered. when as it exceedeth in quantity. Women with child are likewise, unlesse in case of necessity, exempted from this generous remedy. And here custome commeth also to be considered: for such as are altogether unaccustomed to this evacuation, using a spare Diet, turmoiled with cares and troubles of mind, are lesse able to endure this evacuation. The contrary is to be understood of such as are thereunto accustomed,Things contrary to nature doe inhibite evacuation. and feed more liberally: Againe, things contrary to nature, in regard they overthrow the strength, do inhibite this evacuation: as diseases proceeding from crude and ill humours without repletion; as a Dropsie, or the like. As also great distempers of the principall parts, great wounds, etc. And so doe likewise distension of the nerves, paine or gnawing in the orifice of the stomack, swounding, long-watching, immoderate fluxes of the belly, spontaneous evacuation of blood, so farre as it overthroweth strength, or doth suffiently diminish the matter of the disease. Neither yet doth it suffice to consider the present estate of the sicke, but to forsee also what is likely after to insue. By these things wee may then judge; not onely who

may safely bleed, but in some sort aime at the quantity, and how often and when we may let blood, concerning which, notwithstanding, wee shall say some thing more at large in the next Chapter. But first I will discusse two questions; one concerning women with child, the other concerning the age, and whether age doth indicate Phlebotomy.
Concerning that therefore which hath been said concerning the sex,Whether a woman (...) blood or no^ especially of bleeding women with child, ariseth here no small doubt, whether a woman with child may safely be let blood or no? And great reason there is for this doubt: first, for that the antient (...). Aph 30. ^ib ^. Hippocrates, and father of Physitians hath left upon record, that there is no lesse danger than of aborsion to let a woman with child blood. There is also good reason to succour this assertion: for blood being the aliment and proper nourishment wherewith the child is sustained in the mothers wombe, if this sustenance be by phlebotomy withdrawne, the infant frustrated of its food, fadeth and is expelled before the accustomed time of deliverance. Now if this question were to be dec^ded by a jury of women, I doubt not, but we should have a verdict for the negative, unlesse it were composed of some of the wiser sort, who, perhaps, ha^e sometimes seene this with good successe practised. To answer this question, true it is, that Hippocrates doth totally inhibite this remedy,Answere. and that, as is most probable, by reason neither this phlebotomie in women with child, nor yet any other was so frequent in his age, as it is now adaies. As for that which some alledge, that the evacuations in his time were so copious, and so farre exceeding ours, that with good reason he forbiddeth the same, I thinke it to be no reason at all:Phlebotomy not so frequent in the time of Hip^ocrates as in this our age. for it is not to be supposed, that a man of that eminent understanding and experience was ignorant of the limitation of so generous a remedy, according to the severall circumstances. But with us this controversie is long agoe decided, we finding by daily experience, that this in many women proveth a most soveraigne and singular good remedy both for themselves and their children, as both my selfe, and many other Physitians have by daily experience found to be true. And besides, it is by an unanimous consent of our Si sit in trimis mersibus, si adhu^ ie dicoti^nes mutendi ^ ag^^n h^c, po^est ^uto mini eo tempore per sect^onem v^narum orachio^^m, etc Mercur^d^ (...) orb. muliebr lib 22 ca^ 1 Nec adeo uti vet^res fecerunt, i^ grev^dis ple^bo^cis ^hlebo mia metuenda, cum exod us usu aliquas abortivisse mi^i non constet etiamsi^ ambis terve repetier^nt ^ vi^ean usque mustas, etsi vulu^ratae aliterve laesae, plurimum sanguinis profuderint, tamen foetus minime nocuisse. ^ lat. Praxeos sua tract. tertio cap. 1. late Writers of whatsoever nation fully agreed upon and determined. But let us now see whether there bee any reason for this practice? Wee see many times some women so abound in blood, that all the time they are with child, they have their periodicall and monethly fluxe as constantly as at any other time, and often also in reasonable great abundance, which argueth that besides the infants ordinary allowance, there is yet a great deale to spare. Besides, it is not unknowne that some women cannot goe out their full time, unlesse they make use of this remedy. Againe, doe we not see, that even towards the later end, when they are now nearest their time of deliverance, notwithstanding the infant now growing greater, demandeth a greater allowance of food than in former times, yet are the brests now filled fuller with this whitened blood than before. As also,Reasons proving this asser^ion. doe we not often see some women to void a great quantity of pure, refined blood at the nose, sometimes in the beginning, sometimes in the middle, and sometimes towards the later end of  their time? What prejudice then, I pray you, can this bring to a woman 

man in this case,It may safely be used if discretion be not wanting. if surprized with some dangerous acute disease by the advice of a judicious and understanding Physitian; to prevent a further mischiefe, she make use of this remedy? It is true indeed, the issue and event is not in the power of mortall man; and perhaps; sometimes some have observed some sinistrous accident to have in sued the use of this remedy, which may deterre others from the use of it. But by the same reason we may reject the most laudable and usefull evacuation in time of greatest need, it not alwaies answering our expectation: I can, notwithstanding, upon mine owne experience testifie, that some, to whom upon necessity,In the Authors owne experience safe. I administred this remedy, did afterwards confesse, they never found more easie and speedy labour, than after they had used both this and some other evacuating remedies, being likewise freed from divers accidents wherewith they had beene in former times after their delivery molested. Others, I make no doubt, can speake as much  upon their owne experience. Besides, the same Hippocrates alloweth women with childe, the use of strong purging medicines in certaine moneths, which is yet, in my opinion, more dangerous, and not so in our power to stop when wee please: as for phlebotomy, it is alwaies in our owne power, according to our discretion, as we shall see neede require, to take more or lesse, and to use reiteration, if wee shall not see it safe to take our full allowance at the first. But let no man here mis-take my meaning, as though I would perswade women,This remedy not rashly to be attempted. desperately and unadvisedly to rush upon this noble remedy: nay, my meaning is so farre from this, that I wish them to be very wary and circumspect in the use hereof, but when the case without it is dangerous, if not desperate, then my counsell is, that they rather admit of a lawfull warranted remedy, which, by the blessing of God, is in all likelyhood and probability like to doe them good, then to lie still in the ditch and cry God helpe mee, and yet suffer none to put to their helping hand. But it may be the issue will not answer expectation. I answer, it is better to admit of a Praestat ancep^ adhihere anxiliu^ quam nullum Cels. lib. 2. cap. 10. doubtfull remedy, than to continue in a desperate case, admitting none at all. Moreover, I wish women to be circumspect and wary whom they set aworke, not be trusting so pretious a jewell as thine owne,A carefull consideration must be had what Physitian one useth. and it may be, thy childes life also, with some idle, prating, counterfeit Physitian, assuming, though undeservedly, unto himselfe, the name of a Physitian: but such a one as thou knowest an Artist, experienced in his profession, and able to consider of all the severall circumstances here to be taken notice of. It is also to be observed, that it is not here sufficient to take notice of the strength and greatnesse of the disease in the woman her selfe, but to consider the strength of the infant also, and how much time is past since her first conception. And let this rule alwaies carefully be observed, that this remedy be freelier, and in a greater quantity used in the three or foure first moneths than after. Againe, although the woman seeme to be strong and lusty, yet I wish the quantity to be but small, and rather to be sparing, so committing the rest to nature, than standing too punctually upon thy set quantity, adventure to overthrow both the mother and the childe: and if there shall seeme an urging necessity of a larger evacuation, then will it be farre better, and lesse prejudiciall to either

party, to divide thy quantity, and take it at two severall times.Whether phlebotom^ may be used to accelerate and further the birth. Besides phlebotomy upon this occasion, there occurres yet another in the which phlebotomy is used in women with childe; and that is, when now their reckoning is at an end, and they upon the point of their labour, then some Physitians doe advise phlebotomy in the foot, to facilitate and further the birth. The which course, as it hath beene practised by Hippocrates, so can I not altogether disallow of it;Answere. yet I wish him that shall undertake such a taske, to beware, lest hee precipitate and eject this guest out of his antient habitation before his lease be out; and so according to the old proverb, Haste might make waste.
Now,Whether the age doeth ^ndicate phlebotomy before wee conclude this point concerning the persons who are to use this remedy, I have yet something to sa^ concerning the age. Wee have already said, that Lice^ Grae^^ i^ puer^usque ad 14 annum a venae sect, abstinerent a rabes (ut a^^^s ix^mus lib 1. schel ad observat. ^^) e^iam in pueris eam a^iqua do non reliquerant, it nos in puerts c^annorum pteur ^ide laborantibus v^^am ^e^uimas et^am ^ quo^am 13 ann^^ageate, Quida (...) us (...) ensis fael^ci success^ qu^^^o anno venom ^^cuit A^naeius ven^m ^^cuit (...) puero (...) sangu n^o. ^ a^no (...) i^ pueris tomen (...) ^culis ((...) c^ae angustiores sunt) angu^^^^ utuntu^, (...) ^^rum ^aud^ For^e^ (...) serv^e (...). libr. 16. sc^ol ad observ ^^ children under 14 yeeres of age, were not to use this remedy. Vpon this then ariseth a question, whether the age doth indicate this evacuation or no? This is the vulgar opinion, that the age simply doth indicate this remedy: and therefore they stand punctually upon the number of yeeres, without any consideration had to the strength of the party here principally to be considered. I answer therefore negatively, that the age doeth not simply and in it selfe indicate the strength, and by consequent the use of this remedy, but wee are rather to consider the state and constitution of body: for wee see some bodies to be farre stronger at a certaine age, than others at the same age. Some children are stronger and abler at eight, than others at foureteene: and if we may upon urgent occasion let the one blood at foureteene, why not the other at eight, upon the like occasion? Againe, as Ergo si ^uvenis i^b^cillus e^t, aut si^m (...) quae grav^da non est parum val^t, mali san^^is mi^t^^ur. At firmus puer and robustus sene^, and gravida mul er valens, tuto curantur, libr. 2. cap. 10. Celsus saith, if a young man be weake and feeble, or yet a woman that is not with childe, wee ought to refraine from this remedie. But a childe that is strong, as likewise a woman with childe may safely use this remedy. Put the case therefore, that a childe having overpast his sucking time, of a thick and strong constitution of body, and full of blood, fall into some acute dangerous disease, and without the use of this remedy, in all appearance, irrecoverable; it will be the best course without any further delay to let him blood, yet not without a due consideration of the time, age, etc. And thus Avenzoar let his sonne blood at the age of three yeeres. The like may be said of lusty able men or women, sicke of some dangerous disease proceeding of repletion, as long experience hath taught us. Besides, it cannot be denied, that some men are abler and lustier at 60 or 70, than divers others at 40 yeeres. Why then may not such persons, upon urgent occasion, injoy the benefit of phlebotomy. Some dozen yeeres agoe, m^ pres^nce was sollicited for an antient Gentlewoman in Bedford-shire, about 65 yeeres of a^e,History. at that time much distempered with heat, not without a Fever, and feare of further danger. After the use of some small meanes fit for the purpose, fearing shee would hardly admit of phelebotomie, although in my opinion then useful for her, yet I asked her whether shee had ever used this remedy, and whether shee durst adventure upon this remedy, if need should so require? she replyed, that for many ^eeres together, she had used this remedy at least three or foure times a yeere for divers yeeres together, and therefore very willingly gave way to the same, which was not without good successe, and was very lately alive. Moreouer, doe wee not by experience,

often see many both children, women with childe, and old men and women lose a great quantity of their purest and most refined blood, at the nose, and often in a farre greater quantity than any Physitian would ordinarily let out of the arme? and therefore to conclude this point, let not people so much stand upon niceties of age, which as appeareth, is of no such validity, as to withstand and oppose in time of need so noble and so necessary a remedy.


CHAP. VI.

Of the quantity, how long the patient is to bleed, and concerning reiteration of this remedy in time of need, with a confutation of some erronious opinions concerning this point.

IN bodily infirmities we are not onely to consider what is fitting for them, but likewise what nature is able to beare: and therefore we are here to use no small discretion, lest wee give nature more than it either demandeth, or the cure requireth. When nature therefore is strong, then dare we boldly goe about that which the disease doth indicate: for nature it selfe being once set aworke by some auxiliary meanes, doth afterwards of it selfe perfect the rest. The quantity then of evacuation of blood must answer in quantity to that which aboundeth in the body, provided the strength can beare it.No certaine rule concerning the quantity can be set downe. But because there is no certaine rule and measure of the strength, neither doe wee assuredly know or fore-see divers circumstances and accidents to insue after; as of the constitution of the ambient aire, etc. this quantity therefore must needs remaine uncertaine. It being, notwithstanding, in our power when wee open a veine, to take lesse or more, according to our liking; therefore comparing the strength with the greatnesse of the disease and the repletion of the body, by the proper signes of them both, it will not be very hard by an artificiall conjecture, to come very neere to the just quantity.How to finde it out. But if yet wee cannot so well bring our purpose to passe, it shall be the safer course to keepe within compasse, and reiterate the remedy another time, than standing too much upon our precise quantity, indanger the sicke by diminution of strength. Now, wee must alwaies measure the quantity of evacuation, by the quantity or greatnesse of the causes requiring, and strength tolerating the same. And from the mutuall comparison of the diseases requiring, and the strength tolerating,A triple quantity observed. this phlebotomy admitteth a three-fold difference: for there is one sort of phlebotomy called great or perfect, evacuating all or the greatest part of the matter of the disease; another profitable but imperfect, which detracting some part of it, leaveth a lesser quantity

behinde, which therefore nature may easily overcome: there is yet a third, so small and little in quantity, that not only may it be called imperfect, but being so small, is also unprofitable, and no whit beneficiall. The like we may say concerning the strength, which is either absolute, and in the heigth, in a meane declining from the former,The strength threefold. or weake and overthrowne: the first requireth perfect evacuation; the next, though imperfect, yet may prove profitable: the last admitteth either of a very small, or no evacuation at all. The like division may we likewise make of the diseases. And if wee would safely proceed in our cure, this rule must alwaies be observed, that wee lay in even scales the greatnesse of the disease with the measure of strength. If the disease be very great and dangerous,When to use a liberall and plentifull evacuation, and when a lesser. accompanied with strength answerable, we are not to deferre a full and copious evacuation: if the disease be lesse, yet with full strength, a lesser evacuation may prove profitable, that the cure may be safe, although not so sudden: for to use a plentiful evacuation at the first, is not alwaies so safe. Againe, if the strength be but small, yet not altogether prostrate, meeting with a great violent disease, it will be best to divide this evacuation, and in the time interceding these two evacuations, before wee come to reiteration, to refresh and cherish languishing nature. In acute diseases,Reiteration when to be used. by reason of greater danger, wee may use a more plentifull evacuation, if strength be not quite prostrated: but if onely oppressed and languishing, we are not to omit, but divide it, as hath beene said, which wee commonly call phlebotomy, per (...). In diseases called chronicall,In chronicall disease^ how to determine of the quantity. or of longer continuance, the longer we thinke they are like to last, the lesser evacuation may serve, for feare lest nature sincke in the way: for in chronicall diseases, we are not only to have an eye to the present, but also carefully to fore-see the future forces. Againe, in phlebotomy,In prevention the quantity. by way of prevention in approaching of any disease from repletion, wee need not evacuate so much as this plenitude requireth; as wee see in diseases which require a present and speedy cure. The antients, I find, were very lavish in this kind of evacuation, and let them blood often, till they swounded; and yet is this no certaine rule how long they should bleed, neither yet is it safe,Swounding no certaine signe of the quantity. although both by Hippocrates and Galen in some cases prescribed; for neither are such as fall into those fainting fits, alwaies sufficiently evacuated, neither yet will some swound, although they lose a farre greater quantity of blood than the former. No more is the changing of the colour of the blood, especially in inflammations, and many more cases besides, any certaine signe of the true quantity. Now, this change of colour is either to be observed in the fluxe, or after: in the fluxe it is hardly discerned,The changing of the colour of the blood is no certaine rule to discerne the true quantity. and after, it is to small purpose: and we see oftentimes, that after a double or triple reiteration, the blood is still bad, and yet were it not safe to goe on still, untill the blood appeare better: for so sometimes we might exhaust all the blood of the body. And this is diligently to be observed of covetous or ignorant surgeons, either in the City or the country, many being often too ready to exceede the limits of reason; as little certainty is there to be found in the changing of the face and eyes.As little certainty by the change of the face and eyes. And in the streame or impetuosity of the fluxe of blood, there is yet as

litle certainty as in the former: the which many waies faile before a ful evacuation,The best rule of finding out the true quantity. howbeit none of these are to be slighted and neglected. We are then to judge of the competent quantity principally by the ease ensuing, and the patients easie enduring of the same. Now although sudden alieniation doe not alwaies ensue, yet were it better againe and againe to reiterate the same, than proceed too farre at first, as we have said already;The antients very lavish in this kind of evacuation. although the Gal. de venae sect antients proceeded to an excessive quantity, as 6. or 7. pounds at a time; and a Bo^all. de venae sect. late Writer relateth strange stories of prodigious and stupendious evacuations in this kind, which I had rather beleeve than make triall of the like. Our Brittaine bodies, I am sure, would never endure such vast evacuations. But I hold the rule of the learned Celsus far better, that it is good to be sparing in the use of those remedies which evacuat strength, the preserver and gardian of our lives, and in stead of credit purchase often disgrace to the Physitian. Now when as wee cannot at once evacuat a due quantity,Reiteration very usefull. then, as said is, we come to reiteration. And this, both in evacuation, revulsion and derivation, is a very effectuall remedy: and the oftner this reiteration be used, the more effectuall is the revulsion, saith Lib de (...) per ^ang m^ffi^n. Galen. Now in reiteration, if necessitie urge us not much, and we not so well as yet acquainted with the patients strength, it is better to beginne with the lesser quantity: but if necessity constraine us, and we assured of the patients strength, it is better at first to beginne with a greater quantity, and more the second time than the third. If we are to let blood in any inflammation, wee are to reiterate it the same or the next day, and out of the arme. Reiteration by way of preservation may bee deferred untill the third or fourth day.
Erroneous opinion o^ ^he Vulgar.Now before we proceed, we must say something of a point, whereof some ignorants make a scruple: for oftentimes it commeth to passe, when the physitian, not without great need, prescribeth this so lawfull and use full a remedy, that some are afraid to venture on it, not out of any present feare or faint-heartednesse, but for feare, say they, lest our bodies looke for it againe every yeere.Confu^ation of this folly. To this the answere is easy, that if there be the like occasion, the yeere after, I see not, why thou maiest not with as good reason, as before, yeeld to the use thereof. If there be no need, I warrant thee from incurring any danger for this omission. Some againe use to bleed twice a yeere, and feare some great danger if this be neglected;Whether fit to bleed constantly once of (...) and it may be demanded, whether this be well done or no, blood being the treasure of life, and the fountaine and originall of all the spirits?Answere. I answere, I would wish thee to bee well advised, how thou partest from such a Jewell: yet because some may have more need than others; as namely, sanguine complexions with large and ample veines, living in ease and idlenesse, may with good counsell be bolder than others. Some doe this meerely out of custome,Many c^untrie peop^e much (...)Covetous Surgeons much (...) the people as many of our country people will, without any occasion, or good counsell, bleed in the Spring: many covetous country-surgeons (and I wish there were none in the City) also will sooth them up in this erroneous opinion, and bleed them without any necessity at all, yea, although it prove oftentimes the cause of many after-ensuing dangerous diseases. But such as have, without any need for a long

time inured themselves to so base acustome, I advise them by degrees to change this custome into a better: and if they be such, as have been accustomed to live in ease and idlenesse, and to feed liberally, I wish them to bee more frequent in their exercises, and more sparing in their Diet; so shall they both live longer, and injoy better health. No certaine perpetuall rule can here be prescribed to all bodies; yet will it prove alwayes the safest, especially in a businesse of so great a weight and moment, to establish thy thoughts by good counsell, for feare of a too late repentance.Another grosse and erroneous (...) of the ^ulgar. There is yet another erroneous opinion, for want of the knowledge of naturall philosophy, and ignorance of anatomy, hatched in the braines of some ignorant people: to wit, that when as they perceive any palpitation, by reason of some inclosed aire, either in the muscles of the temples, jawes, or any other place, they are of opinion that the life is then in that place, and by consequent, if the blood should at that same instant be let out of that place, that the party would instantly be deprived of life. And a Langius epist. medic lib. 7. ep^st 8. learned Germane Physitian relateth, that some ignorant Surgeons, after the falling of the blood out of the vein into the vessell, perceiving it sometimes, by reason of some flatuous matter mingled therewith, a little to move or tremble, made the party presently to drinke up this warme blood, affirming that this was the very life, whose sottish, ignorant and erroneous opinion the same author doth there learnedly confute, on the which I cannot now insist, having now yet many other things to handle, both concerning Phlebotomy and other matters. But I hope our people will be wiser, and leave many of their foolish, idle, ignorant and superstitious opinions, both concerning Phlebotomy and other points of Physicke. As for this flatulent, windy matter, the letting of it out, if there be not therewith too great an abundance of blood, will rather doe thee good than hurt: and as for the life, it is not confined to any particular part, but diffused thorow the whole parts of the body, although it be more principally, or as we may say, radicative, in the more noble and principall parts, the Braine, Heart and Liver, according to the seats of the three principall powers or faculties, animall, vitall and naturall.



CHAP. VIJ.

Of the fittest time for evacuation by Phlebotomy, both generall and particular, both of election and coaction: as also whether wee may safely let blood during the dog daies.

Eccles. 3.1.AS there is a fit and convenient time for every action under heaven, saith the wise man: so is not time to be neglected in this so waighty a businesse of evacuation by Phlebotomy, where especially the life of man lieth at the stake.Time generall and particular. The time is either generall or particular. By the generall time we understand the foure seasons of the yeere: by the particular, the day and houre befitting such a businesse. Among all our Physitians it is agreed upon; that the Spring is the best and most seasonable time,Best time of the yeer. and next to that the Autumne: but the Sommer by reason of excessive heat, and the Winter by reason of cold,The particular time. are not esteemed so seasonable. Againe, in the particular times the morning is answerable to the Spring, the noone tide to Sommer, the afternoone to Autumne, and the night to Winter.Best time of the day. Time of election and coaction or necessity. Now in the use of Phlebotomy, we consider the time after a double manner, one of election, another of necessity. In election when it is in our power, we are to make choice of the fitest time, as wel generall as particular: in necessity and cases of extremitie and coaction, wee must take hold of that which offereth himselfe, when we stand in most need. Now Phlebotomy is used for a double end, either to prevent sickenesse in the whole, or to cure diseases in the sicke. In prevention,In prevention. where we may have a free election, we are to make choice of the Spring, as the most temperate time, and a day temperate, neither too hot nor too cold: and in particular, the morning is the best and fittest, an houre or two after rising, the partie to be bled being fasting, and having unburdened his body of the fecall excrements, and concoction being fully finished. Next to the Spring is Autumne, in the which, if any be to bleed, the same cautions are to be observed. In sicknes is the case not a like, where we are not alwaies allowed this freedome of election.In sicknesse. Now all diseases are either acute or chronicall, as we have said already.In Chronicall diseases In chronicall diseases wee are, as neare as we can without the patients prejudice, to pitch upon the best and most convenient time:In acute diseases. but in acute diseases the case standeth farre otherwise, where we are often cast upon a coacted necessity. Wherefore, in burnning Fevers, in Plurisies, in Squinancies, and other like diseases, if strength permit, we are not to deferre this remedy, delay here breeding danger; but with all speed, either day or night, at what soever houre, not regarding any preparation of the body, to goe about it. By protracting of time, strength is often overthrowne, and therefore it will

be best at the beginning, and if in the first or second day, wee find this be wanting, we are not to adventure; nor yet after divers daies over-past, if it be not wanting, to incite it. But according to the(...)Aphor. 29 lib 2. Hippocraticall oracle, it is best in the beginning of the disease to undertake such a worke, and when the humors are now setled, it is best to rest. And this is chiefely to bee understood of such diseases as are without intermission. In acute diseases with exacerbation, whether they admit of remission or intermission, we are to make choice of this time of greatest tranquillity.In acute diseases admitting of intermission or remission the fittest time. And therefore in Fevers with remission we are to take that time; as in those that intermit, we are then to use this remedy, whatsoever houre it be, whether day or night: for then nature is most at quiet, and in regard of strength they then are best able to beare it. But when in any inflammatio^,Inflammation and great paines without a Fever. or any extraordinary great paine without any Fever we are to use this remedy, we are not to wait for any remission, but having respect to the greatnes of the cause, presently to set upon it, and in time of greatest extremity to use this remedy, to the end there may be procured a retraction of the humor (the other parts transmitting thither both blood and spirits) from the part affected. Phlebotomy used onely for a generall evacuation from the whole body, ought to bee administred in the beginning of the disease: and therefore in putrid Fevers it is best to be used at the first, according to Method. med. lib. 9. Revulsion when to be used.Derivation. Galens testimonie. Revulsion is used in diseases proceeding from distillation, and is best in the beginning in the impetuous fluxe of humors: but derivation after revulsion or generall evacuation, the affluxe of humors now ceasing.
By that which hath been said already,Whether Phlebotomy may be used during the dog-daies. the fittest and most convenient time for phlebotomy appeareth to be that which is most seasonable, and by consequent, both the heat of Sommer, and the cold Winter-season is here excluded. But here ariseth a great scruple in the mindes of the vulgar and ignorant people, who are so fearefull of phlebotomy in some seasons, especially during the Dog-daies; howbeit,The Vulgar shy of bleeding during the dog-daies. if they well weigh the premisies it will evidently appeare, that in all seasons we are to yeeld to necessitie. But the vulgar seeme to have some reason on their side, at least the authority of Aphor. 5. lib. 4. Hippocrates, who hath left this upon record, and the antients did carefully observe this rule, and that, as seemeth, not without reason. I answere,Answere. it is true indeed, we have it recorded by antiquity, that during that time, it is not so safe to adventure upon phlebotomy or purging, and that by reason of the excessive heat of the Sunne in that season. And indeed in hot countries, this season is often very tedious to the body of man,In hot countries this season often very hot by reason of the dissolution of the spirits, and by consequence debilitating the whole body: yea, during that season, the sea it selfe suffering some alteration is more troubled, and wines in the cellars during that season doe often shew themselves therewith affected by a new ebullition, as it were boiling a fresh. And therefore, good reason had these antient fathers of Physicke, to wish men, during these excessive heats, to refraine from the use of any great evacuation. But let us see, whether there be any specificall, maligne influence descending upon the body phlebotomised during that season. The vulgar,

yea and some of a more refined understanding are carried away with, I know not what, superstitious feare of this season, be it hot or cold; that be they or their friends in greatest extremity of danger by reason of sickenesse in the same, yet shall one hardly many times perswade them to the use of any remedy. And in this, women (as they are commonly most pragmaticall, and readiest to controll the Physitians prescriptions) shew themselves most crosse and opposite. In the first place then, true it is, that this season proveth often the hottest time of the yeere, the Sun then entring into the signe of Leo, as they call it, and the dog-starre then arising upon our horizon, the heat is most commonly then increased.No particular nor (...) call influence p^^ceeding from the ^og-starre doth any ^hit at this time at^ (...) bodies. But that any specificall malignity, more than is procured by heat, (which is a generall cause, and an active qualitie) is conveied from this or any other starre or constellation into the body of man more than at any other season. I utterly deny: although the vulgar are of opinion, that the very season of it selfe, howsoever the ambient aire be affected, portendeth alwaies danger: even as the Papists have a strong conceit of their opus operatum, in mumbling over a set number of their Prayers in an unknowne tongue, the receiving of the Sacraments,Phlebotomy not ab^^lutely (...) ^^dden by the antient Physi^^ans, but compara^^vely. etc. to be of great force and efficacie. And besides, these antient Physitians doe not absolutely inhibite the use of Phlebotomie or physicke during this season, but hold comparatively, that then they doe not so well sute with the body of man as at other times, and in this doe our opinions also concurre. And what judicious Physitian of our time maketh choice of these canicular daies for any elective evacuation by way of prevention? doe we not alwaies advise people, when it is in their power to make choice of the most temperate time, as may plainely by our precedent discourse and difference of election and coaction or necessity, appeare? But the question is not here of election, but of coaction; whether the body being assaulted with some furious Fever or Inflammation; as Pleurisie, Squinancy, or the like, may not in this case safely admit of Phlebotomy? If we should deny this truth, we should be injurious to our Maker,In time of necessity we may freely use this of any other remedy during the dog-daies. as though he were not alwaies the same, and would in some seasons leave men destitute of any helpe or succor, than the which, what can be more impious? I deny not indeed, but that if the sick can adjourne his disease (as Lawyers do their courts) till the Spring or Autumne, I shall be of their opinion. But we know, and many wilfull and peevish patients, though to their great smart, doe often finde this old saying true: Ante capillata, post est occasio calva. He that will not when he should,As no time of the yere is free from sickn^sse; so in no time (...) a misse to use t^e meanes. often cannot when he would. Now as there is no time nor season of the yeere, wherein there is any immunity or exemption from sickenesse, so is there no time nor season of the same, wherein we are deprived of meanes and comfort against this calamity. And this is the generally received opinion of all learned and judicious Physitians, as I could prove by a multitude of witnesses. Among many others, there is a famous Laurence Ioubert a ^^^r^urs p^pu^artes (...) ^econd^ chap 6. French Physitian, who lived in the South parts of France, the Kings Physitian, and chancellour of the famous University of Mountpeliers, and Doctor of the chaire in the same University; who of set purpose confuteth this sottish and erroneous opinion of the vulgar in this particular concerning evacuations.

And yet this place Montpeliers, I meane, is betwixt About ^00 miles to the South (...) England. 8 or 9 degrees further to the South, than wee here in this cold and moist climat, that knowne to be very hot, and of the same heighth of elevation of the pole, with many parts of Spaine, and Italy, yea, of Rome it selfe: which may be yet further proved by the strong wines of that countrie, exceeding many places of Italy; as likewise by the abundance of Orenges, Lemmons, Olives, Figs and Pomegranats, together with the abundance of Scorpions, Vipers, and other venomous vermine (to counterpoise this former felicitie) no where but in hot climats and countries to be found. This En este on doit mavulir le bec et anon le membre sec. Ibid. same Physitian, among many other passages, inserts a metric advertisement for women, wishing them, during this hot time, to counsell their husbands, for their healths sake, to absteine from their amorous imbracings, rather than trouble themselves with controlling the Physitian in his owne profession, who can tell well inough what to doe without their directions: although as he affirmes, some would have this abstinence in all the moneths that have not an (R) in them,Tous les mois qui n^ort pont de R^^aiffe la femme et prennos le verre. Ibid. yet disclaimeth he this rigidity. All this notwithstanding, many people are so pertinacious and obdurat in this their foolish opinion, without either ground or reason, that they will often adventure their owne, or dearest friends life, rather than admit of any meanes for the recovery of their health during this season, and if, perhaps, sometimes pinched with extremitie, by meanes of some dangerous disease affrighting them, they use the lawfull meanes not to be neglected in any season, necessity so requiring, and through the violence of the disease, the patients, or assistants errour, there follow not that answerable successe as was expected, the Physitian is presently laid in fault, and condemned of temeritie and boldnesse, in adventuring the use of any meanes in such a season, when as the ambient aire, perhaps, was as temperate as in April (as in this our countrie and climat often commeth to passe) yet all is one, the very name of a dog-day, doth as much affright them as if some furious mastiffe dog had bitten them by the breech.History About some ten yeeres agoe, a Knight living in Northampton-shire of any acquaintance, about Bartholomew-tide, fall sicke of a viol^^t Fever, with extreme drouth and headach, and although at his first falling sicke, hee would willingly have sent for mee, yet some Ladies and Gentlewomen his friends, at that season lying at his house, for the space of two or three daies, caused him deferre the execution of his intended purpose, and withall, kept him so short of drinke, that scarce would they allow him a good draught of drinke in a day. At length finding no amendment, and fearing some further inconvenience, neglecting now his womens counsell, hee sent for mee. At my first comming, I found him in great extremity of heat and headach, and for this cause I presently caused administer to him a cooling glister, with diet accustomed with such a case, giving way also to a more liberall allowance of drinke, which of all other things gave him most content. The next night after, his rest was better, and after followed great allevation of his former accidents: and therfore, although my purpose was to open a veine, yet perceiving some allevation, and hoping still for more, by reason of signes of concoction in the urine, which accordingly came to passe (withall knowing the hard conceit these Gentlewomen, as is vsuall also with others, had conceived of that remedy, especially in that season, which neverthelesse was not them very unseasonable in regard of the temperature of

the aire) with cooling glisters, abstinence, and some other small meanes, within the space of two or three daies, this Gentleman recovered againe his former health, although by some otherwise indicious, this sudden good successe was not expected. And as for phlebotomie during the dog-daies, and purging, I have both knowne others use them with very good successe, and have beene my selfe both an agent and patient in time of need. Many yeeres agoe, about the midst of the canicular daies, a man of this same Towne, about 64 or 65 yeeres of age,Another of an old man. fell sicke of a dangerous pleurisie, who sending for mee, intreated my best advice and counsell. Acquainting him then with the danger of the disease, notwithstanding the heat of the weather and his yeeres, I wished with all speede to open a veine, a remedy of all other most likely to helpe him in this extremity. This was by him as speedily put in execution as apprehended, (notwithstanding many womens opposition, and their peremptory sentence of temerity and unadvisednesse, past upon mee, as it pleased them to speake) and with as great speede was he rewarded for a voluntary submission to the meanes, by a speedy and happy recovery: who after that lived a many yeeres, and with a thankfull remembrance to his dying day acknowledged me under God the meanes of saving his life. But lest I may seeme too rigid and strict in imposing heavie burthens upon others, which I would not touch with mine owne little finger, I will adde yet one experiment practised upon mine owne person. Some 15 yeeres agoe,Another concerning the Author himselfe. during the heat of these canicular daies, being newly returned from a noble Lady of Northampton-shire, and being great with childe, and then in some extremitie had desired my presence and counsell; after my returne I was surprized with the head-ach, a drouth, with other accidents, arguing the inchoation of a Fever, and therefore well remembring that golden rule, principijs obsta, I did first use a gentle purge, keeping a diet fit in such a case, and the next day after sent for my Surgeon, and out of the median of the right arme, caused him take at least twelve ounces of blood already begunne to putrefie; with a full purpose within a day or two after, in case of continuance of the former accidents, to have proceeded to a reiteration of the same remedy, evacuating as much out of the other arme. But the former quantity sufficed, and followed immediatly alleviation, and so with the use of a gentle purging infusion, by the help of Almighty God, recovered my perfect health: All this notwithstanding, I kept not at home two daies together, but every other day rode abroad to visit a Gentlewoman, a patient of mine, lying within some few miles of Northampton, and newly before that come out of Stafford-shire; and this is moreover yet observable, that although the weather was then as hot as any time I have knowne it, yet found I no more faintnesse then in my bodie after this evacuation, than at any other time of my perfectest health; but on the contrary, a speedy alleviation of all my former accidents. It were easie for mee to produce yet a multitude of mine owne, and other mens experiments of this nature, but these few shall suffice to confirme the truth of this assertion. I will yet adde this, that there is no small difference betwixt this our cold climat, and the country of France, the South part especially;Great difference betwixt this our cold climat and other hot countries, lying further to the South. in the which, notwithstanding, their Physitians, as appeareth, allow both of phebotomie, and purging in time of need, be the season as it will, as hath beene already proved. And Greece, in the which Hippocrates and Galen lived, is yet a farre hotter countrie than any of the aforenamed, as extending it selfe to divers degrees

neere the South. Besides, this our Iland being so invironed round about with Neptunes watrie walls, by meanes of many moist exhalations by the Sunne-beames attracted into the middle region of the aire, is often so watered with showers, and our aire often so overcast with thicke cold clouds, by this meanes keeping from us the force of Phoebus burning beames; that by this meanes wee need not be so much afraid of the biting of this mad dog. To which purpose, I will relate a story told mee by a friend. The cruell Cardinall Beton,History Arch-Bishop of St Andrewes in Scotland, sent for that famous Cardan out of Italy (for no me^er, nor ordinary Physitian would serve the proud prelates turne) to consult with him concerning some infirmity then troubling him: in his returne homewards, passing thorow England, hee staid some daies in London. During his aboade in the City, many hearing a great fame of an outlandish famous Physitian (as the Proverbe saith, A new broome sweepeth cleane) resorted to his lodging to crave his counsell: but when hee saw them so shy of physicke, and that few would then in that season adventure on any, hee asked what was the reason? to whom it was replied, it was by reason of the dog-daies, in the which to take any physicke, they were much afraid. Hee wittily and wisely replyed againe,Canis non mordet 10 Anglia. Canis non mordet in Anglia: alluding to this I have already said, that the Dogstarre is not much to be feared here in England. And this did yet more evidently appeare, this late yeere past, 1630. in the which, during all this canicular season, or Dog daies, wee had not three hot daies,Dogge-daies in the yeere 1630 cooler than any other pa^^ of So^mer preceding. and proved colder than any of the former part of the Sommer. If the season then before or after be hotter than these canicular daies, why should not wee be as warie and circumspect, as when the heat falleth out in that season? And when that time falleth out seasonably, why are we as fearefull of it, as when extremitie of heat scorcheth our feeble bodies? It is the ambient aire, hot or cold, etc. as I said,The ambient aire chiefely to be taken notice of. which doth most affect our bodies and not any specificall maligne influence from this or any other star that threatneth us with any mischiefe. Let people therefore from hence forward be warned, that they be not so superstitiously fearefull at the very naming of a dog-day, that during that season they neglect good and wholesome meanes for the recovery of their health in time of neede. But if it be in thy option, no necessity compelling thee, make choice of the most temperate time. But if thou beest surprized with any acute or dangerous disease, whatsoever the season be, take heed of dallying with thy disease: take counsell of a judicious and able Artist, and thou shalt finde, hee can accommodate his physicke to any season. The judicious and understanding Physitian goeth not hand over head and at randome; but knoweth how to accommodate his physicke both for quantity and quality, not onely to the severall seasons of the yeere, but to the particular and individuall constitutions and diseases also. But if thou cast thy selfe upon Empirickes, woman physitians, and unlearned Physitians, I cannot blame thee to be afraid, not onely of dog-daies but of any other season also. But if thou wilt be ruled by no reason, upon thine owne perill be it, it is sufficient thou hast beene warned.



CHAP. VIII.

Whether in Phlebotomy wee are to observe the signes, and severall other things pointed out vnto us by our Ephemerides-masters.

BY that which hath beene alreadie said, it hath plainly appeared, that in diseases wee are in no hand to procrastinate and spinne out time, but lay hold on oportunitie without respect of time or season whatsoever; yea, even during the scorching heat of the canicular daies. This hath beene acknowledged, as an uncontrolled truth, and generally entertein'd by the most learned and judicious physitians of all ages of all countries; Greeke, Arabian, Roman, and others of all Europe. But as errorum plena sunt omnia, error and imposture carrieth a great stroke in this whole universe; so neither the noble celestiall creatures themselves (the heavens I meane, with their glorious orbes,The heavens and celestiall bodies not freed from imposture. and resplendent ornaments) have beene freed from imposture. And all this by meanes of wicked and malicious men, prostituting themselves to imposture, and making bawds of these celestiall bodies, the more cunningly to circumvent the vulgar, and cover their their owne covetousnesse and ignorance in the principles of this profession. Hence have wee so many erronious and pernitious opinions now so ruvetted in mens mindes, that they cannot without great difficulty againe be extirpate. And this opinion concerning phlebotomie, the Moone being in certaine signes, among others is not one of smallest consequence.Of phlebotomy, the Moo^e being in the signe, erroniously supposed to have predominance over that part. To mainteine then this erronious opinion they have taken for granted, that there are certaine signes, having dominion over certeine parts of the body, and therefore if any shall happen to be let blood in that member, where, say they, the sign for the time is predominant, portendeth no small danger to the patient. And therefore when at any time there is occasion offered of using this remedie, especially to the vulgar sort, or countrie people above others, they aske presently how is the signe? And if it shall then happen to be in that place to be phlebotomised,Superstitious and erronious ignorance of the vulgar in this particular. a man had need to use all his eloquence, and yet should scarce, perhaps, perswade them to it at that time, untill such time as the signe be past that part. And why, I pray thee, ought wee to be so curious in the observation of the signe, so many thousand miles off us, and in the meane time neglect the ambient aire, which, as sense it selfe teacheth us, environeth us alwaies on every side. Now, they cannot deny that all diseases are ingendred in all times of the yeer, in every moneth, weeke, day and houre; and hot acute diseases are as well ingendred when old frosty father Saturne is in conjunction with the Moone, as when firie Mars is joined with the same affinitie: and cold diseases againe ingendred as well under the one as the other. Now, then, Master

Astrologer yeeld me a sound reason, why I may not as well use phlebotomie and any other evacuation during these conjunctions? And yet I^ centi oq ^io. Ptolomee was in this particular so superstitious, that hee affirmeth that if physicke be exhibited while the Moone is in conjunction with Iupiter, it doth blunt the edge of the operation thereof. For, saith hee, our life consisteth in heat and moisture, over which qualities Iupiter presideth: wherefore, saith he, if the Moone be also joined to Iupiter, then is vigour and strength so much increased, that they farre surpasse the vigour and strength of the medicine, so making it of no effect or operation, insomuch, that it worketh not at all. But by Ptolomees good leave,Confutation of the former opinion all our Physitians doe very well know, that by the vigour of naturall strength and heat, all physicall operations are furthered and perfected. And therefore the Moone being accounted the mother of humidity, if Iupiter adde yet more moisture, there will be great use of all the heat hee can communicate unto us: and by this meanes,Humidity doth not inhibite, but rather indicate phlebotomy, and so doth the heat concurring. in all probability of reason, it would seeme, this active quality of heat should the more facilitate the operation in the body now replenished with this double humiditie. And therefore, not without good reason is it that all our Physitians doe prohibite the use either of phlebotomie or physicke to old and decrepid persons, by reason of the want of this naturall vigour and strength, and then onely use them when as the body aboundeth therewith. But now concerning the signe, saith the Languis epist med^^ lib. 1 epist 35. and 36 d^ his agit cop esi^^ same Author, wee are nor to open a veine when the Moone passeth by that signe which governeth that part of the body: for, saith hee, and with him Almansor, that since the Moone filleth the body with moisture, that then that part is replenished with humiditie: and yet it would seeme there should be then most use of phlebotomie. But this doctrine is againe contradicted, by Messahala, who would have us to beginne the cure of all diseases, when as the Moone is entred into that signe which is appropriated to the part affected: as if one were surprized with a Phrensie or Squinancie, although the Moone were in Aries, Taurus, or Gemini, yet should wee beginne our cure by incision of the Cephalica veine, otherwise called humeraria; which, neverthelesse, is quite contrary to the tenent of Ptolomee. This contrariety caused some to confesse, that these precepts were to be understood only of such diseases as might well without danger be deferred. It will then follow, that in dangerous and acute diseases, they are of no force and validitie. Of this then the people in their prognostications ought to be advertised: for, wee see many times, that many, insnared with this perverse opinion, rather than they will transgresse these irregular rules, often indanger that which ought to be to them most deare. And have wee not too many that sooth them up in this their sottish superstitious and erronious opinion? I speake not onely of our ordinary Ephemerides-Masters, and ordinary almanack-makers, but I wish some of the sonnes of Levi were not too much addicted to such idle vanities, with calculating nativities, and such other foolish frothy and forbidden stuffe. I will not deny, but since the Moone is accounted the mother of all moisture,We reiect the observation of the Moone in some cases. there may be some use in the observation of her increasing and decreasing, according to her quarters,

and when it is in our free election, by way of prevention, if there be no impediment, wee may use evacuation in the increase of the Moone. And wee deny not that this same Planet manifesteth her power in many sublunary creatures; as wee see in the Sea, and creatures therein conteined; in the fruits of the earth, etc. It is true indeed, that Lib. 2. and 3. de dieh. ^iti^. Galen, both in the birth of mankinde, and other creatures, and in the criticall daies ascribeth something to the motion of the Moone, according to the 16 angles of her monethly peragration; and wee doe not deny the same. But withall, it as certaine, that the observations and effects of these criticall, judiciarie and provocatory daies depend upon the disposition of the materiall cause of the disease,^riticall daies depend more upon the ^ateriall cause of the ^isease, than by the starres. and concoction of the same, and better knowne by the ordinary and set periods and paroxysmes of the disease, than by all the starres in the Heavens, witnessed that worthy Passim in aphor. prog. nost. and epidem. Hippocrates, in many places of his workes. And in 4 De Morb. one place hee maketh it yet more plaine, where, searching into the cause why the crisis commeth commonly upon the odde day, maketh no mention of any starre at all.The Moone of a swift motion, and abideth not long in a signe. Now, besides all this, the Moone is of so swift a motion, that in two or three daies shee passeth by any of these signes, and that with such a celerity, that she hath quite passed by the signe, before the force of the same can be perceived, or taken notice of. And yet these wise Masters will have us in no hand to exhibite any purging medicine, the Moone being in any signe which doth ruminate or chew the cud: to wit, Aries, Taurus, Capricorne,^^m^nantit signa. for feare forsooth, say they, lest it be againe rejected by the mouth. But I could tell their wisdomes, that both my selfe and others have found this most idle and false; besides, that it is builded upon no reason at all, I have found by manifold experience, that a nice,A weake stomacke especially clogged with corrupt humors will scarce reteine any physicke whatsoever. daintie and weake stomacke, but especially oppressed with corrupt humours, will scarce reteine any purgation, unlesse it be first evacuated by vomit upwards, the which I have proved to worke as well in my selfe as others, when the Moone was most remote from those ruminant signes: and againe, purgations to worke as effectually in these ruminant signes as in others. And besides, I have alreadie made it appeare out of Hippocrates, that hee appointeth some times and seasons fitter by farre for evacuation of some humours, than others,Sottish and idle opinion of ruminant signes, being but a mere fansie. without any relation at all of the signe. Moreover, this rumination is but a meere Chimaera, or phansie, and nothing indeed: for these starres fixed in the firmament for mens better conception and capacity, were by some, at first, ranked into certaine troupes, and as it were, certaine companies; and unto each severall troupe or company, men imposed, certaine names of such creatures as in their conceit they most resembled: as of a Ramme, Bull, Beare, Dog, Dolphin, and the like; although most, if not all of them might as well be resembled unto some other shape or figure, and so carry another name. Now, then, it is apparent, that there is neither Bull nor Beare, Dogge nor Cat in these celestiall bodies; and therefore what relation can there be betwixt this their supposed rumination and our medicines here exhibited? I could yet instance in a multitude of

such idle fopperies: as in what signes with the Moone to administer pills, when potions, and such like; and when to waine children. And what better is it than meer heathenish, to point us out some daies of the moneth good, some bad, some criticall, some not?Heathenish and superstitious to account some good and some bad daies. Is there one day of it selfe better than another? and what makes one day better than another but divine ordination? If they say this dependeth upon some influence of celestiall bodies, I answer, that according to their owne doctrine, they are so various and divers, and doe so suddenly change, that their operations and influences cannot be certaine, and fixed upon set certaine daies alwaies the same. And therefore, as for their good and bad, criticall and not criticall daies, wee care not at all. But what is the reason that these wise men doe so much neglect that great and glorious triumphant King Phobus, who sitting in his chaire of state, by his accesse towards,The Sunne and his con^unct^on, with other p^anets (...) neglect^ and recesse from us, produceth such an alteration in the seasons, and the ambient aire, that not one of all the rest of that great host of Heaven is able to parallell his power? Who doth not sensibly see and feele the various effects and changes of seasons hee produceth in this inferiour world, is deprived of his senses. His effects are more forcible than any of his fellowes: the Moones moisture is but a passive, his vivifying heat an active quality, and therefore of farre greater force and validitie. See in his highest exaltation above our Horizon what a sweet refreshing heat he darteth downe upon these sublunary creatures. Againe, in his recesse and lowest declination,Efficacy and p^^net of this King of planet* notwithstanding Iupiters hot and moist influence, and all his auxiliary helpes, yet for the most part doe we find such frosty effects of old frostie father Saturne, that nill wee will wee, forced wee are to confesse and acknowledge the noble effects of this King of Planets above all the rest: for the which cause, not without reason, among all remote causes, in the generation of mankinde, and by consequence of other creatures,Sol et homo ge^e^an^ hominem. the Philosopher ascribed the pre eminence to this noble Planet. The efficacie and power of this powerfull King doth yet more plainely appeare, by comparison of those places where he doth most manifest his Majestie and power; namely, under the Aequinoctiall line, and within the Tropicks,Intolerable cold of these Northerne climats. and many degrees on either side: with such places as are a great part of the yeere deprived of his princely presence; or else by reason of the farre distance from them, are so little thereby refreshed, that in some of those places, there is no habitarion for mankinde, and in some others a life indeed some lead, but such, as, in regard of the outward estate, a death may rather be desired. The Hollanders in their navigations, to finde out an North-East passage to the East Indies can testifie what enterteinment they found at Nova Zembla in about 70 degrees elevation of the Northerne pole: Forbisher, Davis and Hudson of this Nation, attempting the same by the North-west, could testifie the same truth. If we will passe but into Poland, and other dominions of that great Prince; as Life-land, Lap-land, Courland, etc. We may, during all Winter, make our habitation upon that vast and waterie element, where Neptune hath his dominion, as safely as upon

any part of the terrestriall globe.The Sunne abideth a compleat moneth in one signe, and yet there is no mention made of the Sunne in the signe. Besides all this, the Sunne hath his abode and continuance in each of these twelve signes, for the space of a whole moneth; and yet for all this, there is no mention made of the Sun in the signe, which, in regard of these former reasons would seeme farie more reasonable. Claudius Deodatus panth. hygiast. libr. 3. cap 10. A late German Writer maketh mention of one of those Prognosticators, who had lately published an Almanacke, wherein were set downe certaine daies in each moneth of the yeere, on the which, if any were let blood, it portended extreme danger, if not death to the party: and besides, prognosticated death to all that should be let blood on the feast of the Annuntiation of our Lady (I hope the Roman Catholikes will have this villaine by the eare, for so farre vilifying the power of the virgin Mary that she, that commanded her Son, cannot divert any dismall event from her holy day) on the day of Simon and Iude, and S. Andrew the Apostle, with many more other idle fooleries. In the same place, againe, hee inveigheth against the foolish custome of some, who postposing signe, or any other thing whatsoever, in the midst of Winter, be the weather as it will, frost, snow, or haile, especially upon S. Stephens day, doe usually (as is the custome here with horses) to have a veine opened. Pertinax ista mu^torum Chir^rgorum consuetudo, nullis rationibus firmata, nulla expe^^entia stabilita, nullis veterum, nec recentiorum medicorum authoritatibus munita, eo usque pedem extuli^ ut non solum conjunctiones, oppositiones, aspectu^ insaustos, and pestilentissimos in omni vene sectione, aut purgatione pertimescendos proclament, quasi venae sectio aliquo illorum diorum adhibita certa pernicie hominem sit emedio sublatura. Interim huius perniciosae opinionis, alios, vel authores, vel fautores non h^bent, quam Ani^ulas, Veneficos, Zingalos, ineptos Empiricos, Astrologos, and Ephemeridum calcularo^es, etc. Et paulo post unde Gal. 11. method. Has Lunae ^bservationes adeo nihili fecit, ut etiam magnopere saudet medicum, qui quinquagenarius in cephalalgia noctu sibi venam inciderit, Jdem Deodatus ibidem. This pernitious and pertinacious custome of some Surgeons (speaking still of the signe) and by them stiffely mainteined, is a cause of no small mischiefe in a well ordered Common-wealth; and yet hath no solid nor sound foundation, either from antient or moderne Physitians of greatest fame, who never have any regard unto the same. Vide Duncani Liddelii Aberdinensis Scoti art. medic. libr. 5. de febrib. curat. libros. 3. And some of our late Writers, of no small note, and as well skilled in all the Mathematicall Sciences as any Ephemerides-master of them all, yet neither in their cures nor indications once make mention of the Moone in the signe, of all these idle planetary conjunctions, evill or good aspects, and the like needlesse curiosities. Among others, there was of late yeeres a famous Physitian, and native of Aberden in Scotland, and no lesse skilfull in Mathematicall speculations, and therefore by Henry, late Duke of Brawnswicke (called Henry with the long nose, and married a sister to our late gracious Queene Anne) chosen for Mathematicall profession in his Vniversity of Helmstadt: and yet in his learned works published to posterity in the Latine tongue, in his tractat of indications, evacuations and curations of all sorts of Fevers, hath not one word of the observation of the signe and the rest of that rabble of foolish vanity. And this is also the generall opinion of all our most famous and skifull Physitians. Cum igitur illae planetarum conjunctiones, oppositiones, quadraturae, and catera signa illis mendaciorum tabulis affixa, non sint vera and legitima vel venae sectionis, vel purgationis, aut scerificationis indicatoria, non ita scrupulose observanda veniunt, sed multis nominibus irridenda, expungendaque. Primum enim illorum varietas, diversitas, and descrepantia, argumento est, nihil omnino, vel ad venae sectionem, vel ad catera^ vacuationes conferre, cum in uno diario bona, in alio mala; in his multa, in illis vel nul^a, vel exigna depingatur: Idem ex pernicissimo Lunae per signa Zodiaci rotatu colligiur: licet enim in calendarii tabula Luna duabus, vel tribus in Scorpionis signo viis excurrere doceatur, tanta tamen id pernicitate fit, ut citi^^ Lo^o signum illud percurrat quam signi vires exeri, and animadverti possint. Idem Deodatus loco priu^ citate. Since then these signes, conjunctions, and the rest of these more than foolish and superstitious observations set downe in these lying Ephemerides tables (saith our former author) are no certaine true judicatory signes, either of Phlebotomy, purgation or scarification, they are rather to be derided, and blotted out of

all bookes. And At bone Deus a^^antum praestaret ut (...) cipes and urb^um ^^^ore^, has st^ol^ (...) ^n Ephe^ne^ (...), versum (...) and ^ore ve^e^^m, (...) d^^rum (...) ^r^nt qu^r^m (...) and sacrorum (...) ^bus diebus (...) ratione sa^ra deorum m^^eria (...) de^e re^t, and (...) ^^dicabat etc Et pau^e post, Hu^usmodi ^ane Ephen^er^^es, quae s^derum ortus and o^^asus, ac te^ pestates, d^^que mysteriorum fastos ei ne ^^stos nobis ind^carent nobu satis forent: quas nugigerulum Astrologorum vulgus su^^ ex imaginar^^^ Lunae and pla^etarum aliorumque a pectuum i^sortu^^is, exaltationibus atque triplicationibu^, dierum ^lectionibus defoedavit^* qui ut imperitus S^ytotomus ex uno calopodio omnibus solularia conficit: sic illi Astrologi ex eadem anni constitutione hominibus etiam sub diversissimo coeli themate natis, qua di^^ s^^are venam, c^rpus pha^maco purgare, cucurbitulis aut hirudinibus sanguinem emungere, pueros ablactare, mercari, peregre proficisci, novat induere vestes, caput and barbam radere, resecare ungue^ faustum sit, indiscriminatim omnibus praescribunt. Taceo quod bella, principum mortes, annona caritatem, ^erfricta fr^nte praedicere non erubeseant. Querum^nugis moderatores urbium confifi, nec eorum prudentia and ratione habenas reipublicae moder^ri, nec Medici aegros recte curare possunt. At id reipublicae parum interesse censes? Nequaquam: digniores certe essent in quos omnes anu^ scommata jacerent, quam Thales fuerit Milesius, qui primus Solis praedixit ectipsim, and stellas ursae minoris monstravit; hic enim egressus domum ut astra contemplaretur, inque sub^ectam decidens foveam, irrisus ab anu fertur, quod ea quae in coelis essent scrutari vellet, quum quae pedibus essent subjecta non videat. Si^aec anu^ nostri seculi deliramenta vidiss^t quid eam dicturam arbitraris? Annon exclamaret: O vanitas vanitatum, and super omnia Astrologorum vanitas, etc. Picus Mirandulae ^omes and Angelus Politianus contra Astrologiam iudiciariam scripserunt. Item August. lib. 2. supra Genesim, lib. 2. de Doctr Christi and lib. de civit Dei copiose contra Astrologos genethl. Porphyrius etiam teste Iamblicho candem resutavit Testatur etiam Langius Mars^l. Ficinum qui in libro de vita caelitus comparanda conscripto hanc Astrologorum curanai morbos methodum docuit and approbavit: eundem tamen tandem, palinodiam Angelo Politiano and Pico Mirand^lano canentem, ingenue sateri ha^ Astrologorum observationes ut quomodo libet ad vita conservationem profuturas se congessisse, non ut eas probaret, sed potiu^ cum Plotino gravissimo Platonis interprete derideret, and ambobus congratulatur, quod Astrologica vanitatum and superstitionum Portenta tam argute quam sancte confutaverint, and quod contra Astrologos qui Iovi coelum frustra ^eripere more Gigantum moliuntur, hic ut Palladis alumnus, ille ut alter Hercules egregie decertaverint. Haec ex Ma^sil. Ficin. lib. 12. epistol Porphyrius, teste Iamblico totius eorum artificij fundamentum his verbis evertit and abnegavit, dum ait: Si quu cognosceret figuram nativitatis, Dominumque figurae, inveniret quoque damonem suum, and solveretur per ipsum a fato nativitatis Sed subdit, illam scire, and hunc invenire esse impossibile: and regu^as Astrologorum esse incertas and incomprehensibiles, auctore Chaeremone. Nam certe quis in ta^^ praecipiti fiderum nocturna and diurna vertigine, quum minima momenta ingentes parturiant mutationes, quae vix quisquam cognitione assequi possit, qui^inquam exacte nativitatis thema assequi possit, non video. Adde, quod observationiis astrorum motus organa, raro fint ad amussim facta, sed plurimum manca. Haec and alia multa hanc materiam concernentia congessit Iohannes Langius medicus doctissimus and celeberrimus lib. 1. epist. medic. epist. 35. and 36, ex Macrob. Saturn, lib. 1. Suida, Heschio, Ovid. 1. Fast. Gell lib. 4. cap. 9. Diog. Laert. lib. 1. Euseb. de praepar. Evangel. lib. 12, etc. another famous Physitian and his country-man before him, wisheth that the magistrate would take order that in these publike prognostications, nothing might be divulged, save onely the Festivall times, together with the times and returnes of legall proceedings. The like could I wish might be looked into here in his Majesties dominions, that wee might have nothing but the moveable feasts, the motion of the Moone, and the times and returnes of the Termes: and if any memorable accidents or historicall relations were set downe, I thinke no man would be against it. As for Physitians they could make a good shift without their helpe and directions, to phlebotomise both the sicke and the whole; to purge by pills, potions and electuaries, as the case and occasion should require: women could weane their children, the barbers shave beards and cut haire; and every man pare his owne nailes without the Almanacks prescription and direction. And Princes could undertake, and wage warre, and others goe about the businesse of their particular places and callings, without such busy-bodies intruding upon that which concerneth them not. By these particulars it may then appeare, that this judiciall Astrology is not so well rooted, but may easily fall to the ground, being so loosened and weakned by so many famous and worthy personages of severall ages and times: yea, and some who have in former times favoured the same, after they were thorowly acquainted with the vanity and uncertaintie thereof, at length forsooke it, and have left their recanaition for a perpetuall memoriall behind them. Many others things concerning this subject be said, and many arguments to evince the vanitie and superstitious use of Judiciall Astrology, with all the dependants on the same: but this were besides my text, and withall would prove a taske too tedious, especially for mee, having at this time so many other things yet to handle; and therefore I will now draw this point to a period: protesting neverthelesse, that what I have said, is neither of any

hatred or prejudicate opinion conceived against the persons of any, who have either practised this Art, or published any thing concerning the same: but onely to vindicate the truth from error and imposture, and to give the world notice, how farre they have hitherto been deluded. And besides, it never came into my mind to harbour in my heart the least evill thought against that noble and thrice renowned true Astronomy, with the subalterne Power it hath, from the great Lord, Maker of Heaven and Earth, received over all these sublunary creatures: Onely I would not have the servant to have dominion over his master, and place a creature in the place of the Creator, and to abuse the simpler sort of people, as is most frequent with those which attribute so much to this art.


CHAP. IX.

Preparation before phlebotomy, during bleeding what to be done, and how to bee ordered after. Of particular phlebotomy by leaches: of sacrification and cupping. Of searing, setum, vesicatories, etc.

IN the first place then before phlebotomy we are to prepare the body,Preparation to be used before phlebotomy. by cleansing it from the excreme^ts of the first concoction conteined in the guts, and withal we must have a care to correct the crudities of the stomacke and small veines.Crudities.Expulsion of the fecall ordure. Crudities before must be corrected by a spare and wholesome Diet. As for expulsion of the fecall excrements, it is safest to use a gentle, emollient glister, of some gentle, lenitive, Manna, sirup of roses, or the like. A broth made of loosening herbes; as mercury, mallowes, betcs, spinage, groundsell, and the like, will sometimes serve the turne. But if necessity constraines us, or any other acute disease urge us: as a Pleurisie, a Squinancy, or the like, we are then to make no delay, but take hold of the present opportunity, delay in this case threatning no lesse danger than death.Imbecillity of the orifice of the stomack. If the orifice or mouth of the stomacke be very sensible, if some choler proceeding from the liver or veines have ceized upon it, or it hath contracted any imbecillity or weakenesse, then before we set upon this worke, we are first to corroborate the stomake, and b^unt the edge of these humors, with the juice of lemmons, pomegranats, barberies, or rather their sirups: and the imbecillity of the heart is to bee remedied with a toste in a little Canary-sacke, hipocras or the like; as also with some cordiall loosings, or the like solid or liquid substance. If fasting be offensive, an houre or two before, they may take a little of some liquid substance, broth cawdell or the like. The party to be phlebotomised, if in health, is to bleed sitting,

unlesse upon a small occasion subject to swound in which case he may bleed upon his bed. In sicke persons, especially when they are weake,Situation of the patient to be let blood. this same rule is to be observed, and withall we are to be obserue and diligently to marke, whether in the bleeding strength continue;What to be observed in the bleeding. the decay of which may be discerned by the changing of the colour, by gaping and yawning, by stretching and reaching, dazeling of the eyes, singing of the eares, the hicket, loathing of the stomacke, and especially by the changing of the pulse: in which case it is good either to give over, or else to pause a little untill the partie be a little refreshed, and then to bleed againe, or deferre it a while as occasion shall require.Swounding.After how to be o^dered. If hee swound set him backward sprinkle his face with rosewater, or other ordinary, and present to his nose refreshing smell. After bleeding, especially in sicknesse or weaknesse, the patient is to be laid upon a bed on his backe, not sleeping for two or three houres after; and within an houre or two may take some food in a small quantity, and easie of digestion: as some cawdell, broth or the like. And in case of sudden fainting it may bee sooner used* or at least some other comfortable cordiall. After this, the patient must keepe a good and spare Diet.
But many times is commeth so to passe,Particular phlebotomy by leaches. that this noble and generous remedy by opening of a veine cannot so wel be effected, or at least is not so fit, in regard blood is oftentimes impacted into some particular part, so that it cannot by ordinary phlebotomy bee evacuated, and then doe we betake our selves to a particular kind of phlebotomie by leaches, scarification and cupping glasses.Election of leaches. The leaches must be chosen, such as live not in stinking puddle-water, not very greene, nor having great blacke heads: and being caught, they are to bee kept in faire water, which is often to be shifted.Preparation of leaches. Some counsell to put a little sugar in the water, and some a little blood. They are best that live in waters where mosse and frogges abound: not rough on the backe, of the colour of antimony, or having blew lines; but round little tailes like unto mice, and small heads. In defect of phlebotomy, when for some good consideration it cannot conveniently be administred, we may apply them to the great veines: but most properly they are to be applied to the small veines.In what cases most usefull. They are much used in the hemorrhoidall veines, and doe best of all draw unto them melancholicke blood: and for this cause, they are of singular good use in Itches, Scabs, and the like. They are to be put through a quill,Application. and so applied to the place wee please; howbeit some use a spunge, fomenting the place first with warme water, and then anointing it with a little blood to make them sucke the sooner. Some, when they are a sucking, cut off their tailes that they may draw more freely. If they fall not off in due time, sprinckle some salt on them: and if they fall off too soone,To make them fal off bath the place with warme water, and if it may be with conveniency, bleed over warme water; and after they are falne off, this will still further the bleeding. If the veine bleed too long, use the same meanes we use in stopping the bleeding of a veine in ordinary phlebotomy, adding,To stop the bleeding if thou wilt, a little powder of bole armenicke, some powder of galls, etc.
O^ scarification.Besides these, there is yet another particular evacuation of blood performed by meanes of scarification or racing of the skinne, and differreth according to the manner it is used. If deeper, it draweth more copiously and from the remote parts, and withall evacuateth the thicker blood. It may often supply the place of Phlebotomy. And thus in the armes deepe scarifications evacuat from the whole, as likewise sometimes in the legges, especially cupping glasses being therewith applied. And thus Oribasius in that great and memorable Asiaticke plague scarified both himselfe and many others, and drew out very neare two pounds of blood, and by this meanes escaped the present danger.In what cases to be used. Scarification in this same place is also good in a plethory, proceeding from the suppression of the piles or menstruous fluxe. It may sometimes be used, by way of revulsion, to the remote parts, observing still the rectitude or communion of the parts, as in the inflammation of the right legge, scarification of the right hand or left legge. As likewise scarification of the legge attracteth from the inward to the outward parts, and draweth downe-wards, etc. And in the menstruous fluxe scarification of the thighes or hands serveth in stead of derivation in furthering this fluxe. But scarification hath alwaies a most forcible effect in attracting from the remote parts when it is deepe, and a cupping glasse presently applied. But the most proper use of scarification is to evacuat from the part affected, other remedies not prevailing. And for this cause is effectuall in all Scabs, and other breakings forth upon the skinne, as also for an inveterate Scirrhus, Inflammations, Gangrenes, Pestilentiall tumors, bittings of venemous beasts, etc. But with scarification for the most part we use also cupping with or without fire;C^pp^r^ commonly used with scarification and these cups are made of divers matters, of horne, glasse and copper; and of severall formes, long, round, some of a wider and some of a narrower orifice. They are for the most part used of glasse called therefore cupping glasses.The matter and forme of these cups. And of these the round with a narrow mouth or orifice are the best, and draw most effectually; and of these some are bigger, some lesser, according as the evacuation is to be more or lesse In regard of the bodies they are to be applied to,In what bodies most usefull. they have a farre more successefull operation in thinne bodies, than in thicker constitutions. Againe, we are to consider the nobility, consent, and the vicinity of the parts in the application and use of this remedy; and therefore not to bee applied to any principall part, lest there follow an attraction of bad humors thereunto. But in the mutuall consent of two parts, they may to good purpose be applied to the one; as in the immoderate menstruous fluxe, to the breast. They are not to be used of sound and healthfull bodies, to young and growing people,Manner of application. nor to old decrepit persons: nor yet of custome, but with good advice of the learned Physitian, as need shall require, especially in the Spring and in Winter; not in a hot house, but neere a good fire, onely some frictions going before. We use them either with or without fire,The time. also with or without scarification. The time elective is after perfect concoction, the stomacke now being empty, and the guts cleane from co^mon excrements. The time of coaction or necessity is that which requireth this remedy, although the time bee not so seasonable, and

that to prevent a further danger. They are not ordinarily to be used before generall or universall evacuations have been used, but in some cases; as in the wind-colicke: or when as by reason of the thinne structure of the body it is not so safe to open a veine; or when we would attract any tumor from the internall to the externall and superficiall parts of the body. Wee are then to apply this remedy either to the part affected, or the next to it, when there is now no more affluxe of matter. Dry cups without scarification draw and evacuat the body insensibly, especially of wind.Dry cups without scarification in that ^^ses to be used. They are sometimes for staying of vomits and yexing applied to the stomacke. They are in divers cases applied to severall parts of the body: as the hinder part of the head, and the crowne for divers infirmities of the eyes and head: to the forepart for the Phrensie, Lethargy, etc: as also to the shoulders, chinne, thighes, legges, etc; for divers infirmities, whereon I must not now insist, but proceed.
Besides the premisses, there are yet some other particular evacuations performed by the hand of the Surgeon, the which for affinitie with the former, although no bloody evacuations,Burning or searing of some parts. we will handle in this place. Of these, the chiefe is burning or searing of some particular place of the skin both for preservation and recovering of health; whereunto we referre also the two other, setum and vesicatory.What it is. This searing, in Latine called cauterium, is nothing else but a little ulcer made in the superficiall part of the body of man, with some actually or potentially hot thing, by this meanes to make a free passage for a leisurely ensuing out of peccant, noxious matter causing diseases: and that both for inhibiting corruption, corroboration of the members of the body, and the restriction of the influxe of humors.Vtility and profit of this remedy. This remedy is of greater utility and profit than many are aware of; and may indifferently be used in all ages, not excepting infancy it selfe, where it is most soveraigne, even when they are yet in the cradle, and that for curing and preventing many diseases: as Convulsions, Epilepsies and rheumes; and besides, is not denied to any sex. The severall sorts or kindes of it are distinguished by three severall and distinct names:Fonticulu^. Setaceum. V^ficatorium. the one sonticulus, the next setaceum or setum; from a thred of silke or haire drawne thorow; and the last vesicans or vesicatorium, and of the vulgar, a blister, from the effect: and as for others dropax, sinapismus, psilothrum, as not being so frequent and usefull in sicknesse and health, as the former, I passe by. Now as concerning the part or place of the body where this issue is to be made, we must be very circumspect,The place where wee are to make this issue and well consider where this noxious matter to be evacuated is ingendred. If the matter be by the issue to be derived, diverted or drawne aside, then is the issue to be made neare to the part affected. If it be for revulsion or pulling backe, then we are to beware of molesting any noble part, and therefore the place of the issue must be made a little further off; with that caveat notwithstanding, that the rectitude and consent with the part affected be observed. Neither are wee ever to make any issue in the part affected, unlesse the matter be already there impacted,With what cautions. and universall evacuations have already proceeded. This issue is made most commonly with an instrument made of iron actually hot, and of

divers formes according to the nature of the part affected: and some are also made of gold.With what instrume^t it is made. Some againe use no materiall instrument of iron or other metall; but some hot burning medicine, composed of some ingredients of a hot, burning operation, although no heat to the outward senses of seeing or touching be therein discerneable; called therefore potentiall cauteries:Potentiall cauteries. and these being applied to the part, doe in a short time make an issue. Some againe use to open the part by incision, and so make the issue; but is farre inferior to the former. The best way is that which is seared with gold or iron; and next to that, such as are made of causticke matter; especially, if care be had that is performe its operation with speed, and with as little paine as is possible.The particular place. The particular place where this is to be made, is indicated by the place affected, where the matter hath its residence; which if ingendred in the liver ascendeth up into the head, then is it to bee made in the legge; and if it descend into the legge, then is the arme of the same side to have an issue opened. Againe, if noxious humours abound in the nether belly, it must be opened in the legge; if in the middle region, in the arme, if there be no impediment: but if there be any such matter in the head, it must be made in the the hinder part of the head: if it take the way downe towards the breast and the lungs, then both in the coronall future in the forehead, and in the hinder part. If it be ingendred in the head, and descend upon the backe-bone, the loines and nether parts, then must it bee made in the beginning of the backe-bone to intercept the matter. In many other particular places of the body we use this remedy, which would be here too long to relate.
Vesicatories or blistering remedies.As for vesicatories, or blistering remedies, they use to bee made of such things as blister the flesh; such as be crowfoot, euphorbium, pellitory of Spaine, mustard, cantharides; being any one or more of these mingled, with sowre leaven and vineger wrought together; the blister so made is to be opened, the place to bee kept open with a little fresh butter, or cere-cloth.
Setum what.That which we call Setum or Sataceum, is an issue most commonly made in the necke with a hot needle drawne thorow the necke with a thred of white or crimson silke, the place kept open by drawing the silke to or fro out of its place, and dressing it afterwards as is fitting. Some used heretofore a haire in stead of silke, from whence this operation taketh its denomination.
There is yet mention made of another manner of making of this issue with this hot needle, recorded by a Guilielm. F^bricius Hild. observat, chirug. observat. 40. and 41. famous Surgeon, on which now I will not insist. Now all these issues are to be kept open untill such time as this noxious and evill matter bee quite spent and wasted away, at which time it may safely againe be closed up. But if they be appointed by way of revulsion, or pulling backe any humor, accustomed to fall downe upon any place, and have been of a long time continued, then may they not so safely be dried up, unlesse another bee made to supply the place of the former. This Setum is a singular good meanes to helpe all infirmities of the eye-sight, and many inveterate infirmities of the braine: as Epilepticke fits, bad memory proceeding

of moisture, and many more. And thus have I somewhat at large handled phlebotomy, and all circumstances concerning the same; and so much the rather, for that I see the world so much herein abused, and so many by the indiscreet use thereof miscary: now I proceed to the other and second generall evacuation called purgation.


CHAP. X.

Of purgation, or evacuation of corrupted humors in generall.

HItherto have we handled Phlebotomy both generall and particular, it now resteth, wee proceed to other generall evacuations. In the body there is a triple repletion, two with,Triple evacuation in the body of man. in the vessels or veines, and one without: One abounding in quantitie, to be evacuated by phlebotomy; another abounding in quality, to bee purged by appropriate purging medicines: the third being without the veines, is to be purged by sweat. And all these are called universall evacuations, by reason they doe not evacuat from any one particular part, as from the head, errhina;Purgation what it is. from the brest, bechica, etc: are properly called particular purges. Here wee purpose in the first place to speake of purgations in generall, as they purge evill humors from the whole body. Purgatio est evacuatio humoris qualitate peccan^is, facta a natura, ope and efficaciae pharmaci catharctici, administratia me^io in eum finem, ut sanitas praesens conservetur* aut amissa restituatur. Comment. in aph. 2. Dunc. Liddel. art. med lib 5. cap. 12. Purging medicines of two sort^ Purgation therefore we define to be an evacuation of humors abounding in quality, procured by the helpe of nature, together with the efficacy of the purging medicines administred by the Physitian, for the preservation of health present, or recovering of health already lost. In purgations properly so called two things are to be considered: first, that which is to be purged, and do principally indicate purgation: to wit, the humor abounding in quality, which we call cacochymia, and is of many sorts. Againe, in purgation we are to consider that which purgeth. Nature it selfe, or the expelling faculty purgeth, yet not simply in it selfe, but seconded and set forward by the power and efficacie of the purging medicine, and exciting the expulsive faculty to purge away the superfluous humor, either upwards by vomit, or downwards by dejection. Such purging medicines are of two sorts, either such as by a manifest quality evacuat any obvious humor: and such are ordinary loosening herbes; as betes, mallowes, spinage, coleworts, and infinite others. Againe, there is another sort of purging medicines, properly so called, and by a proper name cathartica, and make peculiar choice of one or more certaine peculiar humors,In purgation three things considerable. called therefore electiva purgantia. Now in purgations wee are to consider three things: the first doth concerne the medicaments wherewith we purge. The second, the manner or method how to use them. The third, the accidents following upon purgation, or such things as are to be done

after the taking of a purgation. Purging medicines, as wee have said already, are of two sorts, either purging by manifest qualities, heat and cold, etc; without any distinction, any or all humors: or else one or more particular humors,A specificall quality in purging medicines or from some particular part. Now although purging medicines by reason of heat, attract unto them peccant and noxious humors, yet that the attraction is of this or that particular humor* proceedeth from a specifical quality, or from the whole substance. And yet such medicines as together with this specificall propertie partake of a greater heat, doe more forcibly and effectually attract the appropriated humor. Each purging medicine most commonly evacuateth one particular humor, sometimes two, seldome three, and never all, unlesse, either the medicine be so violent, or nature so weake, that it is not able to master them: and then it oftentimes worketh so violently,(...), seu superpurgatio. that at length it bringeth blood; and this the Greekes call (...), or over purging; very familiar to Empiricks, women-physitians,In purging medicines 4 things to bee considered. and such as have not been initiated in the schooles, and so trained up in the practise of this profession. In these purging medicines then foure things are to bee considered. First, what humor they are properly to purge, whether choler, phlegme, water or melancholy. Secondly, by what wayes they evacuate: for some purge upwards by vomit, and some downe-wards by dejection. Thirdly, from what parts principally: for some purge from the nether belly,Purging medicines differ both in stre^gth and by reason of the part to purge. some from the liver, some from the head, etc. Fourthly, after what manner: for some purge gently and mildly, some againe more forcibly and violently, and some keep a meane betwixt both. Manna, Cassia, sirup of Roses purge gently: Rhubarb, Sene, and the like, keepe a meane: Scammonie, Colocynthis, strongly. It were easie for me here to make an enumeration of variety of purging medicines appropriated to severall humors. And although these medicines both weake and stronger draw some from the more remote parts, some from the neerer; yet have some of them a neerer relation to one, and some to another part: as Colocynthis and Agaricke most effectually from the head, Rhubarb from the liver, Aloc from the stomacke, etc. These milde and gentle medicines, by reason of their milde and easie evacuation, are rather referred to preparations than purges; these other being of a farre more forcible power to attract and draw humors from the remote regions of the body. Notwithstanding, the judicious Physitian can easily quicken them according to occasions, with an addition of a small quantity of the stronger;Compou^d medicines as likewise, with some of the milder medicines, blunt the edge of these stronger and more violent purgations. Of these simple purging medicines,Their divers and various formes. divers compounded are made, and that in severall formes; which are either taken inwardly by the mouth, or injected, and put up into the fundament: or else outwardly applied, by way of cataplasme, ointment, etc. Such as are assumed at the mouth, are taken either to worke upwards by vomit, or downewards by stoole; and are, according to their formes, divided into three severall sorts: some liquid, as potions made after divers manners; some, againe, solid, as pills, solid electuaries, or confections: some of a soster, and as it were, of a middle substance, betwixt both; as our ordinary electuaries. In the fundament

wee use to make injections by glisters, and put up suppositories, in constipation of the belly, and divers other cases. But in some cases, when the patient is uncapable of any of these, or at least refuseth them, then are wee sometimes forced to supply this defect by outward ointments,Externall formes of purgations cataplasmes, epithemes, etc. and sometimes by masses and lumps made of strong purges holden in the hand, until they grow warme, and smelled to at the nose. Of these purgations againe which purge by election, or by choice,Perfect and imperfect purgations. some are called perfect and full, which purge away the whole cause of the disease at once: another againe, imperfect, which doth not all at once evacuate the whole matter of the disease. Vnder this last is co^prehended, first, that which we commonly call a minora^ purgation,Minor a^^ purgation. whereby wee lessen a little the matter and humour causing the disease, which most commonly is used in the beginning of diseases: and againe,Purgatio per (...) that evacuation performed by degrees, which wee call pe^ (...), whereby we gently, and by degrees purge away the vitious humour, and in stead thereof supply the sicke with good and laudable humours, which by meanes of good and wholesome diet is effected. Now,The manner or method of purgation. the next thing we propounded to consider in purgation, was the manner how to use these purging medicines, or the method of purgation,Five things therei^ to be con^^dered. which we may reduce to these five heads: 1 whether, and to what persons wee may safely administer purging medicines: 2 what manner of humors wee are to purge: 3 how much, how often we are to purge, and how farre to proceed: 4 the convenient and fit time for purging: 5 by what waies or parts, or passages wee are to purge. And this is the summe of that wee have to say concerning purgation and purging medicines, and therefore of these in order.


CHAP. XI.

Whether wee ought to purge or no, what persons are to be purged, and able to indure purgations, whether women with childe may safely be purged.

THat evacuation by purging medicine is to be used in cacochymicall bodies, abounding in bad humours, hath beene said already. (...) Hippoc. aph. ^6 lib, 2 Gal, in comment. But whether bodies living in health may be purged or no, may not without cause be questioned: for purgations not finding bad humours in the body, trouble the good, make a colliquation of good flesh, and withall induce divers evill accidents. I answer, this holdeth true of such strong purgations as were used in the time of Hippocrates and Galen: but in our milde and gentle purging medicines, there is no such cause of feare, they being rather in stead of a preparation than of any strong purgation: for the

which cause, being my selfe administred, they may safely be used of all sorts of people, to loosen the belly, to expell the common excrements of the guts, and withall, to prepare the humour causing the disease. And we may safely purge any body, although living now in health, and that by way of preventing the accumulation of humours, which in time might produce some disease. Hence appeareth the frivolous feare of many people,Needlesse and frivolous feare of the ignorant people. who being altogether ignorant of the true knowledge of this sublime profession, yet, with open mouth cry out there is poison in all our purgations: but the judicious are not ignorant with what caution and circumspection the honest and able Artist, even in cases of greatest necessitie, and with what correction and preparation, and in how small a quantity they make use of these strong medicines, which, notwithstanding, were in onely use among the antients, and yet many of these plantives themselves will often in their need, sooner have recourse to some ignorant Empericke, some unskilfull Barber-Surgeon, yea, to a beard-shaver, or a woman, who will adventure upon any the most desperate medicine, without any preparation, or knowledge of the constitution of the body: than to the learnedst and ablest Physitian, who is able, if it were a poison, so to prepare and accommodate it, that it may safely be taken without any danger: and indeed, who deale with such chapmen, may often cry out with these Prophets, mors est in olla, death or poisoniis in the body, howsoever the effects are not alwaies upon the sudden so sensibly perceived. Besides, some of these severe censurers are often as busie with a pipe of Tabacco, as with their appointed food? and yet no bill of inditement preferred against it. Now, I will be judged by the learned, if this simple be not indued with as poisonable and maligne a qualitie as any of these strong and violent purgations the antients used: I will except neither Hellebore,Tobacco as strong a poison as the strongest purging medicine that is used. of them, nor Antimonie of us used, nor any other; besides, the narcotick quality, as we prove by daily experience, of the which more hereafter. It is then apparent that we may purge, and that no bodies are excluded from the use of gentle and milde purgations. And yet do we not so indifferently admit of purgation, that we thinke they may be of all, and at all times indifferently used, but with divers cautions, diorismes and limitations, especially when wee are to purge cacochymicall bodies with strong purgations, when as they will not yeeld to gentler remedies.Threefold constitution of bodies. Before we proceed, wee are to take notice of a threefold constitution of the body: One injoining perfect health, which we commonly call a sound and healthfull constituion: another we call a neuter, or neutrall constitution, declining from the former perfection of health,^or^us ueutrum, seu valetudinarium. and yet not falne into any sicknesse which may be taken notice of: and such wee commonly call crazie, or valetudinarie bodies, and pertake of both the extremes, and so is apt, ready, and inclined to fall, and yet not falne into sicknesse. The third is such a body as is now already falne sicke. Now, as the first may safely be purged for prevention, so this second sort hath yet greater need, as living still in feare of some infirmity. The sicke especially are not to be abbridged of this benefit, but with these limitations: first, of the strength, constitution, and other circumstances doe not inhibite; we may safely

use it. Againe, if nature of it selfe suffice,When to purge and when not. and by other gentle meanes it may be effected, and where nature leadeth us not the way; as likewise if the humor be unfit for purgation, wee are not to attempt it. In every purgation then, the first indication is desumed from the morbisicke cause, or humor peccant,Triple indication of purg^ng. which doth indicate purgation; to the which wee are to joine also the disease it selfe, and the most urging accidents of the same. The second indication is desumed from the stomacke of the patient. The third is desumed from the condition and nature of the part affected; as likewise the ambient aire and region, which we will referre to the time. As for the first then, in the sicke wee are to consider the quality of the Disease, whether acute or chronicall; whether sole,The quality of the disease to be considered.The matter.Continuance of the disease.Idiosynarasia, or individuall propriety. and of it selfe alone, or joyned with some other, as with a sever, etc. Againe, weare to consider of what manner of matter, whether calme or quiet, or furious and raging; and whether crude or concocted. The Physitian is againe to consider how long the patient hath been sicke; and finally his individuall propriety, called Idiosyncrasia, and whether formerly accustomed to strong evacuations or otherwise. It commeth also sometimes so to passe, that the sicke is unfit for any Physicke at all: wherefore it is good physicke sometimes to administer no physicke at all: and yet this must be alwaies at the Physitians pleasure, and not according to the humor and pleasure of the ignorant assistants, no competent judges in a matter of this weight and worth. In the next place,Vrging accidents. urging accidents doe often inhibit strong evacuation. Strong Purgations, saith Hippocrates, are not fitting for ill-coloured persons, very dry or drouthy, that have a dry cough, and distension under the short ribs; as also such as use evill diet. Such symptomes againe and urging accidents as debilitate and overthrow strength: as violent paine, watching, gnawing about the mouth of the stomacke doe inhibit evacuations. The strength is indicated by the age, sex,Strength how indicated. temperature of the body, naturall individuall propriety, disposition of the body, custome, and urging accidents. First then for age,Aptest age. the middle age is aptest to endure purgations: old age and infancy of all others, by reason of weakenesse most unfit; and therefore unlesse in time of great need, to them they are not to be administred. And yet old age is farre abler to endure them than infants. Besides, children have a certaine naturall evacuation thorow the pores of the skinne, by which meanes,Children how (...) purge. without any other evacuation, they often breath out abundance of bad humors. And yet, if there be need, and nature be wanting, wee are not to deny even a sucking child such an evacuation: yet with the counsell of Hippocrates, we are then to exhibit some gentle purgation to the nurse, which communicateth a purging facultie to her milke: to children of fuller yeeres we may safely administer some gentle medicine. In the second place,The sex to be considered. the sex is to be considered in this indication of strength: men then, for the most part, endure strong purging medicines better than women. Virgins and widowes, and such as are much subject to hystericall infirmities, or fits of the mother, are not to be purged with strong purgations. Besides, women with child doe not easily endure purgations. And from hence then ariseth a question,Whether women with child may be purged,

whether we may at all purge a woman with child? I answere that even Hippocrates himselfe,Answere. who forbad phlebotomy to women in that case (which notwithstanding both by reason and experience I have proved to be lawfull) giveth yet allowance to this remedy. And yet, as hath heretofore been proved, the purgations used in his time were farre more violent, and of more maligne quality than most of our medicines now in ordinary use with us. (...). Aphor. 1. lib. 4. Purge women with child (saith Hippocrates) when we conjecture the child to be attained to the age of foure moneths or seaven, but the last least, for feare left by the violence of the medicine the ligaments tying the child to the womb be burst: but if the child be either younger or elder, we must not use these means. Now in these our daies, if a woman with child be ceized with any acute disease, or the body abounding with bad humors, and without purging there be apparent danger, may we not administer some of our gentle medicines, in antient times altogether unknowne? If Hippocrates permitted the use of his helleborate medicines of so maligne qualities,Women with child may safely be purged with our gentle medic^^^ and so dangerous for the Diseased, why should any be afraid of our gentle and mild medicines? There is no such danger of bursting those ligaments by the use of so gentle meanes. Is it not farre better to administer some gentle medicine, which may prove profitable both to the mother and her fruit? Againe if there be any reason in those women that oppose so useful meanes (for this sex is, as in other, so in this action, often most opposit to Physitians prescriptions) let them answere me, how many women they see, not only for some daies and weekes, but even for moneths together, molested and tormented with excessive vomiting, that one would wonder, that ever they should bee able to hold out to their appointed period? And yet through the helpe of the Almighty both mother and child doe very well, wherof I need to instance in no examples, they being obvious every where. Now it cannot be unknowne, that the succussion and straining of the body one day in so extreme a manner, offereth more violence both to the mother and the child, then three or foure dayes would doe with some gentle purges downewards. It will be replied, this violence is naturall, and therefore not so dangerous. I answere, violence is alwaies violence, howsoever procured; and the action is alwayes the same, whatsoever the instrument be: a man may breake his necke as wel by a natural fall from the top of a tower without any violence offered; as when he is pusht downe by the hand or otherwise. Againe, the mother many times, for want of appetite, and by reason she rejecteth that the taketh, indangereth that she goeth with. In widdowes and unmarried women,Womens bodies are many times more strained upon many outward occasio^s than by gentle purgations. we are willing to use meanes to free them from such evill and unpleasing accidents, and why shall we let languish a woman in this case. All the answere will be, that in them we use to provoke their menstruous fluxe, which here is no waies to be tolerated, far lesse attempted. I answere, wee may freely with gentle medicines purge away these corrupt and evill humors, so offensive both to the mother and the infant, without feare of any danger whatsoever. Now this is not my private opinion onely, but generally of all our best and most famous Physitians, wherewith I could stuffe up this my booke, and make it swell to a too great voluminous bignesse. I will instance but

in one of whom I have now and then alreadie in this book upon occasion made mention, to wit, the learned Ioubert. Ioubert des erreu^. populair^^, lib. 3 cap. 5. This famous French Physitian of late yeeres, hath writ a whole Chapter of this same point only, where hee proveth: that many womens bodies are farre harder strained many times by blowes, falls, scolding and chafing, than by any gentle medicine; and yet never for any such violence miscarry. Nay, yet further the same Author affirmeth, that many gallants dance the gaillards, the valt, and the like, ride on trotting horses, are carried in coaches, being full to the throat, plemees a lagorge (these be the Authors owne words) and yet for all this never are thereby indamaged. Now, besides the case they may from hence receive of all those evill accidents wherewith they are molested; as casting, feeblenesse and fainting, shortnesse of breath, and the like, are all by this meanes quickly cured; and why, saith the same Author, should wee thus suffer a woman to undergoe so much trouble, when it is in our power to helpe her? And upon this insueth yet another great inconvenience, that the childe thus soaked, as it were, in such corrupt and filthy humours, seldome proveth afterwards so sound and healthfull, as when the body of the mother is kept cleane from such corruption; and for want of this seasonable evacuation, in stead of one medicine seasonably administred,The child often after smarteth for this defect. during the abode in the mothers Wombe, the childe is after forced, it may be, to take a hundreth. To confirme this truth, I could produce a multitude of particular examples out of severall Authours, where this course hath with prosperous successe beene used: but to avoid prolixity, I will passe them over, and instance but in one or two of mine owne experiments.History of a woman with child, using both phlebotomy and purgation with good successe. A woman of this same towne, some 8 or 9 yeeres agoe, and great with childe, was surprized with a Fever, loathing in her stomack, and a number of tedious and troublesome accidents, her body both plethoricall and cacochymicall, and withall much oppressed with melancholy, who, after she had for divers daies indured these noisome and troublesome accidents, at length craved my counsell. Her neighbours (of the female sexe I meane, they being especially in such physicall affaires, more pragmaticall than men) utterly disswaded her from any physicke whatsoever. I confesse, I was unwilling, if it had beene possible, to have meddled in so dangerous and intricate a businesse, and where the event was so doubtfull, and where, if all things succeeded not according to expected desire, I exposed my selfe to the censure and slander of so many venomous and virulent tongues: yet being thereunto lawfully called, I first acquainted both her selfe and husband with the danger both the mother and the childe were in without the meanes, and that by the use of phlebotomie and purgation, wee might through the blessing of God hope for some good successe, howsoever the issue or event was not certaine. Both her selfe and husband freely giving way to use such meanes as I in discretion thought fitting in this case to be used, by Gods blessing, upon the meanes of bleeding, and purging both by vomit, and direction downewards, with cordialls and coolers, she went forth her full period of time, and brought forth a sound and living childe; having in this, by her owne confession, both easier labour, and more freedome from after accidents, than in any other before or after. Some two yeeres before that, another woman of the same Towne, being bigge with childe also,Another. for a fortnight and upwards was so tormented with excessive vomiting, that she was able to reteine neither meate nor drinke in her stomacke, whereupon insued great weaknesse and feeblenesse, insomuch, that shee was much afraid, lest this young guest should have forsaken his lodging for want of fresh supply; I being sent for, and

finding her stomacke pestered and oppressed with corrupt humours, I gave her a vomit, which wrought to so good purpose, that after the administring of some other small meanes for the corroborating of her stomacke, within two or three daies not onely her appetite returned, her casting ceased; but shee in a short time also recovered her accustomed strength, and at the time appointed was delivered of a lusty man-childe, and although a mother of many children before that time, yet, by her owne confession,Another of a woman with ch^ld enduring much by naturall vom^^. coughing and purging, and yet recovering. never better in and after her labour, than at that time. And that it may yet still more plainly appeare, that a woman with childe may sometime indure without aborsion, heare yet of a third, who, notwithstanding, used none of these generous remedies. About some fifteene yeeres agoe, a woman of this same towne, about the third moneth of her conception, was surprized with a double tertian, with a continuall casting, coughing, and spitting of blood; the which for certaine daies, as women in those cases thinke themselves exempted from all physicall helpes, shee did neglect, hoping it would not long so continue; but at length, fearing aborsion at the least, sent to mee, but then absent, and therefore sent to another physitian of good account, then living within this same towne, who, after hee had administred one glister, this set nature so aworke, that for the space of two moneths at least and upwards, to all the other accidents this was also added. At length the Physitian forsooke her, as then irrecoverable, especially by reason of her spitting of blood, which was supposed to proceed from the lungs. In this case she continued some three weekes, or neere by, and after my comming home shee sent for mee: but hearing of all that was past, I refused, although twice or thrice intreated, hearing of so desperate a businesse, yet being intreated, to give her satisfaction, at least by seeing her, although I administred nothing. At length, after I had seene her, and well considered of this blood thus reiected, I found it proceeded not from her lungs, whereof I gave her notice, and withall proceeded with cordialls, and other things fitting for her cough, especially excretion of blood, which were by this meanes qualified, and the excretion of blood within a few daies was quite staied; and although I know both phlebotomie and purgation to be of very good used for these diseases, yet durst I not then adventure on any of them, but continued this course with diet such as was fitting. At my first visiting of her, she was now above a moneth quicke with childe, and very feeble, and for the most part kept her bed: her loosnesse left her about a moneth after, and her cought and casting, together with her Fever, forsooke her about a moneth before she was brought to bed, and was delivered of a sonne, who lived a moneth, and was assaulted with fits of a Fever of the the same manner as the mother, and died about the end of the moneth. The mother, notwithstanding all the premisses, a few daies after her delivery was assaulted with the measels, and afterward, recovered her perfect health, and lived after that many yeeres. It may then plainly appeare, that it is not a matter so dangerous as it is deemed, sometimes in time of need to give a woman with childe some gentle physicke, as shall by a judicious and understanding Physitian be thought fitting:Great caution to be used in a^ministring physicke to women with child. and since this hath beene the opinion of all our famous Physitians since the daies of Hippocrates, let women be silent, and not too sawcie in controlling such a cloud of witnesses of learned and able Artists. But let no man nor woman here mistake my meaning, as though I would incourage any women to be too bold in this case; my meaning is onely this, that in case of extremity, women should not be so wilfull, as to let their neighbours perish without meanes, upon needlesse feare, or

at least indanger their lives in apparent necessitie, Hippocrates himselfe giving way to this course, as hath beene said alreadie, yea, even during any time of their nine moneths, although freelier in some than in others, their physicke, notwithstanding, being farre harsher, and of farre more violent operation than our ordinary medecines, as hath beene proved alreadie. But withall, I wish them still to be very warie whom they trust in so waightie a businesse, or else it may cause repentance when it is too late. Especially beware of such ignorant and erronious practitioners as I haue alreadie mentioned. But this by the way, although I hope, not out of purpose, now I proceed.
In the third place then,The temperature and constitution of the body to be purged. in the body to be purged wee are to consider the temperature and constitution, which doth either indicate or inhibit purgation. The middle, or meane temperature and constitution, betwixt extremes, is fittest for purgation: but bodies of drie complexion,What bodies fittest, and what unfittest to be purged. drie, leane, loose, of foggy, thinne, soft, or very fat bodies are not so fit for purgation: nor such as abound in blood, are much subject to swounding, ond are hardly recovered, and such as are apt to cast upon any occasion: children also, and women plentifully purged by their menstruous fluxe: and such as have cleane bodies, and observe a strict and good diet, and such as naturally are constipat in their bodies, and are easily overtaken with fluxes of the belly: all such are not so fit to be purged as others, although upon occasion, necessitie so requiring, they are not totally excluded, yet must it then be done with great discretion and circumspection, and more sparingly than to others. But on the other side, strong able fleshy bodies, accustomed to labour and paines, having strong stomackes, who collect great store of superfluous and excrementitious matter in their bodies, may better undergoe this evacuation.Idiosyneras^^. Next to the temperature or constitution, wee adde the specificall and individuall proprietie of the bodie: and this is the reason why some bodies will beare a strong purgation, and others againe, it may be of a stronger constitution, yet are not able to beare halfe so much. Besides,Custome. wee must not neglect custome, which doth in some bodies facilitate the use of purgations; which they may therefore better beare, which in others unaccustomed, wee must not attempt, unlesse to us knowne to be of a strong constitution. Besides, the ambient aire, the region and place of abode are not to be neglected, of the which,Other circumstances. when we speake of the time of purgation. Now, besides the strength,Situation of the part affected. we must also consider the situation of the part affected, which is discerned by the temperature, the use, figure, or forme, and sense or feeling of the same. And therefore the head requireth stronger purgations than the stomacke and the liver; and the stomacke of a quicke and exquisite sense, subject to gnawing, is gently to be dealt withall. And now wee proceed to the humours.



CHAP. XIJ.

Of the humors to be purged, of their preparation; as also of the body to be purged. Of the quantity and reiteration, or often exhibition in time of need.

THat corrupt humors, commonly called by the name of cacochimia, are to be purged and expelled out of the body, hath been already. These humors are in all foure in number; choler, melancholy, phlegme, and serosity, or thinne waterish humors.Divisions of the humors to be purged. These humors doe diversly in the body abound, and so produce divers diseases. Sometimes one humor alone aboundeth, sometimes one or more, in an even or uneven proportion; and this noxious peccant humor is alwaies to bee purged with appropriate remedies. Againe, in regard of the quality, it is either crude or raw, or else concocted: and againe, either thinne or subtile; or thicke, or else participating of a meane betwixt both. It is againe, either still and quiet impacted into some part of the body; or raging, swelling and moveable. Now in all purgations, aswell spontaneous and naturall, as artificiall, this is to be observed, (...). (...) 4 that that purgation is profitable, whereby such humors, as nature would of its owne accord expell, bee purged out. And againe, (...).Aph 23. lib. 1.What humors are fittest to be purged, and what not.Concoction what. we are not to judge of a profitable purgagation by the quantity (as is the custome among many vulgar, especially of our country-people, who therefore many times more magnifie ignorant Empirickes, who purge away plenty of humors, bee they good or bad, than better skilled Physitians, who purge away but the worst, although in a smaller quantity, but if the right peccant humor be expelled. Humors already concocted are easiliest purged, and then next such as swell and are of a furious nature, and are of thinne or a meane substance. Crude humors, still and quiet, impacted into any part, thicke, tough and clammy, are not so expelled out of the body, and are therefore first by concoction to be prepared. Now concoction is nothing else but a reduction of the peccant humor in the body to a right temper and frame, whereby it is fitted for expulsion. Now of these peccant and noxious humors some are capable of concoction, some not.Humors capable of concoction.Vncapable of concoction. Capable of concoction we call, such as grow tame and tractable; as the humors in putrid Fevers, which ought first to bee concocted, and then expelled. Not capable of concoction are first, such as are sequestred from the blood; as in the defluxion of rheumes, yellow choler, in suffusion and some sort of the bloody fluxe; of phlegme in the wind-colicke, and water in the Dropsie, which without expecting any preparation are to be expelled. Some humors againe, are in fault by reason of the corruption of their proper substance, which destroy

and overthrow the substance of that part whereon they: fal as commeth to passe in the Plague, in Cankers, and in raging and furious humours,Difficultie of conc^ction proceedeth (...) three causes. called turgentes, or swelling. The faculty of concoction proceedeth from three causes, the imbecillity and feeblenesse of nature, the narrownesse of passages, and the contumacy or repugnancy of the matter. In these crude and corrupt humors natural heat hath no predominancy nor power, but externall and adventitious, with a debility of the naturall, confounding good and bad humors, dividing humidity from its naturall siccity. (...). Apho^. 22. lib, ^. In diseases therefore of that nature and kind, wherein the humors are putrified and corrupted in the veines, and nature hath not the pre-eminence, we are not to purge in the beginning, but to expect the concoction of the humor, which maketh a separation of the good from the bad. After concoction whatsoever noxious humor yet remaineth within the veines, and by a laudable crise not expelled, is to good purpose purged away with Physicke. Concoction is, by nature it selfe, by meanes of naturall heat, performed: now if nature be feeble and weak, and his heat not in a due proportion answerable,When the Physitian is to use meanes to further concoction, it is then the Physitians part, with fitting and appropriate meanes to supply this defect. This supply consisteth in removing the lets and rubs lying in the way, preparing the humours to concoction, and repairing the breaches made in the strength and naturall heat. Concoction then is performed when nature overcommeth, and affimilateth the matter making resistance. Now, since the humour many waies repugneth or resisteth; as sometimes by reason of the quality, or the manner of substance beyond the naturall course: to wit, by distemper, thicknesse and clamminesse; and somtimes by reason of too great a quantity impacted into the part: hence commeth it to passe, that there is not one onely kinde of remedy fit to prepare and concoct these crude rebellious humours. And therefore Lib. de hu^n^ri^ Hippocrates affirmeth, that concoction is performed by contraries, and that sometimes it is furthered by hot, and sometimes by cold, and sometimes by drie meanes: and againe, sometimes by extenuation, sometimes by incrassation, sometime by abstinence, sometimes by rest, etc.A double preparation. And thus thicke and tough humours are ratified, and made thinner; thinne hamours againe thickned, obstructions opened, and each humour with proper and appropriate medicinces prepared, as the judicious and discreet Physitian, according to circumstances, shall thinke fitting. There is then a preparation of the humors, and yet another of the body, which was the meaning of Hippocrates in these words: (...).Aphor. 72. lib. 7. If any have a purpose to purge the body, it must first be made fluid, thinne, and passable. And thus the passages are first to be made slippery, large, and passable, without any impediment: which may be effected by meanes of loosening and opening set brothes, by emollient glisters, and such others meanes as easily open the belly and the small capillary veines and other parts obstructed. Now, since of purgations some worke upwards,Different preparation according to the different manner of evacuation upwards or downewards and some downewards, there must not be in all a like preparation: for, in purgations that worke downewards, it is required, that the guts and the small veines be open, and free, as hath beene said already: but in a vomit, especially if it be to worke strongly, Lib. de salubr, victu^ ratione. Hippocrates willeth us, sometime to bath and anoint the body, to use a

liberall diet, and to rest: but when the time of administring the vomit is come, then are we to use such meanes as irritate and loosen the humors, and make them more easily to ascend upwards. But when to prepare the humors, how, by what meanes, and in what bodies, this double preparation is to bee performed, is the worke of a learned and understanding Physitian: but not of any ordinary Empiricke, Barber-surgeon, ignorant Apothecary, Woman-physitian, and the like, who most commonly exhibite their strong unprepared medicines, without regard of any of these preparations. But I proceed now to the quantity, wherein they erre as much as in any of the premisses.
The various and divers constitutions of severall individuall bodies breed no small difficulty in the due dose or quantity of the purging medicine.Indication of the quantity of the medicine. But to define the particular dose of these particular medicines is not my purpose, but onely to set downe some generall rules of direction concerning this particular. ^he indication then of the quantity is desumed from the greatnesse of the disease, and the refractarinesse of the same, the peculiar and individuall propriety of the body, and the strength: as likewise from the nature of the part to be purged, in the sense, substance, office, forme, situation and society. (...). Aph. 6. lib. 1. Thus great diseases require great remedies, as witnesseth Hippocrates: and som bodies are moved with gentle remedies, and others againe although of a weaker constitution, yet endure stronger purgations. Againe, some bodies are strong and well able to endure strong purgations; as in the middle age: some againe, as young children, and decrepit old men, are either not to be purged, or very gently, and so are we also to consider the severall parts to be purged: as the head, liver, stomack, kidnies, etc: and to observe the severall circumstances in them and other parts to be observed. Now to every purging medicine Physitians doe commonly assigne three doses, comparing the strength of the patient with the medicine: to wit, to strong people, the greatest; to weake the smallest, and the middle or meane to the middle or meane strength.The quantity of the medicine to bee intended or remitted according to several circumstances. The quantity of the medicine is also intended or remitted according to the ambient aire, region, etc; as also according to the nature of the noxious humor: for thinne moveable humors will give way to a mild medicine; but tought, thicke and clammie humors, and impacted in the part, will not so easily bee removed. Besides, we must neither exceed in giving too small a quantity: for that often stirreth and moveth the humor, gripeth the belly, and putteth the patient to great paine,Safer to erre in the defect than in the excesse. howbeit to small purpose. Neither yet must it exceed in too great a quantity, which is yet farre worse; and a more dangerous error than in the defect which is easilier remedied than the other in the excesse. Now sometimes we evacuate all the noxious humor at one time, and sometimes wee returne againe once or oftner. This first is called a full evacuation, and then onely hath place where the body is strong, and nature it selfe leadeth the way: and this commeth to passe, when as in diseases the humors are already concocted, and withall doe so abound, that they, as it were, swell and rage. But by reason this seldome commeth to passe,

therefore we doe most commonly purge by degrees,Purgatio per epi^r^^^, or ^en^^e (...) purgat^^n. in reiterating our remedies. And in unknowne bodies, rather than to adventure a full dose, it will bee better to beginne with a lesser quantity, although it be not the true dose the patient may endure, by this meanes trying the strength at first, and afterwards supplying what is wanting. Now in these leisurely reiterated purgations, the indication is desumed from the nature of the humor peccant, from the situation, from the condition and nature of the part affected, and the strength of the patient. Thus we often find, that all this morbificke matter,The m^^b^ ^^cke matte^ contented in divers parts, o^ the bod^, and there^^^^ t^ be pu^ged by severa^l sorts of physicke. is neither altogether, nor yet after the same manner in the whole body, and the vessells of the same, but distributed into divers parts; one part being conteined in the stomacke, to bee evacuated by vomit; another in the guts, by qlisters; another in the veines, by potions; another in the head, to be purged by pills. It commeth often againe to passe, that some portion of the matter is concocted, another part yet remaining crude, some part thinne, another thicke and rough; some part of it quiet and still; and some againe unquiet, swelling or raging: all which ought neither to be purged at the same time, nor at once; and therefore both Galen and Hippocrates counsell us in some diseases; as Quotidianes, Quartanes, and diseases of the spleen, and proceeding from melancholy to purge little and often, which notwithstanding in time will make up a great evacuation. But (...). Aph. 25, lib, 2. in acute diseases the same Hippocrates would have vs to purge seldomer, and that not without great care and circumspection. Againe, the condition of the part affected doth variat the manner of evacuation: for a part that is common and of acute sense cannot endure a plentifull, large and sudden evacuation. In like manner any part that is farre distant from the nether belly, or by reason of small and narrow passages hath any communion with the same, must not bee largely at once evacuated: as infirmities of the brests and joints.Condition of the part affected varieth the maner of evacuation. And any part that daily receiveth a new supply of superfluous humors must not at once and suddenly, but by little and leisurely be evacuated. But above all the rest, as in all other, so in this the strength principally must be regarded. And therefore although both the nature and quantity of the humor, and the situation of the part doe require a strong purgation; yet, if the strength be not answerable, we are forced to administer more mild medicines, and reiterate them the oftner. And this is that wee commonly call to purge per (...), when as by degrees we purge any noisome and noxious humors, and, instead thereof, make a new supply of good and wholesome.



CHAP. XIII.

Of Vomits, Glisters, Suppositories, and with which evacuation wee are to beginne, when divers are required.

IT hath beene sufficiently already proved, and experience it selfe doth daily evince unto us, that there are divers sorts of purgations, some taken at the mouth, and some injected at the fundament. And of these againe taken at the mouth, some worke the same way they went in, which is by vomit; and some againe worke downwards by stoole. Now, although wee have at large spoken of all manner of purgations in generall, yet this being an evacuation not befitting every one, and which some of the antients, as Asclepiades, did utterly reject, it will not be amisse to say something of it. Of this kinde of evacuation, Vomitio cum facili^ and moderata obtigerit sa^uberrima and vacuationum omnium praestantissima, noxios quippe humores ex ipsis f^ncibus sinceros elicit, and vacuat omnem quae in ventriculo continetur, ejusve tuni is eluviem. Im^rimu autem expurgat e praecordiori^ membra^is, and cavis Iecoris ac Li^nis et ex Pancrea ommis generis supervacuos humores ^nc^ros elicit, quos plerumque nec hiera, nec aliua vehementissimum in alvum de^urba^e potest Opitulatur item affectibus qui a praecord^orum impuritati or^um habent, lang^enti apperen^iae, nauscae, cibi fastid^o* vomitioni crebrae, ventriculo pr^cordijsve distentu, ictero, cachexiae, febrib intermittent, Hemicraniae, Vertigini, Epilepsiae, suffusions, omnibusque capitis affectibus qui sympathia praecordi^ru^ contracti sunt, and quos a praecordiit in reliquum corpus effusa impuritas protulit. Gal. de usu partium.Preparation before vomits.Outward preparation Galen givieth no small commendation, and in some cases the most soveraigne of all others: to wit, in repletion of the stomack, and tunicles thereof, and in the hollow parts of the liver, in infirmities of the spleene, the laundise, many infirmities of the head: as Epilepsie, Vertigo or giddinesse, megrim, suffusion; and all infirmities of the head proceeding from a sympathy with the nether parts. Now, it commeth often to passe, that humours which descend not so easily into the guts, yet by vomit are easily expelled. Some of the antients againe, quite contrary to the minde of Asclepiades, were so farre in love with this evacuation, that they prescribed it even in time of health, every moneth for two or three daies together, which I confesse was too much, and tending to another extremity. But all are not fit for the use of so noble and generous a remedie, such especially as are not accustomed to it, are not, unlesse in case of great extremity to be urged to the use of it. And againe, wee are to looke unto the inclination of the humor, whether it incline that way or no, and then are we to second this naturall inclination of the humor by exhibiting help for the bettet furtherance of this worke. But great care and caution must be used in the administring of this remedie in regard of the partie to use the same: for such as are narrow breasted, have a long necke, and disposed to a consumption, are not to use this remedy: and such, whose stomackes are unfit for it, a weake braine, women subject to hystericall infirmities, indure not vomits easily. And to induce this evacuation, there is a good strength required in the stomacke, especialy if the vomit be strong. Now, as in other evacuations, so in this also, wee use in time of need some preparation to facilitate the operation thereof. Relaxation of the stomacke by outward inunctions and fomentations I hold suspect, for feare of too much debilitating the stomacke after, especially in this so nice and effeminate age. For an inward preparation to

facilitate the operation, we use sometimes to suffer the patient fill his stomacke before, with divers sorts of food,Inward preparation. especially such as may cleanse and cut, or attenuate: as salt meats, onions, and the like; and this is when the matter is tough, congealed and stuffed in the stomack, where the use of hot herbs, Time, Savory, of Oxymel and the like may safely sometimes be permitted. But when the humor is thin, fluid, and easie to be purged, then posset drinke blood warme, now and then taken after the assuming of thy vomit, will serve the turne. Some adde butter, which to some bodies wil prove too fulsome.What parts by vomit are to be purged. Vomit evacuateth and cleanseth first the stomack, and the adjoining meseraick-veins; and next if it be strong, the liver, splene, and great veines; and lastly, the whole body: It serveth for revulsion, or pulling back of humors from the stomack, and other inferior parts; and therefore Aph. 16. lib. 16. Hippocrates affirmeth, that after great fluxes of the belly, a vomit succeeding, doth presage good to the patient. And by the same reason it is good in the sciatica, and all other gouts, infirmities of the kidnies, bladder, fundament, etc. It deriveth or diverteth the humours from the next adjacent parts into the stomacke. It helpeth therefore hypochondriacke, melancholy, dropsies and other diseases of the mesenterie, liver and splene: but especially if the matter tend upwards toward the stomack; which by bitter belching, spaine and heauinesse or gnawing under the short ribs may be discerned. Now as of other purgations, so of vomits, some are milde and gentle, some stronger, and others againe stronger than any of the former, such as the antients used. Our Emperickes, and ignorant practitioners erre in nothing more, than in the rash administration of this remedy,Empericks erre much in the rash administration of vomits. to any indifferently, present or absent, without any consideration, either of the body or disease. And yet if there be any veine burst in the brest or lungs, or the party subject to any hemorrhagie,In what cases dangerous. or effusion of blood at nose, etc. What danger may insue to the patient, a vulgar understanding, I thinke, may easily judge. I will not now protract time with instances of such errors, but proceed to that which yet remaineth.
Besides Vomits, there are yet some purgations, which may be called particular, and are injected at the fundament into the guts: and such are our gilsters, which are appropriated to divers inrfimities, and used for divers ends, and are composed of severall ingredients, and sometimes of one only, as occasion and necessity require. Herod. in Enterp. The use of these glisters, among the antient Egyptians, was so frequent and common, that as they used their vomits, so did they those glisters three daies in a moneth successively, one after another. They are used by way of evacuation, and sometimes for astriction and healing; as in the bloody fluxe. Sometimes we use them only to mollifie and supple the guts, that nature may have the freer passage. Sometimes we use this medicine as a preparative for other insuing physicke.Glisters used for divers ends. They are administred for a number of infirmites of the body, but differ accordi^^^y in the composition, and that both in the quantity and quality. (...) ^he quality, some being appointed to purge, some to mollifie; (...) against the wind-cholicke,And used in many infirmities. some against the stone, strangury, suppre^ (...) urine, of menstruous fluxe, or in the excessive fluxe of the same; (...), againe, being administred in great weakenesses to nourish, (...) of many others, the matter

whereof must of necessity accordingly differ, as the learned Physitians well know.The quantity various according to circumstances. Againe, the quantity must needs differ according to the nature of the disease, and party diseased. According to the disease: as in the Wind-colicke, in the suppression and induration of fecall excrements, the quantity must needs be small; as also in children, women with child, etc. And nourishing glisters must be administred in a smaller quantity than others, or else they will purge rather than nourish. Such as are injected for the infirmities of the small, must bee in a farre greater quantity than in the great guts. Besides, glisters must bee reteined a pretty while, some more, some lesse, according to the cause for the which they are administred:Retention of glisters. for glisters given onely to wash and cleanse the guts, would bee reteined about an houre or more; anodine and mitigating of paine, somewhat longer; and such are given to heale and conglutinat the guts, as in the bloody fluxe, a longer time than of the former. Purging glisters commonly give warning when time serveth; and yet, if they be too quicke, it is not good to give way to the first warning.In great weakenesse. In great weakenesse they may bee kept by application of hot cloth to the fundament for a certaine time. If it stay too long, it may be helpt by a suppository put up. This medicine not onely cleanseth the guts, but by consequent often helpeth the head, stomacke, and other parts adjacent. And therefore I wish people not to bee so shy in the use of so soveraigne and so excellent a medicine, wherein there is so small offence, and in the use whereof there is no injury offered either to the taste or stomacke. But when as many times either for haste, or else we cannot prevaile with the patient to admit of a glister,Suppos^tories. we make use of suppositories put up into the same place, but yet with greater facility and ease; they are not onely made of hony hard boiled, but also of allum and other matter: and sometimes the end of a candle performeth such an exploit; and sometimes a violet comfit, especially in children, and many other things will make an irritation, to provoke to stoole. But let this caution, aswell in glisters as suppositories alwaies carefully bee observed, that in infirmities of the fundament,Caution in infirmities of the fundame^t. the Piles especially, fistulaes and the like, there be none of those strong powders or electuaries, hiera simple or compound, or the like vsed, unlesse when we have a purpose to open the piles, or provoke the menstruous fluxe. But let this alwaies be done with great caution and circumspection.
(...) divers reme^^e^ are to bee used, (...) first and what ^ext is to be done.Now in all our physicall actions, especially in evacuations, when divers are to be performed, wee are to consider the order, what is to be undertaken in the first, and what in the next place. So that when as we have need both to purge and bleed, it is doubtfull with which we must beginne. And againe, if purgation be necessary, whether to beginne with a purge upward or downeward, by glister or otherwise: If these things be not carefully looked into, they may prove not a little prejudiciall, if not pernicious to the patient. Now in this case, our rule of direction must bee desumed from the order of the causes, and that especially we are to beginne with that which urgeth us most. It it may be, conveniently, we are to beginne with that operation, which conduceth to, and helpeth to further the operation of the other, removing

that which is the cause of others insuing after: but in any case beginning alwaies with that which presseth us most:Wee are alwaies to beginne with that which presseth and urg^th most. as in some diseases, where with a cacochymicall body is conjoined a great debility of strength; postposing all evacuations, wee beginne to repaire the breaches thereof, without this all other remedies conducing but little. In like manner, if in the veines we perceive a great redundancy of humors, we hold it the (...) to beginne with phlebotomy, and afterwards to purge, and what is remaining to bring to a right temper and frame: and in such cases after phlebotomy purgation hath the better successe. But if there be any impurity in the first region of the body, it will be best to begin with a gentle purge, left being conveied into the veines it infect the blood. But if there be any urgent occasion for phlebotomy: as a fall from some height, Squinancie, Pleuresie, Phrensie, Burning-fever, etc; we are not to deferre this generous and noble remedy. If the stomacke be oppressed with choler, or inclined to casting, and nothing let us, we are to beginne with that remedie. If constipation of body, Wind-colicke, Nephriticall paine pinch, then is it best to beginne with a glister. What further concerneth this businesse, may from that which hath been said already easily be collected, and therefore now we proceed to the time.


CHAP. XIIIJ.

Of the opportune time of purgation, both generall and particular, with divers things concerning this subiect.

NOw if all other things be duly as they ought performed, in purgation, yet we if erre but in the right and opportune time, all our labour is lost. By the fit and opportune time I here understand aswell the time of the disease,Time twofold. as the time and season of the yeere and day. As for the time of the disease I understand both the general and particular, as hath been said already: and in both wee consider the beginning, the increase, height and declinning. By the generall, the whole course and period of the disease; by the particular, the paroxysmes or exacerbations thereof: as in fevers with paroxysmes which we commonly call fits. Now concerning this opportune time, although that which hath beene lately spoken may give us some light, yet will we make the point yet more cleere. It may then be demanded, whether it be fit and safe to purge the patient in the beginning of the disease or no? And that Aegyptios noluisse quicquam in aegrotis non nisi quarta p^ractae die: alioqui medici suo periculo id ag^bant. Arist. 3. polit. cap. 13. among the Aegyptians it was strictly forbidden, may by Aristotle appeare, affirming, that the Aegyptians would not suffer the Physitians to innovate or attempt any thing about the sicke untill the fourth day were past; which

if they did, they were at their owne perill to doe it. From them it seemeth Hippocrates brought this custome into Greece, not determining the day, but deferring purgation untill concoction of the disease, whensoever it commeth to passe. And therefore with De diae^a acut. com. ment. 76. Hippocrates following therein also Galen, we expect the signes of concoction in the urine and the like, unlesse the humors be furious and swelling, then we purge in the beginning, as hath been said already. Otherwise we neither purge in the beginning, nor in the increase of the disease, but deferre it untill the end or vigor or height thereof, when as most commonly diseases are concocted, and by the benefit of nature is made sequestration of the matter, and is often thereby critically expelled. (...).Ap^o^ 20. lib. 1. If nature of it selfe be strong enough for this worke, let it alone: but if deficient and unable, the Physitian is then to further the operation. And this is the wise counsell of Hippocrates, who againe adviseth us, (...).Aph. 12. lib. 2. that if any reliques of the matter be left behind, it may procure a relapse; and therefore it is good wisedome to sweep the house cleane, and so may we be freed from future feares. All this notwithstanding, when as by reason of the abundance of putrid humors, wee feare lest nature faint before perfect concoction, we may sometimes use a gentle minorative, which may lessen this quantity, by which meanes nature is made stronger for the subduing of the residue behind.In maligne and venemous Fevers wee are not to deferre purgation. Besides, in maligne and venemous humors, threatning to the party sudden destruction, we are not then to deferre evacuation, nor yet feare the danger the want of concoction might produce; being better alwayes to yeeld to an incoveniencie than to a mischiefe. And (...) ^ctu acut. Hippocrates himselfe adviseth us sometimes to purge even in the beginning of diseases, before the humors bee setled or impacted upon some parts, or else after they are brought to perfect maturation.In what other cases wee are to purge in the beginning. For in diseases proceeding from an influxe of humors (such as are Pleurisies, Squinancies and the like) we are even in the very beginning to use all manner of evacuations fitting, either by purging or phlebotomy: the like in luxations, or members out of joint, in wounds, etc; is to be observed, for feare lest the humor settle upon the part affected. But what is already setled in any part, cannot, before concoction, bee evacuated. The like course is to bee taken when the humor overwhelmeth any noble part, and by that meanes oppresseth the strength (which often in Apoplexies, and sudden suffocations by reason of rheumes commeth to passe) when delay is not without danger. In other acute diseases, where we feare not the like danger, we are to be more sparing, and use it onely in case of necessity: but in chronicall diseases, and of longer continuance we may be bolder in our evacuations, especially signes of concoction appearing. In them also, by reason of the toughnesse of the humor, being especially setled on some part, we may by a minorative lessen some of the matter, and withall open some of the wayes and passages. And therefore if here we see but the beginning of concoction, we are contented, In Febribus continuis, qui paribus se^e non criticis pharmaco usi ^unt nunquam nimium purgati fuerunt: qui vero aiebus imp^ribus forti medicamento usi sunt nimium purgati fuerunt, multique ex his perierunt Hipp. 4. de morbis. Now concerning acute diseases, having no set paroxysmes or exacerbations, it is best to abstaine from all manner of physicke. And this seemeth to be the precept of Hippocrates, bidding us to beware of odde and criticall daies, on the which the humors are

most moved; as in continuall Fevers, etc. The like may wee (...) of the paroxysmes, or fits of intermittenr Fevers, in the which it is safer to purge on the day of intermisson, especially where the strength is not vigorous, than on the day of exacerbation, which is, according to Hippocrates, odde and criticall. And yet if the party be strong, in Quartans, and the like intermittent Fevers,When we may safely purge the humour on the day of the sit. in the which the humors are not easily moved, it is not amisse, sometimes on the same day, when the humours are in motion, to expell them. For whensoever the matter is in motion, and the disease exasperated, it is then easiest to expell it by purgation: but if the party be weake and feeble, it is farre better to attend the time of intermission. Againe,The best time of the yeere. as concerning the time of the yeere, the Spring is the best, and next to that, the Autumne: but Winter and Sommer, especially if extreme hot or cold, are not so convenient; howbeit if temperate, as they often prove here with vs, I see no reason why we should so much feare them: howbeit in elective purgation, and in chronicall diseases that will stay our leisure, without feare of any danger, I thinke it fit to make choice of thy fittest time. On a temperate faire day,The fittest day. the purgation is most commodious; howbeit on a warme moist day it is more copious and plentifull. In diseases therefore free from paroxysmes, in Sommer, and hot times it is best very earely in the morning to purge: if in cold weather, it will be better later in the day, drawing neerer noone, I meane,The fittest time of the day. that the medicine may beginne to worke about that time: and as wee see the ambient, so are wee to fit our physicke, so as it may worke in a temperate time of the day.Pills, when to be exhibited. Sometimes we exhibite pills an houre before supper to purge the belly; but three or route houres after a light supper to purge the head.Strong purgations when to be taken. Strong purgations are not to be taken but on an empty stomacke: but easie and gentle medicines are given before and sometimes with meat, especially to cleanse the guts only.
As in plebotomie, so here may be asked,Whether physick may be administred during the dog-daies,Answer. whether wee may safely administer physicke during the dogge-daies, or hot seasons? I answer, as I did before concerning phlebotomy, that there is neither time nor age doth hinder any from this so usefull and necessary a remedy; provided all the circumstances in such cases considerable, especially the strength of the patient, be well weighed, as I my selfe have with good successe often found true, both in my selfe and others. And if any shall yet aske mee concerning the signes, and severall conjunctions and aspects of planets, and their manifold conjunctions, whether in them we may safely purge? my answer shall be the same, that it is a frivolous feare, to be afraid where there is no cause, and what wee have already pleaded for phlebotomy, will here sute as well with these evacuations.Whether the signe, severall aspects and coniunction of the planets are to be observed.Answer. It is true indeede, Hippocrates gives us warning to mark certaine starres, especially the Dog-starre, during the raigne whereof it is not commonly so good and seasonable a time to bleed and purge. But this is not meant of such a starre as a starre; but by reason that about that season of the yeere, heat hath commonly a great pre-eminence, especially in those hot countries where Hippocrates lived; but with us, neither is this Dog-starre so dangerous, nor our ambient so hot, that wee need to feare, in time of necessity, either to purge or bleed, as I have already made it

appeare. The same Lib de acre aquis and locis. Hippocrates giveth us yet warning to observe certaine other starres as Arcturus, and the Pleiades; and this onely because that about the rising and setting of these starres, there is commonly a great alteration in the weather: and not as they are such starres, and do alwaies undoubtedly send downe in all places alike, some particular inevitable influence. The like may be said of the two Aequinoxes, and Solstices, whereof the same Author also maketh mention. But because I have somewhat largely already explained my meaning concerning the starres and signes, I will not repeat any thing, but wish people to be warned, and now to grow wiser, and not to be afraid of Wizards and Prognosticators, whatsoever they prate concerning signes, conjunctions, aspects good or bad, and the like: but in time of need inquire of good counsell, and accommodate thy selfe so as to follow such directions as are prescribed thee for thy health, howsoever the season be.


CHAP. XV.

Of the waies and passages by which wee are to purge: of the formes in which wee exhibite physicke; together with the manner how to governe the sicke during purgation, and meanes how to keepe physicke in the stomacke, that it cast it not up againe.

IT hath beene already declared, that the waies by which we are to purge, are two, either upwards by vomit, or downewards by dejection.The way and passage by which wee are to purge, how indicated. The way or passage is partly indicated by the place which the humour peccant, either already occupieth, or is like shortly to assault: and partly the inclination of the humour,In the waies and passages foure things considerable. and motion of nature it selfe. In the waies and passages by which the humor is to be purged* wee are to consider foure things: to wit, whether they be neere the place where the noxious humour is seated, whether it hath any communion with it, and whether they be naturally disposed or no. Now, a noxious humour either taketh hold of the whole body, and all the regions thereof, or else some one region, or one part of it: as the head, stomacke, etc. And wee are alwaies to fit and prepare the place by which the humor may most easily be evacuated;Wee are to purge by most convenient waies and passages. it being alwaies easiliest purged by the passages freest, wide, accustomed* and most naturally disposed. And therefore what is conteined in the stomacke, is easiliest by vomit expelled; that in the guts by dejection, and what is conteined in the whole body, both waies. The like wee are also to observe in particular evacuations: as the excrements of the forehead, by the palate and the nose: of the bladder and kidnies, by the urine, etc. But when as the matter is yet in fluxe,

it is the Physitians part by all meanes, possible to turne it away by some other passage. Wherefore, if the eyes and braine be affected,When the matter is in fluxe. we are not to purge upwards, except it come by sympathy from the stomacke, but downewards. Contrariwise, if any defluxion fall downe upon the legges or nether parts, we are not to purge downewards but upwards; especially, if nature and custome can well beare it, and the passages be thereunto disposed. Againe, as (...). Aphor. 21. lib. 1. Hippocrates teacheth us, we are to follow natures inclination. Now choler inclineth most upwards; phlegmaticke and melancholicke humors decline more downewards. And therefore in Sommer and beginning of paroxysmes, where choler is most abounding, it is best to purge upwards: in Winter best to purge downewards; to wit, when the whole body is to be purged. But if it shall so come to passe that phlegme and melancholy be lodged in the stomacke; as in the paroxysmes of Quotidians and Quartanes, and it affect the way upward, then may we safely follow natures direction, notwithstanding the Winter season, as both Hippocrates and Galen direct us.
The forme of the medicine is not here also to bee neglected.The forme of the medicine. A liquid forme penetrateth more powerfully, openeth obstructions better: but a solid forme, as of pills, stayeth longer in the stomacke, and draweth more effectually from the remote parts. But in hot and dry constitutions and diseases they are not so convenient. Besides, hot medicines in a liquid forme are not so fit for a weake stomacke, except the distance of some part require it; and in that case they are to be mingled with well-smelling correctives, or else they much debilitate the stomacke. But if the stomacke be strong and uncleane, then may they bee exhibited with lesse correction, and long after meales. Electuaries participate of a meane betwixt both, and are of divers sorts; some lenitives and preparatives, and some againe strong purgers.
Followeth now the ordering of the party that hath taken physicke,Ordering of the pat^ent, in and after the taking of physicke.To prevent casting of it up. both before and after the same. The patient after the taking of physicke for feare of casting up againe may wash his mouth with some liquid substance, whereof he may let downe a guple or two to wash and cleanse away the loathsome-taste of the medicine; and this may bee either a little cleere posset-drinke, thinne broth, or a little ordinarie beere or ale: or yet it will not be amisse, especially, for our sweet toothed female sex, to eate a preserved damson, cherrie, or some such thing, which may take away the evill taste of the medicine. Some wish before the taking of the medicine to chew a little pellitory of Spaine. As for the smell, few are ignorant how to hold a tost of bread dipt in rose-vineger to the nose, that the smell offend nor. And as for the manner of taking physicke,Pills how to be taken I hold it not amisse to take Pill^ in the pap of a rosted apple, as many doe, and better in my opinion then in the yolke of an egge. Some gild them over, and so swallow them, which is not amisse. The Germane Physitians make them farre smaller than we use; as for our seven they make commonly the double, if not more, and so give their patients 4. or 5. in a spoone at a time with some sirup to suppe up, and so proceed till they have taken all. Electuaries

are most usually rolled in sugar,Electuaries.Potions how to be taken, and how to keep them downe. and so eaten by gobbets, or on the point of a knife without sugar. Potions are drunke downe, and therefore in most danger to be cast up againe; and therefore greater care must be had in keeping them downe, for feare of frustrating our intention: and therefore, besides that which hath beene said, when that is feared, it will be good to make the party hold his hand in cold water, to besprinckle his face with a little faire water, rose-water, or rose-vineger mingled therewith, or to lap the hands in a linnen cloth wet with vineger; and which is a most soveraigne remedy, let tye a warme linnen cloth close about their necke. And some hold a raw egge, shell and all close to the throat. Besides the premisses, let them be silent, and refraine as much as is possible from spitting, coughing, sit still a while without motion or agitation of the body. It is to bee wished,How long at least we are to keepe the medicine. that the medicine at the least stay an houre: and if there be no meanes to reteine it longer, yet will it not cease to have its operation, the vertue and efficacie thereof having in that space diffused it selfe abroad, and sometimes in a shorter space, as I have often observed: and besides, it will hardly come up alone, but bring up with it such corrupt humors as have been collected in the stomacke, which is no small benefit, if it went no further. I have often observed, that even after halfe an houres retention, and sometimes lesse, although rejected againe by vomit, yet hath it wrought effectually downe-wards. Now here it may be demanded, whether after physicke the patient may sleepe or no?Whether wee may sleepe after physicke Answere. It is agreed upon by all our Physitians, that after Pills the patient may sleep, and are therefore often after supper exhibited: but as for other physicke, most are against it untill the physicke have finished its operation. And yet Ioubert des erreurs populaires partic. 2. chap. 17. a late learned French Physitian sometimes heretofore by us mentioned, alloweth of sleep after any physicke, which he professeth to have practised to his patients without any prejudice; howbeit after the operation is once begunne, then permitteth he it not untill all be finished. As for vomits,In vomits what to be done. we give now and then a draught of thinne posset-drink to facilitate the operation, and some dissolve in it a little butter: and some to facilitate the operation thrust their finger into their throat, and sometimes dip a feather in oile and so thrust it downe the throat,^rative what time ^ bee given. the better to facilitate the same. Now as for the lavative, ordinarily given, after purgations (being nothing else but a draught of thinne broth or posset-drinke) it is hard to determine the particular houre: but it is then to be given, when as we thinke the medicine al or the most part to bee descended out of the stomacke into the guts, which is most commonly three or foure houres after the taking of the purgation: so that if it be taken about six in the morning, this broth may be given about nine or ten; in some sooner, in some later: and then there would againe interceed two houres to let this lavative descend into the guts before dinner; which is to be given, when as we guesse that the medicine hath wholly, or almost finished it operation, and the patient findeth his stomacke empty of it, which is not at one and the same houre in all alike.(...) of (...) The dinner must be sparing, and of boiled meat; and as for supper, if the dinner be late, the supper need

to be little or none, unlesse some cawdell, a potched egge or two, of some such easie thing. If the medicine be taken earely in the morning, then is the operation of the physicke so much furthered, that dinnertime commeth on so earely, that supper may be had in due season, which may likewise be sparing, and rost meat rather than boiled. If pills be taken over night, the lavative may be taken in the morning betimes,When pills are taken over night. and dinner and supper at their accustomed seasons. During this time of purging,Keeping of the chamber cum custodia and the reason. it is commonly injoined by the Physitian to keepe the chamber, which is called cum custodia: and that for a double reason; both for feare lest the ambient aire abroad, if exceeding in cold, might offend, as likewise for feare of troubling the operation of the medicine by any objects, which, then occuring, might hinder the operation thereof. And therefore the roome ought not to be too light, but rather somewhat darke: and the patient to be purged, is that day to free his thoughts from any weightie cares, not to study, nor admit of company, which might hinder and divert the operation of the medicine.The ambient aire how to be ordered. And it is to be observed, that if the ambient aire be warme, wee need not to warme the roome with any fire; but if the ambient be cold, then are we to warme it moderatly. If the diseased be weake, then the discretion of the Physitian must appeare in accommodating diet and other things according to the strength, and other circumstances concerning his patient. And when solid food cannot be received, suppings and liquid meats must then of them be used. And this is the summe of that I thinke needfull to be said concerning the governing of such as take physick. In some, I confesse,Sine custodia what, and when it may be used. we observe not alwaies so strict and precise a proceeding: as in some persons, who, either by way of prevention, or otherwise, for some inveterate chronicall infirmity (being, notwithstanding, well able to walke up and downe, and dispatch their ordinary and usefull affaires) doe use some diet drinke, or other gentle medicines for divers daies, yet without keeping close within their chamber; called therefore sine custodia. Now, we proceed to the signes of a laudable purgation. That the purge hath plaid its part,Signes of compleat purgation. wee discerne by these signes: when the excrements shew some alteration in colour, if the party finde alleviation, the appetite returne, and the accidents be eased: and sometimes if there be a propensenesse to sleepe, and if drouth appeare: provided, it proceed not from some hot rheume, from the heat of the purging medicine, or of the stomacke it selfe, or some cholericke humour, or that there were no complaint of it before the medicine taken: for oftentime a great drouth is well qualified and quieted by purgation, the hot cause being then removed. In other cases, faith Aph. 10. lib. 4. Hippocrates, such as being purged, have no feeling of drouth, let them purge untill they be sensible of it. Neither yet is sleepe simply to be understood, but when as by sleepe and hot humours, great watching preceding, the cause now removed, sleepe ensueth: provided alwaies it proceed not from debility of the body. But that purgation wee account not laudable, which mooveth and stirreth the humours, but expelleth them not:Defective purgation. or that expelleth them, yet not as it ought, nor the fit humour to be expelled; but with great paine, with evill accidents, and the good and bad both

together.Causes of defective purgation. The cause of these proceedeth either from the party purged, in regard of some fault in the debilitie of the facultie, or want of preparation in the humours, or by reason of obstructions: it may also come to passe by meanes of the medicine; as being either too strong of a maligne quality, weake, or not well corrected. It proceedeth also sometimes by reason of some errour in diet:History. As I remember a young Gentlewoman, my patient, some yeeres agoe, having taken a purge by my prescription, within an houre or two after filled her belly with baked peares, which hindered the operation of the physicke, although strong enough, and not without danger to her selfe. If it should happen, as sometimes it may, that physicke should not work,If physick worke not. a gentle Glister, or perhaps a quicke Suppository will draw it downe.If too violently. If too violently, a temperate aire, warme clothes applied to the belly, astringent diet, and rest without motion will helpe it. If not, a little burnt claret wine, or some good Venice treacle,Gripings in the belly. will helpe it. If gripings proceeding from some tough phlegme, which cannot passe thorow the orifices of the small veines, doe gnaw thy belly, some warme clothes applied to the belly will dissolve the humour, and discusse any flatuous matter. And this ^hen shall suffice to have spoken concerning this generall evacuation, we proceed now to the last generall evacuation, which is sweat.


CHAP. XVI.

Of sweating, and meanes to provoke the same; divers sorts of Hydrotickes or medicines provoking sweat, both externall and internall: Something concerning teares, their causes and prognosticke.

OF two generall evacuations, phlebotomy and purgation wee have said sufficiently already, resteth yet a third, which by reason it evacuateth in the like manner from the whole body, is therefore also ranked among generall and universall evacuations.Three concoctions in the body. It hath been said already, there are three concoctions performed in the body of man: the first, in the stomacke and guts, having for excrement the ordure, which is expelled by the fundament: the second in the liver and veines, having for excrement the urine: the third in the capillary veines, in the habite of the bodie, having for excrements the sweat and fuliginous evaporations,Sweat an excrement of the third concoction. expelled by the pores of the body. This last is the subtilest part of this matter, by a milde and gentle heat resolved into vapours, so and insensibly expelled: the other of a grosser substance, expelled in the forme of moisture; and this wee commonly call sweat.What sweat is. And it is defined, an excretion of thinne, serous, or

watry humours by the whole habite, or outward parts of the body. But Sudoris materiam ab internis visceribus succo naturali madenti^us emanare contendis, Fernel. lib. de feb (...). cap. desudere. Fernel would have all sweat to proceed from the inward parts super abounding in moisture, whom, notwithstanding, all our best Physitians doe contradict. Sweat is usefull both in sicknesse and in health, and is both naturall and artificiall. Artificiall sweat is often procured by exercises in healthfull persons, and sometimes by bathes and other meanes. My purpose and intention is here chiefely to speake of sweat in the sick, together with the utility thereof, and many meanes to procure the same; as also divers generall directions and rules concerning the use of these meanes both in sicknesse and in health. Sweat is used either in acute or chronicall diseases. In chronicall diseases, exercise may sometimes further them, which in acute diseases most commonly cannot be effected. In acute diseases, sweat is either naturall or artificiall:Sweating in acute diseases. and againe, naturall, besides the ordinary course, is sometimes criticall, and sometimes againe symptomaticall. Criticall, as when on a criticall day, accompanied with other good and laudable signes,Sweat naturall, or artificiall. the strength especially holding out, and alleviation after insuing.Naturall againe criticall or symptomaticall.Symptomatical what. Symptomaticall, is, when failing either in quantity, in quality, or in the timely and orderly excretion it is deficient, accompanied with some other ill accidents, and without alleviation of the patient, often also accompanied with the overthrow of the vigor or strength; and thus we often by experience find, when the sicke sweateth but in some one or other part of the body; as about the head, and upper parts only: or when the sweat is of an evill smell, and often also cold and clammie; and sometimes also comming in too great abundance, nature now being so much overthrowne, that it is not any more able to conteine this humidity within the body, which we then call sudorem diaphoreticum. Now,Diaphoreticall sweat. all these kindes of sweats doe many times prove dangerous, if not deadly, especially accompanied with other dangerous presaging signes, as Hippocrates in many places of his prognostickes, and other places of his workes; and after him, Galen doe fully testifie. But it commeth often also to passe, that nature is defective in expelling this humiditie, which may proceed from divers causes; and is then by the Phsiytian to be helped forward, by administring such meanes as may answer the patients expectation. Now, this is by divers meanes effected: sometimes, as was said, by exercise,Sweat how to be provoked. in cases where it may safely be admitted, and sometimes by other meanes, as by covering with many clothes, hydroticke, or sweating medicines, diet drinkes, and the like inward medicines: and sometime by outward meanes also; as by perfumes, ointments, baths drie and moist, application of bottles to the soles of the feet, hot brickes and the like. Of simples provoking sweat, called therefore sudorisickes, there be divers sorts, as well vegetables as mineralls, as also some compositions there are which further this worke effectually. The simples are of an opening quality, somewhat hot and drie, yet with moderation,Hydrotick simples, or provokers of sweat. rarefying and opening the passages and pores by which sweat is to passe: as among vegetables wee have divers woods, both forren and domesticke: to wit, lignum sanctum, assafras, Zarzaparilla, China root, Vine root, Box, Ling, Heath or Hadder, of the which divers sudorificke drinkes are made, in severall

cases and manners, according as the nature of the disease, the strength of the patient, with other circumstances concurring shall permit, with the which decoctions are often mingled some other vegetables, herbs, flowers, or roots; and besides, we have yet many other simples of a forcible operation, which may safely be given in a small quantity: as Bezoar stone,Strong hydrotickes. Harts horne calcinated or burnt, Vnicornes-horne (in the esteeme of some) which I value not a rush; a gumme found in the eye of an old Hart. Diuers plants there be also of good use and efficacy for this same purpose: as holy Thistle, the decoction, water and salt of it and of many other simples. Some there are also made of mineralls and metalls, which ought carefully to be prepared, and with great circumspection administred; any Empericke or Barber-surgeon can tell how to make any sweat apace in the poxe, with some mercuriall medicines, suffumigation of cinabaris, etc. better than to fit and prepare proper medicines for the strength and constitution of each individuall patient. There are yet a multitude of medicines made of Antimonie, Sulphur, and other mineralls and metalls, yea, of gold it selfe: as flores sulphuris,Hydroticke minerals. antimo^^i, aurum diaphoreticum, etc. concerning which, our late Writers, especially our Paracelsists, haue written at great length, and undertaken thereby to worke wonders. Compounded sudorificke medicines are Venice treacle, Mithridat, Dioscordium, etc. But in the use of these sudorificke medicines,Compounded sudorifickes. some cautions and rules are to be observed: first, that the body be first evacuated by purgation, phlebotomy, or both,Cautions in the use of hydrotickes. if need be. Againe, the body is to be prepared, especially where there is need, and that by some of the gentlest of some of these same sudorificke medicines: such as are mulsa, or hony water, the decoction of tormentill roots,Preparation. squinant, of our ordinary canes with calamus aromaticus, the decoction of chamomill, sage, betonie, and the like; wherunto may be added cordiall flowers of borrage, buglosse and marigolds, the which, together with the water of the decoction, will correct both their hot and drie qualities. After the exhibiting of these preparatives, they are in no case to be forced to sweat. Now, the preparations may be divers, according to severall and divers diseases: as French poxe, Fevers, and divers chronicall diseases. But when then the poison in the plague*When to be neglected. and some pestilent fevers hath already taken possession, I wish thee then, neither to stay for purgation nor preparation, but according to strength, presently by all meanes possible to expell the enemy out of the house. Some prescribe frictions as a fit preparation,Frictions. which I thinke to be very good, if they be used as they ought. Some, againe, prescribe fomentations; howbeit this better becommeth a particular sudorificke,Fomentations. I meane, of some one particular part.Sudorifickes in chronicall diseases. Besides acute diseases, they are very usefull in many chronicall diseases: as in all manner of defluxions, Sciatica, and all other gouts proceeding of a cold cause; as also in long continuing Fevers, French poxe, all long* continuing fluxes of the belly: as also in Epilepsies. Palsies, and paines of the head, proceeding of cold humours. Wee are also to observe, that wee urge not the sicke to sweat,How to use these sudorificke medicines. at least halfe an houre after the reception of his sudorificke medicine: and then if it come not freely, wee are to force it

with covering with more clothes, or hot brickes quenched in vineger, and lapped up in linnen clothes dipt in vineger, applied to the armeholes, soles of the feet and thighes, rubbing still off the sweat with warme clothes to make it come the freclier. Some bodies thou shalt hardly by any meanes make to sweat, and there the physitian is to beware lest he offer too much violece nature. The sicke is to sweat as strength and other circumstances shall require.The continuance o^ time of endurance. In what cases hurtful. This remedy must not be used in extreme weaknesse, in extenuat persons, wasted with long lingering diseases, in Consumptions, Fever hecticke, in very young children, and old decrepit persons, etc. Now because our authors doe much commend sweating procured by bathing, either naturall or artificiall, we will therefore say something of the use of both these before we proceed any further, having first said something of teares for the affinitie with sweat.
To this place of sweat wee may also referre teares,Of teares. a moist excrement of the braine, participating of the nature of sweat. I passe by a punctuall description of many particulars concerning this point, which may at great length be seene in a Mercur. de excrem. lib. 3. cap. 2. de lachrymis.Differences of teare^ learned late Physitian, and come to that which most maketh for our purpose in hand. As for the differences of teares, they are these. Some are called cold, by reason they seeme in trickling downe to be cold; some againe seeme to bee hotter; and others are called dry: and these be such, as falling downe are quickly dry againe. Some againe are called thicke, and sticke closer to the cheekes, and some againe thinner, which are quicklier dissolved, and are of a very thinne and watery substance. Teares againe sometimes come in great abundance, and sometimes in a smaller quantity. Some againe salt, some sweet, some bittter. Some againe are without any sicknesse, and some with sicknesse. Some come easily and of themselves, and some againe are forced. Upon the severall causes of all these particulars, I will not insist.Vse of this moisture. The use of this moisture is to irrigate and moisten the hard horny tunicle of the eye, which otherwise with its hardnesse might easily have hurt the other tender tunicles, and adjacent parts of the eye. But let us see what teares signifie and prognosticat. Now that a physitian ought to contemplate and consider the nature and signification of teares, there is a warrant in Lib. 1. de cris. cap. 7* Galen himselfe. Abundance of teares argue abundance of moisture in the braine, as wee see commonly in women and children: few teares againe argue the contrary disposition; howbeit sometimes that peice of flesh lying within the corner of the eyes (called caruncula lachrymalis) may be growne to such a bignesse, that it stoppeth all the passages of this tearie moisture, as I may call it:Why some can so easily weepe, and some not at all. and this may be well assigned for a reason, why some cannot by any meanes whatsoever be forced to shed one teare: others againe upon any small occasion shed abundance of teares. Teares of several tasts argue the dominion of such a humor in the braine: as bitter, choler, etc. Tears againe are observed either in health or sicknesse,Naturall involuntary teares, what they signifie. and either naturall and involuntary, or else voluntary. Naturall involuntary teares proceed either from the want of this caruncle, or abundance of moisture in the braine, which they signifie. If they be accidentall,Accidentall teares. then they may

proceed by meanes of cold compressing and condensating: as also by meanes of sharpe things from without, or taken inwardly; as onions, mustard,Involuntary teares in acute diseases.Voluntary teares. smoake, and defluxions and weaknesse of the braines. Involuntary teares in the sicke of acute diseases are esteemed bad, as signifying a great imbecillity of the retentive faculty. Voluntary teares both in sicknesse and in health may proceed aswell from a voluntary compression or a dilatation: and hence is it, that teares proceed aswell from joy and mirth,Cold and hot teares. as from sorrow and anger. Cold teares are not esteemed good, and so are very hot and salt; and that not only because they signifie too great a heat of the braine, but also, because, as witnesseth Hippocrates, they threaten exulceration of the eyes.Thick and thin tears. Thicke teares argue concoction. The thinnesse argueth sometimes the crudity of the humor, and sometimes againe the narrownesse of the passages, which are also causes thereof. But this shall suffice to have said concerning this subject.


CHAP. XVIJ.

Of bathing among the antients; as also certaine ablutions, of head, hands and feet. Of artificiall bathes generall and particular: their right use, the time, preparation, and divers other considerable circumstances, and how far we observe these customes.

Divers sorts of ablutions or washings in use among the antients.THe antients had in great request divers sorts of ablutions, or washings both of the whole, and also of some parts of the bodie, some whereof we yet observe, and some wee have forsaken. They were used either before or after meales, and that for severall uses and ends.Bathing and anointing the body before meales. Before meales they had a custome to bath their whole body, and to anoint it, as may appeare by many places of antient writers both Poets and Orators, and many other antient authors, aswell Physitians as others. Of these some were publike, to receive all commers: others private, which private men of meanes with great cost and charges builded for their owne and friends use: the like whereof is at this day to be seene in all the Germane countries. My purpose is not to spend time in entring upon a particular description of those sumptuous bathes of antient times, whereof antient authors are so full. But what excesse was used in this particular, see in that wise Epist. 87. lib. 13. Bathing in Germany very frequent. Seneca. At this day the Germanes have in very frequent use this bathing once a weeke, or at least in a fortnight, those of any fashion having for this same purpose their hot house in their backe court, as we here have other office houses; and in every towne are some of these publike hot-houses for the use of any; where

they pay a certaine rate for their attendance.Vsed there promi^^^ously without any previous preparation In these bathes they use most commonly to sweat, without any other previous preparation or purgation, both man, woman and child; and many use immediately after,With cupping and scatification. scarification with cupping-glasses applied to some parts of the body, where they bleed at the discretion of their dog-leach, who yeelds his attendance during this time; or yet according to their owne foolish fancy, seldome consulting with a Physitian about this businesse. With us these bathings are not so much in request; although I deny not, they might now and then discreetly used prove profitable for the body; howbeit in some places of London there are some hot-houses, whereof one may make use. It is more frequent here with us to wash the body in cold water in the Sommer-time, which being but seldome, as twice or thrice a yeere used, might well bee allowed. But there is a very perverse and preposterous custome,Preposterous custom of washing the body in rivers with a full stomacke. used of the younger sort, apprentices especially, to wash their bodies in rivers or other waters immediately after meales, especially after supper, being very prejudiciall to their health, and disposing the bodie to divers diseases. The hands may be as often washed as one will, both morning, evening and midday, both before and after meales, in sicknesse and in health. But whether often washing of the hands helpe the eye-sight, may not without cause be questioned. The Mundificat palmas and lumina reddit acuta. Schola Salern. and Arnald. villa nov. in com. Whether the head ought to be washt or no^ Salernitane schoole affirmeth it, howbeit his interpreter thinketh it is only by accident, by reason the hands being cleane, they handling the eyes, they are like to fare the better. Againe, whether we may ever wash head and feet may likewise be demanded? Or whether that old proverbiall speech be true; Saepemanus, raro pedes, nunquam caput. Now as for the head, in regard it is for the most part so well supplied with internall moisture, and that aswell in regard of its moist constitution, as also by the continuall exhalations from the nether parts of the body, and there by sublimation metamorphosed into moisture, it would seeme to be against reason, by any new addition to increase the same. I doe indeed confesse, we are to be wary in medling with this sublime and noble part, the seat of the senses, of reason and understanding it selfe. It is notwithstanding, in some cases and certaine diseases,Answere. not onely tolerable, but even also necessary to use this lotion of the head; provided it bee but seldome used:How and when it it to be washed. as namely in heads much subject to defluxions of rheume, in which case we may wash the head in a lee appropriated for this purpose; as of betony or the like, and afterwards wash it in faire water not fully cold, then dry it with a dry linnen cloth without warming it; afterwards besprinckling the head with some powder made of frankincense, masticke, red-rose leaves, rosemary and sage, it will much comfort both head and senses. And we see the antients used much Embrocations, which was a wetting of the head:Embrocations* and those who goe to the hot bath in Sommerset-shire, sitting in the bath use these Embrocations, or buckettings, which some doe often endure to a very great number. I wish notwithstanding, that these ablutions of the head bee but seldome used in health: as twice or thrice, or at most foure times a yeere. And as for the use of it in the sicke, as in defluxions and rheums, I advise them, if they desire to speed wel, to be

advised by good counsell what and when to doe. As for this ablution or washing of the feet,Washing of the feet. it hath been of very antient use, especially among the Easterne people, where the heat was great, where this was an ordinary curtesie used towards strangers, which was no small refreshing in these hot scorching countries. Wee use it often also both in sicknesse and in health, but in warme-water commonly, with addition of some well-smelling herbes: as fennell, camomill, hyssop, and the like, which cannot be misliked, especially to bed-ward, as it is most commonly by us used. In sicknesse it is also often of very good use, especially in hot acute diseases, in burning Fevers, Phrensie^, where often pertinacious watching is joined with deliration. And in this case we are to boile good store of lettice, white nymphaea or water-lilly leaves, violet leaves and flowers, and some poppy-heads, being very forcible to provoke sleepe, by reason of the great sympathy betwixt those two, howbeit farre distant and remote parts. But in this, as in all the rest, if it be possible, bee advised by thy learned counsell.
But now we come to speake of the division and diversity of bathes; and being of so great use in the body of man, it shall not bee out of purpose to insist a little the longer upon this subject. All baths then are either naturall or artificiall.
Of artificiall baths.Of the artificiall first, as being most obvious and easy to come by, we will speake in the first place.The matter. In the first place then, for the matter of these bathes it is various and divers: as water, wine, milke and oile; and sometimes sand, but the most common and frequent matter is water, sometimes warme, sometimes cold, and sometimes of a meane temper betwixt both. In the body of man these bathes have a triple use or benefit:Their use threefold. some evacuat and cleanse, some qualifie and temper the humors of the body, and some supply and fill up that which is decaied. Now that they doe euacuat by sweat if one should deny, daily experience will evince, and 14. method. Galen himselfe witnesseth unto us: but to fill up and supply any thing that is wanting, will perhaps finde lesse credit with ordinary understandings; which notwithstanding the Qui ex tennibus crassiores volu^t evadere, lavabunt bis, etc. Id. lib. 3. de sympto. cap. 1. and lib. de salub. diaeta comment. 14.Vertues of a temperate bathe. same author yet in another place witnesseth. In the sicke wee commonly use them of warme-water, intending or remitting this quality of heat as occasion requireth, adding thereunto divers simples, according to the nature of the disease, and constitutions of the body to be bathed. Now a temperate warme bath helpeth forward natures worke in such as have need of moderate humectation and heat, and by reseration of the pores of the body refresheth and cooleth, and by extraction of fuligionous excrements freeth from internall heat. A hot bath helpeth contractions proceeding from cold,Of a hot bath. provoketh sweat, exhausteth and draineth the body dry of superfluous moisture. This bathing in warme-water acccording to a Andernacus de veteri and nov. medic. comment. 2. dial. 8. circa finem.The use in divers diseases. late Writer is good to bee used in divers infirmities: as in a Diarie or owne dayes Fever, and in a hecticke fever also sole and of it selfe, before it turne to a marasme, and not as yet joined to any putrid fever: as also for such as have their moisture exhausted with watchings, cares, dry Diet, or medicines of that nature. And not in these onely, but also in dry distempers, and in

decrepid old age. In Fevers proceeding from putrefaction, it is not to be used but after signes of concoction, unlesse in a perfect Tertian, the drinesse of the humours urge the use of it. It is also in use in Quartans proceeding from choler adust. In Rheumaticke distillations, inflammation of the lungs, pleurisie, after signes of concoction, and in headach, proceeding from humours or vapours arising from the nether parts, it is of good use: as also for the falling off of the haire, for Lethargies, Phrensies, Epilepsie not proceeding from the stomacke or head, but from some other part of the body. It is also good against melancholy proceeding from sharpe humors, paines of the eyes, bleere-eyes, fluxes of the belly, helpeth defects of the voice, inveterate infirmities of the spleene, and indurations thereof, the cholicke proceeding of choler, especially in the younger sort. But proceeding of a cold cause and grosse humours it qualifieth indeed, but cureth it not. And it is good against the gout, proceeding of choler, as also against all extenuation of the body. But on the contrary is hurtfull to plethoricall and cachochymicall bodies, to Hecticks proceeding from an Erisipelas,In what cases hurtfull. commonly called S. Anthonies fire, and Headaches proceeding from a flatuous matter: and it is hurtfull for the inward parts overtaken with inflammation, in all diseases of the ioints, excepting the above mentioned; and for all manner of effusion of blood, whether at the nose, or any other part of the body. And it is yet hurtfull for all such as are inclined to casting, loathing of the stomacke, weaknesse of body, such as are subject to bitter belchings, and such as abound with humors, howbeit otherwise good; especially if any feare of a fluxe of blood. That bath which is hotter than the former, in provoking sweat is more effectuall, but withall doth not communicate that humectation to the body as the former. Now there was also an use of bathing in cold water succeeding the former,Bathing in cold water which was not immediatly to be used after the temperate; but from this into a tepid or a little warmish, and then into cold water.For whom hurtfull in sicknesse and in health. But to some bodies this kind of bathing bringeth some prejudice: as among healthfull people, to such as are yet growing, and to children especially, as also to women, and antient people, to small and weake persons. It is also hurtfull for the brest, procureth hoarsenesse and the cough, offendeth the heart, the stomacke; especially if already weake and feeble. And as for the diseased, it is principally hurtfull to weake kidnies, procureth paine in the guts; especially that called Tenesmus, and stayeth womens fluxes: and it is hurtfull also for humid and cold diseases, as likewise for the Fevers Hectick, that especially already turned into a marasme. The antients used often to enter into another roome, where they sweat by meanes of the aire warmed, the which they called Laconicum,Latonicum, and what it is. answerable unto which, in neerest resemblance, are our hot houses, or stoves, as they are in frequent use in all Germanie, although the particular manner of heating this aire differeth much; these drie stoves being warmed by the heat of the fire onely; but this Laconicum was a moister vapour. This vapour then, or hot aire the antients used, was twofold: either dry, in respect of the other, procured by heat of flints,Of two sorts. or the like, water being cast upon them, and the sicke set in the tub, and covered with clothes made to sweat: or else this was a moister aire, procured by a vapour derived from a vessell full of liquour, with

answerable ingredients, and conveied betwixt the two bottomes of a bathing tub, the uppermost full of holes, where the sicke being set, and covered with clothes, was to sweat, as need required; and this with us is also in frequent use. Wee use often also particular moist bathes, called insessus, and semicapium,^^micapium cinsessus. being a bathing tub filled with warme water, or other matter with appropriate herbs, wherein the patient sits up to the middle or more, being prepared for divers uses and ends. And these are chiefely usefull for hot and dry bodies. The other dry sweatings are fit only for moist and cold constitutions, abounding with grosse humours, and for fat and corpulent people, having alwaies a watchfull eye, to the strength of the patient. But such are altogether contrary to cold and dry, and yet more to hot and drie constitutions. Now, as concerning the time of these bathings and sweatings, both generall and particular,The time, both generall and particular. wee are to consider, whether they are used for any necessity in sicknesse, or otherwise, as physick for prevention of future infirmities. If it be left to election, then the most temperate time of the yeere is to be made choice of, as hath beene said of other evacuations: and the time of the day likewise most temperate, as in a morning before dinner, and after concoction is perfected. In sicke folkes, if there be a necessity, the ambient aire, if not answerable to our desire, must be corrected, as accasion shall require. As for the time of the day, as hath beene said already,The time of the day. the former daies food must first be perfectly concocted, as well in the stomacke as in the liver. As concerning the time of the disease, it being with us unusuall in Fevers, and such acute diseases, wee need not so curiously insist upon it: yet if there were any such necessity, the same time already set downe for the diet, and evacuations, both generall and particular,Preparation of the (...). were to be observed. Before entring into any of these baths of any kind whatsoever, wee are to see that the body be before cleansed, and that the common excrements of urin and ordure first be evacuated, for feare of some defluxion upon the feeble parts, by dissolving and liquifying the humors of the body. Neither yet are we to use exercise before it, for feare of filling the head with fumes and vapors: and food must also be refrained from, for feare of crudities, from whence obstructions, and divers dangerous diseases might after insue. If the party be not able to absteine, let him take some little sustenance in a morning, a little biscuit,In bathing how to be ordered. or some cordiall electuary, or the like. In bathing, the party is to abstein from all manner of food, as also from drinke and sleep, for feare of crudities, the mother of a many diseases. But if strength should so farre faile, that we should feare fainting, then are comfortable smells to be presented to the nose: or else the crums of a manchet soak'd in good sacke, or the like, a little marchpane, manus Christi, or some such comfortable refresher of the spirits, speedily to be given the patient. As for the continuance in the bath,The continuance in the bath. there cannot be one certaine rule prescribed to every individuall person. Cold constitutions, unlesse very weake, may continue a longer time: but temperate persons, when they begin to grow red may goe forth of it: and leane and slender people, by long continuance therein are much inda^maged. But the strength is that which must alwaies be our best directer. In hectick fevers, they are first to goe into the warme bath,How to be used in hecticke fevers. and next into a cold, that by this meanes a constipation of

the skin may be procured and dissipation prevented. Such as in health were much accustomed to bathing, in sicknesse more freely may use this meanes: and yet if they use oftner than once a day, they are to interpose 4 or 5 houres betwixt the two severall times. After bathing,After bathing. the party is diligently to be dried with dry clothes in a warme roome, and well rubd, the head especially, and then sent to bed to sweat a while; and is afterwards againe to be rubd and dri'd with soft linnen clothes. After all this is performed, and the body setled, then are we to offer the sick some liquid food at first: as namely some broth, or the like, and afterwards in a more solid substance, sometimes in a greater, and sometimes in a lesser quantity, according to the nature of the disease, strength of the patient, custome, the ambient aire, the season of the yeere, etc.Dangers arising from the inordinate use of bathing. But as in all other things, so are we here to observe the golden mediocrity: for all manner of hot baths immoderatly used, whether moist or dry, doe too much mollifie the body, evacuating and overthrowing the naturall vigor thereof: and if too hot, they cause continuall burning fevers, debilitate the body; from whence proceedeth great faintnesse, and finally death it selfe. Againe, too much bathing in cold water, procureth shivering and shaking, convulsions, and at length an extinction of naturall heat, wherein life consisteth.


CHAP. XVIII.

Of naturall baths, or minerall waters; whether leap-yeere called also the bissextil, causeth any alteration in these minerall waters, or infringeth the force thereof: and of the originall and first beginning of this time.

ALmighty God, out of his singular goodnesse, and infinite bounty, taking pitty upon miserable man-kinde, now by reason of sinne made subject to so many sicknesses, a due reward of the fame, as bee hath affoorded this microcosme man, a multitude of soveraigne medicines for his solace in such diseases; so among many others hee hath made many waters, that spring out of the earth to affoord him comfort in his great calamity of sickenesse. Now, besides the common waters of severall sorts, whereof wee have daily use, both in food and physicke, as hath beene proved already; there are yet many waters that spring out of the bowells of the earth, participating of the nature of divers mineralls and metalls,Minerall waters usefull for the health of man.Thermae, seu aqua ther^ales. the vertues whereof these waters do reteine, and are therfore with no small successe often used of the sicke for many and divers infirmities. And these by a generall word, are by us commonly called Thermae or aquae Thermales, from that heat whereof most of them doe lesse or more participate. Now, that these waters were not at first among antient Physitians in

that request they have beene since, may by Homerum C^lidorum fen^i^m mentionem non fecisse miror, cum aelioqui lavari cali sa frequenter indicarit: videlicet, quia medicina tanc haec non erat quae a ^uarum perfugio utatur, Plin. lib. 31. cap 6. Pliny appeare: who wondering that Homer made no mention of them, doth afterwards answer himselfe, that in those daies there was no Physitian that made use of them; although Homer maketh often mention of washing in warme water. After Homer, Lib. de aere aqu^^ and locis. Hippocrates, although hee seeme not utterly to to reject such waters, yet by reason of their running thorow minerall and metallicke veines, holdeth them therefore for suspected: for the which cause hee never admitteth of them for the use of the sicke. And of the same mind was Galen also, who never that we reade of, made any triall of such waters.The later Physitians made (...) these minerall waters. But the late Physitians, as well Greeke as Arabians, have introduced the use of them; as finding by long experience, that in chronicall and long continuing diseases, there is not a more soveraine remedy: as in old inveterate obstructions of the inward parts, and the like. Now, it is confirmed by the Authorities of a multitude of our best Physitians, that some of these waters are hot, and some againe cold in their first qualities; and some mixt: and so in their second qualities depending upon the first, they differ likewise, according to those mineralls or metalls from whence they borrow their vertues, howbeit in generall,How their vertues are to be discerned. all these waters participate of exsication. Now, from what metall or minerall the water taketh its vertue or operation, may partly by the colour, taste, smell, the day in the bottome; and partly by distillation, long boiling, evaporation, and the dregges left in the bottome be discerned, as also the nature of such diseases as are thereby cured. And howsover, many trust much to distillation, yet is it not so sure a way, that we may alwaies trust to it, these waters being often of so subtile a nature, that they draw nothing, but, as it were, the spirituous qualitie from these solid substances. In generall, it is to be observed, that those which abound in brimstone and bitume,Sulphu^o^us and ^itum^nous waters. are all of a loosening and mollifying nature, and doe therewith affect both the stomacke and the liver.Waters participating o^ divers metalls and m^neralls. But such as partake more of the nature of yron, alum, copper, or plaster, doe too much condensat and shut up the pores of the skinne, by which meanes it commeth to passe, that no excrement can thereby be excluded. But such as participate of both these extremes, are accounted the best, and their use alwaies safest: for they digest and discusse, yet alwaies reserving intirely the strength and naturall vigor of all the parts of the body. But before I proceed to handle divers particulars concerning these minerall waters, I must here discusse a question, whether all these minerall waters be at all times of a like and equall force? And that this question is not out of purpose, nor needlessely propounded,Whether leap-yeere doth alter or annihi^^^ the vertues of ^inerall waters. may from this appeare, in that some have beene, and some yet are of opinion, that these waters every Bissextile or leap-yeere, as wee call it, lose a great deale of their efficacie and power, and therefore not so efficacious and powerfull against ordinary infirmities. In the first place then, that the vertue and efficacie of these minerall waters, is according to the severall seasons of the yeere, and often according to abundance of drouth or moisture, is often intended and remitted, as wee cannot deny, so is not the point in controversie: but whether in any one certaine determinate time, quatenus such a time, howsoever the ambient aire in all the qualities be affected, doth produce such an infallible

alteration in all minerall waters, that during that time, they are of little or no efficacie against diseases: and this is this leap-yeere now in question. And although I am not ignorant, that many of the wiser and more judicious have their judgements well enough setled herein; yet because not onely some of the vulgar, but some of more eminent parts, and more sublimate understandings, have beene involved in this vulgar errour, I shall crave pardon to digresse a little upon this point, which in my opinion may not seeme impertinent.
In the first place then, let us take notice of the originall of this leap-yeere, and what it is. Before the time of Iulius Caesar,Originall of leap-yeere. it is thought that most nations used the computation of the yeere according to the course of the Moone, the which, because it was uncertaine, the Moone in her motion being so unstable and uncertaine; therefore Iulius Caesar 54 yeeres before the nativitie of our Lord and Saviour, after he had finished his warres, taking into his consideration this irregularity of the yeere, resolved to rectifie the same. And for this same purpose he sent into Egypt for the most expert Mathematicians of that Kingdome, and among the rest one Sosigenes (from whence, as from this Iulius it is called the Iulian,Iulian, or Sosigenian yeere. so from this same Sosigenes it is called the Sosigenian yeere) and therefore whereas before the yeere was ordinarily measured by the motion of the Moone, it was then reduced to the motion of the Sunne, which finisheth his course in 365 daies, and 6 houres. These daies he divided into twelve equall parts, called by the name of Mensis, or measure. And because there rested yet 6 odde houres, for avoiding confusion, which in processe of time might thereby be occasioned, every fourth yeere, there being just 24 houres remaining, these making up a just naturall day, were inserted into the moneth of February, which before had but 28 daies. And yet this computation is not so perfect, but that it admitteth of some defects, here being added unto this yeere more by the fifth part of an houre than ought: and by consequence more added every leap-yeere unto February than ought, by 48 minutes: the which hath made an alteration in the Aequinoxes, and Solstices since this Emperours time, about 11 or 12 daies. Besides, that I say nothing of the motion of the Moone, wherein was likewise some defect, notwithstanding the course was taken to rectifie the same, which made a great confusion in the time of the observation of Easter betwixt the Easterne and Westerne Churches, untill the councell of Nice. The emendation of this errour,Alteration of the yee^ by Pope Gregory 13. howsoever for the space of 200 yeeres by divers Popes attempted; yet untill the time of Gregorie the 13 in the yeere of our Lord 1^82, was never brought to any passe. This Pope, by the helpe especially of one Lilius, a Doctor of physicke, tooke such a course to reforme the Calender, that the vernall Aequinoxe was from the 10 of March reduced to the 21, to the same day that it was at the Nicene councell. Now, this could not be, unlesse in the Calender and computation of the daies of the yeere there were 10 daies quite cut off. And for this cause, this same Lilius chose the moneth of October, wherein this Pope was borne, and tooke quite away from it tenne daies: so that when the 5 of October was to be numbred,Amputation of tenne daies from the former yeeres. in stead thereof was substituted the 15. and October that yeere had but 21 daies.

And this is that wee call the Gregorian,Gregorian yeere and account beyond the seas. or beyond the seas account or yeere; by reason it is received in those countries beyond the seas where the Pope is acknowledged. The which account, yet notwithstanding, There wants yet about 2 daies, in all we want 3 of that wee should have. is not perfect, nor without exception, as I could make appeare, if I were purposed to insist upon this point. But to come now to our purpose, and to answer this point: I say it is a thing very ridiculous, and an opinion very erronious,Answer. that this orderly alteration in the computation of time, should infuse any new influence into these celestiall bodies, which should againe produce so strange and stupendious effects upon these sublunary creatures. Now, these celestiall bodies keepe constantly the same course they ever did since the first creation, these humane constitutions neither adding to, nor detracting from these celestiall bodies any new energie, vertue or power. And if there were any such matter, why then did not some such effects follow upon the Ovid, fastor lib. alteration of Num 1 Pompilius, who added two moneths, to wit, Ianuary and February to the former yeere, consisting onely of ten moneths; and why followed not there some strange new effects, upon the altering of the names of two months, Quintilis and Sextilis, to Iuly and August, the names of two famous Emperors: and finally, why followed not there some strange effects upon the alteration of the old Roman Iulian calender, where there is no lesse than the difference of ten whole daies betwixt us and the Romanists, whch it would seeme, should produce new and stranger effects; and this would seeme a thing not unbeseeming a papall power, who, as Gods Vicar generall here upon earth, yea, and an earthly God too, as they would make him, possessing not onely the waies of Heaven and Purgatory, but even of Hell it selfe; and hee that can alter the decree of the Almighty, that from Hell is no redemption, and bring an heathen Trojan. Emperour out of those firie flames, why might hee not as well worke some new wonder in the alteration of the influences of these celestiall bodies? This would have purchased farre greater credit and reputation to his shavelings, than all the juggling Iesuites, in Iapan or China, with their counterfeit miracles, yea, or their whole legend of lies, put in to weigh downe the scales, our Lady of Loretto, and all the wonders of the West Indies, could ever yet doe. This, I confesse, would, perhaps, make our Heretickes and Huguenots thinke better of S. Peters successe. This would be obvious to the simplest understandings; whereas when wee see a dead mans scull thorow a glasse, wee may as well thinke it the head of some Barabbas, as of a holy Iohn Baptist; and when we see some milke, which they tell us was the Virgin Maries, in regard of the great store, and more than miraculous multiplication of this milk, it makes many Hereticke Huguenot of their Master See Calvins treatise of reliques, where he proves many bodies of their Saints to be monsters. Calvins minde, that if all the milke they say was the Virgin Maries, and which for such they keepe up, and make the people beleeve it is such, the best cow in Holland never gave so much: that I say nothing of the monstrous bodies of the Saints, some of them having two or three heads, some store of legges, etc. yea, some double or triple bodied. But if his holinesse could but stay a little the course of the Sunne or Moone, there might yet be some witnesses of it. But yet, to give the divell his right, I doe much commend the attempts of some Popes, for attempting, but

this Gregory, especially for effecting some reformation of the old calender; but withall wish this famous Doctor, that was the chiefe doer had beene as well kept in remembrance for associating him into this communion and fellowship of calling the yeere, as Gregorian, so Lilian, as was done to that famous Sosigenes. But since those daies, the case is quite altered, and Gregory must goe farre beyond Iulius, our Popes assuming the pre-eminence alone, and precedency before Emperours. Let this then remaine firme and stable, like the lawes of the Medes and Persians, that in these Leape or Bissextile yeeres, as such,No alteration in the leap-yeere more than any other. there is no alteration nor difference from other yeers. As such, I adde, because sometimes this yeere may much differ from the precedent, or subsequent yeere (and so may any other yeere differ from others) but never as such a yeere, neither yet is such a difference ever in every such Bissextile yeere observable. Now at the ignorance of countrie people, and such others as may easily in such points prove ignorant, I marvell not so much, as that some better learned in the Arts and liberall sciences, should be so farre mistaken. And this hath made mee a little the longer insist upon this point, finding a Claudius Deodatus panth. hygiast. libr. 2, cap. 7. learned Physitian, in his treatise now and then mentioned, to be of the same mind: Sed Bernardus non videt omnia. But I thinke that some such yeere, perhaps falling out to be very wet, in which seasons, such waters often are not so forcible, and this falling out it may be twice or thrice in these yeeres, and so by some observed, was afterwards taken for an uncontrolled truth, that alwaies in every leape yeere, the minerall waters lost much of their vertues. But now I proceed to that which followeth.
These minerall waters are in a double manner used,Minerall waters used after a double manner. being either drunke, or the body bathed in them. They are used for divers infirmities: for the cleansing of the stomacke, guts, and meseraicke veines; as also to correct the distemper of the body, to helpe infirmities of the lungs, shortnesse of breath, purging of sanious matter without, an ulcer out of the breast, and to heale the infirmities of the liver, splene, guts, and kidnies, etc. In hot baths the body is commonly bathed; the others are ordinary drunke for divers diseases.The time. The time and season most proper for the use of these baths, especially these hot watets, when election may have place, as in other evacuations, so in this must be the most temperate time of the yeere; as the later end of March, all April and May: and againe, in September, and beginning of October. But with us it is better to goe rather in August, that so the businesse may be dispatched before the cold come in, our Sommer-heats here being seldome with us so excessive. If any necessity require, they may be used also at other times, correcting the aire, as occasion shall require, and thy learned counsell shall advise, without which, if thou go rashly to worke, thou maiest, perhaps, all thy life long repent it.



CHAP. XIX.

Of the preparation before the use of minerall waters, the right use and vertues of them; their various kindes both in this Iland and other Countries.

Preparation of the body before the use of minerall waters.NOw, as in all other noble and generous remedies which concerne the health of mankinde, wee are not rashly to rush upon them without some previous preparation and fitting of the body before: no more are wee in the use of these meanes to neglect the like prudence in the preparation of the body. And the same are here to be observed, which before in the use of artificiall baths were mentioned: to wit, obstructions to be opened, the body to be well purged according to the nature of the disease, strength of the party, and other answerable circumstances, and withall, there must be a care had, that the concoction be well accomplished, there be an abstinence from the venereall act, and a freedome from passions and perturbations of the minde.The time of the day for use. The fit and convenient time to enter into these baths, is two houres after Sunne rising in a morning: and if the nether parts be affected, the party is to sit in the water, covered therewith to the navell: if the upper parts be affected, as farre as the necke. And this must all be done in due order, the first day beginning with the space of an houre,The manner. so increasing both the time of continuance, and intending the hot quality of the water. In the meanetime, the same caution both concerning the nature and constitution of the parties to be bathed, and the rules concerning diet, before, in and after the bathing, is to be observed, as we have heretofore set downe. In the morning they may be suffered to continue longer, in the evening a shorter time, the space of five or sixe houres interceeding betwixt these two times.No cetaaine nor precise time for the continuance of the use of these waters can bee determined. But neither can there be a certaine or precise time for the number of houres continuance in the bath, nor yet a certaine and set number of daies determined, not other new particular circumstances limited, but must still depend upon the judgement of the learned and judicious Physitian, without whose counsell this businesse may prove more pernicious than profitable.Hot baths, and where they most abound. Of these minerall waters there be divers sorts, as said is; every country being furnished with some one kind or other. France and Italy abound most in hot baths, desuming their force and efficacy most from Sulphur or Brimston, wherewith is sometimes conjoined some salt,English baths. or salt peter. Our English baths in Sommerset shire, take their vertue and efficacie from this sulphureous substance. In Germanie,Divers minerall waters in Germany. baths of all sorts are in great abundance; and as the country abounds in divers mineralls and metalls, so doe these waters participate of severall and divers qualities and vertues: as those of Baden in Switzerland,

participate of Brimstone principally, and some little quantity of Alum: those of Baden the Marquisat, besides the premisses, participate also somewhat of salt and salt-peter. Againe, in the confines of Lorreine, there are hot baths called Plumbarenses, participating of the nature of Lead, Brimstone and Salt-peter. In the Dutchie of Wirtenberg, there is the wild bath, called Silvestres, or Ferinae, participating of the nature of brimstone, salt and alum: and as some say, of copper and salt-peter also. And besides these, a great number of many others also, not differing from the former in operation: some of them, as they say, participating also of the nature of gold, which I hardly beleeve,Gold and silver communicate no vertue to such waters. it being of so solid and well compacted a substance, that hardly doth it communicate any vertue to waters that runne thorow such mines, no more than silver also, being likest unto it for solidity of substance. As concerning our owne baths with us here in great use for a multitude of infirmities, and which doe most concerne us, because a learned Doctor Venner in his treatise of baths of Bathe: and since the collecting of this tractat, I saw a learned tractat of baths, published by Dr. Iorden, residing there. Physitian hath lately explained their vertues and use, as being best with them acquainted, I shall not need to say any thing; the vertues of others of the same nature and kinde in other countries, being much also of the same vertue and efficacy. But because peregrination and travell, partly for profit, and partly for pleasure and other ends, is now much in this our age improved, and by reason it concerneth not a little the health of such as are to live or travell in remote and forren countries, to know the nature and vertues of such minerall waters as are found in these countries, I will therefore say a little concerning some of them. Among all those,Acid or sowre waters. They abound in high Germany. such as are of an acid or sowre taste, and much abounding in many places of high Germany, beare away the bell. And these waters doe commonly participate of the nature of vitriol or copperas, of alum and yron, with the admixture often of other mineralls or metalls: as sulphur, salt, etc. There sowre waters sometimes somewhat differ in taste one from another; and sometimes little or no difference at all in their taste can be observed. Their chiefe vertues in the body of man are these following; In the first place, they are very soveraine good against all manner of obstructions of the liver, splene, kidnies, and meseraicall veines,Their vertues. and for this cause conduce not a little for the infirmities of those parts, being very good against exorbitant casting,In what infirmities helpfull. which by their astringent facultie they cure: and they helpe also the Iaundise, the Dropsie, in the beginning; cleanse the kidnies, bladder, and other urinary passages, purging away gravell, or any other matter lying in these passages. They are also good against the itch, scab, and any other defedations of the skinne, all foule ulcers and gangrenes. But Nihil est ex omni parte beatum.In what hurtfull. So are not these acid and sowre waters able to helpe all infirmities: and in particular, they are great enemies to infirmities of the lungs, especially where there is any ulcer, wasting or inflammation. They are hurtfull also for the bloodie fluxe, with exulceration of the guts, and any other internall ulcer, or excoriation, and that in regard of their acidity or sharpnesse. And for the dimnesse of the eyes, they have beene tried to be soveraine good; and that they have a singular and forcible faculty in provoking urine, I had the triall in mine owne body, this sowre water being ordinarily brought from a place distant from Ments, in stone

bottles to Franckfort mart.The time for use. These waters are cold, and therefore are commonly drunke in hot moneths, And yet they are ordinarily brought to Francksort mart in March and September. May, Iune, Iuly, August, September, in a morning fasting, an houre or two after Sunne rising, as is the use in others; and then againe at night, after dinner is digested. The continuance or time of duration of drinking this water,Continuance or duration in drinking them is according as necessity shall require, and cannot certainly be determined: as in some 10 or 12 daies, a fortnight, or three weekes. No more can the measure or certaine quantity be gaged, some contenting themselves with halfe a pint, and some againe will drinke double, some 4 or 5. And the more freely they passe thorow the body by urin or otherwise, the bolder in the use of them may we be. How the body before the use of these waters is to be prepared, the Physitian shall in time of need give notice, and according to all severall circumstancess give particular directions.They lose much vertue by carriage. It is to be observed, that these minerall waters, by carrying from one place to another, lose alwaies something of their former force and efficacie, how close soever they be stopt up, and so become lesse powerfull.Observation in the use of these waters. It is further diligently to be observed, in the use of all minerall waters that are to be drunke, that when as they are drunke twice a day, the partie using them must be carefull that dinner be well digested before they be drunke in the afternoone: and for this purpose dinner must either be very sparing, or else a long distance betwixt dinner and the drinking of them; or else it were better to drinke it but once in a morning, and so double the time of continuing this drinke, as for a fortnight, a whole moneth. Moreover, if the case should so require, that the party should need both to drinke of this water, and bathe in it, it would be most expedient to doe them severall: as first for certaine daies to drinke them, and afterwards for as long to bathe in them. But because wee in this Iland are so farre remote from these acid and other fountains, that ordinarily we cannot have recourse unto them, therefore I shall not need to particularise many of them; of one only, being so much freequented by many of the gentrie, as being neerer unto us than the rest, I will say a little; the so much renowned Well of Spa I meane.Of the Well of Spa. This Spa then is in the Bishoprick of Liege, a part of the 17 Provinces, and is much resorted unto yeere by many Knights and Gentlemen, and sometimes by Ladies and Gentlewomen also; and that for recovering of their health in divers chronicall infirmities: howbeit it is well knowne, that under this colour, some have other projects in their pates. This water particapateth principally of the nature of yron, which in the taste it doth somewhat represent: and it participateth also somewhat of a sulphureous faculty, and a little of vitriol.For what infirmities most beneficiall. It correcteth hot distempers, quencheth thirst, and is good against all inveterate obstructions: and therefore usefull in all inveterate Quartane Fevers, or others, and in all sorts of Iaundise, in the Dropsie, and to open the splene; provoketh also urine, and the menstruous fluxe, and helpeth melancholy Hypochondriacke. These waters are exceeding dry in operation, and therefore exceeding good against all diseases proceeding of moisture. But yet it is to be observed, that they fume up into the head, and therefore not so fit for such as are obnoxious to the Epilepsie, Apoplexie, Vertigo, or giddinesse of the head.
Now, to come to our owne Iland, besides our ordinary baths in Sommerset shire, so famous, and so much frequented; whereof I have promised silence; therere are yet many more in this our Iland of no small vertue and efficacie against many infirmities of the body of man. And first I cannot but mention that water of S. Vincents rocke,Water of S. Vincent^ rocke by Bristoll. neere that famous and antient City of Bristoll, which commeth now in request against the stone; and this I need but only mention, the which is to me altogether unknowne, howbeit the D. Venner in the aforenamed treatise. former Author hath likewise past his censure concerning this Spring, and the right use thereof; and therefore unto his discourse I referre the reader: howsoever, it seemeth by his relation, that it participateth chiefly of the nature of Sulphure and Nitre, and is taken now orderly, being potable, and used for all manner of internall heats and inflammations.
There is a Well in Yorkeshire,A neere and antient towne in Yorke-shire, called by the name of Knare^brough. thought to participate somewhat of the nature of the Well of Spa, taking its vertue and operation from yron; and therefore is good against obstructions of the liver, splene and mesaraicke veines, and to cleanse and corroborate the urinary passages, etc. whereon I will not now dwell, there being a little tractat of late yeeres published concerning the vertues and use of this water.
There is within 7 miles of this towne of Northampton,Wellenborow Wel in Northampton shire. and hard by the market towne of Wellenborogh, a Well much of the same nature and efficacy, participating of the nature of yron, as by proofes may easily appeare: and all the ground through which it runneth, coloureth red. This water, although it can scarce be discerned from others in taste and colour, yet is it powerfull in opening obstructions of the liver, splene and mesaraick veins, to cleanse the the kidnies, bladder, and urinary passages, and so good against the stone, etc. It was but within these few yeers brought in request by that famous Physitian, Sr Theoder Mayrne, Dr in physicke, and Phsitian to the King and Queenes Majesties; and first renowned by some good successe, the right honourable Lord of Pembrok, then Lord Chamberlaine, found thereby: and since, by our gracious Queens Majesty now living, and divers others, approved to be of good use and efficacy. But when I shal be my selfe better satisfied and certified concerning this businesse, I shall be ready, if God prolong my life, to give more particular satisfaction to the publike. But in the use of this,Observation in the use of such waters to be carefull of the stomacke. and other such minerall waters, especially such as are deprived of any acidity, in the taste, there is an especiall regard to be had to the strength of the stomack, and accordingly to the strength of it to accommodat the quantity of water, and alwaies to have a diligent care to correct the acidities of the same; and either before, or together with the use of this water, to be carefull in the corroboration of the stomack. I heard a story of a worthy Lady, who,History. by advice of some Physitians, for some infirmities did drink for certaine days of Tunbridge water in Kent: after the use whereof,Tunbridge water, by means of an irrecoverable debility, her stomacke had by the use of this water contracted, it cost her at last no lesse than her life; as for the nature and vertues of this water, because I am not acquainted with it, I will not meddle.
Some other waters in this Kingdome have for a while beene in great credit and estimation for many infirmities, and their fame againe as quickly falne to the ground. Some few yeeres agoe,Water in Mauborn^ hils in Worcestershire. there was in great

esteem and credit a Well in Mauborn hils in Worcestershire, which the vulgar (ut est natura hominis novitatis avida, a new broome sweepes cleane) for a while esteemed as some noble Panacaea, or aurum potabile, supposed good against all infirmities: but in short space, there was againe, altum silentium, and proved, according to the proverbe, but a nine daies wonder. I doe not for this condemne this water, the nature and vertues whereof are to me unknowne, but I advise people to be wise, and to be circumspect, and with good and mature deliberation to admit of these minerall waters, and then should we not have often times such sudden flashes of the fame of some waters, which as quickly againe vanish into smoake,Newname Wells in Warwick-shire. and their credit is as soone crackt.
There hath beene likewise no small account made of New name Wells in Warwick-shire, which of late yeeres have come in request for the stone, and infirmities of the urinary passages, etc. The which, as many others, I beleeve, doe most participate of this same yron, whereof mention hath beene made already, and therefore are good to be used against the same infirmities.The Spa by Aberdene in Scotland.
I have heard likewise, by relation, of a famous Well, neer Aberdene in the North parts of Scotland, called by the name of Spa; and as they say, effectuall against the same infirmities, which the Well of Spa is said to cure. Of this water a learned Physitian of that same Kingdome,Saint Catherins Well, called now the o^ly Well neer Edenburgh in Scotland. composed a learned tractat, as I am credibly informed, the which as yet I never saw.
There is within two miles of the Citie of Edenburgh, in the same Kingdome, a bituminous Well or Spring, called the oily Well, yeelding great store of this bituminous stuffe, being very good against all manner of itches, scabs, and many other outward defaedations of the skinne, etc. This well was in time of Popery called Saint Catherines Well, and so this Saint carried away the credit of any cure that was thereby performed: as the like use they made of minerall waters, not onely here, but in many other places, as is the use even at this day. I make no question, but in that same countrie,This Iland abounds in minerall waters. especially in the most mountainous parts thereof, where there is such store of yron, and all manner of other ore, there might be found as efficacious waters against any infirmities, as any in remote regions. The like may be said of divers places of this Kingdome; especially in Wales, Cornewall, Devonshire, and many places of the North countrie; as in Yorkeshire, and other shires lying further to the North. But concerning minerall waters, and all manner of baths, as well naturall as artificiall, together with their uses, for the present this shall suffice.



CHAP. XX.

Of the excretion by urine, the retention of urine, together with the nature of diureticke remedies, the right use and abuse thereof.

HAving already at length discoursed of generall evacuations, being three in number,De urinarum praesagiis i^ aegretis agit Hippocrat. in locis praen^t. in prorihet. and libr. de indication. we come now to some particular, the consideration whereof is of no small use, as well in sicknesse as in health. Now, for the affinity it hath with sweat, being much of one nature, although both at divers passages, and in a different manner voided, it shall succeed in the next place. Of the nature of this excrementitious humour, the manner of generation, deceit and coozenage of ignorant and erronious practitioners, in the judgement by the same, and many things which concerne this subject, hath beene See our arraignement and anatomy of urines. else-where handled at great length; where hath beene sufficiently proved the uncertainty of judging the issue of diseases by this bare signe onely; being a signe whereby some diseases only, and somtimes, may be discerned: and yet but a generall one,Vncertaine and generall iudgement for the most part afforded us by urine. which can neither acquaint us with the strength of the patient (a thing of all others in diseases of great moment) nor many other particular circumstances, wherewith the Physitian ought, in so waighty a businesse, to be acquainted. And there we likewise proved, that from thence wee could neither gather any certainty of conception, nor yet of the sexe. I say, neverthelesse, that urine is not to be neglected either in sicknesse or in health: but withall, let other signes not be neglected, but have their due desert. That urine therefore, both in sicknesse and in health, which is of a laudable colour, and contents answerable,Best urine. doth commonly argue that body to be in best case, especially if all other signes concurre; as if it be otherwise, wee are to conceive the contrary. That urine we commonly call best, that is of a light golden colour,Best colour. with a meane white coloured even contents: and the farther it decline from this golden rule, the worse we deeme it: as sometimes when it is of an intense red colour, it often argueth Fevers, or inflammations,Red coloured urines. etc. unlesse sometimes by reseration of some small veines the urine be died with this colour. And yet the urine of a cholericke man will looke of a higher colour than any other, and so if hee shall fall sicke, it must needs be of an intenser colour than of a phlegmaticke person: and this same phlegmaticke person in health shall have a paler coloured urine, and falling into some fever, the urine may be also paler than the former, and yet the party as dangerously sicke; and so I could instance in many other like cases. Againe,Blacke urines, it appeareth sometimes of a blacke colour, and portendeth often no good to the party; and yet this same colour may often prove criticall, and accompanied with like contents.

It may sometimes againe appeare unto us like pure transparent water, without any contents at all,Cleare transparent urin without co^tents. signifying sometimes crudity in the first concoction, sometimes obstructions, with a totall ouerthrow of naturall heat: howbeit sometimes it may be accompanied with extreme heat in a burning Fevet, with a Phrensie, of all others most dangerous, etc. In generall, in sicknesse, these colours and contents are very various and changeable,In diseases various. according to the nature of the disease, and constitution of the diseased, on which I will not now dwell, nor make any repetition of that which hath beene formerly handled.
Quantity of urine in excesse.Vrin again faileth somtimes in the excesse, being in too great a quanty, and sometimes in the defect, where little or no urine is excerned. In excesse, as in that disease called diabete, H^drops ad matulam, or pot-dropsie;Criticall excretion of urine. whersas by weaknesse of the retentive faculty, and want of concoction, drinke passeth thorow the body with little and small alteration: answerable to that disease in the stomacke, commonly called Lienteria,In the defect. being a defect of concoction in the stomacke and guts; but with us is but rare. As for criticall excretion of urine, it is very profitable, and helpeth often to terminate the disease. Now, on the other side, there is a frequent defect in the expelling of urine, and proceedeth from suppression totall or in part;Difficulyy of divers causes. or else by difficulty, whereas without great difficulty and paine it is expelled. Painfull pissing commeth divers manner of waies to passe: as either by the acrimony and sharpnesse of the humour, or by the imbecillity or weaknesse of the retentive faculty, proceeding often from cold: and is sometime occasioned by inflammation, ulcer, clotted or congealed blood, and by the stone,Suppression of urine from divers causes etc. Suppression of urine proceedeth likewise from divers causes: sometimes by meanes of the obstruction, or stoppage of the guts; and sometimes of the emulgent or sucking veines, when as by meanes of imbecillity they are frustrate of their attractive faculty, or yet by obstruction. De his omibus fusius Mercatus de intern. morb. curat. tom. 3. lib. 4. cap. 12. It is procured likewise by obstruction or passage of the kidnies, or urinary passages, and by meanes, of the imbecillity of the same. By reason of the obstruction of the foresaid passages, it is divers waies procured: as either by inflammation, knob or bunch of either of the these parts, or some tough phlegme impacted in, and cleaving fast to the place: as also sometimes, howbeit seldome, by reason of some holes and cavities left in the kidnies after the voiding of some stones. It is sometimes also caused by meanes of the bladder, or parts thereto adjoining, comming divers waies to passe: as first, by reason of the want of sense of feeling, by reason of the resolution of the nerve descending from the loines and hucklebone. Secondly, by reason of the failing of the expelling power of the bladder, etc. Thirdly, by the too great quantity of urine longer than is fit, deteined. Fourthly, by a resolution of the muscles of the nether belly. Fifthly, by the totall overthrow of the expulsive faculty: as in burning Foevers, and then proveth for the most part mortall, as witnesseth Incoacis aph. 25. and prorrbet. 155. Hippocrates, and yet divers other waies commeth this also to passe: as by the resolution of the muscle sphincter, a stone, bunch, clotted blood, etc. And this commeth sometimes to passe by consent of the places adjoining, the bladder and urinary passages being also sometimes so shut up, that they cannot freely

deliver the urine; and many times also cannot keepe it long: as commeth to passe in women with child.All these infirmities to bee cu^ed according to their severall causes. All these severall cases are to be cured accordingly, and that with a due regard had to their severall causes. The totall obstruction of urine proceeding from any cause, if long continuing, may prove mortall. Such remedies as provoke urine, we commonly call diureticks, or provokers of urine. But neither are these in all cases of suppression to be administred, nor yet indifferently, when there is need, are they alwaies without a previous preparation to be used. Now in all such obstructions of the urine,Diureticke remedies, and their right use. before we goe about the right cure, we are first to procure the expulsion of the urine out of the bladder, lest o^ by the use Diureticke medicines a greater attraction of humors increase the obstruction.Preparation. And therefore in such cases we often use the helpe of a catheter, insessions, fomentations, inunctions, glisters, violent motions,Diureticks properly so called. as riding on a trotting horse, etc. Such medicines as are properly called diureticke or expellers of urine, are of a hot and dry facultie, rarefying, attenuating and making thinne the humors. Now such as are properly of this nature, doe not onely extenuat and rarefie the blood, but dissolve also, rarefie, and as it were, melt it, and make a sequestration of the thinnest serositie, coagulating and thickning the residue, as we see in curdled milke come to passe: and that serosity so separated, the kidnies, by their attractive faculty, draw unto the themselves, and from thence transmit it into the bladder; and such not onely provoke urine, but even ingender it also. And such bee especially hot and dry simples, seeds especially: as of carrots, cumin, and the like.Another kind of diureticks. There is another sort of Diureticks, milder than the former, which doth indeed attenuat, howbeit not so forcibly as the former; which send it onely towards the passages of the urine: and of these there are yet two sorts, some being of greater force to extenuate and cleanse:Of two sorts. as the foure hot seeds, namely parsly seed, etc. Some againe performe this action more mildly and moderatly, and with a temperate heat; as the foure cooling seeds, of melons, etc: so called in comparison with the other foure hot seeds.Diureticks improperly so called. Among these diureticke medicines are also reckoned some which supple and make smooth the passages: as marsh-mallow and licorice root, and prove often more beneficiall than the former more violent medicines, so ordinarily used by Empiricks and ignorant persons. Now it is a common received opinion among most people,Erroneous opinion concerning the breaking of the stone by Diureticks. that those violent hot and dry medicines are of all others most forcible and effectuall, to breake and expell the stone out of the kidnies or bladder: wherein notwithstanding they so farre are deceived, that for the most part, such medicines, not onely by reason of their great heat they communicate to the body, but also in regard they send downe too fast uncleanne and corrupt humors, doe rather much increase the matter of the stone.Safest diureticke simples, and best for use. Such simples therefore as are indued with a temperate heat, attenuating tough and clammie humors; such as are Asparagus root, and the like,Medicines accidentally good. are for this purpose the fittest.By occult quality. Some medicines are thought to have a diureticke property accidentally, by scraping and tearing by their roughnesse the superficies or outmost part of the stone: as powder of burnt glasse. And some

are thought by meanes of excessive heat to dissolve the viscosity of the stone, and breake it to powder. But I thinke thou maiest sooner by such medicines bake it harder, as we see brickes baked in a bricke kilne. Some medicines by reason of some occult qualitie are esteemed good against the stone. And of this kind is the Jewes stone, goats blood, and many other medicines. Acid juices, as juice of Lemon, spirit of vitriole, if they could in their full force come at the stone, and not offend the passages betwixt, in my opinion were of all others the fittest. But to draw this point to an end, there is no disease for the which there are more remedies boasted of,Many medicines used against the stone, but few answere expectation.Dangers in the use of hot diureticke medicines. with the attestation of a probatum est at least, as much worth as the oath of one of the knights of the post: and yet no disease wherein we see fewer good effects follow. As for these hot violent diureticke medicines besides the former inconveniences, they prove often causes of excoriations in those tender nervous parts, and at length incurable and tormenting ulcers. And sometimes when as thou thinkest to have made a great purchase, to have procured of some Empiricke or other ignorant person a rare remedy for the stone, thou art now falne, as we say, out of the frying-pan into the fire: and thou who before diddest so magnifie thy Empiricke, and too much trust to his smoakie promises, art often then forced to implore the helpe of the learned Physitian, when many times his best skill can scarce allay the extremity of thy painefull disease, whereas by wise counsell at first thou mightest both have prevented thy paine, and saved thy purse. And thus the Proverb proveth often true,Advertisment. Covetousnesse bringeth nothing home. To conclude then this point of urines, I wish, that in time of need people make not such an idole of their urines, that in time of sicknesse they thinke it sufficient to send their urine to the Physitian, it may bee in an inke or oile bottle, and without any further to demand of the physitian, as of some Oracle, not onely the disease; but even often, all the circumstances thereof:The presence of the Physitian is able to discover more in the disease than a many water. but if you would speed well, if you will need your old mumpsimus in sending your urine to the Physitian, acquaint your physitian with all the severall circumstances of the disease. But an honest learned Physitian will bee better able to advise by one view of the patient, than twentie sights of the urine. It may be others, whose worth and sufficiency is confined to such an excrement, may like an empty barrell prate apace, and make thee beleeve wonders by thy water. And be carefull in any case in trustin^ such cheaters with their rare recits against the stone, and if thou be wise, be warned by other mens harmes.



CHAP. XXI.

Of ordure or fecall excrements, and divers things in them considerable, this excretion being sometimes too lavish, and sometimes deficient.

NExt unto the urine for affinity we wil say somthing of the fecall ordure, an excrement of the first concoction performed in the stomacke. And howsoever some may perhaps think the consideration thereof to be of small use, yet hath it alwaies beene of great utility both in sicknesse and in health, and hath been by our antient Physitians diligently observed: and Mercur. de facibut alvi.The fecall excrements diligently to be considered. some have written whole Tractats of this excrement, aswell as of urine. The utility thereof is by Vide Hippoc. in prognost. prochet. and coac. motionib. Aphoc. etiaem 12. lib. 1. Hippocrates aswell mentioned as of the urine and sweat, and by him as much commended. Moreover, if wee shall compare the urine with the fecall excrements, wee shall finde that of the urine farre inferior, which may seeme a strange paradox to our urine-mongers, who will have no signe but the urine of any signification. Now the urine giveth onely notice of the state of the liver and the veines, and sometimes of the bladder: but this excrement besides the liver and the veines, giveth also notice of the nature of the mesaraicke veines, the stomacke, and the guts, and finally of the state of the whole belly, for the which we take so much paines, and for whose sake most men live, saith Lib. 26. cap. ^. What this fecall ordure is. Pliny. This excrement is then thus defined: the most terrestrious part and purgation of the unprofitable part of aliment, in the consummation of concoction separated, and many times mingled with many waters. It is said to have other matters mingled therewith, by reason of choler which doth colour and dye these excrements; which if not thus dyed, then were they not so good and laudable in quality as is required; and some other substances have been some times observed, mingled therewith. Wee will then beginne with those excrements which in every respect are accounted best;Best excrements. and from thence wee may the better observe and know the deviation of others from that rule. The best then are neither too hard nor too soft, or liquid and thinne, but consisting of a meane betwixt both; compact and firmely united, without the admixture of any uncouth matter, of a pale yellow colour, and in quantity answerable to the food received; in smell, neither too stinking, not yet altogether free from all manner of smell, nor of too sharpe a quality; and which are at the time accustomed, without any great paine, labor, straining, or great noise, easily expelled. Such as decline further from these laudable markes, are alwayes accounted worse either in sicknesse or in health. And therefore thinne

and very liquid excrements,Excrements declining from the former laudable conditions. unlesse procured by the like diet, by physicke, or by way of crise, are esteemed bad and unconcocted: as likewise such as are white in colour, and reteining still the quality of the food from whence they proceed: and such also as are of a high golden, or intense yellow colour, by reason of the affluxe of choler into the guts:Divers some of bad excrements. and in like manner we approve not of too pale and frothy, and yet worst of all purulent and materie excrements. Greene, black, linid or leaden coloured, unlesse by reason of such diet, or by way of crises, are dangerous and to be condemned; and so are viscous and fat ordure, by reason they signifie colliguation and wasting. Besides, whensoever a very bad stinking smell is joyned with a bad colour, it is very bad: for then it argueth a very great putrefaction. Variety of bad colours in these excrements is also very bad; as arguing in the body many ill infirmities.Wormes in the excrements, and what they presage. Wormes on a criticall day with the ordure expelled signifie good: but if in the beginning of the disease they appeare, it is bad: and if they come forth by themselves without any excrements dead or alive in acute diseases it is dangerous. There be divers causes of these severall substances of excrements. Thicke, compact and well united excrements proceed from a good concoction of the stomacke,Divers causes of thin and liquid excreme^ts and a temperate heat of the guts. Thinne and liquid excrements proceed either from obstruction of the mesaraicke veines, or by reason the food is not digested and concocted, as in crudities: or else is not altered or changed; as in the disease lienteria: or is corrupted; as in belches from such matter may bee discerned. Such excrements againe from the imbecillity of attractive faculty. Fourthly from defluxion of humidity upon the guts. Fiftly, from the quality and nature of the food, and such other things as loosen the belly; as prunes, caffe, and the like. Sixtly, drinke descending towards the guts, when as it is not carried thorow the mesaraicke veines to the liver,Divers causes of soft excrements. and attracted by the reines and ureters. Soft excrements proceed also from divers causes. 1. From the moderate moisture of the guts. 2. From the mollifying Diet: as mallowes, lettice and the like. 3. They proceed sometimes from the admixture of divers humors, proceeding from the liver or other parts; as likewise from the admixture of some fat with the ordure: as in Pthisickes, Hecticke fevers turned to Marasmes, etc. Mercu. ibid ex Gal. 3 epid. comment. 3. and 8 (...).Hard egestions and their causes. And it is the opinion of Galen, that in pestilentiall Fevers the egestions are almost alwayes liquid, by reason of this fat substance. Hard egestions againe proceed likewise of divers causes. 1. By reason of immoderate heat proceeding of great labour, from bathing, or some other externall cause. 2. By use of diureticke medicines, by which meanes these excrements may bee dried up. 3. By reason of astringent diet: as medlars, quinces, sloes, and the like. 4. The long continuance of the excrements in the guts may likewise occasion the same, the small veines implanted in the guts attracting all the moisture from the excrements, and the guts by this long continuance acquiring a greater heat. 5. By means of the dry constitution of the guts, and the like distemper of the whole body. I could here likewise insist on many other particulars concerning the mixture of severall sorts of excrements,

and causes, which, to avoyd prolixity, I willingly passe by. But the question may here be asked, how often,Quest^on concerning the (...) egestion, and how ^^ten. and when is the best time for this evacuation in health? I answer, that as wee can hardly certainly determine mens particular occasions, constitutions, and individuall proprieties and natures;Answ. no more can wee absolutely set downe any verdict concerning this businesse: yet is it best in time of health to inioy this benefit at least once, if not twice aday: howbeit I am not ignorant, that some, both in sicknesse and in health, have continued divers daies, yea, sometimes weekes,In time of health. without the use of this evacuation. I confesse indeed, such as were able to absteine from all manner of sustenance for divers yeeres together, needed not either this, or any other evacuation;And in sicknesse. examples whereof I have produced some already. But in ordinary healthfull bodies this is alwaies the best, and so answerable also in sicknesse; and who so decline from this rule, it commonly fareth not so well with them. I deny not but there are some individuall constitutions, who better indure the want of this benefit than others. Neither yet is there any set quantity to be determined: for good and laudable nourishment; as egges, and the like,The quantity cannot be determined. ingender fewer excrements than herbes, browne bread, and the like. The best time is the morning, and if it may be conveniently, in the evening also before going to bed, will prove beneficiall. But it commeth many times to passe, than in Fevers especially, and hot acute diseases, the body being bound, and, as it were, locked up, there arise and ascend up into the braine divers hot vapours, the cause of no small annoyance,In sicknesse care must be had of loosening the belly. not to that noble part only, but to the whole body: there must be therefore a speciall regard and care had to expell these excrements, especially by opening and loosening diet: and if that will not prevaile, by lenitive and milde gentle evacuations, suppositories and glisters. Againe, it commeth so sometimes to passe,Divers sorts of fluxes that nature is too forward in this kinde of evacuation; as commonly in fluxes of all kindes, proving often very pernicious to the patient. Now, these fluxes are of divers sorts; as first, that wee call diarrhaea, the mildest and safest of all the rest; and next, dysenteria, proceeding of divers humours, but ordinarily, with the admixtion of blood, and therefore called commonly the bloody fl^xe, or fluxe rather; which, if not carefully in time look'd unto, proveth often dangerous, if not deadly. Besides, there are yet other dangerous fluxes, call'd Lienteria, and Caeliaca, where the parts appropriated for concoction, being interessed by these fluxes, the body is frustrated its of proper nourishment. All these fluxes in due and convenient time, are by the advice and counsell of the wise and judicious Physitian, by proper and convenient remedies to be cured: but now alwaies by the use of astringent medicines, by most people,Be not too busy with astringents. ignorantly and unadvisedly used in those fluxes; lest it befall thee, as it did that woman, of whom Fernel. Fernel maketh mention, who, having beene for a long time troubled with a tedious fluxe in her belly, at length, by the advice and counsell of some shee neighbour, are a whole rosted Quince, which indeed,History: presently stopp'd the fluxe, but withall burst a new passage thorow her belly. But having here no purpose in this place to insist either upon the cure, or diet of these particular diseases, and not willing any longer to

deteine the reader with the entertainment of so unsavorie a subject, I proceed.


CHAP. XXII.

Of Spittle Spiting, or Salivation: of Tabacco and the great abuse thereof in this Kingdome, to the great preiudice of the health of the body.

THe braine, not onely by reason of situation, as a limbecke attracting many vapours from the inferiour region of the body: but also in regard of the moist temper and constitution, is apt to ingender much excrementitious moisture. But all this excrementitious matter or moisture is not altogether unprofitable:Vse of spittle. for some of this moisture is ingendred of certaine glands or kernells, by our great Architect and Creator placed in the jawes or uppermost part of the throat, to the end that those parts might thereby be moistened, lest by exsiccation of internall heat they should prove lesse usefull for the body. So then neither are these glands, nor that excrement they produce, without a profitable use in the body. Of these glands, or kernells, and their utility, Mercur. de excrem. ex variis Gal locis 14. meth. 1. de sem, etc. Galen maketh frequent mention, and affirmeth, that by the same, even the tongue is nourished. This excrement is called in the Greeke, , or . and in the Latin saliva, and with us spittle, spitting, and salivation: and when this too much aboundeth, it argueth great moisture of the braine. This spittle then is such a moisture, as in it selfe, in health, and a sound person, is a profitable, and laudable, and usefull excrement. This spittle then, which of all others is the best, in a sound and healthfull person, should be such,Best spittle in condition. as neither exceedeth in quantity, nor yet hath any ill taste; and this is spit up without any cough. Now, when it aboundeth in quantity,Exceeding in quality. wee use to spit it out; and for this purpose, we often use divers meanes to further the same. And the body being ill affected, it sometimes exceedeth also in quality: and thus it appeareth sometimes of a yellow,In quantity. The colours. pale, or blacke colour, howbeit the white be the best. Sometimes againe, it is of an insipid, acid, bitter, salt or sweet taste: howbeit insipid or sweet be the best. Sometimes againe, it is too tough or clammy,The taste. or else too thinne; and the meane betwixt both is the best. These severall colours and tastes in the spittle do often indicate and demonstrat the nature of the humors conteined in the stomack, and therefore, in sicknesse especially, are of good use, and to be observed. When excrement exceedeth in quantity, wee use to purge it out, not onely naturally by expuition,Exceeding in quantity how to be purged. or spitting out, but divers times by some appropriate medicines, used in divers diseases of the head proceeding from phlegmatick or rheumatick matter: and such are commonly of a hot or sharp quality, and are used sometimes to be chewed in the mouth, and draw downe abundance of rheumatick matter: and sometimes of these

are made and composed certaine compounded formes: as gargarismes,Severall medicines usefull for this purpose. masticatories, and liniments or ointments. Of the simples whereof these are composed, some are of a more milde and gentle operation: as greene bay leaves, dill, and annise seed, tops of hyssop, etc. Some againe, are of a more forcible operation: as pepper, pellitory of Spaine, mustard seed, etc. The effect produced by these and the like medicines,Saliva^^on. we call salivation, or purging by spitting. And this salivation is observed sometimes not onely to purge the humours from the head, but from the whole body: but this is not by any of these ordinary medicines; as in mercuriall inunctions for the french poxe commeth to passe. But in stead of all other medicines used for the expurgation of this excrement, there hath beene of late yeeres, since Sir Walter Raleighs first voiage into the West Indies, in use with us the smoake of an Indian herbe, called by the Indians Tabacco.Tabacco. To insist upon any large discourse or description of this simple, the use of it being now so frequent, and so much said, both pro and contra, for and against it, will be thought, it may be, to small purpose, and thought perhaps, but to sing the Cuckowes song; yet comming now so handsomely in my way, and offering it selfe, as it were, into my armes, left I should leave any thing untouched, I will yet cast in my mite.
As therefore every creature of God is good, so in this simple,Consideration of Tabacco, and the use thereof. this is as easie to be seene and observed. That this simple then is hot and dry in the second degree, cannot be denied: as for the second qualities arising from the first, as attenuation, penetration, discussion, etc. they cannot likewise be denied. And besides the afore-mentioned qualities, it participateth yet of a narcoticke or stupifying nature; which, whether it proceed from heat, cold, or the whole substance, it is not my purpose here to dispute, leaving it rather to be discussed in the schooles. And howsoever out antient Physitians did attribute unto those narcoticke medicines a transcending cold, even to the fourth degree: yet am I sure, that in this simple, with this narcoticke quality, concurreth both calidity and siccity. By reason then of these first qualities,Narcoticke quality. it heateth and drieth very much; and by consequent, conduceth in cold and moist diseases, and alike constitutions: and by reason of these second qualities, it openeth obstructions, cutteth tough and slimy humours, attenuateth and rarefieth them; and therefore helpeth defluxions of phlegmaticke humours upon the wind-pipe and lungs, obstructions of the liver, etc. By its narcotick quality, it stupifieth and benummeth the senses, and so allaieth paine. And the Indians often endure many daies hunger by the onely use of the smoake of this herb, this stupifying quality bereaving the nerves of sense, and procuring often times an artificiall and forced sleepe. Besides all these, we have already proved,Violent purgation. that it is indued with a violent purging quality, both upwards and downewards and that in as violent a manner, as either antimony, or that so much renowned hellebore, and the rest of those violent purging simples, used by Hippocrates or others. And this proceedeth from none of the afore-mentioned qualities, as all our Physitians confesse. It is likewise by the learned in this profession confessed, that such violent purges participate all of some maligne quality, contrary to mans nature: and therfore

never sole and of themselves exhibited, without due preparation, and never in any great quantity, and that but seldome, and in cases of necessity, and for the most part to sharpen and quicken the dull and sluggish operation of other milder medicines. By that which hath been said then,Abuse of Tobacco, as it is ordinarily taken. let the ingenuous and judicious Reader judge of the ordinary use, or rather abuse of this so noble a medicine. We see how nice and shy many people are of the use of good and wholesome Physicke prescribed by the most industrious and skilfull Artist,Indifferently used of all sorts of persons without respect of any circumsta^ce whatsoever. still pleading that in all physicke there is some poison: and yet may we see, and observe the same persons all the houres of the day smoaking this poison, sole and of it selfe, without any correction; morning, evening and mid-day, fasting and feasting, before meales and after, before and after sleep, at home and abroad, in Winter and Sommer, and in all seasons whatsoever: and that for the most part without any respect either of age, sex, or any other circumstance whatsoever. The dry and melancholicke person is often as forward in the use of it, as the moist and cold, the leane as well as the far. If it be good for cold, foggy, moist constitutions, then must it needs be hurtfull for the contrary. If it be good to procure sleepe in watchfull bodies, then let the drowsie,Opiat medicines often condemned without iust cause. sleepie sluggard refraine the use of it. Opium prepared in the most artificiall and exquisite manner, although there bee scarce the proportion of one graine to twice or thrice as great a quantity of the best extracted cordialls, yet is it had in detestation, and such a suspition had of it, that it is often condemned before any good evidence given in against it. And yet dare I be bold to say, that some of those ordinary Tabacconists take in one day the very quintessence and strength of a many graines, that I say no further, of this benumming, intoxicating Tabacco. And whereas the other is used but seldome, by good advice, well prepared and corrected, and that in case of necessity too: this on the contrary is of all indifferently used, and without any preparation (although many times, if they knew all the truth, there is some poyson added to the former) of an unlimited quantity, as every ones unbridled affection, and unlimited lust leadeth him. But it will be objected, that people find hereby some benefit,Obiect. abundance of rheume being thereby avoided at the mouth.Answere. I answere, that there is thereby much moisture voided, but many times, yea for the most part, good naturall and radicall moisture is thereby extracted. But this is neither safe, nor yet agreeth with sound reason.It purgeth away the good with the bad. It hath been already proved that there is a necessary use of this laudable humor, which ought not thus, without rime or reason as we say, be exhaust, when as againe many times by a new supply with the pot wee fill in twice as much as was exhaust. We complaine often, and not without cause, of Empirickes and ignorant practitioners, that they commonly erre in this particular, that they purge away both good and bad humors indifferently: and shall we wrong our selves in the same kind, wherein wee find fault with others? But as concerning the seeming ease it giveth for the present, it is but momentary and of short continuance; but the hurt redounding by exsiccation of radicall moisture and profitable humidity more

permanent, and of longer endurance: so that of this it may well be said, that the remedy is worse than the disease.The remedy often worse than the disease. What shall I say of the venomous and violent deleterious damps from thence imparted to the braine and animall parts, by reason whereof we often see such strange astonishment and amazement in the senses? If any shall reply that by reason of heat and drouth it drieth up a moist braine: I answere, that as in such a braine I hold it best, so againe I say, if a cow yeeld a good deale of milke, and kicke it downe when she hath done, what hast thou here to bragge of? If it doe thee good that way, and perhaps hurt thy memory, and by long continuance leave some ill impression upon thy body, brag of thy winning. And why may not sage as safely, and without any seeming shew of danger be used?Sage soveraine good to corroborate the braine and animall parts. It is by all our physitians accorded and agreed upon, that it doth apparently corroborate and strengthen the nerves, and by consequent, all the animall powers, besides the many excellent vertues thereof recorded, the like whereof were never ascribed to Tabacco. And in obstructions of the pipes of the lungs, why might we not with far greater reason use the harmelesse and innocent smoake of colts foot (since the world is now become so smoakie) than the dampish smoake of this deletorious plant? But we see the world is now full of fansies and phantasticke fashions, and this growne now of late yeeres, a new fashion to smoake away our precious time with this smoakie weed; besides,Colts foot an efficacious simple in pectorall infirmities. that this proveth often but a shooing-horne to make them draw downe drinke apace, the pip and the pot mutually entertaining one another: the dry ale-house, (so did a reverend judge on the bench lately stile these smoakie places) as said is,Tabacco-shope di^ ale houses. proving often a preparative to the other. Some againe in defence of this whiffing plead,Another Obiection; Answ. that it proveth beneficiall for the furtherance of digestion, without the which they are not able to eate any. I answere, that Tabacco in this case proveth as lime laied to the root of a tree, which howsoever hasteneth, it may be, the maturity of the fruit, yet by meanes of exsiccation, and precipitate maturation, the tree is farre sooner overthrowne and decaieth: even so commeth it here to passe, where Tabacco driveth the meate downe out of the stomack before it receive that due alteration it ought,Not good to further digestion by Tabacco and consequently, howbeit the stomacke be sooner emptied, yet crudities the mother of a multitude of diseases are often thereby ingendred, which in their appointed times bring forth oftentimes a bitter fruit of many incurable diseases. How much better then were it not to oppresse thy stomacke, and to impose no heavier burden on it than it is well able to beare? and if ceized with any debility, are there not many good wholesome and corroborant medicines farre safer than this smoake? Besides,Moderate exercise and good Diet better than Tabacco. that moderate exercise and abstinence till thy appetite returne, would perhaps prove better medicines than thou art aware of: sure I am, farre better than all the Tabacco of Trinidad. Now what hath beene hitherto said concerning this simple,Most Tabacco sophisticate. I understand even of the best not sophisticate: what shall we then say of that which is sophisticate and adulterate with divers, yea it may be sometimes deleterious drugs, yea even sublimate it selfe? Now if notwithstanding all that hath been said, people will needs bee dallying

with a doubtfull drugge,Divers circumstances in the use of Ta^acco to be considered. yet I advise them, that as in other medicines they are wished to weigh divers circumstances: as of time, place, age, constitution of body, the disease, the quantitie, quality, and the manner of preparation: so thinke I here the like circumspection, and care not to be neglected. And this I speak to the more understanding and discreeter sort, who erre it may be out of ignorance. As for our roaring bores, tossepots, pot-companions, and our ordinary swil-bolls, who, I thinke, will be readier to jeere and flout, than be reformed and ruled by my counsell, therfore such I leave to be corrected with their owne rod, and it may be a sharper,For whom most hurtfull. if they persist. I advise especially all thin, cleare and cholericke, constitutions, as likewise all melancholicke persons, especially by meanes of choler adust, hot brained and yong people, women with child, and all such as are sicke of any acute diseases, to absteine from the use thereof.Time of the yeere It is best to be used in Winter, in raw and moist weather, and in cold and moist braines, in dropsies, defluctions upon the joints and lungs, proceeding from cold humors, tooth-ach, gout, pector all infirmities, etc. As also for the megrim,The age. proceeding from the same cause, the mother, and divers infirmities of the braine proceeding from wind and cold moisture. As for the age,What profession or ^inde of life it best b^fittethWhat places. it best befitteth old age, where the brain is cold and moist. And as for the kind of life, Mariners and Sailers, and such as live neer waters, and there use their trade: as Tanners, Pelt-mongers, and the like; and such as live in moist, fenny, waterish and moorish places: as in Holland, in Lincolneshire,Correctives to be used with it. and other like places. And such as make use of it thus physically (for to such here I direct my speech) I thinke it very fit they use with it some correctives, it having as great need as any most violent purge whatsoever,(...) the braine. as hath bin already proved. In diseases of the braine therefore, a drop or two of the oile of amber, cloves, mace; or in defect of them, some of their powder, or halfe sage, some dry rosemary, or the like: if in Epilepticall fits, some powder of paeoniae seeds, or roots will much correct the ill qualities of this intoxicating simple,In dise^^es of the lungs. and corroborate the animall powers. In diseases of the lungs, joints, cholicke from wind, or phlegme and the like, a drop or two of the oile of annise seeds, of mints, cumin or caroway seeds, or in defect of them, some of the powder of the seeds will serve for a good corrective. But howsoever, let no man deceive himselfe so farre, as to thinke this to be some famous Panacea, Nepenthe, or some golden Elixir, whereof there hath beene much bragging, but small benefit as yet reaped. If thou wilt not be warned by that which I and others have advertised thee, thou maiest, perhaps, repent when it will be too late:Quod differtur non aufertur. and howsoever thou findest not alwaies suddenly such ill successe as we fore-tell thee, yet remember, that oftentimes in yonger yeers, there is such seed of diseases by disorder sown in the body, that in old age bringeth forth much bitter fruit. And of this I am verily perswaded,Tabacco the cause of divers diseases, and many dismall accidents. that the excessive and disorderly use of this simple, is no small cause, as of the more frequent raigning of divers dangerous diseases among us, so of many strange and uncoth accidents, according to the severall and individuall bodies therewith assaulted. But yet before I finish this point concerning salivation,The dangerous use of salivation by mercuriall medicines in some disea^e^ I must give notice of an ignorant and dangerous custome of some Barber-surgeons in the use thereof. Some of these many times undertake the cure of some in^^^^^t^^^

(...) with an ordinary (...) with a (...) by (...) into this c^^rt, o^ (...) by (...) mercurially (...), which in this cas^ (...) commonly uses, wh^ (...) no^th all there (...) and (...) into (...) with a (...). His reason, as s^^be of her (...) ^ted (...) all (...) or this cause was, to draw the humour upwards, and fr^^ the (...). But here the whole frame of her body was out of order the live (...) body, especially the nether parts, by reason (...). Now, whether such a cours^ was then sit (...) the ^^rned ^^dge, and besides, a reasonable in (...) by that which hath been said already (...) and their wai^s, how unfit and indirect a course this was, (...) mak^ it in th^^ appeare,(...) but that now i^ cann^t, (...) thi^ particular. Onely by th^ way, take a (...) sottish stupidity, and or (...) of the (...) This so^^ (...) counsell, a (...) onely (...) time, being (...) Winte^, to (...) such a (...) as (...) the (...) of the (...) from an^ kinde of physicke, to (...) by (...) and a^e^snesse, and partly for (...) ^presse upon her, sh^^ seeming (...) to (...) the Spirits of the yeere: and yet, (...) it perswasion, shee that before was unwilling to (...) ^tion, submitted her selfe to this trouble some mercuriall (...) ^vation, and such other directions hee was pleased to ordeine, (...) member* very neere a matter of a yeere, I speake n^t this (...) will I beare this mans person: but pleading now f^r the publi^^ (...) ^he which I haue my warrant from my m^ther, the Vniversity. I thought not my duty to betray the truth, but hee ^om^ to my (...) to vindicate the same from error and impo^ture. And therof for (...) ^^suredly knowne that the same party hath with others pr^ceeded aft^^ this same manner, in other cases also, and where, I dare sweare ther^ was not the ha^t ^^^^ition of the po^e, I thought good to give the countrie notice, that they be no more deluded. And that so much (...) ^ther, in that ^ supp^se it be not his errour ^^^ly, but (...) be culpable in th same binde.



CHAP. XXIII.

Of Snot or Snevell: Rheume falling downe upon the lungs and other pectorall parts: of Expuition, or Expectoration; and the great abuse in the use of expectorating medicines, and the right use thereof.

AS in the whole body of man there are divers emunctories or passages whereby superfluous and excrementitious matter is expelled; so hath the braine for the same purpose obteined the nose, which besides other uses, hath this in particular, thereby to expell such superfluous excrements as abound in the braine. This excrement most usually thus expelled, is by the Greeke Physitian Hippocrates especially, call'd (...): in Latine mucus narium: in English snot of snewell. Mercur. libr. de excrem. cap. 4. de mucit. ex Gal. This is then an excrement of the braine, the which abounding in phlegmaticke moisture, whatsoever is superfluous or unprofitable, it partly expelleth by the nose, and partly by other places. Of this excrementitious matter, some is sometimes very thinne, and some tough and clammy, sometimes in a greater, sometimes in a smaller quantity: some againe hot, some cold; some also sweet, unsavoury, and bitter: againe, some without and smell, and some of an evill smell, as commeth to passe in ulcers called ozenae, and principally in the French pox, where the nose, to the view of the eye, may often be discerned to be eaten away with this venomous matter. This excrement is againe often died with divers colors; as reddish, yellowish, white. Sometimes this snot commeth away of its own accord, and sometimes otherwise expelled. Such excrements as are purg'd by the palat of the mouth and the nose,Idem Mercur. ex variis Hippocrat. and Gal. locis. according to Galen, declare unto us how the braine and the members thereof are affected. When this matter is thinne, it signifieth a colliquation, as it were, a melting of this matter, and the beginning of this distillation: but that againe which is thicker, argueth concoction, and that it is either now at the height, or else declining. When this excrement stinketh,Divers significations of this excrement. it is alwaies taken for an evill signe, indicating an ulcer, and sometimes taken for a signe of headach proceeding from wormes. Great abundance of this excrementitious humidity in the braine, is signified, where this excrement aboundeth, and by consequence, often stupidity, or debility of memory: descending copiously of its owne accord, it is not so good as when it is blowne out. When it is of a reddish colour, it is not so to be approved of, as arguing alwaies some blood. Salt or bitter argue some heat; sweet and insipid, the contrary. When this excrement is stopp'd, and the head stuffed, the passages must by convenient and fit meanes be opened, by means of the juice of beets, marjoram, and many other such opening simples, either the juice or dry powder thereof being for this purpose used. Such are commonly called

errhina, or caputpurgia. If it be too aboundant,Medicines to expell this excrement. then meanes must be used to dry the braine by powders, perfumes, etc. especially, a spare and drying diet, and forget not to keepe warme the head and feet.
But wee finde often,Of rheume descending downe upon the pectorall parts. that a liquid thinne excrement taketh another way, and from the braine descendeth and falleth downe upon divers parts of the body; which, when it falleth down upon the pectorall parts, wee commoly call the rheume, which, as also Catarrhus, is a Greeke word, signifying a defluxe, or falling downe. In Latine sputum is common to both that we call saliva, whereof before, and this same whereof wee now speake. That Spittle or Rheume in Comment. in aph. 12. lib. 1. citant. Me^cur. Jdem ibid. Galens esteeme is the best, which is white in colour, smooth and equall, being neither too moist and liquid in substance, not yet too thicke and tough: and Avicenne out of Hippocrates addeth, that they be easie, and of speedy expectoration.Rheume twofold. Without a Fever. This theumaticke matter is either solitary without any other disease or symptome; or else therewith accompanied; to wit, a Feuer. When it falled downe upon the wind-pipe, or the pipes of the lungs, and be not very hot or sharpe, it causeth hoarsnesse and shortnesse of breath, in intention or remission, according as the humour lesse or more aboundeth; and as it is tough and clammy, or thinner; as also according to the strength or weaknesse of the part recipient, etc.With a Fever. When there is a Fever joined with such a matter, falne downe vpon the pectorall parts, it is commonly either a Pleuresie, or inflammation of the lungs, called Peripneumonia: howbeit I deny not but that there are also divers other rheumaticke Fevers, whereof I purpose not here to speake. This excrement is found to be of divers tasts: as sweete, insipid, bitter and salt,Rheume of divert sorts.And divers colours. proceeding from the nature of the humours they are ingendred of. And it is likewise of divers colours, partaking also of the nature of the humours: as some are white, some reddish, some yellow, blacke or greene, which varietie of colours is oftenest in Pleuresies to be observed.Most observable in pleuresies. Sometimes there is also some other matter mingled therewith: as sometimes a congealed mattery substance, sometime a cartisaginous substance from the wind-pipe, and sometimes also little stones. Now, this rheumaticke matter falling downe upon any of the aforesaid parts,Rheume commonly accompanied with a cough. if it be not from thence expelled, is not a little prejudiciall to the health, and is commonly accompanied with a cough. Upon the first annoyance of the cough therefore, it is a common custome to use some meanes to expell this humour; which is most commonly done without any order,Great errour in the ordinary use of expectorant medicines. or distinction, either of causes or constitutions, etc. and none so ignorant, but they are furnished with some one or other, if not more medicines for the cold, as they call it. And yet in the use of them there is no small caution to be observed, both of the state of the body, the time of the disease, the part ttansmitting, commonly the head; and the part recipient, or receiving, to wit, the parts within the brest. When as this excrement is hard to be expelled, wee are by all meanes possible to further and facilitate the same: and this difficulty proceedeth from a double cause, the thinnesse and sharpnesse, or from the toughnesse and clamminesse of the humor. The former we effect by incrassation of the humor,Preparation before expectoration. by sparing and

orderly Diet, and divers other things which doe incrassat and thicken this thinne matter: as conserve of roses, sirup of violets, of Jujubes, etc: and divers compound medicines tending to this same purpose. If it be tough and impacted into the pipes of the lungs, then are wee to use such meanes as may both cut and expell it: as colts-foot, maidens haire,Divers preparations. hyssop, licorice, and the like; whereof are made divers sirups and other compositions for the effecting of this businesse. And when these will not serve the turne, then make we use of some more forcible meanes, as of Oxymel simplex, and compounded with divers forcible ingredients, as squills, etc: as shall by the counsell and directions of the learned be prescribed. And this is the proper way by which diseases of the pectorall parts are ordinarily purged: howbeit sometimes, although seldome, we use to purge by stoole in these cases. It is here also to be observed, that such medicines as are for this purpose appointed,The forme. be prepared in a solid, or at least not a very liquid forme, that they may be lickt downe, or else let melt under the tongue: for taken in a great quantity, and drunke or swallowed downe, they goe onely into the stomacke, and so into the guts and veines, and therefore produce not the expected effect.Error of the Vulgar. Hence doth appeare the error of such as thinke to drive away their cold, as they call it, by large draughts of buttered beere to bed-wards; which is so farre from answering their expectation, that by hindring and interrupting concoction, increasing crudities, opening the orifice of the stomacke, and loosening the same, and by fuming up into the head, it rather furthereth and increaseth this cough or cold,Caveat concerning sweet things. call it as thou wilt. It is in like manner to be observed, that as sweet things loosen tough phlegme, and so facilitate expectoration, so doth the too frequent use of them much debilitate the concocting faculty of the stomacke, besides that in cholericke persons they are apt to ingender the like humor. And the too frequent use of too acid,Acid and tart things. tart or sharpe things, is here also to be shunned: but bitter things, howbeit better for both, yet scarce so wel-come to the Apitian palats of our age.In pectorall diseases that which is spit up, is especially to bee considered. And it is here likewise to be observed, that in diseases conteined within this second region, the spittings up, sputa are equivalent to the urines in many other diseases, whereby wee judge of the concoction or crudity of the disease: as 1 de crisib. etc. Galen himselfe at great length witnesseth: yea, and he himselfe willeth us, in the first place, ere ever we view the water, in diseases of this naure to consider of that which is spit up, which may often reveale unto us the causes of the disease, and sometimes the indications thereof. For that which is spit up reasonable thicke, except some other worse matter be joined therewith, doth most commonly argue concoction: as againe on the contrary, that which is very thinne and liquid argueth cruditie, especially in the beginning of diseases. Very tough and clammy matter spit up in a Pleurisie, argueth the length and contumacie of the disease: yet if it bee frothie, it is a signe it proceedeth from putrefied phlegme.Divers significations and presages of expultion or spitting up That which is spit up of it selfe without any admixture of other matter, is good and laudable; and yet in a Pleurisie and Inflammation of the lungs argueth the crudity of the disease. If it be thinne, salt, and in a small quantity, according to Galen,

argueth alwaies cruditie; and Avicenne addeth, the long continuance of the disease: and if joined either with matter, caruncles, or small cartilages, or little stones, there is no good presaged. In Pthisickes or ulcerat lungs, if all spitting up faile, it is alwaies a dangerous, if not a deadly signe. If this excrement should too much abound, we must looke into the cause, and cure it accordingly, by good and sparing Diet, by light suppers, and sometimes none at all;We are not then to judge of all diseases by the bare inspection of the urine only. corroboration of the braine, by perfumes, plasters, and other things in such cases requisite. By that which hath beene said then, may evidently be understood, how erroneous is the opinion of the vulgar, esteeming that all diseases may by the bare inspection of the urine onley bee discerned; as also of such ignorant, erroneous, and covetous Empiricall practitioners, who being void of all true sufficiency in the profession of Physicke, would by this or other indirect meanes magnifie themselves, amongst the more rude and ignorant sort of people.


CHAP. XXIV.

Of carnall copulation, the right use, and abuse thereof: what age and constitutions it best befitteth. Something concerning the menstruous fluxe in women.

BEsides all these unprofitable excrements, and to be expelled out of the body, there is yet a profitable excrement ingendred in the body of man, abounding not in quality but in quantity onely, and that for a beneficiall and profitable end, the propagation of mankind. And this is that we call the food of generation, which with man is common to unreasonable creatures.Seed of generation what it is. This excrement then is nothing else save a remainder of some portion of blood after the whole body is served in the third concoction, and which being altered and changed into a white colour in the spe^maticall vessells, is in those places reserved untill it be expelled in the act of generation. This is not found in the body untill it have atteined to yeeres of puberty, and these persons atteined to some reasonable stature, all the blood before being imploied to the growth and increase of the body.The use. The proper use of this so utile and profitable excrement, is the multiplication of mankind, and is found both in man and woman. And therefore as other excrements, so is this sometimes to bee expelled out of the body, the which being too long deteined, in some bodies especially, proveth often the occasion of divers diseases and dangerous accidents. But as in all other things, so here especially, I meane, a moderation should bee observed, and herein the Lawes of God and man be not infringed. The moderate; timely and

orderly use thereof is in many respects usefull and profitable: for, besides that it serveth for the propagation of mankinde,The moderately and orderly use many waies profitable. it inhibiteth also the repletion of the body, reviveth the spirits, exciteth naturall heat, helpeth the agility of the body, preventeth phlegmaticke diseases, dilateth the pores of the body, quickeneth the minde, and qualifieth fury and melancholy.Inconvenience of the immoderate use. The immoderate and unseasonable use thereof, resolves the spirits, cooleth the body, hurteth the head, eyes, nerves and joints, ingendreth crudities, dulleth the minde and senses, procureth a stinking breath, pissing of blood, consumption of the backe, etc. And this I say to such as will take warning, and will not wittingly and willingly overthrow both soule and body. I thinke it is to small purpose to speake to these sensuall Sardanaples of this our licentious and luxurious age, our common haunters of whore-houses, to brothel birds, and the like, who will sell their soules, and part of Paradise for satisfying a short lasting lust. But because such sensuall Epicures are seldome moved with divine threats, and scarce ever firmely beleeve there is a hell, untill they fall headlong into it; therefore if the premisses will not serve the turne, let such know, that, besides the loathsome poxe, rottenesse of bones, and a world of weaknesses doe often accompany their later yeers, if divine punition permit them so long to live: besides, that as the Proverbs 6.26.^ Wise-man saith, that by meanes of a whorish woman, a man is brought to a morsell of bread, and if hee should yet escape all this, yet is he but led like an oxe to the slaughter, as witnesseth the same wise Solomon. And all that which is in the same golden booke of Proverbes set downe concerning this subject, I wish they would read, and seriously consider: I knew,History. my selfe, within these few yeeres, a Knight of antient descent, having left him by his father of antient inheritance, 1200 pounds sterling of yeerely rent to spend, who having in a short space wasted all this estate on whores, and other excesse, was at length brought to that passe, that hee had not a morsell of bread to put in his belly, but what hee begged, or else sharked for; and for his lodging, hee had some shop doore in the City to lie at, a penthis to shelter him from the raine, and a hard bulke for his feather bed: many that read this, can, no doubt, out of their owne knowledge, instance in a multitude of the like examples. The age fittest for this act,The fittest age. is manly age, to the younger sort and old age it being rather hurtfull. From hence may then evidently appeare the preposterous course of many, who, for some sinister respect, either for covetousnesse to compasse some great match, some great alliance or the like, often cause children to marry before ever they know what marriage meanes (although not alwaies consummate,Inconveniences by marrying young children and yong people. yet in effect, and finished at parents or neere friends pleasure) or how to make a free choice, which ought to be voluntary, and not forced: and hence commeth it to passe, that both their bodies are debilitated, their growth often hindred (that which should have turned to the nourishing and increasing of the body, being too soone, as we have already said, turned another way) divers diseases ingendred, and their issue (if they have any, they being ordinarily not so fruitfull as others) proving often crasie and valetudinary, and by the just judgement of God, upon such unlawfull matches, there is seldome seen that firme love and true affection, agreement and concord betwixt such parties as ought to be, in this sacred

ordinance, as I have often observed, and by relation heard of a many more: besides, that many times they prove afterwards more incontinent: for considering that they were not of judgement sufficient when they were first married, disliking the party that before was, as it were, pinned upon them, breake forth into unlawfull lust. It is their sinne,Duty of parents in this case. I confesse, but parents and friends minister occasions, which prove more dangerous, when these parties have not first been trained up in the feare of God, which, alas the pitty, is too much neglected. Such, therefore, as have children marriageable, it is the parents duty to provide for their children matches in due time, observing the disposition of their children, lest the neglect of this duty done in due time, extort out of them aftewards a too late repentance. Such as cannot so suddenly,Diligent care ought to be had in the education of children. as need requireth, be furnished to their liking, let parents be more watchfull over them, and all have a care of their pious education in their younger yeeres, preventing all occasions of evill; idlenesse especially, reading of lewd lascivious love books, frequenting lewd and lascivious company; stage-plaies especially, the very bane and break-necke of all modesty, honesty and chastity: and all other things that may worke prejudice in this kind. And such as are of yeeres of discretion, and sui iuris; and now by death of parents freed from that triall of obedience, I wish them to marry, rather than burne and breake out in sinne, and so live to dishonour God, and scandalise their neighbour. And if they cannot accommodate themselves so suddenly, let them in the meane-time avoid all provocations to lust, use spare and thinne diet, avoiding the pampering of the flesh, using often for companion the Bible and other good bookes, and other good meanes. But in any case, never abandon thy selfe to idlenesse; but alwaies be imploied in some good and laudable vocation, whereby thou maist prove profitable either to Church or Common-wealth. But this belonging more properly to the Divines pulpit than the Physitians pen, I leave to them.What persons are thereby most offended. But now because it concerneth every one, both in sicknesse and in health, to be acquainted with that which concerneth them so neere: I therefore advertise all weake, feeble and infirme persons,What constitutions. that they be not too busie in this particular. Of constitutions the hot and drie cholericke, and next dry melancholicke persons are most thereby indamaged: but hot and moist, sanguine and phlegmaticke bodies are hereby most benefitted. And I advise sicke persons, especially in acute diseases,Sick persons must absteine. and in their recovery, untill they have atteined their full strength, for feare of a relaps, to absteine from this act. As for chronicall,In what diseases most hurtfull. or long continuing diseases, by reason it is an enemy to the nerves, and nervous parts, it is therefore in many infirmities of the braine, Epilepsie especially, and all manner of gouts most hurtfull. As for the age, the particular yeeres cannot so well be determined, some being more able at twenty, than others at thirty or upwards: and some old men of fourescore, abler than others at fifty: but yet, as I touched before,The certaine number of yeeres when to marry cannot be determined. to marry children, or young people while they are yet a growing, it is both prejudiciall to the publike, and their owne private persons. For feeble old age, it cannot but prove very pernicious, as any one may easily understand. As for the time of the yeere, the most temperate,The fittest time of the yeere. keeping a

meane and moderation betwixt heat and cold, as in other evacuations, so here likewise is alwaies most seasonable. But in extreme hot or cold seasons be wary and circumspect, especially in time of great heat, which is more hurtfull than the cold. As for the particular time, some have preferred the evening,The particular time. by reason of sleepe insuing after; but most are for the morning, as most seasonable. Howsoever, after a full stomacke, any violent exercise or bodily labour that hath much debilitated the strength, is not to be used. And besides, among men, some are sometimes ignorant of that they ought to know, and some more sensuall than becommeth so noble a creature; therefore, in time of a womans menstruous fluxe, as likewise that time which is set apart for this evacuation, after a womans delivery they must absteine: the which Levit. 1^. as we see to have beene by Gods owne appointment practised among the people of the Iewes, so for divers good respects, the same is to remaine with us inviolable. Now, if this excrement be not in due time and order expelled,Abstinence fro^ marriage what inconveniences it breedeth in some bodies.In women. it proveth often the cause of divers diseases both in man and woman: as that we call gonorrhaea, or involuntary effluxe of seed in either sexe, proceeding also sometimes from the debility of the retentive faculty. In women it occasioneth often histericall Passions, or fits of the mother, greene sicknesse, obstructions, palpitation of the heart, etc. But in both sexes I wish that moderation which becommeth Christians to be observed,Let young gallants (...) beed and withall, to consider that a man may be drunke with his owne drinke, if he take too much, and besides, that Cartwright in his C^^^ch (...), in the expre^^ion of the commandements. a man may (as our Divines hold) even commit adultery with his owne wise. There is yet no small prejudice hereby procured to thine owne health, and besides, hath cost many a man his life. Lib 7. cap ^3. Pliny maketh mention of two Roman Knights, Quintilius Horatius, and Cornelius Gallus, who both died in this act.Divine pu^^tion of uncleane persons. I thinke, few that read this treatise, but can relate the tragicall stories of many, who have by this meanes both shortned their lives, wasted their meanes, and purchased to themselves many loathsome and dangerous diseases, the poxe, especially (a punishment sent from God to punish this odious sinne) and we may see in every corner of the country the wofull effects of this excesse of luxury. In all that I have already said, my purpose is not to disswade any from the use of that sacred ordinance of wedlocke, which God in the depth of his sacred wisedome hath ordeined as a fit remedy for preventing of sinne, and for the great good and manifold comfort of mankinde: but only to advise all people to a moderation, and withall, wishing every one to know themselves, and who have more or lesse need, and accordingly to accommodate themselves in the lawfull use of this ordinance. And from hence may manifestly appeare the malapert sawcinesse of that man of sinne and his shavelings, who in direct opposition to Gods command, and approbation of this sacred ordinance, will make it knowne to the whole world, that he is that man of sinne foretold by the holy 1 Tim. 4.3. Apostle, forbidding marriage and meats. It hath, by that which hath bin said, plainly appeared, that some persons, and some constitutions may better and longer forbeare this ordinance than others:God never prohibited any sort or degree the use of marriage. but never was it by God absolutely forbidden any estate, degree, sexe, or any sort of people, to use this sacred ordinance, Priest nor people, in the old or new

Testament: nay, is there not a punctuall (...) place to the contrary? Marriage is honourable among all men, and the bed undefiled. But the Pope replies, (lest it should not be taken notice hee is Antichrist) that it is not so, Marriage is dishonorable to my shavelings. But what? to keepe a Concubine, yea, to practise that unnaturall sinne of Sedomi^, by God himselfe punished by fire from heaven, belike is no sinne: nay, what shall it be then for a Clergie man, nay, for a (...). Apod^ (...) and (...), A chrep^^e (...) ^ene^^^^nus, (...), in Sodom^^ (...) Di^ne, (...) vit, (...) divi^^m (...) ^^^mavit (...) Iulius 3. Innocent (...) qu^nd^m (...) pr^tes ^ (...) h^bu^rat (...) ^ononi^ legetur i^ Cardina^ium (...) ^rum quam (...) riliqu^ ^l factum (...), es^ in come^^^am con^uctud^nem rur^us ^am fit, Rom^ ^an a erat and libellis que ^ pe^^er^ptur^ suit Iove Garit^^edem fo^ers, licet desormem. (...) vero ali^r^^ scriptores (...) bla^phem^as e^ (...) renda sce^era stilo in (...), ^^rnavit (...) S^dim tan ^^o^on^mum vniel. ^et, qui haec editis libr. tum etur, atque defenderet, ad quod ip^e d^pl^matibus suis approb^t e^. Sixtus 4. Roma nobile a^modum lupanar extru^^t, atque Vent ^i assignavit, meretr^^ eum cohertes aluit, amicisque and servis exhibuit, non nihil etiam em^lumenti ex meritric^o quaestu aerario suo atcumulavit: Romana enim scorta in singul^s hebdomadas nummum adhuc pendent pontifici, qui census annuits nonnunquam quadra, irta ducatorum mill^a ex^edit: idceque eccle^^^ procerum id munus est, ut vna cum ecclesiarum proventibus etiam lenociniorum num erent mercedem. Refert We^l^lius K^oningens^^ in tractatu de indulgentiis papalibus: Quod ad Petri Rueri^ quem pro Cinaedo habebat Sixtus, and Hieronymi fratris sui postulationes, domestice familiae toti Cardinalis de Lucia, in tribus anni mensibus calidioribus, Junio, Iulio and Augusto (horrendum dictu) masculino coitu uti permiserit, addens hanc clausulam: fiat quod petitur. Iohannes 24 accusatur in Concilio Constantrensi ^uca fit ^o domita, Adulter, Scertator, etc. De Clement. 8. in quodam comment super^articulis magistrorum Parisiensium ligitur, quod suer^t ^^^thus, Venesicus. Homicida, Leno, Simoniacus, Sodomita, Periurus, Geomanticus, Stuptator, Rapto^, Sacrilegus, (...) ^^elerum artifex. Tales fuere Benedictus 1, and 14. Paulus 3. Paulus 3. sororem suam luliam Farnesiam stuprandam trac^^d t^ut Cardinali^ and Epi^copus Hostiensis fieret. Alteram deinde sororem suam cum quarem habuerat, vi^iens quod alios ar^^utius quam ipsum a^^aret, toxico interemit. Hunc Nicolaus Quercaeus congredientem cum Laura Farnesia uxore sua, sed ne^te^e u^, (...), ac^t le e^ vninupugione incussit, ut ejus eicatrix ad mortem usque cum eo maneret, sed and aliam neptem le^tissimam, no^ (...) usv^ginalipa^ore quam ^erma praestantem hircosus senex ad incestum and nefandum stuprum sollicitavit. Vt vero filia sua Constantia ^um qua sa pissime rem habuerat, potiri liberius posset, maritum ejus Bosinum S^ortiam veneno necavit. In tabellis habebat numerata 45. meretri^um mill^^ ex quarum fernicatione singulis mensibus censum exegit. Hae a Papa in summo h^nore l^^i ^ntur ^ae ^a^a pedes osculantur, hae Papam samitrarissime alloquuntur, hae cum Papa die nocteque consuetudinem habent. Landonis. 1. Sergii 3. Iohannis 11. (...) 12. Ioh^^n^ 13. Alexandri 6. Christophoci primi f^edas libidines lubens praeterco. Et de papissa Iohanne prius Gilbertad (...), (...) elog^u^, lippis and tonsoribus ut aiunt notum, apud me altum erit silentium. Haec and plura Stephanus S^^gedinus Po^^^nius (...) speculo ^o^tificio in titulo, Septimum membrum, ubi qualis quisque fuerit describi^^, situlus hic (...) Lenone^ ^^ortatores, A^ulteri (...) So ^mitae. Popish Prelate, not by word of mouth onely, but by a booke in print proclaime his owne shame to the open view of the world, and the Romish Clergies impious, abominable, and more than brutish luxurious and lascivious lives. And if one should make a narrow search, and take a survey of these holy fathers of the Church, wee shall finde them nothing inferiour to, if not exceeding Sodome by many degrees in filthy lust; and then what we may expect from children of such parents, let the world judge. We may read of Iulius the 3d. who, to grace that gracelesse Innocentius, whom he had before abused in commiting with him that sinne against nature, when he was himselfe installed into S. Peters chaire, preferred this base varlet into the number of the Cardinalls. And when as some Writers had by publicke writings detested his blasphemies and other grosse villanies, he suborned one of his favorites by publike writing to defend the lawfulnesse of these abominable villanies; and lest he should be unlike himselfe, by his bull and broad seale allowed of all this varlets witing. Sixtus the 4. for another monument to perpetuat the memory, and continue the practice of these salacious Satyres, erected in Rome a publike stewes for the daily practice of both kindes of uncleannesse, for the which they pay even yet a weekly tribute to this unholy holinesse, the which often amounteth to 40000 ducats in the yeere: and this is by his clergie collected, and by them together with his church revenues brought in to his coffers. This same holy father at the request and petition of one of his favorites, whom he abused in the same Sodemiticall sin, granted to his whole family, and to a certaine company of Cardinalls freely to use this sin (a horrible impietie to be mentioned, saith mine author) in the three hot months of the yeere, Iune, Iuly and August. And Iohn the 24. was accused in the councel of Constans for a whoremaster, adulterer, and a Sodomite. Of Clement the 8. it is recorded that hee

was a Bastard, a Poisoner, a murderer, a Bawd, a Smoniacke, a Sorcerer, a ra^i^h^r, Sodomite, sacrilegious, and a contriver and inventer of all wickednesse. Such were Benedict, 1. and the 14. and Paul the 3. And for the commendation of this Paul 3. it is written of him that he prostituted his owne sister, that he might become Bishop and Cardinail o^ Hostia. Another sister with whom he was as familiar as a man with his wife, by reason he saw her more affectioned to another than himselfe, hee poisoned. And being taken in the very act of adultery with another mans wife, received of the husband such a blow, that he carried the marke of it to his grave. And that he might the more freely enjoy the company of his owne daughter whom hee had for a long time thus abused, he caused poison her husband. He had in his memoriall the names of 45. thousand whores of whom hee received a monethly tribute. And these might kisse his foot, have familiar accesse unto him, and converse with him both day and night. These few instances among a multitude more I have set downe, that the world may see the hypocrisie of that filthy Roman strumper, who would beare the world in hand, they and their clergy are very chast and continent, and yet none can come neere them in all manner of uncleannesse. Nay, there lived a gentleman here in this towne a few yeeres agoe, in the Priory of St. Andrewes, whose sonne told me he saw among some deeds concerning this Priory, his father had then in custody during his lease, one, wherein a priest, as I remember, living at Saywell within foure miles of this same towne, was for something hee held of the Prior, tied to bring him every moneth a pretty, faire, young wench: and this was not said to be for lust (they know not what it meaneth, simple babes) but to cleanse his kidnies: pu^llam pulchram nitidam, etc, non libidinis gratia sed ad purgandos renes; were the words as I remember. Nay, if I should hold my peace the multitude of young childrens skulls found in many ponds of these convents of many Monks, Friers and Nunnes, when they were cleansed, would proclaime the Romish whores uncleannesse. And this by the way for a touch shall suffice to have said concerning this point.
The menstruous fluxNow besides this profitable excrement of seed of generation, there is yet another in women, appointed also for a profitable and necessary use. And this is the blood of the menstruous fluxe, which is good and laudable blood, of the same nature and property of the rest of the blood of the body, at first appointed for a profitable use, the nourishment of the infant in the mothers whomb: and after it is brought into the world, this alimentarie liquor is by certaine vessells, as so many pipes, for this end and purpose appointed, conveied into the breasts, and there by paps or dugs converted into a white liquor, which we call milke, the proper aliment of the infant, the which is still by the mother to be continued, and to be exhibited to this tender fruit of her womb, so long as shall be needfull. In women that are with child, whether Virgins or married women where this fluxe is become habituall,(...) f^^xe s^opt cau^e of many disease^ that which superaboundeth, in sound and healthfull bodies is ordinarily by a periodicall course once a moneth expelled. But upon divers occasions it commeth often to passe, that both in maids and

married women this fluxe being stopt proveth a cause of many dangerous diseases, and therefore by good and wise counsell this fluxe is to be furthered, and if it be not regulat and keep not the due times and turnes, we are by fit and appropriat remedies, according to the severall causes and circumstances, to provoke and further the same, on the which here were too long to insist, my Booke already being growne to that bignesse that I dare not bee too bold. Howsoever I advise young maides not to bee too idle, and cocketing mothers not too much to mainteine them in idlenesse.Menstruous fluxe exceeding in quantity to bee stopt, yet not rashly not suddenly. This fluxe is sometimes againe facultie in the excesse, which is then with great discretion, according to the severall causes and circumstances to be suppressed. But I advise every woman afflicted with this infirmitie to be wise, and not be too busie with Empirickes, and womens receits by strong astringent meanes suddenly to stop this course, which was never yet by the judicious and learned allowed for a legall cure of this disease. On the diet befitting both this and other fluxes proper to this sex, it requiring some more paines and time then I can now well spare, I will not insist, but reserve it to some fitter opportunity, when as if God spare my life and health I may give this sex some more particular satisfaction.


CHAP. XXV.

Of sleeping and waking, the benefit and use thereof in sicknesse and in health. The severall sorts of sleepe; and what persons may freeliest sleep, and who lesse.

HAving hitherto at great length discoursed of foure things commonly called not naturall: to wit, of the aire and other elements; of meat and drink, the uses and preparations in sicknesse and in health; of exercises of divers sorts; and lastly of divers sorts of evacuations; we come now to the fift, watching and sleeping, not unworthy of our consideration both in sicknesse and in health. My meaning is not here to enter into a curious and philosophicall discourse concerning the nature and essence thereof, but leave such speculations to our schooles, and who so will bee satisfied herein, let him have recourse to Aristot. lib. de so^^^^ and vigilia. that Prince of philosophers who hath handled this subject learnedly and at great length. The same author and Galen also referre both sleeping and waking to the common sense. As for the seat of sleep, we with Lib. 1 de symptoms causis cap (...). Galen and all our famous Physitians doe undoubtedly place it in the braine, from whence the originall of the nerves is by the senses to be observed, and from thence the nerves communicated to the whole body impart both motion and feeling to every part and particle of the same: although I confesse Aristotle as he

would have the originall of the nerves in the heart, so following the same error, would likewise have the seat of sleepe feated in the heart: which we utterly reject, whatsoever Verum Scaligeri effugium Aristot. defendentis admitti non potest, quia non tantum secundum virtutem, verum etiam propter originem instrumentorum, quasi nervi and venae ex corde oriantur, cor facit principtum sentiendi: and quoniam haec instrumenta obstruuntur, cor suo munere fungi non posse opinetur Itaque si quis maxime (...) Scaligero sentire, and cordi principium sentiendi ex causa^ efficiente tribuere velit, quateum ex corde spiritus oriuntur, qui nervis vim sentiendi suopeditant: ratione tamen instrumenterum and causae materialis, principium sentiendi in corde non erit, and ita nondum Aristotelis opinio qui hoc sentit, confirmata erit. Magirus comment. in Physiolog. suae lib. 6. cap. 13.Benefits of moderate sleep. acute Scaliger seeme to say to the contrary; who by the sharpenesse of his wit would seeme to think that his ipse dixit should be sufficient to make us beleeve that the moone is made of greene cheese. But my purpose is not here to enter upon any polemicall matter, but proceed to that which concerneth the consideration of this subject in sicknesse and in health. Under watching wee here comprehend both the functions of the common sense. The first is the distribution of the animall faculty proceeding from the head to the organs of the outward senses, to the end they may receive the species: and the next is, the perception it selfe, and the judging of such species received into these organs of the outward senses. Now sleepe is not properly a function of any sense, but a certaine affection following upon the naturall function of the senses, to wit, waking, that thereby the strength which by waking was tired out, might the better be repaired and refreshed. The moderation of both these in sicknesse and in health are very necessary, and when either exceedeth, the body is much endamaged, and health much hindered. Immoderate watching drieth up, attenuateth, exhausteth and debilitateth the body, and spendeth the spirits; and therefore in hot acute diseases, if long continuing, prov* the very dangerous. Sleep, produceth the contrary effects; howbeit exceeding measure dulleth the body, moisteneth too much, oppresseth and suffocateth naturall heat, ingendreth abundance of excrements* and drowneth both the senses and the mind. But sleep moderately used benefitteth both the body and the mind: for by this meanes the concoction of the aliment in the stomacke and all the parts of the body, are by the testimony of 6. Epid. 5. Hippocrates, best performed, the which is also by 3 de sympt. causa. 2. de motu muscul. Galen him selfe seconded. Sleep moistneth also the body, whereunto it seemeth the Virgil. Poet alluded, fessos sopor irrigat artus. And besides, it nourisheth and maketh fat, and what is corrupted expelleth by sweat or urine, and what is not fully concocted it perfecteth and maketh profitable for the nourishment of the body: besides all this, it qualifieth and mitigateth choler, the cause of many dangerous diseases: and it staieth and hindereth any evacuation except sweat, and withall cooleth the body.What sleep is. Sleep then is a naturall rest, and that almost perfect of all the externall senses; or a naturall impotency of the animall faculties to the actions, by reason of a mild and pleasant vapor arising from the aliment irrigating, and as it were, besprinkling the braine, that in the meane time, the vigor and strength of the body may be this meanes bee repaired and refreshed. Now,In sleepe there is not a totall cessation of the influxe of the animall spirits in the organs of senses. although there be here a cessation of the influxe of the animall spirits into the organs of the outward senses, yet is there not a totall cessation of this influxe: for then a man should not againe waken at all, and this would prove a stupefaction of the senses, and not a sleep. Sleep is therefore, as it were, a binding or tying up of the common sense, and a hindering of the influence of the animall spirits into the organs of the outward senses in part onely; as wee see by experience in respiration and many motions the body useth in sleepe: but the influxe of so great a quantity and quality of spirits into these organs

of the outward senses, as for the performance of their functions is requisite, then is denied. And in a profound, sound or deep sleep, as we may call it, there is a smaller or lesser influence; in a lesse profound sleep, when as the senses worke but slenderly, there is a greater quantity of spirits. This humor or vapor thus moistening the braine, being spent, the body awaketh, and so becommeth more fit and quicke to goe about all ordinary imploiments; and these two doe thus alternatively succeed each other, according to the Poet.

Quod caret alternarequie durabile non est.
What thing wants rest, thou maiest be sure,
Long time on earth cannot indure.

And all this is to be understood of naturall sleepe, usefull and usuall both in sicknesse and in health, there being also some sleepes, or rather soporiferous affections which are not naturall. And this unnaturall or soporiferous sleep is often an accident of acute diseases, sometimes dangerous, and sometimes free there from. Sleep then being so necessary for all ages, sexes, and sorts of people, wee will say something concerning the fit and convenient time for sleepe, as also of the duration and continuance thereof, and with what site or posture of the body we are to sleep, and who may safely sleepe longest, and who are not allowed so long a time. The wisedome and provident care of our Maker, is not a little in this to be admired, in that as he hath appointed the day time for man to labour in, so hath hee likewise appointed the night time for a cessation from worke and serious imploiment, and a time to repaire that which hath beene decaied or tyred out the day before. The night time therefore is the fittest and most convenient time for sleep and rest,The fittest time for sleepe. when as both the Sunne withdrawes from us his bright beames, and the darknesse and night-silence seeme to invite and summon us thereunto.Whether sleep in the day time be to be admitted? But it hath been and yet is a question among many, whether sleep in the day time be not allowable, which by the generall suffrage, and unanimous consent of Physitians seemeth to have been condemned? The Sic brevis aut nullu^ tibi somnus meridianus Febre, pigrities, capitis dolor atque catarrhus, Hae^ tibi proveniunt ex somno meridian^* Schola Salern. Salernitan schoole likewise disclaimeth it as hurtfull for the health. I answere, it is not indeed allowable, that especially which is used immediately after dinner, called commonly somnus meridianus, of the which all our Physitians are to be understood: and indeed it cannot but be very hurtfull to the body, and prejudiciall to the health, filling the head with many vapors,Answ. and by consequence procuring many diseases. Such especially as are subject to rheumes, Epilepticke fits, and diseases of that nature, are chiefly to shunne this kind of sleep. To some thereunto accustomed it is lesse hurtfull, if especially sparingly, and an houre or two after dinner used. Morning sleepe, although by some longer continued,Morning sleepe, is alwaies lesse offensive than used immediatly after meales, howbeit the night is alwaies most seasonable.Sicke persons cannot alwaies be strictly ti^^ to this rule. As for sicke people we are often forced to suffer them to sleep when they can, it being often out of our power to accommodate it, as we would, to the right and proper time and season, especially in acute diseases, and in hot cholericke constitutions: howbeit we are by all meanes, if it be possible, to helpe them to rest in the night

time, as they were accustomed in time of health; the which is alwaies most fit and convenient both in sicknesse and in health. And Silla, Pythagorae symbolum de conturband^ veste stragula, vide Plutarch. sympol. lib. 8 probl. 7. saith Plutarch, is of opinion, that this symbole of Pythagoras, whereby is injoined to marre the print of the bed-clothes wherein any hath lien, is to be understood of sleeping in the day time, as though we were thereby dehorted from sleeping in that unseasonable time, appointed for action and imployment, and there be no remainder or shew of sleeping left behinde, there being no more use of a sleeping, than of a dead man. What shall wee then say of such prodigious monsters, not worthy to be ranked among men, unprofitable pieces of earth, who seeme to have beene borne to subvert and invert the orderly course of nature; while as in drinking, dicing and drabbing, they turne the night into day, and the day into night. These night owles, the cankers and caterpillers of a common-wealth, would to God our Magistrates would diligently search and inquire after, and having found out, would condignely punish, that others might thereby be warned to live moderatly and honestly in their places and callings, if they have any; or if without, to force them to live in some usefull and lawfull imploiment. Now, although the night time is of all others most seasonable for sleep, yet are we not immediatly after supper to compose our selves to sleepe, but at least to let an bourne or two passe over before wee goe to rest.Good to walk a little after supper. And it is the advice of all our Physitians, after supper to walke a while gently, that so our food may descend from the upper orifice of the stomacke to the bottome thereof: for as wee are not suddenly after our exercise to set upon our meats, untill the perturbation of the body be somewhat setled,; no more are we immediatly after supper to setle our selves to sleepe. This was the custome of Plutarch. in ejus vita. Cato of Vtica: and likewise Sueton in ejus vitae. Domitian the Emperor was wont after supper to walke all alone in his chamber till bed time. The manner how to compose our selves to sleepe,Best situation of our body in sleepe. is at first to lie downe on the right side, and after the first sleepe to turne on the left: and the head ought to lie reasonable high, especially in a disposition to defluxions from the braine, and diseases from thence proceeding. To lie on the belly, might, perhaps, helpe and further concoction,Lying on the belly. but the harme the eyes might by affluxe of humors by that meanes receive, would quickly eat out all the gaines would be gotten by the bargain. To lie upon the back is yet worst of all other,On the backe. and furthereth the Apoplexie, Epilesie, Vertigo, or giddinesse, Incubus, or night mare, and the like. Now, as for the time, duration, or continuance of sleepe, wee use to determine it by concoction, continuing the same untill it be quite finished.Duration or continuance of sleepe. But because in all is not required the like length of time for concoction; hence have wee also the uncertainty for the time of sleepe. But most commonly, in ordinary and indifferent constitutions in time of health,Ordinary allowance for sleepe. wee include it within the compasse of seven houres, so that wee thinke it should not exceed this period of time. Some constitutions of body, as the cholericke and the melancholike, are commonly contented with a smaller portion of rest I was my selfe acquainted with a gentleman, who many times contented himselfe with a nap of an houre or two long,History sitting in his chaire, and that for divers night^ together, and found thereby no inconvenience at all. Some againe have need

of a longer time for sl^epe: as young inf^^^ (...) abound in crudities, and others also that are (...) travell. And its written (...) of Augustu^ (...), that (...) ^bove seven houres at a time. As for (...) to consider both the nature of the person, and the (...) eases differ much,(...) both in their nature and in (...) and some chronicall: againe, acure, either (...) all which may make the sleepe differ in (...) diseases, which give no intermission, if it can b^ (...) prove best of the night rest, as was accustomed in the time of (...) unlesse necessity and long want of sleepe prevail^ with us. It (...) be wished, that the sicke absteine from sleepe an (...) past, if extreme weaknesse alter not our intention: in which cas^ necessity must be our best guide. And by reason sleepe doth (...), and withall cooleth the inward her distemper,(...) the (...) in (...) diseases, the sleepe may be of longer continuance, (...) b^ any internall inflammation, in which case much sleep (...) ^ning of the disease increaseth the same. As for i^t^^mitting (...), wee cannot appoint any certaine or precise period of time, m^ght (...) day; and that in regard of paroxysmes, or exacerbations, which (...) here be our load-stone to lead us.(...) In the beginning therefore of the paroxysme, or fit, Physitians doe with the sicke to abstein^ fr^m sl^^p^ and towards the declining thereof to repaire the ^^rmer l^ss^^^ and if the presence of a judicious physitian shall some (...) alter, to his discretion it is left. But as concerning (...) disea^^s, we are as neere as wee can to admit of sleepe at the time ac^^stomed in time of health, most of them being of that nature,(...) that they may easily be guided after that rule. Some diseases there (...),(...) as namely some in the braine, proceeding from frigidity and humility where in the (...) i^ too prone and inclined to sleep, and therefore such we are ^ot to suffer to sleepe too long to shunne sleeping in the day time, and to suffer them to sleepe so much in the night as may well suffice to repaire decayed strength For the more ea^ie vnderstanding of this matter* we are to consider that Physitians make (...) ^^efold sleep; a naturall, not naturall,(...) and criticall. Of the naturall we have already spoken. Of that which is not naturall there are three sorts properly so called: that is, when the sicke either sleepeth in the day and waketh in the night; or else when sleep^ is troublesome and unquiet; and when the sicke sleepeth both day and night unto the which some adde this also, (...) when the sicke sleepeth neither day nor night: and although this may seeme rather to belong to immoderate waking, yet being an extreme, referred to the same medium or meane, it may be, as wee use other extremes, referred hither. Now, all these in diseases prove often, although not alwaies, dangerous; but then especially, when accompanied with other dangerous accidents. And it is often observed, that when the sicke hath long languished, and it may be for divers daies beene deprived of any rest, that before he exchange this life for another, some certaine time,(...) before falleth into some pleasant sleepe, often deluding the friends and assistance, flattering them with some counterfeit sh^w of some better

presage then is often confirmed by event. And indeed this is nothing else but a drowsie disposition, arguing an extreme imbecillitie of the animall parts, when as they are not now able any longer to keepe open the shop-windowes, and this is rather to be termed sopor, than somnus, or a heavy and deadly drowsinesse, rather than a true and naturall sleepe. (...) And most commonly that sleepe is to be suspe^ted that bringeth no alleviation to the sicke partie. And this is likewise to be observed, that as well in sicknesse as in health, a full stomacke to bed-wards,(...) or too hot and vaporous and flatuous meat or drinke, will much annoy and interrupt quiet rest, which in sicke persons especially is carefully to be avoyded. As for soporiserous affections, my purpose is not in this place to meddle with them, as being now beyond my present intention, but will say a little of criticall sleepe. This criticall sleepe then is twofold,Crit^^all* ^^eepe ^^^^^old. as being either a presage of a good or bad crise. Of a good crise againe two manner of waies: either when as there is a freedome and liberty for nature, without any trouble or molestation whatsoever,Good criticall sleepe. to order and dispose of their businesse, that the sicke after much trouble or turmoile, and much watching, falleth now into a quiet, profound and comfortable sleepe, a sure presage, especially accompanied with other good signes, of a good and comfortable crise. And sometimes, againe, during this sleepe, there is often an eruption of an orderly alleviating sweat, sometimes also seconded by some laudable criticall excretion, accompanied with a durable and continuing alleviation. But on the contrary, that which commeth with unquietnesse,C^^^^call s^ee^e accompanied with evill accidents. accompanied with many ill accidents, with imperfect sweating, and other evacuations begunne onely, and not fully perfected, without any alleviation, and often seconded with a profound soporiferous sleepe, with intense and strong delirations, bad pulse and urine, doth either presage death, or at least a ttansmutation or exchanged of the disease for a worse. Now, since the benefits of sweet, comfortable and moderate sleepe are so many, and so great, and the body by extraordinary watching so much endammaged, we are, especially in cases of extremity, as namely in hot and dry diseases, in feare of delirations and phrensies to use all meanes possible to procure the sicke some rest;^^eep carefull some^i^es (...) procured. which is divers waies procured, both by fit and convenient diet, cold and moist in quality, Lettices, Violets and the like; as also by outward applications of oinments to the temples* and divers other meanes as the case shall require. Sometimes wee use lotions of the head and feet,(...) of hypnotick me^^^ines inward and (...) hypnoticke medicines inwardly in divers formes exhibited, and of such meanes the vulgar are often much afraid, by reason such meanes being often used in cases of extremity, and the patient yeelding under the burthen of the disease, after dying, the fault is presently laid upon the medicine, and the Physitian who administred it. Sometimes also, I am not ignorant, that unskilfull and ignorant Emperickes are too busie with narcoticke unprepared,(...) one his iudgement (...) the vulgar concerning hypnoti^^^s and other medi^^ne. and ill corrected narcoticke medicines, and by this meanes make the honest and skilfull Physitian fare the worse, especially when the matter dependeth upon the vulgars voyces, who judge all by issue and event. The like commeth often also to passe in phlebotomy

and purgations, and other physicall helps, little considering that often through the malignity of the disease, and divers dangerous accidents, the Physitian is forced to try rather some doubtful remedie in apparent danger, than to leave the patient in desperation, not once offering to try some meanes to succour his necessity. Now, if it shall so come to passe that through the malignitie of the disease, or multiplicity of evill accidents, the sicke succumbe under the burthen of the disease; in stead of thankfull acknowledgement of the Physitians care and diligence in doing his utmost endeauour for the patients recovery, is often by slanderous and virulent tongues traduced, and by ignorant persons his actions, and diligent indeauors misconstrued, and he by false ignorant witnesses, directly against the ninth commandement, condemned without any hearing. I justifie no mans ignorance, nor patronise empiricall errour, but taxe vulgar indiscretion in assuming unto themselves to judge of that which farre transcendeth their reach, and making no difference betwixt a true Physitian, and a masked or counterfeit one, where there is nothing but a shaddow and an outside, without any substance. It behoveth therefore every one carefully to consider with what Physitian they betrust this precious jewell of their life: but when the honest and learned artist hath done his best, I see no reason why hee should be thus roughly without any cause dealt withall, as though the Physitian were of so malicious a minde, that he would willingly suffer his patient to perish, if it lay in his power to preserve life: litle considering that,
Interdum doct a plus valet arte malum,Diseases sometimes greater prove than skilfull art can cure.
But because I have already touched upon this string, I will no further here digresse. Now then, the excesse of sleeping and watching,Whether the excesse of sleeping or waking be more dangerous. Answere. being so prejudiciall to the body, it may, perhaps, be demanded, which of the twaine is most dangerous? I answer, that in weake and feeble persons, especially in acute diseases, in phrensies, and strong delirations, there must needs be more danger in contumacious watching, than in profound and sound sleeping: For, besides that by long watching,Excessive sleepe to be preferred before excessive waking the motions are often violent, overthrowing the naturall strength, concoction hindred (howsoever distribution may too much by this meanes be furthered) and by consequence crudities ingendred; whereas in sleep, be it naturall, or symptomaticall, there is some cessation of the senses and motion, and that little remainder of strength whereon all hope consisteth, is not vtterly overthrowne: besides, that in hot and dry diseases the body is thereby moistened, and somewhat withall cooled. From this rule, notwithstanding, wee must alwaies except soporiferous diseases of the braine: as lethargie, Carus, etc. Againe, it may, perhaps, here be demanded, whether it be good to sleepe with the mouth open or shut?Whether it be good to sleepe with open mouth.Answer. I answer, that to sleepe with open mouth, doth farre better breath out such fuliginous vapours as arise from the concoction of the stomacke, than with the mouth shut: howbeit it drieth somewhat the mouth and the throat, but after the party is awakened, this is againe easily amended. Sometimes againe, there be some that sleepe with open eyes, like

hares, and some with their eye-lids close shut, now then may be demanded which is the best?To s^eepe with open eyes, and when t^^le^^^le, I answere, that in perfect health some are accustomed to sleepe thus with open eyes without any hurt or danger whatsoever; and the same party falling sicke may so continue this custome without any hurt or detriment: but if this should befall another sicke person, in former times unaccustomed thereunto, it is then more dangerous, especially if accompanied with other dangerous signes.


CHAP. XXVI.

Of Dreames, and that of them there may be made good use in sicknesse and in health. Of night-walkers, or such as walke in their sleepe in the night-season, and the cause thereof.

NOw in our sleep there appeare unto us often imaginary visions and apparitions, which we call insomnium or somnium from somnus sleepe, and wee call in English dreames, and by the Greekes (...),Dreames what. answerable to the Latine somnium. Dreaming then is a middle disposition without any disease, betwixt sleeping and waking, in the which neither as waking doe the outward senses performe their whole perfect actions; neither yet as wholly asleep are they altogether idle: howbeit this properly is an affection or function belonging to the principall faculty, especially the Fancy;Cause of dreames. which although the body bee asleep, yet is that together with the cogitation and memory, often set a worke; and because in an ordinary or meane sleep, the Fancy is often free, the discerning faculty confused; therefore if severall objects or species, either remaining still in the senses, or which the body being yet awake, hath done or felt, it composeth together in many vaine visions, and as we commonly for hence call them, Fancies, the which being asleepe we seeme to see; and because reason is then weake we give thereunto our assent. But if it shall so come to passe (as we often find when we are as it were in a light slumber) that reason is at som more liberty, and giveth no assent to such Fancies exposed to our imagination, then such are not so properly called dreames. Of Dreames there have beene some supernaturall:Supernaturall or divine dreames. and thus we read that in the old Testament, God did often reveale his Will by dreames and visions. With this supernaturall dreame my purpose is not here to meddle at all. Some againe are naturall,Naturall dreames. arguing and declaring unto us often the state and disposition of the body in sicknesse and in health, and are by the Physitian onely to be considered, and to this onely end and purpose. Concerning dreames Hippo^^atis liber de (...). Hippocrates among the rest of this works hath written one little Tractate, where he setteth downe divers things concerning sicknesse

and health signified and pointed out unto us by dreames, and the meanes to remedy the same. And there he sheweth* that if such things whereabout we were in the day time busied bee after the same manner represented unto us, it signifieth that all is well within, if otherwise, the coutrary is signified.D^eame^ (...). The same author there setteth downe, that to see with a cleere and sharpe sight such things as are done upon earth, and likewise to have the sense of hearing answerable in dreaming portendeth health: as likewise to seeme to travaile strongly and securely without any feare, to runne apace, and to see the earth plaine and smooth, well manured, planted with pleasant and fruit^ full trees, and bearing good store of fruit: as also to see rivers and fountaines running their accustomed course, and the accustomed quantity of water, this doth also signifie sound health; and that both meat and drinke and all excretions keepe a due symmetry and proportion. If these things seeme otherwise, saith the same Author,D^eame^ (...) there is a deviation from that former soundnesse of body, and some inward distemper thereby argued. If the sight then or hearing in thy dream^ seeme to be endamaged, there is some disease in the head portended A rough and uneven earth argueth some corruption in the flesh. Tr^^^ seeming barren argue corruption of seed of generation. If leaves fall from the trees, it argueth hurt from humiditie and moisture: but if the same trees seeme full of leaves without any fruit, it presageth some hur^ from heat and drouth. Rivers running with greater abundance of water than ordinary,(...) signifie greater abundance of blood in the body then is usefull; the contrary argueth some deficiency in this n^ble humor Wels and springs signifie wind about the bladder. If the sea seeme to be troubled, it portendeth some disease in the belly. It is also according to the same Author good to see by dreame people apparelled in white and comely clothes. But againe, to see any naked or apparelled with base, blacke, sordid and sloven-like apparell, receiving any thing or carying any thing out of the house, portendeth no good. Many other things are there set downe by the same Author concerning this subject, with briefe remedies for the preventing and curing such infirmities. And there it may plainely appeare,One and the same ^reame may have ^ divers g^^^i^ation in sickne^^^ and hea^^^ that one and the same dreame may have a diverse signification in sicknesse and in health: as if the earth or house seeme to move, in a healthfull person it signifieth imbecillity and weaknesse; but to a sicke person presageth health and a change and alteration from his former estate. In like manner if any person seeme to swimme in a river or pond, in health it portendeth too great abundance of moisture: but in a burning Fever it portendeth good, and that this extreme siccity is overcome by the contrary humidity. It is moreover in that place apparent, that many times dreams do accompany such humors as abound in the body, and may often from thence be collected.Dreame^ many times dem^nstrate the humour^ abounding ^n the body. As much dreaming of rivers and ponds and often swimming therein, abundance of moist phlegmaticke humors in the body. To see blacke and burnt earth, argueth a great exsiccation of the body by choler adust. Strange and terrible shapes, and affrighting monstrous formes, signifieth that the body is filled with divers sorts of uncouth foods, which make a great perturbation in the body. Besides,

all such troublesome, fearefull dreames often argue melancholy in the body. Passing over rivers (saith the same Author) armed men often appearing, and many strange and monstrous apparitions doe portend either some great disease or madnesse. And thus wee see it is apparent,Oppression of the stomack will produce both unquiet sleepe and troublesome dreames. that by the dreames may often be discerned or presaged some present or future infirmity. Besides, we finde many times that even in our best health, oppression of the stomacke at night with too great a quantity of food will both procure unquiet rest and troublesome dreames. And severall constitutions of body produce often dreames answerable thereunto: as the sanguine dreameth often of all pleasant things, greene medowes and gardens, etc. The cholericke of fire,Dreames often follow the constitution of the body. and the like. Such as are much subject to wind, of much flying aloft and the like: and so of the rest, as may from the premisses easily be collected. And now concerning dreames, so faire as they are observable in sicknesse and in health, this shall suffice. Now to give some satisfaction to the curious Reader, I will say something concerning a point depending upon the former: and that is concerning such as during their naturall sleepe, yet performe such actions as are commonly performed by such as are awake, to the no small astonishment and amazement of the beholders, and are called therefore Noctambuli, or night-walkers.
Caterum quando ex causaram somni medioeritate placidus obrepic somnus, discernendi tamen facultas adhuc vaporum ^ulegine obfuscetur ^ effectrix tamen visorum facultas libera nullis irretita vmculis si^^ constat: cum ex rebus quas vigilans sensit, gessi, cogitavit and operata est, plurima somniorum spectra esfingit, quae tanquam vera dormientes amplectantur, unde tandem solutis a calore accidentario sensuum, spirituumque meatuum vinculu and motus compedibus, vigilantium opera exercent, tecta in subtime conscendunt, per trabes and lacunaria in adibus oberrant, lectos allorum adeunt, omnia intrepide audent, nec quicquam fi^i timent: quoniam vis illa discernendi sensus communis adhuc vaporum caligine consopita sacet, nec pericula nisi lamore experrecta agnoscit. Casus enim eu abrupto, scribit Albertus, ijs qui excelsa conscendnat, tunc maxime accidere solet, qaum pericula agnoverint, and formidare coeperint: eoque virtutes raboris ad cor formidolosum confluunt: lacertos, nervos, musculosque virtutis motivae organa destituunt. Dormienies igitur secur^ores so^t: acclamationibus experrecti, saepe praecipites cadunt. Iohan. Lang. Epist. medicin. lib. 1. epist. 45 ex Christophoro Marcello 4. de anima cap. 11. and Alberto magno lib. 2. and 3. de anima. Quae ab ijs (noctambulis) fieri persuasum habeo ex sanguine turgido ^ospumanti, tum estuoso fervidoque spiritu, quae in mentis sedem delata, animae vim atque facultatem, qua functiones suas perfi^it, partesque instrumentarias ad actiones impellit, agitant, atque ad huiusmodi motu^ effectusque concirant. Quo fit ut corpus spiritus animalis impulsu, qui nervorum ac musculorum robur, h^e sentie^di movendique mu^us in cerebro continet ac tuctur, in sublime feratur, eiusque v^etiem per som^um ad tales actiones incitetur. Sunt autem istiusmodi constitutionis homines raro laxoque corporis contextu, etc. Lovin. Lemnius de occultis naturae miraculis, lib. 2. cap. 3.Of these actions then thus performed our Writers assigne this cause; When as by the mediocrity of causes procuring sleepe, wee fall into sweet and comfortable rest, the discerning faculty, notwithstanding, being over-clouded with thicke, misty vapors; the efficient cause of Fancies and dreames, without any let or disturbance enjoying its full freedome and liberty; then of such things as the party being awake either felt, thought, or by practice put in execution, this fancying faculty composeth many sorts of visions or dreames, the which by the sleeping party are taken for truths: and hence commeth it often to passe, that at length the bonds of the senses, passages of the spirits, and impediments of motion being removed, they performe workes proper to those that are awake; as to climbe up to the tops of houses, to walke upon narrow beames and bridges, and many other such actions without any feare or danger, which if they were awake they durst never doe: and all this by reason this discerning facultie of the common sense is yet at rest, not acknowledging nor discerning any danger, unlesse by loud houping and crying the party be awaked out of sleep. If they be suddenly awaked, then are they in danger of sudden precipitation, or falling downe head long, all the spirits and powers of the body then leaving the extreme parts hands and feet, and flying

to succour the feeble heart now assaulted with no small feare. A late Writer averreth, that this commeth to passe by reason of hot and vaporous spirits, arising from a commotion and heat of the blood, which being carried aloft into the seat of the minde, doth incite and stirre up that faculty of the soule by which it performeth its actions, and by which it doth impell the instrumentary parts to their actions, to produce such motion and stupendious effects, as are often by such persons performed: Hence also commeth it to passe, that if these vaporous and flatuous fumes be not strong and violent enough to produce the former effects, then the parties doe but stirre, or start up in their sleepe, uttering some lowd cries, and turbulent speeches, yet still conteining themselves within the bed. The same author addeth, that such persons are most commonly of a thinne and leane constitution of body, and of a low stature: and such as have hot braine (as for the most part cholericke persons have) saith Hippocrates, are most apt to cry out in their sleepe, and are much subject to motion and agitation therein: especially, if in the day time their braines be much encumbred and busied with many matters. Such especially be our busie bodies, who will needs have an oare in every mans boat, and oftentimes more imploied about other mens affaires, than carefull to looke home to their owne businesse. But of this now sufficient.



CHAP. XXVIJ.Quemadmodum Ape^l^s celeberimus o^im pictor, eum pulcherrimam illam atque admirabilem Veneris imaginem depingeret clavum fixit, quo amoto tota simul imago dissolveretur: in ejus vero clavi summa parte ^uam depenxit imaginem: ita Deus ille o^timus maximus cum elegantissimum hoc miidi opificium fabricasses, tanquam coronidem and colophonem conjecit hominem, in quo suam collocavit imaginem, ex cujus inspectione ipse er^fex agnosceretur, ut si vere dicere sas sit humanus animus Deus quide^ parvo corpusculo conclusus videatur. Cum itaque res plurimum i^ter se pugnantes atque contrarias homo complectatur, recte illi scripsisse videntur, qui hominem vinculum esse, quo aeterna caducis necterentur asseverarunt, etc. Claud. Deodatus Panth. Hygiast lib. 1. c. 1.


Of the Soule, and of the passions thereof in generall.

THe noble painter Apelles, after he had drawne that curious picture of Venus, fastened the whole frame with a peg, or pinne, the which being pulled out, the whole frame fell in pieces; and in the top of this peg, he drew his owne picture: even so it seemeth the Almighty God, after he had made the whole frame of this universe, at length, as a conclusion and closing up of his whole worke, he made man the noblest of all the rest of his creatures (for whom all the rest were made) and stamped on him his owne glorious image, by the inspection whereof the workman himselfe might be knowne. This noble creature which we may justly call the microcosme, or little world, man, is composed of a double substance, whereof the one is terrestriall, composed of the elements, whither after a season it must returne againe, which we call the body; the which, without the other more noble part, which wee call the soule, is but a dead carcase, as may after the separation of these two loving friends plainly appeare. Now, this soule is of a more sublime and celestiall substance, neither composed of any elementary substance, nor yet ever to

be dissolved into the same; not ingendred, and therefore incorruptible and immortall. And as by the body wee take, as it were, roore in the earth; so by the soule againe, wee take hold of Heaven, and glorifie our Lord and maker: and this was the principall end of our creation, being then at our first framing fitted for so high and sublime imployment, and all the faculties of our soules being then bent upon our God, his honour and glory, wherein was then placed mans chiefe felicity, and pleasure. But afterwards, this so noble a creature by the subtile Serpents perswasion, rebelled, and tooke up armes against his Lord and Master, and so forfeited that great and glorious estate; by which meanes both the soule, that sublime and celestiall substance, and all the powers and faculties of the same are now become sinfull, prone to evill, and averse from any good. Now this same soule, although in the estate of innocency, yet was not without certaine powers or affections; as love, joy, anger, feare: the which affections or powers the soule now by sinning hath now not lost, but are become altogether sinfull and evil, and called now in sinful man, animi pathemata seu perturbationes, the passions or perturbations of the mind; the which exorbitant affections, as they are displeasing to the Almighty God, so are they many times very hurtful to health, and in sicknesse are oft the causes of no small mischief to the patient: for the which cause it shall not be amisse to say something of them, being especially ranked among these six things not naturall, having already handled the five former, resting now this sixth and last. The Stoickes indeed would have brought in a certaine apathie, or blockish stupidity among men, whereby they should be, as it were, insensible, and not affected with any thing whatsoever, which wee altogether disclaime. Now, as concerning the diversitie of opinions, and some controversie betwixt Physitians and Philosophers, or betwixt Philosophers themselves, concerning the seat and place of residence of these affections or passions, as not being so pertinent for our purpose we let passe. As for their number, it is not likewise agreed upon among all. Some make tenne, ambition, avarice, pleasure, envy, curiosity, anger, feare, ioy, griefe and hope. Some againe but seven, excluding the last three: and some will have but foure; ioy, griefe, hope and feare, excluding the three former.Actus concupiscibilis sex numerantur affectiones: ni^^irum, amor, odium, desiderium, fuga, delectatio, and tristitia. Irascibilis quinque elicit actus: and sunt spes, desperatio, audacia, rimor, ira. Mercatus Tom. 1. libr. 1. part 5. class 5. quest. 154. ex Thom Aquin. Some againe reduce all to two heads, concupiscible and irascible, under which they comprehend all the rest. Vnder the concupiscible therefore we comprehend, love, hatred, desire, a flight, or fleeing from evill, delectation and sadnesse, sixe in number. Vnder the irascible, these five following: hope, desperation, boldnesse, feare and anger. The actions of both these powers are commonly therefore, called passions or perturbations, by reason that thereby there is with them some affection or materiall passion or perturbation caused in the body: such as is the heat, or ebullition of the blood in anger, etc. All these againe, and whatsoever doth participate of the nature of such passions or perturbations, doe consist in the prosecution or avoyding of some thing, by reason of the opinion wee conceive of the shew of some good or evill; and that either present, imminent, or instant and to come. And first of the imagination of some present good newly represented to us, ariseth pleasure or delight: the which againe consisteth either in our owne

prosperity, or other mens adversity. As concerning our owne prosperity,Gaudium. Lae^itia. In^ultatio. if it be constant and moderate, we call it qaudium, or ioy; if profuse and exorbitant, wee call it laetitia, or ioy in a high measure; and if it extoll it selfe too much, it is called bragging or boasting. If againe this pleasure and delectation arise from other mens adversity,Malevolentia, sea ^^litiae it is called malevolentia, and malitia, or ill will and malice. Againe, from the opinion of evill present ariseth an aversation and griefe of minde, which is various and divers. In the first place, oppressing griefe is called angor, or anguish:Anger. Aerumum. Afflictio. tormenting griefe with labour and paine, is called aerumna, or miserie: with vexation of the body, it is called afflictio, affliction: that which commeth with trouble and profound cogitations, wee call sollicitudo,Sollicitudo. or anxious care; that which commeth without any expectation of better hopes, desperatio, or desperation:Desperatio. that which is accompanied with weeping, lamentation, howling and yelling, maeror,Maeror. being a higher degree of sorrow; if for the death of any friend, luctus,Luctus. sorrowing or lamenting: that which proceedeth of anothers miserie, which we desire to helpe, is called misericodia, pittie or compassion;Misericordia. that which proceedeth from others prosperity, if of good things, it is called livor,Livor. envie or spite: if of evill things, it is comprised under the name of revenge, called vindicta, being a mixt affection of anger and griefe.Vindicta, Againe, thirdly, from the opinion of a future good, ariseth hope,Spes. an expectation and a confidence, and from hence an earnest desire, called cupiditas, which is yet various;Cupidita^, Cupidia. Libido. Ambitio. Avariti^, one consisteth in the lusting after dainty faire, called cupidiae; another in lust and lechery, called libido, or lust; some in the earnest desire of honour and glory, called ambitio, ambition; some againe, in excessive desire of riches, called avaritia, or covetousnesse; some in revenge: the which, if it suddenly vanish away, wee call excandescentia; if it grow inveterate, wee call it odium, or hatred:Excandiscentia, edi^^. if there be an expectation of revenge, it is called inimicitia, enmity,Immicitia. or hostility, etc. On the contrary, from the opinion of any future evill, ariseth feare, (contrary to hope and confidence) an expectation of some future evill, the which, when it is instant, or neere at hand, we call it timor;Timer. Formid^; Terror, Pivor^ Consternatio, Exanimatio, Pigritia, Verecund^^. if of longer continuance, formido: if it move the body very much, terrour; if it strike a terrour in the minde, pavor; if it proceed yet further, consternatio and exanimatio, or strange amazement and astonishment; if it arise from feare of labour, pigritia, or lazinesse, etc. But verecundia, bashfulnesse, or shamefastnesse, is a mixt affection of hope and feare. And these be the chiefe affections, passions and perturbations of the minde, all which, for the multiplicity, by reason of the copiousnesse of the Latine, and penury of the English tongue, cannot all be accommodated with proper English names. But because all these doe not equally affect the body and minde of man, neither yet produce alike dangerous and sudden alterations in sickenesse and in health, therefore omitting the greatest number, we will but single out some of the principall, and on the which most of the rest doe depend. The chiefe then of these, and on which I purpose principally to insist, are these foure following: Love, Anger,The chiefe passions of the minde, and on which all the rest depend, foure. Ioy and Sorrow or Griefe: and these are commonly called, and accounted the exercises of the soule, the which doe not a little affect the body both in

sicknesse and in health. And so forcible and powerfull are these passions of the mind, that by meanes thereof some have sometimes lost their lives, some their wits and understandings; and some have by some of them suddenly recovered out of some sicknesse. Since then they doe so much affect both body and minde, they are not slightly to be past over. And therefore my purpose is to insist upon them somewhat the longer, and first I will begin with that noble affection of Love.


CHAP. XXVIIJ.

Of lustfull Love, and what hurt is thereby procured to mankinde. Whether any may die of love; something also concerning iealousie.

AMongst all these passions of the minde* this Love is not the least, nor of smallest efficacie and force,Great harms droceed by lustfull love to the whole man. as being often not only the occasion and cause of many dangerous diseases unto the body, but also depriving the soule of its chiefest happinesse, and so metamorphosing the whole man into an informe monster, void of all reason, whereby he runneth headlong upon his owne ruine. My purpose is not in this place to speake of the love of ambition, honour, riches, dainty fare and the like, but of that foule lustfull love, the author of so much hurt, of so much mischiefe to the body of man. Vpon this therefore, as witnesseth Suidas, Cadmus Milesius de amore.Definiton of love. Cadmus Milesius published 14 books concerning the same subject. De amore, and aliis affection, unde Gal. lib. 3.4. and 5. de placitis Hippocrat. and Platon. Now, this mad affection of love is a passion of the concupiscible part of the soule, residing in the liver and the heart, conceived of the desire and representation of the thing beloved, and conveighed by the eyes unto the mind: whose concupiscence, which hardly can be satisfied, both by imagination, and the common spirits of the liver and the heart is set on sire. And therefore some deduce (...), from the sight. And this is the opinion of In Tunao. Plato himselfe, as may in his workes be seene; as also that it hath its seat in the liver. De opificio Dei lib. 4. And Lactantius also assigneth the same seat to lustfull concupiscence. And to this likewise may be referred that which Odyss. 10. Homer writeth concerning Titius, who fell in love with Latona, and for this cause had assigned to him two ravenous vultures to eat vp his ever new renewing liver. But that which yet surpasseth all other authorities, the Proverb 17.32. Wise man in the Proverbs alluding to this, maketh mention of a dart striking thorow the liver of a libidinous young man, punishing that part where was the root of his sinne. The like butchery doth this cruell tyrant love exercise upon many, who can scarce ever be satiat, although many times injoying that they have long desired; neither can yet the rule of reason so over-rule this brutish and

sensuall apetite, but that it still burneth the very inward marrow of the bones, as the Ovid de amore. Poet well expresseth it:
Fecit amor maciem and longa internodia crurum,Love makes the body pale and leane,it marres the members quite and cleane.
Now, the infirmities which follow this disorderly passion, are not a few: as namely decay of strength, fainting and swounding, hollow eyes, a body pale and destitute of blood, languishing, crudities, continuall watchings, palpitation of the heart, trembling of the joints; sometimes madnesse, deepe melancholy, consumptions, and the like. These and many more like effects are the attendants of this lustfull and disorderly passion.This passio^ the cause of great mischiefe. How dangerous a thing then it is to give way to this so disorderly affection, if there were nothing else but what hath beene said already, may easily appeare. How many by this meanes have anticipated the ordinary period appointed for man to live? And whereas it is naturall for all creatures to seeke their owne preservation; yet have many so farre infringed this sacred law of nature, that they have put violent hands into themselves, so becomming their owne executioners: and that sometimes by way of desperation, being affraid to be deprived of that booty they so eagerly pursued after. And of this, that famous Physitian Observation, mi^it. lib. 1. p. 51. Plater maketh mention of a scholler and student in physicke, who being farre in love with a Doctor of the same professions daughter, and for some disparity, despairing of ever obteining that hee aimed at, with sublimat poysoned himselfe, having first set downe in a paper the cause thereof. But with such examples, and many tragicall stories many bookes are stuffed full; and many of our young Gentlemen and Gentlewomen, I doubt, are better versed in such legends, than in the sacred historie of the Bible. And many have bin by this disorderly passion so farre transported, that at the command of a base strumpet (a prodigious thing ever to enter into the thought of a reasonable man) they have cast away that life which the Lord of life had allotted them to doe him service. To omit antient histories, Deodatus panth. by giast. lib. 2. cap. 21. a late Writer maketh mention of one Galeacius, Duke of Mantua, living then at Padua, A Mistresse of his wished him, if hee loved her, to throw himselfe into the river, Brenta; the which, being then on horse-backe, setting spurres to his horse, hee presently accomplished. I wish by the talion law shee had her selfe beene served after the same manner. But it may, perhaps, then be demanded, what is the remedy to prevent so dangerous a passion? The heathens themselves set downe divers good directions in this case, which would to God Christians would imitate;Idlenesse a great furtherer of unlawfull lust. whereof one principall is to avoid idlenesse the mother of all mischiefe. That Ovid de ^ medi^ amoris. amorous Poet setteth downe this idlenesse as a principall incentive to this unlawfull lust.

Quaeritur Aegistus quare sit factus adulter?

In promptu causa est, desidiosus erat.

Men aske the cause why Ae^isthus adultery did commit?
The reason's plaine, he sloth ^ill was, sloth lov'd, and liv'd in it.

The same Poet willeth us to shunne the fight of the object beloved,

and whatsoever may nourish or cherish the secret flame; of the which we are also warned by Lucret in fine lib. 4. another, although himselfe and Epicure.


Sed fugitare decet siumulachra, and pabula amoris,


absterrere sibi, and alio convertere mentem.

All wanton pictures feeding love, avoid, shunne and decline,
And turne thou still another way, thine eye, thine heart and minde.

I have a little before in another chapter touched upon a principall remedy, concerning the care parents ought to have in the education of their children; and therefore, as likewise being a theme proper for the Divine, I will not here meddle any more with it, nor repeat any thing that hath beene said already. But it will, perhaps, be demanded what is then the remedy for such as are already intangled with this love passion? I answer, that here I have not undertaken to set downe a particular cure of this, or any other particular infirmity, but only to set downe some generall directions to remedy this passion.Things to be considered in matching. There must therefore a due consideration be had of the individuall partie, considering the sexe, age, temperature, and constitution of body, and the object whereunto this furious passion is fixed. If there may be a yeelding to the parties desire without the breach of the lawes of God and man, although, perhaps, some disparity betwixt the parties, in regard of wealth, birth, or both; yet, if there be danger in the deniall, my opinion is, rather to yeeld to an inconvenience, than to a mischiefe, especially where the disparity is not so great. But when as this cannot be atteined unto without breach of Gods commandement,Better sometimes to yeeld to an inconvenience than to a mischiefe. wee must never doe evill that good may come of it, nor commit one sinne to prevent another; but use all other lawfull meanes, and commit the successe to him that can bring light out of darknesse, and is able to bring his owne purpose to passe without any mans sinne. Let them use such meanes as wee have already set downe in that place already mentioned. It is true, wee Gal. lib. 1. prognos^. History. read of Erasistratus the Physitian, that hee found Antiochus, sonne to King Seleucus, to be now almost consumed and pined away with the love, or rather lust, of Stratonice his mother in law, insomuch, that to his seeming, there was now no other way but the inioying of his lust to save his life: this too indulgent parent gave way to his unlawfull lust. But wee are to remember, this was but a heathen, and such actions not to be drawne into imitation. But among us in this age, there is many times a great oversight in parents, who stand often so punctually upon some points: as of wealth especially, and some others; that vertue and true worth, the true feare of God especially, is set in the last place, and scarce, indeed, regarded in any place. Hence commeth if often to passe, that many of our young prodigalls so gallop out of their goodly estates, and are throwne off their horse before ever they were well setled in the saddle; and their wealth many times quite vanished away, before they atteine to a dragme of wit. I speake not here against some sutable proportion betwixt parties to be matched in marriage, and some competent meanes according to their places and callings; but my meaning is, that many times true worth and vertue is so, by worthlesse people, undervalued, that this proverbiall speech is often very truely verified,

many times for a little land they take a foole by the hand. But because it is an easie matter for an ordinary understanding to make a large co^ment upon this Text, I here leave it, wishing people to be wiser, and not so much wrong their children, as is now adaies the custome, which oftentimes brings the gray-haires of the parents to the grave with sorrow, and a too late repentance, had I knowne so much, etc. The antient heathens against this used mans blood against this intoxication, and histories make mention of Iulius Capitolinus, in vita Antonin^ Philosophi.History. Faustina, daughter to the Emperour Antoninus Pius, and wife to Antoninus the Philosopher, who fell so farre in love with a sword-player, that this Emperour asked counsell of all his wisards what was the readiest and speediest way to cure this strong and violent affection: and they (being instructed by their Master Satan, a murderer from the beginning) advised him to put to death this sword-player, and that afterward Faustina should drinke up a good draught of his warme blood, and then get her to bed to her husband; which accordingly was performed: of the which copulation was ingendred that cruell Emperor Commodus, who with his frequent sword-plaies, and slaughter of his subiects, had almost quite over throwne the whole Roman common wealth. And howbeit this woman was thus freed, yet is this no warrant for the use of such a remedy, although some of the Plin. lib. 28. Cornel, Cels lib. 3. cap. 23. antients have set downe this as a remedy both against this and the Epilepsie. The Paracelsists promise wonders of mans blood; as Paracelsus himselfe promiseth by a secret made of mans blood, to cure all Epileptick diseases. And one Ioh. Ernestus Burgravius maketh a lamp of mans blood, called brolychnium, or lampas vitae and mortis. Of this lampe of life and death hee promiseth wonders: to wit, that it shall burne as long as the party of whose blood it was made continueth, and goe out at the same instant that the party dieth; and withall, that as this lamp burneth cleare and quietly without any sparkling, the party shall live with freedome from any infirmity, either of body or minde; but if otherwise, it sparkle, or the light be dimme and obscure, and the flame be sometimes lighter than at other times, then it is a token of anxiety, heavinesse, and the like. Credat Iudaeus apella. Let them beleeve it who list. It is not unknowne how Satan hath from the beginning thirsted after mans blood: hence have wee so many sacrifices of mankinde: as in antient stories recorded, so even unto these our times so many still continue; as our Spanish narrations make mention of the Westerne parts of the world. And hence was if also, that hee suggested to his ministers so many remedies composed not onely of the blood, Affinit isti artificio and persuasioni fortitudinis (de aqua martia and balsamo magnanimitatis sermo ei prius fuerat) est lampas vitae, quam concinnant no^nulli tanquam fatale quoddam lumen, in quo hominic fortuna, affectus, morbi, and tandem mors possint observari. Arbitror excogitandi ansam praebuisse magiam illam, seu observationem popularem, qua arbor, vel herba depacto aut sata in nomine cuiusdam, tamdiu durat, and late crescit, quamdiu ipse bene habet and floret. Cum aegrotat, arbor quoque aliqua indicia morbi habet; cum instat hora mortis, marcescit. Ita scribit C. Suetonius in Galba: Cum in Liviae gremium Aquila gallinam albam ramum lauri'r ostro tenentem demisisset, nutriri alitem pangique ramulum placuit (Plin. lib. 13. cap. ult.) inde lauretum factum tale ut triumphaturi Caesares inde laureas decerperent, fuitque mos triumphantibus alias confestim eodum loco pangere; et observatum est sub cuinsque obirum arborem ab ipso instituta^ elanguisse* Ergo novissimo Neronis anno and sylva omnis exaruit radicitus, etc. Tanti est in nomine elicujus quicquam fieri admurmuratis proculdubio aliquibus verbis, and adjurationibus, quibus postea magorun sententia est corroborata, aliquam vim habere verba, intentiones, imaginationes, and similia, qua persuasione fabricant signa cerea, quorum passiones flant, in his quibus fint dicata, etc. Et paulo post, Videntur baec ex Sympathia and magnetismorum familiaritate tracta esse, ut and unguentum sympathetitum Paracelsi, de quo item narant hominem affici eo modo quo telum, itae ut cum lubet possi^ ei dolorem excitare. Vulgaris persuasionis est, magos multa posse, si sanguinem nancisci queant. Quocirca qui fibi metuunt, in profluentem jubent sanguinem ex vena effundere, aut cloacam. Quid chymici ex sanguine eliciant, quoque modomumiam and lapidem Catbunculi instar fulgentem ad omnium morborum depulsionem ex eo faciant, etc. Andreas Libavius defens. syntagen. arcan. cthym. contra Hening. Schernem. Act 1. cap. 3. but of divers other parts of the body of man, and as our Magicians still teach their too too credulous disciples, Tertul. in Apolog cap 14. as an antient Father well observeth.
Whether one may dy ^f love or no*But now it may be asked whether one may die of love, inseeming not to offer that violence to nature as to extinguish this lampe of life ^ I answer, that this passion, as we have heard, may emaciat, dry up and exhaust all the radicall moisture of the body. And so although it doe not worke such a sudden impression upon the body, whereby it is in an instant overthrowne: yet doth it by degrees so extenuate and debilitate the whole body, that it is thereby often cast into an irrecoverable consumption. And with histories in this kind, it were easie to make up a great volume. Observat. medic. lib. ^ pag ^^7. Schenchius maketh mention of a maid, who being by her parents crossed of a match intended betwixt her and a young man, pined away and died; many, I make no question, can instance of many in their owne experience, as it were easie for my selfe to doe also, but that I hasten to other matter. And besides, because I thinke few of judgement will make any doubt thereof, I will therefore leave it.
(...)To this place also we may referre iealousie, called In (...) lauda (...) nullum pram^^m* aut mu^as (...) accipiat: sea illud non perinde probatur, si mo^c^um interfe^^rit. Vin^^sta enim (...), and magistratu^a (...), figna^o permit (...) excipiat, (...) ^iviles in pler^^ rebus* [History] (...) hac ma^ito permit^ere: Respondee, illud parum commode indulgeri. Nam difficile est homini, praesertim iraecundo, vel potius furen^^, accep^a huiusmodi (...), modum in vindicta tenere, deinde praecipiti hac and confusarei interfectione, via and aditus resipi^centiae praecluditur. Thom. Cartwright in Proverb. cap. 6 vers. 34.1 Plat. Observ. medic. lib 1. pag. 53, etc. zelotypia, being nothing else but the excesse of love, with a continuall feare of being deprived of that they love, or at least of having any corrivall, which often maketh a man or woman to lose the use of reason, insomuch that the minde is never at rest. And this feare is merely imaginary, I meane, without any just cause, and sometimes there is too just cause ministred. It behooveth therefore both man and woman, to be carefull in their choice, and afterwards to give no just occasion to bring their reputation in question. Some instances of jealousies, both justly and unjustly conceived, a r famous late Physitian setteth downe. A certaine Merchant of a chiefe towne in Switzerland, a man of good account and esteeme in that place, being divorced from his former wife, married another being a maide, who bare him divers children. After certaine yeeres, perceiving his man too familiar with his Mistresse, conceived a strong iealousie of his wife, which caused him the more narrowly to observe her carriage. Vpon a time he fained himselfe to goe a iourney into the countrie about some earnest businesse, and yet in the evening conveied himselfe secretly into a chamber next adioining to his owne bed-chamber, where he might easily observe what passed, and within a short space, es^ies his man come boldly to his Mistresse, where he killed them both in the very act of adultery: and then, as is the custome of that country, laid certaine pieces of mony upon their dead corpses, which was a signe, that they were taken in this filthy act, and might therefore lawfully be killed; the matter being afterwards examined, hee was acquitted of the fact. The same Authour maketh mention of a Doctor of the civill law in the South part of France, who was very iealous of his wife (and not without iust cause) and suspecting her familiarity with a Scrivener, so narrowly observed her actions, that one day hee comes rushing into the roome where shee and this Scrivener were together (being in his owne house) masqued and accompanied with many schollers, students in law; where he first bindes him hand and foot, then cut off his nose, his yard; and afterwards cut his hamstrings, and so let him goe: the same maimed Scrivener (sayth mine Author) I saw afterwards at Montpelier, going upon crutches, and in a miserable and wretched case drawing his lame leggs after him. A just recompence for adulterers; and it were to be wished we might see some such exemplary punishment inflicted upon such as thus neigh after their neighbours wives: since especially Moses law, that the adulterer should dy the death (which in all the Germane countries

is in force is not here with us in force.(...) The ^ same Auth^^ (...) yet mention of another ev^n me jealous of his wife,(...) and yet with out any cause: This was a scholler newly returned out of France, who married Do^^^^ of physickes daughter, with whom a long time before h^e had been (...) love; (...) Doctor had a patient lying at his house, a Canon: and because the ^^the^, (...) widdower, often sent for his daughter to helpe him out in some domesticall all (...) therefore this scholler conceived a great iealousie against this Canon, as though (...) were more familiar with his wife than was fitting (howbeit, (...) kept her fathers house, it was not to be marvelled that hee often sent for h^^) insomuch, that he confessed to the Author, that he sometimes purposed to have killed this supposed corrivall Canon, when he went at night to fetch home his wife, but after a while, giving way to reason, and fully perswaded of his wives honesty, and so acknowledging his owne fault, became more wife afterwards. But before I close up this discourse of jealousie, I cannot passe by a story of an (...) old woman. This woman, although very antient, yet married a lusty youngman; and afterwards when she bethought her selfe of her owne old age and his youth, perswading her selfe, he would out-live her, and marry againe another younger than her selfe, it did so trouble her,(...) quam (...) esse de (...) ingeu^ (...) siqua ^^num malum dicat, dulce am^^um, sa erum profanum, and contr^^ (...) and illud etiam corruptum and depra^atum e^t si quis in (...) non assignat^^^^ aut (...) legim^es, 1^. 13, 14 (...) ^ominibus illius saeculi in quo (...) Salomon; (...) nium enim (...) ^^urem enim omnes (...), and com iti^ (...) sunt, si ^g^i^id^m (Anglicae Gallowes-^lapper, Newgate-bird, etc.) apellantes: una mensa cum illo vivere renitunt, uno peculo bibere, usque adeo ut ve^^sea ejus fere abhorreant; denique carceri and morti tradunt. Contra vero in adulterio nihil hujusmodi, non modo non exprobrant, sed nec abstinent ab ejus con^ortio. Quis unquam de furto suo se jactabit. Atqui sepe inventi sunt qui de suis adulteries, cum pulchra or e^ertim aut nabili faemina gloriantur. ^anto autem magis, haec judicij perversitas apud nos locum habet, quanto scelas adult^ (...) ^mni immunius est; cum tamen furtum seuerissime vindicetur. Interim tamen Deus sententiam suam non mutabit, suo minu^ adulteros deteriores iudicet, and suppliciis exquisitioribus puniat, utcunque homines statuant. Thom. Cartwright comment in vers 27, 28.29, 30* 31, 32, 33, 34, 35. cap. 6. Proverb. Salom. ubi etiam de hac re plara in medium efferu^tur, that with much anger and in di^^nation she^ would m^^e her griefe knowne to her neighbours and gossips, and thus to her dying day persisted. It is good wisedome therefore to be wary, and take warning, that neither man nor woman give any just cause of suspition. How much more then ought both parties to be circumspect in absteining from the act of uncleanesse it selfe. And by that which hath beene said already, we see that which was spoken by the wise Salomon, the pen-man of the holy Ghost, confirmed: Iealousie is the rage of a man, therefore he will not spare in the day of vengeance. He will not regard any ransome, neither will he rest content, though thou givest many gifts. And a worthy Divine of this kingdome, expounding the later part of this chapter, by the Text it selfe maketh it plainly appeare, how farre adultery doth exceed theft; and how erroneous is the judgement of many men, who will exclaime with open mouth against a theefe, and will scorne to come in his company; and yet many times bragge of this erroneous and detestable crime; which the same spirit of truth in the same place affirmeth, to destroy the soule. And besides that, this reproach shall never be wiped away. But this sinne is so frequently in the pulpits spoken against, and better befitteth the pen of a Divine than of a Physitian, and therefore, Manum de tabula.



CHAP. XXIX.

Of amorous or loue-potions, called Philtra. Whether loue may be procured by fascination?

IT hath beene an inveterate opinion, and is yet fast rooted in the mindes of many, that there are certaine medicines of that naturall force and operation, that being taken within the bodie, they will inflame that party that taketh them with this passion of loue. Now whether this be so or no? and if it be, whether it can force the affection to any one individual person more than another, is worth the inquiring. As for the first, it would seeme there were some such medicines,Mention made of love potions among antient authors. there being so frequent mention made among our Authors of these love medicines. The poets both Greeke and Latine often mention them, and some also set downe the matter, wherof they are made,Whether any simple be endued with a property to procure love. which is without all controversie: but whether they be indued with any such efficacie, let us now inquire. We have already declared that all simples worke either by their ordinary qualities of three severall sorts, as we have said already: or else by an occult and hidden qualitie: as we see the loadstone draweth the yron; and divers purging medicines make choice of certaine select and peculiar humors: as rhubarb purgeth choler, etc. Now that there proceedeth no such vertue from any of these ordinary qualities, it is so manifest that none did ever yet affirme it. It resteth then that it must needes proceed from an occult qualitie. It must needs then follow, that there are some simples that will procure love: and since love is an affection of the soule, why may there not be other simples to worke upon other affections of the soule: as harted, anger, etc? and if so, then these medicines which are corporeall, may worke upon the affections of the soule, which is spirituall, which is absurd. But will some reply, it cannot be denied, that some medicines there are which procure love. I answere, that some doe provoke lust,Some simples may procure lust, but none force to love. I doe not deny; but to procure love is not yet proved* and such produce this effect by an ordinary and to us knowne qualitie as some by increasing the blood, and consequently the seed of generation: some by meanes of their flatuous quality: and some againe by their acrimony,Some of these love-medicines are venomous. sharpe and venomous quality, doe often provoke an irritation, and are of such a corroding and fretting nature, that they often make pisse blood, and cause irrecoverable ulcers in the kidnies and obscene parts. And sometimes these intoxicating medicines fly up into the head, and cause madnesse, of the which fearefull effects frequent mention is made in divers Authors. And it is memorable which is written of Lucretius the Poet, who howbeit he set downe divers directions against love, yet could he not escape death by this owne

violent hands, incited thereunto by meanes of a love potion ex^^o^ted to him by his owne wife, Lucilla: of the which (...) another Poet hath these words:
His qui philtra hibit, nimioque insanus amoreMox ferro occubuit, sic mente^^ a^^^serat omnem.In love who drunke his charmed drinke, raging on sword did fallAnd being mad, did lose his wit, his sense, his life and all.
And it is just with God often to punish men by that meanes wherein they promised themselves some extraordinary great contentment. But those same simples which are supposed of this efficacie and power (howsoever some of the antients have by tradition received them from others) yet neither our antient, nor moderne Physitians doe attribute any such efficacie unto them. And besides, if there were any such force or efficacie in them to be found, then were this towards all equally,These ^ast are not (...) such (...) and not towards one individuall particular person. If any shal yet reply, that this hath beene often observed, that after the use of such medicines, such an effect hath followed; I answer, this is but an evill consequence, and that Philosophers call* lenchus a non causa pro causa* when that is assigned for a true cause which is none at all. And this wee see often verified in magicall spells, and characters, which in themselves have no such efficacy and power to produce such strange stupendious effects, where it may plainly appeare that Satan is the chiefe actor in the action. During my abode in France, som 25 yeeres agoe, I was familiarly acquainted with a gentleman of Poitou, who had a Tennant dwelling in the same towne,History. ever which hee was sole Lord, whose wife told mee, that some few yeeres before that time, being married, the very same day as they went out at the Church doore, the one ranne away from the other, and could not indure either to come neere, or indure the sight one of another: and when the one was brought at unawares into the presence of the other, they cryed out, that they were in that case as though they were all pricked with pins and needles, and hated as much one another, a^ did ever two of the mortallest enemies that lived on earth. Their Land-lady, a stout and couragious; Gentlewoman commiserating this distressed couple, and suspecting a knave accustomed to play such prankes, and living in the same towne, sent for him to her owne house, and taking him aside into a private roome, drew her knife, and vowed shee would presently cut his throat with her owne hands, if hee redressed not the wrong hee had done her tennants; who, after a saint deniall at first, yet promised hee would presently accomplish her desire, which as soone was performed* for this villaine went but a little way into an adioining closset, where with his knife he digged out of the ground a point, with certaine knots on it, with a crosse sticke, and I remember not if any thing else; after the untying of which knots, accompanied with some secret whispered words, this couple came presently together, without any feeling of these former painfull accidents, and ever after that loved one another in such a manner as became such as were ioined in that honorable estate. And this I had from the womans owne mouth who was so served; as likewise from the relation of the Gentlewoman her selfe, of whom I learned all these particular passages. Besides, this same Gentlewoman told mee that another time all her pigeons came flying out of the Dove-coat,History and would not by any meanes any of them goe in: the which this same Gentlewoman

perceiving, used this same fellow after the former fashion, and he presently went up within the Dove-coat, and tooke out of a hole a crosse sticke, with a little salt, and I know not what else, and before the fellow came downe three or foure rounds of the ladder, the pigeons were all got in, and continued their former custome. Besides, I was credibly informed, by many of good worth, that this practice towards new married couples was there so common, that many for this cause married in the night time: and yet many times the Priest himselfe that married them was the worker of this villainy, who, even as he married them would use this charming or inchaunting, call it which you will. And I was informed of three neigbouring Priests, in the three next adjacent townes to this Gentlemans dwelling, who ordinarily played such prankes. And while this lasted, there was neither love betwixt those parties, nor the man able carnally to know his wife. And these relations I had from Papists themselves. As for the Protestants, I speake it unfainedly before God, I never remember that I heard it practised among any of them, either in that Kingdome, or any other place of Christendome where I have travelled: farre lesse did I ever heare any of their Preachers to be tainted with any such infamous courses. It is then apparent that this was no vertue or power in these things whereof use was made; but was the immediate operation of Satan, who, by Gods permission, and for causes best knowne to himselfe, sometimes suffered Satan to afflict the bodies of men after strange manners; the which by the history of Iob, is apparent. And as for these amorous potions, wee finde they prove rather poisons, than produce any amorous effect; as by that wee have already said of the Poet Lucrece may appeare. And ^ean Wier de l'un post deidiate, lib. 2. cap. 62. a late Writer allegeth out of divers Authors the truth of this tenent. Cornelius Nepos (saith he) and Plutarch have written, that Lucius Lucullus Emperour, having drunke an amorous potion, given him by his wife Calisthene, became fist furious and mad, and afterwards died. The like is related of Caligula the Emperor, who having received of his wife Caesonia a like medicine, became mad therewith; and this was supposed to be made of that so much talked of Hippomanes. Mais Aristote au liure huiectisme de la nature des animaux, chapitre 24. escrit que tout ^e que lon croid de l'Hippomanes n'est que fable de vicilles et invention de ce ux qui sont profession d'enchanterie. Il escrit aussi ausecond liure des grandei morales, qu'vne femme bailla vn brunage amoureuxa vn bomme, lequel en mourut subitement. Aussi est il escrit par Hippolire Marsil, que la mort est souventes fois advancee par ces boissons, in d. l. eiusdem adiectio. D. de fica. La on il est parle au texte du venin amoureux: comme il est aussi parle du brunage amoureux en la loy, Si quic aliud @ qui abortiuis. D. de poenis. Et encore qu'il semble que Constantine premier des Empereurs Chrestiens ait pense que C^amour s'acquerois par art magique en la ^oy qu'il sect ^. de molef. L. eorum: etc. Idem ibid. And yet, even in the opinion of Aristotle, this Hippomanes, and that they write of it, is nothing but a meer fable of old women, and the invention of such as make a profession of Sorcerie. But even many of the same heathen Poets, who plead for all that may procure love, do often disclaime these amorous medicines, as may at length in their writings appeare. And many times a love potion is pretended to colour a great deale of knavery: and many times a pretense of the affections to be forced by some such meanes, is made a stalking horse to hide and cover our owne foule lust. Idem. ibid. Mine Authour rehearseth to this purpose a history: Wee have knowne, saith Henry Jnstitoris, and James Sernger, Doctors in divinity, an old woman, who, with her love-drinkes, not only bewitched and inchaunted three Abbots one after another, but likewise (as the common report goeth, yet at this same time amongst the fryers of that convent) that shee made them all three to die, and set the fourth besides himselfe. And this strumpet is not ashamed to confesse in publike, that shee hath not only done, but continueth still to doe the same villainy, and that these Abbots are not able to withdraw themselves from her love, and that by reason they had eaten as much of her dung as her arme was

bigge. And this woman yet liveth (say they) by reason none hath as yet given us any charge to bring her before any Iudge that shee might be punished. But (saith mine Authour) I am of opinion, that this dung shee saith shee hath made them eat, was nothing else but their filthy lust and pleasure, in the which, as in a stinking filthy mire, these Monkes being now as it were drowned, and having so often now tasted of this carnall and filthy lust with this old strumpet, they were now at length, as it were, so poisoned, and bewitched therewith, that they were never after able to leave this beastly sin, and returne againe to their right wits. Idem ibidem ex Plutarch. The same Author bringeth another history out of Plutarch, of a yong maid, belov'd of Philip, father to Alexander the great: This Philip, King of Macedonie, fell in love with a young maid of meane condition and degree; this maid, by reason of the great disproportion betwixt these regall riches and her poore pedigree, without any great difficulty yeelded to this great King that which hee demanded. This being brought to Olympias the Queene, it is no marvell if shee tooke it ill, the which did yet the more trouble her, in that it was reported, that by meanes of amorous potions shee had attracted the Kings affections; much therefore mooved at this matter, she sends to the lodging where she lived, commanding to bring her to her, with a stedfast purpose and resolution to shut her up in some dungeon or else to send her away into some remote country. Being brought into her presence, and perceiving her beauty and comely countenance, the excellency of her understanding, etc. shee said with a lowd voice, I give now no more eare to false and slanderous reports; for thou hast within thy selfe power enough to bewitch any. And by this meanes was her anger appeased towards this young woman, and her owne husband also. I wil instance in no more histories, but now proceed. The absurdity then of this opinion may yet further appeare in this, that such as maintein and practise such things, Lang. epist. m^dicin lib. 1. epist. 33. affirme, that the same part of one and the same creature produceth divers effects, according to the right and left situation in the body: insomuch that the bone in the right leg shall cause love, and that of the left hatred. These amorous medicines therefore are in case to be used, as being altogether dangerous, and besides, unlawfull, and by the learned ranked with that sort of witch-craft, called Sunt and hui^us Goe^ia plures adhuc species, nempe Epatosco^ia, Hydromantia, Geomantia, Haruspicina, and reliqua id genus divinationum artificia, etc. Idem ibid. Goetia, and reckoned for the third sort thereof, there being of this same yet divers other sorts, on which we will not now insist; but leave them to such as delight in such trash, which is all forbidden in the second commandement. And therefore I thinke I have proved this point sufficiently, that these love-potions, or philtra, are not to be used, and that they produce no such effects as are unto them prescribed, neither yet can they of themselves force the affection. As concerning medicines which provoke lust, I hold it altogether unfit for the unmarried to use them: and for such married people only, who, for the better furtherance of procreation of children, do desire and crave the aid of the honest and learned Physitian, to excite and stir up the force and vigor of nature now languishing. As for others, yea, even in wedlocke it selfe, merely for wantonnesse to increase their carnall lust, I advise all those of mine owne profession, that they yeeld no satisfaction to these their disorderly carnall lusts: and that as they will not be accessary to their sinne, and as they will answer it at that great and dreadfull day, when that great House-keeper shall call for a redde Rationem villicationis tuae. The like I say of our complexion-mongers, who, as our Taylors devise new fashions,

so these are ready to devise new faces, to such of our discontented female sexe; who, not contented with that feature and comelinesse of face, which their Lord and Maker thought fitting, will yet make use of a painter. And I thinke it much derogates from the dignity and worth of an ingenuous and generous Physitian to abandon himselfe to such base imploiments (I meane, both this last and the former) as become better some Bawd than an honest Artist, professing so excellent and eminent a calling. Sed manum de tabula. Howbeit I could yet insist at length on these matters, yet I hasten to that which followeth.


CHAP. XXX.

Of Fascination by sight, by word or voice, and by spells: of imagination, and strange stupendious effects our Paracelsists attribute therunto, together with the absurdity of the same.

Of fascination or bewitching.THere is yet another erroneous opinion crept in, not onely among the meaner and more ignorant; but even among some of the more judicious sort, that love may be procured by effascination or bewitching: and by this meanes some have been strongly perswaded that affections might be forced; and the affection of one by effascination (as before they conceived of philtra) to be procured to another: the truth whereof would be a little inquired into. That there is such a thing as fascination, or effascination, cannot be denied, as by the antient Poets, both Greeke and Latine may appeare; but what it is would be considered. Est fascinatio, vaporis ^irulentia corpore noxio, natura ab aliis dissidente (...). id est, de stu^ium, quo aliorum corporis habitus and spiritus per visum, contactum, invidiam, ob vocis, and maledicae linguae virulentia^, ^er vaporis halitum conspurcati, corpora tabescere cogunt: quae continuo halitu disflari et ob id alimento refici oportere. Galenus. n^li^ro de salubrib. re^te do^uit. Lang. epist, med. lib 2. Epist. 36. In this fascination therefore, there must needes be an effluxe of something from some body, and received againe into some other body. In this businesse then wee are to consider the body transmitting, the body receiving that which is transmitted, the medium, or middle space betwixt them, and that which is transmitted. That which transmitteth, is most commonly the eye or mouth, the party receiving, some tender body, apt to receive such an evill impression, as children especially: the medium, or middle space, the aire: and the thing transmitted, a vapour, called by the Greekes (...). Now, certaine it is, that there is no member of the body that doth so abound in spirits as the eye, nor that sendeth out more resplendent beames than the ball or apple thereof. And it is reported of Sueton in e^us vita. Augustus Caesar, that on whomsoever he had firmely fixt his eye-sight, they were forced after a while to winke, as in the bright shining of the Sunne beames, so cleare and bright shining were his eyes. Idem Sueton in ejus v^ta. And of Tiberius Caesar it is also written, that when he rose in the night time, he saw as clearely as any cat. And it is reported, that ^ellius scribit in ultima terra, cur al^aniae nomen est incolas in puer^tia ^^nef^ere, and noctu a^utius quam interdiu cernere, falgore, scilicet, teneram vis^m ac^^m obtundente ^dem Lang. ibidem. in the country of Albania, the inhabitants before they atteine to mans age,

are white haired, and that they see better in the night than in the day time. These lucid spirits then, the carriers of this fascination, slowing in that abundance, towards the eyes, and ejaculated upon the object; if these spirits proceed from uncleane blood, it is no marvell, that some most obnoxious to receive this venomous impression, be therewith surprized: and such vapors our (...) 5. pro^^. 7. (...). lib. ^. cap. 1^. Authors affirme often to proceed from bleare-eyed persons, whereby they may infect others with the same infirmities: as likewise that a menstruous woman infecteth the glasse shee looketh into. ^igona^ scriptis (...) testatum reliquit, esse in Triballis and Illeria quas^am ess^scina^^ium famil^as, quae v^su quos irat^^ or ae^ipue o^ulis asp^v^rint) interimans, e^^que gemina in ocul^^ pupula esse cognobiles (...) iusque ma^i conta, (...) impuberes sa^i^us (...) etc. Idem ibid And some write of certaine families among the Triballians and Illyrians, who, if they looke earnesty, especially if angrily, upon any one, they presently kill them by their bare aspect onely; and they likewise write of some women of Scythia, and of others living neere unto Pontus, having in one of their eyes a double bale, and in the other the shape of a horse, being very terrible to behold, and who being throwne into the water, clothes and all, could not be drowned. Now, this fascination among the antients was so frequent, that the very brutes were not freed therefrom; as may by the Poet appeare. Nescio quis teneros, etc. Many other things might here out of antient Authors be alleged, but that I hasten to that which followeth. Besides this fascination by sight, antient Authors mention yet another kind by meanes of speech and tongue. And Gellius maketh mention of whole families in Africke, bewitching with their speech and tongue: who if they praised much either young children, trees, corne, cattell, or any thing else, all died, and withered away presently. Hence have wee this custome derived from antiquity, that when wee praise any thing in a high manner, wee use a kinde of prayer, desiring God to blesse it, lest, perhaps, our tongue hurt it. And there is yet another phrase in use among the vulgar especially, when any thing prospereth not according to our intents and wishes, to say it is forespoken. But whatsoever credulous antiquity hath beleeved concerning this matter, yet in truth there is no such efficacie in either of these as was supposed. I beleeve no such strange effects produced by bare beholding of any. If any children or weake natures received any such venomous impressions from such eyes, it was but rare, and seldome came to passe. And as I said before, so here againe: why might not God sometimes suffer the divell to inflict some hurt upon children or other, after some such particular persons intent fixing their eyes upon them, which that arch-enemy of mankinde might afterwards make them beleeve came to passe by reason of their intent aspect; as he does ordinarily make our deluded witches beleeve that by meanes of certaine words, spells, or other creatures, such effects are produced, howbeit most falsely, as shall presently appeare. And that which some relate, that if a Wolfe see a man first, it bereaveth him of his speech, is but a mere fiction. And so is that which Pliny writeth concerning that Serpent called Catoblepas and the Basil^^k^, which hee, beleeving others, saith, doe kill any man on whom they looke. All this Ex hac historiae ^aerietate ac inconstantia facile adducor, ut eredam plerosque ^^^toriam (...), ut fabularem discripsi (...). Id quod etiam (...) Diosco^^des (...) atque adeo (...) videtur. Siquidem is ac cum a (...) etur, ^^a^is^ratum ^^avit, aut^er^mque (...) secit. (...) cap. 5^. (...) a late Writer confuteth as fabulous, proving the varieties of opinions concerning this Serpent, the last especially, called by vs a Cocatrice, which our vulgar erroneously beleeve to be hatched by a Toad sitting on a Cocks egge. This, as some say killeth by sight: some againe,

affirme onely by the bite, and some by the sound or hissing of it. The history of it therefore is very doubtfull, and divers waies related. As for the other sort of bewitching by Socrates recte dixisse fertur incantationes esse verba animas decipientia humanas, quae ne quidem assis faci^ cam nullum realem effectum naturaliter producere, nec ob id sanitatem in aegritudinem commutave possint, nisi divin^ censurae ma^estas annuat: aut nisi quis sorsa^ ex confidentia in medicum pharmacis plus energiae, sic ex fide verbis incantationum aliquid virium accrescere non temere suspicetur. ^an. Epist medic. lib. 1. c. 33. Exilis inflicted upon man or beast are not the works of any man or woman, howsoever falsely so supposed. words, there is as little, if not lesse probability of producing such strange stupendious effects. And if I should grant that sometimes there might proceed out at the mouth some virulent vapours which might annoy a tender infant, especially by neere approaching, yet tell mee, I pray thee, what so forcible vapours can come forth at the mouth of any mortall man to infect forrests of trees, and whole come-fields. It is then a cleare case, that when any such accidents come to passe, they are effected by Satan himselfe, GOD in his hid and secret wisedome, and for causes best knowne to himselfe, suffering some persons themselves, or their goods, to be in this enemies power: and many times such persons as are by the vulgar suspected of performing such ill offices, are ignorant wicked people, filled with envie and malice, often wishing such harmes to their neighbours, which Satan by his power from above, putting presently in execution, these wicked malicious people are often beleeved to be the actors; and sometimes God in his justice suffereth such to be punished by the sword of the Magistrate, although free from any compact with Satan;Sathan often the agent. God sometimes thus justly punishing their envie and malice, and other sinnes. And therefore it behooves those in authoritie to be carefull of the lives of such people, where there is no evident and apparent proofe to convince them. And it commeth often to passe,Old women often accused for witches and why. that as old age is peevish and froward; so sometimes some poore melancholicke woman in the countrie falling out with some of her neighbours, useth froward speeches, and, perhaps, some imprecations also; and then, if any hurt or harme suddenly befall this neighbour, with whom this woman wrangled, be it that any of the cattell miscarry, or any of the family fall sicke; especially if any thing by this poore woman imprecated come to passe: this poore woman then is presently accused for a witch; and if it lay in their power (so ignorant, envious and malicious are some of those people) merely upon this pre-conceived opinion, they would hang this accused party: in which cases, if the reverend Judges and the Justices of the countrie were not more judicious and mercifull than the accusers, we should have many an innocent person condemned to death. I have here a large field offered mee to expatiat upon, but not willing to dwell too long upon it,The cure used against fascination of old. I must contract my matter. The cure used against such fascination doth yet argue the truth of that which hath beene said: as to hang some things about their neckes, for the which, corall is commended: although I cannot see what vertue can proceed out of so sollid a body, to encounter with so subtile and venomous a vapor, as proceedeth either from the eyes or other part. And what great vertue can proceed out of herbes hung up in the roofe of the house? and what extraordinary vertue was there in Plin. lib. 28. cap. 19. a Wolfes head nailed upon the entry of great mens gates, as is yet the custome in divers places of Germanie, although now I thinke they have no such intention? and in divers places in Switzerland they use Boares heads after

the same manner. It is farre more probable that Probl. 3^. sect. ^0. Aristotle writeth concerning Rue, which being eaten, is good against fascination: for being good against poisons, it might also resist maligne and venomous vapours proceeding from any part of the body. Now,Spels and other trash of that nature have no power or efficacy to doe good or evill. that both ordinary spells, barbarous words, and many other such trash used by Satan and his imps, have no such power not efficacy in them either to bewitch, or yet to cure the bewitched, I could makes it by evident arguments appeare, but that I may not now too long insist, howbeit I will relate a story our of Iean Wiet de l'impost. des diables libr. 4. chap. 15. a late Writer, who hath of set purpose confuted this foolerie, where he prooveth the force of a strong confidence. A Knave upon a time, saith hee, went to visit a woman much vexed with a paine in her eyes, whom this fellow promised to cure, onely by hanging a billet about her necke, wherein were written some few words, which shee was to weare constantly, and never to open or one looke what was within it. This foolish woman,History. accustomed continually to weepe and cry, (the chiefe cause of all her misery) conceiving now such a confidence in this cure, gave over her weeping, and became now as cheerefull as ever before, and so her eyes mended. After a pretty while, her eyes being now reasonable well, shee was somewhat carelesse of her billet, so that at length shee quite lost it. But bethinking her selfe what shee had lost, and fearing lest shee should be againe troubled with her former infirmity, fell a weeping and crying as before shee had beene accustomed, and so fell as ill in her eyes as ever before. This note or billet was found by a stranger, who opening it, found written in it these words in high dutch: Der teuffel kat zedir die augen auff, vnd scheisse dir in die loocher: that is in English, The Divell scratch out thy eyes, and fill up the holes with his ordure. Now, if there had beene any vertue in these words, this good woman had lost her eyes: for they had beene pulled out and filled with the divells ordure. It behooveth then all honest,All honest Physitians ought to shunne all unlawfull and unwarranted waies of curing.People ought not to seeke to witches and wizards. carefull, and conscionable Physitians, to shunne all such unwarranted and suspected waies of curing the sicke. And I advise sicke people to seeke for remedy by lawfull and allowed meanes, and not to Wizards, Witches, Spell-mongers, and the like forbidden crash. What? in the time of the Gospell must wee needes goe to 2 Kings 1.3. Beelzebub? Is there never a God in Israel? No balme in Gilead? If this be scandalous for common Christians, what shall it be for one of the tribe of Levi, anointed with sacred oile? It is not unknowne to the country, how that some of that profession, besides their lawlesse intrusion upon another profession, if they doe no evill, yet I am sure, doe that which is evill like. I speake nothing here of their practising of Iudiciall Astrology, calculating nativities and the like: but I heare by relation round about the countrie, that some remedies they use, which have beene by the most judicious accounted to savour of superstition. And although I have heard much, yet will I instance but in one particular, and of mine owne knowledge, and related to mee by a Clergie man, and therefore, I hope, the credit of the story lesse liable to exception. This sa^^e last yeere there came to mee a Minister, desiring to know mine opinion concerning a doubt whereof hee was desirous to be satisfied: A maide (saith hee) being obnoxious to Epilepticall fits,History of a Parson using amulers, and other such trash.

craved the counsell of a Minister-Physitian. He gave her Proinde his periaptis and amu^c^^s, quae ratione nituntur natura^^ fidem non derogamus: de quorum substantia, vapori^s defluvia inspirata, vires corporis reficere, internamque morhi causam alterare possunt. Nam contacta tridente torp^dine trarina piscatoris manus obstupescere, and echeneida pisciculum quomvis veloce^, navis procella ventoris agitatae cursu si tere videmus. Sir quoque melanthii semen, catarrho: radicem paeoniae alhe, quae altera est nostri dictamu: species, Epilepsiae: and stercus lupi alligatum co^^cis mederi experimur, non ut Pa^philu, med^cus, inca^tationis viribus, sed quod ab illorum substantia vopores quidam velut a o^n, de fluerent, qui inspirati cerebrum si carent, morbique causam suis viribus alteratent. Vnde Galenus experientia horum edoctus: periaptis (inqua) confidere oportet, ut substantia illoru^, and non incantationis magorum verba, invet. Cui Theoph^astus libro de historia p^antarum nono ita lu^scribit: potius inqu^e, a^surda ilia putentur, quae alligata, and v^a^fic^o^um adversantia va^antur, and tum corporibus, tum domibus uni^e o^^tulari credantur^ quae ^ommenta ho^^ (...) esse plane vident^r, qu^fuas artes magn^ficare, ce^ebrar^que eu^erent unde non temere Antoninus Caracalla Imperator, teste Aetio Spartiam, gestan^es amuleta co^tra tertianam damnavit. Jdem Lang. ibid. a silver ring to hang about her necke, wherein were written certaine barbarous words, such as are commonly used by those who use unlawfull arts. This the young woman for a while continued, and was so long as shee wore the amulet free from her former sits: afterward being by some put in doubt of the lawfulnesse of this manner of medicine she left it off, and still after that was haunted with her old fits, as before. But being againe by some perswaded, if I remember right, shee made againe tryall of the same medicine with a like effect following as before. But after a while being without the use of this ring, whether it was lost, or whether shee left it off of purpose. I re^emember not well, but shee was seized with her fits as before. Now, this Minister demanded of me, whether I thought this to be a regular cure, and warranted by the rules of our art, and by us ordinarily practised; my reply was, that cures were all either supernaturall, or naturall: the former proper to almighty God, and practised both in the old and new Testament. As for natural means, the Physitian makes use of them, as medicus est naturae minister, the Physitian being an assistant and helper of nature in time of neede. And thus Physitians make use of severall sorts of simples of all sorts, variously prepared, and exhibited often inwardly, sometimes applied but outwardly, according to severall circumstances, and such simples as the Physitian knowes to be indued with such vertues and qualities, or else he meddleth not with them at all. As for this ring made of a solid metall, although our Chymists attribute some antepilepticall quality to silver; yet neither use they this not gold it selfe (of the medicines whereof they tell us such wonders) without a laborious and artificiall preparation, and then exhibit it inwardly, most commonly in a potable forme; and yet are many times, yea, for the most part frustrat of her expected effects. And as I said then, so I say now, that I see no naturall cause of this cure: the silver being so solid a substance, can send out no such forcible vapors as might produce so strange an effect. Now, then, it resteth it must either be effected by vertue of these barbarous words of the ring, or force of the imaginating faculty, and her strong conceit of the excellency of the medicine: the former of the which I have already proved to be false, and that words have no vertue either to hurt or heale. It resteth then, if by any meanes, it was by vertue of her strong imagination, by reason of the high conceit shee had of this medicinall ring. But this is false: for howsover shee might at first have some high conceit hereof, yet afterwards her minde was quite altered, and what shee then did, it was rather against her judgement, and with feare, as not being perswaded of the lawfulnesse thereof. But now I appeale to the ingenuous and judicious unpartiall reader, whether this be fit and comely for a Churchman to make use of such meanes, which, suppose they be not unlawfull, yet at least are they suspicious. And the Apostle wisheth us to absteine from all appearance of evill; if this precept my be extended to all Clergie men. And whether there be not here at least an appearance of evill, that I say no further, let the learned and judicious judge. I cannot dwell longer upon this point, but wish master parson now in his old age, being now capularis senex, to leave these vanities, and betake himselfe to doe what good he can in his owne ministeriall function, not meddling

with such things especially, as have bin by the honestest and most judicious of all ages condemned; and so may he at that great day of account give up a good reckoning. Now, because in this point of fascination there is often much use made of imagination, and having beene lately also mentioned, it shall not be impertinent, ere wee proceed further, to say something thereof.
I purpose not here to enter into any exquisite and accurate Philosophicall discourse, concerning this subject, nor yet the strange effects thereby produced, but to demonstrate the erroneous opinion of some concerning the same. Phantasia est sensus interior, species a sensu communi perceptas, vel a se formatas diutius retinens, and diligentius examinans, Magir-Physiol. caep. 7. lib. 6. ex Arist. 3. de anima. The phansie, then called phantasia, is an internall sense, reteining and examining such species as have beene by the commonsense apprehended, or yet by it selfe framed. Of the strange effects of this phansie, called also imagination, both in melancholicke persons, in women with child, and divers others, the mouthes of every one are so full, that I shall not neede to insist thereon. But all these strange effects are yet immanent, and confined within the body imagining, not transient or working upon any outward object. For although wee ofte gape or make water when we see some others doe such things, yet is this but by way of remembrance, and being excited by their example, and not forced thereunto by their imagination. But here ariseth now the question, whether the phansie can worke without that body whereunto it belongeth: or whether it can worke without its owne body for a great distance. This hath beene alwaies by an unanimous consent as well of Physitians as Philosophers ever denied, the which I could prove by a cloud of witnesses, which were but to small purpose, it being a confessed truth. Notwithstanding the premisses, some have taught us another lesson, and Ferunt alterari corpora nostra imperio animae propriae, and etiam animae alterius corporis, tanquam a praestantiori and superio^^ agente, cui obedire tenentur inferiora naturalia-Et sic imaginationi tribuunt multa opera quae nullus sanae mentis concedet. Hanc enum statuerunt Arabes in corpore cui inest, and extra se, posse aliquas formas producere; eo quod anima sit proxima supirau intelligentus, and ea ratione diversas habere potestates and vires, inter quas est, imperare inferioribus naturis. Veram quam sit iniqua hujusmodi positio adeo est evidens, ut multis opus non fit, siquidem intelligentia superiores anima humana, operantur naturaliu^ agentium interventu, pluvias, germinationes and serenitates. Praterquam quod si imaginatione vehementi^ aliquid possit fieri extra corpus, maniaci qui vehementer imaginantur, prascantius and evidentius aliquid efficere^t. Adde quod si homo aliquod objectum distans posset alterare citrae co^tactum, in infinitumageret, quia nihil est, quod in quavis distantia impediret agere. Mercar. Tom. 1. lib. 2. class. 2. quaest. 168. Praeterca si animae esset ea vis viri sapientia and virtute praestantissimi ea praeficerent: secus autem res se habet, and hi impostores censent hos alexicacos, imperitos, nebulenes, e^rios, and incontinentes, quorum anima nulta aut virtutis, aut sapientiae dote illustratur, id posse efficere. Idem ibidem. that imagination not onely within the same individuall body, but in others also may produce strange effects. And this hath been by our Arabians strongly mainteined, that the soule approached neerest to the celestiall understandings, and by that meanes was indued with extraordinary vertues and powers, and among the rest, to command inferiour natures. But to confute this opinion, many arguments might be produced. In the first place, these supreme intelligences, by meanes of naturall causes interceding, produce raine, stormes, and faire weather, etc. Besides, that if by this strong imagination any thing might be without the body produced, then mad men, who are very strong in their imagination, should in this farre excell others. Besides, if by strong imagination any man could alter any remote object without touching, it might thus doe infinitly, there being nothing in any distance to hinder it. Besides, if this were true, then the wisest and most vertuous men should performe best such actions. But the case stands farre otherwise: for these impostors are of opinion, that the most wretched and unskilfull knaves and drunkards, whose soules were never indued with any excellency or vertue, produce such operations. But besides that which hath beene said, our Paracelsists have well improved this doctrine of imagination. So strange

things they tell us of this imagination, that Figmentum est imaginatione forti posse aegrotum ex astante sano and rebusto sanitalem and vires inse trabere, cum potius valens ex aegroto contagiu^ eliceret. Sympathetica quoque, ut persicaria, unguentum armarium and similia nullam habene scientiam. Siquid sit, fortuna fit, seu ex accidente, fallitque saepissime. Libav. lib. de art. med. Hippocr. and Hermet. typo. it will draw health from a whole man; whereas, saith mine author, in reason the contrary should rather come to passe, and the stronger draw the weaker, insomuch, that the sound party should rather draw sickenesse from the former. And as concerning that sympatheticall operation, saith the same Author, as that of Persicaria, the weapon-salve, and the like, they have no sound reason for them: if any thing come to passe, it is but casuall and accidentall, and often deceiveth us. By the same imagination they tell us, that wee may inflict any sicknesse upon our neighbour: and the stronger be our imagination, and Infligi credit Crollius maiorem noxam vimque inferri sortiorem si is qui nocere cupit, si cogitationem fortem, desiderium, and intentionem habeat ad nocendu^: quia cogitatione diriguntur spiritus, quomodo leprosus possit inficere alium magis, si simul intendat cogitationem natura^^ virtute in membris, obediente cogitationibus and desideriis, idque ut in malo, its and in bono, praesertim si anima munda sit a peccatis, si modo mundus inveniri possit inter immundes. Hincque concludetur per verba and operationes co^currentibus dictis caussis posso magna fieri: quod verba fint cum balitu, calore, and spiritu, and dirigantur cogitatione, seu imaginatione and appetitu sorti, etc. the more our cogitations that way intended, the greater shall be the mischiefe: by reason that by intent cogitation the spirits are directed, the which holdeth as well in doing good as harme. This will sute well with the Popish doctrine, whereas the consecration of the hoste dependeth upon the Priests intention; insomuch that any Sir Iean may gull his people, and give them a bare wafer for the body of Christ. But now, if imagination do all, our witches and wizards are mere ignorant fooles, let them but turn Paracelsists, and by their strong imagination they may bring any mischiefe to passe which they had purposed, and not be liable to the law. What neede they be so much beholden to the divell, as to sell themselves to be his slaves, if these operations may so easily be effected. But if this should come to passe, then the Divell would have nothing to doe. This Haec autem cum particularia sint, and nih^l valcant, nisi patiens quoque sit dispositum ad recipiendam impressionem; tamen Paracelsiei transferunt ad omnia, indeque fingunt mirabilia etiam per immanes distantias Idem lib quomodo Magi Biblica scripta depravent, exemplis ex Crollio productis. Cum autem homo ex astru strinamd^ti suum sidereum corpus accipia^t, and hominis imaginatio tota ab astris firmamenti pendeat, ima eadem sit, and una maneat cum ipsis, necesse est quoque firmamentum habere imaginationem, sed sine ratione, stenti homo proles mundicum ratione. Ibidem in margine. Coelum totum nihil aliud est quam imaginatio: operatur in homines pestes, febres, sine instrumento corporeo. He paulo post, imaginatio in homine operatur inflar Solis: ut enim Sol corpereus sine instrumento operatur, redigendo illud in carbones, ci^eres; ita hominis cogitatio in corpore^ tantum spiritu, seu inf^eumento invisibili operatur in corpus subiectum: quod corpus visibile facit, id facit etiam corpus invisibile, seu homo sider^us, alteri damnum inferendo. Jmaginatio bominis est magnes, ettrabens ultra mille milliaria: imo quicquid vult in exaltatione sun, ex quatuor elementis ad se attraebit. Et paulo ante, Praeterea cum ^omo fit m^j^ris mundi quentum esse, sequitur illam hominem non solum imitari posse Coelum, sed illud quoque regere suo nutu, atque eidem dominari si vult. Omnes res ha^^ut naturalem obedientiam ad animam, and de a cessitate habent motum, and efficacione ad id quod defiderat anima forti desiderio, and omnes virtutes operationesque rerum naturalium obediunt illi, quando fertur in magnum excessum sui desiderij: uniuersas mu^di virtutes in nostrum ministerium cogit, attracta virtute ab ipso arche^ypo operum nostrotum virtute ad quem cum ascendimus, necesse est omnem creatur^m nobis obe^^iie, totusque nos sequitur coelestium chorus. Per fideus naturalem ingenitam qua ipsis spiritibus pacificamur, omnes magicae operationes atque omnia mirab^lia effi^iuntur imaginatione accidente. Ex paulo post. Hinc verus Magus seu Sapiens, astrorum operationem attrabere potest in imaginem, lapides, metalla, ut eandem cum Astris exercea^^ vim atque potentiam: exemplum sic speculum incensorium, per quod radij Solis cum calore ad nos derivantur. Quicquid oculis videmus in majori mundo, boc idem imaginatio quoque potest producere: sic omnes herbae, omniae crescentia, omnia metalla, per imaginationem, and ve^am Gabaliam possunt produci, etc. Oswaldus Crollius in praefut. admon^t. ad Basilicam suam Chymicam. page 37, 38, and 39. Crollius tells us yet strange things of this imagination; to wit, it dependeth wholly upon the starres, yea, that it is all one with them, as also, that the firmament it selfe is indued with imagination, howbeit it be void of reason; as man hath imagination with reason. And that the whole heaven is nothing else but mere imagination, sending downe upon this inferiour world, fevers, pestilences, and the like, without any corporeall instrument. And this imagination, saith he, is as a load-stone, yea, farre exceeding the same, working beyond thousands of miles: yea, saith be, in its exaltation it attracteth from the elements whatsoever it pleaseth. So that these wise men can attract the power and vertues of the starres into any image, metall, or any other thing whatsoever; insomuch, that the power and efficacy therof may therin plainly and conspicuously be seen. Many more such things may there be seen, the confutation of the which fooleries may in the forenamed Libavius at great length be seene: where the same Authour justly taxeth the other, that if hee can attract any thing from the

elements, as hee seemeth to have both heaven and earth at command, why then doth not he and his fellowes help the publike in time of need? And why did he not, saith hee, in the yeere 1613. draw downe some warmth, to qualifie the extreme cold of that nipping winter: and if he can doe good to the publike, and be so envious, it is a pitty, saith he, but he had beene buried in the snow. I adde yet, where were all our imagination-mongers this last yeere 1630. where drouth, and by consequence famine and scarcity prevailed through the most parts of Christendome? It was a very malicious minde, that had no pitty of the publike. If they would not helpe their enemies, yet they might have helpt their friends. But I am sure for all their strong imaginations, if our poore people had not found more reall comfort by the charity of well disposed people, they might often have dined with Duke Humphrey, and gone supperlesse to bed. But concerning this imagination, this shall for this present suffice, howbeit I could yet have inlarged my selfe very much upon this point.

A Digression concerning the Weapon-salve, not impertinent for this place.
COurteous and kind Reader, by thy good leave, let mee a little digresse upon a point which, as I hope, will not prove impertinent, of the which howbeit I might by reason of the precedent Chapter have taken occasion to have discoursed, yet had I past it over in silence, if there had not come lately into my hand a little discourse concerning the Weapon-salve, by one impugned, and then by another in another discourse stoutly mainteined: for the which cause I must intreat a little patience to declare as briefely as I can mine owne opinion also, which whether it be grounded on reason I shall be willing to be judged by the judicious aswell of mine owne profession as others.No partiall respo and moved the Author to meddle with this subiect. And first I doe here protest before the searcher of all hearts, that in this particular I aime at no private or particular end, either for mine owne advantage, or yet to injury others; but onely to cleere and vindicate truth from error and imposture. Neither is it here my purpose to meddle with any mans private quarrell, or to adjoine my selfe as a second in this contention: nay both the plantife and defendant are to me alike knowne by any intime acquaintance, the one being knowne by sight, and the other by heare-say onely, and by his late published Tractat. And besides, I have never ever had, nor yet have, any particular relation to the company of Barber surgeons, nor yet any one person among them in particular; and know none of my kinred either by affinity or consanguinity of that profession. Surgery indeed is a part of the Physitians profession, the which, as also the Apothecaries part in Galens time (as some doe yet even at this day) was performed by the Physitian alone; although now the case be much altered,

the Surgeon often (here in the Country especially) undertaking all three. And therefore, if partiall respects carried me away, I had more reason to give sentence against the Surgeons. Besides then, the antient, and in all ages accustomed cure of wounds by application of appropriate and fit remedies to the part wounded,Paracelsus was at least the man that spread abroad the use of the Weapon-salve. Paracelsus hath brought in a new manner (whether he were the first inventer, or onely the disperser abroad of this cure I care not) of curing the same by anointing the weapon onely which inflicted the wound, or some other drawne thorow the wound. In Basilica chymica, pag. 278. Oswaldus Crollius a late Germane writer, and a very affectionate scholler to his master Paracelsus, hath both set downe the description of this ointment, and the manner of performing this cure. It is ordinarily knowne by the name of Huguentum armarium in Latine, and in Greeke (...): but by Paracelsus and his disciples Vnguentum sympatheticum, the sympathicke ointment; Magneticum and stellatum,The names. the magneticke and starry ointment, from the supposed attractive power, whereby it seemeth to draw down influence and efficacy from the starres. It is likewise to be observed, that this Jdem Crollius ib. Author willeth us first before the anointing of the Weapon to stay the bleeding of the wound: as also addeth this caution, that the wound be every day bound up with a clean linnen-cloth first dipt in the patients urine. Moreover, the wounds thus to be cured must neither be in any principall member, and neither nerve nor arterie must be cut. This manner of cure howsoever used by Paracelsus and his disciples and some others who have beene by them caught, yet hath it beene by others confuted and impugned, some calling it Andreas Libavius de impostoria vulnerum per unguentam armarium curatione Paracel. usitata commendateque. impostorious and others worse. This same last yeere there came forth a little Tractat, disclaiming the use of this ointment, and proving it altogether unlawfull. But the same yeere there was by a learned Physitian of the Colledge of London published an other Tractat, wherein he not onely labours to confute his adversaries arguments (wherein I confesse hee satisfies me not, whatsoever he doth others) but with might and maine, by a fresh supply of arguments and examples, labours to uphold and mainteine the credit of the Weapon-salve. In the first place then to divert our thoughts from any conceit of a cacomagicall cure (so I cal it according to his owne mind) or diabolicall cure; the defendant (so here I call the Doctor,The Devil may often do things apparently good, as cure diseases and the like. as the impugning Parson the plaintiffe) takes great paines to prove, and that by many places of Scripture, that because God alone operateth all in all essentially, therefore there is no devill nor evill spirit that can produce any good worke or doe any good, his nature being destructive and altogether evill, quite contrary to the manner of Gods spirits operation; and therefore that he is altogether for hurting but never for healing of mankind. As for Gods omnipotent power and goodnesse, that hee is good, yea goodnesse it selfe, to prove the same were but to spend our time in vaine: as likewise, that the divell is the prince of darknesse, aiming at the overthrow and utter ruine both of the soule and body of man, cannot be denied. And although his end be alwaies evill, yet is his purpose not alwaies prosecuted after one and the same manne. Can any deny this 2 Cor. 11.14. text, that Satan oftentimes transformeth himselfe into an angell of light? And what more contrary than

light and darknesse? Why doth he thus transforme himselfe? Is it not because he cannot alwaies in his owne lively colours deceive every one; and therefore when the Lions skinne will not serve the turne, he puts on that of the Lamb. It will perhaps be objected, that then his actions are still evill, which is the point in hand. I answere, that howsoever indeed that be true, yet it serveth our turne, if these actions be apparently good, which is that most men looke after. Now that God oftentimes suffereth the devill and his instruments to doe some apparent good, in healing some diseases, etc: if any shall deny, experience of all ages will evince the contrary. And a Pari ratione negari non potest daemones humidum radicale restaurando, nimiam senectutis ariditatem tempera^do, succum meliorem calidioremque supponendo, reliqua requisita ad tempus supplendo, posse efficere, ut defecta atate viri, vires nitoremque juvenilem ac crasin recuperant canos, etc. Rodulph. Gocl. synarth* magnet part. 22. late Writer, as stoutly standing for this cure as our defendant, yet cannot deny but that sometimes the devill may by repairing the radicall moisture in man, and by a supply of benigne, warme, temperate moisture, retardate, and for a while stave off old age. And what, doth not this farre surpasse the curing of a greene wound? And is not this accounted a reall good which so many men hunt after, whatsoever the devills purpose bee? Nay which is yet more, did not God himselfe make Num. 24.2, 4. etc. the mouth of wicked Balaam a notorious wizard, to blesse his owne people Israel, and yet this same imp of Satan aimed onely at the destruction of this people, as after appeared? And it is not without great reason ordinarily averred, that the white devill is alwaies the most dangerous. Who likewise is so ignorant, that knoweth not,Witches convented before King James. that there are such as they call good witches, which doe more dangerously than any others often insnare the simpler sort. In the time of the raigne of King Iames of famous memory, in his kingdome of Scotland, after his returne out of Denmarke, and marriage with Queene Anne, divers witches were questioned, and at his owne desire convented before him, who affirmed they were in the ship with him at his returne, relating many particular passages which had then happened: among all these was there one woman called Anna Sampson, who was commonly (for her ordinary practice in curing maladies) called the good witch,Anna Sampson a good witch, as they termed her. who did constantly averre, that she never hurt any, but helpt all she could. Some few yeeres after that, there was in that same kingdome a notorious wizard called Richard Grahame, who, as I was credibly informed,Richard Grahame ^ notorious wizard. came to a great noble man, a pious Peere of that kingdome, then lying and languishing on his death-bed, promising to cure and recover him, if he would follow his advice; who like a truely noble man indeed utterly refused any succour from Satan, if God would not by lawfull meanes affoord him health and deliverance, and in this pious resolution resigned his soule into the hands of his Maker and Redeemer. This same wizard was aftewards burnt at the Market-crosse of Edinburgh. I will not avouch that this wizard could then have cured this noble man; but this much to us it evinceth, that he practised upon others this trade of healing. And who hath not heard that in our forefathers dayes in the time of Cimmerian darknesse, when this Prince of the world domineered with lesse controll, there were certaine spirits then usually frequenting many houses, performing in the night-time many workes, the servants were with great toile to have done in the day-time, as threshing in the barne, dressing up the houses, etc. And these were

here called by the name of Hob Thrush;Hob Thrush Faries, and the like spi^ies frequent here when poperie was openly professed. and in the northermost part of this Iland, Brownie; and beyond the seas other answerable names. The white Divells, the Faries, or rather (as they say they were ordinarily to be seene) the green Divells were wont to pinch the maids in the night time, if all were not cleane in the house. And thus those divells were seldome observed to doe any apparent harme either to mans body or goods, and yet still the same Divell; and no question, this was, notwithstanding, a farre more efficacious meanes to delude the simpler sort, and to lead them hood-wink'd into hell, than when hee appeared in his more lively colours. If God, either for the punishment of his creature, or for other ends best knowne to his secret wisedome, shall feale Satan a commission against his creature, what matter is it whether hee delude as an Angell of light or darknesse? this being also a thing most certaine, that hee neither can, nor dare in the least point exceed his commission. And therefore it is altogether without sense or reason to aske, if then the tutelary Angells leave their charge, as though God had now forsaken them. I answer, that his is meant of either his owne electiones, and then he somtimes leaves them to Satan to try for a time; as he did to Iob 1. Iob, or else they are reprobate; 1 King. 22.22. Ahab, who was by lying Prophets seduced; and that by Satans inspiration, although by Gods owne direction. Rom. 9.21. Hath not the Potter power over the clay to make of it a vessell of honour or dishonour? And to no more purpose is it, that because it is said, Wisdome 12.1. The uncorruptible Spirit of the Lord is in all things, and Psalm. 33.6. that from the Spirit of Gods mouth proceede the vertues of all things, with such other places, which for brevity I here passe by, therefore God doth not make use of inferiour Angells. And therefore there was no neede of the enumeration of so many places to so small purpose, no man calling in question the power of Gods Spirit. But whereas the defendant would from hence inferre such a new spirit of Paracelsus,The new spirit of Paracelsus with great reason we reject. and his owne forging, to operate in this weapon-salve, we have at least as good reason to deny it. I cannot here for brevity insist upon the severall acceptations of this word spirit in holy Writ, but must leave it with the true meaning of the severall places alleaged, to those who have more leisure and meanes to effect the same: Yet sure I am, that in all holy Scripture there is no such signification of spirit as is here intended.The various waies of preparing this ointment argueth the nullity and vanity thereof. But now I proceed to the salve it selfe, the ingredients, and manner of use or application. As for the ingredients, the various waies of composition, doe evidently evince the vanity and nullitie of the operation of this ointment. Some indeed set downe a number of various ingredients collected after a superstitious manner. Some againe are not so scrupulous and superstitious, either in the number of simples, or curious composition; some contenting themselves with dogges grease: and Andreas Libavius lib. de impostoria vulnerum per unguentum armarium fanatione. a learned late Writer relateth an insianee in a woman of high Germany, who professed, shee onely stucke a sticke or weapon in a piece of lard, and had as good successe as others with their most curious composed ointment. And it is there usuall with others to sticke a knife, or any other thing that hath hurt them, or a sticke in stead of it, in a loafe of bread, or in the earth it selfe, and yet (say they) followeth still the same effect. And this, I thinke, were sufficient to confute

this weapon-salve, if there were no more. But it is to be observed,Blood by s^o^^ius omitted in the composition of this ointment. that whereas blood by our defendant is accounted one of the principall ingredients of this ointment, how commeth it then to passe, that Crollius (as it were Paracelsus his owne genius) doth omit the same? But howsoever, since such an account is made of the blood, I will not quite passe over it in silence. It is then demanded why God gave so strict a charge to his owne people of Israel, that they should Gen. 9.4. Levit. 17.14. eat no blood* if not for this reason that the life is in the blood? I answer, that indeed the blood is the vehicle and receptacle of life, which is communicated to the whole body. But this was not the reason why God forbad them the eating of the blood of beasts; but as that worthy light of the Church See Calvi^ on that place of Genetic. Calvin allegeth: In this prohibition God would accustome men to a gentle and milde kinde of diet, and lest then being too much accustomed to the eating of blood, they should afterwards be imboldned to shed mans blood, which is the principall scope is here aimed at. Besides (as the same Authour allegeth) that the flesh and the blood are not here as divers and distinct set downe, as differing so much one from another, but the same in substance; and yet was the flesh of beasts even then permitted to be eaten, and so was the milke, being nothing else but blood refined and dealbuted or whitened in these gloobus mamillarie glands. Moreover, if this had beene simply and in it selfe a sinne, and had obliged us adsemper, for ever, then had it beene still a finne, the contrary whereof is true, this ceremoniall precept being but a part of that legall pedagogie; as the difference of meats, cleane and uncleane, and the like. And the blood of the murthered cries as loud in these our times, as ever it did after the death of Abel, this being still a crying sinne, and this being a figurative speech, as the plantiffe hath sufficiently proved. And howsoever blood by some be esteemed for one of the principall ingredients in this salve, yet (saith the same learned Idem Libav. ibidem. Libavius) Surgeans hold mans blood to be poyson to wounds, and that the cure is thereby rather hindred than helped: and put the case it were indeed helpefull, yet were this onely applyed, and not at so farre a distance. And as for the spirits in the blood, wee justly deny so active operating spirits in the blood now separated from the body. And besides, admit there were any such matter,All blood have not alike efficacious spirits. yet were all spirits alike efficacious? Hath a heavy melancholicke or phlegmaticke blood as active spirits as a quick cholerick and firy blood? And what if the blood be putrefied by the poxe, plague, poison, or any other contagious disease, the blood being starke naught, shall these corrupt spirits be so powerfull and efficacious? Surely, the more we stirre in this businesse, the more it stinketh. And whereas it is said that of mans blood, with the spirit of wine,A lampe of mans blood, and the spirit of wine. is extracted a spirit whereof is made that burning lamp which will burne as long as the party whose blood it is, liveth, and at his death goe quite out, with divers other like allegations; I answer, that even in this they then confesse, that this blood is actuated by meanes of this operating menstruum, the spirit of wine, and therefore no such efficious power proceeding from so farre a distance can be the cause of this cure. Besides, that the right spirit of wine is to be knowne for such, if it be suddenly quite consumed with the flame, and put the case the

blood might a little retardate and hinder this operation, yet could it neither wholly inhibit the operation of this devouring element, nor could there such strange effects follow as are related of this lumpe. But for brevity I passe by all other things concerning this point. The fat is likewise forbidden to be eaten,The fat aswell as the blood forbidden to be eaten, and yet never man heard it cry, etc. howbeit no vehicle of life, the flesh (permitted notwithstanding to bee eaten) being farre neerer the substance of blood, as hath beene already proved. Againe, as for the bones of the skull, mummy and skull-mosse, or usnea (by them called the essence, I say rather the excrement of the skull) being now but parts of the cadaver, or dead corps, them cannot bee that neere relation to the lively microcosme man.There can be no such sympathy betwixt the living and the dead as is pretended. And if we plead a sympathy betwixt man and man, what doe we know but some of these may sometimes be taken from an enemie, and then shall we have an antipathy, and by consequent a contrary operation? And let there be as much balsamicke salt (as they tearme it) in the blood and bones, this same answere will serve. I hold it impious to mainteine that by vertue of that balsamicke salt remaining in the bones of Elisha 2 Kings 12.21. made to the murthered man revive: for it should then first have revived Elisha himselfe, in whom it inhabited radically, or else not suffered him to dye. No more was there any power in the dead bones mentioned by Ezech. 37.3. etc. Ezechiel, nor yet in the dead at the death of our Saviour Christ, and at the last resurrection to arise, all these being meerely miraculous, and not effected by any natural meanes. On these, I say, and the like places, impiously (in mine opinion) and out of purpose alledged, I cannot now longer insist, but leave them to the scanning and judging of by the judicious and learned Divine, and come to the manner of cure.
And here I must intreate the Reader to call to mind what was first said concerning this cure. In the first place then the blood was to bee stanched, the wound washed with the patients owne urine, and well bound up: and that the Author might act his part more handsomely, if a bone were broken then he put into this ointment some comfrey rrots. The condition and quality was that it were neither of any principall part, nor yet yet that any nerve or arterie were cut. And what need such adoe about nothing, this being easily by nature effected? Wash an ordinary wound, and keepe it cleane, and I warrant it will heale without this curious ointment, which effecteth just nothing,This ointment effecteth iust nothing. especially as it is used. The beasts (dogges especially) wee see licking a wound or ulcer, and by this meanes keeping it cleane from corruption (the chiefe impediment hindring the healing) is thus easily cured without either stitching or any other helpe. And therefore if this have beene accounted impostorious to make the world beleeve that was done by the vertue of such ointment wherewith the weapon was anointed,Sympatheticall and why. let no man marvell. This manner of cure is called sympatheticall and magneticall by way of sympathy and attraction; and from the supposed attracted vertue from the starres, stellatum, or starrie ointment. Now, as concerning the operating vertue by sympathy,In sympathies the things sympathising are not farre remote one from another. as I doe not deny, so I say the same is not here to be seene; and where this sympathy is to be found, the things sympathising are not far remote one from another: as in the unisone harmony and consent of

two lutes or vialls may easily appeare, which is the defendants owne instance. But let any one touch the string of a lute or viall, and see whether the unisone string of another lute a mile off will make any vibration or stirring of the straw, or make it leape from one thing to the other unison with that of a miles or more distance; suppose also there be neither wind stirring, nor interposition of houses, or any other impediment whatsoever. And therefore the length of a table is no proportionat distance to that often, yea, twenty miles of the operation of the weapon-salve, as is applied by our defendant. And as little, or farre lesse for this purpose make the rest of his examples of sympathie: as of the maw or gussord of fowles, alleaged for this same sympathie, good to corroborate the stomacke, braines to braines, lungs to lungs, heart to heart, guts to guts, etc. If I should yet grant all this to be true (whereof I have yet just cause to doubt, if not to deny, whatsoever some others have held to the contrary; and fox lungs working by their abstersive and opening quality) yet would all this make just nothing for the purpose, these working, per contactum physicum, by mutuall contact, and their operation exuscitated and actuated by the internall naturall heat; but none of them producing any such effect at a miles or more remote distance. But on things so plaine and evident I need not to insist.Magneticall and why. This salve is called also magneticall, for magnetically attracting (forsooth) a sanative vertue from the weapon and salve to the wound. But the experience of many yeeres hath taught us, that the load-stone will draw yron but at a small distance, neither twenty, ten, nor yet one mile, take as bigge a load-stone as a mans head, and as little a piece of yron as you will. Quoniam igitur nulla actio fieri porest, nisi per contactum (ut in naturalibus demonstratur) similia autem haec non sese tangunt, nec per naturam moventur unum ad aliud, necesse est si applicari invicem debent, demitti aliquid ab uno ad aliud necesse est, demitti aliquid ab uno ad aliud quod proxime tangat, and ejus applicationis principium sit. Et paulo post. Nos enim praesentibus multis e nostris medicis experientiam multorum (magnetum) fecimus perpendiculo bene and concinne aptato, quaele est in navigatoria Pyxide maniseste vidimus magnetem trabere magnetem, ferrum ferrum, tum magnetem trahere ferrum, ferrum magnetem: porro electrum, parva electri frustula rapere, argentum trabere argentum, and quod valde mirati sumus, magnetem vidimus argentum trahere, etc. Vidimus quoque idem frustum magnetis per unam faciem magnetem trahere non ferrum, per aliam ferrum non magnetem, per aliam utrumque, quod indicium est una parte plus esse magnetis, in alia plus ferri, in alia utrumque aequaliter, unde fiat diversitas attractionis. Quare nemini esse dubium debet similia omnia per se, se invicem trahere, nisi per accidens impediantur. Et paulo post. Constat praeterea perpendiculum illud declinare a linea quo ad polos spectat, i nostro quidem himispherio, quod est a fortunatis insulu ad Carygaram declinare dextrorsum per gradus circiter 9. Jn alio autem hem spherio ultra insulas fortunatas declinare finistrorsum, and modo plus, modo minus: observant enim qui ad novum orbem navige^^ quom perventum est ad meridianum quod per Alores vocatas insulat transit, mutari perpendiculum, and quum in nostro mari dextream ^ectat a polo, illic sinistrorsum verti etc. Hieron. Fracast. lib. de sympath. and ani^ path. cap. 7. And therefore although some agents worke at some distance, yet is there alwaies some proportion to be observed betwixt the agent and the patient; and although there be not alwaies a naturall contract, yet there is commonly some effluxe, or emanation whereby the one toucheth the other. And this is the ordinary manner of operation. And that this is the case with the loadstone may easily appeare, in that it attracteth yron, more or lesse, as it is of efficacy and power: and not only doeth it draw yron, but even sometimes silver it selfe: yea, sometimes one loadstone hath beene observed to draw another, yron to draw the loadstone, yea, yron to draw yron. And some piece of a loadstone hath beene observed, with the one side to draw yron unto it, with another to draw another loadstone, and with a third to attract both unto it. And as concerning the point of the needle compasse alwaies looking to the North, that is not universally tree: for sailing towards the Wersterne world, passing under the Meridian of Asores or Terceres Ilands, the compasse then turnes, and lookes not towards the North pole as before. And not onely there, but even in our owne hemisphere also

that the needle of the compasse declines from the line looking towards the North, from the Canarie Ilands to Carygara, about some nine degrees. But of this subject, although I could say a great deale more, yet this shall here suffice. And in the fire this is yet more manifest, where there is an emanation of heat, which warmeth at a proportionate distance: and therefore although the fire heat, and warme at a remote distance, yet is this not indefinite, but proportioniate, the fire warming according to the bignesse of the fire, and the propinquitie or remotenesse of the object.Fire warmeth not at any indefinite dista^ce And therefore although the fire be a very active agent, yet make a fire of ten or twenty load of wood or coales, and in a cold frostie morning let any stand a mile or two off, yea, although there be neither hill, nor any other obstacle betwixt, yet let him tell me what great warmth he findes thereby. As for the distance alleaged, sometimes to interceed betwixt the bullet and the party thereby offended,In all these there is still a physicall contact, which is not in the Weapon-salve. it makes as little for the purpose: for the bullet violently beats the aire, the aire thus agitated, worketh such a violent impression on the bodie: and the like may be said of the lithning producing the like effect. But this aire so agitate by such an agent will not offend the partie many miles distant from thence. A friend of mine told mee, that in a hot skirmish, betwixt the English and the Portugalls, in the East Indies, a bullet shot from the enemies ship, past over him within a yard or little more of his head, and yet never hurt him.In sweet smells there is a sensible emanation or exhalation fro^ the subiect to the olfactorie organes. As for the sweet smells of Rosemarie in Spaine, and Sassafras wood in the West Indies, be many miles carried into the aire, and by sailers smelt a farre off, what strange thing is here, these countries abounding with such odoriferous trees and shrubs, by meanes of the vehicle of the aire agitated with the wind, carries such smells to the olfactorie organe, as I may say, where wee see, that sense it selfe is here judge of this action: and yet if the wind be contrary, these odoriferous and fragrant smells are not carried halfe so farre. The like is likewise here in our owne countries, by meanes of the blossomes of pease and beanes observed. And yet this ointment, being so little in quantitie, notwithstanding all winds, or other interceding rubs or hinderances, can by a direct line send out for many miles a sanative vertue from this salve and besmeared weapon to the wound. Now, yet somewhat more concerning this operating medicine, besides the blood besmeared on the weapon, there is also great store spilt upon the ground, and on the patients clothes, and in the same, no doubt, great store of spirits, and therefore the greater store of blood be effused, the sooner should the cure be performed: and if those few spirits in so small a quantitie of blood so far remote from the patient produce such stupendious effects, shall all those spirits of the hot blood so neere the patient be idle, and of none effect? But I will yet demand further, whether the blood besmeared on the weapon, or that mingled with the ointment gives this efficacie and operation. If that in the ointment, how then, when there is no blood in the same,The blood used in the Weapon-salve is take^ ^rom any man. as wee have already proved. (As for blood on the weapon, wee have newly answered it) and if any, then this blood is taken from any man, and yet sometimes they tell us of the sympathy betwixt the blood of the wound and wounded, howbeit this blood may be taken from one that bare the patient small good will. But if they

will yet hold so neere a sympathy, then this cannot hold betwixt those that differ so much, it may be in complexion, and many other circumstances, but especially betwixt man and beast.This neer sympathy, if any, ceaseth, the blood being once separated from the body. But if we should yet admit of this sympathy, yet when the blood is now separated from the body, this sympathie also ceaseth: and although there remaine some vertue in the parts so separated, yet are they farre different from those of a living man, a dead man being a man onely equivocally: for the which cause it commeth also to passe, that of the dead carkase of a man are ingendred some other creatures, but never a man being of the same species. And hence also is evinced the impertinency of the defendants comparison betwixt the blood and a graine of corne: for, as I said, the blood now separated from the body hath lost those lively spirits and operations it injoyed being within the body; therefore when as being yet within the body,Blood now separated from the body, hath not such active spirits as before, neither yet hath it that potential energy as a graine of corne. it was not able to produce any such effect at so far a distance, farre lesse now reteining onely the nature of a part of a dead carkase. But the case is not alike with the graine of corne, which hath not yet left its proper forme and potentiall energie to produce another corne like it selfe, being sowne in a fit and convenent soile, as the meanest husbandman in the country can tell; and when I shall have as good triall of the former as of the later, and as good reason, I shall be ready to beleeve it. And therefore the seede of generation of man, being sowen in a fruitfull soile, had been more pertinent to be compared with a graine of corne, howbeit it is true, this would not have proved the tenent the defendant tooke in hand. The blood had farre more pertinently beene compared with the chaffe or straw: and as the straw will never produce corne, sow it and dung it as much as you will, no more will the blood produce any such effect as is pretended, order it as you please. There is then no sympatheticall nor magneticall cure performed by this ointment, as is erroneously pretended. This opinion symbolles too much with Paracelsus his imagination, whereof something hath beene lately said. As concerning the cruentation,The bleeding of the dead corps is not a certain and undoubted signe whereby to discover the murtherer. or bleeding of the corps killed, at the presence of the murtherer, it would take up a larger time to discourse of, than I can here well spare. Some would have it by antipathy, and some otherwise; howsoever, it is not alwaies observed to hold true, although some strange things concerning the same are received, besides, that sometimes some innocents have beene by this meanes accused. And if this come by antipathy, then when sometimes at the approaching of some whom the deceased dearely loved, it must come to passe by sympathy; and thus shall wee have one and the same effect produced by two so contrary causes: and therefore the defendant findes as little helpe here, as in the other arguments. It is likewise to be observed, the time of the yeere,Many things may hinder or further this bleeding. the site or situation of the dead, the nature or quality of the blood, magicall spells, with many other things, may hinder or further such an effect: as also when sometimes the Magistrate or other maketh the party suspected, put his finger into the wound, etc. And therefore I advise Magistrates not to be too rash in giving credit to every such shew of detecting a suspected person.This oyntment receiveth no such particular vertue from the starres. And as concerning the operation this ointment taketh (as is supposed) from the starres, I have already proved, that many times this

cure is as well performed by other things where there are no ingredients collected with the observations of the heavens. And as I doe not deny a power from the superiour powers of the heavens upon our inferiour sublunary things here below; so in like manner doe I acknowledge the same to be but generall, and so effect things here below, as they find them disposed. And even in some of those most co^monly received and subject to our senses, all is not so cleare, but may admit of some doubts.Whether the Moone be the cause of the ebbing and stowing of the sea. As who makes any question of the Moones predominant power over humid and moist things; and hence is the cause of the fluxe and refluxe of the sea ascribed to this planet, together with the spring-tides, and yet might it be asked why have wee so high a spring-tide in the change of the Moone, when shee is quite hid from our sight, and shines not in our horizon, as well as when she shines in her full and greatest glory and splendour: and likewise since the sea in most places keepes a like time of ebbing and flowing, yet in some other againe, it ebbes and flowes farre oftner,It ebbeth and floweth there seven times in 24, houres. as in the Euripe and at Burdeaux in France. And why againe in some places it neither ebbeth nor floweth: as in the Balticke sea; of some of which, althoug some have indeavoured to render a reason, yet are they not satisfactory and without doubts. If there be then such doubt concerning this neerest planet unto us of all others, what may wee say of the remotest fixed starres, and their particular supposed influences? And therefore although superiour bodies produce due effects upon these inferior creatures, yet have they no such particular influences upon these inferiour bodies, as is supposed. And since the starres are of so vast a bignesse, that the least fixed starre farre exceedeth the whole earth in bignesse, they send not downe such particular influences upon the particular subjects, but affect these inferiour things, as wee have said already. And therefore wee justly deny those particular influences upon particular simples,Starts make not some bodies stiptick and others prone to fluxes. as wee have said. As with like reason doe wee deny that some starres make the body stipticke, and some againe prone to fluxes. But wee finde by daily experience, that in obstructed bodies, without previous preparation, physicke will not so well produce its expected effect. But because something concerning this hath beene said already, I will here surcease; but withall I would have the reader take notice of one point whereby the defendant would faine seeme to mainteine the credit of particular effects of the starres; he wrests and detorts some places of Scripture, as in other passages of his booke may evidently appeare. Hee makes use then first of that place of Ecclesiast.Eccles. 3.1.2, etc. There is a time to plant and a time to pull up. What can be here collected, but that we are in all our actions to lay hold on the right time and oportunity, as he instanceth in the husbandman, and here he shall finde no particular influence. As little for his purpose maketh that place of the Psalme: Psalm. 121.6. The Sunne shall not burne thee by day, nor the Moone by night, where David witnesseth his confidence in God so much, that nothing can hurt him, no, not the Sunne himselfe, nor the Moone, these being the two planets that have most powerful operations. Neither is here any particular influencee vinced, but such ordinary operations as are by them produced upon these sublunary creatures. And if I should grant the Moone produced the Epilepsie (which

is yet to prove) yet would it not prove this particular influence. Againe, there is a place produced out of the Ephes. 6.11. Ephesians after this manner by him alleaged. Put on the whole armour of God, that yee may resist the divell in the unfortunate day. Now, neither in the new translation, nor other I could find, neither yet in the originall Greeke, nor Bezas Latine translation could I find any such unfortunate phrase.Interpreters understand this of troublesome and sharpe times. See then how farre this trash is fetcht to prove that which cannot be found. The place of Iob is as little to this purpose, yea, rather maketh against the same. For wheras Ioh 38.21, 22, etc. the Lord there asketh Iob whether he knoweth the course of heaven, etc. this interogation is to be taken for a strong negation, as in the precedent and subsequent discourse, may evidently be evinced. I wil proceed no further to this apocriphall proofe, which, notwithstanding, would stand him in as little stead. Now, I proceed to that which remaineth.
All the former arguments and allegations seeming too weake,The curing by the weapon salve accounted miraculous, and sometimes misticall. and the credit of the weapon-salve now being in danger, the defendant is forced to flee to a miraculous operatoion, whereat indeed, in most of those generall passages concerning the Almighty power of God hee aimeth at. And thus it appeareth, that not onely in some places, hee calleth it miraculous, but affirmeth, that that man that beleeveth, and relieth upon this spirit, may effect what hee desireth, and that even by the true knowledge and use of it, the Prophets and Apostles did wonders, as well in curing, as effecting matters of greater moment. Now, that the Spirit, or omnipotent power of the Almighty, can doe whatsoever it pleaseth, is without all controversie; howbeit here he seemeth to intimate unto us this Spirit or power of working miracles, and then immediatly afterwards applies it to the dead blood. I know not what hee meanes to make such a mingle mangle of miracles with this working of the weapon-salve. If it be miraculous, like the cures performed by the Prophets and Apostles, let it appeare, and wee will beleeve it; and if this be true, hee might have spared all this labour in alleaging falsly so many places of Scripture with his other arguments. And yet I deny, that he that hath the gift of miracles may doe what hee listeth:Moses and Aaron, although indued with the gift of miracles, could not doe what they listed. for neither Moses nor Aaron, both indued with this spirit, could either prolong their fatall period of life, or yet atteine to enter into the land of Canaan, although the chiefe earthly thing that holy man Moses did desire. And to the end wee may the better beleeve any dotage that Paracelsus, or any phantasticall spirit hath hatched in his braine* wee have brought in the miraculous healing of the Iohn 3.2, 3, etc. Poole of Bethesda, with the which it seemeth this weapon-salve is paralleled: yea, the lying legend of Tob. 6.7. chap. 5.12, Tobias guide call^ himselfe Azarias, etc. and againe, chap. 12.15. hee calls himselfe Raphael, one of the seven Angells, etc. Tobies Angell, and the liver and heart of his fish, the perfume whereof is there said to chase away the evill spirit. What need wee thus to be enterteined with lies, if this cause be good. Math. 17.21, This sort of divell (saith our Saviour Christ) is not cast out but by fasting and prayer. The perfume of the heart and liver of a fish are used by none to drive out divells, unlesse by Magicians; and that it hath any such power, out rationall Physitians, I am sure, done where that I have red, avouch. As for the Poole of Bethesda, when I shall see as good a warrant for the weapon-salve (the manner of operating I meane at a farre distance) as I see for it, I shall be ready to beleeve it. Besides, it resteth

yet to proove, that in this Poole of Bethesda, did any sanative vertue reside, as also in the River of Iordan, wherein 2 Kings 5 14. Naaman the Syrian was cleansed from his leprosie. And in the text it is affirmed, that at a certaine time the Angel of God moved the water of this poole^, and whosoever after this stepped in first, was healed, and freed from whatsoever infirmity he was formerly troubled with,It cannot be proved that the poole of Bethesda had in it any healing power. and no other, untill the next time, although multitudes lay there attending this motion of the water; which if it had beene otherwise, then that infirme person healed by our Saviour needed not to have lyen there so long. And howsoever this cure was miraculous, and done per contactum, and not at a farre distance distance, as the operation of the weapon-salve is pretended to be effected: although I disclaime here any efficacie in the water, as the like appeareth in the Iohn 9.6. clay and spittle wherewith our Saviour cured the blinde man, this clay participating of no such sanative power; yea rather efficacious to the contrary to put out eyes. And the better to blind the world, and to confirme and strengthen his opinion of working miraculously, or (as sometimes againe hee sayeth') mystically, hee would have us quite to abandon and abdicate all heathen Philosophie, the Coloss. 2.8. Apostle giving us warning that we be not therwith deceived. But I think the abuse doth not abolish the right use. What? shall all Universities give over teaching Aristotles philosophicall precepts?Heathenish Philosophy is not to be abolished, but the abuse to be shunned. The scope and drift of al is this, that we be not tied to the ordinary operation of agents and patients, but adhere to Paracelsus and his followers, and beleeve their mystical, miraculous, if not cacomagical manner of curing, and so by this meanes must we take for current whatsoever they shall obtrude upon us, as may by the question now in hand plainely appeare. By this meanes also should all our rationall and methodicall proceeding by our antient Physitians so carefully prescribed, be quite overthrowne. And what? were miracles in the old Law so seldome, and that by holy men onely performed, and afterwards by our Saviour Christ and his Apostles, and is it now in every mans power that can greaze a weapon or sticke at pleasure, to worke a miracle? We justly tax the church of Rome for their lying wonders and miracles by 2 Thes. 2. Revel. 13. Gods owne spirit foretold, and shall we beleeve that whatsoever strange or wonderous act, transcending the ordinary course of naturall agents, is some miraculous worke of God? Nay wee have no reason so to doe. We know there was a Acts 8.9. Simon Magus, who with his counterfeit miracles wonderfully deluded the Samaritanes. And have we not good reason to suspect Paracelsus, and what he and his followers obtrude upon us,Paracelsus was addictted to diabolicall magicke, and therefore we justly suspect his mystical and miraculous cures. of such especially as transcend the course of ordinary agents. If he had bin either Prophet or Apostle, we might have had a better conceit of his strange cures; and yet not so that we would not have his tenents examined and tried by the true touchstone of Gods word, with the which this doth not agree. And that he was too much addicted to infamous magick, but that I wil not now so spend my time, I could easily make it appeare. And that he was no holy man, may appeare by his manifold impieties in abusing and wresting many places of holy Scripture to maintaine his phantasticall and impious opinions, concerning which, a Possuntne Paracelsici Magiam suam divinaru^ literarum authoritate and philosophia physicaeque nomine defendere. Autor. Andr. Libav. etc. learned writer hath composed a whole tractate. As for his wholesome

and approved chymicall remedies either of his owne invention, or collected from other men, I am so farre from disallowing the use of them, that being discreetly used, I doubt not but they may and doe produce very laudbale and desired effects; neither am I, or ever was I so rigid, that I would refuse the use of any safe and lawfull remedy, whosoever were the Author. As for that they tell us, that if the weapon be exposed to the cold aire, the wound will smart, and be in paine; but not so, if kept warme in a close place and free from dust. To that I have already said concerning sympathy may serve for an answere. And if there bee such a sympathy, seeing wounds are much wronged by great noises; as shooting of ordinance and the like, I mervaile whether such a noise many miles distant from the party wounded, but hard by the weapon anointed, would annoy the said wounded partie. It is by that famous Lib. 9. cap. 14. Pare reported, that at the siege of Hesdin in France by the army of Charles the fifth Emperour, at the shooting off of the ordinance many hurt in the head were extremely tormented, whether the weapons wounding them were in the open aire or lapt up warme by the fire-side. And I meruaile whether our souldiers now in the Germane warres doe alwayes keep their weapons in the open aire, or close lapt up. I beleeve it is not the custome either of the King of Sweden or his enemies, to lap up their weapons by a fire-side; and yet, if one should make inquiry, hee should find, that many of them were notwithstanding easily cured without great paine,The ambient air^ much hindereth or furthereth the cure of wounds. as many by experience have heretofore found true. Some wounds againe in regard of the ambient aire, although but small, and in themselves seeming secure, yet many times prove mortall: that I say nothing of the severall constitutions of bodies, time of the yeere, the country, age and sex, etc. But it seemeth this cure like an Empiricke contemneth and neglecteth all such circumstances.
As for the signe of life and death by the blood sweaty drops,The like may be said concerning drops of blood on the weapon when the patient tra^gresses in Diet. I hold it either imposterious or impious and superstitious, the sympatheticall operation being alreadie overthrowne. Powder of red sanders being laid upon the weapon being warme, and being moister then it may make a shew of bloody sweat, and then this is but to cozen the world: and if otherwise, it is already answered. And as for the knowledge of life and death by a lampe made of his blood with the spirit of wine, I have already touched it, and if any such thing be effected, it is more like to bee produced by art diabolicall than otherwise. As for that which is alleaged, that lying with a menstruous woman will frustrate the operation, I hold that the carnall knowledge of any woman is hurtfull to the wounded; and this standeth to farre better reason than that the person that anointeth the weapon, lying with a woman should be hurtfull to the wound. But on these and the like I will not any longer insist, but proceed to some examples.
Now although that which hath beene said already might suffice to prove the invalidity and unlawfulnesse of this cure,Lying with menstruous women. yet will we say something of these examples also. These examples then are of two sorts, either of such cures are supposed to have beene performed by the weapon-salve, or of other magneticall and sympatheticall cures (as

the defendant calls them) seeming farre stranger than those performed by this ointment. As for the first sort then, admit they have been performed, wherein I will not call in question the relaters credit, of what quality soever, the question is not here de facto, as we say, but de jure; not whether there hath beene any such cure performed, but by what meanes, and therefore they are of no validitie. And the invalidity of this argument desumed from issue and event, I have already in the beginning of this discourse answered. Of one of those cure notwithstanding I will speake a word.Historie. A fellow (saith he) had his finger cut with a sith, and when the blood could not bee stanched, the Noble man his Master wished to knocke off the handle of the sith, and send him the very sigh to anoint; the which, the wounded fellow himselfe went about, and at the very first knocke he gave the sith that had wounded him the blood stanched.The mystery of this cure new ascribed to the secret or invisible spirit in the blood, and not to the salve. In the same place he avoucheth that the same noble personage acknowledged, that although there were not drop of blood to be discerned on the weapon, yet if hee anointed the place of the weapon that made the wound (which oftentimes he confessed was done by guesse) he did aswell performe the cure, as if the blood had stucke upon it. out of which revelation or detection (saith our Defendant, for they are his owne words) I gather, that all the mystery of this cure consisteth in the secret and invisible spirit that is within the blood, aswell remaining still and operating in the wounded body, as that which hath penetrated invisibly into the weapon: or else without the presence of the visible blood it could not operate. Out of which I againe likewise collect, that if all this mystery consist in the secret and invisible spirit of the blood; then no part of this mystery consisteth in the salve; and so by consequence the variety of ingredients blood,The salve then is of no efficacie. fat, mummy, mosse and bones, the observation of the starres and position of the heavens in the collection and composition are of no efficacy, and not to be regarded, and consequently it will follow that this is a meere gull and tricke put upon the world to cozen them, and by this meanes the cure will answere the name by some imposed,Marke well. to wit impostorious. Againe, whereas it is said, that the cure was aswell performed without any blood to be seene upon the weapon, as with it; that the same Noble man ingeniously confessed, that he was often forced to anoint the weapon by guesse, I againe gather this conclusion, that the former tenent of the emanation of the spirits of the blood in the wound to that of the weapon, and the sympathy betwixt both is frivolous and idle. The weapon is sometimes anointed by guesse, there being no blood sticking on the same whereby to discerne it; and yet this stout Champion, where both sense and reason faile, loath to have the foile will needes have the spirits of the blood to bee there by secret penetration. I thought strange before to heare of so subtile, penetrant spirits of blood separated from the body, and now I confesse I am more amazed to heart as much of the emanation of spirits of blood where no blood at al is to be seene. In a peice of wood, perhaps, there might be more appearance of this penetrating spirit, but in yron or steele it is farre more unlikely. This as a tricke transcending that which hath hitherto been published.
Now to prove the operation of the Weapon-salve, and confirme his former tenent, (although already by himselfe overthrowne) besides

that which hath been said already,History of St. Walter Raleigh stanching any fluxe of blood hee mustereth up a number of other examples both homebred and forren. One is of a Noble knight now resting in peace, who often staied any fluxe of blood at a pretty distance, if he might but get a handkercher of the parties with some of the same parties blood sticking thereon: the which manner of cure, because built on the same foundation with that which hath beene said already, concerning the sympathy betwixt blood and blood, what hath been said already shall now suffice: howbeit the argument used is but impertinent, that if this knight had thought this cure unlawful, would hee have persisted in the use thereof?A slender argument. And the Defendant himselfe sayes, Bernardus non videt omnia: this knight might likewise bee perswaded of the lawfulnesse of this cure: and yet doe not milions of people often commit enormious crimes, which their consciences doe witnesse to be sinnes? And this I am sure none will deny. I deny not notwithstanding, that many who both use this weapon-salve, and many other unwarrantable, are perswaded of the lawfulnesse of the same: neither yet doe I thinke so uncharitably of all such persons, as have through ignorance used either this, or some other cures of the like kind, which is the cause I take this paines to acquaint them with the truth, and to reclaime them from their erroneous opinions.
Other sympatheticall and magneticall cures (as they are called) are likewise in the same chapter produced,Some of the examples alleaged are two like cacomagicall cures. some of them in my opinion (and I doubt not but I shall have many both of judicious, learned and religious on my side) as like cacomagicall cures as an egge is like another; and therefore, if this may passe for current coine,Strange manner of the cure of withered members. I warrant we shall not bee unfurnished of such commodities. The first is concerning the cure of withered members, by taking some of the nailes, haire, and skinne of this member, stopping them in a hole of a willow or hazell tree, bored with an auger or wimble, fastened with a peg of the same wood, and close stopt up: and to give the better glosse to the matter, it is added, that the motion of the heavenly bodies, the Moone to bee increasing, and the good Planets in such a multiplying signe, as is Gemini, etc. This cure is by him also called magneticall, concerning which manner of cures, because I have already said something I shall not now need to speake much. We have had already much adoe about the spirits of the blood moving to and fro, for the which were pretended many faire shewes of reason, howbeit to small purpose, as hath been already proved; and now behold wee have as great, yea greater matters performed without this loud-crying blood and the spirits of the same. Now the very excrementitious parts (by most of our Physitians denied the very name of parts) haire,Skin, haire and nailes as efficacious as the blood. nailes and skinne, seeme to be as efficacious as the blood it selfe. Nay any old wife can cure warts by rubbing the same with a piece of raw beefe, and after burying the same in the ground, the which as it rotteth and wasteth away, so doth the wart. Well then, according to the Defendants owne assertion, this is performed without any observation of the heavens which have here no energy: and indeed the starres are made but a stalking horse to hide a great deale of cosenage in the like cures, as may by that which hath been already said, easily appeare.

But now I would aske mine Author,Starre but made a stalking horse to hide a great deale of co^en^ge whether there be as great and efficacious spirits in those dry excrementitious parts, as was in the blood, from whence was fetched the sanative or healing vertue. In the first place then it is said, these parts were withered and dried up, and these excrementitious parts, especially now amputated from the part wherunto they pertained, I thinke not so well furnished with balsamicke spirits, as that they might impart some to this member from whence they were fetcht, there being no bond to tye them to communicate that to others which they have not themselves. From whence then proceedeth this sanative vertue? If it be answered, from the starres, I have already confuted that, yea he himselfe hath made it void. But if it be answered from the tree, I demand againe what so great a sympathy betwixt the tree willow or hazell and the parts of a mans body? What? is there such a sympathy betwixt a vegetable and an animall? are trees and plants furnished with such spirits as may supply the defects in man? As for the event that so it commeth to passe, proveth no more than may bee said for any cacomagicall (for so I see I must distinguish) operation. And how like this is to this satanicall operation of witches and sorcerers, may by that History by a Bodin. Daemon. lib. 2. ex Hect. Boet. Histor* Scot. lib. 2. late Writer related,History of the bewitching a Scottish king by a picture of wax. easily appeare. A Scottish King languishing of an irrecoverable Consumption (as was supposed) at length were certaine witches discovered in the country of Murrey at a small fire roasting the Kings picture made of waxe, and as thi^ picture wasted, so the body of this King sensibly decayed and wasted away; and as these witches pinched this picture with pins or bodkins, so this King found paine in his body answerable: and these witches being apprehended, and this picture taken from the fire, the King recovered. The application is easie. This I leave to the judicious, Christian and unpartiall Reader to judge of. It is well knowne I am sure, that witches are very diligent in searching after some of the clothes or haire, etc: of that partie they would bewitch,Witches practises. although this be not alwayes. And that they may likewise sometimes helpe the sicke to health, hath been already proved.Operation of the rose of the Sun. Howsoever sure I am, this is not the manner of operation practised by God himselfe or any of his Prophets and Apostles, either in the old or new Testament. No more than the others doth that relation concerning the herbe rose of the Sunne opening and shutting as doth the matrix, prove any thing. This plant is put in plantaine water, and a little of this water given to the woman with child in the beginning of her labour, and the gentle-woman using this remedy, judgeth of the time of the birth by the opening and shutting up of this plant. In the first place then this is a relation from others, and what may therein be concealed I know not.Something may bee concealed, and somthing not truely related. And admit all be true as is related, yet this plant and plantaine water not being of one and the same operation, seeme not so well to accord* for howsoever the former may produce a laudable effect, yet the plantaine water being of an astringent faculty, is impertinent: and were better to use some matricall water appropriate for such a purpose. Howsoever this instance or argument taken from such an event (put the case it hold alwayes true, whereof I am ignorant) will yet prove nothing. And what doe I know what may bee here hid and concealed from us in this relation? and

what know I whether there be spels, or compact direct or indirect used by those who make use of this remedy? Much more could I yet say concerning this, but I hasten to that which followeth; howsoever many times aliquid latet quod non patet. There is likewise related unto us a story concerning the Jaundize, at the distance,History of cure of the Iaundize at the distance of almost a 100 miles. not of 10. or 20. but even almost of a 100. miles, the which because I have from the same author, and he relateth the same from a great personage, yet because he taketh upon him the justifying of such manner of cures, I take it as his owne act. This cure of the Jaundize is performed by meanes of a paste made of the ashes of certaine wood against the Jaundize, together with the urine of the patient,A ball for the cure of the Iaundize at such a distance. with a blade of saffron in the top each ball. As for the ingredients of these balls, I doubt not of their efficacy and power, being used after an orderly, legall and methodicall manner of other medicines: but that they have any power to worke at such a distance, I am not so credulous, as by seeming shewes to beleeve. The manner of the cure is that these balls are layd in a secret place, where they must not be stirred, lest the cure be hindred. And it is not unlike that of the Weapon-salve, but that this seemeth rather to exceed the same. In that we read not of above 20 miles distance betwixt the wound and the weapon-salve, and here is neere an 100. And besides, there was blood, and the secret emanation of the spirits of the same from the wound to the weapon, the blood thereon and the salve, with the speedy posting backe againe of all these nimble spirits with their sanative vertue to the wound: and here wee have a tincture of blood and naturall salt, and some of the relicks of the icteritious humor. But this emanation of spirits,Note, here, there is no use of the stars and celestiall bodies, which are sometimes so efficacious.These balles are said to cure any Iaundize indefinitely without any respect had to cause, continuance, age sexe, etc. and the manner of this cure may easily be confuted by that which hath been said already. And we are yet to take notice, that in the weapon-salve the simples were to be collected at a certaine time, when the aspect of the heavens were propitious; and in these balls working at a farre greater distance wee heare of no such matter observed: and from hence may we collect that this and some other circumstances are but fopperies, and have no more power to procure or further any sanative vertue, than spells, characters and uncouth words have in the cure of diseases. But this may yet seeme strange to a rationall Physitian, that he affirmeth indefinitely any Jaundize, of any age, sex, or proceeding from any cause, may be thus cured. Our best medicines duely applied per contactum, yet cannot cure any Jaundize whatsoever; and yet these balls are said to do this at almost a 100. miles distance. Icterus in universum triplex est, felleus, hepaticus and criticus; qui sane omnes in multo plures species subsecantur juxta diversitatem causae. Felleus quidem fit vel. ab immodica plenitudine vesiculae fellis, vel parvitate eius, aut ab imbetillitate facultatis attractricis eiusdem, aut a meatuum obstructione; sive eorum sit per quos allicitur bilis, sive eorum per quos pellitu^ ad intestina, quo regurgitat ad venas bilis, and praedictum gignit effectum. Hepaticus autem efficitur icterus ab Hepatis obstructione, scirrbo, inflammatione, aut calida distemperie: ad quod etiam membrum reducitur venarum caliditas exurens, and totius etiamcorporis; Quippe evidentissimum est praedictis rationibus, and ob infirmatatem secoris icterum fieri, na^^ multitudo bilis crassae ob scirrbosum tumorem, and infirmitatem jecoris expultricis tendens per ve^as, in cum effectum fere semper commigrat: sic ab eiusdem partis inflammatione, and quia plus bilis generatur: and p^ri ratione obstructo Hepate, quo minus itura bilis in vesicam conscendat: Sed evidenti etiam eventu cum ^ecur calidum efficitur, quo tempore plus justo flava bilis generatur, quam vesicula fellis expurgare potest; quo fit ut venas irruens pradictus color oriatur: Quem quoque affectum fieri conspicimus venoso genere male affecto, nimirumcorrupto aut exhausto in venis, and in universo corpore sanguine, ob earum intemperamentum circa hepaein affectum, aut a veneno assumpio, vel ei aculato a fera, vel a cathareticis non purgantibus, quae, ut quibusdam placet, vel humorem purgandum alunt, vel deleteria inficiunt qualitate. Vltima autem icteri sors est cum Crititus efficitor, qui duplex existit: salutaris unus, qui cursus fit, dum copia bilis sano existente homine molestatur natura, aut in morborum indicationibus, quae septimo die, aut post 7. diebus Criticis incidit, antegressis coctionis signis, etc. Ludo. Mercat. Tom. 3. lib. 4. de intern. morb. circui^ cap. 5. de icteri omnibus speciebus. What if the Jaundize proceed from

the debility, obstruction, inflammation, scirrhus of the liver, will this medicine make up all these breaches, especially at so farre a distance? What if from obstruction of the gall-bag, from the abundance of this excrement, from the small bulke of this bag, or the imbecillity of the attractive faculty, will this remote agent produce such stupendious effects, where the united forces of the best Physitians, how methodically soever applied, are often frustrated of their desired effects? And if it be a sympatheciall Jaundize, manifesting it selfe before the seventh day, by the father of Physitians, deemed so dangerous, will this medicine suddenly cast nature into a new mold, and so prevent all future danger? And besides, when the Jaundize proceeds from poison, which hath poisoned all the blood of the body, will these balls rectifie and renew the whole masse of blood, and like some famous antidote extinguish this whole venomous quality: Ordinary medicines, I confesse, sometimes cure ordinary Jaundizes, although, I confess, there is no small error often committed in the use of these, as those used for other diseases. But to cure such as have long lyen drooping under the burthen of this disease, is not so obvious for any ordinary medicine to cure, and farre lesse at a very far remote distance. The learned know there is often a great mistake in the cure of diseases, and some said sometimes to have cured them, who never had any share in the businesse, as I have in the beginning of this Booke already proved. Many times the learned Physitian hath so shaken the foundation of a disease, that it is now ready to be eradicated, and yet nature now weakened with a multitude of medicines is not able so suddenly to recollect it selfe, howbeit after a while, the good effect of former medicines is to the patients senses apparent: and yet, if in the meane time the patient shall happen to use any medicine prescribed by the simplest old woman in the country, that shall often carry away the credit of the cure, yea, many times, although nothing be by any administred, and yet there intercede any distance of time betwixt his physicke and time of recovery, it will often be imputed to the strength of nature, or some other meanes. In cures of this nature both my selfe and many other Physitians could easily instance. And therefore the more I mervaile that a rationall Physitian, and a Doctor in his profession should so meanely account of a rationall and methodicall proceding, and so much to magnifie and extoll such unwarrantable manner of cures. A worthy and learned Divine,History. and sonne to an antient, reverend, grave Divine this last yeere 1631. having for a while lost the use of his rationall part, for a long time used the Counsell and advice of some learned and expert Physitians of the City of London, of whose labours, notwithstanding, no sudden effect did follow, so that at length they desisted from any further administring Physicke. In the meane time during this rest, mention is made of certaine Empirick, a Barber by profession, but accounted very famous for such cures. The friends of the patient taking hold of any hope of doing him good, commune with this barber Aesculapius, who would not under 20. pounds undertake his cure, and for that summe he made no question of the cure: and after some dayes demurre, the patients friends standing upon the summe demanded, the patient suddenly recovers without any further meanes than what had beene formerly by his Physitians prescribed.

Some were ready to censure the Physitians,See then how much the learned Artist is often injured. that they could not helpe him: and had this bold Empiricke exhibited the least medicine (yea although contrary to the disease, as is with them most common and frequent) the whole credit of this cure had beene ascribed to this ignorant Empiricke, whereas, next vnto God, it was performed by the meanes those learned and rationall physitians used, howsoever the effect so suddenly followed not. But leaving divers other things I could except against this Jaundize cure, I proceed.
To confirme this wonderfull working of the Weapon-salve, our defendant is not contented with homebred examples, but seekes abroad for forraine aid. He tells us of a Noble man of Italy recovering a nose lost. This Noble man having at a combate lost his nose,History of an Italian Noble man recovering twice a new nose afterwards by advice of his Physitian, for a summe of money and liberty, got his slave to yeeld to wound his arme, and so joyned his owne wounded nose to his slaves wounded arme, and so caused bind them fast together, untill these two fleshes were united and assimilated, and after a collop or gobbet of flesh was cut out of the slaves arme, and fashioned like a nose unto this Lord, and so handled by the Surgeon that it served for a nose. The slave manumitted and rewarded went from Boloigne to Naples. Afterwards it fell out that this slave died, at which instant the Lords nose did gangrenate and rot off, whereupon the part of the nose which he had of the dead man, was by the Doctors advice cut away, and hee being animated by the foresaid experience, followed the advice of the same Physitian, which was to wound in like manner his owne arme, and to apply it to his wounded and mutilated nose, and to endure with patience till all was compleate as before. Hee with animosity and patience, did undergoe the brunt, and so his nose continued with him untill his death. Here is then the storie which the Doctor had by relation. Upon this is concluded an undoubted victory, and this example taken for a strong argument to prove the operation of the Weapon-salve, how truely let us a little inquire. From hence (saies hee) is inferred, that the concourse of these two spirits, or rather (as he calls them) one spirit, being as a line stretched out from the extremities of so farre a distance, could neither by the tall hills of Hetruria, nor yet the high Apennine mountaines bee stopped. In the first place then, for the credit of the History wee have nothing but the Authors owne bare relation, so that wee must take it upon his trust; and how well it is knowne in Italy, I am ignorant.This makes nothing for the confirmation of the matter in hand But put the case this were yet true, what will his new nose make for the confirmation of the matter in hand. Hee sayes it was related to him that immediatly upon the death of the slave, the Noble mans nose gangrenated and rotted off. Well,This artificiall nose might rot off about the same time the slave died, casually, or yet by reason of a like radicall temperature of the part with the whole. I am neither certaine of the time nor manner; and yet of this am sure enough, that many have not onely had their noses, but some other parts also rotted off, with the Neapolitane or catholicke disease. What doe I know whether this might not be so, and concurre about the time of the slaves death, it may bee a little before or after, or what, if at the very same instant? What from this effect will follow for the fortifying of this former position. Moreover what, if, as we sometimes observe neere kinsfolkes, brothers, sisters, etc: by reason of a like radicall temperature fall sicke, and sometimes dye at one and the same time, although many miles asunder,

as I could instance in examples of mine owne and other mens observations, if I did not feare to trespasse on the readers patience: so likewise this slave and that piece of his flesh, although now incorporated with the Noble mans nose, participating of one radicall temperature (notwithstanding some difference in their late aliments) might both perish at one and the same time. Divers other things concerning this same point I were yet able to say, if it were necessary* howsoever, if it were but this, that it might be a catholicke, Neapolitane nose, and so perish without any poasting and repoasting of catholicke spirits over the Hetrurian or Apennine mountaines,There might be a satanical operation. may suffice. And notwithstanding, the Defendants peremptory opinion, that here can be no operation of the Divell, I affirme, that as wise men, at lea^^ as will maintaine the contrary, might here maintaine a possibility of satanicall operation, but I will not insist upon this point. And thus by way of concession of the supposed truth of the story, it is apparent, that this story proves no more than any of the former, which without any further might well satisfy the Reader. But besides that which hath been already said, what if I should hold this artificiall reparation of noses scarce to bee faisable, and this story consequently to be false? I can produce mine Author, one of the famousest Quod si integer nasus velnasi portio penitus excisa fucrit, non sperabilis re^^itutio. Ambr. Par. lib. 9. ca. 28 Surgeons of this our latter age, a man famous in his generation, of manifold experience in peace and warre, and who was imploied in the continuall service of 4. French Kings succeeding one another. And thus much for these examples.
But to daw now towards an end of this controverted point, I thinke it is now apparent to the indifferent and unpartiall Reader, that this cure by the weapon-salve cannot be ranked amongst ordinary naturall cures, being neither performed per contactum physicum, nor being within the spheare of activity, as the plaintiffe well pleadeth, howbeit, in mine opinion, the defendant answereth not so pertinently. And besides, there is no such manner of operation recorded in holy writ. Naturall cures are there performed per contactum physicum: as Isaiah 28.21. Hezekiahs sore healed by a lump of figges, a medicine befitting the same. Miraculous cures have sometimes conceived contactum physicum, howsoever the instrument used have in it no such energy or efficacy: as the river Jordan to cure the Leprosie, clay to cure the blinde, etc: As we have already instanced. Sometimes againe is no instrument at all used, but the absolute Power of the Almighty: as in the lepers, paralyticks and others may be observed. But such cures as this of the weapon-salve we have no where in Scripture recorded. And those who use such cures, let them take heed lest they fall suddenly in to Satans snares. I doe not deny, that many excellent and rare conclusions are by that called naturall magicke, or wisedome brought to passe. But I affirme againe, that this same hath often proved a stalking horse to cover a great deale of cacomagicall impiety, as might easily bee proved. This spirit of error hath now by the experience of so many thousand yeeres well improved his cunning and skill in seducing and deceiving mankind, and although he yet many times easily seduce the simpler sort, and weaker sex, especially by reall contracts and bonds; yet every

one will not bite at this baite; and therefore there are other more cunning contracts for more refined understandings. Aut exercetur Magia tacite sive conspicuis signis, aut per instrumenta aspectabilia. Vtrumque cum peragat diabolus decept^s Magis fraudulente^, ^uanqu^m ^iqui hene sciant se aut c^^^nerc^^ ^^iabo ^^amen p^aetendunt lumen natu (...) Lumen natura and precipere spiritibus imm^^^^ a^ a^s^at ad mi^ (...) Lumen naturae est temp^state^^tere, sata ^^an^ser^c, (...) mont^^per fidem naturalem: capita demire hominibus, iterumque imponere: subito momento coenas exhibere magicas: essiagere cornua: bibere cribro: sisterepridem defunctos; tribus jaculis ex a^cu, aut globulu ex bombera^ emissis omne quicquid (...), etiam non visum consodere: in speculis videre omnia praeterita, praesentia, futura, facta, scripta, dicta, cogitata: sanare per maximas distantias: colioqui cum co qui est in Persia, cum tu si^ in Hispania: in disco lunae legere scripta ab eo qui mille milliar^a abest: in homine destinato and absente and ignorante ea perficere, quae in homine cerco, vel alia imagine qua iste repraesentatur: ligatu^a^ physicas inducere, and iterum demere: Inimicitias and favores concil^are, affect^sque hominum mutare ad libitum: detrahere uni vires and in alterum inferre: victorias transserre: ingentes exercitus voce, fistula, vel imaginations in fugam vertere; mures and muscas congregare ut and sagas: Characterihus, sigillis, pentaculls and alijs ab omni injuria^se immunem reddere: armaturas, gladios, ^^lypeosque martios facere, quibus saltem visis fundantur bosliles exercitus; adjurare bo^bardas ne explodantur: equos ita afficere ut summa celeritate etiam per praecipitia serantur and ex hostibus salvum reportent sessorem; Canes habere Gamabaas per quos mira effi^ias; and ita parhedros, suc^ubos, succubas, cervas, aves sacere, etc; facere tintinnabula quibus meretrices discernas: mutare humanam figuram in leoninam, ursinam, lupinam, osininam, etc. Sic ludere posse tuesseris, chartis, and alijs ut numquam succumbas, avium votes intestigere, novacula cutem dissecare, baculos in serpentes mutare, and alia inen^^rabilia patrare, qualia facta meminerunt ^i^toriae mundana; estque vix alius in tota seu antiquitate, seu nostro saeculo Magus quem Paracelsus and Paracelsistae non commendent, admireatur, (...) aedicent. Paracels. Mahumetum nominat, Archeum Hippocr. quendam; Sarellum, Archasium, Techellum, Virgilium and al^o^ plures, etc. Andr. Libav. lib. Quomodo magi Isiblica scripta depravent exemplis ex Crollio product^s There is therefore a more secret close and indirect compact with Satan, as is by our Divines and other writers granted, as the plaintiffe truely affirmeth. And as a learned late writer affirmeth, the divell is the author of both these operations, although he cunningly delude such impious Magicians, howbeit some are not ignorant of their commerce with the Divill, but yet pretend the light of nature and other faire shifts and colourable excuses. The light of nature is (saith mine Author) to command uncleane spirits to be ready at our service: to cut off mens heads, and set them on againe: as likewise to raise stormes and tempests; to translate whole fields of Corne, and that by a naturall faith: in a moment and suddenly to exhibite magicall suppers: to set hornes on a mans head, to drinke out of a riddle or sieve: to make dead men seeme alive: with gun-shot or arrow-shot to kill any thing although thou see it not: in a mirror or looking glasse to see all things past, present and to come, done, written, spoken, or once but thought: to cure at a farre distance (marke with what company this cure by the Weapon-salve is coupled) to speake with one in Persia, the other party being in Spaine: to worke upon a man absent and ignorant by a waxe picture: to read in the body of the Moone written by another a 1000. miles distant: to induce physicall legatures, and at pleasure to undoe them againe: to procure hatred and favour, and to change mens affections: to draw strength from one, and bestow it on another: to convey great victories to their friends: with the noise of a flute, the sound of the voice, and by imagination only to put great armies to flight: with characters and the like to free one from outward injuries: to congregate and assemble together mice, rats and witches: to make such armour that at the very sight thereof, the enemy shall runne away to conjure ordnance and guns that they shall not shoot off (It is a wonder the Emperour can find none of these so usefull artificers now in his so great need) to provide such horses as will with incredible colerily carrie the riders over any high hill or dangerous precipices; yea thorow the middest of an enemie. And such horses, say our Paracelsians, used the Wise men of the East at the Nativity of our Lord and Saviour. A multitude of such in^tances of other strange magiciall impieties could I relate. Howsoever many of these be meere lies, which they cannot effect, yet may the judicious and unpartiall Reader thereby easily perceive ex unguibus leonem, what such people aime at, whasoever plausible reason they pretend to the contrary. And such is the doctrine of Paracelsus and his followers, for the which reason, we have just cause to suspect such cures, rather then with the defendant call them Dona Dei, miraculous, mysticall, extraordinary, and what not. Proverb 1^.25, There is a way (saith Salomon) that seemeth right in his owne eyes, but the issues thereof is death. And the 1 Thess 5.22. Apostle Paul wisheth us to abstaine from all appearance

of evill. And if there were no other reason, methinkes, a good Christian should be circumspect what he useth. If some Divines and Physitians have approved of it, that is no warrant for me nor any man else, it is good for every man to be sure of a good warrant for his actions. I weigh more the truth than the eminency of the person or his calling. Amicus Socrates, amicus Plato, sed magis amica veritas.
And thus have I declared mine opinion concerning this cure done by the Weapon-salve, although neither of any contentious spirit of contradiction, or opposing any mans opinion: farre lesse to please or applaud or plead for the profit of any silver-smith Demetrius; howbeit I thinke those men (the company of Barber-surgeons I meane) not so despicable, but that they ought to be regarded and have their due, that profession being both antient and famous, yea most antient of all the parts of Physicke, and practised by manuall operation (from whence it is denominate) many yeeres before either Anselmus, Paracelsus, or whosoever was the broacher and propagator of the Weapon-salve was heard of. Many things here I passe by in the Defendants booke worthy of confutation, as not having taken that in hand, which would have required more time, and made this booke to swell to too voluminous a bignesse, my purpose being onely to touch upon such things as chiefely and most neerely concerned this subject of the Weapon-salve. And what I have said, I referre to the censure of the learned and judicious. Errare possum, hareticus esse nole.



CHAP. XXXJ.

Of mandrakes, the nature and vertue thereof, and whether this plant hath any power to procure love?

NOw from that which hath hitherto beene said concerning Philtra or love potions, there ariseth yet a question concerning one simple, and which may seeme to crosse that which wee have already said concerning such simples as are supposed to provoke or procure love. For it seemeth, at hath beene constantly mainteined, and by sacred Writ confirmed, that that simple called Mandragora, and in English Mandrake, hath beene endued with this amatory qualitie. That truth therefore may prevaile, and error may be convinced and confuted, I thinke it shall not bee impertinent, ere wee proceed, to say something concerning this simple. Of this mention is made in Geniso. 14. Genesis, where it is said, that Reuben went forth in the time of wheat Harvest, and having brought home with him Mandrake, Rachel begging them of her sister Leah, she refused, etc. From whence it is collected, and by some supposed, that Leah

used this simple as an amorous bait to make her fruitfull, and to attract, and so much the more procure her husbands love, into the truth whereof we are now to inquire. In the first place then, it would seeme this simple was by the antients used to this same end and purpose; and was for this same cause by them called Circaea or Circetris, from that famous witch Circe. Lib. 4. cap. 7. Dioscoride maketh it of two sorts, male and female: the female he maketh lesser in leaves, the leaves smaller, and smelling better: to the male againe he ascribeth greater leaves, and the fruit bigger, participating of a sweet, heavy, loathsome smell. Of any pleasantnesse of smell Rem comperi pulchram and suavcolentem, sepore quideus insipido: and ideo cur cam mulier tantoper concupiverit ignorare m^ fateor, nisi propter raritatem, and odoris j^cunditatem. lib. 22 cap. 56. conti^ Faustum. Pliny speaketh not one word; but whereas all agree that the leaves and root are of a loathsome and strong smell,Lib. 25. cap. 71. Pliny averreth, that this apple or fruit doth yet exceed them herein: but neither of them doe ascribe unto it any amorous quality. Lambert ^anaehus Phys. Christ. part. 2. tract. 3. cap. 67. S. Augustine affirmeth, he found in his owne experience this pleasant smell in these apples, and withall that they were of an insipid and unsavoury taste; for the which cause, he wondreth why Rachel should so much desire the same, and acknowledgeth himselfe to be ignorant hereof, unlesse she were in love with the smell and beauty of this fruit, and the rarity thereof. A Lib. de simpl. medic. late Germane divine, who also quoteth this same place of S. Augustine, is of this opinion also, that this was not for any venereous use, that Rachel so much desired these apples or flowers, or whatsoever it was. Matthiol in praedic. Dioscorid locum. (...) History of the impostorious cheating with counterfeit Mandrakes. Galen giveth it no such amorous quality, but ascribeth unto it a cooling vertue in the third degree, together with some portion of heat, especially to the root: but the apples he acknowledgeth to be moister; but in all he holdeth this narcoticke quality to be predominant. Now by any thing which hath hitherto beene said, there hath beene proved no amorous quality in this simple, which notwithstanding hath beene hitherto by many very stedfastly beleeved, and hath been the cause that many have bought such supposed roots at a very high rate. There have beene many ridiculous tales brought up of this plant, whether of old wives or some runnagate surgeons or physicke-mongers, I know not, but sure some one or moe that sought to make themselves famous and skillfull above others were the first brochers of that error. They adde further, that it is never or very seldome to bee found growing naturally, but under a gallowes, where the matter that hath falne from a dead body hath given it the shape of a man; and the matter of a woman, the substance of a female plant, with many other such dotish dreames. Matthiole a late learned Physitian upon that place of Dioscoride above mentioned, maketh mention of the cheating and cosening of impostors with this counterfeit root. They take, saith hee, a briony or some other root, in the which they cut out the proportion of a man, and in the head, place of the beard, and other parts where haire useth to grow, they make many small holes, into the which they put some cornes of barly, millet, or some other graine, and burying it in the ground, let it lie untill such time as these graines were growne out: and then with a pen-knife, or otherwise, cut out those blades of the graines in the forme and fashion of small haires, and so sell them to credulous and simple people, women especially, who are perswaded that this is a speciall remedy against sterility. And this the same Author affirmeth that hee learned of a notorious quacke-salving Mountebancke, whom at Rome hee cured of the French pox; who among many other cheating trickes, confessed this also, and affirmed, that for one of those counterfeit Mandrakes he had had sometimes 25. sometimes 30. crownes. Now the better and more easily to delude the simpler sort, and more cunningly to picke their purses, they tell them a There have beene many ridiculous tales brought up of this plant, whether of old wives or some runnagate surgeons or physicke-mongers, I know not, but sure some one or moe that sought to make themselves famous and skillfull above others were the first brochers of that error. They adde further, that it is never or very seldome to bee found growing naturally, but under a gallowes, where the matter that hath falne from a dead body hath given it the shape of a man; and the matter of a woman, the substance of a female plant, with many other such dotish dreames. strange tale of the manner of pulling up this root: that it is very dangerous for them that doe it, and therefore that they bare it about the root, tye one end of a string about it, and the other end about a dogs necke, and the master departing, the dog essaying to follow him, pulleth up this

plant by the root,Gerard in history of plants, booke 2. chap. 39. and dieth immediately; and then there is no more danger either to the master or any body else. And this fable, it seemeth, had its first foundation in De bello Judaico cap 25. Josephus, who writeth such a thing of a root, which he calleth Baaras, digged up after the aforementioned manner. Now this Mandrake root barren women sought much after, supposing it did further fecundity; unto the which they have beene induced by the mistaking of the true meaning of that place of Genesis. And there is a Stuck. an tiquit. convic. lib. 3. cap. 1. learned late writer that laboureth much to prove this, howbeit in my opinion to small purpose. His first argument is taken from the Chalde Paraphrasts, who both in both places (Genesis, I meane, and the Canticles) translate this word Dudaim,Bed and Dudaim have divers significations. Jabruchin in the plurall number, the singular being Jabroach: and the Arabians even at this day call Mandrake, Jabora and Jabroach. Againe, saith he, both the septuagint, and the old Latine translation hath translated this word Dudaim, Mandragora in both places. Againe, saith he, Dod, and in the plurall Dodim, signifieth love or charity; and therefore the breast and paps are also called by this name, being, as he saith, the seat of love, and in forme like this apple. But the truth is, that whatsoever faire flourishes these reasons may make, yet in them is no certaine nor assured truth. For as concerning the signification of the word he himselfe confesseth, that the word Dod from whence Dudaim is derived, besides this signification, signifieth also a caldron, and laboureth also to apply this to the forme of the Mandrake: and againe, Dod signifieth an uncle, and Dodah an aunt, from the effect of love, and would have this Greeke word (...) the brest or dug derived from this Hebrew Dod or Dodim, how well, let the learned judge. And he confesseth also that Rabbi Schelomoth in both places interpreteth this word Dudaim sweet and well-smelling figs: others interprete it violets; others that plant we cal Satyrium; and some againe, that we cal Winter-cherry: and finally some translate it pleasant and well-smelling apples. To come then to our purpose, it seemeth this word is not proper to this plant onely, or rather is a generall word,It is a generall word, as appeareth by the translation of Junius, and Tremellius himselfe being a Iew. signifying well-smelling fruits or flowers; as doth appeare by the late translation of the learned Tremellius, himselfe a Jew, and his friend Junius, who both in both these places where this word is onely found, translate it well-smelling fruits or flowers; in English indeed, in both places it is translate Mandrakes. Now if wee but consider a right this place of the Canticles, it seemeth to stand to best reason that it should be translated sweet smelling flowers, or at least, of very pleasant and delectable fruit, there being mentioned before it the vine and pomegranat; and after all manner of pleasant fruits. Now this apple of Mandrake, take it at the best, is not, I am sure, to be parallelled with the best and pleasantest fruits. S. Augustine indeed saith it smelleth well, and some others say it hath a mixt smell. I will not call in question S. Augustines credit, nor argue the case whether he might be deceived, and being no Physitian have some other fruit given him, and called by this name: but with us, sure I am, there is no such smell to be found in those that grow in the hottest of our European countries, nor such as I smelt in the middest of France, nor could learn it of others: and it is proper to all our narcoticke medicines to bee of

an evill and loathsome smell, although growing in a hot climat: as we finde it in Opium, as also in Tabacco; although it be verified in this drug which Divines say of sinne, Consuetudo peccandi tollit sensum peccati, The custome of sinning taketh away the sense thereof: So may I say of this, customary use maketh people complaine of no annoyance at all, being so inured to this filthy smell. Ingrari illi cotulae, sambuci, and camphora odores, satis arguunt, putido quidem ac narcotico, sed quod and mitigativo sulphure scatea^t. Cu^us generis ^ulphur, mitigando, extinguendo que, tanto fulminis ardori, in cerebri nostri coelo, surenti, and insulius hos Epilepsiae, fulgureos jaculanti aptissimum ac congruentissimum est; quod satis testatur aure a illa nostra Nepenthes compositio, quae promptissimum ac singulare huic morbo (Epilepsiae) ad s^rt subsidium. Atque ut particula^^us causam audiatis, quae nos ad scobem ligni buxei alioqui admodum foetentis, and caput serientis addendam impulit: sciatis in eo vim quandam narcoticam and suporiferum sulphur abunde contineri, unde foetore contrabit, quema^modum cicuta, ruta, mandragora omniaque papaverum genera, quae ingratum odorem spirat, quod narcotica sint, hoc est, narcotico sulphure uimium ^incta and insecta. Ioseph Quercet. in Tetrade cap. 15. St Pharmaco^, Dogma^. restit. lib. 1. cap. 24. This soporiferous and narcoticke quality (say our Chymists) proceedeth from a narcoticke sulphur, whereof this loathsome smell is an individuall assistant. Galen also himselfe judgeth of the quality of the simples, not only by the taste, but also by the smell: and such as are of a sweet and pleasant smell, not only he, but all other Physitians after him, account to comfort and corroborate the spirits, and principall parts; which no man yet ever affirmed of any narcoticke: nay, nor yet of Tabacco it selfe, although growing betwixt the Tropicks in Trinidad. Is it then likely, that the holy Ghost, and Salomon his Pen-man, and so well skilled in the nature and vertue of simples, would ranke a venomous plant among so pleasant fruits or flowers? But put the case, that this simple growing in those hot Easterne countries, did smell well, and lost that loathsome and unpleasant smell, incident to such simples (which, notwithstanding, is not likely, these hot countries commonly intending their properties and smell, as appeareth in Tabbaco, etc.) yet then, why may not I with as good reason affirme, that many of our ordinary fruits or flowers, transplanted into Salomons pleasant garden, might much improve their former properties and smells, insomuch, that they might farre surpasse this plant and fruit, and so should be in small request, where there were so many better? I thinke now I have made it to the indifferent and unpartiall reader, plainly appeare, that there is small probability, that this Mandrake mentioned in the Scripture, is our Mandrake. And put yet the case it had beene so, yet wee see it produced not that effect in her that obtained this plant; and she that parted from it had children in a short space. But let us yet search a little further into this love-property attributed to it: this property is only confined to helpe womens sterility by those who stand stiffeliest upon the point. And yet our antient Physitians, neither Dioscoride (who reckoneth up all the severall properties thereof, yea, even a violent purging quality, equalling, if not exceeding, Hellebore it selfe) Galen, nor Pliny, make any mention of this property. And whereas they make mention of some names, tending to that purpose, they only relate other mens opinions, they never ascribing any such property unto it. I will not indeed deny, but it might have bin used by witches and Sorcerers in their love-potions, (as I may call them) and so were bones of Frogs, haires of a Wolfes taile, Hippomanes, and such other trash (which no understanding man ever thought to be indued with any such quality) by wicked people, notwithstanding, imploied for such purposes. And this same late alleaged Author, when he alleageth the supposed love quality in this simple, groundeth his reason on the cooling quality of this simple, fit, saith he, to coole the hot wombs of those Eastern women, as he thinketh it to be incident to most women dwelling in hot countries. But what if this simple be hot in quality? I think then his building wil soone fall to the ground. Loceo prius citate. Galen himselfe

joyneth heat with the cold quality in this simple. And I thinke, let but a judicious Physitian well consider of the purging quality, and many other operations in this simple, incident (at least many of them) to other narcoticks also, will acknowledge a hot quality predominating in it, and then this cooling effect is quite vanished away in smoake. And put the case this were yet true, then were it onely good for women of very hot wombes, and not proper for ever barren woman; and withall, were not good for women of our cold Northerne climat, who are not, for the most part, so hot wombed as there Easterne women. Besides, if by reason of its narcoticke and soporiferous quality, by reason it provoketh to sleepe, and consequently the better to reteine the seed of generation, why may not opium, henbane, or hemlocke doe the like? Or why should that plead such privilege above other simples of the same nature and quality? Moreover, if this plant had beene indued with any such vertue, is it likely that Leah, who had now for a long time beene debarred from bearing of children (insomuch that for this cause she had given her maid to her husband to helpe out her number) would so easily have parted with so effectuall a meanes, to her sister especially, betwixt whom and her selfe there was such emulation and debate? To conclude then this point, there is no probability, that this Mandrake hath any such power or vertue, as to make barren women fruitfull; and yet farre lesse to procure love, or make any love better, howsoever, it may be that in antient times, it hath, perhaps, beene used as other poisons for this same purpose, as I have said already. And Pliny himselfe mocketh the Magicians, who attribute strange vertues to herbes, and divers simples, and such as is impossible for any reasonable man to beleeve, as namely, to open any locke without resistance, to drie up rivers and lakes, to supply all wants, and make enemies to flee. But the same Magi efferunt Aethiopide herba amnes and stagna f^^cari coniectu, tactu cla^sa omnia aperiri. Achemenide coniectae in aciem bostium, trepidare agmina, ac ^ergae ver^ere. Labacen deri solitam a Persarum rege legatis, ut quocunque venissent, omnium rerum copia abundarent, ac multa fimilia. Vbinam ista fuere, cum Cimbri Teutonique terribili Marte alularent, aut cum Lucullus tot reges magorum paucis legionibus sterneret^ Curve Romani duces primam semper in bellis rationem commerciorum habuere? Cur Hercules Caesaris miles in Pharsalia samem sensit, si abundantia omnis contingere unius herbae faelicitate poterat? Non satius fuit Aemilianum Scipionem Carthaginis portas herba patefacere, quam machinis claustra per tot annos quatere? Siccentur Aethiopide Pontinae paludes, tantumque agri suburbanae reddatur Italiae. Namque apud eumdem Democritum legitur compositio medicamenti, quo pulchri bonique and formati giguantur liberi. Plin. lib. 26. cap. 4. Pliny wisely replyeth, Where were such herbs when the Romans obteined such victories of their enemies? And I could make a many questions to this same purpose, although, I confesse, it were but to small purpose. But concerning these things, as also concerning love, love potions, and the appendixes, or things thereunto belonging, thus much shall suffice for the present: on the which I have somewhat the longer insisted, by reason I perceived some erroneous opinions concerning this subject to be so ruveted in the mindes of many, that it is a hard matter to root them out: wherefore, if I have trespassed upon the readers patience, let this apologie plead for mee; that my intention was to profit the publike; the which I wish may likewise plead for any former trespasse of the same nature.



CHAP. XXXII.

Of immoderate or passionate anger, the hurt thereby procured to the body, in sicknesse and in health, and antidots against it: in what diseases best, and in what worst; and whether any may die of anger.

THat the affections of the soule being kept within compasse, and ruled by reason, are not sinfull, may by that which hath been said already plainly appeare. And a worthy light of this land, a man famous in this generation, and to whom not this land alone, but the whole Church of God is not a little indebted, speakes worthily to this same purpose. Animi affectus and (...) turbatiunes a Deo hominib^ utiliter da^^ ^unt, and rerum praecture g^rendarum admi^i^uia, and subsidia afferunt, modo D^i timore tanquam freno in medio^ratate contintantur, neque pro naturae nostrae vitiositate modum tranfire sina^^r. Quamobrem i^a non vitio datur, sed si quis sit ad iram proclivis, ac levi momento accendi se patiatur, ut tanquam somes ignem facile con^ipiat, et instar ollae notius quam aheni, quae ex parvo igne subjecto calescit. Hoc e^t quod Christus damnas, Matth. 5. atque hi fere tunt de quibus proverbium di^itur, dielum colap^o rependitur. Cujus egregium exemplum vide in Lamecho, Gen. 4. Cartwright comment. in vers. 17. cap. 14. Proverb. The affections and perturbations of the minde (saith he) are, and that not without great reason, by God himselfe given unto men, and prove often very profitable for the atchieving of high and sublime matters; provided alwaies, that by the awe and feare of God, as with a bridle they be kept within compasse, and not suffered to exceede the bounds of mediocrity. Of the first of these passions, to wit, of love, wee have spoken at great length; we come now to anger: this the same Authour, in the same place, observing what hath beene said before, doth not discommend; but when a man upon any small occasion shall so farre suffer himselfe to be transported with this passion, that like a drie match, hee is easily set on fire; according to our common proverbe, but a word and a blow. And therefore, Sundem quippe inter se ordinem h^ben^ ratio et iracu^d^a, quem eques and equus, quem venator and can^^. Iustius quidem est, and convenientius, ut quod natura nobilius meliusque est dominetur, aques videli et equo, cani venator, ir acund^ae ratio. Sed incidit ^uo non semper naturae sex in hoc consugatarum rerum ordine ad nin^stra^do servetur; equus enim ferox and inordin^tus interdum sine ullo modo excurrens, sessorem quoque vel virium imbecillitate. vel equestris artis imperit a succumbentem secum rap^c. Ita et am^ra noununquam vehemen^atque ad jumeudas intempesti^e ^oenas pauloviblentius exci^ata, infirmam and in^octem rationem subigit, and secum trahit. Quod si and eques, and ratio tam viribus qua^ scientia praediti fuerint, proculdubio and ille equam, and ^eac iracundiam cohebebit, ac vincet: sin vel u^eque vel horum alterocaruerint, periculu^ imminet, he quod superius nobiliusque natura est, inferiori, ac vilion sese tradat ac summittat. Hoc Scythis and Gallis, mutu^que alus barbaris nationibus, atque ex nostris, vel pueris, vel ineruditis hominibus usu venit ut iracundiam ratione habeant potentiorem. In quod Homerus cum vellet ostenders, Hectorem and Achillem, and quosdam alios hic^usmodi invines iracundiae succumbentes indutit: Vlyssem vero, Polydamantem, and Nestorem, illi dominantes Gal. de Plac. Hippocr. and Plat. libr. 3. Galen well compared and paralleled together anger and reason, comparing anger to a horse, and reason his rider: As the horse then (saith he) should be ruled by his rider, so should anger be ruled by reason, which made Vlysses curbe and keepe in his anger, and just indignation conceived against his maids for their great insolencies, it being then no fit and opportune time to punish them according to their deserts; and therefore when reason beareth rule, then this furious and raging beast, anger, is supprest and kept under: as when the rider is master of his horse, and both strong and skilfull enough to rule him, then the horse obeyeth his Master, and doth him what service is sit for him to performe. But it commeth sometimes to passe, that either by imbecillirie and weakenesse, or unskilfulnesse, or both; the horse gets the head, and so, running away, hee throweth his rider: Even

so commeth it often to passe, that this rash and precipitate anger getting the head and mastery, often over-throweth reason his rider, and so giveth him the foile. This, when Homer would expresse, hee brings in Hector and Achilles, young men, succumbing and yeelding to this furious passion: but on the other part, Vlysses, Polydamus and Nestor, prevailing and getting the victory over the same. But if I should speake of the mischiefes procured by this furious wilde beast, anger, I scarce know where to beginne, and might compose great volumes of this subject onely. It armeth the will to all manner of villany, and openeth a doore to all manner of wickednesse. Is it not often the cause of great warres, broiles, dissention, of the overthrow of whole countries and famous cities. And therefore well may it be called a most cruell informe monster, matamorphosing man, not only into the shape of some furious cruell wilde beast, but even into the shape of the Divell himselfe: and as smoake dazleth the eyes of the body, so doth this the eyes of the understanding. And what marvell, I pray you, if a man now deprived of the use of reason, and following the violence of this furious passion be transported to the perpetration of strange and enormious facts? It was not therefore said in vaine; Ira furor brevis est, anger is but a short fury: and wee may as well say, Furie is but a long anger. How many murthers have beene by this furious monster committed? Have not men thereby become more cruell one to another than the very wilde beasts? according to that old proverbe, Homo homini lupus. See how this anger prevailed in that great conqueror of the world, Alexander the great, who yet could not conquer himselfe, but in his drunken anger killed Clitus, etc. It is recorded of Vedius Pollio, a Noble Roman, having invited Augustus Caesar to a feast, and his Butler having broken a crystall glasse, hee cast him into his fish poole to be food for his Lampreies: for the which cause, that Noble Emperour caused breake all the rest, lest they should afterwards be an occasion of any such cruelty. But I should spend too much time, if I should insist upon many particular relations of this nature. It will be better to set downe some antidots, both out of sacred and prophane writers, against this disorderly passion. The Wise man well acquained wiih the evills and mischiefes thereby procured, therefore in that golden booke of Proverbs, and in severall places of the same, setteth downe the evills of anger, and the antidots against it. Besides that place alleaged, in another place hee setteth downe these words: Proverbes 15.7. A soft answer turneth away wrath, but grievous words stirre up anger: vers 18. A wrathfull man stirreth up strife, but hee that is slow to anger appeaseth strife: Chap. 14.17. Hee that is soone angry dealeth foolishly: and a man of wicked devices is hated. Chap. 16.38. He that is slow to anger is better than the mighty: and he that ruleth his spirit, than he that taketh a citie. Chap. 19.11. The discretion of a man deferreth his anger, and it is his glory to passe over a transgression. Verse 19. A man of great wrath shall suffer punishment: for if thou deliver him, yet thou must doe it againe. Chap. ^^.9. It is better dwell in the corner of a house top, than with a brawling woman in a wide house. And againe, Verse 19. It is better to dwell in a wildernesse, than with a contentious and angrie woman. Chap. 21.24. Proud and haughtie scorner is his name, who dealeth in proud wrath. 22.24. Make no friendship with an angrie man, and with a furious man thou shalt not goe. 29.22. An angrie man stirreth up strife, and a furious man

aboundeth in transgression. The learned, if they list, may read the exposition of that worthy Divine, Cartwright, upon these places. The same sacred Writ affoordeth us yet in sundry places soveraigne remedies against this same passion. Eccles. 7.9. Be not hastie in thy spirit to be angrie: for anger resteth in the bosome of fooles. Psal., ^.8 Cease from anger, and forsake wrath: fret not thy selfe in any wise to doe evill. Ephes 4.31. Let all bitternesse and wrath, and anger, and clamour, and evill speaking be put away from you, with all malice. Colos. 3.^. But now you also put off these, anger, wrath, malice, etc. Ephes ^.29. Give place unto wrath, Rom 12.19. Be yee angry and sinne not, let not the Sunne goe downe upon your wrath. And this last holy anger, not sinfull, but against sinne, is that which only is warranted by Gods Word. And thus wee see holy Moses was so moved at the making of the golden Calfe, and to see God so grossely by Idolatry dishonoured, that he brake the two tables. But to discusse this Theme I leave to the learned Divine, and proceed to shew how carefull the very heathen Philosophers were to subdue this foule passion, and what wholesome precepts and directions they gave against it. Plato Philoso^^us ^apunt^^ auditores a^^ onebat, ut^r^tos (...) tu specu^o contemp arent^^ Nam ^tim facum ^^am suribundam per oma^a phre^ (...) si malem cernerent, eo d^^ecore terri^^, in posterum ab ^racurdi^ sacil si^t t^mperatu^os (...) in A^^ath (...) sic ^racundia, ex ^u^^ lib. 7 cap. 1 Plato very wisely wished his hearers when they were angry, to view themselves in a looking-glasse, and when as they should see their countenance looke so furiously in every respect, like one in a phrensie, it would be a meanes, for ever after to make them refraine from this so fierce and furious passion. Idem ibid. ex Dio^. Laer^ lib 3. Anton. in Me^^ssa par 2. ^er 53. V^ler Max. lib. 3. cap. 1. The same Philosopher being angry with his servant, and preparing himselfe to punish him, it fell out that in the meane time Xenocrates came in, whom Plato intreated to punish his servant for him; alleaging that now bee was angry. This wise Philosopher, by reason of the commotion of his minde, mistrusted himselfe. And yet is this the ordinary custome among men, then to punish and correct, when they are most transported with this passion. Arist. dic^bat, perinde atque umus oculo. comov^t, and aspectu ita conturbat, ut neque nobis ca v^denai potestas fiat quae sunt ante pedes: ita oborta ira ration^ ca^go suffunditur, ut se celinquere nulla cogitatione deprehendere possit, Ide^ ibid ex Stob. ser. 1* It was the saying of Aristotle, that Prince of Philosophers, that as smoak so troubleth and dazleth the eyesight, that wee are scarce able to discerne such things as are right before us: even so doth anger so farre blinde the eyes of the understanding, that a man cannot for the present discerne hee doth amisse: according to that vulgar verse: Impedit ira animum, ne possit cernere verum.
The Aristoteles, Alexandru^ ira excandescentem placare volens, and sedare summom indignationem haec ad cum scripsit: excandescentia and ira non in pare^^ed in me^iores ex^tere solet. Tibi vere nemo par est, Idem ibid. ex. Elian var. hist. l. 12. same Aristotle being acquainted with Alexanders hasty and angrie disposition, wrote to him after this manner: Anger and wrath is not commonly exercised against our equalls, but against our betters; and now there is no man on earth to be compared with thee. Drog Laert. in eu^o vita.Chilon docebat vincendam iram, quod ie affectus sitcaeteris potentior: quam superare fortius est, qua ho^t^m armatum dei^cere, nec min^s exitu mortali^us sit ab ira quam ab hoste. Idem Laert in (...) vitae. Bias the Prienean, was wont to say, that there were two things contrary to good counsell, hast and anger: for an angrie man being besides himselfe, is void of all counsell. Chilon taught, that it was good to overcome anger with reason, the which affection is stronger than any other: the which to overcome, is more excellent, and requireth more strength, than to over-come an enemy; neither receive wee lesse hurt from anger, than from an enemie. Diogen^ de n^^ irascendo accurate d^^ere ut, Ado esce^s quidam protervus ve^u^i periculum fac^ (...) praestaret ea (...) ^bat, ^nspu^t (...) ^em. Tuli^ hoc (...) sapien^er: no^ (...) inqui^, rasem^ (...) to tamen ^a (...) ^teat, Idem Lae^^ (...) eiu^ vitae. Diogenes upon a time seriously disputing against this passionate anger, in comes a young rake-hell, and to try his patience, and whether hee could practise that himselfe hee taught others, spate in his face: But the Philosopher replyed, I am not angrie, howbeit I doubt whether I ought not to be angrie.

Democritus ad Lacedaemonium flagris sevien^em in servum: desine, inquit, te servo tuo simielm ostendere. Servus ea^m e^^, qui suis cupidita^ibus imperare non potest. Licost. loco supra citato ex Eras^^ Apophth. lib. 8. Democrates seeing a Lacedemonian in great anger, beating his servant, wished that hee himselfe should cease to be of his servants servile condition: for he is a servant that cannot command his owne affections. Idem ex Cicer. Tuscul. Quaest. lib. 4. etc. Architaes having found some of his seruants in some fault, and finding himselfe somewhat incensed against them, yet did nothing to them at that time, but departing, added these words; Happy are you that I am now angry at you. Demonax cum a quodam cui Imperator exercitum commiserat, interrogaretur, quonam pacto delegatam provinciam quam optime gerere posset? Si, inquit, iracundia vacaris. ^ram sensit ver prudentissimus, ad omnem functionem inu^ilem esse. Idem suadebat, non facile irascendum esse hominibus si delinquerent: sed potius corrigenda esse vitia, medicorum exemplo, qui non ind^gnantur aegrotis, sed morbum sanans, Idem Lycosth. ex Era^m^ Apophth. lib. 8. One Demonax being asked of one to whom a great Emperor had committed an army, by what meanes hee might best discharge his duty in this so weighty a businesse? answered, if thou beest free from anger. The same Wise-man advised people not easily to be angrie with any; but rather to use all meanes to amend their faults; imitating in this Physicians, who are not angry with their patients, but labour to cure their infirmities. By that which hath been said may then easily appeare, what is the duty of Christians, and how farre wee come short of these heathens, destitue of any other guide, but the light of nature; the which, comparing these two cases, and paralleling the one with the other, may more perspicuously yet appeare. But this I leave to the learned Divine at great length to prosecute. But before I leave this point, I cannot passe over in silence that worthy and memorable example of that Patet quod ira facit co^mitte^e ^aba, ae quibus solet posihac multum dele^e, sicut p^tet per decretum, in quo factum sheodosi^ ^mpera^oris recitatur, quom^do lecit in ira quadam multos occidi in Thessalonica, de quo postmodum multum doml^ns o^dinavit, quod nulla talis ^rincipum sententra effectai^ ab executor^bus acmand^retur ante triginta dies p^st sententiam ^atam (sicut patet ^1. q. 3. cum apud Thessalonicam) ut ^aterim impleri possit, quod jubes Apost^lus, dicens, date locum irae, Rom. 12. ne sibi, vel alteri iterum contingat, quod prius contigit in Thessalonica, videlicet quando per iram homicidij fraternitas de p^riu. Sapiene 10. In quo patet, quod ira viri justitiam Dei non operatur Jaco No C^^ 6.3 Iohan Bromiardi summa praed. cap. 8 Nu. p. 1 pag 412. famous Emperour, Theodosius, and his constitution, worthy to be ingraven in letters of gold on pillars of brasse for a perpetuall memoriall to posteritie, to shun and avoid rash anger. This great Emperor, by reason of a sudden sedition, raised in the towne of Thessalonica, sent thither his troupes, who slew of the citizens about 7000 men. This good Emperor, although hee had no small provocation to incite him to this revenge; yet because this remedy was somewhat sharpe for the disease, hee not onely repented him of the fact, being by Saint Ambrose for the space of eight moneths first therefore excommunicate: but made such a decree, as I wish Princes and great ones well to consider of it: that no decree made by any Prince should be put in execution before the full space of thirty daies were accomplished, that in the meantime that might be fulfill'd, Give place to wrath; and lest the like accident should againe befall any, that had befallen those of Thessalonica. Rapuerat auriga, gubernator l^dorum Circensiam, adolescentem ad stuprum, hunc aurigam praefectus, vir honestus, incluse^^i carceri. Quia vero populus hujus aurigae industria delecta atur, poscit, ut impunitus dimi^tatur; quod cum denegaret praefectus, per seditionem occisus est: Tria igitur magna scelera co^^^rruc^ quod noluerum (...) ^au umsrelus aurigae; quod seditionem in caussa turpissima moveru^^: quod praesectum, and alios v^ros nobiles trucidaver^ni: Propter ^as tantas caussas cum Princeps, justo dolore exarserit, no^ exissimetur deliquisse more Tyrannorum, qui propter nullas, aut leves caussas, magnam saevitiam exercent, e^si excessi^ modum. Sed in mag^i^ viris Nemesis valde inflammatur. Hanc ex^usationem Theodosii addid^, quia multi caussa errant. Chion. Carion. a Phil. Melancth, aucti, lib: 3: in Theodos. And yet (as a late Writer well observeth) there were three great and notorious offences, which incited this pious Emperour to this severe revenge, lest it may be imagined, that like a Tyrant hee raged thus against his subjects without any seeming reason, for a small or no cause at all. For in the first place, the people would not suffer a villaine to be punished, who had ravished a youth to abuse him against nature: againe, when as hee was by this good governour committed to prison, they raised a tumult about so infamous a businesse: and when as this governour did labour to suppresse this their sedition, they killed both him and divers others of worth assisting him. But it is now more than time wee come to the hurt it procureth to the bodie,

both in sicknesse and in health. And first in health, it often altereth the naturall comlinesse and decency thereof, changeth the colour of the face, dazleth the eyes, maketh the tongue clamorous, armeth all the parts of the body; as hands, feet, teeth, etc. And as for diseases thereby procured to the body, they are not a few, and no passion more prejudiciall to the life of man, and which more accelerateth or hasteneth on old age. And this to be consonant and agreeable to right reason, may easily appeare: for anger being nothing else but a heat, or ebullition of the blood, and a violent motion of the same in the heart, which at length with violence is diffused and dispersed over the whole body; as Galen himselfe defineth it: it must needes over-heat and dry up the bodie; by which meanes, it sometimes exciteth Fevers; in such bodies especially as are apt for a long time to reteine this impression of heat. And although oftentimes the violent motion of the heart be setled and staid, there remaineth, notwithstanding, in the body an unnaturall heat, from whence often proceed Fevers. Many also overtaken with this passion, have beene suddenly surprized with Apoplexies, Epilepsies, Convulsions, Palsies, trembling of the joints, and gouts of all sorts. Some also have fallen into Pleuresies, laundizes, many sorts of laskes, proceeding of choler, etc. But such especially are most offended with this passion, that are of a hotter constitution of bodie than ordinary, either naturall, or adventitious, by meanes of any infirmitie: but such especially, as have the head and heart hot naturally, or accidentally, are most obnoxious to hurt by the same. In all hot and acute diseases, therefore, as also in hot cholericke constitutions, we are by all meanes possible to prevent this passion, the patient then of himselfe, by reason of his infirmitie, being more peevish and froward: for the which cause there must such caution and circumspection be used of those about the sick, that all possible content must be afforded, and such placed about them in whom they most delight. Their diet also and their Physick must with all discretion be accordingly accommodated, as hath alreadie beene related. But it may, perhaps, here be demanded,Whether anger be useful in any diseases? whether anger be not usefull in some diseases?Answ. or whether it be hurtfull in all? I answer, that in some diseases it may be beneficiall for the patient. And this is chiefely to be observed in some infirmities of the animall parts; especially in cold diseases of the braine,In what diseases and constitutions most usefull. in cold constitutions of bodie, and where the head and heart, especially, are of this temperature, and that even by the authoritie of Lib. 1. cap. 4 de differ. Febr. and lib. de causae mor^. Galen himselfe; where hee affirmeth, that it exciteth and stirreth up naturall heat, in them almost decayed. And this is the opinion of Adhibenda diligentia est, ut praeceps acerbaque iracundia inducatur, cum coloris reficiendi, tum etiam succorum in corporis habitum effundendorum gratia. 2 Epid. sect. 4. Hippocrates himselfe also, where he affirmeth, that both it helpeth the colour of the face, and disperseth the blood through the whole bodie. In cold and moist cachecticall constitutions, it may be now and then, and by intermission used, and that at fit and opportune times: but yet never so as the body be thereby prejudiced, or the facultie offended. And this must be, as it were, by way of exercise, and that with great discretion: as for the degrees of anger, wee mentioned them in the generall discourse of the passions; and howbeit all the sorts of this passionate anger be evill, and pernitious; yet the most violent and most furious

are most hurtfull to health* and inflict the deepest wounds. Before I finish this discourse of anger, resteth yet I should say something concerning a question which may here be asked, Whether any may die of anger, as of other passions of the minde?
Whether one may dy of anger.Now, that I have reason on my side to move this question, it may from hence appeare, that even O^ timorem nonnulli subitaria morte perierunt, prae gaudio etiam nonuulli, etc At ex ^ratu nemo mortuus est, ut pote quibus, neque ca or refrigeratur, neque robur dissolvitur. De Sympt. caus. lib. 2.Galen himselfe, who freely confesseth that of exorbitant joy and griefe one may die, yet, that ever any died of anger, hee altogether denieth. His reasons are probable, in that anger neither cooleth the bodie, nor yet overthroweth the strength thereof. But by Galens good leave, we have of late yeeres learned another lesson. In his time hee never had observed it, and yet others have since his time: Bernardus non videt omnia. Plat. Oservat. medicin. lib. 7. pag. 34. A late Writer, and heretofore sometimes mentioned, tells us this storie: A widdow being married to a captaine and Switzer by nation, on the marriage day, some of her friends having hindred her to bestow upon her new married husband so much as she desired, was so transported with choler, that shee would eat no supper that night, and fell, a few houres after, into so strong convulsions, that shee died immediatly after. Jdem. ibid. page 46. History. The same Authour relateth yet another historie: A man of good account having by certaine intelligence found, that his maide had one night lien with his miller, watching her on the morning, as shee came home, pulled her by the haire of the head, and troad her under his feet, and was in that violent manner transported with anger and indignation against her, that suddenly he was seased with shortnesse of breath, and a trembling over his body, insomuch that I (being called to looke upon his wives eye) found I had more need to succour him: but having used phlebotomy, and findin no alleviation, the former accidents continuing, and strength decreasing, he died withing two daies. By this then which hath beene said, the truth of this assertion may appeare, so that I shall not neede to instance in more examples of such as have fallen into Epilepticall, Apoplecticall and convulsive fits, and after died of the same. Those that are wise, will be warned by that which hath beene said, to those not I, but that truth which cannot erre telleth them, that anger resteth in the bosome of fooles, and therefore with these verses I conclude this point.


Ira animis lethale malum procul absit, ahilla


mors saepe ingeniis corporibusque venit.


Turbat enim, caecaque animos caligine versat,


et sensus tota cum ratione rapit.


Sicut enim tactae serro candente lacunae


sic motu calidi sanguinis ira fremit.


Hinc subitis fractos accendit febribus artus,


saepius hic etiam deteriora facit.


Hinc flavam ratione omni praevertere bilem


convenit, and caussis non statuisse locum.



A deadly plague to mortall minds, is fretting wrath and rage,
It kills the body, spoiles the wits, thine anger then asswage.
It troubles so, and over-turnes mens heads and hearts alway,
That senses, wit and reason quite, it snatcheth cleane away.
As water trenches make a noise, hot yron put therein,
So anger meeting with hot blood, to rage doth still begin.
Thus man with sudden agues oft his broken limbs inflames,
And oftentimes in mortall men, it breeds far worse ill quames.



CHAP. XXXIII.

Of Sorrow, Griefe and Feare, the danger and detriment commeth thereby to the bodie of man; and how hurtfull in sicknesse and in health: Whether any may die of Sorrow and Griefe.

THere is yet a passion of the minde, oppressing both body and minde, when it exceedeth moderation, and is not kept within the compasse of mediocrity, and ruled by reason. And this is Griefe and Sadnesse, which in Latine hath obteined divers names, which by reason of the penury of our vulgar tongue cannot all be Englished by severall termes. They proceed all from the opinion of some future or instant evill oppressing the minde, and by this meanes often occasioning great hurt to the bodie: and are these following: Metus, Tristitia, Timor, Terror, Pavor, Consternatio, and exanimatio,Several sorts of fear^ and griefe. as we have already in the generall discussed. These passions doe all, more or lesse, concentrat and draw in the spirits from the circumference or outward parts to the center, or middle region of the bodie, the heart especially, which being destitute of heat and spirits, they doe by this meanes coole and drie up the bodie; and that lesse or more, according to the extension or remission of the passion, the sudennesse of the same, together with the aptitude of the subject to receive such impressions. Of this effect of sorrow and griefe, the wise Salomon was not ignorant. Proverb^ 12.25. Heavinesse in the heart of man maketh it stoupe, and againe, 15.13. By sorrow of the heart, the spirit is broken; or as it is after expressed, it drieth the bones. This feare or griefe, or sorrow, are commonly affections following melancholie, and depending thereupon; on the which subject, if I should expatiate, I had need begin another volume; but because this hath bin by Democritus Iunios, or Burton of melancholie. others, both learnedly and largely handled, as also my purpose and intention not being here to handle any particular disease, but briefely to say something concerning these passions of the mind, and what dangers they procure to the body in sicknesse and in health, I will not meddle therewith, but prosecute that I have undertaken. This grief and sorrow then, if too much yeelded unto,Hurts procured by griefe and sorrow. will to some procure irrecoverable Consumptions, will dry up the braine and marrow of the bones, hinder concoction, and so procure crudities by meanes of want of rest, and by consequent prove a cause of many dangerous diseases. Now, as the excesse is hurtfull to all, so to some farre more than to others: especially to leane spare bodies, dry braines, persons inclining to melancholy. And women, especially, if with childe, young children, who be reason of

their sexe and age are lesse able to resist such passions, and some by naturall constitution very timorous, are more liable to danger, by reason of feares and sudden frights, than other people. It is therefore a very unadvised course most commonly to affright children with bug-beares, hob-goblins and the like:An evill custom to affright yong children. for there is many times thereby such a deepe impression of feare ingraven in their tender senses, that howsoever it doth not bereave them of their lives; yet are they so possessed with an habituall feare, that they are scarce ever freed therefrom; at least, untill they atteine to ripe and mature age. And some that are yet of a more tender constitution, are sometimees ceized with some sudden and dangerous disease, if they escape death: as Paralyticke, Epilepticke, Apoplecticke and convulsive fits, as I could easily instance, but that I cannot dwell upon it.Dangerous, especially for women with childe. Of all others it is most dangerous for women with child; and that not only for feare of present aborsion; but even for some future feare of some hurt may befall the tender fruit of her wombe. I have knowne some little better than meere naturalls, by reason of the mothers fright, during their ingravidation. It hath beene often also observed, that even upon men of mature age and judgement, the strong apprehension of some future danger, hath in them produced strange and sudden effects. Schenck. observat. med. libr. 1. obs. ^. ex Had. Junii li. de coma. History of one whose haire turned white in one night. A late Authour relateth a storie of a young Gentleman, whose haire was in one night turned white. The Gentlemans name (saith he) was Didacus, or Diegus Osorius, a Spaniard, Who falling in love with a Gentlwoman, one of the Queene of Spaines attendants, this Gentleman according to former agreements, was got up into a tree growing within the precincts of the court, but bewrayed by the barking of a dogge, was by the guard laid hold on, committed to prison, and in danger to have lost his life, for attempting any such thing within the precincts of the court. The next morning the keeper found this Gentlemans haire turned to a perfect white color as the antientest mans in the countrie (and yet their haire in that countrie is ordinary of a blacke colour) the which the King first hearing related, and seeing it so indeed, it wrought such an alteration in his minde, that not onely freed hee him from his punishment, but restored him to his former liberty, affirming, that it was punishment enough to have changed the flower of youth with white old age. Idem ex Levini Lemni^ de complex. li. 2. c. 2. Another. There is in the same Author a like accident happening in the cour of Charles the fifth, Emperor, whom the Emperor himselfe could scarce beleeve to be the same party that was committed to prison the night before, and granted him likewise a gracious pardon: And many strange accidents are there out of divers Authours related, which for brevity I here passe by. Now, as other passions excite and stirre up some particular humour: as joy stirreth up the blood,These passions excite and stirre up melancholy. and anger choler; so doth feare and griefe stirre and move melancholy. But it may then be demanded, whether such passibe contrary to all sorts of people, and whether one may ever give way ons thereunto?What sort of people are least hurt therby. I answer, some people are more privileged than others; provided alwaies, that it be not in excesse: and such are principally Arnold Villa nov. com in c. 1. Schol. Saler. Faul. Aegin lib. 1. c. 57. Aetius cap. 32. Rhas. lib. 4. ca. 9. ad Almans. grosse, fat and foggie people, with full bodies, and such as have their spirits hot and moveable. And in such people sadnes, feare, and profound cogitations and cares do somewhat blunt the edge of those hot and fiery moveable spirits, and withall do extenuate and take away some part of that bulke of body wherewith they are so burthened; the which both

Greeke and Arabian Physitians doe with unanimous consent witnesse. Such as are of a contrarie constitution, of bodie, braine, or both, as wee have said already, are by all meanes possible, as they love their lives and healths, to shun and avoid these passions. But in sicke persons especially, which is that I here principally aime at, there must a singular care and regard be had, that as little distaste as possible be given. And herein that golden rule of Hippocrates hath chiefely place; Aph. 1. lib. 1. that it is not sufficient for the Physitian to play his part, but the assistants also, and attendants; and all other things must also be answerable. The sicke, wee know, by reason of his sicknesse, hath sorrow enough, especially, if the party be of a feeble, fearefull and pusillanimous spirit, the phansie still framing unto it selfe new feares of some bad and sinistrous event. And thus wee see through rashnesse and indiscretion of some about the sicke, sometimes by relating to them some evill tidings, and sometimes putting them in needlesse feares, without any sure ground: or yet when there is just cause of feare in the sicke; yet being indiscreetly revealed to him, either by the Physitian, or others, or yet at an unseasonable time: as about the time of rest, or before meales, may much prejudice the sicke. And therefore I advise all those whom it concerneth,Care and circumspection to bee used whom wee suffer to come about the sicke. to be very vigilant and circumspect, whom they suffer to come about the sicke, wee finding by daily experience, that many times ignorant and unadvised people, prove the causes of infinite evills to the sicke: and that sometimes by disswading them from a laudable and legall course for the speedie recovery of their health, prescribed by learned and wise counsell; especialy if their shallow capacities be not able (as seldome they are) to dive into the depth of the Physitians intentions: and sometimes also by erring in the maner above-mentioned. Such constitutions of body as we named heretofore, are not hereby so much wronged, providing we goe not too farre. My meaning is not here, notwithstanding that which hath beene said, to forbid any that true sorrow for sinne, and a true compunction of heart, for offending the Majestie of the Almighty God, the which will be so farre from producing those effects of worldly sorrow, that on the contrary, it will purchase to thy soule more solid comfort and content, and more inlargement of true heavenly joy to thy drouping and sorrowfull soule, than all the silver and gold of Ophir, and both the Indies, and all the gracious gems and jewells ever gave to the greatest upon earth that possessed them; yea, if it were yet possible they were all in one mans possession: And as Proverbs 14.23. the wiseman saith, that, Even in laughter there is sorrow; so may I as well invert it, that even in this godly sorrow, is joy in the holy Ghost, and comfort unspeakable. Worldly sorrow causeth death (saith the Apostle) but godly sorrow causeth repentance not to be repented of. But many are the volumes written by our learned Devines, concerning this subject; among others Robert Bolton, preacher of Gods Word at Broughton in Northampton shire. a learned late Divine hath handled this point very punctually, in his learned and elaborate Treatise of comforting afflicted consciences. But this not being my proper element, therefore I proceed.
There is yet a doubt concerning this point,Whether one may dy of sorrow or griefe. which resteth to bee discussed, whether of griefe or sorrow any may dye? To this question

Itaque etiam ob ^^^morem, and immentum moerorem ^^nnulli repeniana merte ^interie unt, quod sci^icet imbecilla suaple natura animula eorum sub valido affectu oppr^ssa confertim extincta and suffocata sit. De causa symptom lib. 2 Galen himselfe maketh answer that one may dye of these passions, and to this doe all Physitians assent; and experience maketh it so appeare. And this same Author seconds his authority with sound reason: for in such passions the blood and spirits having a speedy and sudden recourse to the heart to succour the same in so great a need, where aboarding it with too great violence, and in too great a quantity, they leave the outward parts of the body quite destitute of this blood and spirits. We see what a strange effect this griefe wrought on 1 Sam. ^.18. good old Heli (alas how small is our griefe for matters of this nature) when he heard the arke of God was taken. And 1 Sam. 4.20. that worthy woman his daughter in law, although her husband were a prophane and wicked man, yet at the hearing of the taking of the arke, she was so much therewith affected, that nothing, no not the newes of a sonne borne of her womb, could give her any comfort, or hinder her from following the footsteps of her father in law in giving up the ghost And Ioseph. antiquit. Judaic. lib. 12. cap. 13. histories relate that Antiochus Epiphanes, or rather, as some well call him, Epimanes, that tyrant, being chased out of Persia, and hearing also that his generall Lysias was defeated, and chased away by the Jewes, by reason of greife and sorrow fell into grievous diseases: although there was yet in him divine punition to be observed, and yet not excluding naturall causes. Platerus observat. medic. lib. 1. pag 49. A famous Physitian, and now and then mentioned in this discourse, relateth a story to this same purpose.History. A preacher of this City (Basil he meaneth) accompanied with his wife onely, in the moneth of November returning from a village not farre from the towne, hearing them call to shut up the gates, hee ranne before to cause them keepe open the gate untill his wife came in, and so entring himselfe supposed his wife had been entred after him, the gate was shut and she excluded (the keyes being, as is the custome, immediatly carried to the Burgermaster, no entry is of any to be expected for that night, as I found once too true by mine owne experience) and neither could he get forth to her, nor shee suffered to come in to him, the night very darke; this poore desolate woman, all the night filling the aire with her complaints (there being no house nor town within a great way of this city) passed a part of the night, and in the morning of this feare and griefe was found dead at the gate. Idem ibid. pag. 33. The same Author relateth yet two other stories making to us appeare the truth of this point. A company of young wenches in the Spring of the yeere, walking abroad in a faire morning, they came to the place of publike execution, where was still hanging upon the gallowes one who had been lately put to death. These wild wenches beganne to throw stones at this dead corps: at length one throwing a greater stone than the rest, this corps turned round: at the which motion, this maid apprehended such feare and terror, that strongly apprehending this* dead corps to be alive, with all possible speed shee ranne home, still supposing this dead body followed her. Being come home, she fell into strong and violent convulsive fits,Another. and so died suddenly. Idem ibid. Another young maid about 16. yeeres of age went downe into a grave new digged, where had beene layed heretofore some matron of the City of Basil, and not as yet consumed: this dead carkasse this young maid essayed to lift up by the armes; but was presently striken with such a feare and terror, that she went home, and was seized with so violent Convulsions, that her eyes were like to leape out of her head, and so presently died, and was the next day buried in a grave hard by the other; as though

this dead corps had called for her company; as shee cryed out a little before her death. In the late yeare 1630. in the beginning of January, my presence and paines was craved for a yong Gentleman living within some few miles of Northhampton then sicke of a Fever.History of a young Gentlewoman recovering of a dangerous fright and convulsions. Within some two or three dayes this gentleman still continuing very sicke, the gentlewoman his wife being now quicke with child, terrified with some accidents she saw in her husband, and withall fearefull of some future event, fell suddenly one morning into strong and violent fits of Convulsions (being at other times also subiect thereunto) the agitation of her head and armes being so violent, sometimes drawne one, and sometime another way, that much trouble it was to hold her: but withall the blood and spirits flying all upwards, the nether parts were left so feeble, that she was presently deprived of the use of her legs, insomuch that she was in a chaire carried into another roome. But yet the gentleman her husband recovering, shee was in a few dayes freed from all her former fits and feares; and at her full appointed time was safely delivered of her burden, without any hurt or danger either of herselfe or infant. I have the more willingly instanced in these particulars, to make every one more carefully and circumspect in avoiding and shunning these passions, and whatsoever may provoke or incite us thereunto. The remedies shall appeare in the next Chapter, where wee purpose to speake of the last passion.


CHAP. XXXIIIJ.

Of Ioy and Gladnesse, and of the excesse thereof, which may also hurt the body: and whether any may die of excessive ioy.

THat the former passions are prejudiciall, and often very hurtfull to mankinde, especially if they exceed, may easily obteine credit, perhaps, with an ordinary understanding: but that joy and mirth so agreeable to our nature; and so acceptable to our senses, should ever produce any such effect, will hardlierreceive entertainment. And this may seeme yet so much the more strange, in regard this is that we all principally aime at, as being a soveraigne and excellent meanes, not onely to preserve and mainteine our health, but likewise to recover the same, being already lost. And good reason there is for this; Est letitia animi motus ad extimas corporis partes, cum libidine amplexandi gratum: in qua adeo fit sanguinis and spirituum motus vehemens, ut pusillanimes exanimato corpore reliquerit, ex nimia ipso^rum prosuslone. Mer. tom. 1. lib. 2. class, 2, quaest. 1^8, Joy being a motion of the minde to the outward parts, with a certaine gratefull and delighting desire to lay hold on that which may give us content. And yet there is withal such a violent motion and agitation of the blood and spirits, that weake and pusillanimous people may bee much thereby endangered. And the wise man intimates unto us such a moderation in every thing, where hee warnes us to be wary even in visiting our neere and loving friends, under the comparison of eating hony moderately, wherein if we exceed, we may fare the worse for it. But as for moderate Joy it is commended

by the Holy Ghost himselfe, and in the same Booke of Proverbs the utility thereof extolled. Animi and corporis tame^si sua substantia and materia lo^^e maximu discrimen si^ tamen tam arcto illa vencuio Deus colligavit, ut mutua sit utriusque in se invicem compassio, seu (...) Nam corpore afflicto dolor ad animum redit: and contra, animo exulcerato corpus concutitur. Sed maior tamen corporis quassario cum malum ab animo initium capit, quam cum contra fit. sametsi vero malum per totum corpus se diffundat, tamen quia eius mali indicium primum in^vu tu aspicitur, ideo Salomon vultus praecipuam mentionem facit; and docet a^imum latum and hilarem n^n tantum sanum corpus efficere sed porro reddere vultum aspectabilem and amabuem, ut si^ut corpus sanum est, sic etiam sanum and macre apparet. Vnde sit ut cum cor laetum sit, oculus sit vividus, versabilis, and ad videndum acutus, genae sint rabicundae, sanguis purus and purgatus, cutis pulcbra and spectabilis: contra vero cum animus afflictus est. Hoc quanti sit ad omnes vitae partes, non facile est explicatu. Num in cultu divino operae pretium est, ut animo laeto ac alacri fiat. Hince est quod Isaacus ad filiorum suorum propheticam benedictionem se acci^gens, priu^ mandat ferinam sibi comparari and vinum, quibus exbilaratus liberius posset manus Propheticum obire. Gen. 27. Elizeus contristatus aspectu impij Regis ^orami, antequam quid conatu^ sit, quo 3. Reges siti laborantes reficerentur, ^ussit sibi peritum musices adduci, cuim arte, and in pulsando perit^a ra^^ror^m pelleret. Quod si Prophetae qui per inspirationem locuti sunt hoc laetitiae animi adminiculo opus habent ad culium Dei pro dignitate exercendum; 2 Reg. 3.13. nedumalij, etc. Apud homines etiam officia quae a ir^stibus and maestis praestantur ingrata sunt, ut in Mardocheo and Nehemia liquido constat. Esth. 4 2. Nehem. 2.1, 2. Animum vero laetum vultum jucundum reddere apparet exemplo Esau^, munere a lacobo exhilaratus, vultu tam se amabilem and jucundum exhibuit, ut lacobus in eo, visus sit fac^em ^ei benignam intueri. Gen. 33.10. Sed in pijs hoc magis illustre est, qui pace conscientiae ^ecreati vultum habent and aspectum (...) lem Vide Naz^^eos, qui cum vinum non biberent, tamen, etc. Vide porro exemplum Danielis and sociorum, qui tametsi leguminibus and aqua pascerentur, tamen, etc. Haec igitur animi laetitia, quae consistit in reconciliatione cum Deo, vnde nascitur bona conscientia, omnibus fucis and pigme itis, quae moltes and delicatae foeminae ^udiose ad se infucandum and ^pingendum conquirunt, potior and praestabilior est; praestabilior omni ^taeta and delectu ciborum, in quo tamen plurimi multum ponunt, vel omnia potius, (...) ad valitudinem and colorem tuendum pertinent. Cartwright ad vers. 13 cap. 15. Proverb. A merry heart maketh a chearefull countenance. And a learned expositor upon this place affirmeth, that although the substance of the soule and the body differ much; God hath notwithstanding tyed and united them so fast together, that there is no small harmony and sympathy betwixt them: insomuch that either of them being affected, the other suffereth also. And although the harme redoundeth to the whole body; yet because it is most conspicuous in the countenance, therefore the Wise man maketh chiefely mention of the countenance; and teacheth us here likewise, that a cheerefull and merrie heart not onely maketh the body sound and healthfull; but maketh a cheerefull and amiable countenance. Hence commeth it to passe, that when as the heart is merry and cheerefull, the eye is lively and quicke sighted, the cheeks of a comely, ruddy colour, etc. But all contrary, when the mind is heavy and dejected. In what an account and high esteeme this is in all the parts of our life can scarce be declared. For first, in Divine worship and service it is very requisite that we be of a cheareful countenance. And hence was it that Isaac preparing himselfe for that propheticall benediction of his sonnes, calls first for wine and venison, whereby his heart being cheered and refreshed, hee might the better performe this Propheticall function. And the holy Prophet Elizeus being much grieved at the sight of wicked Joram, before ever he went about to refresh those three Kings distressed with thirst, calleth first for a cunning Musitian, whereby the griefe and sorrow of his mind might be mitigated. Now if the Prophets themselves, inspired with a propheticall spirit, had need of this chearefulnesse of heart for the better performance of Gods worship and service, how much more have others use thereof? And such services as performed by sad and heavy persons, we see, are not so acceptable: as may in Mardochee and Nehemia plainely appeare. And we see that Esau being cheered with Jacobs gift, was of so cheerefull a countenance, that Jacob confesseth he beheld his countenance as though he had beheld the face of God. But in the godly (saith the same Author) this doth yet farre more plainely appeare, who being refreshed with the peace of a good conscience, have a cheerefull and lovely countenance. This may plainely appeare by the example of the Nazarites who drunke no wine, etc: As likewise by the example of Daniel and his fellowes, who although they fed but on pulse and water, yet their countenance was farre fairer and better liking than of any of the rest who were fed with all the Kings dainty fare. And therefore this Ioy and mirth consisting in our reconciliation with God from whence proccedeth a good conscience, is farre to be preferred before all the most curious washes and paints, wherewith the lascivious and dainty Dames of our times doe dawb, and as they thinke, so curiousl^ adorne their faces: yea, and of farre higher esteeme than all the most curious and dainty diet that can be devised, in the which neverthelesse, many, if not all, place all that pertaineth to the preservation of health and maintaining

the comely colour of the countenance. That the life therefore might bee the more comfortable, and that griefe, sorrow and sadnesse might not too much prevaile and oppresse us, it was the bounty of our good God to give us not onely food and raiment for necessitie, and water to quench our thirst: but to give us also wine to cheere the heart, oile to make glad the countenance (in the hot Easterne countries then in great request, howbeit in our cold climats not so usefull) and musicke both vocall and instrumentall, to stirre up, and excite the dejected melancholicke minde. And therefore the moderate use of all these comfortable creatures is, as we see, allowed by God himselfe: and besides good merry company, either at meales or otherwise; provided, the mirth be honest, not scurrilous, and offensive either to God or man: and thus may these verses following be understood:
Quaere igitur sed honesta tuis solatia curis,quae tibi nec somni, nec loca sola dabunt.Vtere convivis, non tristibus, utere amici,quos nugae and risus, and ioca salsa dabunt.Quem non blanda iuvent varii modulamina cantus?hinc iecur, and renes, agraque corda stupent.Nam nihil humanas tanta dulcedine mentesAfficit, ac melica nobile vocis opus.Seek comforts in thy griefe and cares, which may thy heart solace,Much more than either drousie sleepe, or solitary place.But let thy comforts comely be, and honest all thy jests.Converse with cheerefull merry friends, at banquets and at feasts.Sad company avoid and shun, such company frequent,As love in laughter and delights to have the meeting spent.What man so lumpish is of mood, whom musicke doth not move,And merry songs? these fro^ thy heart all pensive quames remove.For nothing doth with such sweetnesse the minde of man rejoyce,As doth that noble worthy worke, of mans melodious voice.
But my meaning is not here of such mirth and musicke as is most commonly and ordinarily used in Tavernes and Tap-houses, in Play-hous and Ale-house, where the most dissolute and deboist companion is often accounted the best fellow; and hee that can most dishonour God by blasphemous bloody oathes, and by that swinish sin of drunkennesse shew great manhood in un-manning himselfe, carrieth away the bell for good-fellowship, and such are accounted the onely merry companions of the countrie. If one should advise them sometimes in their merrie mood to sing Psalmes, it were puritanisme; and yet such a puritaine was the Iames 5.13. Apostle Iames: If any be merry, let him sing Psalmes: and such a puritane was the Ephes. 5.19. Apostle Paul, willing us to use Psalmes, Hymnes and Spirituall songs. I know there are times and seasons for all things; and as excesse of mirth is alwaies, so, especially, in these bleeding times of the Christian world most unseanable. 1 Kings 5.20. And as the Prophet Elisha said in another case, Is this a time to take silver, etc: So may I say, is this a time for such excesse?

The Lord (saith the Prophet Isaiah) God of hostes did call to weeping and mourning,Isaiah 12.22. and to sadnesse, and to girding with sackcloth; and behold, ioy and gladnesse, staying oxen, and killing sheepe, eating flesh, and drinking wine; let us eat and drinke and be merry, for to morrow wee shall die. And it was revealed in mine cares by the Lord of hostes; surely this iniquity shall not be purged from you. And the words of that worthy Vriah ought never to be forgotten: 2 Sam. 11.16. The Arke, and Israel, and Iuda abide in Tents, and my Lord Ioab, and the servants of my Lord are incamped in the open fields, shall I then goe into mine house, to eate and drinke, and lie with my wife? as thou livest, and thy soule liveth, I will not do this thing. There is yet a pregnant place for this same purpose. Amos 6.4. That lie upon beds of yvory, and stretch themselves upon their couch, and eat the lambs out of the flocke, and the calves out of the midst of the stall: that chaunt to the sound of the viol, and invent to themselves instruments of musick, like David. That drink wine out of bowles, and anoint themselues with the chiefe ointments, but they are not grieved for the affliction of Joseph: Therefore now shall they go captive with the first that goe captive, and the banquet of them that stretched themselves shall be removed. Let our Preachers apply these places; I will not thrust my sickle into another mans harvest.Sicke folkes chiefely to be cheered up, and who have greatest need. But now, as concerning mirth, and cheerefulnesse in diseased and sicke persons, I thinke it is to them by all meanes to be procured; and, as I said already, all manner of discontents are to be avoided. But of all other, sicke people, to such especially as are otherwise of a melancholy constitution of bodie, or sicke of any disease tending that way, although but accidentally: as likewise such as are of themselves fearefull and pusillanimous, and easily dismaied at a small matter. And herein is required great wisdome and circumspection, and that the Physitian doe accommodate himselfe to the severall dispositions of his patients, and to many particular circumstances concerning them, which cannot punctually be set downe. And howbeit this passion as well as others may sometimes exceed the bounds of mediocritie, yet are not the sicke for the most part so much hereby indangered as by other passions: Resteth now to discusse one question before we conclude.
Whether any may dy of mirth and ioy.Since joy and mirth is so agreeable to mankinde, and lesse offensive than any of the rest, it may then, not without good reason, be demanded, whether any may die of this passion? I answer, that even Praegaudio autem nonnulli supra modum pusillanimes mortui sunt, haud aliter quam timentes, de Symptom. caus. lib. 2.Galen himselfe, who was ignorant that any could die of anger, yet did confesse, that some might die of too great joy. And there is some reason for it: for the blood and spirits flying all from the center, or heart, to the circumference or outward parts, the party must needs die, the heart now being left destitute of such necessary provision: and Gaudio praeter Chilonem de quo diximus, Sophocles, Dionysius Siciliae tyrannus uterque accepto tragicae victoriae nuncio. Mater pugna ila Caennensi filio incolumi viso contra falsum nuncium, Plin. lib. 7. cap. 8. Pliny makes mention of some: as of one Chile, Sophocles, Denis the Tyrant, and of her, who after that dismall battel of Canes, contrary to a false rumor, received her sonne alive, whom she supposed to have bin dead. And Purchas maketh mention of the like accidents even in this our age. Purch. lib. 4. cap. 9. Abraham Kendall (saith he) put into the Ile of S. Helena, about the yeere, 1592. and left on shore a sicke man, whom Edmund Barker 18 moneths after found in good plight: but their unexpected comming, as it seemeth, so ravished his weake spirits with ioy, that it distracted him, and being otherwise of constitution very well, he died 8 daies after. The like hee saith of a Portugall in the same place: I wish therefore

thou use moderate mirth and cheerefulnesse, and such as be too much subject to sorrow and griefe, to refraine therefrom, and not to give way to any anxious cares, which are the causes of many mischiefes both to the body and the minde. Take therefore this counsell with thee:
Omnia curarum somenta relinque, nec ullisCorpus habe pressum sollicitudinibus.Anxia mens, non ipsa sibi, non rebus agendisconstat, ab hac vitium corpora saepe trahunt.Hince variae pestes, morborum mille figurae,crede animam nostri corporis esse ducem.Saepe graves ista, veniunt ex arce labores,sicut ab aercis pestilens aura plagis.All things that may thy cares increase, avoid and lay aside,Keepe still thy heart from heavinesse, let joy there still abide,A pensive minde even to it selfe, inconstant is alway,And in all things it undertakes, it keepes no constant stay.From thence the body often drawes corruption and vice,Hence plagues, and of sore maladies a thousand sorts arise.This know, that of each man the soule is of his body guide:From whence, as from corrupted aire, great pains in him reside.
And thus much shall suffice to have said of joy and mirth, the true antidot against sorrow, griefe and feare. And this likewise shall suffice concerning all the passions and perturbations whereof I undertooke to speake: and as I said at first, I am not ignorant, but that there are yet a many more affections which in time worke a deepe impression both on the body and minde of man; yet worke they but leisurely, and by degrees, and worke no such sudden impression, and therefore I passe them by.


The Conclusion of this whole Discourse.
BY that which hath beene said already, may plainly appeare how excellent, and how usefull is this Diet of the Diseased, and how necessary it is to be carefull in the prescription thereof, and from hence may evidently be evinced, into what danger they precipitate themselves, who fall into the hands of such unskilfull persons, who are not able to advise them what Diet is best, and what is worst. And yet, as by this precedent discourse hath plainely appeared; Diet is that which principally, and above all other meanes, is narrowly to be looked into. And that this is not a matter of so small a moment, as by the vulgar it is accounted, hath at great length,Many things in this discourse to be considered. by the authority of the learned in all ages, beene plainely proved. In the first particular then, wee see, wee must consider the nature of the aliment, whether it be a vegetable; as all sorts of
(...)

plants, fit for the use of man; the variety whereof, together with their severall vertues, wee have at length set downe. Againe, there being such varietie of other creatures, foure-footed beasts, fowle and fishes, which afford food for susteining of mans life, their natures must be well knowne, and what food they afford the sicke, and how safe it is to administer the same. Besides all this, the right preparation is duely and carefully to be observed; some sickenesses requiring one, and some another kinde of food, and a different preparation. And besides, the quantitie must carefully be observed, and that according to severall individuall bodies; and the order, when more than one dish is allowed. Now, all this is yet nothing, if the state of the individuall bodie thou dealest with, be not without great care and diligence looked into. And principally, and above all other things, wee must have a watchfull and carefull eye over the strength of the sicke, and not onely narrowly observe the difference of severall and individuall parties, one from another, according to their severall complexions* but even one and the same individuall partie, how it differeth from it selfe, according to the severall seasons, not onely of the sicknesse, but even of the time of the yeere also. All the which circumstances, as they have beene at great length discussed, so doeth it as evidently appeare, that this is not the taske of any ignorant quack-salving Mountebancke, Empericke, Barber-surgeon, or of an ignorant busie-bodie woman-physitian; nay, nor yet of a medling pragmaticall Minister: but of a skilfull and judicious Artist, able upon all occasions to adde what is wanting, to alter what is not usefull, and detract what is superfluous.If it transcend the skil of the ignorant Physitian, to prescribe good and wholesome diet for the diseased, how shal they be able to prescribe physicke fit for the state of the sicke bodies. If this then be true in this dieteticall part, as hath bin proved, what shall wee then say of the administration of physicke it selfe? If the unlearned, by reason of their unsufficiencie, are not to be allowed to deale with this dieteticall point, how much more are they unable and unfit for this other of so great a consequence? If the vulgar be so afraid of physicke, that scarce can they sometimes be perswaded in cases of greatest extremitie (and I cannot in some sort blame them, there being so many dog-leaches, and ignorant practitioners of all sorts suffered, as it were, to throw lots upon mens lives) to admit of any lawfull remedie, although exhibited by the hand of a skilfull, learned and rationall Physitian: why are some of them, yea, and some of a more refined judgement often so lavish of their lives, that they will sooner commit themselves into the hands of any quack-salving Mountebancke, or Barber-surgeon, than into the hands of the must learned and judicious Artist, and are often so shy of physicke, as of some deadly and deleterious poison: But it often befalleth them according to the old Proverbe.


Incidit in Scillam, dum vult vitare Charybdim.

They leape out of the frying-pan into the fire.

And whereas the learned and skilfull Physitian is furnished with store of gentle and benigne medicines, which offer no force nor violence

to nature; and if at any time the greatnesse and malignity of the disease indicate an addition of stronger remedies, either to acuate and quicken the dull and sluggish quality of the others, or to eradicate som inveterate disease; yet is he able so to correct the malignity thereof, that he can make it a soveraigne medicine for the healing of his infirmity: the other on the contrary useth most commonly his crude, maligne and unprepared medicines both mineralls and vegetables; the hurt and smart whereof, howsoever they be not at the first felt, yet are they often afterwards the causes of many mischiefes: besides, that this kind of counterfeit Physitian purgeth often away as well the good as the bad humor, the which is impossible for the patient to observe or discerne, howsoever he knowes it to his cost. But besides Empericks, there is yet another sort of intruder upon the profession of phycsike as faulty (if not more, all things considered) as the former: practising Ministers, I meane, concerning whom although I have in the beginning of this discourse said something; yet by reason of some seeming colourable objections might by themselves or others be made in their behalfe. I will adde yet something before I make a full end: although in my opinion, this one place of S. Paul, if there were no more, 2 Cor. 2.^6. Who is sufficient for these things? were sufficient to confute them.Charity is not sufficient to warrant any with the neglect of his owne calling to meddle with another calling, wherein is as much, if not more difficulty than in the former, and no lesse danger then of life in the errors committed therein. But I have heard some of them pretend a charity and love to their neighbours to helpe them in their need. This reason, as it first makes a glorious shew, so if we shall narrowly view this pretended reason, we shall find it like Ioseph. de billo Iudaic. lib. 5. cap. 5. those faire apples of Sodom, which being once touched, turned into ashes; and like Matth. 23.27. those painted sepulchers being within full of rotten bones. But this is no new practice to cover vice with the mantle of vertue; which as it is most common, so it is most accursed: Simulata sanctitas duplex iniquitas. And this by many places of Scripture I could make manifest, but that I think it wil not be denied, and I am loath to spend too much time on it. Charitable workes, I confesse, are to be performed; but every person is not fit for the performance of every worke of charity. The ministers charity is to have a care of his peoples soules, to visit and comfort them when they are sicke; and even to extend their charity to their bodies, according to their ability. As for the curing of their bodies, that exceedeth the compasse of their callings, and in so doing they break down hedges, and intrude upon another mans right. If they shall reply, that sometimes they do it to supply the place of a Physitian (perhaps) wanting. I answere, they are very witty to devise wiles to maintaine a wrong cause. And it was a good speech of a worthy Divine of this shire, now resting in peace: O quam argutatrix est humana ratio, praesertim quum aliquid de suis commodis and emolumentis deciditur! How hard doe men plead for their profits! I say againe, If a minister bee endued with any competent skill in this profession (as perhaps having learned it before he betooke him to this profession) and any of his parishioners be amisse, either in the absence of a sufficient Physitian, or yet in case of the patients poverty, the ministers charity in such a case is most seasonable. But my meaning is principally of such as make a pecuniary trafficke of this profession, erect Apothecary shops in their houses, and often traine up others in

that profession which they are yet themselves to learne, and have been knowne to have been most busie, where able and sufficient Physitians were to be found. And the want of able and learned physitians is often by meanes of their lawlesse intrusion occasioned. It is not unknowne to some, that some of these men have beene so impudent and shamelesse, that they have often offered their service to the Gentry, and people of best note, some of them traffiquing to and fro to engrosse all imployment into their owne hands, debasing and vilipending the actions of other able physitians: and if (perhaps) at any time, some successe doth second their bold attempts (as sometimes Audentes fortuna juvat, fortune helpes the hardy) thou shalt then have them like that proud Men^erates celebris Ep^lepsiae medicus nunquam sine in publicum, nifi suis quos curaverat, rabitu ^eorum vestius st^^^o^us, and ipse vero purpura vell^ tus, aurea orona deco ratus, sceptrum demque ^n ma^ibus velat alter Iupiter gest^nt, prodire solitus est Lang Epist. medic. lib ^. epist 25 ex Athen dipn. lib 7. Menecrates bragge and boast of their noble exploits. It is no doubt a hard case, when no Physitian will serve the turne but Levies Tribe; and if Lucullus were not, Pompey cannot live, scilicet! It is a hard case, no question, when Physickes sufficiency is all covered under a Clergy mans cassocke. But I would faine know what Aesculapius hath infused this sufficiency into them. The famous Universities of this Kingdome doe quite disclaime them as informe Monsters, and births borne out of season, which never yet received the right shape of a Physitian. The famous Physitians of the Colledge of London acknowledge them to have no part in the Hippocraticall commonwealth. Their grave and learned Brethren of best note deny them, The reverend Bishop of etero^riow in a Sermo pirached at Northampton this same yeere 16 ^ a little before midsommer, out of this text, Gen 47.3. What is you^ trade or occupation taught that a minist^ (...) trade, and should have but that on: the question being Quid operu in the singu^ar number. That ministers therefore are not to meddle with other callings. They are not then (saith hee) to meddle with Galen and Hippocrates, which he there proved ^oth learnedly and religiously, by the weightinesse of the calling, and paines there^n to be im lo^ed. And as there was there a great deale of good counsell for the clergis, ^o I hope he will have a care to be all faults and abuses of armed. some preaching against their practice, and some againe As it is unlawfull for a Physitian to preacher administer the Sacraments: so I thinke it unlawfull for a minister to be a professed practicer of Ph^sicke. Parre on the (...) to the Romanes publishing this dislike in print. But it may bee, they will claime kinred to the Theslal^s quum ostendit se in Hippocratica Disciplina nequaquam institutum, nec eius opera sub prae^eptore leg^sse, tamen non veretur talis quum sit, palmam sibi ipsi eri^ u^e Gal. meth. med. lib. 1. methodian Thessalus, who taught that the profession of physicke might in six moneths space be attained unto. Similes habent labra lactucas. Like lettice like lips. But there resteth yet an objection, and more materiall, at least in shew than the former. Venter non habet aures. Need maketh the old wife to trot. A necessity by some is pretended, their livings being too little, and their maintenance too meane to mainteine them and their families. I doe not deny, that many of our learned Levites are not rewarded according to their due desert, learning not beeing rewarded according to its worth; which is farre easier forme to lament than to amend But all the offenders cannot cover themselves with this cloake: nay, the most grosse and notorious offenders for the most part injoy greatest livings, of one, two, or three hundreds a yeere, if not upwards. One of them in my knowledge hath plaied the usurer; although some of the principall is gone into a bottomelesse bagge. Let the ingenious Reader then judge, whether any of these can justly plead poverty. Others againe, I confesse, have smaller allowance, and therefore would seeme to deserve more favour. In the first place, as I grant the antecedent, so I deny the consequent, as false and erroneous. Many honest men and good schollers of unblamable life and conversation I my selfe well know, whose livings come not neere the others who have least; many of them not exceeding forty, thirty or twenty pounds, and some not twenty Marks, yet far more painefull in their calling than the former, of whom none that I could yet heare of under fifty, three or fourescore pounds. But put the case this were yet true, what then? Must they strike Richard for Robert?

Must they robbe Peter to pay Paul? If they themselves be wronged, must they of necessity injure others? Must they of necessity deprive the people of their paines, and encroach upon an other calling too weighty and heavy for their shoulders? But if they will needs make an addition to their meanes, why meddle they not with some other calling of lesser consequence, in the performance whereof the error of the Artist bringeth lesse danger and detriment? If they shall reply, that were too base for them, I answere, that Acts 18.3. and 20.34. 1 Cor. 4.12. 1 Thessal. 2.9. 2 Thessal 3.8. S. Paul, notwithstanding, in the night-time made tents, and in the day-time was diligent in delivering his masters message. And there are yet some other meanes in case of necessity might farre easilier and safelier be used, than the profession and practice of Physicke, and that without derogation from the dignity of a scholler. And yet the Abissine Priests even at this day keepe this custom, of For this same practice there were canons in former times set downe.Clericus quantum libet verbo Dei eruditus, artificiolo victum quaerat.Et postea.Clericus qunntum libet verbo Dei eruditus artificiolo, vel agricultura absque officij sui detrime^to victum praeparet. Lib. Concil. Concil. Carthag. 4. can. 51, and 52. labouring in som trade or calling, their ordinary maintenance being but very meane. But let no man mistake my meaning, as envying the maintenance of worthy, learned and religious, painefull Divines, as willing to reduce all to that antient, Apostolicall custome, which in our established Churches now for good reasons, I confesse, to be out of use. Absit, nay it never came into my thought. Nay, would to God I might bee so happy to live to see abuses reformed, buyers and sellers whipt out of the Church, and Levi to injoy his full allowance, that I might then with Luk. 2, 29. holy old Simeon, sing a joyfull Nunc dimittis. On the the otherside, let ministers wait on their ministery: I neither plead for Simoniacke Patrons, nor yet for lazy Levites: but as I thinke them worthy of double honour, so let them consider who deserve the same; such as labour in the word and doctrine. As for idle loytering Levites, who seeke the fleece and not the flocke, I thinke them so unworthy of any honour, that I wish, like drones they may be driven out of the Church. Some againe, willing to mince the matter, maintaine, that a minister may at least so farre play the Physitian, as the Physitian is somtimes to play the part of the minister: and that as somtimes the physitian in absence of the minister may administer spiritual physicke to the sicke, so may the Minister in absence of the Physitian administer to the patient corporall physicke. I confesse this maketh the fairest shew of reason of any of the former, and my meaning is as farre from hindering charity in time of necessity: provided alwayes, the party be able to exercise that kind of charity, and this particular case occurreth but seldome. Againe I say, there may here fall out by this meanes some inconvenience; so that still, Latet anguis in herba. Besides, these two cases are farre unlike, there being therein a great disparity.Consider the diversity of these two cases. The Physitian may in time of need give the sicke good and wholesome counsell for his soules health: and this may sometimes a neighbour aswell, yea, it may be, better performe, than either the Minister or the Physitian. The Physitian then performeth this charitable worke, as the duty of a common Christian, and that which any other that is able is allowed to doe, there being no danger in applying this remedy, if done but in any ordinary discretion: although it were to bee wished the spirituall Physitian himselfe were able alwayes to administer his owne Physick. Now the case standeth

not alike with the minister, who may easily be mistaken either in the disease, or the remedy due to the same, or yet in the due and convenient time of application, with divers other considerable circumstances, unlesse hee be skilled aswell in a theoricall knowledge, as in the practicall imploiment of this profession: unto the which he shall hardly ever atteine, without the neglect of the worthiest of the two. And put the case hee may yet helpe some distressed neighbour in his need, it will both draw him on to doe the like for others, who may plead the like interest in him; and againe, his example may incourage some ignorant and idle dames to doe the like. Principiis obsta. Resist occasions of errour at first. All the errours of the Romane Church at first crept in upon faire and plausible pretences, as might easily be proved; the which now are become so many, and so strongly mainteined, that wee had now need of some Hercules to cleanse this uncleane and filthy stable. And the Pope himselfe, made he any small account, thinke you, of such ware, whenas History of the councell of Trent. hee sent his holy ghost so often post in a cloak-bagge from Rome to Trent, to inspire the Fathers of that councell, to stand stoutly to the mainteinance of this their freehold? But if they will yet plead any sufficiency in themselves, whereby they may safely practise this profession, and if any Aesculapian genius hath infused into them the Hippocraticall skill, I see no reason why they should be debarred from doing good, even in this same kinde. But let this proviso be put in, That they first resigne their livings to those who will affoord them better attendance. I neede not mention that young frye of able schollers, these famous nurseries of good learning, like two fruitfull mothers, send yeerely abroad into this our fruitfull Canaan, flowing with milke and hony: and how many of these stand idle in the market-place, no man hiring of them into his Vineyard; when as others undertake and ingrosse farre more worke than either they are able, or is fit they should deale with. But if the dole be a dealing, I see no reason why the Physitian may not claime a share in it, as well as they doe in others. The Talion Law will allow it, and I make no question, but they may finde some of them as fit to preach, as they to practise. As for that objection taken from the affinitie of the soule and body, I thinke it not of that worth,Objection taken fro^ the affinitie of the soule and the bodie, idle, and to small purpose. as to be objected by any scholler: and yet I have heard that some have pleaded this. Now, if it may take place, it will make as much for the Physitians preaching, as for their practising. And besides, if this argument may take place, then by reason of this affinitie of the members of the bodie one with another, the Tailor shall become a Shoo-maker; and againe, the Shoo-maker a Tailor: and the Haberdasher (because he dealeth with the head, the most eminent part, and seat of the sense and reason it selfe) will, perhaps, plead a priviledge in all three, and more also. I have somewhat the more at large insisted upon this point, not only for that this notorious abuse, hath so long continued; but likewise to give warning for the time to come, that Ministers keepe themselves within the precincts of their owne calling. To this the weight of their owne calling, if there were nothing else, might be a sufficient motive: besides, that I have proved in the beginning of this discourse, that the Physitians pains and trouble are greater than of any

calling, yea, even of the painfull and laborious Divine himselfe. It is true, the Divine hath his evasion: for many of them have this tricke (although scarce honest) that they are ready to gleane what gaines they can gets by sitting still in their cells, casting waters, as they call it, prescribing medicines to the absent, fall out as it wil: and when the patient hath most need of their presence, Mr Parson cannot come then: and by this means, many times Mr Parson hath his gaines come in easily, declining the greatest pains; and if the patient rely wholly upon him, he shal either be denied that attendance is due in time of danger, or else cast upon another physitian, who must now take the worst, when Master Parson hath had the best. Some againe will sometimes, and that often, attend, as another Physitian, on the necessitie of the sicke: and here is then another inconvenient, that many times, when Master Parson or Vicar should be in his pulpit, his patient calls for his presence. Let the judicious and unpartiall reader then judge of the equitie of this cause. Wee still hope, (and have hoped a great while) that the reverend Fathers of the Church will have an eare open to heare this more than just complaint. No ignorance can be pretended, this not being done in a corner, but in the eyes of all Israel. And among them, such especially, as are too much addicted to judiciall Astrologie, and many suspicious, if not sinfull things thereupon depending: as calculating of nativities, and prognosticating future events thereby; using amulets without any shew of reason, to cure diseases, and to prevent many outward accidents, are to be inquired into: if the antient Si quis Astrologia, vel mathesi existimat esse credendum anathemafit. Toletan. 7. con. 21. Canons and Constitutions of the Church forbid such trash indefinitely, shall this be suffered in a Church-man, now under the cleare Sun-shine of the Gospell? But I leave this text, wishing withall, that people would not prove a means of distracting the Divine, and hindering him in that whereunto he is called and set apart, lest they prove accessary to his neglect, if he have not so much grace to looke to it himselfe. I have In the preface to the arraignment of urines. elsewhere alleaged the example of David, 2 Sam. 23.16, 17. who would not drinke the water that had bin fetch'd with the hazard of mens lives: see then how you seeke health with the hazard of mens soules.
But before I end,Sordide and base obiection in the defence of Empiricks. although I have already said somewhat of Emperickes, yet a word or two more. There is an ordinary objection wherewith many people deceive themselves in this care of Emperickes: for, say they, wee are by using Emperickes often freed from a great deale of charges which learned counsell would cost. I answer,Answ. that in the first place they build on a false foundation, parallelling and equalling ignorant Empetickes with the judicious and learned Physitian: and this erroneous opinion is often confirmed by meanes of the like events often befalling both the one and the other, which I have sufficiently confuted in the beginning of this discourse. It is then apparent, that this seeming saving of charges, is but a meere fallacie, and so many of them finde it at the last, when it is too late. For in the first place, the ignorant and unskilfull, howsoever most presumptuous of their owne skill and sufficiencie, yet are they not able often to finde out thy disease; especially, if either it be uncouth or intricate, composed or partaking of divers diseases, accompanied

with various and severall symptomes:Emperickes can neither finde out the disease, nor apply right remedies. farre lesse then are they able to apply a right and laudable remedie to the same. Againe, put the case they both finde out the disease, and apply some remedy: yet are their remedies often so rough, venomous and unprepared, that they leave a virulent and evill impression behinde them; the which, howsoever, peradventure, not at first felt, yet at length often payeth both the principall and interest. Besides, that I say nothing of their ignorance in the application, according to the severall constitutions of the individuall bodies, sexes, ages, order, time, quantity, qualitie, due preparation and correction; but especially the strength of the patient, etc. Besides all this, when they have thus hazarded their lives, spent their mony, poisned their bodies, and neglected good and wholesome remedies, which in time and place, in all probabilitie were like to have cured the infirmity: it commeth often to passe, that at length, howbeit too late, they are forced to flie unto the learned and judicious Physitian, as I could instance in many particulars. Now, if the patient recover, what is here saved? is he not here at a double charge, besides the hazard of his life? and if hee die, I confesse there is something saved: but I thinke people that are wise, should in this be of Satans minde, Iob. 1. Skinne for skinne, and all that a man hath will he give for his life. I meane, use the likeliest meanes to save thy life, and leave the successe to God. As for the meaner and poorer sort, there is no honest Physitian, but in charitie hee will be readie in time of neede to further their health with his best counsell. But this fault we finde to be as frequent in the rich, as in the poorer sort: some I know doe it out of meere ignorance; but others out of meere avarice and fordid tenacitie. And yet I have heard some say, their Empericke cost them as much as better counsell had done in former times. The ignorant are more to be excused, and therefore it were to be wished (and I doubt we may wish long enough) that there stumlbing blocks, which vulgar eyes are not able to discerne, were removed out of the way. Then should our Surgeons betake them to curing of their sores, wounds, and other things thereunto belonging: Apothecaries to their compositions; and other ignorant and illiterate Emperickes, forced to forsake their profession, and if they were of any before, to betake them to the same againe, or to same imploiment befitting them, if they were of no calling before. As for women, they might finde them worke within doores about their housewiverie, farre better beseeming their sexe, than to play the busie-bodie abroad, medling with that whereof they are altogether ignorant. But because a Doctor Venner, in his advertisement of the ^reat utility that commeth to mans body, by taking of physicke in the Spring. late learned Physitian of this land, hath lately said something concerning Emperickes, making well for our purpose, I will insert them also into this same place. But here I must advertise you, that you expose not your body to the unlearned Empericke, that can neither finde out the peccant humours, nor parts affected; but to such as are learned in that art, that can well iudge of your state of body, and accordingly prescribe you remedies, as your constitution and affected parts shall require. Many men thinke, yea, some of a generous note, wherin they bewray their carelessenesse, if not their stupiditie too, that whilest they are in health, they may for prevention take physicke from any one, it matters not

from whom it be, nor what physicke it be, so it worke with them. I must tell you, that many overthrow their bodies thereby, and that there is no lesse art and iudgement required for preserving the bodie in health, than for curing of it being sicke, if they did but know how the foure humours are, or ought to be proportioned in their bodies: for inioying according, to their constitutions, a sound and healthy state, they would, I am perswaded, be more cautelous, than to commit themselves into the hands of the unlearned, who, by their inconsiderate courses, take humours from them at an adventure, so well those that are not offensive, as those which are, to the utter subversion of the oeconomie of the bodie: whereof though, perhaps, in regard of their strengths, they are not by and by sensible, which is that which onely cloaketh the errours of Emperickes, and as a vaile masketh many mens eyes and understanding therein: yet they will, as I have in divers observed to their perill, by little and little, incurre a lapsed state of body. It is strange to see the ignorance of most people, how backward they are to give to the learned professors of physicke their due, readie to lay scandalls upon them; but forward to magnifie Emperickes, their physicke, their honestie, their care, willing to passe over and excuse their grosse slips and absurdities, O mira hominum stupiditas! But proceeds this altogether out of ignorance? I suppose no: for doubtlesse many seeke unto them, and magnifie their physicke, because it is cheape: but such are fooles and Gulls indeed; for they wrong, and even poison their bodies with grosse and ill qualified physicke to save their purses. But to answer the reasons, or rather words which they produce and alleage in the favour and behalfe of Emperickes: to what purpose is the working of that physicke which respecteth not the peccant humours, nor parts affected, but to the overthrow of the bodie? What is a supposed honestie in a Physitian without learning, but a snare wherein the ignorant doe voluntarily entrap themselves? I say supposed: for I cannot thinke that man to be honest, which usurps a calling, which with a good conscience hee is not able to discharge. Or to what purpose is the care that Emperickes take about their preposterous and ill composed medicines, but to the utter ruine of the patients bodie, as too too unluckie happened of late to a Gentleman of good worth and note, who taking physicke by way of prevention,History. of a Pill-boasting Surgeon, in a short space, by his ill qualified and preposterous physicke, incurred an incurable and mortall lapse of his stomacke and liver, being in his constant age and perfect strength of bodie. Vaine therefore, and very absurd is that conceit, which many have in favour of Empericks, viz, If they doe no good, they doe no harme. Admit that sometimes by their triviall pettie medicines they doe no harme; yet neverthelesse for that, I must tell you that they doe much harme: for the sicke bodie relying upon their skill, and they being not able to direct and execute such courses as shall be sitting and effectuall to impugne the disease, while there is time fitting for the same, the sicknesse gets the masterie, and then (perhaps) when the strength is too much weakened, and the disease become incurable, they seeke helpe of the learned Physitian. So basely verily, are most of our people affected to their health, that untill some practicall Minister, parish Clerke, Apothecary, Surgeon, or the like, have done their utmost hurt, they secke not to the Physitian. And here to vindicate our Art from calumnie, I cannot but taxe the most sort of people, that being affected with any great or difficult disease, which by reason of the nature thereof, or contumacie of the peccant humours, will have such progresse, as that it cannot in a short time, by the medicines and best indeavours of the learned Physitian,

how forcible soever, be evicted, will reiect their Physitian, and betake themselves, which is an absurdity, super omnem absurditatem, to some ignorant sottish Empericke, and every good wives medicine, to their great hurt, and oftentimes utter overthrow. But if it happen that they recover thereupon, they lay an imputation upon their Physitian, and grace their Empericke with the cure; whereas, in very deed, the matter of the disease was wholly, or at least the greatest part thereof eradicated by such fit and powerfull remedies, as the learned Physitian had formerly ministred unto them: whereupon the residue of the cure was effected by the force of nature, not by the weake endeavours of the Empericke, or triviall medicines of any other whatsoever. I have of purpose inlarged this advertisment, and doe leave it far a memoriall and caveat to all posterity, especially to the Gentlemen of this our age, who, for the most part of them, very much wrong their iudgements and understanding, in taking physicke of the unlearned; and wherein they doe not onely wrong themselves, but also give occasion of hurt others: For the meaner sort of people following their example, doe the like, whereby it comes to passe, that in all likelihood, more untimely perish (which I beleeve to be true in the Wee may say as much in these parts we live in, if the matter might be narrowly looked into. Westerne parts of this Kingdome) under the hands of Emperickes, than die otherwise. Such as will not take notice hereof, in Empericorum manus incidant. And if any Asinus Cumanus, or Terrae filius shall obiect, that divers recover under the hands of Emperickes; I answer in a word, that the recovery is not to be attributed to their physicke, but to the strength of Nature, that beares up, both against the disease,History of a bold Empericke, disgraced by that matchless prince King Iames, of happy memory. and their preposterous courses. A grave Divine lately told mee a story of a notorious old Empericke, living in the West countrie. This Empericke was by a Noble man brought before that famous Prince, King James, of happy memory, thinking thereby to grace him (a small grace for a great man to grace such worthlesse persons) which notwithstanding, was not answerable to expectation. This Noble Prince then, as hee was most iudicious, and Eagle-eyed in all Arts and Sciences; so had he a singular dexteritie in discerning a skilfull and learned Artist in the profession of physicke, from an Empericke, an ignorant and counterfeit Physitian. This bold Empericke (as is the custome of such emptie barrells to make a great sound) bragged before this learned Prince, how many Consumptions, and other dangerous diseases hee had cured: to whom his Maiesty replying, asked him how many hee had killed. This learned Prince asked him after if hee could cure mad men? that I can, quoth the Empericke: Being asked after what manner, by making of them madder, quoth the Empericke. I beleeve thee well saith his Maiestie, and withall, asked him whether hee had ever read Hippocrates,A speech well befitting such a Prince. Galen, and other physicall Authours? Who answered, that hee had never studied in any such bookes. His Maiestie at length, thus closed up his discourse, Goe thy way man; for if I have need of good advice for my soules health, I will be advised by the honest and learned Divine; for my bodily health, the learned Physitian; and for my temporarll estate, the learned Lawyer shall give mee directions. Now then, since people are commonly so carried with apish imitation of great ones, why will not people in this particular imitate the patterne of so great a Prince, of whom it may well be said, that since the daies of Solomon, the world saw not a wiser. But now to draw to an end, what I have said, either against these, or any other erroneous practitioners,

if the unpartiall reader will but seriously consider that which hath beene said alreadie in this precedent discourse, he will, I thinke, say, it was no lesse than necessary. I doubt not also, but according to the severall and various humours and dispositions of people, this my paines shall finde censurers of severall sorts. But against all envious detractions the uprightnesse and innocency of my intention, being a desire to profit the publique, shall be to mee as a brazen wall. Now, if I have done any thing well, as is fitting, it was that I aimed at: and if otherwise, yet was my principall aime and indeavour, to doe good: and therefore, in this imitating our gracious God, I pray thee to accept of my endeavours in a good part, and charitably to interpret any error or over-sight, Farewell.
FINIS.


