



THE PLAT-FORME
OF THE
GARDEN.
WHerefore, my GENIVS, I
would wish thee, to enter into the
large, spacious, and ample GARDEN
of our SACRED PARTHENES,
and there behold those specious,
and most delicious Obiects;
all, so wholy consecrated to her seruice, that they
seeme as borne to expresse her prayses; euerie one, to
help thee out, to accomplish and performe this task
so hard to vndertake, and impossible to be done so
worthily, as SHE deserues. Goe, I say; suruey her
GARDEN, beset with the bashful ROSE, the candid
LILLIE, the purple VIOLET, the goodlie
HELIOTROPION, sprinckled al with
DEWES, which the busie BEE gathers as it falles
from the HEAVENS, dressed with an IRIS, as with
a siluer MOON, insteed of a torch, and enameled
with miriads of STARRES, as lesser lamps, to afford
it light, in the obscuritie of the night; enclosed
round, and compassed-in with a wal, where on an
OLIVE, you may behold the iollie PHILOMEL to

pearch, chanting her Roundelayes; and on the other
side, a flourishing and statelie PALME; and likewise
see a goodlie HOVSE of pleasure, standing therin
before you; and if you mark it wel, you shal discerne
that domestical and almost inseparable companion
therof, the HEN, there scraping in the dust for food,
wherin She finds a precious Margarit or PEARL;
and on the top therof espy an innocent and meek
DOVE, as white and candid, as the driuen snow;
for in this GARDEN are al things pure. Where
likewise in a place more eminent and conspicuous
then the rest, you may behold a faire and beautiful
FOVNTAIN, artificiously contriued with
pipes so vnder ground, as waters al, when need
requires. And if, my Genius, al these wil not suffise,
to make vp ful thy Quire of Laudes, to magnify
thy SACRED PARTHENES, ascend vpon that
MOVNT before thy face; and with an Opticon
discouer thence, the Ocean SEA, and inuite it
likewise with the rest, to beare a part; and for a fuller
complement of al, waue but a little banner to some
SHIP or other, to come-in with al her fraught of
magnificent prayses. For al within ken or view of
that same MOVNT, are subiects and deare Deuotes
of our Sacred and Incomparable PARTHENES.
But soft, my Genius; ere thou leade thy Reader
into the Maze or Labyrinth of the beauties therin
contained, pause heer a while, to consider how to
behaue thy self, before (I say) thou let him in, to
speculate that Magazin of beauties; which
being so mysterious and delicious an Obiect, requires
not to be rashly lookt vpon, or perfunctoriously
to be slighted ouer, but, as the manner is
of such as enter into a Garden, to glance at first

theron with a light regard, then to reflect vpon
it with a better heed, to find some gentle mysterie
or conceipt vpon it, to some vse or other; and
then liking it better, to reuiew the same againe,
and so to make a Suruey thervpon to the same
vse. This would I haue thee punctually obserue
in al, to guide thy Reader with, in this present
GARDEN of our sacred PARTHENES. First
then shalt thou presente him with the Symbol it
self, set-forth in manner of a Deuise, with an Imprese
and Motto, expressing the allusion to the
SACRED PARTHENES herself, in some mysterie
of hers, or attribute belonging to her. Then
shalt thou take the Imprese being the Symbol by
itself, and dallie as it were with some natural
and apt Character vpon it; being no more, then
certain superficial Glances, deciphering it in some
sort, but lightly only, for a first entertainment of
thy Reader. The^ with Morals, on the Motto, shalt thou but
touch or reflect vpon the Paragon herself for the present,
and no more. Then looking back with a fresh
reuiew on the Symbol itself, by way of an Essay,
shalt thou make a fuller Suruey therof, discoursing
on the Paragon herself, to match compare, and
paralel them togeather, to find out some Elogies or
other, in prayse of our SACRED PARTHENES.
Thence to satisfy the Eye as wel as the Vnderstanding,
for his greater delight, thou shalt
pause a while, to leade him to behold, as in a Tapestrie,
the Symbol turned into an Embleme, piously
co^posed; where for the clearer vnderstanding therof,
the same shal be indicatiuely expressed in a Poesie,
made for the purpose. Then shalt thou make him sit
downe a while, to ponder, consider, and conte^plate
some things besides, conducing to the further discouerie

of the hidden mysterie, contained in the
Symbol itself, to the honour of our SACRED
PARTHENES, as certain Speculations or Theories theron.
And after al, shalt thou inuite him to Apostrophize
with the Paragon PARTHENES herself, vnder
the Symbol so handled, being the vtmost scope,
and ful fruition of the whole; and so conclude the
peece with some boone or suite, correspondent to
the present occasion, in euerie one. And this method
would I haue thee keepe in al. Now then, being thus
admonished, I licence, and freely giue thee leaue, to
leade thy Reader first into her priuate Garden (for
Princes, you must know, and great Ladies too, besides
their publick, haue some priuate Garden of
their owne) where, though enclosed, yet with the
wings of Contemplation, may he secretly view, reflect,
reuiew, suruey, delight, contemplate, and enioy
the hidden and sublime perfections therin, and lastly
obtaine, no doubt, anie reasonable suite at the
hands of the SACRED PARTHENES in respect
thereof, for his reward.



THE I. SYMBOL.
THE GARDEN.

THE DEVISE.






THE CHARACTER.
THE GARDEN is a goodlie Amphitheater
of flowers,The Impres^^^. vpon whose leaues,
delicious beauties stand, as on a stage,
to be gazed on; and to play their
parts, not to see so much; as to be seen;
and like Wantons to allure with their looks, or enchant
with their words, the ciuets and perfumes they
weare about them. It is euen the pride of Nature,
her best array, which she puts on, to entertaine the
Spring withal. It is the rich Magazin or Burse of the
best perfumes or Roman wash: A poesie of more

worth, then a bal of pomander, to make one grateful
where he comes; the one being sweetly sweet, the
other importunely. It is a Monopolie of al the pleasures
and delights that are on earth, amassed togeather,
to make a dearth therof els-where, and to set
what price they list vpon them? It is the precious
Cabinet of flowrie gems, or gems of flowers: The
shop of Simples in their element, delighting rather
to liue delicious in themselues at home, where they
are bred, then changing their conditions, to become
restoratiues to others; or to dye to their beauties,
to satisfy the couetous humour of euerie
Apothecarie, to enrich himself with their spoyles.
It is the Pallace of Flora's pomps, where is the
ward-robe of her richest mantles, powdred with
starres of flowers, and al embroadred with flowrie
stones. It is the laughter and smile of Nature: Her lapful
of flowers, and the Garland she is crowned with
in triumphs. It is a Paradice of pleasures, whose open
walks are Tarrases, the Close, the Galleries, the Arbours,
the Pauillions, the flowrie Bancks, the easie
and soft Couches. it is, in a word, a world of sweets,
that liue in a faire Communitie togeather, where is
no enuie of another's happines, or contempt of
others pouertie; while euerie flower is contented
with its owne estate; nor would the Dazie wish
to be a Rose, nor yet the Rose contemnes the meanest
flower.



THE MORALS.

SACER PRINCIPI.

IT is a Maxime in al Arts: There is no
rule without exception.The Mor^. And Sanctuaries,
we know, in al good Christian Common-wealths
haue been euer allowed
of. Who is he so rude; that dares lay
hands vpon the vessels marked with the Prince's
Armes? Or who presumes to disannul or cancel his
Priuie or Broad Seals? The Prince's closet is shut to
al, but to the Prince himself. His Signet is a Key,
that opens al the posterns of his Court. There is no
Prince, who, besides his common treasure, hath
not a priuat casket of his owne. When the world was
drowned, there was an Ark, that safely floted on
the Mayne; nor al the Cataracts of Heauen, were able
to ouerwhelme it. The Iewes indeed had their
Citties of Refuge, and the King of Iewes no lesse
his sanctifyed Cittie. It was a great Praculum to
violate the immunities of those; What think you
then of his priuat Cittie? Hath he a Cittie for himself,
and not a Garden priuate to himself? Doubtles
he hath. He hath then a priuate Garden of his owne;
and keeps the keys himself. Long liue the Prince
then, to enioy his Garden;Capit comme de^^us: and cursed be he; that shal
but with the mouth or hart seeme to violate the
sacred closures of his Garden. Quia PRINCIPI
SACER.



THE ESSAY.
I wil not take vpon me to tel al; for
so of a Garden of flowers,The Review. should I
make a Labyrinth of discourse, and
should neuer be able to get forth.
Cast but your eyes a little on those
goodlie Allies, as sowed al ouer with
sands of gold, drawne-forth so streight by a line.
Those Cros-bowes there (be not affrayed of them)
they are but Cros-bowes made of Bayes; and the
Harquebusiers, wrought in Rosmarie, shoot but flowers,
and dart forth musk. Those Beasts likewise, horrible
there and dreadful to see to, are but in ieast; al
that menace they make, is but a shew only. Al those
armed Men with greenish weapons, and those Beasts
al clad in skins of green, are but of Prim, Isop, and
Tyme, al hearbs very apt to historify withal. I wil
quite passe ouer those little Groues, Thickets, and
Arbours, and speake nothing of those Pety-canons
there and Quiristers, chanting their Complines in
the Euening, and Nocturnes in the Night, mingling
their prettie Mottets, which Nature learnes them, of
their owne accord. Nor wil I heer speake a word of
those Water-works, Conduits, and Aquaducts, which
yet might you heare to make a gentle murmur
throughout, affording an apt Base for the birds to
descant on. I hast me to the Flowers only most proper
to our GARDEN heer. Behold, I pray, those
Bushes, al enameled with ROSES of so manie sorts;
these heer apparrelled with the white of Innocencie;
those there with a scarlet tincture; one wel-nigh
withered embalmes the ayre with its perfume, and
makes a shew with its golden threads, and al
its treasure; that other is yet in its folds, and dares

not hazard so much as to peepe forth; this heer puts
forth the bud, and now half-open smiles withal, and
shewes forth a glimps of its purple, through a cliff
of the green Cafe, wherein it is; which the theeuish
birds would soone come to steale away, were it not
for the Garrison of thornes, that serues for a Corpsde-guard
to that Queene of flowers. Behold there the
Lillies of ten sorts; some yet hidden in their green
cups; others half borne; and the rest newly disclosed.
What think you? are they not exceeding faire?
You would say, they were of white Satin, streaked
without, and al embroadered within with gold; you
can hardly tel, whether they be milk condensed into
leaues, or figured snow, or siluer flower-de-lis'd, or
a starre al musked. Those yellow ones, would you
not verily think them to be golden bels? and that
red one, a little purse of crimson-satin? and those
others, some goodlie vessels of Emeralds, or the
like? But marke a while; see you not those beds
strewed with a thousand Violets? some yellow, some
purple, some white, some speckled, and some party-couloured,
some Carnashion, and some changeable.
Behold those faire and beautiful Tulips there; those
rich Amaranths, cerulean Hiacinths, Pansies, the
gemmes of the goodlie IRIS; the scarlet Gilloflower,
the Pinks, the Marygolds, and a thousand
other flowers. O what a Paradice of flowers is this!
What a Heauen of muskie starres, or Celestial Earth
al starred with flowers, empearled with gemmes and
precious stones! A land of promise, ful of milk and
honie! Behold, I say, the ROSE, dedicated (they
say) to that little elf Cupid; whose threads are as
golden hayres; whose thornes in steed of arrowes;
whose fire, a flash of luster; and whose leaues are
wings; few can touch it, without touch of loue

vnto it; and it costs them deare, who meddle with it.
The LILLIE hangs the head downe; for modestie, I
suppose; though it can not blush, for hauing nothing
to blush at; her flower being al so white and without
spot. They say, She was borne of the milk of Iuno;
howsoeuer she is called the Royal flower, the Rose of
Iuno. Note there the humilitie of the VIOLET, how
like to the strawberrie she keeps by the ground,
hiding, what she can, her beautie in her leaues, but is
discouered whether she wil or no; partly by the
flashes of her luster, breaking forth vnawares
betweene the leaues, not so reserued as they ought;
and partly with the odour she can not choose but
send forth. The Tulip is a singular ornament to this
Garden; looke and obserue it wel. How were it possible,
one would think, so thin a leaf, bred and nourished
in the same ayre, and proceeding from the
same stem, should be golden in the bottome, violet
without, saffron within, bordered on the edge with
fine gold, and the prickle of the point blew as a
goodlie Saphir? and a hundred others of seueral
fashions, as if they had striuen to dresse themselues to
put the eyes into paine, not knowing where to bestow
themselues. There againe, may you note another,
not vnlike to a Columbin, very gracious to see
to, enameled with drops of gold, and a thousand
other the like varieties; so as of necessitie we must
needs confesse, that GOD is very admirable in his works,
since on so poore a thing, as a slender stalk, grow
such a number of excellent varieties. And now I addresse
myself to Thee, the Soueraigne and Mystical
GARDEN itself, the Paragon of Gardens.



THE DISCOVRSE.
I Speake not heer of the Couent-Garden, the
garden of the Temple,The Suruey. nor that of the Charter-house,
or of Grayes-Inne Walkes, to be had
and enioyed at home; nor of the Garden of
Padua, or of Mountpelier, so illustrious for
Simples, I speake not of the Garde^ of Hesperides, where
grew the golden Apples, nor yet of Tempe, or the Elizian
fields. I speake not of Eden, the Earthlie Paradice,
nor of the Garden of Gethsemany, watred with Bloud
flowing from our Sauiour's precious bodie: But I
speake of Thee, that GARDEN so knowne by the name
of HORTVS CONCLVSVS; wherein are al things mysteriously
and spiritually to be found, which euen beautifyes
the fairest Gardens: being a place, no lesse delicious
in winter, then in Summer, in Autume, then in
the Spring; and wherin is no season to be seen, but a
perpetual Spring; where are al kinds of delights in
great abundance, that can possibly be deuised;
where are faire and goodlie Allies, streight and euen,
strewed al with sands, that is, a streight, vertuous,
and Angelical life, yet strewed with the sands and
dust of her proper Humilitie; where are Arbours to
shadow her from the heats of concupiscence; flowrie
Beds to repose in, with heauenlie Contemplations;
Mounts to ascend to, with the studie of Perfections:
where are hearbs, and Simples, soueraigne
medicines of al spiritual maladies, where (I say) are
the Flowers of al Vertues: The LILLIE of spotles and
immaculate Chastitie, the ROSE of Shamfastnes and
bashful Modestie, the VIOLET of Humilitie, the Gilloflower
ol Patience, the Marygold of Charitie, the
Hiacinth of Hope, the SVN-FLOWER of Contemplatio^,
the Tulip of Beautie and gracefulnes. In this GARDEN
ENCLOSED are certain risings to be seen of Hils in

eleuations of mind, and Valleys againe in depressions
and demissions of the same mind, through annihilation;
heer likewise are Vines of spiritual gladnes,
and Groues of a retired solitude, to be found.
Heer whole Quiers of Angels are accustomed to
to sing their Alleluyas, at al howers, in lieu of the
Phil^mels in the silence of the Night; in steed of the
Larks, at the hower of Prime; in place of the Thrush,
the Linet, and Canarie-bird, at al Howers. Heer spring
the limpid fountains of al Graces; whence streame
the little rils and brooks watering the Paradice on
al sides, and thence abundantly flowing to the rest
of Mortals. Heer are Pooles for the harmles fry of
her innocent thoughts, like fishes heer and there to
passe vp and downe in the heauenlie Element of her
mind; heer and there certain labyrinths formed in
the hearbs of Her endles perfections. Heer lastly are
statues of Her rare examples to be seen, Obelisks,
Pyramides, Triumphal Arches, Aqua-ducts, Thermes,
Pillars of Eternal Memorie, erected to Her glorie,
in contemplation of her Admirable, Angelical,
and Diuine life.
But that which sets forth and adornes this incomparable
and mysterious GARDEN most, is the special
Priuiledge and Prerogatiue it hath, not only ouer al
the Gardens of the world besides, but euen also of
the Terrestrial Paradice itself; for that the Garden
of Eden, or Terrestrial Paradice, was not so exempt
from Sinne, but the place where Sinne began; and
was not so free from the Serpent, but that he could
get-in and work the mischief; so as for auoyding
more enfuing dangers, it was necessarie to place at
the gates therof for euer after, an Angel-Porter of
the Order of the Cherubins, with a fierie and two-edged
sword, to guard the same. Wheras this GARDEN

(our LADIE) was a GARDEN shut-vp indeed fro^ the beginning,
and diuinely preserued Immaculate, from Her
first Conception, adorned with al those sorts of
flowers and plants of Graces, Vertues, and Perfections
I mentioned aboue; whereto no Serpent, nor
Original sinne, much lesse Actual, could haue acces,
but was alwayes euen from her first beginning, a
most delicious Paradice and GARDEN shut-vp from al
inuasions of Enemies.


THE EMBLEME.






THE POESIE.
THe Virgin was a Garden round beset
With Rose, and Lillie, and sweet Violet.
Where fragrant Sentss, without distast of Sinne,
Inuite^ GOD the Sonne to enter in.
But it was clos'd:Alma signifyes Inclosed and a Virgin shut vp in Hebrew. Alma's shut vp, we know,
What Gard'ner then might enter in to sow?

Or plant within this Eden? Or, what birth
Might be expected from a virgin-earth?
The Holie-Spirit, like a subtile wind,
Peercing through al, only a way could find.
As th' Earth brought forth at first, how't is not knowne:
So did this Garden, which was neuer sowne.


THE THEORIES.
COntemplate first, how our Lord GOD
had planted a Paradice of delights, that is,
the Virgin MARIE,The Contemplation. from the beginning,
to wit, in the East; wherin he placed
Man, whom he had framed, because
indeed he put CHRIST in her
womb, through the operation of the Holie-Ghost.
Which place in truth is very pleasant; because whatsoeuer
is delightful in a Garden, was abundantly
found in Her: there being the Cedar of high Contemplation,
the Cypres of odoriferous fame and sanctitie of
life, the Lawrel of Constancie, the Palme of glorious
Victorie, the Mulberrie of Patience, the Myrtle of Mortification,
the Oliue of Mercie, the Almond of Fruitfulnes, the Figtree
of Deliciousnes, the Plane-tree of Fayth; for the Plane
hath leaues like to our Escuchions, or Targets, and
therefore signifyeth Fayth; for that Fayth is a Target
against the temptations of the Diuel; But especially
the Tree of Life, whereof S. Augustin sayth thus: The
Virgin MARIE is sayd to be a Paradice, in the midst
wherof is the Tree of Life, with whose leaues the sick
are cured, whose odour reuiues the, dead, whose
tast sweetens the bitter, whose shadow refreshes
the wretched, and whose aspect reioyceth the Angels.

Consider then the amenitie and pleasure of this
GARDEN of our Ladie. For there were Pomgranats,
that is, an ordination of Vertues, and a wonderful
sweetnes of Deuotion; for loe, Pomgranats haue
their graines disposed in an admirable order, and are
indeed most delicious fruits; to which kind of Apples
the Spouse inuites her Spouse, saying: Let my beloued
come into his Garden, and eate the fruit of his apples. There
likewise was the Cypres with Nara, that is odoriferous
fame and profound humilitie; because the Cypres
is an oderiferous tree, and the Nard a most humble
hearb. There was Nard and Saffron, to wit, feruent
Charitie, and Humilitie of Celestial Contemplation;
because the Nard is a hot hearb; and Saffron
hath a golden colour. There were Canes and Cinamon,
withal the trees of Libanus; because in her was a singular
puritie of Conscience, an excellent odour
of good Fame, and Incorruptibilitie of the flesh.
For the Cane hath its vertue in the pith; the Cinamon
hath its odour in the bark; and the wood of Libanus
is incorruptible: And lastly was there both Mirrh
and Alloes, with al the prime Vnguents; because in Her
was bitternes of tribulation for her Sonne's passion,
the bitternes of compassion for the affliction of
the miserable; and the sweetnes of deuotion was in
Her mind. For Mirrh and Alloes are bitter; and the
Vnguents sweet and delicious.
Ponder lastly these words of the Canticles:Cant. 4. Come
Southern wind, and blow vpon my garden, and the spices
shal flow forth. Where by the Southern wind is vnderstood
the breath of the Holie-Ghost. For the
South-wind is a hot, humid, and fruitful wind; which
euen blew in the Virginal Garden of our LADIE, for
that it made her hot through Charitie, humid through
Pietie, and fruitful through plentie of good works: and so

flowed She with odoriferous Spices, whose odour
as balme did recreate GOD; and like Cinamon comforted
the whole world: because Cinamon co^forts the
stomack; and like vnto Mirrh did driue away Diuels;
for that indeed the smel of Mirrh expels the wormes.


THE APOSTROPHE
SHAL be made to the INCOMPARABLE VIRGIN,The Colloquie.as to the Abstract of perfections, in this or
the like manner: O most Soueraigne Princesse,
Ladie of Paradice, yea a Paradice itself of al perfections:
Most pure Virgin, most chast Spirit, Virgin ful of grace, Mirrour
of puritie, Pattern of sanctitie, Sunne of chastitie, Model of innocencie,
Image of vertue, Example of perfection, Vessel of singular
pietie, Mother and Mistris of Christian Religion, blessed Band,
delicious Garden, the Deuotion of the whole world: Be al Vertues,
O my dear Aduocat, afforded me. O Ladie, Soueraigne
creature among the pure; obtaine them for me, I beseech
thee from the bottome of my hart, through the sweetnesses of thy
immaculate Conception, and thy blessed child-birth; through the
sweet nourishment of the precious milk, giuen to thy Sonne,
GOD and MAN, the King of Kings; by those sacred and
diuine kisses, which thou so reuerently gauest him in his tender
infancie. O grant me those flowers of thy delicious Garden,
I beseech thee; and after al, to behold Thee triumphant in the
Celestial Paradice.




THE II. SYMBOL.
THE ROSE.

THE DEVISE.






THE CHARACTER.
THE ROSE is the Imperial Queene of
Flowers,The Impresa. which al doe homage to, as to
their Princesse, She being the glorie and
delight of that Monarchie. She is herself
a Treasurie of al Sweets, a Cabinet of
Musks, which She commends to none to keepe, but
holds them folded in her leaues; as knowing wel,
how little conscience is made of such stealths. If anie
haue a wil to seeke Diamonds among flowers, he
may seeke long enough ere he find them; but if a
Rubie he seekes for, the ROSE is a precious Rubie. It
is the Darling of the Garden-Nimphs, and the cause

sometimes perhaps of much debate betweene them,
while each one striues to haue it proper to herself,
being made for al, and is verily enough for al. It is
the Pallace of the flowrie Numens, enuironed round
with a Court-of-Guard about her, that stand in a
readines with iauelins in hand, and the Qui va la in the
mouth, with whom is but a word and a blow, or rather
whose words are blowes, that fetch the bloud.
It is the Metropolis of the Graces, where they hold their
Co^mon-wealth, and where the Senat of al odoriferous
Spices keepe their Court. It is the chiefest grace
of Spouses on their Nuptial dayes, and the Bride wil
as soone forget her fillet as her Rose. It is the maisterpeece
of Nature in her garden-works, and euen a
verie spel to Artizans to frame the like; for though
perhaps they may delude the eye, yet by no meanes
can they counterfeit the odour, the life, and spirit of
the Rose. When Flora is disposed to deliciate with
her minions, the Rose is her Adonis, bleeding in her lap;
the Rose her Ganimed, presenting her cups ful of the
Nectar of her sweets. It is euen the Confectionarie-box
of the dantiest Conserues, which Nature hath to
cherish-vp herself with, when she languisheth in Autumne.
The Cellarie of the sweetest lickours, either
wine or water; her wines being Nectars, and her
waters no lesse precious then they, whose dryed leaues
are the emptie bottles. In a word, the Rose for
beautie is a Rose, for sweetnes a Rose, and for al the
graces possible in flowers, a verie Rose; the quintessence
of beautie, sweets, and graces, al at once, and al as
epitomized in the name of ROSE.



THE MORALS.

CASTO PERFVSA RVBORE.

IT is a co^mon Saying: The honest Bridegroome,The Motto.
and the bashful Bride. For so when
Rebecca first was brought to the
youthful Isaac, as a Spouse, she put
her scar for veile before her eyes. So
Rachel did, and manie others. Lucretia
the Chast chose rather to wallow in her bloud, then to
suruiue her shame, wherin she blushed indeed, but yet
without cause; for yet stil she remaynes in al mens
mouths, the Chast Lucretia. The hart and cheeks haue
their intelligences togeather, and the purest bloud is
messenger betweene them. The hart is put into a
fright; the obsequious bloud comes-in anon, and
asks: What ayle you, Sir? Goe, get you vp, and mount
to the turret of the cheeks, my onlie friend, and cal
for help; the bloud obeyes, and makes the blush, that
rayseth such alarmes, intender Virgins most especially.
What feares the Virgin, when she blushes so?
The wrack of her honour; you wil say. How so? Is Honour
in the Bodie, or the Mind? If in the Mind, the
Mind is a Citadel impregnable, not subiect to violence,
nor to be betrayed, but by itself. Then blush
not, Virgin, for the matter; thy hold is sure enough,
and thou in safetie, if thou wilt thyself. But this of al
other Vertues, neuer is safe and secure enough; this
of al others feares the verie shadowes themselues,
and trembles like an Aspin-leaf at the least motions.
Now lookes she pale like a verie clowt; and now
through modestie, the colour mou^tss into her cheeks,
and there sets-vp his ruddie standard, as if the Fort
were his; til feare againe preuayling, plucks it downe

And these were the vicissitudes our Sacred VIRGIN
had, when her glorious Paranimph discoured his
Embassage to her in her secret closet, presenting her
a shadow only, seeming opposite to her chast Vow;
wher at She trembled in his sight, CASTO PERFVSA
RVBORE.


THE ESSAY.
BEhold heer the Princesse of flowers, the
Pearl of Roses,The Reuiew. with al its varieties: the
Damask Rose, the Musk-Rose: The Red, the
Cinamon, the Carnation, the Prouince, the
White, the Sauage Rose (which growes in
the Eglantines) and lastly the Golden Rose, faire indeed
to behold, but not so sweet. The Rose growes on a
speckled thorn, swelling into sharp or pointed buttons
somwhat green, which riues by little and little,
and opens at last, then vnbuttons and discloses its
treasure, the Sunne vnfolds it, and opens the lights
and leaues, making it display itself, and take life, so
affording it the last draught of beautie to its scarlet;
and now hauing perfumed it, and made the infusion
of Rose-water therinto, in the midst appeares, as in a
cup, certain golden points, and little threds of Musk
or Saffron, sticking in the hart of the Rose. But to
speake of the fires of its Carnation, the snow of the
white Satin, the fine Emralds, cut into little toungs
round about, to serue as a trayne to wayt vpon it; of
the Balme and ambergrees, that breathes from this
little crop of gold, which is in the midst; of the
sharpnes of the thorns, that guard it from the little
theeues, that would be nibling it away with their
beaks; of the iuice and substance, which being
squeezed, embalmes al round about it, with its fauour,
of a hundred hidden vertues; as to fortify the

hart, to cleer the cristal of the eyes, to banish clowds,
to coole our heats, to stirre-vp the appetite, and a
thousand the like, were a world to deale with; but I
hasten to the Mistris-flower herself, who mysteriously
sits in this goodlie oeconomic of Sweets and
beauties, as in her Bower, wherin She delights to
shrowd herself.


THE DISCOVRSE.
Two things in the Rose chiefly doe I note:The Suruey.
what inwardly it containes, and what
vertue and qualitie the Rose outwardly
giues forth. It is strange, the same should
be hot and cold togeather; cold in the
leaues, hot in the seed; so as passions proceeding of
excessiue heat, it alayes and qualifyes with its leaues;
and with the heat and vigour of its seeds, it quickens
and virifyes the frigid and melancholie affections of
the bodie. Some men are tepid, yea cold in the loue
of God; they are so dul and stupid in Diuine things, that
they cannot rayse vp the mind from terreue and
earthlie cogitations, to sublimer thoughts; being
immured with base affections. But our Mystical Rose,
with the seed of Grace in her, wherewith She was
replenished, inflames their harts to the loue of God.
Oh seed of our Rose!(...). She shal not feare her house for
the colds of the snowes; for al her houshold are cloathed
double. This snow so cold, is a frigiditie of
mind; but against this cold she cloathes her Deuotes
with double suites of charitie, to God and their
Neighbour. Some also are hot, and most desperatly inflamed
with the fires of Concupiscence; these heats
she tempers and extinguishes with the deawes of her
refrigerating grace, as with the leaues or mantle as

it were of her gracious protection.
The Rose, the more it is wrung or pressed, the
sweeter odour it sends forth, and yealds such a redolent
fragrancie withal, that al are wonderfully taken
with the odoriferous breath it giues: and this our
Rose, the more she was wrung and pressed with the
cruel fingar of tribulations and afflictions, the greater
her sanctitie appeared. Being banished into
Aegypt, she gaue forth a most fragrant odour of
Patience, wherewith she embalmed al Aegypt, and
fructifyed afterwards into an infinit race of Deuotes,
to her and her Sonne; witnes the Pauls, the Anthonies,
the Hilarions, the Macarians of Aegypt. In the Passion
of her Sonne, transfixed with the sword of sorrow,
she yealded a sweet perfume of perfect Fayth. In
other afflictions and tribulations she imparted the
communicatiue odour of Compassion. For the torme^ts
which he suffered of the Iewes, she sent vp the fragrancie
of Thanks-giuing to the heauenlie Father, from
the Thurible of her Hart. And in the desolation she
felt after his Ascension, for the absence of her
Beloued, she powred forth incense of her holie Desires
and incomparable Deuotion. After al which
odours, O giue me leaue, most sweet and odoriferous Rose,
through desires and deuotion to runne after thee; or, doe
thou but draw me after thee,Cant. 1. vnto the odour of thine oyntments.
The Rose growes on thorns, but puts not on
their nature; the thorns are churlish and rough,
while the Rose is sweet and gentle. And Our Rose
sprung indeed from the thornie stock of the
Iewish race, but yet tooke nothing of the condition
of thorns with her. The Iewes were
Prowd and haughtie, She most humble; they ful of vices,

she fully replenished with grace; the Iewes, we
see, are Infidels, she the pattern and mirrour of
Fayth; the Iewes couetous of earthlie and terrene
things, and she most thirsting after celestial. She
sprung likewise from the thornie Eua; but yet tooke
not after her nature. O thou Virgin (sayth S. Bernard)
most flourishing Rod of Iesse! through whom was recouered
in the Branch, what had perished in the
Root! Eua was a branch of bitternes, Marie a branch
of eternal sweetnes. An admirable and most profound
dispensation of the Diuine Wisedome! that
such a Rod should grow from such a Root; such a
Daughter from such a Mother; such a Free-borne from
such a Bond-slaue; such an Empresse from such a captiue;
from so dry a Thorn, so flourishing a Rose.
What the Rose giues outwardly forth, are the
objects of three principal Senses: of Seing, Smelling
and Touching; and for the first, who sees not, that
hath the benefit of eyes, how gorgeous the Rose
is among al the flowers of the Garden, alluring
and attracting the eyes of al that enter into
it? So our incomparable Rose, was exceeding faire;
and with incredible beautie, seemed gracious and amiable to
the eyes of al.H^st. 2. She was a glad spectacle vnto GOD, Men,
and Angels; to GOD, because so specious to her
Sonne, her Spouse, her GOD. The King desires thy
beautie, and sayes therefore: Shew me thy face, for thy
face is comelie.psal. Vnto men, she was so admirable
for beautie and grace, that S. Denys, that great
light of the Militant Church, beholding her,
acknowledged himself to haue been dazeled, and
nigh transported from himself. And for the Angels,

heare what the Prophet sayes: Al the rich of the people,
shal implore thy countenance. And who are these rich, but
the Angels, who beyond others enioy the riches of
the heauenlie Kingdome? Whence She is sayd to be
the Glorie of Hierusalem, the gladnes of Israel, the honour of
her people.
As for the odour she gaue-forth of her Sanctitie,Iudith. 14. it
is sayd: The odour of thy garments; which is of her
outward vertues,Cant. 4. being as the odour of incense, a
grateful Sacrifice to God, which recreates those that
are edifyed therewith.
And for the sense of Touching in the Rose, it is vnderstood
in a spiritual sense. Heare S. Bernard: Why
feares human frailtie to approach to Marie? you shal
find nothing terrible; She is wholy sweet and gentle;
and being so sweet, is therefore to be sought-for, and
embraced through deuotion. Take her then, and she shal
exalt thee; when thou shalt embrace her, thou shalt be glorified
by her.



THE EMBLEME.






THE POESIE.
THe Virgin sprung euen from the barren earth,The Pause.
A pure white Rose was in her happie birth,
Conceau'd without a thorne. This onlie Flower
The Father rays'd by his Almightie power.
When th' Angel said, she should conceaue a Sonne,
She blushed, and asked, how it should be donne?
The Holie-Ghost inflam'd, and so the white
By him was made a Damask firie bright.
Lastly her Sonne made her purple red,
When on the Crosse his precious Bloud was shed*
No Faith of Mortals then but had a staine,
Excepting hers; for she was died in graine.



THE THEORIES.
COntemplate first,The Contemplation. a gallant and odoriferous
Rose, growing on a pricklie
and thornie stemme, and men with
admiration to stand pointing at it,
saying to one another: What is that,
there so shot-vp, so beautiful to behold,
from so ragged, sharp, and harsh a thorn? And
then ponder, how the Angels stood amazed, seing so
our Mystical Rose transplanted from Hierico, into the
Heauenlie Paradice; or ascending rather so flourishing
from the Desert, when there was like questioning
amongst them, at her glorious Assumption, asking: Who
it was,Cant, vlt. that ascended flowing with delights?
Consider then the Rose, while it growes in the
Garden, and flourisheth, as it were aliue; how it
cheeres and glads the eyes of al with its glorious
presence; and how, after it is cropt from its stemme
also, which is the death of the said Rose, what an
odour it hath with it, euen after it hath been persecuted
with fire in the fournace of the Stil, as wel in
the water, as in the cake; and then think, what a mirrour
and pattern of sanctitie Our Ladie was, during her
abode heer in the garden of the World; and how she
multiplied her fauours to man-kind, especially after
she was translated thence, and had been proued and
exercised with infinit tribulations, leauing an vnspeakable
odour behind, of miracles and graces;
witnes the innumerable Votes that hang on her Te^ples
and Chapels throughout the world.
Ponder lastly, that of Roses are made, sometimes
Electuaries, sometimes Oyles, sometimes Playsters,
and Conserues very soueraigne and medicinal for

manie diseases, namely foure: for first, the Rose fortifyes
the stomack, and comforts the hart; secondly, it
stops the flux of the venter; thirdly, it clarifyes the
eyes; and finally, heales the head-ach. So our Mystical
Rose comforts the hart, in affording it the Charitie of
GOD; restraines the flux of sinnes, through the Feare
of GOD, which she giues to eschew sinnes withal; clarifyes
the eye of the vnderstanding, by imparting to
it the knowledge of Diuine things; and cures the
head,Thess, 5, which is hope, being the helmet of health, when she
rayseth our tepid hope, to desire Celestial things; and
therefore sayth: I am the mother of fayre dilection,Ecel, 24 of feare,
of knowledge, and of holie hope.


THE APOSTROPHE.
FLower of flowers,The Colloquis O Rose of roses, O
Flower of roses, O Rose of flowers! Shore
me vp with flowers, because I languish
for loue of thy loue Iesvs, the bud
of thee, o Rose, little in thy womb greater in
thine armes, and then fayrest of al, when opened
throughly and displayed on the Crosse. By that precious bud of
thine, I beseech thee, and the sheading of his most precious bloud,
thou wouldst change my thorns into roses; and present me, as a
Rose of sweet odours, to thy Sonne, and not as thorns for fuel of
the fire of his indignation. O grant me this, I beseech thee; and heer
doe I present thee, in honour of thee, the Mystical Rose, and thy
Sonne, thy soueraigne Bud, the Hymne that followes:
Salue CHRISTI sacra Parens,Flos de spina, spina carens,Flos, Spinati gloria.Nos spinetum, nos peccatiSpina sumus cruentari;Sed tu spinae nescia.




THE III. SYMBOL.
THE LILLIE.

THE DEVISE.






THE CHARACTER.
THE Lillie is the Scepter of the chast
Diana;The Impresa whose Flower-deluce, the crowne;
and stemme, the handle; which she
chastly wealds amidst the Nimphs of
flowers. It is a Siluer-Bel, without sound
to the eare, but ful of sweets to the brim; and
where it can not draw the eares, the eyes it wil; and
inebriats the curious with its ouer-sweets. It is a
Box of Ciuets, which opens to the Zephirs, and prodigally
powers forth its spices to the standers roundabout,
though they come not very nigh it, Flora it

seemes hath no other Purse, then this of candid saffron,
without strings to shut it vp; so prodigal she is
of her sweets which she wel knowes can neuer al be
disbursed. Who had not seen a Lillie heertofore, especially
the Flower-deluce, the Prince of Lillies, would
start (no doubt) as with the sight of a Garden-Comete,
and cal in his friends perhaps to gaze on a
Blazing Starre or Garden-Miracle. It is the ensigne
of France, euen vying with the Brittish or Lancastrian
Whiter Rose; if not so happie for her Vnion with the
Red, the Ensigne of Peace, yet in this more happie,
that she neuer was diuided, to haue need of such a
Vnion, as euer standing of herself. It is a Quiuer of
amourous shafts, with golden heads, which some cal
hammers rather, against lust, to blunt the thorns of
lewd Concupiscence. A verie Purselin cup, replenished
within, with the rarities of Nature, enough
to stupify and astonish the curious in the search of
secrets. It is besides a precious Pot of the purest Alablaster,
filled with the inualuable Spicknard of
Arabia; for sent and odour, as it were, fellow vnto
that, the blessed Magdalen powred on her Maister's
head; and if you wil not beleeue me, approach but
to the vessel itself, and you shal feel it streight. To
say no more, no snow is found to be more white then
it, nor giues a greater flash of lightning in the eyes
then it, that sweetly dazels and not duls the sight.



THE MORALS.

NIVEO CANDORE NITESCEN

THey are truly chast,The Motto. whose mind and
bodie neuer yet admitted stayne in the
virgin-wax of their pure integritie, in
either part. Chast is she held to be, and
so is truly, that vowes her chastitie,
and keepes the same, howbeit once stayned perhaps,
at least with impurities of mind, and washed againe
with the Lauer made of the purest Bloud of the immaculate
Lamb, she seemes indeed to follow the
Lamb, wheresoeuer he goes. The Turtle-Widowes
are accompted chast, and so they are, that hauing
lost their virginal integritie, are re-borne anew, as it
were, both in mind and bodie, with a chaster purpose,
neuer more to choose another earthlie Mate, or
Turtle-Doue, to follow and consort withal; but insteed
of such, make choice to linck themselues from
thence-forth to a heauenlie Spouse; and who, trow
you, but the Spouse of Spouses? and that for euer. The
Vestal-Virgins were esteemed such by al their Flamins,
though they had but a bodilie integritie, and no more,
while the mind perhaps was secretly a Prostitute
to al impurities. And if there was anie of them, as
some there might be, who kept both the one and
other sort of purities indeed, yet were they not
vowed perpetually to be such; and so were chast,
though they shined not with that snowie chastitie;
which, if it be, were, and euer shal be so, is not yet
the perfectest chastitie of al, nor anie way such, as the
Queen of Virgins was, and therefore worthily sayd to
be: NIVEO CANDORE NITESCENS.



THE ESSAY.
WHEN Nature is in her cheefest iolitie,
she tapistryes the whole Vniuers
with a world of delicious flowers.The Reuiew.
And to say truth, these flowers are
euen the smiles and laughters of the
Earth, that sees herself now deliuered
of the cruelties of the Winter, and long captiuitie.
She seemes therin to take pleasure, recreate, and disport
herself; to diaper the face of the earth in a thousand
fashions, enameled with as manierarities; while
the gentle breaths of Zephirus, with the sweet influences
of Heauen, mixing their moystures, with the
heats of the April-Sun, make that whole diuersitie,
which is in the bosome of the earth, al sowed-ouer
with a thousand seeds, now mortifyed with the
austerities of the winter. When they are come forth,
Nature solicitous of these treasures so odoriferous,
seekes to guard them carefully, and adorne them
curiously; arming some with thorns, others with
prickles; couering these with rough, and others with
large and shadie leaues, to conserue their luster.
Amo^g the which the Lillie carries hers very long, and
green, the stem, high and round, streight, vnited, fat,
and firme, al clothed with leaues. On the top wherof,
grow out as it were certain wyers, with heads thero^,
or buttons somewhat long, of the coulour of the
hearb, which in time grow white, and fashion themselues
in forme of a bel of satin or siluer. From
the bottome and hart therof, grow vpright, some
litle wyers of gold, with heads like hammers of the
same. The leaues wherof, of an exquisit whitnes,

al streaked and striped without, goe enlarging
themselues, like a bel, as before is sayd. The seed
remaines in these hammers of gold. The stem to carrie
the head the better, is knotted and strengthned
through-out; for that the Lillie is euer with the head
hanging down-wards, and languishing, as not able
to beare vp itself. There are some of them red, some
of them azure. These are al so delicious, that euen to
behold them were a great delight.


THE DISCOVRSE.
THE Liseron is a Lillie also,The Suruey. though a bastard
of that kind, without odour and those
wyers aboue, made as an essay, or practice,
and first draught of Nature, endeuouring
so to forme patterns, to frame some maister-piece of
the true Flower-deluce, the Prince of Lillies. Our incomprable
VIRGIN is this Flower-deluce, that Princesse of
Lillies, for the manie sympathies and faire resemblances
it hath with it. The Lillie is white without, and
gold within, and both within and without, most fragrant
and odoriferous; and the Blessed VIRGIN was
most faire and beautiful in her flesh, through the candour
of her virginitie:Sap. 7. she, the candour of the eternal light;
and the glasse without spot. In mind she was al inflamed,
as the burnisht gold, Gold (as Aristotle sayth) can not
be corrupted; nor could Her Charitie be euer extinguished.
For,Cant, 8. c manie waters, as it is sayd, can not extinguish
charitie. And how sweet She was both inwardly
and outwardly, who sees not, that considers her
Humilitie, in the lowlines of her hart within, and
outwardly in her conuersation? Which Humilitie of
hers sent forth such an odour vnto God,1. Cant 1 as allured
and attracted him to her: When the King was in his seaty,

my Nard gaue forth an odour: to wit, her Humilitie: And
these are the Lillies: Virginitie, Humilitie, and Charitie,
which cheefly inuironed the Blessed Virgin, while
her litle IESVS was hanging at her breast, being fed
among Lillies; for if these be not Lillies, what are they?
Againe the Lillie hath a streight stem or stalk, tending
wholy and directed vpwards, but the leaues
pendant and hanging downwards; and the Virgins
mind like a staf was alwayes streight, and tending to
GOD, in yealding him thanks for his benefits, and
euer magnifying his holie Name. For as the Lillie
whatsoeuer odour and candour it hath, directs it to
heauen-wards: So MARIE, what sanctitie or grace
soeuer she had, offered it vp al vnto GOD, But for the
leaues, her words, they were alwayes bent to the
earth, in speaking perpetually most humbly of herself.
Whence sayd she so affectuously: My soule doth magnify
our Lord; behold the stem of this Lillie, how
streight it was, and how directly ascended to the
Heauens: But see the leaues now, and marke how
they looke downwards: He hath regarded the lowlines of
his handmayd, and the like.
The Lillie besides is alwayes fragrant, and of a most
sweet odour; and our Lillie was perfumed with an
odoriferous oyntment, which made her so fragrant
and redolent, composed of three odoriferous spices:
aromatizing as Balme,Eccl 24. Mirrh, and Cinamon. For she was
Embalmed by the Diuinitie, when the Deitie was lodged
in her; spiced with Mirrh, through the guift of Angelical
puritie and Virginitie; and enflamed with a
sweet Diuine loue, which is as the powder of Cinamon
heer vnderstood, hot in smel, and tast; hot in
smel, and therefore as loue, draw me with the odour of
thy Oyntments, to wit, with the loue of thy heauenlie
graces; hot in tast, and therefore Diuine; because we

are bid to see and tast, how sweet our Lord is. Of which
oyntment it is sayd in the Canticles:Cant. 2. The odour of thine
oyntments, is beyond al spices.
Besides, the Lillie hath the root and stem, six-square
or corner-wise. So the root of Charitie in this Paragon,
hath six points with it: the first, a loue of GOD aboue
al things; the second, wherewith she loued her owne
soule, conseruing the same in al sanctitie; the third,
wherewith she loued her bodie, keeping it entirely
for the Diuinitie; the fourth, wherewith she loued
her domesticks and familiars, instructing them in al
vertue; the fift, wherewith she loued her friends, in
GOD; The last, wherewith she loued her enemies, for
GOD.
And to conclude, as the Bed-chambers of Kings are
adorned with Lillies, that they may rest more deliciously
among them; so the Virgin, not the Chamber
only of a King, but of GOD also, was dressed-vp and
beset al with Lillies round-about; according to that:
Thy womb as a heap of corn hedged-in with Lillies;Cant. 7. for she was
al encompassed with Lillies: aboue, being enclosed
with the Lillie of eminent Charitie; beneath, with the
Lillie of profund Humilitie; inwardly, with the Lillie of
internal Puritie; outwardly, with the Lillie of Virginitie;
on the right hand, with the Lillie of Temperance, in prosperitie;
on the left, with the Lillie of Patience, in aduersitie;
before, with the Lillie of Prouidence, in future
things; behind, with the Lillie of Gratitude, for passed
benefits. And since she was so enuironed and enclosed
with Lillies of al sides, the Church sings of her: As
the dayes of the Spring, doe the flowers of the roses enuiron her
round.Cant. 2. Among which flowers of Roses and Lillies, the
Beloued, that is CHRIST, is feeding: My beloued to me,
and I to him, who seeds among the Lillies.



THE EMBLEME.






THE POESIE.
A Pure-white Lillie,The P^use. like a siluer Cup,
The sacred Virgin humbly offers vp.
Her constant, stedfast, lowlie Hart (the foot,
Which al supports) is like this flower's root.
The stemme, her right Intention; and the bole
(The flower itself) is her chast spotlesse Soule.
The yellow knobbes, which sprowting forth are seen,
Isradiant Loue, which guild's her Cup within.
In lieu of liquides, is a fragrant sent:
Her vertues odours, which she doth present.
Her Sonne accepts al, that she offers vp,
GOD, Part of her inheritance, and Cup.



THE THEORIES.
Contemplate first,The Co^templation, how al thorns conceaue
but thorns. For what should
thorns conceaue but meerly thorns?
Corrupt mothers bring forth into
the world but men, which meerly are
but men and sinners. But the Virgin-Mother
conceaued the Holie of Holies. She now a Lillie
conceaued, and afterwards produced the true Lillie of
the vallies; a Lillie of Virginitie, the Lillie of Maiestie:
through whose candour is darknes expelled; with
whose odour, are raysed the dead; with whose touch,
are the leaprous cleansed, and al the infirme and
diseased cured. And therefore how much this Lillie
of ours, is to be exalted aboue al the other Daughters,
iudge you, and ponder it wel.
Consider then, that though there were manie other
Virgins besides, conspicuons and eminent for sanctitie,
yet were as thorns; for that they had some blemish
in them; since, howbeit they were pure in
themselues, yet the fomes of sinne was not extinguished
in them; who were indeed as thorns to
others, that haue been touched and incited with
concupiscence towards them. Wheras the Virgin-Mother
was wholy priuiledged from al guilt, in whom
was that fomes altogeather extinguished, and was accomplished
with so intense a Chastitie, that with
her inestimable Virginal puritie, she so penetrated
the harts of the beholders, as she could not be coueted
of anie; but for the time rather extinguished
al lust of concupiscence in them. O beautie of Virginitie
and Humilitie, wherewith the Sonne of GOD
was so allured and rauished!

Ponder lastly, that as the Lillie hath a most efficacious
vertue against leaprosie, vlcers, and the holiefire,
as also against the stinging of serpents: So the
blessed Virgin being conceaued as a Lillie, was endued
with such vertue of the Diuine grace, that neither the
leaprosie of Original sinne, the fire of concupiscence,
nor the biting of the old Serpent, could anie wayes
hurt her.


THE APOSTROPHE.
O Lillie of Lillies, and next the Lillie (thy dearest
Sonne) the purest of al Lillies.The Colloqute Alas! most pure and
immaculat Virgin, shal I alwayes liue in the flauerie
and seruitude of this impure flesh of mine? And shal I
euer be troubled and vexed with these vnchast cogitations, and
impure apprehensions; which so macerate my vnwilling soule? Oh,
thou eleuated and raysed aboue al pare creatures, most blessed
Virgin, I say Blessed with al benediction! how long? Alas! how
shal I sustaine the bodie of this death, this impure thistle of
the bodie, with its thorns? Alas, when shal I be deliuered and rid
therof?




THE IV. SYMBOL.
THE VIOLET.

THE DEVISE.






THE CHARACTER.
THE Violet is truly the Hermitesse of
flowers,The Impresa affecting woods and forests,
where, in a lowlie humilitie mixt with
solicitude, she leads a life delicious in
herself, though not so specious to the
eye, because obscure. She is a great companion to
the Primrose, and they little lesse then sworne sisters;
with whom, when she is disposed, she wil
recreate herself whole nights and dayes; and you
shal likely neuer find them farre asunder. When they
are so in companie in the wood togeather, where

she is bred and borne, they make an excellent enamel
of blew and yelow; but being by herself alone,
as in her celle, she is a right Amethyst. Had Iune been
in quest; to seeke her Bird, as strayed in the woods,
she would easily haue thought these purple Violets
had been her Argoe's eyes, as shattered heere and there,
and dropt downe from her Peacocks trayne; and so
wel might hope to haue found her Bird againe, as
Deere are traced by their footing. She is euen the
Wanton among leaues, that playes the Bo-peep
with such, as she is merrie and bold withal; whom
when you think you haue caught, and haue now already
in your hand, she slips and leaues you mockt,
while you haue but her scarf only, and not her self.
She is the Anchoresse, sending forth a fragrant odour
of her sactitie, where she is not seen; which she would
hide ful faine, but can not. She is the Herald of the
Spring, wearing the Azure-coat of Armes, and proclaiming
sweetly in her manner to the spectatours
the new arriuall of the wel-come guest. She is the
Primitiae or hastie present of Flora, to the whole Nature.
Where if the Rose and Lillie, be the Queene
and Ladie of Flowers, she wil be their lowlie handmayd,
lying at their feet, and yet happely (for
worth) be aduanced to lodge in the fayrest bosomes,
as soo^ as they; as being the onlie Faire affecting
obscuritie and to lye hid, which other Beauties hate
so much.



THE MORALS.

HVMI SERPENS EXTOLLOR HONORE.

VIrginitie indeed is a specious and glorious
thing,The Motto. and hath somewhat of the
Angel with it: but yet nothing so happie
as Humilitie is, which hath in truth
somewhat els withal, as it were Diuine.
Virginitie and puritie inuited the Word to take vp
his lodging in the Virginal womb; but Humilitie was
it, that strook-vp the bargain between the Immaculat
Hostesse and the Diuine Guest. And hence arose
the source of al her aduancements. The Angels are
pure indeed, but lower then their nature is, they
can not stoop; since Lucifer himself euen after his fal
retained his nature stil, which he could not forgo:
t^rice happie they, had they not aspired higher then
they were indeed. But the Eternal Word could stoop
so low, and really did, to be lesse then Angels. If puritie
then be a glorious, specious, and Angelical
thing, Humilitie is a vertue more then Angelical, as
being Diuine. The Angels would faine haue risen
higher, but could not; they tryed their wings, and
with that Iearus (that daring youth) had a shameful
fal. But the purest of al Virgins in contemplation of
the Eternal Word, readie to stoop so low, wheras she
was to be truly the Queen of Angels, stiles heer herself
the lowlie handmayd of our Lord; when creeping on the
ground as low as might be, she came to be exalted
to the highest dignitie next her Sonne, in human nature,
and might worthily say: HVMI SERPENS EXTOLLOR
HONORE.



THE ESSAY.
ONE would think,The Reuiew. the Authour of Nature
had made choice of the Violet, to couch his
enamel, and to make the delicatnes of his
pencil shine therin, and the fairest coulours
of the world, to border the mantle
of the Spring withal. There are some purple, but with
the finest purple; some as snow, fashioned into litle
flowers, like curdled milk, and blazoned as with
Argent leaues, al sowen thick with little odoriferous
starres: Others are of Ore musked, or of Violcts metamorphosed
into most sweet gold, cut into blossomes.
There are some deckt with a hundred and a hundred
leaues neatly fitted togeather, and al as grafted into
one stemme, which casting themselues into a round
and folding within one another through a sweet
oeconomie, agree to frame and compose a very dayntie
and delicious Violet, as faire as sweet, mingling,
with a gentle confusion, a thousand coulours, which
simpathize exceeding wel, and glad the eye. Behold
the Violet of March and April; May and Iune haue theirs
a-part, being of a changeable coulour, hauing the top
and edge of purple, white in the midst, and guilded
beneath in the bottome. What a maruelous enamel
to see the argent, the purple, the Ore, and azure of the
leaues, which shade round-about, al coming forth of
a litle green tuft, from a litle sprig, with a string, that
serues as a pipe for Nature to distil her musks, that
breathe from thence. The leaues are somewhat
round in their peering forth, and iagged; and then
after extend they in length, and spread themselues.
Their great vertue comes from a litle fire wel tempered
in them, and a sweet heat, which is the predominant

qualitie of their complexion, and makes
them sweetly bitter. To renew their forces againe,
when they are decaying, they steep them in vinagre;
and it is incredible, the vertues these little flowers
haue; for they mollify hardnes, alay heats, and extinguish
infla^mations: the iuyce softens the venter, dissipates
and euacuats choler, sweetens the asperitie of
the lights, alayes the fire that burns the breast; with
infinit other things, most soueraigne for vse.


THE DISCOVRSE.
BEHOLD now the Violet,The Suruey. which after the
Rose (the Queene of flowers) and the
Lillie (the honour of gardens) I should
think might follow wel in Our Ladyes Garden,
as an excelle^t Type or Symbol of her.
It is flower wel knowne to al, familiar and domestical
with al Nations. For where haue you a Garden,
that hath not store of them? yea the woods togeather
with the Primrose seeme to be as strewed with
them as tapistryes; they are so diapred al-ouer with
those flowers. And our glorious VIRGIN is as easie
and familiar to approach vnto, as it. The honour
of this Violet, is in the Spring; or rather is the Violet,
the honour of the Spring. Because the hoarie and horrid
Winter now passed ouer, and the rigid frosts and
snowes dissolued, the pleasant season of the Spring
returning, the Earth seemes to put forth the Violet,
as the primitias of flowers, togeather with the
Primrose her inseparable companion, to welcome
it with; a hastie present indeed, but yet a rare one.
The spring of Grace so appearing, and opening the
breast, after so tedious a Winter ouerpast, of horrid
Sinne and frozen Infidelitie, our MARIE the Violet,

or the Violet-Marie rather, is put forth, as a ioyful
present to glad the time withal.
This flower I find now to affect the hils and
mountains, though there want no store and plentie
of them in the plaines and vallies also; and, as gardiners
vse to say, it loues to be transplanted to and
fro. And so our Violet heer was no lesse transplanted
in her Visitation, when she Rifing vp, went hastily into the
mountains. For loe, this Violet sprung at first and grew
in the vallies, to wit, of herself; but was then transferred
and remoued into the mountain of Perfection,
to the mountain of Glorie, mountain of
Fame, Honour, and Exaltation: but yet was admirably
planted in the valley of Humilitie. A strange
thing truly, and more then a Garden-miracle, that
our Violet should stil remaine in the valley, and yet
be placed on a Mountain! yea the higher she was
exalted on the Mountain, the better she was rooted
in the Valley: both on the same Mountain, and in
the same Valley, at one and the self-same time.
Now, Philosopher, tel me, what would you more?
can not the same thing be in two places at once? It
may; MARIE on the Hil of exaltation, and the
self-same MARIE in the Valley of demission, fulfilling
therin the precept of the Wife-man: How
much greater thou art,Eccles. do thou humble thyself in al.
And now see, I pray, the haste the Violet
makes aboue al flowers, to entertaine the Spring;
and then to behold our Violet made to clime the
mountaines, would make you wonder, to see
her in such haste. For who would not admire to
see a tender Virgin, great with child, to fly from
the valley, ouer hils and dales, through thick
and thin, to the mountain-tops? But yet wonder

not, while we dayly see great engins moued, and
that most swiftly too, by force of fire: GOD is our
consuming fire.Deut* 4. This fire then the Virgin carried in her bosome;
She is stirred and excited with the blast of the
Holie-Ghost, vnto offices of pietie. The fire breaks
forth; what maruel then, if it carries so the engine of
the bodie with it? I say, what maruel, while the Spirit
of GOD, whose Symbol is Fire, carries her so fast
through publick places, to shun the aspect of men (so
contrarie to the inclination of Virginal modestie) to
hide herself in the house of her Cosen?
The Violet, as the Rose also, being planted neer the
leek, or garlick, becomes more fragrant in odour; so
as the vngrateful sent of the one, giues a sweeter
fauour vnto the other; and therefore the Gardiner
plants it neer vnto them, to haue it send forth a greater
odour. Now the Virgin-Mother being in herself a
most odoriferous Violet aboue al other Violets and
roses of the world, breathed from herself the sweetest
odour of al vertues. The odour of her garments were as the
odour of the fulfield. But in her house at Nazareth, which
^ignifyes Flowerie, this Violet shined lesse, and, as a Violet,
lay hid within her leaues. Wherefore it seemed
good to the expert Gardiner, her heauenlie Spouse in
her womb, to transferre this Violet with his Spirit into
the mountains of Iudea, being places al set with
garlick and leeks, as I may terme it; Where Zacharie
and Elizabeth sat sheading of teares for the Redemptsion
of Israel, the proper effect of those hearbs; which
She through her coming wiped away, and further
gaue forth a greater odour of sanctitie, then euer; for
loe, she filled the whole house with the odour of her
Vertues.



THE EMBLEME.






THE POESIE.
IN Heauen the humble Angels GOD beheld;The Pause.
And on the earth, with Angels paralel'd,
The lowlie Virgin viewd; Her modest eye,
Submissiue count'nance, thoughts that did relye
On him, that would exalt an humble wight,
And make his Mother. Alma, ne're in sight,
With vertues, fragrant odours, round beset,
Close to the earth lay like the Violet;
Which shrowded with its leaues, in couert lyes,
Found sooner by the sent, then by the eyes.
Such was the Virgin rays'd to be Heauens Queene,
Who on the earth neglected, was not seene.



THE THEORIES.
COntemplate first,The Contemplation. how, as Plinie sayth,
the Violet is soueraigne against the
Squinzi in the throat, the Catharre in
the eyes, and Impostumes in the bodie.
So S. Iohn Baptist was before his Sanctification,
being as vlcerous and impostumat,
as we al before Baptisme, through Original
Sinne: Elizabeth continually powring forth teares,
for the barrenes and sterilitie as wel of the Sinagogue,
as of herself: and Zacharie's throat being
stopt with the squinzi of Infidelitie, so as he could
not speake. MARIE the Violet entering into this Hospital,
the impostume^ of Iohn vanished, the defluxions of
Elizabeth ceased, and Zacharie's squinzies were vnstopt;
and finally health was restored to the whole
house.
Consider then againe, how, as Plinie sayth, the seed
of the Violet, is the infallible destruction of the
Scorpion; then which, what more expresly in Symbolical
Theologie declares the Mother of GOD to be a
Violet? For this malediction was giuen by GOD against
the accursed Serpent, from the first beginning: I wil
put enmities between thee and the woman; and thy seed and
her Seed; and she shal tread (or it shal tread) thy head. No
seed more opposit to the Scorpion, then that of the
Violet: nor none to the Serpent so much, as the Seed
of the Virgin, IESVS.
Ponder lastly, how the Violet by some is called the
Flower of the Trinitie; perhaps for the triple coulour
which is found therin: for that, as in the Violet are
seen the violet, the purple, and the golden coulour;
and as those coulours in the natural, so in the Violet

MARIE may you consider, the Violet coulour of Humilitie,
the purple of her Chasti^^e, and the golden coulour
of Maternitie or Charitie in her; since her Charitie was
the cause of her Maternitie, and consequently, she the
Violet of a Trinitie.


THE APOSTROPHE.
O Faire and goodlie Flower, the true Aurora of the
Spring,The Colloquie the gladsome Herbinger of the Spring of
grace, thou fairest of al flowers, and yet who holdst
the lowest place, stil grounded in thy Nothing! O that
this true contempt of my-self were planted once and rooted in
the ground of my hart! that this lowlines of hart, I say, O Ladie
Violet, and humilitie of spirit, were imprinted for euer in
my soule! Oh obtaine for me. Alas! due. I coniure and bes^e^h
you to it, by al the reuerences and respects, which the Sonne
of God, the Wisedome of the Father, hath yealded you in
heauen; and which the Great GOD your Sonne no lesse
hath afforded you on earth.




THE V. SYMBOL.
THE HELIOTROPION.

THE DEVISE.






THE CHARACTER.
THE Heliotropion is the loftie Cedar of
flowers,The Impresa wherin the Sun, could he nestle
himself, would choose of al the rest to
build his neast; for birds, we know, breed
where they hant most, and delight to
harbour and conuerse in, al the day. It is euen the
Eye, and nothing els but Eye, to behold the Sun; which
she neuer shuts, til he sincks down in Tethis's bed; where
being drowned ouer head and eares, she wincks and
shrowds herself the while, in the thin eyelids of her
leaues, to meditate vpon him. It is the Arsenal of

crimson-flags displayed to the Pithian Apollo, in despite
of Mars, whom she adores as God of Armes as wel
as Books; wheras Mars, if you take him from his
speare and shield, can neither write nor reade. It is
the Gnomon of the Garden, a Dial artificially made in
hearbs, to expresse al the howers of the day; a verie
needle, pointing to its radiant Starre; which being
so restles as it is, makes her as restles euerie whit;
with this difference only, that he measures infinit
degrees of Heauens, and she as manie points. It is a
verie Mart of silks, sarcenets, taffeties, and satins,
al of Gingeline in graine, because in fashion. If the
Rose excel in sauour, which she professes not to vtter
in her shop, she vowes to be more loyal and constant
to her Paramour, then it. She is so amourous, and dotes
so much vpon him, that she can not liue without his
conuersation; which she hath so much, as she almost
is turn'd and quite metamorphosied into him, and
now become already in the Garden, what he is in his
Zodiack, the true and real flower of the Sun, or Sun of
Flowers, as he himself the Sun of starres, or that great
Starre they cal a Sun. It is the true Alferes of hearbs,
bearing vp the standard of Flora, amidst the rest of
flowers; the Pharus, to direct the Garde^-Nimphs, whe^
they loose themselues in the labyrinth of flowrie
knots or Maze of flowers: the Beacon al on fire, to
giue warning to the rest of flowers of the arising of
the Sun, to beware of his parching rayes, for feare of
withering before their times. It is euen the Daphne of
flowers, whom Phoehus followes al the day; and, if she
fly, she hath her eye on her shoulder, to looke behind
her, as she runnes.



THE MORALS.

AD ME CONVERSIO EIVS.

PIctures likely are so framed, that be
you in the roome,The Motto. in anie part, they
wil seeme to look vpon you. Looke
where the Panther is, in woods and
forests, there wil commonly other
beasts resort, to look and gaze vpon
him; whether it be the beautie of his spotted coat,
or sweetnes of his breath, which attracts, I know
not; but this is sure, the effect is so, as I haue heard.
The Turtle seemes to haue no eye but for his mate;
and where they sit togeather, their eyes wil be as
glued vpon each other. The Pole that drawes the
Needle to it, the load-stone that attracts the iron, the
ieat that puls the fescue, what is it el's but a natural
instinct, or Moral rather I may say, of more then
mutual loue that makes the one so powerfully to
allure, and the other to be so easie and wiling to be
drawne? This I am sure of, Vertue is so specious, and
so goodlie a thing, that it drawes the eyes of al to
look vpon her; and where they haue not harts to
follow her faire steps, yet wil they stand to gaze
vpon her, and admire at least. The litle IESVS lying in
the Crib, like a Loadstone drew the Shepheards from
their flocks, Kings from their peoples, a Starre from
the rest of the fellowship of starres, yea euen the
Angels from the Heauens, to sing a Gloria in excelsis vnto
God, and peace to men: What trow you, but a secret
instinct, that could be no lesse then Heaue^lie and Diuine,
made so great a conuersion of Terrestrials and
Celestials to a litle Infant? And as for the Mother her

self, that held him in her lap the while, she before
sitting in her little Nazareth obscure, drew so the eyes
of the Almightie to her, that He could not choose,
but so conuert himself vnto her, as to descend and
lodge within her, and she truly say: AD ME CONVERSIO
EIVS.


THE ESSAY.
THE honour of our Gardens, and the
miracle of flowers, at this day,The Reuiew. is the
Heliotropion or Flower of the Sun; be it for
the height of its stem, approaching to
the heauens some cubits high; or beautie
of the flower, being as big as a man's head, with
a faire ruff on the neck; or, for the number of the
leaues, or yellow, vying with the marigold; or, which
is more, for al the qualities, nature, and properties
of the Flower, which is to wheel about with the Sun;
there being no Needle, that more punctually regards
the Poles, then doth this Flower the glorious Sun. For
in the morning it beholds his rising; in his iourney,
attends vpon him; and eyeth him stil, wheresoeuer
he goes; nor euer leaues following him, til he sink
downe ouer head and eares in Tethis's bed, when
not being able to behold him anie longer she droops
and languishes, til he arise; and then followes him
againe to his old lodging, as constantly as euer; with
him it riseth, with him it falles, and with him
riseth againe. Nature hath donne wel in not
affording it anie odour at al; for with so much
beautie and admirable singularities, had there
been odour infused therinto, and the sweetnesse
of odoriferous flowers withal, euen men, who

are now half mad in adoring the same for its excellent
guifts, would then haue been stark mad indeed,
with doting vpon it. But Nature, it seemes, when first
she framed a pattern for the rest, not being throughly
resolued, what to make it, tree or flower, hauing
brought her workmanship almost vnto the top, after
a litle pause perhaps, at al aduenture put a flower
vpon it, and so for haste, forgot to put the Musks into
it. Whervpon, to countervaile her neglect heerin,
the benigne Sol, of meer regard and true compassion,
graced her by his frequent and assiduous looke with
those golden rayes it hath. And as the Sun shewes
himself to be enamoured with her, she, as reason
would, is no lesse taken with his beautie, and by her
wil (if by looks we may guesse of the wil) would
faine be with him. But like an Estrich, with its leaues
as wings, it makes vnprofitable offers, to mount vp
vnto him, and to dwel with him; but being tyed by
the root, it doth but offer, and no more. It is like the
Scepter which the Payn^ms attribute to their Deitie,
that beares an Eye on the top; while this flower is
nothing els but an Eye, set on the point of its stem;
not to regard the affayres of Mortals so much, as to
eye the Immortal Sunne with its whole propension;
the midle of which flower, where the seed is, as the
white of the eye, is like a Turkie-carpet, or some finer
cloth wrought with curious needle-work, which is
al she hath to entertaine her Paramour.


THE DISCOVRSE.
COuld there be deuised a more noble Symbol
of our Incomparable LADIE then this
flower,The Suruey. regarding indeed the true Sunne (...)
Iustice, whom she followed stil in the whol^
course of her life, vnto her death? Therefore, whom

we haue already represented, as a Rose, Lillie, and Violet,
let vs now contemplate, as a true Heliotropion. Compare
we then, first, by certain Analogies, the Sunne,
being the king of Planets, with the Sunne of Iustice, King
of the Sunne and Planets; and the Heliotropion, with the
Virgin Marie, The Sun chief of Planets, fils the earth with
his influences: the Sun of Iustice, the world, with the
effects of his power. The Sun of Planets is the First
cause, among the Seconds; the Sun of Iustice the First
before them al; that trauerses al places, this penetrates
al harts; that lends his light to the moon and
starres, this giues both life and being to al creatures.
The Sun, the Planet, is the origin of life, the Sun of Iustice,
life itself; that is soueraignly visible, this most
soueraignly intelligible. In the Sun of Planets, is fruitfulnes,
light, and heat, essentially but one and the self
same thing; and the Sun of Iustice, with the Father, and
the Holie-Ghost, substantially is but One God. The Sun of
Planets was neuer without these properties; nor the
holie Diuinitie of the Sun of Iustice, without these
Three eternal Persons. And for our Ladie herself, our
faire Heliotropion, as the Sun of Planets illumines the
Starres, so the Sun of Iustice enlightned her thoughts.
The Sun of Planets, is the eye of the world, the ioy of
the day, the glorie of heauens, the measure of times,
the vertue of plants and flowers, the perfection of
the starres: and the Sun of Iustice, is the eye of her
thoughts, the ioy of her hart, the glorie of her soule,
the rule of her desires, the vigour of her spirit, the
maister of her loues, and euen the center of her propensions.
He was, I say, the obiect of her looks, the
Monark of her wils, the thought of her thoughts,
the light of her vnderstanding* and the absolute Moderatour
of al her passions.
Looke where the Sun is, the Heliotropion, being

nothing els but eye, hath the same stil cast vpon it:
and so the Virgin had the eye of her soule, stil on the
Sun of Iustice.Cant 1. 10. I to my beloued, and his conuersion to me. Examine
each day of her blessed life; runne ouer the
howers, tel the quarters, discusse the moments, and
you shal alwayes find her turned to the Sun. In her
Natiuitie, an Heliotropion; in the Presentation, an Heliotropion;
in the Annunciation, an Heliotropion; in the Purification,
and euerie action, a true Heliotropion. For she neuer
sayd, did, or thought anie thing, which she directed
not to GOD as to the Authour, which she reduced
not to him as to the last end, which she began
not for his seruice, and finished not for his glorie,
and lastly, wherin she followed not her Sonne,
that true Sun of iustice, which is to be a true Heliotropion
indeed. And for her bodilie eyes, she was directly
so, when she stood dolourous by the tree of the Crosse,
on the top wherof was CHRIST the true Sun indeed
in the height of the Zodiack, as in his proper
Orbe, whe^ not only with the face, but with the whole
bodie also she regarded her Sonne, and with eyes fixt
attentiuely indeed, beheld him fully: and as the
flower Heliotropion is wont to flag with the leaues at
the setting of the Sun, so likewise was she (had she
been left only to the strength of nature) readie to
fal and sinck to the ground, when her Sonne drooped.
Plinie wonders at the Holiotropion, for conuerting
itself to the Sun, euen vnder a clowd, and that in the
night also; but MARIE, our true Heliotropion heer, takes
not her eye of Contemplation of from her Sonne so much
as in the night. For manie Doctours most constantly
hold her Contemplation was neuer interrupted so much
as in her sleep; and that she slept in bodie, but waked
in hart. I sleep, and my hart wakes. There was neuer
knowne a time more clowdie, nor euer night more

obscure then that, wherin the Sun of Iustice being set,
the whole light seemed quite extinguished; nor anie,
Heliotropion appeared in the Garden of the Church, so to
gaze on the Sun vnder a clowd, but only those two
beautiful Heliotropions, Iohn and MARIE; neuer creatures
better resembled that flower, being of the selfsame
posture, of the same pale sad coulour, and with
the whole countenance cast stil vpon him, and she
especially, not taking off her eye from him, who was
enwrapped in the clowd of Death.
Behold now this rare Heliotropion of Ours, euen at
the point of death, as she lay a-dying; dying, doe I
say, or sleeping rather? For if the death of anie mortal
wight may be tearmed a sleep, surely that of the
Mother of God is not to be called a death so much, as a
sweet Sleep. She lyes in her death-bed, as burning al
with loue, like a true Heliotropion turning to her Sonne,
stil casting her eyes vpon him. I to my beloued, and his
conuersion vnto me. The Eternal Father, like the Sun; darts
most radiant beames of loue vpon her: she endeauours
of the other side; with reciprocal looks of
loue, as darts; to returne to him the like, but sincks
and fayles in the midst of the endeauour, and like
a flower hangs downe the head, and dyes. With this
kind of death, the Fathers of the Church, clients of
that great Mother, affirme, she was translated from
the earth, and assumpted into heauen.



THE EMBLEME.






THE POESIE.
HEer you behold the handmaide of the Sunne,The Pause.
That waites vpon him, as his stallions runne.
There in the Moone an other flower attends,
And followes her, that borrow'd brightnes sends
Vpon its gazing eyes. Eue, like this flower,
Was al for change. Her happines an howre
Continued not. Alas! 'twas altred soone;
Affected Deitie, was like the Moone,
Which she beheld. But Marie's thoughts were high,
Vpon the Sunne of Iustice fixt her eye;
Her Soule, with al her powers were stil theron,
As flowers and leaues of Heliotropion.



THE THEORIES.
CONTEMPLATE first,The Contemplation. how as
soone as the golden Sun peers and
puts forth his head in the morning,
the Heliotropion displayes itself to the
Sunnie beames, circles with the Sun,
and when he comes to the West,
bowes downe the head, and sits with him. So MARIE,
as sooneas CHRIST, the Sun of Iustice, arose in his natiuitie,
framed and composed her countenance to his,
with him fetching her compas in the Zodiack of his
life, she ordered her course, as it were, by the same
coasts: by the South of Loue, when he redeemed mankind;
by the North of Patience, in so manie aduersities;
by the East of Resignation, whe^ he satisfyed the Eternal
Father, by his passion; and lastly in the West, in the setting
of her Sonne the Sun, in her solitarie retirement
til his glorious Resurrection, the new Aurora of the
Eternal day.
Consider then, how we first conuert not ourselues
to the Sun of Iustice, nor attract the rayes of the Diuine
benignitie vnto vs: but he with a gracious cast of
his beames, vpon the Heliotropion of our hart, excites
the flower, and allures it to turne the face vnto it
back againe. Conuert me, and I shal be conuerted,Ierem. 31. 18. sayth the
Prophet. But the Mother of God, the true Heliotropion
indeed, doth otherwise; and therefore, I to my beloued,
that is, I conuert myself vnto him; and so it followes:
and his conuersion vnto me.
Imagine you behold artificially painted, a IESVS

sporting in his Mothers armes; looke which way you
wil, of anie side, he alwayes seemes to haue his eyes
cast vpon you. So surely the most sweet face of
IESVS, whose eyes shine like starres, of their parts are
alwayes conuerted towards thee; so as if thou perceauest
not thyself to be especially regarded by
them, it proceeds no whit from them, but from thyself,
who turnest away thy face, or dost not marke or
eye them at al. Wheras our Heliotropion heer neuer takes
off her eyes fro^ her Sonne,Cant. but hath them alwayes
cast vpon him: and therefore truly may say: I to my
beloued, and his conuersion vnto me.


THE APOSTROPHE.
O Fairest Virgin-flower! Thou most specious and
amourous Heliotropion, more happie then the rest
of flowers for those especial fauours from thy Spouse,The Colloquie being no lesse then the glorious and radiant Sun of
Iustice. O gracious Queen of flowers! O Sacred Prodigie
of al Gardens, and m^st stupendious Heliotropion, the miracle
of Paradice, the amazement of Philosophie, wonder of Nature,
fruitful Virgin. Virgin-Mother! O mediate for me, with thy
amourous Sun, thy Sonne, and obtaine for me, through thy
example, I may become a true Heliotropion, with mine eyes
stil cast vpon thee my obiect, and may receaue like glances from
that al-seing Eye.




THE VI. SYMBOL.
THE DEAW.

THE DEVISE.






THE CHARACTER.
THE Deawes are the sugred stillicids of
Nature,The Impresa falling from the Limbeck of
the Heauens, as so manie liquid pearls,
and euerie pearl as precious as the
truest Margarits. They are liquifyed
Cristal, made into so manie siluer-orbs as drops.
They are the verie teares of Nature, dissolued and soft
through tendernes, to see the Earth so made a Libian
Desert, which she supplies of meer compassion with
the ruine of herself. No teare she sheads, that sta^ds her
not in as much, as a drop of her deerest bloud. They

are the grayne and seed, once reaped from the Ocean
fields, and sowne againe vpon the Earth, for a better
haruest. They are the sweatie drops of Tethis face,
which the benigne Sol exhales and wipes away for the
vse of Tellus. They are the Ma^na of Nature, to vye with
those Corianders, food of Pilgrims, made by Angels:
with this vnhappines, they could not be co^gealed, to
make a food so much for me^, as a Nectar for the pla^ts
to drink. They are the Protheus of fresh waters, diuersifying
into as manie coulours, as they light vpon;
and are so courtlie withal, as they wil easily comply
with euerie thing they meete with; and likely seeme
to put-on the forme, the garb, and qualities of euerie
one: so as I verily beleeue, had they but toungs to
speake, they would say the same with euerie one,
that can so temporize with al. And as the showres
were wrung and drawne from Magdalen through
contrition of her sad and clowdie hart: so these
Deawes are wrung and strained from heauen, through
compression and mutual collision of the clowds.
The Bees are the most laborious and industrious
Factours for these Pearls; and they wil venture for
them, as farre into the ayre, as any Moor shal diue
into the seas for the best pearls. In fine, they are the
Milk of Nature, wherewith she is disposed to suckle
creatures at her owne breast.



THE MORALS.

RORE MADENS, RORE LIQVESCENS.

THE sweats of that great Monark,The Motto. were
held to be perfumes; and why? Perhaps
because they took some Deitie to be in
him, for his so strange and prodigious
Conquests. The trees that haue a gummie and viscous
lickour in them, looke what they haue within, the
same they oft put forth; and if they sweat at al, they
sweat but gummes. The Spouse, when he knockt so
long at his Spouses doore, and could not be let in, was
al wet with Deawes from heauen; and no maruel, that
Deawes should fal on him, from whom al Deawes proceed;
since Deawes exhaled from the earth, do thither
distil againe. When the Sauiour of the world was
borne, arose a Spring of oyle, to signify the infused
Oyle of Grace was then powred forth into the
world. And what is Oyle in drops, but Deawes of
oyle? and what is it to spring, but to ascend vpwards?
what to Deaw, but to spring downe? Our Sauiour then
being Oyle of Grace, was dissolued al into Deawes of
graces, when he was borne. In this, looke what the
Sonne was, the same the Mother is, with this difference,
He the Fountaine of Grace and Mercie essentially
the same, she the fountaine likewise, but participant
of his; and as He through her distils downe Deawes of
Grace and Mercie: so she from him distils the selfsame
Deawes of Grace and Mercie; and therefore
rightly RORE MADENS, RORE LIQVESCENS.



THE ESSAY.
HEER now,The Re^iew. must I needs confesse mine
ignorance; for otherwise should I loose
myself, in considering of the one side,
the accompt which GOD and Nature
make of the Deaw; and of the other, the poornes of
this litle creature in itself. The voice of men, that set
it forth, is more rich and copious farre, then what
soeuer is in the Deaw ilself; it is but euen a litle fume,
and oftentimes an vnholesome exhalation raysed
from some corrupt marishes or other, drawne-vp to
the second stage of the Ayre (being the Matrice as
it were of Nature, whence hayls, snowes, frosts, and
the like proced) if it arriue so high; where being
dissolued, and recollecting itself, within a litle after
thickens and turnes into litle teares, which falling
downe againe, affords vs nothing but a meer Seren
infected, and breeds often very mortal catharres,
lighting on our heads. See now a trim and goodlie
thing, for vs to make such reckoning of. And yet
how manie treasures doe I see enclosed within these
litle drops, within these graines of Cristal liquifyed?
What think you the^, is it ought els, then a litle water?
Oh, do no think so of it; for if Plinie say true, that the
Deaw takes the qualitie of the thing it lights on, that
which to you seemes to be a water only, is Sugar in
the Reeds of Madera, Hypocras in the vine, Manna in
the fruits, Musk in the flowers, Medicines in the
Simples, Amber in the Poplers, the verie milk of the
breasts of Nature, wherewith she nourisheth the Vniuers.
The Deaw it is which falling on our gardens,

empearls them with a thousand muskie gemmes:
Heer it makes the Rose, there the Flower deluce; heer
the Tulips, there the violets; and a hundred thousand
flowers besides. It is the Deaw, that couers the
rose with scarlet, that clothes the lillie with innoce^cie,
the violets with purple, which embroders the
marygold with gold, and enriches al the flowers
with gold, silk, and pearls, that metamorphosies itself,
heere into flowers, there into leaues, and then to
fruits in sundrie sorts; it is euen the Protheus and Chamaeleon
of creatures, clothing itself with the liuerie
of al the rarest things; heer scarlet, there milk, heer
the emerald, the carbuncle, gold, siluer, and the
rest.


THE DISCOVRSE.
BVt now come we to the mystical Deaw
indeed,The Suruey. the Incomparable Ladie and Queene
of al the Meteors of this Region of ours,
or of the other, the thereal or Celestial.
Who if she were not the Deaw itself, she
was the Fle^ce al steept in Deaw, and consequently
may wel be held for Deaw; for she is sayd to be ful of
Grace, which is a kind of Deaw. The Deaw is properly
engendred in the spaces and regions of the Ayre,
tempered with heat and cold. Three Regions there
are: The Heauens, the World, and Hel. This Deaw of
Grace, was not engendred in the vpper Region, that
is, in Heauen; nor was the work of the Incarnation of
CHRIST effectually wrought therin, because he assumed
not the Angelical nature: He apprehended not
the Angels;2. Pet 2. Nor beneath, that is, in Hel: because he redeemed
not Diuels, or spared the^, or shewed mercie
to them: God pardoned not the Angels sinning;Gal. 4. But it was

engendred in the midst, that is, the Incarnation was
wrought in this middle Region. because therin the Diuine
hypostastis assumpted human nature to itself. God sent his
Sonne made of a woman. Now was this Deawing or Incarnation
made, as I sayd, of hot and cold. For God vouchsafed
to become Man, for two respects, that is, out of abunda^ce
of charitie, of the one side, which was excessiue
heat, and out of a general miserie of ours, which
was a kind of benumming cold. From this heat therfore,
to wit, from this Charitie of GOD, and from
this cold, the general miserie of mankind, was
wrought roration or Deawing, that is, the Incarnation
of the Sonne of God; with this onlie difference, that
there, was a temperate heat and cold togeather, but
heer a heat,Ephes. 2 with a great excesse, through his too much
charitie, wherewith he loued vs, and a great frigiditie of
languour in vs,Psal. or a languishing frigiditie: Because al
haue declined, and are become vnprofitable.
Moreouer, this roration or Deaw we speake of, was
made in our Virgin-earth, who being watered with
Celestial Deaw, brings forth the Nazaraean flower, that
sayth of himself: I am the flower of the field. Againe: Let
flow thy speech like Deaw, and as drops vpon the gras. To
which the Church alluding sayth: Let him descend into
the Virgins womb like Deaw therin.^see 14. This earth therefore
so moystned and watered with Deaw, produced the
Lillie of Paradice. I the Deaw of Israel budding like the Lillie.
This Israel is interpreted a man seing God, and heer
signifyes our incomparable Ladie, who was truly
Masculin in al her actions, beholding, as it were, the
Diuine Essence, through Contemplation.
I wil now then maruel no more, that GOD leauing
al other creatures, should take complacencie as he
doth to be the Father of Deawes, the Scriptures saying:
Who begat the drops of deaw?Iob 38. and who is the Father of rayne?

You would say, he mea^t that there is nothing, which
better represents the Diuine generatio^ of the Sonne,
which is begotten of the Father by way of Vnderstanding;
from whence as from a fruitful clowd,
distils the Diuine Deaw of the Word: Let my word flow
like deaw. But for the Incarnation itself, it seemes to be
iust the verie same. For the Sun of the Diuinitie therin
vnited to the little poore vapour of our mortalitie
hath fertilizd this beautiful Paradice of the Church,
the Deaw watering the same, which fel from the Fiue
Wounds of IESVS, that deawie clowd suspended in
the ayre, and hanging on the tree of the Crosse.
Hence it is, that GOD makes so great accompt of
this Deaw; for when he would make a feast for his
people, in the wildernes, he did it by meanes of the
Deaw, which was then conuerted into Manna, and
Manna virtually into al meats. And if GOD would
make him a chamber al of gold, or a cabinet for himself,
surely he would choose the Deaw to be his house:
Who puts the clowds his bower etc.Psal. God makes as exact
esteeme of a simple drop of Deaw, as of al the world
besides. Before thee (sayth Salomon) is the whole world as a
drop of morning-deaw. You wonder now at a smal matter;
but I wil tel you yet a thing more strange, which
is, that since the Sonne GOD of a litle graine of mustard
sayes: The kingdome of heauen is like to a graine of mustard-seed
etc. me thinks, I might say as wel: The kingdome
of heauen is like to a drop of Deaw: For the Sauiour of
the world, who is the graine of mustard-seed, is likewise
this same rich drop of Deaw. For as the Sonne of
God in outward apparance was, as it were, no bodie,
nor seemed to make anie shew, yet when the Sun of
the Diuinitie once began to appeare in him, he shewed
himself to be the vertue of Paradice, euen so a little
drop of Deaw falling from the heauens, for example,

on the Flowerdeluce, would seeme perharps to you
but a little round point of water, and a meer graine of
Cristal, but if the Sun do but shine vpon it, Ah! what
a miracle of beautie it is? while of the one side it wil
looke like an Orient-pearl, and being turnd some
other way, becomes a glowing Carbuncle, then a Saphir,
and after an Emerald, and so an Amethist, and al
enclosed in a nothing, or a litle glasse of al the greatest
beauties of the world, that seeme to be engraued
therin; so manie drops, so manie Orient-pearls, so
manie drops of Manna, wherewith the Heauens
seeme to nourish the earth, and to enrich Nature, as
being the Symbol of the Graces, wherewith GOD
doth water and fertilize our soules.
For what should that Flcece of Gedeon signify, but
the Grace of graces, the admirable grace of the Incarnation
of Christ to be wrought in the conception of
the Diuine Word, in the virginal womb or fleece of
the said Gedeon, which was replenished with the Deaw
of the Holie-Ghost, in liew of the verie Deaw; that
is, where descended the fulnes of the Diuinitie, she
being worthily called and compared to a fleece,
since she hath cloathed the true Lamb of God with her
flesh, who takes away the sines of the world? O Virgin worthie
of al grace! How art thou graced indeed, and fauoured
aboue al the Daughters of Ierusalem! since thy
head, IESVS CHRIST, came so to thee, ful of Deaw,
and reposes in thy chast bower?



THE EMBLEME.


Benedicta inter mulieres. lucae. c. i.




THE POESIE.
NOt like a duskie clowde,The Pause. which Sol exhales,
Nor like a gloomie mist, that shrowdes the vales:
But from the Earth, the Sunne of Iustice drew
A purer vapour, which dissolu'd the Deaw,
Distilling from the Limbeck of the skies,
Our drie and barren Earth doth fertilize.
The barren womb erst was accurst; but she,
Though Virgin, was a faire and fruitful tree.
Women bring forth with paineful throbs and throwes;
She was a Mother, but not one of those.
Mongst women blest, drawne by heauens radiant beames,
Twixt clowd and mist, pure Deaw twixt both extreames.



THE THEORIES.
COnsider first, that as Eue our first Parent
and Mother of vs al, was not created
immediatly of earth,The Contemplation. as Adam was, but
taken from his rib (it being a priuiledge
only due to Adam, so to be framed
of virgin-earth) and was therefore called Virago, fetching
her extraction as it were a Viro: So our second
Eue, our Spiritual and Celestial Mother, adopting vs,
and engendring vs as children, through the Deawes of
Celestial graces procured vs from heauen, was not
made of virgin-extraction herself, that is, was not
framed of the Diuine or Angelical nature, as a Deaw
exhaled from the virgin-element of waters, but of
the pure human nature, as drawn from the mixt, bitter,
and brackish waues of the Sea, by that great Architect
of heauen, the Sun of Iustice, giuing her the name
of MARIA, to wit, a mari amaritudinis, as it were,
fetcht from the Ocean of bitternes of human kind.
And now with her graces and fauours, as Deawes falling
from heauen, perpetually doth nothing, but
showre downe vpon her children and Deuotes.
Consider then, how our Ladie became as a marine
Coucha, or Oyster of the Sea, which opens itself to
receaue the heauenlie Deaw into her Lap, that so the
precious Gemme might be engendred in it, which
when it hath receaued once, it closeth vp againe, not
to loose so precious a depositum, til it be fairely deliuered,
and brought forth in time prefixed. Euen so
our incomparable Ladie, the precious vessel of so
heauenlie and Diuine a Deaw, hauing once conce aued
the same within her virginal Womb, retires herself
into her Nazareth, to ruminate on the mysterie she

had within her, vntil necessitie drew her to Bethleem
and the time prefixed of the deliuerie of her fruit was
come; for then as purely as she receaued it, she gaue
it vp most perfect and compleat, and made therof a
rich present to the world.
Ponder lastly, how the Deaw being a meer extract
from the Seas, exhaled by the vertue of the Sunnie
rayes, which when he can hold no longer, lets it fal to
co^fort and refresh al fublunarie things, and drawing
it againe vnto himself, lets it fal againe for the same
end; and so wil do, to the end of the world, for the
comfort and solace of man-kind. So the humanitie
of our Sauiour Christ, as a waterie Deaw, being extracted
from the virgin Marie (amaro mari) and through
the Sunnie rayes of the Diuinitie assumpted vp to
heauen in the glorious Ascension, through loue not
able to stay any longer, descends againe in the blessed
Sacrament, to recreate and refresh vs Mortals, and
so as often as we desire, is readie to visit vs with his
supercelestial and diuine Deaw, and thus til the consummation
of the world.


THE APOSTROPHE.
O Thou great Ladie, Mother of grace and mercie,The Coll^quie.
who in a strange and maruelous manner hast been replenished
with the Deaw of grace in a soueraigne degree; I beseech
thee, intercede for me, that I may likewise be replenished and filled
with grace, feruour, loue, and the Diuine delights of thy Soune,
whom thou receauedst from heaven as the Deaw fallen into thy
virgin-lap. And this I beg O blessed virgin-Mother, through
the virginal milk, wherewith thou fedst that little great GOD
in person; and by the teares of ioy thou sheadst for the deare embraces
of so great a Sonne of thine; and by al the sweetnesses of
his Diuinitie, which made thy blessed soule to liquify with ioy. O
Ladie, O virgin-Mother, O my sweet Aduocate, to thee do I recurre
to impetrate these grates for me, at his hands, who sitting on
thy lap, and hanging at thy breasts, can deny thee nothing.




THE VII. SYMBOL.
THE BEE.

THE DEVISE.






THE CHARACTER.
THe Bee is that great little Architect of
houses made of wax,The, Impresa. as of playster of
Paris, al ciment, and no stone, while you
find not a stone or rub in al his works.
He is a great Enginer in that mould,
working his subtle mines til he be al in a sweat,
which in truth is no more then a moisture he hath
with him through his so much padling, and medling
with deawes. It is a world to see, what mines and
countermines they wil make amongst them, to supplant
one another, whervpon manie suits of law arise

between them. For you must know, they haue a notable
gouerment, and a wise and politick reason of
State with them, which though it may seeme to partake
of al, yet is in truth a pure Monarchal rule, and
surely the best. As the Venetians haue their Duke or
Doague, they haue their King, enthroned doubtles
and inuested with a more absolute authoritie then
he, and yet not apt to slide or degenerate to Tyranie,
as some would imagine. And if the Venetians haue
their Senat and Magnificoes, they haue the same.
The King for sword of iustice, hath his sting, which
he weares for terrour rather then vse, whose best
armes is a certain sweet and serene Maiestie with
him, which makes him loued rather then feared, if
not feared for loue: yet were anie so refractarie as
not to loue so sweet a Maiestie, he could tel, how to
bend the brow. He is then the great Dictatour aboue
al, and true Augustus Caesar of that great Common
wealth of little Romans. The Bee of al others makes his
vintage in the Spring, because his chiefest haruest is
^n the sugred deawes, that fal vpon the tender blossomes,
at that time, wherof part they tunne vp in pi^^es,
for the purpose, to brew their meade with, against
the winter; and churning the rest as handsom^
as they may, they make it into a kind of butter,
^e cal honie, which they crock and barrel vp for
^reatest marchandise. They are but Pigmies, in
^espect of the Giants amongst them, whom for their
^undring voice, they cal humble-bees. Nor can you
^now the rest by their voices only, while the least
^il carrie as great a horn about him, as the biggest
^f them. They are notable husbands abroad, and
^ood huswiues at home; for so they are both, or
^either, as hanieg no sex amongst them;
^hich if they haue, they are Mayds, or Bachelours

euerie one, because they haue no marriages with
them, as liuing very chastly togeather like so manie
Angels.


THE MORALS.

OPEROSA ET SEDVLA.

LAbour and Industrie are Brother and
Sister,The Motto. dwelling in the same house.
He is strong and robustuous with
Atlas shoulders; She as quick and
nimble of the other side. It is incredible,
what these two are able to do,
when they ioyne togeather; they wil work wonders,
moue mountains, and runne through stitch with euerie
thing. Rome indeed was not built on a day, but yet
with labour and industrie in short time became the
Metropolis of the whole world. What a work was
that, which the infamous Incendiarie, to eternize his
name, ruined in a moment, which Labour and Industrie
had reared-vp from the verie foundation to the
roofe? The great Mausoleas, Amphitheaters, Piramids
(and what not?) haue al been built and finished
by them. If Labour once fayle, Industrie anon rouze^
him vp: and then wil they roundly fal to their wor^^
as fresh as euer. Wheresoeuer they meet, he is the
Bodie, and she the Soule; and as the Bodie and Soul^
can not be diuided without ruine of the person, (...)
Labour without Industrie is no bodie, and wil presently
come to nought. The Grace of the Holie-Ghos^
wheresoeuer it is, is Industrie itself, and knowes (...)
delayes; it is as gun-powder set on fire, which carries
the bullet, though of lead, more swift then an arrow
where it goes. The tender Virgin-Mother of God had

^his powder of Industrie in her, when conceauing
with fire, through the match of Fiat, she flew so
^imbly ouer hils and dales to her Cosen Elizabeth, the
subiect of Charitie; wherin truly she shewed herself
OPEROSA ET SEDVLA.


THE ESSAY.
The Bee is the greatest Politick in the
world;The Reuiew. the gouerment of their litle commo^-wealth
is most admirable. The King
is he that hath the best pre^se^ce with him,
and a Royal looke; al his subiects obey him
with submission and reuerence, not doing anie thing
against their oath of alleageance. The King himself
is armed with Maiestie and beautie; if he haue a sting,
he neuer makes vse of it, in the whole manage of his
estate. He carryes nothing but honie in his co^mands;
one would not beleeue the great seueritie and courtesie
there is amongst them, liuing in communitie,
with good intelligences abroad, al goes with them
with weight and measure, without errour or mistakings.
In the winter they keep wholy within, not
knowing otherwise how to defend themselues from
the force of the weather and violence of the winds,
and hold their little assemblies, in some place deputed
for that effect, and keep correspondencies one with
another; but for the drones and idle bees, they banish
them quite from their common-wealth. They commit
not themselues to the discretion of the weather
abroad, vntil such time as the beanes begin to
blowe, and from that time they wil loose no day
from labour. They frame the wax from the iuice
which they suck from flowers, hearbs, and trees;
and for honie they deriue it also from trees and gommie

reeds, hauing a glue and viscous lickour on the^.
They wil make their wax likewise of euerie herb and
flower; saue only, they neuer light on a dead or withered
one. Their sting is fastned in their bellie; and
when they stick it so, as they cannot draw it forth
againe without leauing the instrument behind, they
dy of it; and if the sting remaine but half, they liue as
castrat, and become as droans, not being able to gather
either honie or wax.


THE DISCOVRSE.
THE mellifluous Doctour S. Ambrose,The Suruey. in his sweet
booke of Virgins, sayth: the Bee feeds of the deaw,
engenders not at al, and frames the honie.
Which three properties peculiarly and singularly
appertaine to Virgins; but most expresly and sublimely
of al to the Sacred Virgin herself, the Queen of Virgins.
For as al other creatures liue of the earth or water,
as birds, beasts, and fishes, some few excepted, to
wit, the Camaeleon of the ayre, and the Salamander
of the fire; the Bee, as a choicer creature, more curious
then the rest, feeds no worse then of the deaw,
that falles from Heauen; and wheras al other creatures
(not bred of putrefaction) are subiect to libidinous
heat in their kinds, the Bee is free therof, and
multiplies by a way more chast; and where other
creatures are wholy maintained at their Maister's
charge, and some wil eate you more then their bodies
are worth, or their labour comes to, the Bee makes
its owne prouision of itself, and leaues his owner
rich with the bootie and spoyle they make of the
flowers of the field, without anie cost or charge of
the Maister; so industrious they are, to the great confusion

of men. Iust so our Ladie, not taken with the
bayts and allurements of this world, for spiritual
life, liued not but of the heauenlie deaw of Diuine
grace; being capable of no other heat, then of the
chast and amourous fire of Diuine Loue; not conceauing
Fruit, but by an admirable, mysterious, and miraculous
way, through the work of the Holie-Ghost,
remaining a Virgin before, in, and after her Childbirth;
and lastly framed without anie cost or merits
of ours, that Honie of honies, that Honie-comb distilling,
which carries the honie in his lips.
The honie indeed is engendred in the ayre through
the fauour and influence of certain starres; as in the
Canicular dayes, we may note betimes in the morning,
the leaues to be charged and sugred with it.
Such as go forth at that time, before day, shal find
themselues to be moistned therewith, which the Bees
suck from the leaues and flowers, and tunne-vp in
their little stomaks, to discharge againe, and to
make it perfect honie in al points, for the vse of men.
So our incomparable Virgin receauing this Deaw or
honie of the Eternal Word, as it came from Heauen,
into her Virginal womb, so wrought it in her, as
being deliuered therof, it proued a honie most apt
for the vse of man; the true Bread of Life indeed. Most
happie Bee! and a thousand times most blessed
HONIE!
Where it is to be noted, that Bees are exceedingly
delighted with these things: first, with faire and serene
weather; for then those deawes more plentifully fal and
are more delicious: and of the contrarie in the raynie
and more boysterous weather they are wholy hindered
from their vintage, as it were, or gathering those sugred
deawes. Secondly, they are pleased much with
abundance of flowers; from whence they gather

their purest honie; for though the deawes fal vpon
the leaues, and they gather it no doubt from them
also, yet is it not so delicious and pure; for the nature
of deawes participats much of the places they
light on, which makes the Bee farre more busie and
industrious on the flower, then on the leaues. Thirdly,
they are wonne with a sweet sound. For Aristotle
sayth, they are exceedingly allured with the harmonie
of musick and sweet sounds; which we ordinarily
practise now adayes, to stay them with, when they
are in a great consult to take their flight and be gone;
for then with the striking of a pan only insteed of
other musick are they brought to settle themselues
neer home; so Musical they are. And lastly, they ioy
greatly insweet wine, as we find by experience and
daylie practise, as often as they begin to swarme, and
are now on the wing and point to trauel into forren
parts.
Al these things the Blessed Virgin was exceedingly
affected to, and had them al, as it were, within her;
as first a serenitie in the internal conscience, where
appeared no clowd in the ayre of her Mind, and
where the pacifical Salomon sat peacefully indeed as
in his Iuorie Throne. Al the glorie of the King's daughter,
was wholy within her. Then had she the flowers of al
Vertues and Graces within her, to wit, the diuersities
of al vertues, the lillies of chastitie, the blush and
mo^estie of the rose, the hope of the Violet, the charicie
and Diuine loue of the Heliotropion, and the like. Her
soule was a Garden of al flowers, and no lesse then a
Paradise, which had the Archangel as Paranimph and
Guardian therof, with the two-edged sword of Humilitie
and the chast Feare of God. O delicious Paradise,
and more then terrestrial, euen when she was
dwelling on the earth! Thirdly she was affected to

Musick, and very rare and singular therin, as appeares
by that excellent and melodious Canticle of hers,
the Diuine Magni^^at, so chanted now adayes in the
world, and taken-vp in the Church, for an admirable
peece of that Art, to vye with the Angels, the Cherubins,
and Seraphins themselues, to frame the like.
Nor yet was she so pleased, to heare herself sing only,
as to listen to her Spouse, the voice of her beloued knocking
and saying: My sister, open vnto me; to whom she would
answer againe: Behold, my beloued speaks vnto me. Oh let
thy voice stil sound in mine eares! and a thousand other affects
of her Musical hart would she dayly sing besides
to the Angelical troups, which enuironed her
round. And lastly for her loue to wine, that is, to
the Angelical Nectar, she was dayly feasted with, of
spiritual gladnes, as tasts before hand, of her future
ioyes, which might appeare by the quantitie
she tooke of those wines, and the qualitie againe by
the frequent extasies of loue she would breake into,
remaining in her Closet, as we may piously beleeue,
being inebriated therewith.



THE EMBLEME.






THE POESIE.
TO Bethlem's sillie shed,The Pause. me thinkes I see
The Virgin hasten like a busie Bee;
Which in a tempest subiect to be blowne,
In lieu of ballast, beares a little stone;
As 'twere with oares beats to and fro his wings,
Collects heauens deaw, which to the hiue he brings.
Within that store-house lyes the daylie frait.
Lets fal the stone, Euen so of greater weight,
Cut without hands, the Virgin now is gone
To lay the prime and fundamental stone,
Heauens Deaw condens'd was in the honie-comb.
She was the Bee, the Hiue her Sacred Womb.



THE THEORIES.
COntemplate first,The Contemplation. how little soeuer the
Bee seemes, yet how great its excellencies
and eminencies are; and measure
not the singular properties it hath,
with the outward shew it giues forth.
For though it seeme no more indeed, then as raysed
but a little higher then an ordinarie fly; yet is it a miracle
in nature, an astonishment to men, and a liuelie
Symbol of our Blessed Ladie; who being so singular and
eminent in al prerogatiues and graces, Celestial and
Diuine, made no greater a shew, then she did in being
so priuate in her Closet or Oratorie, where she was,
as a Bee, in her Cel a-framing the delicious honie of her
admirable examples of life, to sweeten the world
with, for after-ages. Where you may note her stupenduous
humilitie, that seing herself elected the Mother
of God, and consequently the Queene of Angels and men,
yet held herself to be no more then as a seruiceable
Bee, to worke the precious honie of Man's Redemption,
in her Virginal Womb, when she sayd: Behold the
hand-mayd of our Lord.
Consider then, that as one of the properties of the
Bee is, when it is on the wing, and feares to be carried
away with the winds of the ayre, to take vp a
stone, to keep itself steadie therin, through the poyse
therof: So our blessed Virgin, in her highest contemplation
of heauenlie mysteries, which was frequent
and ordinarie with her, would take herself to her
little Iesus, the mystical stone (for Christ was a Stone)
for feare of being carryed away with the wind
of vanitie;S. Paul she would fly and soare aloft, but
yet hold her to her little Nothing, which she

euer tooke herself to be. O admirable humilitie of
our incomparable and industrious Bee!
Ponder lastly, that if the Bee is so admired for its
singular guists of Continencie, of Policie, and Industrie,
and especially so affected by al men for the benefit
of the honie they receaue from it; how admirable
needes must the blessed Virgin be? so chast, as to be
the first, and onlie patterne of al Chastitie, both Virginal,
Coniugal, and Vidual; so wise, politick, and welgouerned
in herself, to haue Sensualitie so obedient
to Reason, and Reason to GOD, as to haue no deordination
in her, either of the inferiour to the superiour
part; and so industrious withal, as to work so
exquisit a loome of al Perfection, as wel Human as
Angelical, in the whole course of her diuine life. Yea
how ought she to be honoured and worshipped of
vs al, for the Celestial and Diuine fruit she brought vs
forth, that mellifluous Honie of the Diuine Word
Incarnate and made Man in her most precious and
sacred Wombe?


THE APOSTROPHE.
O Great Monarkesse and Princesse of intercession in heauen,The Colloquie
most constant and immoueable in thy Virginal purpose,
who hadst rather not to haue been so great in the kingdome of
God, then to falsify thy promise and vow of perpetual Virginitie,
if in being the Mother of God, the same had been put in the
least danger: O help me then to guard this inestimable treasure of
Chastitie in my state of life! by that sweetest Honie-comb
thou hredst within thee, and broughtst into the world, thy deerest
Sonne. Ah, let me not be perfidious, disloyal, or a breaker of my
faith, nor rash in my good purposes made to His Diuine Maiestie.
For that, O soueraigne Ladie, displeases him highly, and
offends thee likewise, deare Princesse of Virgin-soules.




THE VIII. SYMBOL.
THE HEAVENS.

THE DEVISE.






THE CHARACTER.
THE Heauens are the glorious Pallace of the
Soueraigne Creatour of al things;The Impresa the purple
Canopie of the Earth, powdred ouer and
beset with siluer-oes; or rather an Azure
Vault enameld al with diamants, that sparckle where
they are. And for that there is aloft aboue this seeling,
they make a pauiment likewise for the Intelligences
and Angelical Spirits, strewed, as become such inhabitants,
with starres. It is a Court, where those blessed
Spirits, as Pensioners, stand continually assisting in
the King's presence, with the fauour to behold him

to face in his greatest glorie, while the Starres as
Pages attend in those spacious Hals and lower roomes.
If al togeather, should make vp the bodie of an Armie
ranged and marshalled in the field, the Spirits
themselues would make the Caualrie, and the Infanterie
the Starres, S. Muhael General of the one, and
Phoebus of the other; where euen as the Foot, that are
as the Corps of the whole Batallions, make a stand;
so remaine the whole multitude of Starres al fixt in
the Firmament, while the Planets, which are as the
Collonels of the rest, with the speedie Coursers of
their proper Orbs, fly vp and down to marshal the
Legions, and to keepe the Companies in their due
squadrons. If they shoot, their shafts and darts, they
send, are but their influences they powre on mortals
and terrene things, good and bad; some sweet,
of loue; as those which Venus shoots from her Regiment,
headed with gold; some with steel, as those of
Mars, and his troups; and some againe, as more malignant,
dipt in venome, as those of Saturn and the
Caniculars. As the Earth hath beasts, the Heauens haue
their Lion and Beare, the great and lesse. Where the
Sea hath fish, the Heauens haue theirs, and waters
enough, as wel aboue as vnder the Firmament. As
the Ayre hath birds, the Heauens haue Angels, as
birds of Paradise. And if the vpper Region of the
Elements be of fire, the Seraphins are al of amourous
fires of Diuine loue, and the highest order of
the blessed Spirits.



THE MORALS.

CAPACITATIS IMMENSAE.

THat great Galleasse or Argosey of Noe
clapt vnder hatches the Epitome of the
world;The Mott^. which yet virtually contained
that vast volume or tome of the greater
World. The Troyan horse held a whole
Ambuscado in his bellie of warlick Grecians in compleat
armour. Yea the Eye of man, though de facto it
reach no farther then the Hemisphere only, yet of itself
is able to extend to the ful immensitie of the
whole Sphear, were it placed as Center therof, But
that were to make the Heauens the visible Obiect of
the Eye only: I wil then go further. The Hart of man
as it is, how litle soeuer, if it be wel purged, is able
to walke through the heauenlie vaults, both aboue
and beneath; I meane, contemplate the Starres and
Spirits themselues, with the immense capacitie of
that wast dwelling of theirs. But what were al this
but a meer extension and perlustration of the mind
only, wholy occupyed in measuring Intellectual
Obiects? It is the Local continencie, I meane, as
the kernel is contained in the shel, and the like. I say
that great Amphitheater of Pompey was but a nutshel,
as it were, of so manie sonnes of men, compared
with the Globe of the Earth, and the earth with
the Zodiack of the Sun, and the Sun againe being paraleld
with GOD himself. It is GOD only, who
truly beholds al Obiects, both Intellectual and Visible;
and truly containes them al, being present to al,
comprehends al, is Al in Al. And yet this great
AL, whom the Heauen of Heauens can not co^taine, hath

the Virgin-Womb of the immaculate Mother of God
conceaned and held in her lap, as the Church sings;
an therefore is sayd to be, and that most rightly,
and worthily too, CAPACITATIS IMMENSAE.


THE ESSAY.
THe Heauens with their circuit,The Reuiew. cloathe
and mantle al the world, and with the
sweetnes of their influences nourish the
same, and distil a life into it. They are
the House of GOD; the floare and pauiment
of Paradise; the Garden of the Angels, al
beset with starres insteed of flowers, with an eternal
Spring; the Temple of the Diuinitie; and the
azured Vault of the Vniuers. The number of the
Heauens hath not alwayes been agreed vpon; for one
while they beleeued, there was but one onlie, wherin
the ^tarres did sweetly glide heer and there, and
glance along, as in a liquid cristal floud. Sometimes
haue they allowed of eight, by reason of so manie
diuers Motions and Agitations very different in
them; then nine; then ten, and then eleuen; and if
perhaps some new Gal^laeus should deuise and frame
vs other spectacles or opticons to see with, we are in
danger to find out yet some new Starres and Heauens
neuer dreamed of before. This round Machine
makes its circular reuolutions through an vnspeakable
swiftnes. But that is a meer tale, which Plato
tels, to busie mens braynes with, to say, the Starres
and Heauens yeald a sound or delicicus melodie
through their motion and stirring vp and downe;
whereas truly the sweet sliding and shuffling of the
Heauens, the accords so discordant of contrarie motions,
those sweet coniunctions and diuorces of

Starres, is it truly which is called, the sweet harmonie
of the Heauens. They would likewise make vs
beleeue, the Heauens were al engraued ouer, because
the Zodiack is composed and distinguished into twelue
Figures of Beasts, therin cut, as with a chisel; and the
whole Figure and face of Heauen were as fully stockt
with beasts, carued and fashioned so to beautify the
Heauens; and therefore wil some haue Caelum to take its
denomination from caelatum, as much to say, as carued
and engraued; But in effect, are nothing els but certain
assemblies and congregations of Starres togeather,
which the fantasies of men hath fashioned in Figures
and Constellations; which being so taken, resemble
some kinds of beasts, but in truth haue so smal resemblance
with them, as that which they cal a Beare,
might as wel be tearmed an Ape; and Necessitie
makes vs to accept it for good coyne, and GOD himself
with Iob makes vse of such manner of speach, in
naming them Orion, the Hyades, and the like. This great
Bowle of the Heauens, roules and turnes about an
Axeltree, fixt in a certain place, and flyes with the
winged swiftnes it hath; the Angel giues it the
whirle about, and makes it turne round according to
the Diuine prouidence, crowning the world with its
vaulted Arch enameled al with starres.


THE DISCOVRSE.
THvs are the Heauens expressed in themselues;The Suruey* ^arth. Angl. l. 8. c. 2.
and now let vs seeke another
Heauen, these ancients neuer dreamed of.
One Authour diuides the Heauens into
seauen parts; the Aerean, Aetherean, Olympian,
Firie, Firmamental, Waterie, and Empyreal. But we
wil content ourselues with these three only, the

Syderean, the Cristalin, and Empyreal. And for the first,
we shal find our Queene of Heauen to be so the Queene
therof, as she is a Syderean or Starrie Heauen herself, if
we regard but the ornaments she is decked with, as so
manie starres. For as that Heauen is adorned with
varietie of Starres; so she with diuersitie of al Vertues.
The beautie of Heaue^,Eccl. 4^. to wit, of Marie, is the celestial glorie
of the Starres, that is, the glorious varietie of al Vertues.
For as for the ornaments of this Heauen, it is sayd
in the Apocalyps: She had a crowne of twelue starres vpon her
head.Apoc. 12. Now in this nu^ber of Twelue is a double nu^ber of
Six, which is the number of Perfection, and signifyes
the Saints, as wel those which are in glorie and Celestial
Paradise, as those, who are as yet on their way thither;
who al honour, crowne, and adore this blessed Virgin, as
their Queene and Ladie. For as the Heauen with its proper
Orb and certain reuolutions, carries al the mouing
starres along with it, so she induceth al the Saints,
to ioyne in intercession with her.
The Cristalline Heauen she is, being a Heauen as composed
of the waters aboue the heauens; which is hardned,
as it were, and made solid, like Cristal; the matter being
nothing els but waters hardned and condensed, as
some think, not much vnlike to the crust of Cristal,
which is solid, lucid, and most pure: And so the waters
of our Ladie were solid, that is, her Vertues were confirmed;
and lucid, that is, transparent, because through
them she might contemplate and behold the glorie of
GOD;1. Cor. 3. according to that: But we with face reuealed, shal
speculate the glorie of GOD. The forme of this Cristalline
Heauen, is Spheral and round, which is truly the most
Capacious, the Perfectest, and Fairest of al figures; and
so is she most Capacious, as becomes the habitatio^ of
GOD, according as the Church deliuers: Who^ the Heaue^s
could not containe, hast thou held in thy Womb; the Perfectest,
because endued with al vertues:Eccl. 24. In me is grace, of the way

and veritie; most Faire, because stained with no blot, nor
euer touched with anie blemish, so much as Venial:
Thou art wholy faire, my friend,Cant. and there is no blemish in thee.
She is the Empyreal Heauen, which is the habitation of
the Saints, and a Heauen al of light, of an infinit capacitie,
and imme^se sublimitie. The blessed Virgin then is
resembled to this Heauen: First, for her vnspeakable
Claritie, because she is now wholy radiant and resplendent
in Celestial glorie, hauing beneath, the Moone
vnder her feet, and on her head, a crowne of Starres, and
for the rest clothed with the Sunne. Secondly, for her
great capaciousnes; for as there can be thought no place
of greater capacitie, then the Empyreal Heauen, so can no
creature be found of greater Charitie, then Marie. For
she had an ample Womb, which was able to receaue
GOD; She had an ample Vnderstanding, which had the
knowledge of al Diuine things; an ample Affect she
had, for her singular compassion on the miseries of al
the afflicted. Thirdly, for her highnes and sublimitie; for
as Heauen is the highest of al bodies, so is she higher
farre then al Spiritual creatures, as wel Angelical as
Reasonable. Thy magnificence is raysed,Psal. that is, the Virgin
Marie, to whom GOD hath shewed very great things,
yea aboue al the Heauens, as wel Material as Rational,
because appointed Queene ouer al Saints; and therefore
sayes of her self: Who hath wrought great matters for me*
who is potent* and holie is his name.
Which things S. Epiphanius considering, in his Sermo^
of the Prayses of our Ladie,Epip. in laud. Mariae. breakes forth into these words*
O impolluted Womb, hauing the circle of the heauens within
thee, which bare the incomprehensible GOD most truly comprehe^ded
in thee? O Wo^b more ample, then Heauen, which streightned
not GOD within thee! O Womb* which art euen verie Heaue^
indeed, consisting of seauen Circles, and art more capacious farre
then them all O Womb more high and wider* then are the seauen

Heauens! O Womb, which are euen the eight Heauen itself,
more large then the seauen of the Firmament. So he. And S.
Chrysologus thus:Cherisoh. Ser. 11s. O truly blessed, who was greater then Heauen,
stronger then the Earth, wider then the World! For GOD,
whom the world could not containe, She held alone; and bare
him, that beares the world; yea bare him, who begat her, and nursed
the nourisher of al liuing things. But yet heare what S
Bonauenture sayth heerof:Bonau. in spec. c. 50. Thou therefore (sayth he) most
immense Marie, art more capacious then Heauen, since
whom the Heauens could not hold, thou hast held in
thy lap; thou art more capacious then the World: for
whom the whole world could not hold, hath been
enclosed within thy bowels, being made Man.
But especially indeed is the blessed Virgin sayd to
be the Empyreal Heauen, because as that same being the
proper place of Beatitude, where GOD cleerly manifests
himself to the Blessed, face to face: so the Wo^b
of the blessed Mother of GOD, was the first of al
wherin GOD in a permament manner communicated
to the soule of Christ our Lord, the cleare and blessed
vision of himself; since certain it is, that from the
beginning of his Conception, he was truly a comprehensour;
and yet in his way, and a true viatour. Which
no doubt is a singular prayse of the Virginal womb;
that, where the wombs of other women are meerly
the shops of Original sinne, as Dauid lamented (And my
mother conceaued me in sinnes) which makes one vnworthie
of the visio^ of GOD:Psal. 50 the Virgins Wo^b of al others
should be a place for the blessed Vision, and the only
first shop of Beatitude. So as wel might the Woman
of the Ghospel cry out: Blessed is the Womb, that bare thee.



THE EMBLEME.






THE POESIE.
THE Blessed Virgin,The Pause. euen from her birth,
Was like a Heauen without a clowd, on earth;
Where fixed Starres did shine, each in his place,
As she encreas'd by merits more in grace;
Til ful of grace (as is with starres the sky)
Gabriel salurtes. Then more to glorify
This Heauen, from his, the Sunne of Iustice came,
Light of the world, with his eternal flame.
Lo, how the Angels from th' Empyreal sphere
Admire this Heauen on earth, that shines so cleare,
Contesting with their glorious Orbe aboue,
And with the Seraphins in burning loue.
Empyreal Heauen! For in her makes abode
The first blest Soule, that had the sight of GOD.



THE THEORIES.
COntemplate first, that as the Heauens in their
motions commit no errour,The Contemplation. because they are
alwayes obedient to the Intelligences or mouing
Angels that moue and guide them: so likewise
the Blessea Virgin could slide into no errour of sinne, because
she punctually obserued the Holie-Ghost, her Motour
and proper Intelligence, as it were, in al things;
while being moued with such motio^s, she was carryed
to GOD through feruent loue, as being the wheel of
GOD, wherof Ezechiel speaks (Which was carryed wheresoeuer
the spirit went;Ezech. for the spirit of life was in the
wheels) now in praying for vs to her Sonne, now directing
the Angels themselues vnto our ministerie,
and then exhorting the blessed Spirits to pray for vs,
Behold of what agilitie and motion this Heauen is!
Co^sider then that euen as fro^ heauen; and its ^ights,
we receaue al the chiefest benefits of Nature, especially
the growth and prosperitie of plants, without
which nothing would succeed or come to anie thing:
so from this glorious Virgin-Mother we likely receaue
the most notable fauours and guifts we haue fro^ GOD.
For as the Heauen visits the earth, affording its light by
day and night, by meanes of the two great torches, Sun
and Moon, and millions of lesser lights, which with
their influe^ces besides doe fructify the same, and with
their sweet showers in a ma^ner inebriate it, and coole
it againe, when need requires, with dryer clowds, yea
enrich it also, with gold, siluer, and precious stones: so
our incomparable Ladie visits and illustrats the whole
vniuersal Church with her admirable examples, and
with the guifts of the Holie-Ghost inebriats the same,
stores it abundantly with good works, and enriches
it with an infinit treasure of al vertues:Psal. and therefore
is it sayd: Thou hast visited the earth.
Ponder lastly, how among al things which haue anie
stuff, matter, or dimesion in them of length, breadth,

or thicknes, there is no incorruptible thing to be
thought on, but only the heauens; for al mixt things,
whatsoeuer they be, corrupt at last, and the Elements
we see continually corrupt; saue only the Celestial
bodie, which is wholy incorruptible of its owne nature:
So in like ma^ner, whenas al the Childre^ of Adam,
begot according to Nature, are lyable, and obnoxious
to the corruption of Original sinne; and al women
loose in co^ceauing, the integritie of the bodie; yet this
Heauen of Marie, through especial grace and prerogatiue
of her Sonne, was made incorruptible, according to
either part, of soule and bodie: Of the soule truly, because
the co^tagion and corruption of Original sinne
touched not her so much as a mome^t only; and of bodie
also, because though indeed she were a true and natural
Mother, and co^ceaued her Sonne most truly indeed, yet
knew she no corruption at al, obseruing and keeping
perpetually, the Virginitie of mind and bodie. How
worthily therefore, is she compared to Heauen for this
so strange and admirable incorruptibilitie in her?


THE APOSTROPHE.
O Great Miracle of the world,The Colloquie. or little world of miracles; not
Queene so much of Heauen alone, as the Heauen of
the King of thee, Queene and Mistris of the Heauens; thou
only maister-peece of the Almightie hand; O Diuine Throne, not
second vnto anie; Thou liuing Ark of Alliance; and the Elder
Sister of al creatures, who wast a Mother and a Virgin a Virgin, and
a Mother, al in one; a Mayden and a Nurse, a Nurse and yet a Mayden,
the Mother and the Nurse of God and Man, a Virgin and a
Mayd for euer. By that glorious virgin-fruit of thine, the astonishment
of Angels, which so miraculously thou broughtst into
the world, after thou hadst so long afforded him thy precious
Womb, as a gratful and delicious Paradise of Heauen: Grant,
we beseech thee, by that shower of grace in Him, which fel
through thee, O mysterious Heauen, that we may come at
last to that Heauen of his glorie, which he hath purchased for vs
with his more then precious Bloud.




THE IX. SYMBOL.
THE IRIS.

THE DEVISE.






THE CHARACTER.
THE Iris is the radiant and refulgent Bow
of Heauen,The Impresa. that shoots but wonders to
astonish the world with. It is the Thiara,
or fayrest dresse of Nature, her shining
Carkanet enchaced with the richest
iewels. It is the Triumphal Arch of the heauenlie Numens,
set-vp in triumph as a Trophey of Beautie, to
allure the eyes of al, to stare and gaze vpon it. The
Protheus of the Seas could neuer take so manie shapes
vpon him, as the Iris diuersifyes its coulours. And for
the Camelion of the ayre, she doubtles vsed no other

pattern then it, to coppie forth the great varietie of
coulours she assumes. This Prodigie of Nature, liues
in and by the Ayre, but hath its whole subsistence in
the Eye only. Open the eyes, and there it is; but shut
them vp, and it wil vanish. It is indeed the faire and
goodlie mirrour of the heauenlie Intelligences themselues,
which they wil gaze on, as their leasure serues
them, and breake at their pleasure, if they like it not,
to make them new perhaps to please them better. If
the Angels would lay aside their wings, and goe afoot,
I doe not think, they could haue a better way to
descend by, and ascend againe, then by this Causway,
paued al with iewels heer and there, and where not, al
strewed with tapistries; the Turkie ones are nothing
like; nor those of Barbarie come neere them; while
those the mothes wil eate, and time destroy their
coulours, and they fade; but these, wil last til al be
quite worne out. They seeme al as made by the same
hand; they are so like; looke what you haue to day, the
same you haue to morrow. And surely no other Artizan
then he that made you this, can make you such
another. They say, it is a nothing in itself; which
if it be, it is a prettie Nothing, that so with nothing
should make the heauens so beautiful, nay more, so
rich, and al with nothing.



THE MORALS.

PACIS FERO SIGNA FVTVRAE.

THE Scythian Tamberlan,The Motto. the terrour of the House
of Ottomans, had in his warres, three Ensignes:
the red, the black, and white; which he
vsed to aduance vpon occasions; wherof the white
especially signifyed Peace and a reconciliation offered;
which if refused, the red, and then the black succeeded.
Castor and Pollux in the Heauens, are held to be sweet,
propitious, and pacifical Starres. The Halcion in time
of a tempestuous storme at Sea appearing on the
decks, is a comfortable, and little lesse then a certain
signe of a calme and quiet Sea, wherat Mariners wil
cheer vp, as no such thing had euer hapned. The
Spring immediatly followes the bitter and sharp
Winter; the signes are the buds appearing then, in
the tender and green twigs. When the Lyon is in his
chiefest rage, and when he roars most dreadfully of al,
and for anger beats himself with his tayle in meer
despite, let come but a tender Virgin, by, the while,
and appeare in his sight, his courage wil fayle him,
and he be a Lamb in a Lion's skin. The Lion of Iuda roared
then, when the Lord of Hoasts, to extirpate human
kind, so let go the Cataracts of heauen, to drowne the
world, with a total deluge of waters couering the
earth; when lo, the white flag was spred in the Heauens,
in forme of an Iris, representing the pure and
immaculate Virgin of Virgins, which made the Lion to
let fal his creast, and to enter into a league with al
mankind, to drowne it no more; and therefore our
Ladie herself was a true Iris, and may rightly be called,
and truly is, that PACIS FERO SIGNA FVTVRAE.



THE ESSAY.
THE Iris or Rainebow is that goodlie mirrour,The Reuiew.
wherin the humane spirit sees very
easily its owne ignorance, and wherin
the poore Philosopher becomes Banckrout,
who in so manie yeares can know
no more of this Bow, then this, that he knowes nothing
to the purpose, and that it is a Noli me tangere; since
as manie as haue mused thervpon, haue but broken
their braines about it to their owne confusion. For of
the one side, there is nothing of lesse being, in the
whole pourtrait of Nature, being framed of a goodlie
Nothing, diuersifyed and diaperd with false coulours,
dressed-vp with a feigned beautie, the matter
nothing, its durance a moment. It is a Bow without
an arrow, a bridge without a Basis, a Crescent not
encreasing, a phantasme of coulours; a Nothing, that
would faine shew to be somewhat. And yet is this
rich Nothing a miracle of beautie, among the fairest
things of the world, which being compared thervnto,
are euen as nothing. Would you haue riches? The
whole Bow is nothing els then the carkanet of Nature,
enameled with al the precious Iewels she hath; some
are Pearls, others haue the sparcle of the Diamant,
the flames of the Carbuncle, the twincle of the Saphir;
I should say rather it is the maister-peece, wherin
Nature had embrodered al her rarest stones, and placed
the richest peece of her treasures, which she can
seuer at her pleasure: It is the Collar of her Order, her
chaine of pearles, and the fairest of al her Cabinet,
wherewith she decks herself, to please her Spouse, the
Heauens. Good God! what a goodlie Nothing is this,

if it be no more, that carryes such beautie and riches
with it? It is said, that great High way of milke, which
appeares in the heauens, was the way of the Gods,
whe^ they went vnto the Co^sistorie of Iupiter; but it is a
fable: whereas I should think, that were there any ordinary
way for the Angels to descend down vnto the
earth by, or for men to mount vp to heauen, there
could be no fayrer the^ this Bridge alwayes tapistryed,
and paued with so bewtiful stones.


THE DISCOVRSE.
GOD himself takes such complacencie
in the Rainebow,The Suruey. that when he is in the
highest point of his iust choler, if he cast
but his eye thervpon, he is suddenly
appeased. I wil looke on my Bow, and wil
remember etc: sayth he.Gen. And no maruel surely; since
the Bow, he regards so much, is the Symbol heer of
his deerest Mother, the Incomparable Virgin.
Let vs see then, how this heauenlie Bow deciphers the
Queen of Heauen, this mirrour of Nature, and the astonishment
of man-kind. The Generation and extract
of anie thing discouers it most. This Iris then or
Raynebow, is caused by the reflexion of the Sunnie
beames, vpon a lucid clowd, concaue and waterish.
Clowdes are engendred of the marine vapours or
exhalation of the seas, where the vapoural parts of
the Ocean are attracted by the vertue of the Sun;
which conglomerated togeather, engender a clowd,
when the brackishnes of the Sea-water is turned to
sweetnes. And so was our Ladie a true clowd, since in
her were found these marine vapours, that is, incredible
tribulations, bitter and brackish of themselues,
though to her made sweet, through the force and

vertue of Diuine Loue. The Sunnie beames therefore,
that is, the grace of GOD being a ray, as it were, of
the Diuine Essence, reflecting on the purest Virgin, a
lucid clowd, concaue and waterish, produced the
Iris or Rainebow in the Hierarchie of the Church, as in
the firmament of the Heauens; and therefore called
the Iris or Celestial Bow, a signe of the Reconciliation
of GOD with al mankind. She was concaue through
humilitie, and therefore very apt to receaue the
rayes of the Sunne of Iustice, the influence of Diuine
graces; as she was waterish no lesse through compassion
and pietie, because her hart was a Spring, and her
eyes as continual-standing pooles of teares.
A bow commonly hath a string, is bent with an
arrow in it, and hath the horns conuerted towards
vs, as menacing the Foes. Our Blessed Vigin is a Bow
indeed, but without the string of seueritie, because
most iust; and without menaces and feare, because
most sweet; and hath two horns withal, to wit, Grace
and Mercie, which she holdeth towards vs; while
grace she affordeth to the iust, and mercie to sinners,
and is therefore called the Mother of Grace, and Mother
of Mercie.
Aboue al, the Rayne-bow hath its proper subsistence
in coulour, which it seemes to borrow (as Bede sayth)
of the foure Elements. For, of the fire it contracts a
ruddie coulour; from the water a Cerulean; from the
ayre, the coulour of the Hyacinth; and from the
earth, the green it hath: al which seeme spiritually
to be found in our Celestial Bow, the Incomparable
Ladie; for red she was, being wholy inflamed with the
fire of Diuine loue, which she tooke from the Diuine
fire, God being our consuming fire: a fire indeed, that
burns and consumes others, but not her; because although
she were a bush, and burning too; yet incombustible.

She might borrow that coulour likewise from her
dead Sonne, as he lay on her lap, being taken from the
Crosse, al bathed with his precious Bloud, which
mixed with her faire complexion, might wel appeare
like to flames, in our heauenlie Iris.
She had the Cerulean, which is the coulour of the
Sea, because she is properly the Starre of the Sea, and
hath therefore a great correspondencie with that liquid
Element; and through meer compassion, was
become, as it were; al liquid, according to that of
the Psalmist: My hart is become as dissolued or liquifyed wax;
as wel for the abundance of teares she was wont to
shed, as the puritie of her mind, which made them so
limpid and cleare.
She had thirdly the coulour of the Hyacinth; which
she tooke, as from the ayre; since al her conuersation
was in the ayre, as it were, abstracted from the earth,
or terrene cogitations. She was wholy as the Bird of
Paradise, which hath no feet to touch the earth with;
and from the time that her Sonne ascended to heauen,
from the mount Oliuet, she could do nothing but cast
vp her eyes thither-wards* and so powerfully perhaps
contracted that coulour* through the vehemencie of
her attention, and application to that object, til her
Assumption haply, when she left it by the way in her
Bow, to remayne for euer, as a signe of her puritie.
But now to conclude with the green, which she
tooke from the earth, what might it be, but a continual
Spring of al Graces and Vertues, which she practised
on earth? Looke into a garden, in that season of
the Spring; and whatsoever your eyes can behold
truly delicious there, in the greennes of the plots and
arbours, both open and close, and in the green-sword
allies and bancks; your vnderstanding shal be able to
paralel and find-out her vertuous conuersation on

earth. For if you consider her green walks, they were
al as streight, as garden-walks; for streight were the
paths of her whole life. If on the arbours, you shal
find her continually in her closet; her plots were nothing
els, but how to become more gratful to her
Sonne, her Spouse, her Lord; and those alwayes new and
euer green; so as in the garden of her mind, was a perpetual
Spring to be seen of al vertues, while she liued
amongst vs: no maruel then, the green was so dear
vnto her, to be put into her bow.



THE EMBLEME.






THE POESIE.
FRom heauen the Father viewes his Sonne below
Vpon the Crosse,The Pause. as on a clowde a Bowe,
When vapours from the earth exhal'd arise.
The Mother likewise sees with mourning eyes
Her Sonne al black and blew, pale, wan, and red,
Green with a crowne of thornes fixt on his head.
Al which reflect, and by reflexion die
The Mother, like a Raine-bow in the skie.
To her for mercie when the Sinner sues,
The Sonne his Mother as a Raine-bow viewes,
That pleades for mercie, to her Sonne appeales,
Who signes the Pardon, and his Wounds are Seales.



THE THEORIES.
COntemplate first,The Contemplation. that if Nature be
able to frame so rare a peece of workmanship
as the Rayne-bow; and that no
wit of man can truly comprehend the
reaso^ of its forme and figure, with the
admirable diuersitie of coulours in it,
so as among her other works most choice and rare,
the same is accounted as a cheef miracle in Nature,
in the visible Heauens: I imagin the while, what GOD
himself is able to doe in his works of Grace, being
disposed, as it were, to vye with Nature in framing
an Iris likewise, in this Heauen of Heaue^s, to astonish
not Mortals only, but the Angels and blessed Spirits
themselues, better able to iudge of the diuersitie of
coulours in her, to wit, the mysteries and graces,
wherewith he hath adorned her.
Consider then, that as the Rayne-bow of it-self is no
more then a meer Meteor in the ayre, if it be so much,
whose whole luster it takes from the Sun, and vanisheh
as soone as he is either in a clowd, or hath his
aspect some other way, since it is wholy of him, and
so of him, as without him it is nothing: So our Inco^parable
Virgin-Iris, whatsoever she was of herself, she
esteemed as nothing, not so much as a Meteor, as it
were, in the Celestial Hierarchie of Heauen, attributing
al to the Sun of Glorie reflecting his rayes so
powerfully vpon her, to make her appeare so glorious
as she doth, the most refulgent Bow, or Carkanet of
Heauen, the delight of the Angels, and the gracious
signe of Reconciliation to Mortals with her onlie
Sonne, the Sun of Iustice, whose she is wholy, and euer
was.
Ponder lastly, how as the Rayne-bow of itself, is

nothing els, but exhalations and vapours extract
from the Seas, and drawne-vp into the ayre, by the
heat of the Sun. So this Iris is the Quintessence, as it
were, extracted from the Sea of the generation of
Adam, through particular fauour and priuiledge of
the Sun of Iustice, to become first a light clowd, that is,
capable of Celestial rayes; and then being concaued
through humilitie, to beare him in her womb, and
to haue the forme of a Celestial Bowe, enriched with
such diuersities of al Graces.


THE APOSTROPHE.
OH specious Iris!The Colloquie. Hand-mayd of the Sun of Iustice,
in thine owne account; and yet esteemed of al the world
besides, the glorious Queene of Heauen, and placed as
a radiant Iris or Anckour of our hope and reconciliation
to GOD thy Sonne, whose vnbent Bow thou art, sure
Signe of Peace. Ah then! shal I alwayes liue thus? Shal I alwayes
walke the labyrinth of the fraylties and inordination of my
soule, for want of a Clue to guid me forth, and to leade me vnto
the true loue of my GOD, the only Louelie and Amiable aboue
al louelie and amiable things? Shal I alwayes walke thus, by
the brinck of Hel, vnrulie, unmortifyed, curious, sensual, and
vayne? O my most deer Diuine Mother; guard me with the
bow of thy safeguard and protection, and make intercession for
me, O thou proclaymed Happie through al nations; heare
my desires, haue pittie on my teares, let my sights mount vp
vnto thee. O receaue them, I pray, most gracious and auspitious
Iris of the Empyreal Heauens.




THE X. SYMBOL.
THE MOONE.

THE DEVISE.






THE CHARACTER.
THE Moone is the Dowager,The Impresa and Queen-Regent
of the Firmame^t, that rules that
Monarchie by turnes with Titan her
brother, with this happines aboue him,
that his gouerment ouer some of his
prouinces is found too hot and intolerable, and held as
tyranous; but hers more benigne and sweet ouer al. She
is so good, as she seems to spend her whole demeanes
vpon the poore and indige^t. And as she is charitable to
al, she is eue^ prodigally profuse of the treasure of her
influe^ces of on her neerest kin about her, especially Tellus

her Sister, more necessitous then stands with her
gentle breast, to see her in; and therefore as made for
her alone, she seemes to apply herself to her only.
And to the end she may stil haue to giue, she is stil
borrowing from her elder Brother new and fresher
lights, from the rich Magasin of his greater splendour;
wherof she spends so fast, as she is often forced
to breake and become Bankerout, and as often by
her Brother set aflote againe, with a new stock, as
brisk as euer. She holdes besides very faire correspondences
and good intelligence with the Seas, and
those so good, as neuer fayle without some prodigie
or other. They vse to taxe her of inconstancie; but
they doe her wrong; for She is constant stil, in that
inconstancie of hers, they charge her with; how then
inconstant? The spots they note her for, shew but
how good a glasserepresentatiue she is, that so figures
something, which they cal a Man, which I scan not
heer. She is faire and beautiful, and yealds to none but
to the Sun, and that for reuere^ce, and good respects.
She is a great riser in the night, which she doth to
good purpose, stil obliging the whole world through
manie fauours. She is indeed the precious Diamant
of the rest of Starres, cut round of the larger size,
and sometimes Crescent-wise, as she is pleased to
communicate herself, and take away the veyle before
her face.



THE MORALS.

BENIGNA ET FACILIS.

THe Children of Israel indeed, though they
acknowledged GOD for the Authour and
Creatour of al things,The Motto. yet not to be dazeld
with his glorie, were stil calling vpon
Moyses to speake to them, and not the Lord. The Kings
of China are neuerseen to their Subiects, but negotiate
their Royal affaires by the trustie hands
of their Eunucks about them; and they dispense his
fauours heer and there according to his mind. By
them giues he audience to Embassadours; and by
their hands, receaues the presents, suits, and requests
of al; and giues dispatches by them: and so his Subiects
doe more sweetly tast his benignities and fauours,
and seeme more freely to communicate with
him. The Vnderstanding or Reason hath the common
Sense for chief dispenseresse, and the Executiue
powers for ministers, while al things are not done
immediatly by himself. Tyberius had Seianus as it were
his right hand. He that would haue a fauour at the
hands of Alexander, would apply himself streight to
his deerest Ephestion, and he was sure to haue his suit.
Yea the great S. Peter himself, how great soeuer
in his Maister's fauour, would stil be pulling of
S. Iohn by the sleeue, to put forth his doubts and
his requests to his Maister for him. And the
great Assuerus had his gracious and benigne Hester
alwayes by his side; who did nothing but communicate
the Prince's fauours to his people with a pious
and prudent hand. This was the Virgin-Mother right, to
our great Assuerus indeed; and therefore is she heer most
truly and aptly stiled: BENIGNA ET FACILIS.



THE ESSAY.
THE Moon of al others, is a Planet the neerest
to the earth,The Reuiew. and most familiar with it. It
is the Sun of the night; her course and
decourse neuer fayles; her glasse is cleer
according as she lookes on the Sun; and sometimes
do we see but a certain list, as it were, and Crescent
of Siluer; sometimes it waxeth againe, and makes a
demie O or half circle, and then growes it to be wholy
orbicular and round; her Argent is alwayes dimmed,
with some shadowes and certain obscurities, that
seeme to fashion a face with them. She supplyes the
defaults of the Sun, and often shines in fellowship
with him, and mingles her rayes with his, euen at
midday. The simplicitie of Painters heerin is discouered,
in that ordinarily painting her in companie
with the Sun, they make her horns, to looke to the
Sun-wards; wherein truly are they quite mistaken;
for the back is it, which is turnd to the Sun, and not
the horns; for she hath no claritie in her, but that
which she borrowes of the Sun, presenting him in
lieu therof, her mirrour and glasse to looke vpon.
She is the Sister of the Sun; and, as I sayd before, the
Sun of the nights, which pearceth the thicknes of
their darknes, with her siluer rayes; somewhat moyst,
and sweetly co^forting the tediousnes of them, being
otherwise gloomie and dark of themselues. A Starre
she is, that liues but of loane, and hath the visage alwayes
vpon change: She is the Mistris of the Sea, the
Queen of the Night, the Mother of Deawes, the sweet
Nurse of the Earth, the Guide of Mariners, the Glasse
of the Sun, the Companion of his trauels, the Guardian
of his light, and Depositaria^ of the day and treasures
of the heauens: the second Glory of the firmame^t,

the Empresse of Starres, and Regent of this world
beneath, where she hath her iurisdictio^ and demeanes.
She marks-out the months and yeares, and the ages,
as they runne, and through her sweetnes tempers the
burning heats of her brother the Sun. When she is
diametrally set vnder the Sun, and interposed between
him and the earth, she ecclipseth him, and robs the
earth of the beames of the Sun; and the shadow of
the earth of the other side being cast ouer her, ecclipses
her, and suffers her not to enioy the Sunnie rayes:
but the point of the shadow of the earth, not mounting
neere so high, makes no ecclips at al in the
other starres.


THE DISCOVRSE.
NOw what may this Moon denote and signify
to vs,The Suruey. Cant. 5 Eccl. 53 Psal. but the glorious Queene of Heauen? For
she is al faire as the Moone: She is, as the Moone,
ful in her dayes: and a perfect Moone, because
Her Throne as the Sun in my sight, and as a perfect Moone for euer.
She is a Moon therefore, yea farre more beautiful then
the Moon euer was, or euer like to be. For as the Moon
indeed hath her light borrowed, very gracious to
behold, but none of her owne, being meerly a light
reuerberated fro^ the Sun: So the Virgin truly, though
her light be borrowed, and none of her owne, as
simply hers, yet hers it is indeed, though borrowed
of her Sonne, the Sun of Iustice, as daughter of the King.
For al the glorie of the King's daughter is within her etc: not
outwardly only in the voice of people, alwayes
doubtful, euer vncertain, for the most part vndeserued,
and of little subsistence and permanencie, but
intrinsecally in her most certain, meritorious, and
for euer. Besides, the Moon hath her light often
ecclipsed, and looseth wholy her light for a time;

but the blessed Virgin, though she seemed to be ecclipsed,
through the vehemencie of her sorrow, when she
saw her Sonne so shadowed by a clowd, in the time
of his Passion, yet for her co^stancie of fayth she could
not be ecclipsed so, as to despaire of his Resurrectio^.
I wil not cease vnto the end of the world.Eccl 22. Wel might the
Apostles fayle at that time, but Marie neuer. Moreouer
as the Moon is variable and subiect to changes, in the
light it affords to Mortals (an argument accounted
of weaknes of brayne,Eccl. 22. while the foole, as the Wise-man
sayth, is changed as the Moone) let vs see, what cha^ges and
mutabilities they are. One is of the mind, which is
often moued through diuers affecti^ons; another in the
bodie, which is subiect to manifold alteration and
corruption; an other of fortune, because temporal
things are alwayes a flowing or ebbing, a flux or
reflux, the losse of guilt and offence which is in sinners,
who alwayes are sliding from vice to vice. But
our Ladie hath al these changes and mutabilities vnder
her feet, since the Moon indeed is placed vnder her
feet; while she alwayes retained the constancie of her
mind, and Vow of Virginitie; she put on the glorie
of Immortalitie on her bodie; she trampled al terrene
and temporal things vnder foot; and lastly through
a singular prerogatiue was euer priuiledged from
sinne. Furthermore, the Moon hath her light al speckled
ouer with little spots: but our blessed Ladie had
no blemish or spot at al, either in her thoughts,
because alwayes pure and immaculate; or in her bodie,
because Angelical. Thou art wholy fayre, my friend,
And there is no spot in thee.Cant. 4. I say, most fayre in cogitations,
affections, and intentions; and spotles in al. Oh
beautiful Moon, transcending anie heauenlie Planet or
Starre in the Firmament, as farre in dignitie and excellencie,
as so heauenlie a Ladie and Queene of Heauens

can surpasse her Rational, Sensible, or Insensible
subiects!
The Moon is sometimes wholy obscure, sometimes
wholy lucid and bright, and sometimes partly obscure,
and partly resplendent; wherin it resembles the
Virgin right. For the Moon, as S. Augustin sayth, is obscured
either when it is vnder a clowd, or when ecclipsed,
or when renewed, as in the new Moon: So the blessed
Virgin in this world, was thrice or three manner
of wayes obscured. First, through her excessiue humilitie,
which was a kind of obscure clowd, that ouershadowed
her brightnes or splendour in the eyes of
the world. Black I am but beautiful; as if she had sayd:Cant. 1.
I am outwardly black through humilitie, but inwardly
beautiful in grace and maiestie. Secondly,
through acerbitie and bitternes of sorrow; and this
in the Passion of her Sonne, as I sayd aboue, where
she suffered an ecclips in the veheme^cie of her greef.
The Sun, that is to say, Christ, shal be turned into darknes
through death; and the Moon, to wit, the blessed Virgin,
into bloud,I^el 2. that is, into dolour. And thirdly, through
corporal death; for then became she obscure in a
sort, when her soule departed fro^ her precious bodie
so obscured, as it were to become a new Moone againe
in her Assumption; and then indeed was she a moone most
perfect for euer.
Secondly this Moon of ours, was wholy lucid, in
her Assumption, because she was glorified in soule and
bodie, and receaued there her double Stole; and likewise
shines vpon vs, with her infinit fauours and
graces, which she dayly sends vs. For then indeed as
the Moon is wholy bright and lucid, when she shines in
the beginning, midst, and to the end of the night: by
which night is tribulation both signified and vsually
vnderstood: And as some Saints there are, who help

the afflicted, in the beginning of the night as it were;
others, who suffer men to fal into tribulation, and to
be tempted, in the beginning and middle, but help
and succour them at the end: the blessed Virgin shines
with her fauours vpon the distressed, as wel in the
beginning, in affording courage; and in the midle, in
giuing perseuerance; as in the end, in placing the
crowne on their heads. This is she, when others fayle,
who neuer fayles; whom other Saints for sinnes iustly
forsake, she neuer leaues; and while others seeme to
subtract their suffrages, she alwayes helps.
Thirdly, this Moon was partly lucid and partly obscure;
and this truly in the Passion of her Sonne, where
both she was obscured, and yet gaue light; obscure,
through inte^se sorrow, yet lucid by most firme Fayth.
For as whe^ the Sun is ecclipsed, the Moon being opposed
between vs and the Sun, appeares wholy obscure:
so when the Sun of Iustice suffered ecclips at his death,
the blessed Virgin became wholy dark, that is, quite
ouercast and ful of sorrow; And yet notwithstanding
she shined euen then likewise, because she kept
the light of Fayth vnextinguished in her.Prou. vlt. Her light shal
not be extinguished in the night. Surely two Heaue^s there
are, which yet neuer lost their light, nor euer are
like to doe: to wit, Christ for one, who neither with
death did forgoe the light of his Diuinitie, but his
Deitie was both with his bodie in the Sepulcher, and
with his soule in Limbus: and his Mother the other,
who neuer lost the light of grace and fayth within
her.



THE EMBLEME.






THE POESIE.
THe Empresse of the Sea,The Pause. Latona bright,
Drawes like a load-stone by attractiue might
The Oceans streames, which hauing forward runne
Calles back againe, to end where they begunne.
The Prince of darknes had ecclipsed Eues light,
And Mortals, clowded in Cymmerian night,
Were backwards drawne by Eue, as is the Maine;
^T was only Marie drew to GOD againe:
(...) chast Diana, with thy siluer beames,
Fluse and reflux (as in the Oceans streames)
^Tis thou canst cause, O draw! and draw me so,
That I in vice may ebbe, in Vertue flow.



THE THEORIES.
COntemplate first,The Contemplation. that if the Moon being
so faire, beautiful, and perfect, be so
accounted of Mortals; and for the manifold
influences and fauours, which
she continually imparts to creatures,
be held in so great veneration, as to share in their
opinion with the Sun himself, in the gouerment of
the world, whom the Paynim Gentilitie holds to be a
GOD, and her Brother, and she his Sister, notwithstanding
she hath yet so manie blemishes, defects, and
spots appearing in her, who can except against the
Churches deuotion, in so magnifying our Ladie, who
is truly so faire, beautiful, and perfect indeed, without
any the least blemish, or spot in her; and so beneficial
withal, as to communicate her graces vnto vs in a
far higher nature, and those in a measure so immense?
Or who can tax vs, for stiling her the Queen of heauen,
who is not only the Sister, the Friend, the Doue, and
beautiful Spouse of the Sun o^ iustice, but euen his most
immaculate Mother, the fountain of al her prerogatiues
besides; when especially we afford her no more
honour, then may worthily be due to a meer creature?
Consider then, that as in the opinion of such as
hold the Moon encreasing to haue her horns directed
towards the rising of the Sun; but decreasing, or
being in the wayne, to haue the horns pointing to
the setting of the Sun: So our heauenlie, Angelical,
and spiritual Moon, the Incomparable Virgin-Mother,
had certain addresses and preparations, of humilitie
and Virginitie, wherewith she disposed herself, to
embrace her Sun in her armes, in the morning of his

birth, as he lay in the Crib: And at his setting againe,
that is, at his Passion, regarded him with two other
horns as it were; to wit, with the sorrow she had for
his death, of the one side; and the ioy, she receaued of
the other, for the Redemption of the world.
Ponder lastly, how though the Moon, while it is iust
ouer the earth, and the Sunne in oppositio^ thervnto,
in a right diameter beneath the same, is shadowed,
obscured, or ecclipsed: Yet our mystical Moone, when
Christ, our true Sun indeed, descended and abid in hel,
which is vnder the earth, and our Moon remayning
there ouer it, lost not the light of Fayth, of his present
Resurrection; for that the shadow of the earth,
that is, the infidelitie of terrene things, could not
ascend vnto her, whereby the darknes of Infidelitie
comprehended her not.


THE APOSTROPHE.
O Empresse of the world, Ladie of the Vniuers, Queen
of Angels,The Colloqui^. standing in the Moon, and crowned with
Starres in Heauen by God Almightie; most wise,
most good! Oh regard me, I beseech thee, from the top
of the heauens with thy sacred influences from thence; and haue
pittie vpon me most miserable wretched sinner in al points. Present,
O sacred Virgin-Mother, al my pouerties to GOD,
al my perils, al my miseries and necessities, to thy Sonne. For so
wil he take pittie on me, and open his hand, and afford me his
Benediction, through thy gracious intercession. This grant, I
beseech thee, most radiant and resplendent Moone, who shinest
in heauen, and shal for al eternitie,




THE XI. SYMBOL.
THE STARRE.

THE DEVISE.






THE CHARACTER.
THE Starres are the glittering la^ps of Heauen,The Impresa.
set vp as so manie lights, in the close
or vpper seeling of the ample Theater
of the world. They are as sparckling
Diamants strewed in the Firmament, to
entertaine the World with, as a goodlie maister-piece
of the great CREATOVR. They are the siluer Oes, al
powdred heer and there, or spangles sprinckled ouer
the purple Mantle or night-gowne of the heauens:
the seed of pearle, sowne in the spacious fields of
the Heauens, to bring forth light. Haue you seen a

statelie Mask in Court, al set round, and taken vp
with a world of beautiful Ladies, to behold the
sports and reuels there? Imagin the Starres then, as
sitting in the Firmame^t, to behold some spectacle on
Earth, with no other light then their owne beauties.
If that great Pan they speake of, were that man sitting
in the Cabin of the Moone, the Starres would be his
Sheep and lambs, feeding in those ample downes of
heauen; which not appearing by day (their proper
night) you must suppose to be lockt-vp in their folds
for feare of those Beares and Lions in the Welkin. As
Cinthia in the Heaue^s is euen the very same that Diana
is in the woods and forests, the Starres by co^sequence
are her Nimphs, who encompas her about, and da^ce
the Canaries in her presence, while so they seeme in
twinckling to dance and foot-it in the same place.
They are extremely giuen to mortification, and to a
strange annihilation of themselues; that being so
great as they are, they appeare to be so litle in the
eyes of men; yea manie of them, are so passionatly
addicted to it, as they appeare not at al. They affect
equalities amongst them; and be anie of them neuer
so great, they wil shew to be no greater then the rest.
Their greater height and eminencie in degrees
swelles them not a whit or puffs them vp, but diminisheth
their creasts, and abates them rather. In fine,
they are a happie Common-wealth, deuoyd of enuie
or ambition; where wel may you heare of coniunctions
of Houses, but no iarres and discords amongst
them, that euer I could heare of.



THE MORALS.

IN ITINERE PHARVS.

WHEN Theseus was puzled and entangled
in Minos Labyrinth,The Motto. he found the twist
of Ariadne to deliuer him thence. The
little Bird with the red breast, which
for his great familiaritie with men
they cal a Robin, if he meet anie one
in the woods to goe astray, and to wander he knowes
not whither, out of his way, of common charitie wil
take vpon him, to guide him, at least out of the
wood, if he wil but follow him; as some think. This
am I sure of, it is a comfortable and sweet companio^,
insuch a case. It is the manner in al countries likely,
in doubtful wayes especially, where they seeme to
crosse one another, to set vp Pillars with hands, directing
and pointing this way or that way; and you wil
not beleeue, what comfort it affords to wearie Pilgrims,
whose euerie step out of their right way, is a
greeuous corrasiue to them. The Kings had a Starre,
as companion in their pilgrimage, to the Crib. And
the Pastours of the Church, are as so manie Starres,
to leade their Sheep, and to guide their subiects in
the pilgrimages of their owne saluation. When the
hauens are crooked and perilous to passe to and fro,
the publick care of common safeties, in the night
especially, prouides some burning torch or other,
vpon some turret-top, to admonish the Marriners,
where they are, and fayrly to guide and direct them
into the wished port. This same prouision hath the
Wisedome likewise of the great CREATOVR found
out, to comfort and direct vs, no lesse, in the open

Seas, exposing a certain Starre among the rest, as a
sure and infallible Pharus: But more truly and abundantly
farre, in ordaining the Incomparable Virgin
Marie, his blessed Mother, to be our Starre in the dangerous
and tempestuous Sea of the world; and therefore
is heer very truly sayd in the Motto: IN ITINERE PHARVS.


THE ESSAY.
THE Starres,The Reuiew. as sowne vp and downe the
Heauens, are the thicker and massiue
parts of Heauen, certain Buttons of Crystal
as it were, which serue as a grace and
entertainment to Heauen. By these siluer
channels, Nature distills her influences vpon vs, and
insensibly distributes fauours. They are the eyes of
Nature, which without cease serue vs as a Court-of-guard
for watchfulnes; the Iewels of Nature, wherewith
ordinarily she dresses herself, Sometimes they
send forth their fire and rayes; sometimes they ecclipse
their beautie, and strip themselues of al refulgence.
There are some, who can punctually tel you, the
course and trauails of the Starres, their aspects, their
encounters, and their fruits; the marriages and diuorces
of the Planets, their defects and ecclipses,
their risings, their settings, their asce^dants, their coniunctions,
and the whole ^economie of the Heauens.
For the swiftnes of their motions, it is a thing almost
incredible, what they write, that one Starre in the firmament,
should goe 200000. Italian miles in a minute
of an hower; so as neither the flight of a bird,
nor force of an arrow, nor the furious shot of a Cano^
nor anie thing of the world, can approach or come
neere the imaginable swiftnes of these Starres; bus

yet most true, Besides al this, there is no Starre, thahath
not a particular vertue with it, though vnt
knowne to vs. The clowded Starres cause infallibly
rayne; others, frost; some, snow; others shead abundant
deawes; some sow their hayle; others open the
mouth and gates of the winds; others fold the world
in clowds; others send downe mistie fogs; and others
contribute to the production and generation of Minerals;
and when the Sun and the Canicular Starre
are in coniunction, and match togeather, the world
burnes with outrageous heats. It is a dreadful thing,
to consider the greatnes of these Starres, their dista^ce
in the Heauens, and the inexplicable swiftnes of their
courses and reuolutions. You shal haue a Starre which
shewes no bigger then a crowne, that is a ^15. times
greater then the earth. Goodnes of GOD! Who would
imagin this beautie, to see such a Boule of Cristal al
of fire, to cast downe here beneath a thousand benedictions
on the earth, by meanes of its rayes, and the
sweetnes of its influences?


THE DISCOVRSE.
THvs farre then of Starres in general;The Suruey.
which being thus decyphered, may
seeme, as so manie glorious Suns, in the
Firmament of the Heauens, but are indeed
as the Common-people of that
Celestial Citie and Kingdome, compared with the
Sun himself, sitting in the midst of Planets, as the
King of Heauen, to whom al the rest of Starres make
vp a Court; among whom, as a choice Hester, is one
especially selected by that great Assuerus of Starres, to
cast his most amorous glances and fayrest influence
vpon. This happie and auspicious Starre is knowne
and called by diuers names, according to the offices

she discharges in the great Assuerus his house. For first
is she stiled by the name of Venus, not as the Goddesse
of Loue, which the Poets feigne, but for that she disposes
them to loue, whom she lwayes, and exercises her
vertues on. Secondly, she is called the Morning-Starre,
because she shewes and declares the Morning now at
hand, and euen begins the same herself with her burning
torch, to glad the world withal, who then begins
to shake off sleepe, and disperse the mistie vapours,
which so long had shadowed and clowded ouer
the Gemell Starres or Eyes of the Microcosmes of
men. Thirdly, they cal her Lucifer, in that her light exceeds
so much the other Starres; so as wel she may be
sayd, the Hester of the^ al. And fourthly, she is tearmed
the Hesperus, for as much as she respects the ensuing
night, and greatly illustrats the same with her more
then ordinarie splendour and light; so as she glads the
world therewith, and drawes al eyes to gaze vpon her.
Such is this special Starre indeed, the glorie of the
Heauenlie Orbs; but loe, we haue another Starre in
hand, dwelling in the vpper Region of the Empyreal
Heauens, that greatly symbolizes with this; but as
farre exceeds it (Analogically speaking) as the great
Assuerus, Sun of Iustice, excelles the same of this our Firmament;
or as much as this same Firmament itself,
where GOD eternally raignes in his Empyreal and
Celestial Court: to whom, I say, these seueral titles
may aptly agree, according to these other things,
which are sayd of her: I am the Mother of faire dilection,
and of feare, and of knowledge, and of holie hope.Eccl 24. This Starre is the
blessed Virgin, that may wel be tearmed Venus, because
she enflames mens harts with Diuine loue; and therefore
is sayd to be the Mother of faire dilection. Then
the Morning-Starre; for that she is the beginning of a
new life; as the morning is the commencement of

the ensuing day, and therefore, of feare. For feare is the
beginning of grace and of a new life; according to
that of the Psalmist: The feare of GOD, is the beginning of
wisedome. Againe, she is sayd to be the Lucifer, for that
she giues the beginning of Diuine knowledge, and so is
the Mother of knowledge; And lastly Hesperus, since she so
piously regards and illumines sinners, who are in the
darknes of wickednes and sinne; and for that cause is
fayd to be the Mother of holie hope. She is likewise called
the Morning-Starre, because appearing to Mortals, she
is the most certain and infallible signe of the approach
of the day of grace, and rising of the Sun of Iustice.
This Starre besides is called the Starre of the Sea; and
that most fitly, if Philo most skilful of the Hebrew
tongue be worthie to be beleeued, to whose interpretation
Beda assents,Phil. de Mar^no. Bonau. in opera. and the Doctour S. Bonauenture in
his Glosse of the Blessed Virgin; yea the Catholick Church,
while she sings the Aue Maris stella, and againe Stella
Maris, succurre cadenti. And truly, if Stella be sayd of stando
for its stabilitie and immobilitie, then needs must
Marie be a Starre, whose firmitie and stabilitie in good, is
known to be such, as she neuer stept a whit fro^ the wil
of GOD; which to no other creature once of riper yeares
was yet afforded,Iacob. 3. Bern. Ser. Super Mis. since (as the Apostle S. Iames sayth)
We haue al offended in manie things. But for the glorious
Virgin, as S. Bernard Sayth, She was a Starre, because that
as the Starre sheads its rayes without corruptio^, so she
powred forth her Sonne without impeachment of her
Virginitie; And as the Starre thereby looses no light:
^o the Virgins Sonne empayred not the light of her integritie
anie wayes. Reade but S. Bonauenture in his
foresaid Glasse,Bonau. in spec. and he wil tel you, how fitly the Virgin
heer bears the office of the marine Starre. For it is
read (sayth he) and true it is, that the custome of

Marriners is, that when they determine to sayle vnto
some land, to make choice of some one Starre, by
whose signe they may be lead without errour into
that part they desire to arriue vnto. And such truly is
the office heer of Marie our Starre, who directs the
Marriners through the vast sea of the world, in the
Ship of Innocencie or Pennance, to the shore of the
Heauenlie countrey. And not vnlike to this, Pope innocent
writes, being cited likewise by the sayd S. Bernard
in the same place. By what helps (sayth he) may
ships among so manie perils arriue at the shore of
that Heauenlie countrie? Surely by these two, that is,
through the Wood, and Starre, to wit, through fayth of
the Crosse, and vertue of that Light, which Marie, that
Starre of the Sea, hath brought vs forth.
Now therefore as that Starre guides and directs the
saylers to their port: So this blessed Virgin is worthily
called the Starre of this te^pestuous Sea of the world,
while in the midst of the stormes of this life, she lends
so her light to such as sayle to heauen-wards; and
through her example and patronage continually directs
them to the Hauen of the Heauenlie countrie.Bern. Ser. 20.
Which S. Bernard knew wel when he sayd: This is the
glorious and renowned Starre very needfully raysed vpon this
great and spacious sea, shining with merits, and illustrious
in examples: if the winds of temptatio^s arise,
if thou lightst vpon rocks of tribulations, if thou
beest tossed by the waues of pride, and hoysed vp with
the surges of ambition, looke on the Starre, cal vpon
Marie, let her not depart from thy hart, let her not
depart from thy mouth; And sayth prese^tly thervpo^:
In following her thou strayest not; imploring her,
thou despayrest not; in thinking on her, thou errest
not; while she protects, thou fearest not; thou art not
wearie, while she guides; and she propitious, thou

landst securely at the part; and shalt find in thy felf,
how worthily it was sayd: the Virgins name was Marie.


THE EMBLEME.






THE POESIE.
THe glorious Sunne withdrew his beames of light;The Pause.
My sinne was cause: So I in dismal night
Am sayling in a stormie dangerous Maine;
And ere the sunne (I feare) returne againe,
Shal suffer shipwrack, where the fraite's my Soule.
My onlie Hope's a Starre, fixt neere the pole,
But that my Needle now hath lost its force,
Once touchd with grace, and saile out of course.
Starre of the Sea, thy sun hath giuen thee light;
Til he brings day, guide me in sinnes dark night.
I seeke, what Sages heertofore haue donne,
Guided by thee a Starre, to find the sunne.



THE THEORIES.
COntemplate first,The Contemplation. that howbeit a
Starre be sayd, by many degrees to be
greater then the Earth, yet seemes it to
be but a spangle or fierie point only in
that immense and vast vault of the Firmament.
So likewise the Blessed Virgin
though she be the greatest Starre in the Heauenlie
Hierarchie, yet thought she alwayes humbly of herself;
and seemed the least and meanest of al the Daughters
of Hierusalem, while she liued on earth. For she was
humble in mind, in word, and fact: in mind, because she
euer preferred others before herself; as Ioseph: Thy
Father and I with heauines haue sought thee; In word,
because she called not herself the Mother of GOD,
nor Ladie of the world, nor Queene of Heauen, but
the handmayd of CHRIST, when she replyed so:
Behold the ha^dmayd of our Lord; and agayne. He hath regarded
the lowlines of his handmayd; And lastly in fact, because
that after she was now become the Mother of GOD; she
made herself the handmayd of Elizabeth, when she ministred
to her for three months togeather that she remayned
with her.
Consider then, how this Starre of ours is as the Pole-Starre
or axeltree of the Firmament. For as the whole
circumference of the lesser Starres encompasseth the
Pole, and the wheel enuirons the axeltree round: So
is the whole Firmament of Saintlie and Angelical
Starres, about this singular and soueraigne Starre, that is,
the whole Celestial Court of blessed Spirits, wheele,
as it were; and beset the Virgin round, because they
enco^passe and enuiron her about as the Queen and Ladie
of the^ al, according to that which the Church sings:
Like the dayes of the spring-time doe the flowers of roses and lillies

of the vallies beset her round, that is, the Orders of Confessours
and Virgins; and the Prophet sayth: The Queen stood
at thy right ha^d, in a garme^t al of gold with varietie beset round.
For the Saints are a certain robe or garment of the
blessed Virgin, adorning her richly indeed like a Ladie
or Queen, where the Apostles afford the embroderie
of gold; Martyrs, the ground of scarlet, Confessours,
Saphyrs and Emeralds; and the Virgins, the Orient
Pearls and Diamonds.
Po^der lastly, that as this Starre is moued most swiftly
by the motion of its Superiour, to wit, of the vpper
firmament or chief Mouer, because it dayly carries it
about the world; but moues most slowly of its owne
motion, for that they say it moues but one degree in
a hundred yeares. So the blessed Virgin, our delicious
Starre, moued neuer of her proper motion, but
through the motion of her Superiour, to wit, the
Holie-Ghost; for as much as moued by the Holie-Ghost
made she a vow of Chastitie, and kept her virginitie
inuiolable, and that perpetual; moued by the Holie-Ghost,
she gaue her assent to the Conception of the Sonne
of GOD in an instant; being moued to goe to serue her
Coseu, presently she climbd the mountains; being
moued (so great with child, and neer her time) to
goe to Bethlem, she went her wayes; and lastly moued
to returne againe, immediatly she returned. Behold
how she moued not of herself, but meerly of the
Holie-Ghost, which was within her, and guided and directed
her in al things: for other motion in moral
actions had she none.



THE APOSTROPHE.
O Glorious Starre! O Mother of mercie! we haue heard,The Colloquie. thou art
ful of grace; and grace is it which we haue need of.
O ful of grace! O radiant Starre! we, who are thy humble Suppliants,
present our selues before thy Sonne, great King of
Israel, with sack cloth on our back, ashes on the head, and cords
about our necks, confessing our offences in thy sight, that by thy
meanes, we may obtaine pardon of them. Look toward the North
heer of our afflictio^, O Starre of the Sea; thou art our co^fidence;
interpose thyself, between thy Sonne and thy seruants; that of
the one side thou mayst appease his wrath, and of the other cancel
our sinnes; that through the heat of thy rayes, O Diuine
Starre, the frigiditie of our soule may be warmed againe, that
by thy aspect, the heat of the Holie-Ghost may viuify vs. O
grant the same, most Orient and bright Starre of Heauen.




THE XII. SYMBOL.
THE OLIVE.

THE DEVISE.






THE CHARACTER.
THE Oliue,The Impresa the Fig, and Vine, are the three
Triumuiri, that might wel haue shared the
Monarchie of trees between them; as
hauing the voyces of al the Tribunes on
their parts. But the Oliue especially refused
the scepter, as greater in itself, then the flash and
luster of Purple and Diadem could make it. It is the
true Agathocles, contented with his sallets in an earthen
dish. It is euen the meek and innocent Doue of
trees, as the Doue is the Oliue of birds, hauing such
sympathie and faire correspondencies with them. It

was once the gladsome mirth and ioyful solace of
Noe's hart; was then, and is stil the Ensigne of peace
and mercie. It is the Herald of Armes, that passeth
freely to and fro, amid the holbards and squadrons
of pikes, and cryes but out: hold your hands, and al
is whist. It decks the browes of Poets, equal with
lawrel, since Apollo and Minerua were as brother and
sister, and deare to each other. It works the same
effects, that Musick doth to reuiue the Spirits after
a dearth, like a liuelie Galyard, after a doleful and
sad Pauen. And for the Oyle, the bloud of the
Oliue, it is the quintessence and creame therof. It
is the fat or butter of the garden, and foyls the
Dayrie, as more wholsome, and agreable with our
first nature. If the Vine be the Dearling of Bacchus,
the Oliue is so to Minerua, that being the Cellar of the
one, and this the Apothecaries shop of the other.
The Oyle is so coy and delicate, so reserued and recollected
in itself, as it opens no doores to admit anie
stranger into its house. It is fierie and haughtie in its
nature, and wil mount and ride on the back of al his
fellowes. Yet wil it slily insinuate and familiarize itself
with its neighbours; for there is nothing wil encroch
so much and shew so slick and smooth a brow.
And finally it is the ioyful smile of the husbandman,
and the leaping of his hart, his barne, his cellar,
and his whole Riches. It is the Wardrop to cloath his
children, wherwith he payes his rent, and liues as
merrie as his Landlord doth.



THE MORALS.

SPECIOSA ET FRVCTIFERA.

THE Lion is a statelie and princelie creature,The Motto.
and held to be the King of beasts,
but is not fruitful; because lightly they
whelp but one at once, and that but
rarely too, as once in fiue yeares only;
while the Wren wil bring fortha 16. or 20. yong in
a neast, that besides a litle skin and bone is litle more
then a tuft of feathers. The Sicamour is a goodlie and
beautiful tree, and hath so faire a leaf, so smooth and
delicat, as a reasonable Taylour might wel haue
made therof a gowne and cloke for Adam and Eue.
And yet this galland tree is wholy barren; wheras
the Slowe, though she beare a world of fruit, they are
but sowre, and she no more then a thorn, Sara, the wife
of Abraham, was so faire and beautiful, as Abraham
himself had some litle iealousies of her; and Pharao
was so passionatly enamoured with her, as to snatch
her away from him, and to carrie her to his Court.
But yet she was not fruitful, while she had much ado,
to bring an Isaac into the world. Lia indeed was very
fruitful, and brought her Iacob manie children; but
she was but bleer-eyed and ilfauoured, and Iacob illuded
in taking her for another. Rachel indeed was gracious
and extreme faire, but barren, that with al her
Mandragoras was hardly able, to bring her Iacob a Ioseph;
and the litle Beniamin cost her her life. Only the Virgin
Marie was truly faire and fruitful both togeather,
who remayning stil a Virgin, was yet so fruitful, as
to bring forth not a Ioseph, or a Sauiour of a few, or
a Beniamin, Wo to his mother, but a IESVS and a

Sauiour indeed of the world, being the true Primogenitus
of an infinit ofspring of Christians, succeeding in
the world; and particularly of true Parthenians. And
therefore was truly SPECIOSA ET FRVCTIFERA.


THE ESSAY.
BY the Oliue,The Reuiew: is vnderstood the tree, the
fruit, the oyle. As for the tree, if man be a
tree, turnd vpside downe, as some wil haue
it, whose bodie is the trunck, his legs and
armes the branches, and whose head the
root, where, by the mouth, it takes its nutriment; the
Oliue is that tree, since no other tree resembles him so
wel. For no other tree, is so ciuilized as it; no other
tree so vseful and profitable to the neighbour; no
other tree, so medicinal. The first makes him a Citizen,
at least a free Denison amongst men; the second,
a Marchant; and the third, a Physician; and what are
these but trades, faculties, and professions of men?
Minerua was the first as the Paynim Antiquitie wil
haue it, who found-out the culture and planting of
the Oliue, and expressio^ of the lickour thence, or pressing
of the Oyle; howbeit they grant the Plant had
been euer existing, and had growne before, but altogeather
vnknowne to men, among the other trees.
And for a good while was not the Oliue to be found,
but with the Athenians; and therefore the Epidaurians
contracted with them, to send them yearly Oliue
branches for their Sacrifices. And for as much as
the lickour of the Oliue, as the Oyle expressed, is apt
for al arts, they held Minerua was the Inuentresse of al
arts. For surely, there is hardly anie Art, that makes

not vse of this vnctuous lickour, we cal Oyle of Oliues.
There are two sorts of these Oliue-trees; the one Ciuil,
as I sayd, and fit for Citties, bred and trayned vp
in Gardens, wel cloathed with Oliue-coulour suits
without, and faced or lined with ash-coulour within;
the other Wild, and fitter for the forrests, being
somewhat of a harsher and more churlish disposition;
as being ful of thorns and prickles mingled with the
leaues, and whose fruit seldome or neuer come to
good, as hauing little acquaintance or familiaritie
with the Sun, that perfects al things, by reason of the
thickets of the forrests where they dwel, which
hinder it. But for the nobler and more generous Oliue,
they are high and tal of stature, wel branched, and
with as manie armes and hands to feed vs with, as
had Briarius to sling and hurt with. Their flowers and
blossomes cluster togeather, like to grapes; the fruit,
made Oual-wise, being long and round, about the
bignes of our damsons; whose bones within, were
they as smal as the flesh is good, the marcha^ts needed
not to venture so far as to the Indies for gold or spices,
while Spayne and Italie would hold them trade
enough. As for the Oyle, the Poets, who are punctual
and Religious in their Epithets, are wont to adorne
and mark out al other lickours with their proper
attributs, as to tearme the milk, candid; the honie,
liquid gold; the Rose, crimson; the wine, brisk; but
the Oyle of al others, they cal humid, a qualitie common
to al lickours, chiefly, for that it hath no
ariditie of anie mixture with it, as other lickours
haue, euen the water itself, there being nothing more
smooth, slick, and lesse porie, then it. It hath besides
very faire correspondencie with the eyes, and little
lesse then good wil between them; affording itself to
be easily gazed on, as a glasse; and though not so

transparent as other lickours, yet more reflectiue and
representatiue, then others. It is apt to burne, as
being so liquid, as I sayd; for were it ayrie, it would
vanish into smoke; if earthlie, turne to ashes; but
being humid, it spends itself, and nourishes the fire.
Finally this sweet lickour, as the friend and dear
companion of Nature, restores the fraile forces,
comforts the languishing vigour, repayres and nourisheth
the bodie in decay, clarifyes the voice, dissipates,
resolues, and quite consumes the coldnes of
humours, and asswages tumours; and what not?


THE DISCOVRSE.
THE Sacred Scriptures shew,The Suruey Iudic. 9. that when
the Trees decreed among themselues, to
elect a King, the first they cast their voyces
on, to haue aduanced to that Regal
dignitie, and weild the Scepter, was the Oliue of al
other; for that, the first and principal thing they require
in such a one, to gouern subiects with, must
needs be Pietie and Mercie, whose type indeed the
Oliue beares. No man denyes, but the Incomparable
Virgin is worthily heer compared to the Oliue-tree; of
whom is sayd:Eccl. 24. As it were an Oliue specious in the fields. Since
then that Supreme, Soueraigne, and more then
Royal dignitie of Mother of God, was conferred so
vpo^ her in her Annunciation, as on the mystical Oliue, after
the receauing of that Imperial title, her Charitie
and Mercie appeared more then euer, as became a Quee^.
And as in the Annuntiation of the immaculate Mother of
God, the Doue was a true type of her; so is the Oliue-tree
no lesse, wheron she sate a liuelie and represe^tatiue figure;
between which two, are so great correspo^dencies,

which Philisophers cal a sympathie. Cal then to mind
that admirable Doue, which Noe, the great restorer
of the world, from that vast and huge Argo^rie of
his, or rather vnmeasurable Chest, wherin he had enclosed
and shut-vp the world, as vnder lock and key,
sent forth to be his Spy and Intelligencer abroad, to
vnderstand, how matters went with the other world
so buryed vnder waters. Who flying freely through
the emptie world, within the liquid ayre, prying
euerie where with the pearcing cast of her litle eyes,
the elder world beginning now at length to discouer
some part of its lame^table ruines, when she mought
wel haue lighted either on some statelie Cedar, or
victorious Palme, vpon some mountainous Cypresse,
or robustuous Oak, or els on a prudent Mulberrie,
the most sweet Fig-tree, or most florishing Almond:
yet she belike as slighting them al, and al other kinds
of plants or fruits whatsoeuer, made choice of the
Oliue to set her litle foot vpon; and with her litle bil,
as a wise and ingenious Spy, to fasten on some proof
or argument, to bring away with her of the faire dispatch
of her negociation, which was to bring her
maister certain and infallible tidings of the discouerie
and recouerie anew of that greater world. Returning
to the Arck againe, as Scriptures testify, she brought
along with her a branch of that Oliue-tree: the 70.
reade a leaf, a sprig of Oliue, or, as others, a fescue (as
it were) therof, to wit, with leaues, or the top only
and most slender twig of an vpper bough, as Del^ius
expounds it; for so might the Doue very easily
twitch it off.
Wherefore we aptly marke the Oliue in the whole
Mysterie of the Annunciation, as the Symbol of Mercie
and Peace. For in the same was made the first beginning
of human Redemption, as also of the Diuine

benignitie and liberalitie; which to the end that Patron
and louer of men the Sonne of GOD might truly
shew, it was needful, through the bowels of mercie to visit
vs rising from aboue; which in this Mysterie was truly
done, when Gabriel taking the person of an Embassadour,
deliuered his Embassage to Marie, whom if you
conceaue as the Doue of Noe, bringing in his hand a
sprig of green and flourishing Oliue with him, as the
ensigne of his Legation, you shal not think amisse;
since the Oliue-branch is euen with the Gentils themselues,
the Symbol of mercie, but in a singular and
peculiar manner denotes to vs the Virgin in the Theater
of the Annunciation.
But heer may we demand with S. Ambrose: how
came it to passe, the Oliue should flourish so suddenly
after the Deluge, and put forth a twig so soone? doubting,
whether that leaf (for so he calles it) sprung
before the floud, or, during it; concludes it did, and
that the iust Noe reioyced, to see some fruit reserued
of the old seed; and gathered thence a notable signe
of the Diuine Mercie, for that as then he had remoued
the deluge, shewing the fruit which the inundatio^
could not hurt, as holding the litle branch of green
Oliue to be a signe therof, which euen flourished in the
midst of the waters and vniuersal inundation of vindicatiue
Iustice, since this Oliue of Mercie could not
be drownd, swallowed, or withered wholy. Wherein
truly may we worthily contemplate our blessed Virgin
Marie expresly deciphered, as the especially and most
singularly preserued plant of this mysterious Oliue,
which euen flourishing before the floud, ceased not
likewise to be green and prosper in the verie floud.
For if the iust man worthily reioyced to behold
yet some fruit to remaine of the old seed; could
he choose but admire this mystical branch of our

Oliue heer, which euen so great an vniuersal floud of
Sinne could no whit domage?
Heer now the Hebrewes would haue Mount-Oliuet
not to haue been couered wholy with the waters of
the floud, and how that branch of Oliue was taken
from that Mount-Oliuet. Others report it to haue
been fetcht out of Paradice. Both which I hold fictitious,
if we speake of the Mount or Paradice in a
literal or historical sense; and otherwise most certain,
if we vnderstand it in the mystical. For the
Mother of Christ is mystically indeed the Mount of
Oliues, and she also the Paradice of pleasure, wherin
our Lord hath placed the man whom he had
formed. This Mount of Oliues then, this Paradice,
no floud of ouer-flowing sinnes hath drowned or
couered.



THE EMBLEME.






THE POESIE.
NOT without cause the Oliue-tree is slow
And backward in it's growth: The fruit doth show,The Pause.
By th' oyle it yealdes (the type of Mercie) long
We did expect, before that tender, yong,
And fruitful tree, the Oliue, from the earth,
(The blessed Virgin) sprung, by whose blest birth,
The oyle of Mercie, from the fruit did slow,
Which with the tree grew vp, and grew vp so,
As the first Oliue tree, not slow in growth,
But branch'd, and leau'd, and fruitful. Mercie both
(Like oyle) the Tree and Fruit, produce: a Priest
Messias in her Womb's annoynted Christ.



THE THEORIES.
COntemplate first,The Contemplation. that as the Oliue is
euer green, both in Sommer, Winter,
Spring, and Autumne; and what hew it
receaues in the Spring, it stil retaines
the dead of Winter, when al other
trees besides haue either no leaues, or
els are changed into other coulours, as tasting the
common calamitie of al Plants, some few excepted.
So the incomparable Virgin Marie neuer lost the flourishing
greennes of her sanctitie, eyther in the smiling
Sommer of her abundant consolation in her
ioyful passages with her deer Sonne; or in the sad
Winter of her greatest desolatio^, as when she lost him
in the Temple, and when she found him afterwards
hanging on a forren tree, so strangely altered, as he
could hardly be knowne, in his passion; nor in the
Spring of her youth, while she liued in the house of her
Parents, and especially in the Temple of our Lord, during
her minoritie; nor yet in the Autumne of her elderage,
since look what feruour she had in youth, the
same she stil retained in her elder yeares.
Consider then, how the blessed Virgin, and her deer
Sonne, were both Oliues, to wit, the fruits of Oliues. For
as the Oliues are first green,Isid. then red, then brown or
black: so was the Virgin-Mother green through the
precious and ifitemerate flower of her Virginitie;
red, through her burning and enflamed Charitie; and
brown or black,Cant. 1. through humilitie. I am black behold
the brownnes of her humilitie; but faire: see there the
flourishing state of her Virginitie; like to the skins of
Salomo^: where you may note the rednes of her charitie.
And for her Sonne, the yong Oliue, He was green in his

whole conuersation.Leuit. 23. If in green wood they do this, what wil
be done in the dry?Isay. 69. He was red in his passion: Wherefore
is thy garment red, and thy vestments like to those, who stamp
or tread in the presse? And black he was, at his death:
while the Sun became black as a Sack-cloth.
Ponder lastly, how Christ himself was truly the Oliue;
and the Virgin-Mother, but as the Oliue. He was truly the
Oliue, because he had the total and vniuersal Mercie
with him, and was indeed the natural Mercie himself,
since it was indeed his verie nature, and proper to him,
to haue mercie, and take compassion of al: while the
Virgin was but as an Oliue; for that she was so accustomed
to pittie, and so readie and prompt to compassion,
as she seemed in a sort most like vnto him.


THE APOSTROPHE.
O Delicious and fruitful Mother,The Colloquie. doe thou shew thy
self a true Mother; and doe not reiect me from thy
bosome, so open to al sinners. O Virgin Mother, O
Oliue truly fruitful in the house of GOD:
according to thy name, let me proue the effects therof: for thy
name dilates itself like Oyle; thou healest the wounded, thou
giuest light to the ignorant; thy name seemes to carrie a bitternes
with it, and yet affords vs a sweet and delicate oyle or balme
of mercie and grace, more sweet then honie, or the honie-comb,
and thy name,Eccl. 25. in the mouth, is ful of suauitie and delectation. O
how faire is thy mercie, in time of tribulation! For
then dost thou powre it forth, when the necessitie is most euident,
Mother of mercie, who presentst thyself most prompt to al,
that erre and goe astray: Doe me the grace, to participate of the
fruit of thy name: Giue me a special deuotion to praise thee, a loue
to loue thee, and a perfect humilitie to follow thee, through the
fruit of thee, the Oliue, thy blessed Sonne IESVS.




THE XIII. SYMBOL.
THE NIGHTINGAL.

THE DEVISE.






THE CHARACTER.
THE Nightingal is the litle Orpheus of the
woods, and the true Amphion of the forrest,The Impresa.
that hath for Lyre the litle Clarigal,
or Organ of his throat; wherin he
is so expert, as not contented to outstrip
others, he wil neuer lyn, til with running his diuisions,
he hath put himself to a Non-plus, for want
of breath: and then wil look about him, as he had
done some thing, and some notable conquest, when it
is but himself or his owne Eccho he hath so foyled,
and put to silence. He is the pety Quirister of the

Groues, that sings his Anthems and prettie Alleluyas in
the night, giuing the word to Chantecler, the obstreperous
Cock, to ring the world an Alarme or peal to
Mattins. He is so prowd of his musick, and hath so
good a conceipt therof, as he wil not consort with
anie other minstril besides, to fil-vp his melodious
Symphonies, but wil alone haue al the pipes to himself.
He is a true Musician indeed, that hath a litle of
the fantastick with him; and wil in a humour, if he
iarre but neuer so little with himself, of meer choler
be readie to break his pipes to peeces. It is wel he
sings no words or Dittyes to his Sol-fa; for if he did,
we should doubtles loose our selues, and be rauished
and reft of our senses. And much I doubt, whether
the Intelligences themselues would not quite giue
ouer their musick, to listen to his Mottets. His vsual
songs are certain Catches and Roundelayes he hath,
much after the manner of the French Braules; you
would take him verily to be a Mo^sieur of Paris streight,
if you heard but his preludiums; for then indeed is he
set on a merrie pin. Sometimes againe wil he be in a
melancholie dump, and strik you such Notes, as
Dowland himself neuer strock, in al his Plaints and
Lachrymies. It is then perhaps, when he feels so the
prickle at his breast, in the midst of his Nocturns. For
then like a right Michael-Angelo with his statue framed
to the life, which seemes to liue and breath, wil he
make his pipes to speak out plainely: Ay me! Ah! Eheu!
They are Hermits al, for the most part, and keep in the
wildernes; and are so contemplatiue, as they hate the
Citties, and neuer come there but as Captiues, sore
against their wil. It is maruel, there is such store of
them, and that euer they should leaue the single life,
and betake them to the coniugal state, but that Chastitie
indeed is a strayne beyond their Ela.



THE MORALS.

IN ORE MELOS, CORDE IVBILVS.

IT is a common Prouerb: Musica in
luctu,The Motto. importuna narratio: as much to
say, as Musick in mourning, is a harsh hearing.
And yet the Rauen hath had the
commendation of a good voice, and
been seriously told, she had a good
one; but whosoeuer it was, he did but to flatter her
grosly to herface, and spake not as he thought indeed,
but to bring her into a foole's Paradise, and to sooth
her vp for some politick ends of his owne. But what
haue we heer to doe with such Saxtons, as she, that
rings but knells to passengers out of this world? Welfare
the Swan yet, who though she sings very dolefully,
yet doth it very sweetly; nor should I think the
Swallow had reason of her side, to contend with her
for skil in musick; for if her tune be reasonable good,
she hath no varieties; and though she sing very cheerfully
and hath iubiley in the hart, yet hath she no
great melodie in her mouth. The Philomel is truly she
of al wind-instruments, that carries the siluer bel
away. For she wil iug-it forth both cheerfully and
sweetly to. She wil sing from the hart, as hauing an
innocent soule of her owne, not an ounce of care
within, nor so much as a Doit of debts to pay. A good
Musicia^ indeed can not choose but be an honest man;
nor doe I see, how an honest man can be ought els,
then a good Musician; since Musick is no more then
a harmonie and sweet accord of diuers tones into
one melodie, without any iarre or discord between
them. And Man is a Harp; the Powers and Faculties of
the Soule, the strings; and Reason, the Harper. If Reason

then playes wel his part, which makes the honest
man, Oh what a harmonie there is in al, and especially
where the tongue and hart agree togeather? When
Dauid playd on the harp, the il Spirit fled fro^ Saul. And
why? because he hateth vnitie and concord: Whereas
had he iarr'd but neuer so litle, the Spirit had stayd no
doubt. Is it so in the Harp, and not in the Organ of the
voyce? No doubt it is. As the hand striks, what the
hart dictats, so the mouth puts forth, of the abundance
of the hart. The hart then of the Incomparable
Virgin, so innocent and free from al engagements, how
cheerful of necessitie must it needs be? and being so
ful of glee and iubiley, how must she needs exhale and
vent forth melodie? and consequently, how diuinely
brake she forth into that melodious Canticle of her
Magnificat? And if euer els where, was that truly verifyed
in her: IN ORE MELOS, CORDE IVBILVS.


THE ESSAY.
IT is one of the prettiest sports of Nature,The Reuiew.
when she is in her deepest silence, to
heare the litle Nightingal to warble, in telling
and recounting her delights and pleasures
to Zephirus and the forrests, tuning a
1000. Canzonets, and sweetly cutting the ayre with
repetitio^ of a hundred thousand semi-semi-quauers,
which she lets go without cease. To take her pleasure
and recreation, she wil ballance her self vpon a
branch that shakes, to dance Laualtoes as it were at
the Cade^ce of her lighter so^gs, and to match her voyce
with the siluer streames of a chrystal currant, gliding
there along, which breaking against the litle pibles,
murmures and sweetly purls, while she pearches and
sets herself iust ouer a banck enameled al with

litle flowers. This litle Musician alone making vp a
song of foure Parts, and a ful Quire of musick, you
would say she held within her throat, a thousand
Quiristers, and as manie Violins, and that the litle
cornet of her beak were in steed of al the wind-instrume^ts.
It is admirable in so smal a bodie, so cleere,
so sweet, so strong, and pleasant a voice should be
found; that in the Spring, when trees begin to bud
their leaues, whole dayes and nights perpetually she
should sing without intermission at al. For whence
from so litle a bird, so bold and pertinacious a spirit?
Whence that force of containing yet the soule, in
chanting so manie diuersities in the continuation of
one song? and where, I pray, are the liuelie streightnings
and remissions of the voice co^tained? Whence
so artificious and so perfect a knowledge of musick,
so ingenious a modulation, so gratful a tone to the
eares, which now with a continued breath is drawne
out at length, now turns againe with a strange and
admirable varietie, distinguished with a slicing
voice, and then with a wreasted, peeced togeather?
There is truly no Song so hard and abstruse, which
she can not expresse, ful, flat, sharp, quick, long, high,
meane, base, what more? Now in these litle throats,
are al kinds of songs to be found entire and perfect;
which, with so much labour, with so much industrie,
and with so manie instruments inuented, the Art of
man hath deuised. But oh what sport it is, when this
litle feathered voice, this prettie harmonie in the
shape of a bird, this litle end of nothing, as it were,
being viuifyed with musick, is euen readie to kil herself
with singing, when she heares the counterfet
Nightingal (the Eccho) to mock her, in repeating
and returning her whole melodie againe! For then
she mounts vp, as it were, to the heauens, and then

stoops againe to the Center of the earth, she flyes,
she followes, she sighs, she sobs, she is angrie, and then
pleas'd againe, she mingles the sharp with the sweet,
the sharp with the B. flat; one while a Chromatick,
then a sweeter stroke, now strikes a Diapente, and
the^ a Diapaso^. She counterfets the Hawboy, Cornet,
and Flute; she deuids, she gargles, and hath her Groppo,
the trills, and the like, and al in that her litle throat,
but yet can varie nothing, but the Eccho imitates
and expresses; til at last, as it were, she looseth al patience,
falles into a litle chafe with herself, in that
seing nothing, she heares notwithstanding, and so
flyes into some bush to hide her self for shame, til
prickt with a thorn, at last she is pushed to sing
againe; which she doth without measure, where al is
delicious as before.


THE DISCOVRSE.
BVT what are al these to the sweet modulations
of Maries voice,The Suruey. wherewith she
tuned a Canticle of her Diuine Soule, surely
a magnifying of GOD, to be imitated
of no Nightingal els inferiour to her self,
whether we regarde the manifold varietie of her
voice, or the delectable sweetnes, or pertinacitie in
the co^tinuation therof? The Orpheans, Amphions, Arions,
the Orlandos, and Marenzas, yea the Sirens them selues,
with casting downe their eyes would goe their
wayes confounded, and breake their harps and other
instruments into peeces, had they heard the melodie
of that Diuine Voice of hers. O let thy voice then sound in
mine eares? for thy voice is sweet.Cant. The Nightingals are sayd
to be of two sorts: some conuersant in the mountains,
and some in the marishes; which wil appeare

by the manner of their singing, there being no comparison
between them; since the one doth far excel
the other, whether it be the litle pipes of their organs
be stopt by the vapours of those humid places, I
know not, but am sure of this, that Iulius Alexandrinus
vpon the 9. booke of Galen, puts a notable difference
between them; for thus he sayes: It is noted, that the
Nightingals of the plaine and marish places,Alex 9 l. Galen. are wont
to giue forth a voice a great deale shirler, then those
of the mountains, the organ of the voice relenting
no doubt through too much moisture, as they cannot
haue so smart, cunning, and tunable a voice with them,
as the others haue.
Behold then our Lalie a Nightingal of the mountains:
For Marie arising went into the mountains, and so became
the Nightingal of the mountains. She inhabited not the
fens or marishes of dissolute lubricitie, abode not in
the playnes of an ordinarie vertue, but left the vallies
of baser cogitations, aspired to the tops of Heroical
vertues, placed the nest in the sublimitie of Diuine
contemplations, and dwelt in the top of the mount
of Perfection; whence proceeded that sweet voice,
more sweet then anie mortal harmonie besides: My
Soule doth magnify our Lord.
Let others with the tongue, hand, or breath charme
the delicate eares; let them wind the Cornet, with a
thousand diminutions, runne diuisions on the Harpsicon
or Virginals: Let them pay the Violin as much
as they wil, spatter the Lute, touch the Orpharion
neuer so sweetly, the Cithern, Pandore, and the Harp
itself: Yet this Canticle of Magnificat in my mind exceeds
them al, and wil stand for Organs, Flutes,
Cornets, Harps, Lutes, Citherns, Pandoras, and a
thousand the like. This is the Musick indeed that
pleased GOD, and which I like best, which the syllables

of the Soule and hart doe make, while the
tongue playes the Harp. GOD magnifyed Marie
because he made her great; Marie magnified GOD,
because she proclaimed him Great.
When I think of our Nightingal, what hast she made
to goe vnto the mountains, it comes into my mind,
what a certain Authour hath, writing of the nature
of things: That the Nightingal is wont to
sing with expedition and celeritie.Vliss. Aldr. Ornith. l. 28. p. 780. But what are
the causes of her so hastie and precipitous speed?
The Naturalists wil tel you: perhaps, because she
feares, least the time of her singing passe away;
perhaps she hastens, least her tunes otherwise
would seeme harsh and vngratful to delicate
eares; perhaps, because she would charme the
eares more powerfully and politely withal. But
why made Marie such hast then? Let Ambrose tel
vs: The Virgin made hast, that she might not remaine
long in publick out of her house. Learne,
you Virgins, sayth he, not to stay in the streets,
nor to hold vnprofitable chats in publick. Againe
let Ambrose tel vs: She hastned for ioy, wherewith
the Virgins hart exulted to GOD. Let him
tel vs a third time againe: The Virgin being ful of
GOD, whither should she goe but to the higher
places, with ful speed? The grace of the Holie-Ghost
knowes no delayes. Let Origen yet tel vs: For
that CHRIST, who was in the Virgins womb,
made hast to sanctify Iohn, and cleanse him from
Original sinne. O let our Nightingal therefore sing
apace.
But hearken awhile, you Musicians, how the
Nightingal sings; obserue her wel, and you shal note,
how she pauses not, but equally sings at length with a
co^tinual breath without anie cha^ge, stil holding out

her wind to the ful: now she sings her diminutions,
and diuides in infinitum; now she wrigles and curles
her voice as it were, now she lengthens it againe,
now she drawes it back; one while she chants forth
longer verses, as they were Heroicks; another while,
more short and sudden, much like vnto Saphicks; and
sometimes againe, extreme short as Adonicks. Now
she tunes with a fat and grosser voice, you would verily
say, it were a Sack but at least: anon rings she
forth a most shril treble, as fetched a note aboue Ela
at least; cleer; to fil the eares with a siluer sound; sweet,
to charme the hearing with deliciousnes, running
Descant as it were, vpon the ground of her lower
Notes; and now she goes smooth and euen againe, now
seeme you to heare a Tenour voice, then a Counter,
and a Counter-alt following and chasing one another
with certain fugnes. But Oh terrene Philomel, thou
art but a babler heer, with al thy trilloes, if thou
standst in competencie in Musick with this Diuine
Nightingal.
Let vs heare then this Celestial Bird: My soule doth
magnify the Lord. What is this I heare? What is it, that
filles so mine eares? What is it? what a melodie and
most delicious sound it makes? which being conioyned
with vnequal pauses, but yet distinct, with
certain quauer-rests, and not with an artlesse voice
vnskilfully come off, nor with affectatio^ ridiculously
handled; nor with a swelling of the throat vncomely
to see to, nor expressed with instruments il tuned,
but most diuinely and sweetly done, with a gratful
inflection of the natural voice, which tempering the
Flat with the Sharp, the rough with the sweet, the
obscure with the plaine and perspicuous, the ligatures
with the free, the slow with the quick, in one expresseth
most different harmonies. Let (...)

the musick Magnificat etc. which if we relish wel,
and the eares of our soule be not wholy out of tune,
we shal find most melodious indeed, and framed not
only with admirable artificiousnes and skil, but tempered
with a singular sweetnes and varietie withal.
For therin is heard the height of Diuinitie in the
Treble, My spirit hath exulted in GOD my SAVIOVR: the
vilenes of the Humanitie, and so the bottom and the
Base of demission, He hath regarded the lowlines of his
hand mayd: the Alt of Power, He hath done great things
for me, who is powerful: the Tenour of Mercie, And mercie
from generation to generation to them that feare him: the
Graue or Flat of vindicatiue Iustice, The prowd hath he
dispersed in the mind of their hart: the Sharp of Exultation,
My spirit hath exulted in GOD my SAVIOVR: the
Sweet of Refection and refreshment, He hath filled the
hungrie with good things: the Chromatick or harshnes
of Rebuke, The rich hath he sent emptie away: the fatnes
or fulnes of Fidelitie, He hath receaued his child: the
artificiousnes
of Reuelation, As he hath spoken: the consonance
of both Instruments, to Abraham and his seed
for euer.



THE EMBLEME.






THE POESIE.
EVE, like a Nightingal, was plac'd to sing
In Eden, where, with euerlasting spring.
GOD for her solace pleasant arbours rays'd,
Had she with lowlie straines her Maker prays'd.The Pause.
But to an Alt her mind aspir'd too high,
Would be like GOD, affecting Deitie,
Therefore from Eden's spring she was expel'd,
Sad Philomel, to mourne: Til GOD beheld
A Nightingal with an exulting straine,
That magnifyed her Lord. But downe againe
She lowly stoop'd, and iug'd it, when she sayd:
He hath beheld euen me a seruile Mayd.



THE THEORIES.
COntemplate first, that as the searchers into
natural things;The Contemplation: haue deliuered, al birds
haue their peculiar Notes, which are as
their proper Dialects, in the region of
their kinds, and by which, when they are not seen, they
are easily distinguished one fro^ another, saue only the
Nightingal, which hath no proper Note of its owne,
but rather alone is a Quire of al the Musical birds in
the world. So is it right with our heauenlie and diuine
Nightinga; for as al other creatures chant forth the
prayses of their Creatour with Notes each one in their
seueral kinds, our Nightingal warbles them, with the
diuersitie of al voices, with the voice of the Angels,
of men, and of things that want both reason and sense.
Consider then, that, as Plinie sayth, the Nightingal
sings not so artificiously by nature so much as by art;
while the yong are taught to warble of the elder. The
yonger (sayth he) do meditate and receaue their
verses fro^ the elder to practise, to imitate: the schollars
attentiuely listen, and proue their Notes, and by
turnes hold their peace. You may note a correction
in the learner, and a kind of reprehension in the teacher.
Where behold, how S. Iohn was a yong Nightingal;
and if you doubt it, aske of him, if he be so or no: he
wil tel you: He is the voice of the desert; Which is nothing
els but a Nightingal. For if you pul but the feathers of
his titles from him, you wil find but a voice, and nothing
els; and what is that but a Nightingal, that sings
as it is taught by an elder one? whe^ being in his Mothers
womb, and hearing this our Nightingal, to lead
him a verse of her Canticle of Magnificat; he prouing to
follow and sing likewise, as then could no more, but
skip and dance.
Ponder lastly, that as the Nightingal, though often she

be iouial and ful of glee, and out of iolitie of hart doth
often sing in the publick groaues among a thousand
of other quiristers besides, vying and inuiting them
al to sing to the prayse of their common Creatour: Yet
wil she sometimes by herself alone be singing in priuate
also in a bush, where hauing a thorn at her breast,
it is incredible, the varieties she wil put forth, that
were euen able to rauish the Intellige^ces themselues,
could they heare her at leasure, and were not occupyed
already with their owne Musick. So our blessed
Virgin, the Nightingal of Heauen, though she would
often sing in the companie of Angels, as likely was
she rarely without their companie, with whom she
would chant Alleluyas more audible and melodiously;
yet sometimes againe she would retire herself, and
the thorns of her deerest beloued through a liuelie
memorie sticking at her breast, and pricking the hart,
it can not be imagined, how dolefully, and yet how
sweetly, she would sing.


THE APOSTROPHE.
BEhold,The Colloquie. great Chorist and Rectrice of the Angelical
Quire, we poore petty-Quiristers beneath, haue our eyes
cast vpon thy al-commanding Rod, to moderate our Time, that
with due proportio^ heer on earth, we may answer in some maner
to that vpper Quire in heauen, chanting the prayses of our co^mon
Lord and great Creatour. o Marie, o Diuine Nightingal;
thy Quire beneath is held in the whole Church: but thy priuate
Schoole is kept in the Co^claue of the Hart, where thou art wont
to teach thy Deuotes, to sing aright, how with the Voice, the Hart
should iump withal, and the hand and foot be keeping a iust Time,
that is, with our hart, voice, example, and good works, that we
keep an euen time with thee, in correspondencie of that great
Magnificat of thine. Come then, great Chantresse of heauen,
and errect thy schoole within my hart, and teach it to sing forth his
praises with out cease. Lo heer, I say, let thy voice sound
in mine eares; for thy voice is sweet.




THE XIV. SYMBOL.
THE PALME.

THE DEVISE.






THE CHARACTER.
THE Palme is the inuincible Champion
among trees,The Impresa whose chiefest point of
valour consists in bearing iniuries and
oppressio^s, without shrinking. It is euen
a verie Atlas, for the breadth and sturdines
of its shoulders; which the more you loade, the
stoutlyer it stands to it: It is for name and qualities a
Phenix right; and therefore as they sympathize much,
the Phenix wil lightly take vp his Inne no where els.
And verily I think, if the Phenix were to be a tree, it
would be no other; and I doubt much whether if the
Palme could metamorphize itself, it would wish to be

anie other, then it is. It is a whole prouisio^ for the vse
of man: so as a new marryed couple might wel go o^
howse with such a stock. They are euen as Turtles
among trees, and constant Louers to each other. They
are so amourous one of an other, as they wil hardly
liue without the societie of each other; and yet so
chast, as they breed and bring forth without contaction.
As the Turtle-widowes sit mourning on a
withered branch, or die of greef; so wil the Palme in
loosing his mate become a withered tree, and pine
away. If diuers sexes they haue with them (as some
think) they are the constant Vlisses, and chast Penelope;
if not, a Damon and Pithias. Of al trees, the Palme comes
neerest to a reasonable soule, if Loyaltie and friendship
be according to reason, who are so passionatly
carryed towards each other. No maruel then the Palme
alone, is so taken vp to heauen, as Scepter of the
Martyrs, where nought but reasonable things can haue
admittance. The Male, that beares no fruit himself,
in a manner is endles and euerlasting, because Dateles,
as without dates; and the femal though fruitful and
ful of dates, yet bearing pulles her not downe, but is
for al her dates as durable euery whit as the other.
They are the Hermit's Kitchin and Refectorie at once;
whose dates they eate no otherwise then as they
come already cooked and dressed on the tree. They
shew a far off like Tropheys hangd with Fauchions or
Turkie Scimiters; but neerer hand, as loaden and
adorned with strange leaues, insteed of armes or
branches without boughes. By reason wherof no
bird can hansomely pearch vpon them: which priuiledge
is only reserued to the Phenix, where she willingly
and deliciously plants her cradle, her couch,
her Temple of the Sun, her Aultar of holocausts, and
finally her tomb at one.



THE MORALS.

DEPRESSA RESVRGENS.

THE Vertues of Fortitude and Patience
may seeme as two,The Motto. but are easily reduced
to one, that is, to a stout Patience, or patient
Fortitude. If you deuide them, Fortitude
attempts without temeritie; and
hauing once begun, without al feare goes through
with it. Patience hath large shoulders, and fit to beare
a burden of iniuries, which it suffers not of pusillanimitie
or basenes, as not daring to reuenge it self, but
out of a true and Christian magnanimitie, because he
may not. Fortitude seekes not dangers, but meeting
with them, beares them brauely indeed with courage
and good successe. Patience is so subiect to it self, as
iniuries can not subdue it, as holding this Maxim,
that the whole victorie consists in yealding. Fortitude
is sole Mistris of it self, submitting passions to
Reason's lore, through which interiour victorie it
works its owne peace. Patience walkes aboue Nature,
so long as it is beneath itself. Fortitude is troubled
at nothing, but for displeasing the Soueraigne
Good, and feares nothing but Sinne. Patience makes
vse of Lawes for its onlie protection, not for reuenge,
and its owne forces, to eschew indignities and
not to offer them. If Fortitude haue a quarel in hand,
it regards not the arme, but the cause, not how stout
it is, but how innocent; and where it hath equitie
for warrant, wel may it be maistered, but not
vanquished. The contrarie euents, do only exercise,
but not affright it; and whensoeuer it is

pressed with afflictio^, it acknowledgeth the inuisible
hand to be ouer it, that layes very sensible scourges
vpon it, against which it dares not rebel or murmur
a whit. This stout Patience then, or patient Fortitude,
this Heroical constancie (I say) the glorious Virgin
had, through the whole course of her blessed life, but
especially in bearing the dolours of her Sonne's passio^,
so equal, and perseuering so long at the foot of the
Crosse, and not fainting the while, but remaining
firme on her feet, so victorious a Palme of Cades, as wel
might she say indeed: DEPRESSA RESVRGENS.


THE ESSAY.
THE Palme,The Reuiew. of trees is it, that beares away
the palme. It is euen the Tower of Plants,
both for height and strength at once; for if
the Pine be higher, it is the weaker; if the
Oak be stronger, it is nothing neer so high; and therefore
with Antiquitie it was the Symbol of constancie
and victorie. It is (as I may say) the Phenix of
trees, with which it hath such simpathies, as what
with the Etimologie of the name, being the same in
Greek, and the faire correspondencies they haue
with each other, in Authours they are much confounded.
And for the Phenix, she wil neast herself in
none other. The Palmes are likewise the Turtles amo^g
trees; for they are Male and Female, as they; they
match and payre togeather as they, and are as loyal
as they, and ful as chast as they. For in the absence of
each other, they produce no fruit, and yet (wherin
they much exceed the Turtles) they bring the^ forth
without co^taction of branch or root, but it is enough
that they enioy each others companie; and so great
a sympathie they haue withal, that if they be transplanted

from each other, they mourne and languish
likewise, if not dye. The Palme is euen the Magazin of
al prouisions, for the vse and sustentation of man.
The Indians haue need of manie things, and lo the
Palme supplyes the^ al; so as if anie one be industrious
among them, or anie thing be very profitable, they
wil say immediately: Behold the Palme. It affords them
oyle, wine, and bread, as they ha^dle it; with the leaues
they couer their houses, as we with tiles; they write
theron, insteed of paper; if they put themselues to
sea, the Palmes doe furnish them with al things necessarie
thereto; and not only with victuals, but euen the
very vessel in itself is nothing els but Palme. The
trunck and branches yeald them masts and boards;
the leaues being wouen, make vp their sayles; with
the bark, they frame their tacklings and cordage. So
as not without some miracle, as it were, may you say,
when you see a Man-of-warre of theirs, or a marchant's
ship, behold a Palme, how it rides vpon the
seas.


THE DISCOVRSE.
BEhold heer the true triumphant Palme indeed,The Suruey.
the Queen of Heauen, who notwithstanding
al her combats and bitter agonies
in the passion of her Sonne, yet stil she
triumphed ouer al, especially in her glorious
Assumption: I am exalted as a Palme in Cades, that is, in
my Assumption, since Cades is interpreted: Translation;
for who sees not the Assumption of the Mother of GOD,
to be nothing els, but a certain translation of her fro^
this Militant to the Triumphant Church? A Palme
being oppressed with a heauie weight, was put vp in
the Obsequies of Marguerit of Austria, with this Deuise:

Subacta mole resurgo; representing therin, how the Iust
shal arise at the last Resurrection, like the Palme, more
faire and beautiful then before; though formerly oppressed,
by the burden of death and of human necessitie.
And so was it with our incomparable Ladie
in an eminent degree, especially (I say) at her glorious
Assumption.
Among the Palmes, there are Male and Female; and
the Female neuer brings forth fruits, but standing
opposit by her Male; and hence it is, that two Palmes,
being planted by two banck-sides of a riuer, are the
Hieroglifick of Nuptials, with Valerius: and especially,
say I, of the Spiritual Nuptials between the Spouse, and
his Spouse, between Christ and his blessed Mother. Amo^g
these Palmes likewise, is noted this difference; that the
Male growes and flourishes sooner then the Femal;
and so fares it heer with our two Palmes, our Sauiour
Christ, and his deare Mother. Where, of the first sayth
the Prophet: The iust shal flourish like the Palme; And the
latter sayth of herself:Psal. 31 I am exalted like a Palme in Cades;
with this difference,Eccl. 24. that Christ much sooner then
his Mother arising to immortal life, seemed to flourish
sooner:Psal. 27. as he testifyes of himself: And my flesh hath
flourished. But the blessed Virgin dying some yeares
afterwards, and gloriously resuscitated, did flourish
indeed, but so as after him.
It is sayd moreouer, that though the Palme grow
higher then manie trees, yet neuer arriues it to the
height of the Cedar. So likewise, though our mystical
Palme, our admirable Ladie, were raysed and exalted
so high, as she far transcended the glorie of al men
and Angels, yet to the height of the glorie of Christ,
very aptly signified by the Cedar, was she neuer
assumpted, as wel for sublimitie as innated incorruptibilitie;
because our Lord Christ as wel in the

Triumphant as Militant Church is the Head of the
mystical Bodie, whereof his Mother was a member
only, though the noblest part of al, as being the
neck. Heerto may be added that prettie Deuise of
Mark Anthonie, being this: a Pillar wreathed and composed
about with two branches, the one of Palme, the
other of Cypresse, with this Motto: Erit altera merces;
signifying thereby, the recompence of a generous
man, was either a noble Victorie, or an honourable
Death; for that the Palme representing victorie, the
Cypresse of the other side is a Symbol of death, being
ordinarily vsed in the Funerals and Sepulchers of
the dead. So was al the life of the blessed Virgin a
perpetual standing pillar or Trophey, as is were, of
incredible Mysteries, especially in the palme of her
glorious Assumption, yet by the meanes of the Cypresse
of her death, since that was to be the way and
the next step to her highest aduancement, and the
greatest victorie of al.
The Palme, is sharp and rough beneath, but smooth
and handsome aboue; wherein S. Gregorie sayth in his
Morals, the life of the iust man is aptly represented,
being bitter and rough in the exteriour shew and in
the sensitiue part, but yet sweet and delightful
through contentments which the soule receaues the
while: So was the whole life of the Mother of GOD
nothing els but a life of paynes and doulours, especially
at the passion of her deerest Sonne, which
through compassion she made her owne, but yet
sweet for the end, to wit, of a life of rest and repose
afterwards in the kingdome of Heauen, and of the
ineffable ioyes of her glorious Assumption by
the way, as riding in Triumph. Which Saint
besides, makes yet another note, which is

this; that the Palme heerin is differing from other
trees, in that the other are grosse beneath, and grow
slenderer vpwards; while the Palme of the contrarie,
is slender beneath, and bigger and grosser, the higher
it goes: So were the thoughts of the blessed Virgin, the
true Palme indeed, as poore and slender downe to the
earth-wards, but substantial and solid vp to the Heauens,
whose conuersation doubtles, as S. Paul sayth, was
wholy in Heauen.
Strange things are reported of the Palmes, to liue
mutually, and dye togeather. A singular type surely
of the Sympathie between our two Palmes, our Christ
and his blessed Mother, affording one life, and as it
were one self-same death between them both. For
Christ dying, she languished as dead; and he arising
from his Sepulcher after his death, she reuiued
againe as it were from death. And so that same Epitaph
more fitly might be applyed to these Diuine
Louers, our amourous Palmes, which a certain Poet
of ours had framed for a payre of profane Louers,
dying both with one and the self-same sword:
His being was in her alone,And he not being, she was none,They ioy'd one ioy; one grief they grieu'd;One loue they lou'd; one life they liu'd.The hand was one, one was the Sword,That did his death, her death afford.



THE EMBLEME.






THE POESIE.
PHaenix (in Greek a Palme) doth aptly sute
With that rare bird the Phaenix, here the fruit;
Which,The Pause. when bright Phoebus scorching heames displayes,
A neast of Spices (to renew his dayes,
By a second birth) vpon this tree he makes:
Where burnt to ashes so himself forsakes,
Made yong, that he retaines what he had byn.
Thus th' only Sonne of God, t' abolish sinne,
Midst burning flames reuest with mortal plume,
Reuiues man's nature, which he doth assume;
The Virgin-Phaenix is the fruitful tree,
Where God in flames of Loue, new-borne would be.



THE THEORIES.
COntemplate first,The Contemplation. in the Palme, what
a gratful shade it affords to wearie
trauellers on the way, preseruing them
from the scorching rayes of the Sun,
and yealding them Dates to expel
hunger, and not so only, but is a notable
delicacie besides. The Monks and Fathers of
Aegypt, Thebarda, and Arabia, would make a goodlie
liuing with a Palme-tree only by a chrystal riuer
side, subministring them al things needful, for meat,
drink, and cloath, to satisfy nature. O rare and admirable
tree! But then consider the Palme of Paradise; I
say, the admirable Virgin Palme, vnder whose shadow
and protection, we are saued from the outrageous
heats of concupiscence, fed with the delicious
examples of her life, and cloathed with the habits of
her vertues, and especially refreshed with the sweet
consideration of the limpid streames of her purest
chastitie, no lesse then Nectar in the tast.
Consider then, how as the Palme is rough without,
narrow beneath, and broad on the top, wheron the
Phenix takes delight to build his neast: So was our
blessed Ladie in exteriour shew but coorse in the eyes
of her Nazarean neighbours, being held for no
more, then a Carpenter's wife; while she was truly
indeed the Palme of Cades. Beneath she was narrow,
that is, in the loue of terrene things, wheron she
touched as it were, but in a point only of the human
nature, not acquainted with the impurities
and miseries therof: but broad on the top, that is,

in Diuine contemplation, and loue of celestial
things, where she alwayes dwelt in the highest; and where
the glorious Phenix, the eternal Word, had taken vp
his neast for so many moneths, to issue thence a
human Phenix, her true and natural Sonne indeed.
Ponder lastly, that as the Palme euer flourisheth
and neuer withers, so our Incomparable Mother of
GOD, had alwayes fresh and flourishing thoughts,
being holie and chast; green and intentions,
because most pure and neat; and green and
flourishing affections, because very liuelie and
actiue in the seruice of the Highest, whose lowlie
handmayd, notwithstanding her maternitie, she
would be; nor decayd or withered euer, because
euer entire and neuer once subiect to corruption;Eccl. 24.
not in bodie, because embalmed with the Deitie:
As Cinamon and balme aromatizing I haue sent forth an odour;
not in soule, because being vnited with the Soule,
of her Sonne, they were made in a manner both as one,
as by this is insinuated: A sword shal pierce through thy
verie soule: that is, thy soule, which is his; or his,
which is thyne: nor in Spirit, because through loue
she was truly conuerted into GOD; and S. Hierom sayth:
The grace of the Holie-Ghost had fully replenished her, and
Diuine Loue had made her wholy white.



THE APOSTROPHE.
O Statelie and victorious Palme of Paradice,The Colloquie. most
triumphant Queen of heauen, Cittie of refuge, Temple
of Safeguard, House of the Liuing GOD, faire
Couch of the mystical Salomon, and his Throne of
Iuorie! Oh Sanctuarie of GOD, the Arck of peace, Seat of
Wisedome, the Rest and repose of the most high GOD, the glorious
Cabinet of a thousand and a thousand guifts of the most
blessed Holie-Ghost, the precious Reliquatie of al infused graces!
O sacred Pauilion, where GOD sets himself in the shadow
of the rayes of his great glorie; most delicious Ladie, most pure
and gracious, in the midst of those Celestial pleasures, and Diuine
delectations of thine: Grant, I beseech thee, that I alwayes rest
vnder the shade of thy branches, within the folds of thy protection
and sweet mercie, in this life; and when I shal finish the
course of my pilgrimage, in this vale of miseries, it would please
his Omnipotencie, to vnite my hart and spirit, with his more then
holie Spirit, by the sacred linck of his most faire and transforming
loue. This doe I beg as the feet of thee, most soueraigne Palme
of the heauenlie Paradise.




THE XV. SYMBOL.
THE HOVSE.

THE DEVISE.






THE CHARACTER.
THE House is an artificious Plasme,The Impresa framed
by the hand of man, for his vse and
habitation. It is a creature made in spite
of Nature, to vye with her: That forasmuch
as Man only is borne naked, and
without a house to put his head in, afforded him by
Nature, Art taking compassion on him, abundantly
supplyes the defect. There is nothing comes so suddenly
to so great a growth, as it; for wheras an
Elephant being one of the greatest among beasts, and
yet by manie degrees not so big as manie Houses are,

he is twentie yeares ere he comes to his ful growth:
a goodlie house wil be reared, and brought to perfection
in lesse then a yeare. Plants wil not grow without
rayne, or waters cast vpon them, where this
plantation hath no need of waters, but rather al industries
are vsed to keep them out. The Tortoyes in
this respect, is better housed, not charged with reparations
as long as his Lease lasts, for terme of his life:
but yet hauing none els to trust, to looke vnto it, he
is faine to carrie it about him. The Cockle hath his
house, tiled with slate; which hauing no lock and
key too, he is forced to keep at home for feare of
theeues. And not so much as the poore snayle but
hath a house of his owne, which in his pace, like a
Pedler with his pack, wil he carrie about him
throughout the world, and do that with time, which
the Sunne can no more then do, with al his swiftnes,
Nay you eate not an Oyster, but you vn-house him and
put him out of his tenement. The Sun is the house of
light, that needs no windowes, being nothing els but
light. And for the 12. principal houses and Pallaces
in the Heauens, they are but weakely built without
foundation, more then the Astronomers working
braines. The Moone is the house of the Flux and Reflux
of the Seas, who thence go in and out by turnes
at their pleasures. The Almond is a house of the kernels
within, which neuer comes forth til the roof
comes fluttering downe about her eares, that costs
her life. The Hiue, is a house and Colledge of Bees,
where they liue Collegially togeather; the Combs
are their Refectorie. The Birds, for proper houses,
haue their neasts; whose children are the yong ones,
and she the good huswif that keeps at home.



THE MORALS.

SEDES SAPIENTIAE.

LOoke where the Prince is,The Motto. there is
the Court; and where the Court,
there his Seate. Wisedome is the
Prince of the whole Microcosme of
man: His Court then, and seate must
needs be in the Power of the Vnderstanding,
where he chiefly resides, and not where soeuer
his dominion stretcheth; for so should he be in
euerie place in person, which stands not with the
Maiestie of so great a Prince. Wel may his Ministers,
like Purseuants and Heralds, performe and execute
the Royal commands: as the hands, to make prouisions
to maintaine the State; the feet, to trauel for
that purpose; the eyes, to keep Centenel in the turrets
of his pallace, and that neer to his person, against
forren iuuasions, and the like: but yet the Prince
himself in his Royal person departs not a whit from
his proper Chamber of presence, the Intellect. And
GOD himself, the Monarck of the whole Vniuers, is
seen to be euerie where within his Dominions,
through his essence, power, and presence, but not in
that particular manner, as he is in heauen, in his
proper seat; or as he was in earth, in his humanitie,
or in the Sacrament itself most mysteriously and
Diuinely. For to speake in general, his seat is euerie
where: The Heauens, are the roof; the Starres, the
Seelings; the earth al diaperd and diuersifyed
with infinit coulours, his footstool and pauements;

and the maruels of Nature, his shop of wonders, but
his proper and peculiar seat, where he resides in, as in
his Court, is either in the Empyreal Heaue^ (as I sayd)
or in Christ's excellent Humanitie, or in the most
Venerable and dreadful Sacrament of the Aultar;
nor hath he made choice of anie other seats to dwel
in, as not worthie or able to comprehend him. Where
then had Wisedome properly set vp his seat, but in
that pallace he had built for himself, founded in so
great an humilitie, and so wel sustained with the
seauen-fold pillars of the Holie-Ghost, I meane, in the
Virgin-Womb of the Incomparable Ladie? who receauing,
and so long entertaining the Wisedome Increated,
in her virginal Lap, as the true Salomon indeed,
reposing sweetly in his Iuorie Throne, may wel
be stiled: SEDES SAPIENTIAE.


THE ESSAY.
A House being a meer artificial,The Reuiew. and no
natural thing, hath its first subsistence
in the Idea of Man's brayne;
according to whose model, good
or il, the house so built, proues
good or il. We recurre then to
the Architect, for direction in al. This Architecture
is a soueraigne Mistris of building, which
giues the addresses, for disposing al the parts
of a house, with relations in themselues, in comlines,
proportion, ornaments, situation, distances,
eleuations, and a thousand of the like;
of al which yealds it a pertinent and satisfactorie
reason to the curious examiners, why euerie
thing is so done, this and not that. Some are Architects
by hand only, and no more, who frame

their buildings by roat, taking forth copyes heer
and there, but can afford no reason at al for what
they do, nor inuent ought that is worth a rush; and
for a final reason say nothing but, such is the custome
so to do. Others are Architects by booke only, and
by discourses which they haue read; but they haue
no hands to put in practise, and know but the Theorie
only; such as they, are good for nothing, but
to build a house for Plato, of Ideas, al suspending in
the ayre. The good Architect should linck his spirit
with his hand, and the compas with his reason,
setting his hand to work, as wel as the brayne. The
first do frame but bodies without a soule; the second,
soules without a bodie; the third do build the whole,
and are men of note and reputation indeed. The
perfect Architect indeed should be ignorant in no
Science; otherwise, if he do wel, it is by chance, or
els by nature, as beasts do, which do manie goodlie
things, and know not why, nor wherefore. He had
need be a Painter, to make his plaines, eleuations,
designes, and to copie-out a thousand rarities to please
the phantasie withal; a Geometrian, to handle the
compas, for the vse of Circles, rulers, squares, plummets,
and the like; To haue the Perspectiue, to let-in
lights into his house, to steale-in the day in certain
corners, to content the eye with diuers aspects; and
if not directly to introduce the Sunnie rayes, at least
obliquikly through reflexions; The Arithmetick, to
cast vp and calculate the charges he is at, to number
the materials and degrees that belong thereto; The
Historie: for al the enrichments of buildings, Armes,
statues, and other ornaments, are nothing els but
Historie, true and fayned, which if he knowes not,
he shal commit a thousand errours; To haue Philosophie,
to know the nature of beasts, the seas,

the elements, flowers, fruits, and al whatsoeuer in
nature; Astrologie and Phisick, in planting his house
in a holsome and sound climat, in choosing the best
Sun, a good wind, the purest ayre, holesome waters,
a faire and free prospect, a good situation for pleasure
and profit. This is certain, that al art is then in
truest perfectio^, when it may be reduced to some natural
Principle or other. For what are the most iudicious
Artizans, but the Mimiks of Nature? This same
in our House is seen, comparing it with the fabrick of
our natural bodies, wherin the high Architect of the
world hath displayd such skil as euen stupifyes the
human reason to enter into it: Where the Hart, as the
Fountain of life, is placed in the midle, for the more
equal communication of the vital spirits; the Eyes
seated aloft, to comprehend the greater circuit in
their view; the armes, proiected on each side for the
vse and commoditie of reaching; Briefly, the place
of euerie part, is determined by the vse. Wherefore,
the principal chambers of delight (as Studies and Libraries)
should be towards the East: for the Morning
is a friend to the Muses; Al offices requiring heat, as
Kitchins, Stil-houses, stoues, and roomes for baking,
brewing, washing, or the like, would be Meridional;
Al that needs a coole and fresh temper, as Cellars,
Pantries, Butteries granaryes, to the North;
and so likewise al Galleryes appointed for gentle
motion, especially in warme climes, to the West.



THE DISCOVRSE.
THe chiefest grace, splendour, and glorie of
a house,The Suruey. is, that the Maister therof, who
dwelles therin, be markable and illustrious
for singular and eminent vertues; since the
chiefest ornament of a house is, the vertue of the Lord
therof. Now then the blessed Virgin, being eternally
ordayned to be a House and habitation of the Diuine
Word Incarnate, and wherin the Holie of holies for nine
months, and the endles Fountaine of al sanctitie was
corporally to inhabite, this sacred House must borrow
needs so great a sple^dour and dignitie, as no other,
nor the Empyreal heauen itself, might anie wayes co^pare
with it. What more? Howbeit the glorie of that
ancient house and Temple of Salomon were great, yet
can none deny this defect in it, for being incapable
to hold the greatnes of GOD in its ample galleries and
spaces, euen by the genuin confession of Salomon himself:3. Reg. 8
If the Heauen and the Heauen of heauens can not containe
thee, how much lesse this house which I haue built? But the
golden house of the blessed Virgin, more capacious then
the heauens themselues,Ier. 31. Eccl. did close in and enco^pas the
greatnes of GOD on euerie side, as Ieremie sayth: A woman
shal encompas a ma^. And the holie Catholick Church
itself sings: Whom the Heauens can not containe, hast thou
held in thy Lap.
Besides that, which highly aduanceth and sets forth
the glorie of a house, this same prerogatiue is of no
smal moment, to haue been deciphered, delineated,
plotted, and contriued, and euen raysed and built from
the first foundatio^ by a skilful and exquisit Architect.
Behold GOD himself, the Supreme Architect, not only
designed this House, but euen finished it himself, and
brought the same to that eminent perfection,Prou. 86. it is of:
I haue been eternally ordayned. Behold the plotting, co^triuing,Psal. 86.

and designing of our House; The Highest himself hath
founded her, where note the foundation.
I know, how Ouid in his Metamorphosis describes the
house of the Sun very elegantly in this manner:
The Pallace of the Sun, on pillars highly placed,With burnisht gold did shine, and Pyrops stone,And seeling roofs with purest Iu'rie graced.
But who sees not, how this House heer, wherin the Sun
of Iustice dwelt, did farre exceed the same, whose
ornaments surpasseth those, by infinit degrees?
for whose golden pillars, were the Guifts of the
Holie-Ghost erected in her; for whose Pyropus or
Carbuncle, which euen glowes like a burning cole,
her most ardent Charitie abundantly supplyed; and for
the white and purest iuourie, her inuiolable and immaculate
Virginitie. Whence, while the most blessed
Virgin Marie more ple^tifully abounded with the guifts
of the Holie-Ghost, she burned more ardently with
Charitie; and in virginal puritie was more neat, then
the heauenlie Spirits themselues; surely more strong
and statelie Pillars sustained this house, more precious
Carbuncles enriched it, and purer Iuourie adorned it,
then those others did the Ouidian Pallace of the Sun.
I haue sanctifyed this House, which thou hast built, to put my
name eternally therin,3. Reg. 9. sayd GOD to Salomon, not being yet
(as I suppose) affected so to that material house, as he
pretended thereby rather to shew the loue he bare to
his spiritual house, and yet corporal both, of his Incomparable
Mother, whom he hath so sanctifyed with his
eternal predestination before, and enriched so with
his personal presence, to put his name eternally in
her. For that saying can not so wel be verified of the
house built by Salomon, which was afterwards demolished
and razed; but rather of Marie heer, who shal be

sayd and preached for euer, the Temple of GOD, the holie
House, where al glorie hath entred in, as to a chast
Bower, and which hath neuer been ruined like that of
Salomon; for that her foundations haue been planted in
the holie mountaines, as Dauid sayth, that is to say, by
the Diuine Perso^s of the Holie Trinitie; while the power
of the Father hath confirmed her in goodnes, the Sonne
hath illustrated her with Wisedome, and the Holie-Ghost
preserued and established her in his grace.
Material houses, which are built but of frayle matter
and tra^sitorie stuff,Iob. 4* diuersly fal to rubbage, and are soone
demolished quite, as Iob sayth: Who dwel in clay houses,
haue a terrene foundatio^. But the bodie of Marie, howbeit
otherwise framed of a frayle matter, is neuertheles so
consolidated and co^firmed through the fire of the Holie
Ghost, as she is subiect to no demolishment or dissolution
at al; and as she sayd in the Canticles, that leaning or
resting on her wel-beloued, she was strong as the mountaine
of Sion,Cant 2. hauing such confidence in him. So as truly
the prophecy of Aggeus was fully accomplished in her:Agg. 2.
That the glorie of the latter house should be greater then that of
the former. For as in the building of the first, was heard
no noyse or the least stroke of anie hammer: so heer
in this House of Marie, could not be heard so much as
the least sound or touch of Original Sinne, so built by
the Diuine Wisedome, who was a more expert Architect
by far, then Salomon was, of whom is verifyed that
which Dauid so long before had prophecyed and foretold:Ps. 111.
That glorie and riches should be in the house of the Diuine
Wisedome, and its iustice shal be perpetual.



THE EMBLEME.






THE POESIE.
HAu,The Pause. Who dwels heer? A Virgin. What are you?
A Paranymph sent far, am come to sue
For one that pilgrime-like would lodge this night
Vnder your roof, and be a mortal wight,
Comes as a Bride-groome. Heer's no harbouring seat.
But h'is a Monarch. Then for me too great.
H'is GOD. He now, and euer lodg'd with me.
Would be a child, your Sonne. How can this be?
By th' Holie-Ghost you shal be shadow'd ore;
You let him in by keeping closd your doore.
Then be it donne. One Fiat banisht night,
And now an other brings from heauen the Light.



THE THEORIES.
COntemplate first, that as in euerie House
wel built,The Contemplation. and orderly disposed, there
is a Dining-roome at least; and a hansome
chamber for some principal guest
to lodge in; so this gol^e^ House, the Mother
of GOD, which he had so eternally prepared for himself,
was not contriued without them both. And first
for the Dining-roome, King Salomon made him a
Throne of the wood of Libanus; which woode^ Throne
was the blessed Virgin, because the heauenlie Prince
and bride-groome sate and lay sweetly reposed in her
armes and wombe delightful vnto him, while he
took flesh of her. She was a Bride-chamber, because
a golden couch. For as gold is beautiful, incorruptible,
and refulgent: So was her vertue golden, because beautiful
for sinceritie of manners; incorruptible, through
priuiledge of Virginitie; and refulgent, for her luster
of Vertues. O how beautiful! behold the beautie of her
manners, Chast generation:Sap. 4. see the priuiledge of Virginitie;
With clarity: note the luster of Vertues.
Consider then, that as a House hath also Galleries
for recreation and delight, so had our Mystical House
heer, delicious galleries to walke in, and, for varietie,
three: to wit, the lower, the middle, and the vpper
gallerie. The lower was sustained with siluer pillars;
and therefore is it sayd, that wisedome erected siluer pillars.
The middle was paued with precious stones, according
to that: The middle was strewed with charitie. The
highest was hangd with silks and purples; and therefore
is added a purple ascent. The lower gallerie of
this virginal house, was the precious bodie of the
Virgin; the middle, her purest soule; and the highest,
her sublime and Angelical spirit. Her bodie was the
lower gallerie, because her sensualitie was neuer

prone to euil, but alwayes co^formable to reason. Her
soule, the second; because strewed with precious stones,
that is, Diuine vertues. Her Spirit was the vpper
gallerie, and adorned with purple ha^gings, for being so
enflamed with charitie, or wounded with the sorrow
of her Sonne's passion, or sprinckled with his bloud.
Ponder lastly, as a house, especially the Pallace of
Kings, requires to be spacious and ample; so was this
House, our Ladie, being the House of GOD, most spacious
and wide; according to that which the Church sings of
her: Whom the heauens can not containe, hast thou held in thy
lap. Secondly, wide and ample in co^passion, while she
receaues al, and refuseth none, into the bowels of her
mercie; receauing the tempted, in prtoecting them
from the snares of the Diuel; Sinners, in obtaining
mercie and grace for them; the Iust, in conseruing the^
in grace obtained; and lastly the Dying, in receauing
their soules into her protection: and therefore sayd
to be Mother of grace, and mother of mercie.


THE APOSTROPHE.
O Sacred House,The Colloquie. Temple of the Diuinitie, and Diuine Tabernacle
of the liuing GOD! A work surely much greater the^
the workma^ship of the world besides! O sacred Pallace framed by
the Diuine hand, with admirable art, and most exquisit and choice
matter; a peece of workma^ship without peer, erected by the Diuine
Wisedome, imputrible Arck incorruptible vessel, Celestial Te^ple,
Cittie of God.Psal. 86 Oh what glorious things are sayd of thee!
Thou wast ordained eternally,Eccl. 24. before the earth was made. The
Lord hath possessed thee fro^ the beginning of his wayes,Prou. 8.
and thou wast before his works. Thou wast begot,
when as yet there was no abysses seen; thou wast formed
before mou^taines were yet placed. Whe^ he prepared
the heaue^s, was thou prese^t. By al the se faire prerogatiues
we beseech thee, Inco^parable peece of his handie work so
lo^g designed and premeditated before ha^d, and so exactly framed at
last to his owne Idea and designe, that in vs likewise his eternal designe
of predestinatio^ through our defaults may not vtterly perish.




THE XVI. SYMBOL.
THE HEN.

THE DEVISE.






THE CHARACTER.
THE Hen is that gentle Hart, that contents
herself with the common Apellatiue
of her sex;The Impresae and as others ambitiously
vsurp strange titles, as in Hawkes, for
males or females (as the ma^ner is) to be
called Ladie, Mistris, and the like, she wil go no higher
then the stile of plaine Goodwif, and be called the Hen,
and wil take it amisse, to be termed otherwise. Yet is
she the dear consort of the generous Chantecler, and
his deerest beloued partner, and most indiuidual co^panion.
She is very familiar and domestical, and that

so truly as she wil neuer goe from home so much as
a flights shot. But is so kind-harted to al, especially
to her owne children, as she hath not a dish, which
she shares not among them. It is sport to see, how
she knocks to her dresser, to haue the^ come quickly,
if she haue but a bit worth the eating, and then to see
what strife there wil be amo^gst the litle fry of them,
for a single graine of corn, as the ambitious of the
world for a Crowne and scepter, or as Caesar and Pompey
for the Empire and Dictatourship of Rome itself; while
the Hen falles a deluing and digging afresh for more.
She wil be as fierce as a Tigre or Nemean Lionesse
against the assassinats, who are so bold at to seaze on
her familie, when she wil bristle her self and fly in
the faces of the cruelest Bandites that are of the la^d,
or Pirats of the ayre, on behalf of her brood; and
triumph as fast, if she come but handsomly off with
her owne. And then must al the world take notice of
her conquests, and she be recounting the same to her
deer consort, who wil swel therat and bristle as fast;
and euen menace the skyes in his greatestcholer. She
is no great Arithmetician, and hath but a shallow
memorie; for she neuer knowes, how manie yong she
hath; and so she haue anie at al, she is pleased alike. She
loues not her children so much, as the name of Mother;
which holds in one, as wel as a 100. She is not a
Castle, or Bulwark, which keep their stands attending
the assailants; but as a Pinck at sea, wel man'd,
wil meet and encounter the Aduersaries themselues,
and defye them to their teeth, and with the sayles of
her wings wil seeme to fetch the wind of them, to fly
the fuller into their faces. But if she be let alone, and
not prouoked, there is noe Doue more meek and
gentle them she.



THE MORALS.

TVTELA FIDISSIMA.

IT is hard to say,The Motto. which is better, to
giue protection to others, or to find
it for themselues; this am I sure of,
the first is more specious and glorious,
the latter more happie and secure.
It is sayd indeed: Beatius est dare
quam accipere, because it is supposed, who hath to giue,
hath otherwise no need to craue, wherin the beatitude
consists; wheras who finds protection now, was of
late in distresse, or feare of danger; so as though he
hath the happines now, to dry vp his waterie eyes,
yet not the priuiledge, to haue them neuer to dry. To
giue protectio^, inuolues a power to be able to afford
it; to take the same, implyes a necessite to recurre
vnto it: the first hath a kind of obligation with it, if
not of iustice, of charitie at least, to yeald his succours:
in which estate he euer stands, and co^sequently
in a state of seruitude, because obliged. But the seco^d
discouers his impotencie only, and present il condition;
but yet with a hope of enfranchizment, and a
kind of title vnto it; yea manie times an absolute
freedome and quite discharge of further cares. The
truth is, howsoeuer the first, as it is more honourable,
so is it more happie, and as approaching neerer to the
soueraigne excellencie of GOD himself, is acquit fro^
anie imperfection of seruile obligation; but al what
is, is meerly a goodnes in him, that seemes to put the
obligation vpon him, which is no more indeed, then
a kind of vertue in him, that makes him so prompt
and readie to help the miserable in al necessities.

This excelle^cie and singular priuiledge the glorious
Vrgin hath, of power, to protect; and of beneuolence, to
haue the wil to protect; with the happines besides of
an infallible efficacie in al whatsoeuer she vndertakes.
And therefore is she implored of al, and held to
be the common Sanctuarie of the necessitous that fly
vnto her, and especial Patronesse and sure Protectrice
of her Deuotes, and by consequence rightly and deseruedly
called: TVTELA FIDISSIMA.


THE ESSAY.
THE Cock is very glorious,The Reuiew. when he hath
al his attires and accoutrements about
him; for then he wil strout it, as a souldier
right; he buckles himself against his
enemies, and with his wing making a
target or buckler, defends, couers, and shroudes the
chickens from the assaults of the Rauen; and falles a
quarrelling with euerie one, either friend or so, that
approches or but looks vpon them. And for the Hen
herself, before she layes her egs, as others doe, she begins
to prouide and take care for her lying downe.
For she chooses her a quiet place to breed in, and
builds a neast or couch to sit in, and makes it very
soft, as knowing wel her egs would bruise and destroy
one an other, if they be not commodiously and
handsomly layd. Her yong are no sooner hatched,
but she presently clucks them with her wings, least
the cold or sharper ayre should hurt them; and is so
tender of them, as that if a Kite or Wesel come in
sight of her, receauing them vnder the shaddow of
her wings, she opposes herself as a stout champion
against them, with a great clamour and outcry, to

strike a terrour into them, defending them herself
with spurre, bill, and wings, with might and mayne,
so as she wil rather euen dye in the place in defence
of her brood, then by flying away leaue them in anie
danger. To some she wil present her wings to cluck
beneath, to others yeald her back to mount vpon,
nor hath she anie part about her, which she is not
willing to afford them what she may, to cherish and
conserue them; nor that truly without ioy and alacritie,
as appeares by their kackle and tone they haue
at such times. When she is alone, and hath no more to
care for then herself, she trembles at the Hawke and
buzard, and wil fly away from them; but if she haue
yong, and espy anie danger neer, she comes forth
like a Lion against them in their defence, and fights
oftentimes far beyond her forces.


THE DISCOVRSE.
NOW is this Hen truly a gallant
Symbol of the fruitful Mother of
GOD,The Suruey. as wel for the plentie of
egs she layes (for they wil lay,
some two, and some three a day)
as also for breeding so each moneth
of the yeare, whereof
though Aristotle and Plinie except
the two winter-moneths, yet experience shewes and
some Authours affirme, they wil lay also in those moneths,
and some there are, that wil lay two a day euen
in those moneths likewise; which surely is a great fecunditie,
not lightly found in anie fowle besides. For
lo, the blessed Virgin hath a double fecunditie with
her, one natural, and the other mystical: the natural, in
bringing forth CHRIST, whose natural Mother she was;

and being his Mother, she was Mother in a sorte to as
manie, as are called an are truly Christians: whilst of
this one her seed became multiplied beyond the
Starres in heauen, and aboue the sands, that lye on the
Sea-shores. But what shal I say of her mystical fruitfulnes,
which euen filles and embraceth the whole
world, that inuocates and calles vpon the name of
MARIE, as their common Mother? Behold al the kingdomes
therof, and al the ample Prouinces, and you
shal find them ful of her Deuotes and Children. Nor
is Hungarie only her proper damilie, which title she
hath taken, and yet holds from the donation of S.
Stephen King of that Nation, who freely and deuoutly
once consecrated the same to the Mother of GOD; but
euen our England is knowne also by the name and title
of our Ladies Dowrie: Yea Erance, Spayne, Italie, and Germanie,
and the rest of the Kingdomes and Prouinces
of the world, whose affection and deuotio^ is no lesse
to this common Parent, our Incomparable Ladie, the
Mother of GOD. But nothing demonstrates her spiritual
secunditie so much as the innumerable multitude
of Families of the Sodalitie o^ her Immaculate Conception,
the true Parthenian Children of our sacred Parthenes.
For in how short a time, throughout al Europe first, and
then through America, the new world, the Indies as wel
the East as West, haue Sodalities of al sorts and conditions
whatsoeuer either Secular or Ecclesiastical been instituted,
vnder the soueraigne and most blessed name
of MARIE? which with al obseruance and due worship
serue her as the Mother of GOD, and their common Parent:
while they doubt not by her meanes to be led
and conduced to a better life, and to obtaine Eternal
saluation, if they serue her truly indeed, and but obserue
the Rules of her said Sodalities.
Besides the propertie, the Hen hath to defend her

chickens, during life, this is singular in her, that
euen after death, she is soueraigne and medicinal
for infinit diseases, and her bodie the choycest diet
for the sick and infirme. And therefore is the Cock
consecrated to Esculapius the Inuentour of Physick.
And for our Ladie, what need I say more then that
versicle of her Litanies: Salus Infirmorum? because she
procures health both of bodie and soule. For is there
a disease in anie part of the bodie of ma^, euen running
through the whole Catalogue of maladies, whereto
present remedie hath not been begd and obtained of
our mysterious Hen, the soueraigne Mother of GOD? O
what a thing it were to reckon vp the Te^ples and Chapels,
and therin the Votes, tables, and waxen images set
vp as testimonies of her infinit cures! Nor helps she
the bodie more the^ the soule. For Pride she heales no
lesse, the^ the head-ach; Vanitie no lesse, the^ the vertigo or
turning of the head; Wrath no seldomer the^ the fre^zie;
Slouth, the^ the Lethargie: Ignora^ce as easily, as the Pin
and web in the eye; Lust, as the disease belonging to it:
Gluitonie, as the Consumption: and Auarice, as the dropsie.
There is yet another thing which I note in the Hen,Arist l. 9. c. 49.
not so much out of Aristotle, as by experience, though
Aristotle hath it likewise: that the Hen is a great scraper
in the dust, which especially they do for three causes:
as wel by busking therinto satisfy the itching they
haue in the^selues, and to me^d their plumes and feathers,
as also to shakeoff the veni^ about the^. Our Hen likewise
most willingly busked and rould herself in herdust and
ashes also. Dust is the beginning of huma^ generatio^, and
the origin of our vile extractio^; and Ashes the verie Epilogue
therof: whence both are the Symbol of our
birth and end; and the^ce Humilitie. Al me^ are earth and ashes.
Why art thou proud, thou earth and ashes?Ec. 19. In these cogitations
and the like,Ec^. 10. as in a heap of dust, the most Blessed

Virgin continually volued herself, reuoluing nothing
so much in mind, as her dust and proper extraction.
Whence that: Behold the handmayd of our Lord. God hath
regarded the lowlines of his hand mayd.
But how then, O mysterious Hen, louest thou dust
so wel, hating al fowlnes and sordities so much?
Feltst thou the itching of Vanitie a whit, that thou
shouldst scrape in that sort? No, not the least itching
of vaine ostentation infested thee, the immaculate
Virgin. Or wouldst thou haue pranckt thy quils and plumage
of supernal affects? It was not needful, since
they were without anie lets to hinder them at al. Or
was thy intention, to shake off at least any euil cogitations?
Not so likewise; no such thing had euer
accesse or ingresse into that purest mind. No
temptation of arrogancie, ostentation, or pride
could euer find admittance there. But truly, this it
was; thou louedst Humilitie, which thou knewest to
be gratful and acceptable to thy Sonne, which could
no where more appeare, then in the dust of human
nullitie, then in the ashes of mortalitie, and thy proper
annihilation. An other reason may be also, why
thou diggest so in the dust of thy Nothing: to find, as
Hens are wont in the dust, some food more acceptable
to them; for this is a maine cause likewise of
their so frequent scraping in the dust; and who knowes
perhaps, whether they may not light on a gemme
or no? for so it hath been knowne. The most humble
Virgin Marie indeed euen nourished herself with
humilitie, as a most sauourie food vnto her; this she
supposed to lye in the dust of her proper abiection;
and therefore with clawes of consideration, neuer
left she digging and scraping it forth; nor was she
anie whit deceaued; the earth of her abstraction,
gaue her abundantly to feed most deliciously. And

which is more, she found, in so doing, the precious
gemme indeed, which was so enamoured with her
humilitie, as he euen stoopt into the dust, to be
there found by this mysterious and blessed Hen.


THE EMBLEME.






THE POESIE.
NO mother,The Pause. like the Hen, preserues her yong,
Protects, and shelters with her wings; her tongne
Is clucking with a sad and doleful note;
Call's back her chickens, when they are remote;
And if they come not, chides sharp, shril, and lowd;
With beck and tallions fights for them. Thus shrow'd,
OVirgin Mother, while the Puttock flies,

(The Prince of darknes) who with watchful eyes
Seekes for my Soule, his prey. The Hen is knowne,
Careful of al. Yet if she hath but one,
Her care's as great. So's thine of one, or other.
Then to me Sinner, shew thy self a mother.


THE THEORIES.
COntemplate first, the great magnanimitie
of the Hen,The Contemplation. in defence of her chickens,
as aboue sayd. And then reflect
vpon the courage and fortitude of our
victorious Patronesse, the glorious Virgin,
especially in the protection likewise of her Children;
for to her enemies is she terrible as a battail wel arrayed.
As an armie wel marshalled, is a terrour to the
enemies, and makes them fly at the sight thereof,
before they enter into fight: so are the Diuels danted
at the presence of this inuincible Champion, standing
in defence of her Clients and Children.
Consider then, the great compassion of the Hen
towards her yong; which appeares in this, that with
the sick and infirme, she wil be infirme; she is so sollicitous
in feeding them, as she finds not a graine, but
she calles them to her, to participate therof: And
for her care of preseruing them from danger, she
clucks them vnder her wings, from the rapin of the
kites, and the like rauenous fowle. And then weigh
withal the tender compassion the Virgin-Mother hath
euer shewen towards vs her Children and Seruants,
in being so sollicitous to feed vs, while she was on
earth, with the food of her doctrine: She hath opened
her mouth in wisedome, and the law of clemencie in her toung;
and for custodie,Pro. 31. how she hides vs vnder her wings,
and protects vs from the snares of the Diuel. For this

is she,Ap. 12. to whom was sayd, that two great wings were giuen
her: The one, the wing of Mercie, to which Sinners
do fly to be reconciled to GOD; according to the
Prophet: Protect me vnder the shadow of thy wings; The
other, that of Grace, vnder which the Iust remaine,
to be conserued in grace, and may say with him likewise:
She hath shadowed vs with her shoulders.
Ponder lastly, how the Hen not only sits vpon her
owne egs, but sometimes strangers likewise, as the
egs of Ducks and pea-hens, put into her nest, which
being hatched, the Ducks according to kind wil betake
themselues to the waters, and there diue and
plunge themselues ouer head and eares; and the
yong pea-hens enamoured with their owne beautie
wil forsake their tender nurse that bred them vp.
And then weigh withal, how manie strange and vngratful
children our mysterious Hen, the admirable
Virgin, cherishes and nurse; with her daylie protection,
who requite her il for al her care in trayning
them vp.



THE APOSTROPHE.
O Queen of Angels, saluted hy the Archangel,The Colloquie. adored
by the Powers of Heauen, Mistrisse of Vertues, Dutchesse
of Principalities, Ladie of Dominations, Princesse
of Thrones, more highly aduanced then the Cherubins
themselues, more enflamed with ardour os Diuine loue,
then al the Seraphins; The first next to God, the second in the
Role or Register of the Predestinate: Thou most terrible to thy
foes, as an Host wel arrayed; and yet infirme with the infirme,
as a Hen amid her chickens, most tender of them, and a most sure
bulwark for them, against al incursions and assaults of forren
and domestick enemies, either visible or inuisible. O thou, who
through thy Sonne, and thy matchles humilitie, hast crushed
the Serpent's head: through thy holie prayer and intercession, I
beseech thee, let Sathan be trampled likewise, vnder thy Seruants
feet. O grant this same, mysterious and Indulgent Bird
of Paradice.




THE XVII. SYMBOL.
THE PEARL.

THE DEVISE.






THE CHARACTER.
THE Pearl, or Margaret, the Lillieamo^g Iewels,
is the peerlesse Gemme of Nature,The Impresa so much
happier then the rest, as nobler descended
then they: this being bred in the womb of the sea,
and they in the bowels of the earth. If they be stillicides
from Heauen (as some think) they are the milkie
drops distilled from Iuno's breast, which Sol parcheth
into seeds; which seeds empearle in those
litle Ouens lying on the beach. The Diamant that
sparcles so, though rich indeed, arriues not to that

wealth without trade, and exercise of the Ieweller,
in passing the file and chizel, wheras the Pearl needs
none of those to raise its fortunes by, but is truly
borne a Ptince. They are the ordinarie companions
of the greatest Ladies, and so chast as they wil be
dandling in their necks, without sensualitie in
themselues, or those they dallie with, without iea^ousie
of anie. They are true Subsidie-men, and such
Sureties indeed, as their credit wil be taken for as
much as they are worth. If you would epitomize an
ample estate, and put the same into a litle Compendium,
with Bias to carrie your wealth about you, sel what
you haue, and put it into Pearl. If you haue anie suit
in Court, it wil purchase greater friends, and procure
you better preferments, then the best deserts.
Like a pin and web, it wil put out the eyes of Linceus
himself, not to see what he should. It is the key, that
wil set open the Iayle to the worst conditions; and
the bolt to shut vpon the best deseruings. What ciuil
warres could neuer effect, the Pearl or Vnion hath infallibly
brought to passe, to wit, the ruine of that
great Triumvirat, being disunited or dissolued:
what would it then haue done, if vnited? It is called
Oriental, as much to say, as it makes al men to arise
vnto it, to do it homage: and wil make you more
place in a throng of people, of meer respect, then a
rufling Whifler shal do with torch in hand. In fine,
it is a rich Treasurie of rarities enclosed in a box
of Pearl.



THE MORALS.

PRECIOSA ET CAELESTIS.

RAre things are likely precious,The Motto. and
precious rare: not that scarcitie alone
should set the price, or price and valew
make them rare; but that the ordina^ce
of GOD is such, to haue them so, that
things which are excellent in themselues, should be
rare and scarce to be found, that pearls (for worth)
might not be cast to swine, or trampled vnder foot.
Monsters are rare indeed, and yet most hateful, and
prodigious. It is the worth then that giues the price
to things. The Sybils Books were valued lesse being
nine, then when they were but three; not for the
plentie of the nine, or scarcitie of the three; but to
let Tarquinius see, the true estimate and value of each
one; and had he not perhaps taken her at last at her
word, as he did, he had payd as much for one alone,
as for the nine, or gone without it. Yea gold itself,
were it as common happely as manie other things
are of litle worth, would yet be in as great esteeme
as now it is, through a certain excellence it hath in
itself aboue others. And therefore S. Iohn did very
wel, to dresse vp GOD al in gold, and paue the Paradice
of ioyes with the same: for otherwise, do I
feare, that manie an one, would neuer haue had
anie great thirst after it; who perhaps would
better haue liked the horns of Lucifer, tipt
with gold, then those of the Moon with siluer,
or the burning cristal of the Sun. Who would thinke,
that a peece of earth, taken, as it were, with the

disease of the yelow Iaundise, being no more indeed
then a yelow earth, a glittering Stone, a kind of froth
boyling from Hel, should haue such a power vpon
reasonable men? So as wel it may seeme, to be the
Golden Age, since al is set vpon gold; they wish but
gold, they speake or thinke of nothing els but gold,
when lo, the Gold of gold, the precious Margarit of
Pearls, is truly valuable indeed, the Incomparable
Virgin-Mother, I meane, who is either the Pearl itself,
or Mother of the true Oriental Pearl, which descended
from heauen, and therefore is worthily called: PRECIOSA
ET CAELESTIS.


THE ESSAY.
THE true Pearl hath a luster of siluer with
it, which wil not soyle a whit, nor wax yellow;The Reuiew.
its skin feares no nipping of the
frosts, nor the tooth of Time. It is bred in
the Sea, and seemes to disdayne the fare of its Hostesse,
the Scallop, wherin it is a prisoner, while it takes
its food from the heauens, and hath its whole
alliance with them. They vse to counterfeit the same
in a thousand manners with glasse, and aboue al, with
the Mother-Pearl, in beating it to powder, and making
a past therof, and then causing pigeons to let it
downe, which with their natural heat do boile
and polish it in the manner it is, and then put it
forth againe. The Mother-pearl engenders from the
heauens, and liues but of celestial Nectar, to bring
forth her Pearl withal, either siluer, pale, or yelowish,
according as the Sun makes it, or the ayre, whence it
feeds, be more or lesse pure. Receauing then the deaw
of Heauen into the gaping shel, it formes litle
graines or seeds within it, which cleaue to its sides,
then grow hard, and geale, as it were: and so Nature

by litle and litle polishes them through fauour of
the Sunnie beames, and at last they become the
Oriental Pearls; and as the Deaw is greater or lesse, the
Pearls become the bigger and fayrer. The Pearl in
powder, is good in a manner for al maladies. It
growes not only in the flesh of the fish, but in the
mother itself, or shel without the fish. It is tender
within the mother, but growes hard as soone as taken
out of the water. The greatest gallantrie of Ladies,
is to haue them dangling at their eares by half
dozens, whence are they called Cymbals; they wil
say likewise: a faire Pearl in the eare, is as good as an
Vsher to make them way in a presse. Cleopatra wore
two of them, which were worth a million and a half;
wherof one she swallowed downe, being first dissolued
by vinagre.


THE DISCOVRSE.
IF you look now into the mysteries
of al natural Secrets,The Reuiew. you shal find
none to symbolize better with the
Virgin Marie, this Margarit of ours,
then this same Pearl or precious Margarit
of the Sea: if especially we regard
but the names only, wherewith they are stiled,
the one of Marie, the other of Margarit, and both hauing
so great alliances with the Seas: the one being,
amarum mare, a bitter sea: and the other, as wholy
borne and bred in the seas; the one importunatly
begd and obtayned of GOD, by Anna her Mother:
and the other, as greedily gaped-after from the Heauens,
and especially from the Sun, by the Mother of
Pearl, so properly called by like, for her motherlie and
maternal appetite to engender and bring forth; and

we al know, what Pearls of sanctitie are lightly
brought into the world, with so great importunities.
But if we looke into the other congruities
between them, we shal find them to sympathize so,
as we may wel tearme our Virgin-Mother, a Pearl or
Margarit of the Heauens, as the other of the
Seas.
The Margarit, as I sayd, is bred in the Sea; which
Isidor affirmes, and that in this manner. At certain
times of the yeare, to wit, in the Spring and Autumne,
the cockles, oysters, or scollops, or cal them what
you wil, approach to the Sea-shore, and lye there gaping,
and opening themselues, and receaue the
celestial deaw into their bowels; from the coagulation
wherof, as abouesayd, are the Margarits engendred.
Now this Shelfish, oyster, or Mother-Pearl
(for the Mother, or issue Pearl, are al of a substance,
as mothers and embrions vse to be) is the Virgin-Mother-Pearl
it self, which opened her Virginal soule,
at her mysterious Annunciation, in the Spring of the
yeare, by the quiet shore of her tacit and silent
contemplation, to receiue the heauenlie Deaw, the
new Margarit: that is, to conceaue that precious
Pearl, Christ Iesus, in her womb. For she opened her
consent, to the great Angel, her singular Paranimph,
to obey GOD in al things, saying: Behold the handmayd
of our Lord, etc. and her soule likewise to the
Holie-Ghost, to ouershadow her: and after the opening
thus of her free consent, and her Angelical soule, the
Celestial deaw of the Holie-Ghost descended into her,
and so this infant-Pearl was diuinely begot in the
virginal womb of the Virgin-mother - Pearl. Of
which deawing of the Holie-Ghost, and opening of
the Blessed Virgin therevnto, it is prophetically sayd:

Deaw you heauens thervpon,Isay. 45 and let the clouds rayne
downe the Iust; let the earth open and bring forth the
Sauiour.
These Pearls besides, if they be right Margarits
indeed, are faire, white, and cleer; for such as are so,
are truly of the best, and a great deale better then
those which are dimmer, and of a yellow and duskish
coulour. For those which are faire, white, and cleer,
are bred of the morning-deaw; and the others, of thar
which falles in the euenings. And our Incomparable
Margarit, was predestinate so from the morning of
the eternal Decree in Heauen, so created, as it were,
ab initio and ante secula, while the other pearls of lesse
regard were only produced in the euening, after
that sinne was brought into the world.
This Margarit therefore so faire, so white, and cleer,
signifyes our heauenlie Margarit and glorious Virgin,
who was beautiful and faire in mind through a
more then Angelical puritie of hers consisting in the
mind; most snowie and white in bodie, through an
immaculate chastitie and virginitie; and cleer and
sincere in works, through a simple sanctitie, and
Saintlie simplicitie in al her actions, in the whole
course of her blessed and incomparable life, which
she led on earth.
I sayd aboue, that Pearls being stampt and beat to
powder are holesom, soueraigne, and medicinal
for manie maladies; wherof I find the Naturalists
chiefly to reckon three: First, they are purgatiue,
because they purge and euacuate the bodie of al
noxious and superfluuous humours; secondly, restrictiue,
staying the flux of bloud or venter; and thirdly,
they comfort and corroborate the hart, being readie
to faynt or swoune through debilitie of the spirits,

or the vital parts. To these infirmities, the applications
of these pownded Pearls so beat to powder, are
of singular auayle. In this manner the Blessed Virgin,
being seriously pressed with importunitie of prayers,
and often vrged and called vpon with incessant
vowes, relenting and mollifyed at last, as fallen
into powder, applyes herself, first through a purgatiue
power to purge vs of our sinnes, by procuring
vs the grace of Contrition, and the holesome
Sacrament of Pennance, to bewayle and purge our
sinnes past; secondly, with her restrictiue vertue,
to restraine the soule from flowing and falling againe
into future sinnes; and thirdly, with her restoratiue,
comfortatiue, and corroboratiue power,
to strengthen and fortify the hart, in present occasions
of sinnes.


THE EMBLEME.







THE POESIE.
A Rare and precious Pearl is hardly found,
That's Great, and Heauie, Smooth, pure-white and Round.The Pause.
The Sonne of God came from his heauenlie Throne,
Factour for Pearles, aet last found such an one.
Great, to containe himself; and Heauie, ful of grace.
And therefore sunck vnto a Handmayds place.
Smooth without knob of Sinne. Virgin pure-white.
Round in perfection, more then mortal wight.
This pleas'd his eye; a long time hauing sought,
Gaue al that ere he had, and this he bought.
Vnion's a Pearle (no twinnes) it-self, but one;
Such was the Virgin-Mother Paragon.


THE THEORIES.
COntemplate first, how this Pearl or
Margarit is vsually called,The Contemplation. as we sayd,
by the name of Vnion; whether it be
for the great vnion and sympathie
there is, between the Mother and the
Pearl, I know not; for you can not
mention the Mothers name, but needs must you
bring-in the Pearl withal: or for the vnion of the
Celestial deaw, with the Conchal nature, to make
vp a Pearl, in the lap of the fish, I wil not say: this I am
sure of, that our blessed Pearl heer is called Deipara,
as much to say, as the Mother of GOD; nor can she be so
called a Mother, as she is, but GOD must needs be vnited
to her, to make vp her name.
Consider then, that as the Mother-pearl, being otherwise

only a meer shel-fish of its owne nature, and of
no greater a ranck then a playne oyster of the Sea:
yet through the appetite she had to suck, and draw
in the heauenlie deaw into her bowels, obtained the
especial priuiledge and prerogatiue, to become indeed
the Mother of the true oriental Pearl. So the virgin-mother,
though she were, as she sayd herself, the sillie
handmayd of our Lord, and of our human nature,
subiect to the natural fray leties therof; yet through
a singular immunitie with the puritie of her
intention, integritie of bodie, and Angelical candour
of mind, disposing herself most affectuously and
ardently indeed, to receaue the Celestial deawes fro^
heauen, that is, the grace of perfect Vnion with GOD,
in her pure soule, she deserued to become the Mother
of the Pearl of Pearles, sweet IESVS.
Ponder lastly, that if a meer Pearl, being so basely
bred in an oyster-shel, whose extract at the best is
but meer Deawes let fal from the nether Region of
the Ayre, and those but drops of fresh water, as it
were impearled in the fish, through benefit of the
Sun should come to be so highly prized as we haue
sayd, being no more then a meer seed of Pearl somwhat
fairer then the rest of that kind; how are we to prize
and magnify, trow you, our heauenlie Pearl heer,
whether you meane the Pearl, or Mother herself? the
Pearl himself, for being such a Pearl so truly descending
from heauen; and her, for being the Mother
of such a Pearl.



THE APOSTROPHE
MOST sweet, most debonnaire Virgin-Mother,The Coll^quie. the Immaculate through emphasis,
the Mother of faeyre dilection, Mother
of Iesus, regard me poore wretched soule,
and obtaine, that my hart and affection be
pure and clean, at least like the seed pearl,
according to the proportion of my litlenes, and my bodie wholy
free, from the duskish blemishes of the least sinnes, and that by
day and night my thoughts being repurged from al immundicities
and vncleane obiects, the flourishing bed of my Fancie,
may neuer be soyled more, to offend thine eyes, and those of
the Immaculat Pearl of thy womb, the Spouse of my soule,
CHRIST IESVS.




THE XVIII. SYMBOL.
THE DOVE.

THE DEVISE.






THE CHARACTER.
THE Doue is the true and perfect type of
Loue;The Impresa let them but change caps with
each other, and the Doue shal be Loue,
and Loue a Doue. If Venus betake her to
her Chariot, she is drawne with the
teame of foure of them, as Poets say. This are we sure
of, the Holie-Ghost, the essential Diuine loue, hath
been seen to appeare, as carried with Charitie, in the
forme and figure of a Doue. The Doues are neuer in
their proper element more, nor better pleased, then

in digging them holes in the rock, and planting
their litle pauillions there. And the Eyes (the Agents of Loue)
like a payre of twin-like Doues haue set vp
their rests, and built their nests, as it were, in the
hollow concaues of the browes, in seruice of Loue.
The Doue is the trustie messenger, or winged Post of
the Ayre, that carries letters to and fro, in matters
of the greatest importance; which she fayles not to
deliuer with the hazard of her life, nor euer misseth,
but it costs her the best bloud of her bodie. She is
euen an arrow, and verily as swift as it, but without
a steelie head to hurt withal, as hauing no gaule
within her, or curstnes in the bil. She is a very sociable
creature, and apt for Citties; witnes their
Douecots, where they liue in great peace and neighbourhood
togeather; and not of feare, as some, do
they flock togeather in great troupes, but meerly of
loue and charitie one to an other. She is very abstemious
and religious in her dyet, and wil not feed on
those flesh-pots of Egipt, that first came-in with that
Patriark and second Parent of our kind; contenting
herself with bread alone, allowed euen from Adam's
time, who tilled and ploughed the first of anie. She is
hot by nature, and yet of condition a Moyses for meeknes,
and euen the verie Lamb of birds; if not so able
to cloath our nakednes with her wool as he, yet surely
she would, if she could; yet euer readie and
prompt to lodge vs in her downes. And when she can
not stead vs otherwise, she wil afford her bodie, to be
sacrificed by vs, as an entire holocaust of her good
nature.



THE MORALS.

IN FORAMINIBVS PETRAE.

WHO wil giue me the wings of a Doue (the
Prophet sayth) and I wil fly and rest?
The Doue would fly,The Motto. and then rest:
fly in the exercise of al vertues, and
then rest in the contemplation of the
Diuine attributes; or fly in the meditation
of our Sauiour's life, and then rest in the deep contemplation
of his bitter passion; fly in reading the
Diuine Scriptures, that point vs the Rock; and rest
in digging in the holes of the said Rock, the blessed
stigmats of his venerable and sacred wounds. For
Reading indeed, though it much auayle to lead vs
to the Rock, yet diues not so deep into the Rock, as
serious Meditation doth; and Meditation though it
dig into the Rock, yet dwels not so quietly there,
nor rests so sweetly in the Rock, as a deep Contemplation
doth; while Reading regards but the shel
only, that is, brings to the Rock; Meditation, the
kernel, that is, digs into the Rock; but Contemplation
swallowes and relisheth the kernel, that is, dwels
and sets vp its rest in the Rock. Reading looks but
superficially therinto; Meditation bores and enters
into it; but Contemplation diues and sounds into
the depth. Reading exhibits the breasts of the Mother-Church,
in opening the books of the Old and
New Testament; but Meditation, and more Contemplation,
wrings them, to fetch out the milk to
nourish withal. Reading crops off the eares of corne;
and Meditation and Contemplation, as with the fingar
and thumb, wrings out the grayne; then grinds

it to meal, til it comes to be bread and food of men.
And this the tender and compassionate Mother did,
who flying, like to the Doue, al the time of her life,
neuer rested herself, til finding her Sonne, become a
Rock of scandal and reproch, aud piteously bored
on euerie side, she enters into them, and dwelles
within them; and if you ask her, where she is, might
very wel answer: IN FORAMINIBVS PETRAE.


THE ESSAY.
THE Doue, the Mercurie of birds, the faythful
Messenger of Noe,The Reuiew. the friend to the
Oliue, hath properly no coulour of her
owne to know or distinguish her by; so
is she vniuersal for al; in this only she is
singular aboue the rest, that being of what coulour
soeuer, her neck being opposed to the Sun wil diuersify
into a thousand coulours, more various then
the Iris it-self, or that Bird of Iuno in al her pride;
as scarlet, cerulean, flame-coulour, and yealding a
flash like the Carbuncle, with vermilion, ash-coulour,
and manie others besides, which haue no
name, but as you borrow them from other things.
And though she be neuer so chast, innocent, and
loyal to her mate, yet can she not auoyd his iealousie.
Which you may see, and it is a pleasant contemplation
to note the while, when the Cock
returns to his Douecot, how, discouering his iealousies,
his litle breast wil swel vp to the bignes of
his bodie; then with the voice to break forth into
a hoarse and angrie note; by and by to walke in state,
as it were, and encompas his mate about; and
with the shew of a wrothful Nemesis, rake the ground,
with the swift trayling and strotting of his trayne,

and that you may not doubt but he is angrie indeed
with the pecking of his bil, and strokes of his wings
he persecutes the poore wretch, deseruing it not. Yet
she abides very patient to al, nor is troubled a whit
at his causeles indignation, proceeding out of vehemence
of loue; she flyes not away to shun him,
and withdraw herself, but rather approaches neerer
and closer to him; she returns not blow for blow
againe, but meekly endures and suffers al; vntil the
diuturnitie of sufferance and her meeknesse do vanquish
and mollify the choler and fiercenes of the furious
thing. And so at last the Cock forgetting his
suspicion, is quite tamed; and laying the enemie aside,
puts on the Louer, returns to reconciliation of
friendship againe; and the ioyning of their bils togeather,
with more ardent affection, renewes the
same, as the flame is encreased with the sprinckling
of frigid drops theron. She is a meek creature, and
hath no gaule; she feeds on no liuing thing; she brings
vp others yong, she makes choice of the purest grayne,
she builds in the rocks, she hath groanes for singing
notes, and sits very willingly by the waters side,
that she may suddenly shun the haw ke foreseen by his
shadow therin; and a thousand other qualities besides.



THE DISCOVRSE.
NOW then, as the Doue builds her
nest not in trees nor on the earth,The Suruey.
but in the holes and concauities
of the Rock, not so curious as
some birds be, to plaister and
trim vp their nests, or to seeke
for the softest downes to prepare
their beds with, against the hatching
of their yong: So our Ladie, the mystical Doue
we treat of, built not a whit, nor placed her hart, in
the baser earth of terrene desires, nor in the higher
thrones of princelie Maiesties, but eue^ in the wounds
and passions of her dearest Sonne. Arise, my friend, make
hast,Can^. 20. my Doue; I say, make hast, and come into the holes of the
rock, where our Doue is sayd to inhabit. In the holes
of the rock, I say, because in her thoughts and remembrance
was she stil conuersant and lodged, as it
were, in the wounds of Christ. Or we may say, and not
vnaptly to, that Christ had sundrie nests, to wit, the
Crib, the Crosse, and his Sepulcher or monument. In
these nests now of Christ, our Doue would ofte^ inhabit,
because she would often visit these places with incredible
ardour and deuotions. Of which opinio^ is doubtles
S. Hierom,S. Hier. thoughhe say, perhaps: Perhaps, sayth he,
through excesse of loue she is sayd to haue dwelt in
the place, where her Sonne was buryed. For one
hardly would beleeue, how much internal loue and
affection is fed with looks.
The Doue againe feeds not on the flesh of other fowles
and birds, as some do, but of the graynes of corne,
and that the select and most choice of al. Nor was our
Doue, the blessed Virgin, affected or giuen to terrene

and worldlie things, but to Celestial and eternal;
she fed not on the flesh-pots of Egipt, nor yet of
Manna, being but only the bread of Angels, but rather
fed of the Bread of life, the thing represented by
that Manna, she fed on the sweet thoughts of the Diuine
Word it self Incarnate in her womb,Ioan. 10. and fed of
that grayne of corne, wherof it is sayd: Vnles the grayne
of corne falling into the earth be mortifyed and dy etc. This
grayne of corne refreshes and satiats; and therin may
signify our Sauiour Christ, according to the Psalmist:
He satiats thee with the fat of corne;Isay. 63. and hath rednes
without, in regard wherof may it signify the flesh
of Christ; agreable to that: How red is thy garment etc:
and besides is white within, and expresseth the
soule,Sap. 7. which is fulgent and bright with the candour
and splendour of puritie; For indeed it is the candour
of light, And therefore in the Canticles the Virgin sayth:
My heloued is white and red, and chosen of a thousand; White,
for his blessed and diuinifyed soule;Cant. 3. red, for his
precious flesh, embrued with is bloud; and the choice
of a thousand, for his soueraigne and supreme Diuinitie.
This Doue then fed of such a grayne, because
she was wholy and fully delighted with the Diuinitie
and the Humanitie of Christ.
And for her groanes, the ordinarie musick
of the Lyre of her hart, they were the lamentable
and sad accents, which the Passion of her deer Sonne
had caused in her. For lo, this Doue with the rest
of that desolate and mourning flight of Maries, her
fellow-doues, did nothing els, but sigh and
groane, in beholding the onlie Pearl of doues, her
deerest Sonne, in so piteous a plight, so hampered
and entangled in the fowler's nets. Like Doues
that meditate, they groned sore, as the Prophet sayth,

especially this Doue aboue the rest, the incomparable
Virgin-Doue, being the natural Dam and parent of the
poore distressed one, most sadly powring forth a
floud of teares without measure. Whence S. Anselm
sayth in a certain place:S. Anselm. My most merciful Ladie, what
fountains may I say brake forth of thy purest eyes,
when thou sawest thy onlie innocent Sonne to be
scourged, bound, and so cruelly entreated before thee,
and the flesh of thy flesh so mangled in thy sight?
what groanes shal I imagin thy breast sent forth the
while, when thou heardst him say: Woman, behold thy
Sonne; and agayne: Behold thy mother? For she could not
see her Sonne to be so crucifyed, without groanes,
and motherlie laments for her dying Sonne, the ioy
of her hart, and hart of al her ioyes, so pierced with a
souldiers speare, that euen transfixed withal the mothers
breast, a verie Niobe of teares, or rather Noome of bitter groanes.
Now for the wing, which so eternizeth the Doues,
and makes them most illustrious among fowles of
the highest pitch, this I note, they loue not much
to fly alone, bur to assemble themselues in flights.
The blessed Virgin, is that Woman cloathed with
the sunne, of whome it is sayd in the Apocalyps,
that two wings were giuen her to fly with, in the
desert; which two wings are the wings of Loue and
Hope, wherewith she flyes into Heauen. Who wil afford
me wings as the Doue? But yet she would not fly alone,
but draw others also to fly along with her, to wit, the
Apostles, during her life, and through her example
afterwards al other Saints.
They were accustomed of old, the better to attract
strange pigeons to their houses, to vse this industrie
or slight, to annoynt some one tame and domestical
Doue with an oyntment, which they knew most

grateful vnto them, and so annoynted to let it fly at
large; when she so flying in the ayre, through the
fragrance of the odours about her, would draw to
her a number of them; and so she, who first flew alone,
would returne back againe in triumphing manner.
The Virgin of herself alone at first was the onlie louer
of vowed Chastitie, who professed, she knew not,
nor euer would know man. This Doue then the heauenlie
Fowler had sent forth into the ayre of the
world, as annoynted with the perfume of al graces,
and especially of Chastitie; but now she flyes with an
innumerable number of Virgins, led by her example,
singing altogeather with one consent that verse: We
wil runne after the odour of thine oyntments; the yong virgins
haue loued thee, O louelie Doue.
Lastly, for the sitting of the Doue by the waters
side, heare what the Holie-Ghost in the Canticles sayth:
Thine eyes like Doues vpon riuer-waters,Can. 5. which are washed
with milk, and sit by the fullest streames. S. Hierom, that
great Contemplatour of Celestial Secrets vpon the
Canticles, speaking of this most holie Virgin, how she
was assumpted to Heauen, sayth: I saw one specious
as a Doue ascending from the waters. She was a beautiful
Doue, as it were; because she shewed the forme
and simplicitie of that Doue, which came vpon Christ,
coming out of the streames of waters. Now as the
Doue is sayd to dwel vpon the streames, as wel to discouer
the shadow of the hawke, as to refresh herself
against the heats: So the blessed Virgin rests and abides
vpon the fulnes of the flouds of the Holie-Ghost, as wel
to admonish her Deuotes to beware the Diabolical
snares, as to enioy the plenitude of the waters of the
same Holie-Ghost, to wit, the guifts therof.



THE EMBLEME.






THE POESIE.
THE Holie-Ghost,The Pause. that nestles like a Doue,
Betwixt the Father and the Sonne aboue,
Is flowne from Heauen to seek a mate below,
A Virgin, chast, pure Doue, as white as snow
Fethred; a like consort; she without gal,
Simple and mild; he Loue essential.
Thus they accord, as they in colour sute,
And to the flower correspond's the fruit.
The Virgin's shadowd, yet remaines pure white;
(Shadowes expeld) the substance brings to light.
But while her Sonne is shadowd on the Crosse,
The mourningColumbam nigram pingeba^t Aegypty ad significanda^ ^idua^ c^stam and constantem; inquit Pierius. Doue in blackes laments her losse.



THE THEORIES.
COntemplate first,The Contemplation. how the Doue, being
a most pure creature, feares to be defiled,
and abhorres whatsoeuer is foule
and sordid, as appeares by that which
hapned in Noe's Floud. Noe sent forth a
Doue after fourtie dayes, to discerne
whether the waters were fallen and ceased vpon the
face of the earth or no, who not finding wheron to
rest her foot, returned into the Ark againe; and the
reason was,Gen 88. as S. Augustm thinks, that though the tops
of hils appeared bare, yet they remained moist and
slymie, and therefore the Doue being a nice and delicate
bird, and extremly amourous of puritie and
cleannes, would by no meanes put her foot theron.
And heer reflect vpon the Virgin pure, in whome no
spot appeared of Original Sinne at al, in that great
inundation and deluge therof in Adam, but remayning
in the Ark of her Innocencie Immaculate, because
the mother of the Immaculate Lamb.
Consider then the singular prouidence of the Doue,
which is a part indeed of the prudence of this creature,
in that to shun the hawke, she shrouds herself in
the secret holes of the Rock, and there securely reposeth
in great peace. And then consider, how this
Doue of Doues, this same most prudent Virgin, being
higher then the rest, and more profound, had placed
her nest or chamber in Christ her Rock; where being
alwayes safe and kept inuiolable, the slights of the
Diuels and the subtleties of Hereticks could doe
nothing against her; but what they did, was against
the Rock itself, rebounding back vpon the impious
themselues, like the waues against the cliffes, the
ships against the shelfs, the rusling of the winds

against the towers, the fomie froth against the beach,
the edge of the sword against the Adamant, the reed
against a target, drifts of snow against a helmet, fire
against gold, and lastly a slender cloud against the Sun.
Ponder lastly the great similitude and resembla^ce,
which is between the saluation of mens liues in Noes
Ark, and that of Soules in the Church, whose foundatio^
was layd in the Virgin-mothers womb, our true
Doue indeed, at the Annunciation of the Angel Gabriel,
when that stupe^dious miracle of grace was wrought
within her. But as then that Doue of the Ark carryed
only the message of saluation, the figure of that embassage
heer brought by Gabriel, whom when you
behold so painted with a bra^ch of Oliue in his hand,
as a token of peace and mercie, what see you els, but
Not's Doue, bearing a bough of oliue, in the feet?


THE APOSTROPHE.
O Most innocent Doue,The Golloquie. Lady of meeknes! O would
you please to remember me for my good, most sober and
^emure Virgin, and amourous Mother of my deerest
Spouse, Oh pray the eternal Loue for me; reiect me not poore
wretch, most wretched Sinner, so wholy immortifyed in al my
senses, who heer present myself before your goodnes in the dema^d
and pursuit of man suetude of mind. Oh grant, most precious
Virgin-Mother, that I perish not for euer, and be lost. O
admirable Ladie, Ladie, I say, of heauen and earth next GOD
your deerest Sonne, placed aboue al the Hierarchies of Heauen:
Let me not quite perish, Queen of the heauenlie Empir^; for alas,
what profit wil there be in my vtter ruine? Alas, Alas, let me
not fal, a caytif and vnworthie worme as I am, to nothing, or
worse then nothing, so wholy drowned in Sinne and vice.




THE XIX. SYMBOL.
THE FOVNTAIN.

THE DEVISE.






THE CHARACTER.
THE Fountain is the liquid Glasse or Mirrour
of the Naiades,The Impresa where they haunt to
contemplate their beauties in; or rather
is the Nimph herself, who gazing on her
proper beautie, through a strange Metamorphosis
of self-loue had lost herself in her owne
Glasse. Hence it is, she runnes the Hay, as it were, in
the meadowes, to seeke herself in the waters which
she is herself, got forth to take the ayre, in the fields
abroad; and as it runnes, it playes on the Harpsicon
the while, whose iacks are the pible stones, checking

the litle waues as strings, that so with purling frames
the harmonie it makes. The feathered Nimphs
there, are much taken with it, especially the Swan,
that wil be tuning her Descant to that ground. Al
the care she takes, is but to haste to pay her rents,
which she doth to the Brooks and Riuers, as Bay lifes
to that great Exactour, who takes them grumbling,
as neuer satisfyed. She is the breast of Nature, and
Nature the Nurse that suckles al things with her
milke, and is so good a Nurse and so prodigal of her
sugred lickours, as where she can not els communicate
herself, of her owne accord wil she break out
into Springs: Springs so called indeed, because they
leap and spring forth of the earth. For so shal you
see the litle lambs and kids prickt with this milk of
Nature, wel concoct with youthful heat, to spring, to
iump, and frisk; whence doubtles the season of the
Spring tooke first the name. For what is the blossomes,
trow you, to spring and bud forth, but for Nature
to breake out as into Springs? The Rose springs
forth, while Nature breaks a veyne as it were, that
springs into a Rose. The Lillie springs, while Nature
spilles her crystal milk, that sprouts into a Lillie. The
Springs and Fountains therefore, are the life of Nature,
if the life, as some maintaine, abide in the veynes,
which may wel be. They are the verie ticklings of
Natures hart, that make her sprug vp herself in the
season of the Spring, to court the world with, in her
best array. For then she crownes herself with a garland
of al flowers, puts on the mantle of her goodlie
meadowes diapred al ouer, and tricks and decks vp
her hayre, the fruitful trees, with gemmes of blossomes
of infinit varieties, to feast and entertaine the
new-borne world.



THE MORALS.

PERENNIS ET INDEFICIENS.

AL things that are,The Motto. haue their certain
tearmes; and ther is a stint and period
to be seen, in al things. Be they treasures
of immense riches how vast soeuer,
they may be summed with good
Arithmetick, to a last farthing. The
Cataracts of waters, in Noe's time, that powred
downe so fast, at last were exhausted quite, and gaue
leasure to the Earth, to swallow and digest so huge a
draught. They were neither perpetual, for they lasted
but a time; nor yet without measure, for it may be
supposed the Springs were dryed, or that the hand of
GOD had put a sluce to the torrents. Elias called for
rayne, and it powred downe so fast, as manie were
affrayd of a second deluge; but the glut and tempest
ceased in a certain time, and al was wel. To leaue these,
and to come to Man, whose pride makes him oft-times
to prete^d to a kind of eternitie of felicitie; Let
him lift vp his crest neuer so loftily, his pride wil
soon haue a fal. Alexander how great soeuer, when he
saw he could not eternize himself, and become dreadful
enough otherwise, vsed a stratagem, which was
to be drawne by Apelles in sundrie manners, now
mounting on his Steed, that braue Bu^ephalus, in the
action of making the earth to tre^ble with his looks;
and then to be admired in the habit and equipage of
a GOD, calling himself the Sonne of Iupiter Amon; but
the truth is, his looks made not the earth to quake,
but only in his picture; nor was he adored, but in his
pourtrait, and he no more then a mortal man, whose

Aurora and cursorie day, had a speedie sun-set.
Nero caused a coyne of gold to be stampt, where his
owne effigies was engrauen of the one side, and of the
other Fortune enchained at the foot of a Rock, with
this word: Nec scopulos metuo. But he shortly found
the contrarie, when killing himself, he suffered shipwrack
in the sea of his owne bloud. Otho represented
himself in such peeces of gold, with his hand armed
with thunder, with this: Alijs non ^tor armis. But soone
the spring of his life and Raigne, was the winter of
his death; and what death but a death which his life
deserued? There is nothing sure and perpetual in this
world; but al things slide away like running streames
from the spring-head, which leaue not so much
behind them, as the memorie of their passage. The
Spring only is it, which stil remaynes, whose waters
after they haue runne an endles time, shal then but
seeme to begin to runne, as being an Abysse of waters
sprung from an endles source. Looke then what
the Spring is of elemental liquids, the same is the Mother
of GOD, an endles fountain of spiritual graces and
perfections, and is truly the FONS PERENNIS ET
INDEFICIENS of al Graces.


THE ESSAY.
TO speake of the Fountain truly,The Reuiew. as the
thing deserues, one had need of a fountain
of wit and brayne about him, to
decipher it aright. For who can draw a
picture of one that can not sit, but is euer
iogging vp and downe? For lo, the fountain-water
neuer stands, but hath the palsey in the veynes, that
wil not rest. It is sometimes taken for the Fabrick
itself; as built of stone; which if we should, the diffitie

would encrease. For so were we obliged to expresse
as manie formes wel nigh, as there are fancies
in the Brayne. For some shal you see of one
fashion, some of another, as euerie one abounds
in his sense. Witnes that so artificially wrought by
the famous Michael Angelo de Bonaro^i in figure of a
Woman washing and winding of linnen clothes in
her hands; in which act of hers, she straynes forth
the Fountain-waters. Another haue I seen of an Elephant
spouting the waters from his Proboscides or
trunk, to the pleasures of the Spectatours; another
of a Whale, that spouted the waters so high, as euen
did diselement the same into a dust or powder of
waters. Another so cunningly set and contriued,
as what with the waters so disposed, and the Sunnie
rayes togeather, it would make a perfect Iris in the
eyes of al men; and a thousand other, while Art in
nothing more wil vye with Nature, then with her
workmanships of this kind. The Fountain therfore
is properly neither the manufacture alone so
wrought, nor the water of itself, as it creeps in the
veynes of the Earth. For so the one were a liuelesse
Statue of Man or beast, and the other a Spring only,
and no Fountain; The one would be but a dead or
sensles Carkas, and the other only in the Concha,
as the bloud abiding in a boule; so as to haue a
Fountain indeed it must be aliue, and haue the siluer
bloud, as in the veynes, that spouts, streames, or
trickles from it: Such as Niobe herself was transformed
into a Liuing Fountain, as it were, when she
wept out her eyes; such, I say, as Magdalen was at
her Maister's feet, or as that great Porter of Heauen
and the Keeper of the keyes therof, when he so bitterly
wept at the Cock-crow. I can not tel, whether

there can be a brauer sight, then such as these, curiously
represented in marble, with the azure veynes
appearing in the bodie, and the rest of the lineaments
liuely set forth; and then to behold the trickling
streames to fal from the eyes, either as
pearls by drops, or as open Cataracts burst
forth.


THE DISCOVRSE.
BEhold we now the Incomparable Fountain
itself of liuing waters of Grace,The Suruey.
that flow from thence: to wit, the Signed
Fountain, the most pure Virgin Mother
of GOD, according to that of the
Canticles: The fountain of gardens,Cant* 4. the well of liuing waters
which flow with violence from Libanus; and againe: My
sister is a signed or sealed Fountain. She is a Fountain placed
by or neer GOD; she is a Fountain turned into a Riuer;
She is a perpetual Fountain; and lastly a sweet and pleasant
Fountain. She was a signed fountain, because she
was likewise an enclosed Garden. She was a Garden,
because Her vnderstanding was ful of fayth, and
knowledge of GOD, with infinit varietie of
flowers of al kinds; and closed it was, because
no errour or ignorance might enter therinto. She
was a Garden, because her affect was ful of loue to
GOD and her Neighbour; and closed, because no
terrene loue or base desire of the flesh or world,
could find accesse to her hart. She was a signed
Fountain, because her Virginal womb was ful of
the water of Celestial grace; and signed, because

sealed with the irreuocable Vow of perpetual and
immaculate Virginitie. She was a Fountain placed neer
to GOD, Because with thee is the Fountain of life; A Fountain,
in that she refrigerates from the heat of concupiscence;
and a Fountain of grace, for that she viuifyes
from the death of mortal sinne; and because she
is very neer to GOD, she plentifully and aboundantly
powreth forth herself to al.
This litle Fountain encreased to a huge Riuer, and flowed
into very manie waters.Hest. 11. For lo she was a litle fountain in
her humilitie and conuersation; but then grew into
an immense Riuer, in her Annunciation and Conception
of the Sonne of GOD; and flowed into manie Waters
in her glorious Assumption, when she flowes so abundantly,
as al participate of her fulnes; as wel they
without (as yet in banishment) as those also in the
streets of the Celestial Hierusalem; according to
that of Salomon in his Prouerbs:Prou 5. Thy fountains are
deriued abroad, and thou diuidest thy waters in the
streets. She is a perpetual Fountain, because (as
Esay sayth) a Fountain of waters, whose waters neuer
fayle.Esay. 1. 6. Other Fountains wil soone dry vp, but this
neuer, For the loue of the world is no endles
or perpetual Spring, but slides away, goes, and
comes, and oft comes to nought; but is a Cestern
rather, that wil in time be exhausted, and
that ere very long.Hier. 2. They haue left me the Fountain o^
liuing Water, and framed to themselues broken Cesterns
that leake and can hold no water. Lastly, this Fountain
of Ours, is sweet and pleasant. For as Springs
and Fountains of waters, arising from the Sea*
and passing through veynes, as it were, and
subterranean places, become very fauourie
and sweet; and that by certain degrees, hauing

first of al a kind of bitternes with them,
and then a more gratful, and lastly a pleasant
and delicious tast. So the blessed Virgin like a
Fountain springing from the source and origin of
the bitter and harsh people of the Iewes, was
through a singular and especial prerogatiue preserued
from the least tack of those brackish waters,
whence she came; and being diuinely sanctifyed
by the Holie-Ghost, became a most delicious
Fountain of al graces; according to that of Iudith:
The bitter fountains are made sweet to drink.Iud. 5. From
whence, as from a publick Conduit of a Cittie, the
vniuersal Church deriues infinit streames of graces
and fauours. And, as in great Citties there is
wont to be some Conduit or Concha, or most ample
and spacious Channels erected in the open market-place,
from whence may al at their pleasure
fetch waters without limit or restraint, for al
their vses; besides some special pipes conueighed
into some mens houses, as a singular fauour: So
the blessed Virgin, like a copious and endles Conduit,
abundantly affords the waters of her graces
to al that haue their recourse to her for them; and
more particularly and familiarly to those, that are
her special Deuotes, as being of her families and holie
Sodalities.
Let vs now see then, what waters she affords;
for surely her waters are ful of Vertues. And first,
they coole and refrigerate, and are therefore most
welcome to the thirstie soule. And as Fountain-water
in Sommer is more cold, and hotter in Winter: so
the Incomparable Virgin, in the sommer of prosperitie
giues fresh and coole waters, to wit, a
cooling and refrigerating grace, that the mind
be not too much enflamed with terrene affects;

but in the winter of Aduersitie yealds her waters
hot, that is, inflaming, least the mind with aduersities
being too much depressed, might coole, and
at last grow vtterly cold in the loue and seruice
of God. As these waters coole, so do they quicken
and viuify withal; and are therefore called
liuing or the waters of life.Num. 13. Heart the clamour of
this people, and open them the treasure, the fountain of
liuing water.
These Fountain-waters haue an humectiue and
vegetatiue vertue with them, to water and to
make things prosper and grow vp.C^n. 2. A fountain ascended
from the earth, watering the vniuersal superficies.
So Genesis. And for growing, Esay sayth:
The shower falles and snow from heauen, and returns no
more;Esa. 55. but inebriates the earth, powers vpon it, and
makes it to spring and grow vp. For the earth indeed
is sayd, first to put forth the blade of the wheat,
then the green eare, and lastly it becomes a ripe
and ful-grayned eare of corne. And this heauenlie
Fountain of ours, first makes the earth of our
soule, to put forth the green hearb of the feare
of God, which is the beginning of a new life; then
the green eare of Pennance, which is bitter and
sharp; lastly a ful perfect fruit in the ripe eare,
which is Charitie; since Dilection is the fulnes of the
Law.
And to conclude,Rom. 13. the vertues of these waters
haue the power to ascend and mount vp, according
to that: The water which I shal giue you, shal be
(in her) a Fountain of water arising and springing to
eternal life. And as the nature and propertie of
the water is especially in pipes to arise the higher,I. 4.
the lower it falles: so the Virgin stooping

to the center of her Nothing, is aduanced so high,
aboue the Cherubins and Seraphins themselues;
and so consequently the waters of grace, that
flow to vs from her, rayse vs the higher in Heauen,
while by her example we stoop downe and
abase our selues, and especially despise these base
and terrene things.


THE EMBLEME.







THE POESIE.
IT had not rayn'd, and so the earth was dry,
No showres of Grace were falling from the sky.
An vniuersal drought possest the Land
With dearth and famine;The Pause. God's reuengeful hand
On Eue, pass'd to her progenie, For sinne,
Man's soule, like earth dried vp had euer byn,
But that there did a cristal Spring arise,
To drench the barren soile, and fertilize:
For Naamans (Iordan-like) it made a floud,
That flowd with Grace.Turbata est in sermone cius. 'Twas Troubled (not with mud,
While She's cal'd ful of grace) But sinner I
Am troubled, 'cause I want. Fountain, supply.


THE THEORIES.
COntemplate first, that as an Aqueduct
hath length and breadth with it:The Contemplation. so
our glorious Virgin, the Fountain, I mentioned
aboue, of liuing waters, as an
Aqueduct hath so great a length, as
she reaches euen from heauen to the
earth; according to that mellifluous Doctour: Marie
is an Aqueduct,S. Ber. whose top like Iacob's ladder, reaches
to Heauen. And the breadth of this Aqueduct is
such, as she was able to containe the Diuine Fountain
itself, as the same S. Bernard affirmes: A Fountain is borne
to vs,Idem. because that Celestial veyne hath descended
by the Aqueduct, though not affording vs the whole
plentie of the fountain, yet powring out certain stillicides
of grace, into our dry and arid harts.

Consider then, that as we can not deriue the waters
of the Heauens into our Conduits on earth, without
some conueyance or other: so can we not expect the
waters of Grace to come from thence without some
Aqueduct of Grace, which is the blessed Virgin, the
Incomparable Fountain therof; for that, as S. Bernard
sayth, the flouds of graces were wanting so long to
human kind, for that as yet no Aqueduct had made
intercession for it. Seeke we therefore grace through
the inuocation of Marie, Mother of Grace; and whatsoeuer
we offer to GOD, commend we to Marie, that
grace may returne back by the same channel, by
which it flowed.
Ponder lastly the manner how this Aqueduct or
Fountain of ours communicates its waters; for
to some she communicates in manner of a Well,
to some againe in manner of a Spring, and thirdly to
others in manner of Riuer-waters. The Well hath its
waters hid in the bottom of the pit, and not to be
drawne without some difficultie: in which manner
she communicates herself to sinners only, to whom
the waters of grace are hidden, but yet to be fetcht
and had with the labour of contrition and pennance.
but the water of the Spring is drawne without labour
at al, and flowes continually: and in this manner
she communicates herself to pious Soules and her
Deuotes, because continually she affords them graces
with much facilitie; and lastly, as touching the
Riuer, that flowes so with great abundance, she communicates
and powres forth herself to the Blessed
Soules, with ineffable graces, which are not communicable
to mortal wights.



THE APOSTROPHE.
O Virgin Marie,The Colloquie. Fountain of grace, Fountain, I
say, of the Paradise of pleasure. Thou cristal Well of
the liuing waters, which flowe with impetuositie
from Libanus, O signed and sealed Fountain, such as the
Wise-man so points forth, that beganst to rise from the earth
of a barren soile, to fructify the world with thy Merits, and
to water it with thy Graces. Thou litle Fountain as then,
now growne to a great and ample Riuer, who in thy birth appearing
as a litle Spring by humilitie, and then a Fountain of
more note, and so encreasing stil with sanctitie in conuersation
becamest atlast to be a swelling Riuer, when so thou conceauedst
in thy Wo^b, the source of al graces, that precious Oyle CHRIST
IESVS; so as now from the plenitude of this Fountain, through
al places of the Church, haue balsomed liquours been deriued
to vs, Obtayne, o incomparable Virgin, inexhaustible
Fountain of Graces, of that deare Sonne of thine, that the
waters of his Celestial graces may so water my soule, that
through spiritual ariditie it be not enforced to languish vtterly.
This I beseech thee, thou Fountain of liuing waters.




THE XX. SYMBOL.
THE MOVNT.

THE DEVISE.






THE CHARACTER.
THE Mount or Mountains are of the noblest
and best extraction of the earth,
and therefore aptest to take fire;The Impresa witnes
Aetna or Mongibel. They are as great
Barons in England, and Grandes in
Spaine, for their eminencie aboue the rest of Hils,
in the Vpper-house, and the other as Knights and Bourgeses
of the Lower; the Vallyes being no more then
the Commons of the Land, who choose them out
to stand for the people. They are the Cedars of the
earth, and Cesars in the Senat of the highest towers, as

topping them al and keeping them vnder. They are
the Piramides of mould, more ancient and more lasting
then those of Egipt; and the true Mausoleums
of the Monuments of Nature; the statelie Collosses
of earth, erected as Gog Magogs among the lesser
people of the Hils or Hillocks. They are as Sauls, far
higher then their brethren by head and shoulders:
and the rest as litle Dauids, more fit to keep sheep in
the lower playnes. Had not Mount Arrarat stood so a
tipt-toe as it were, the Ark had been forced to haue
made a longer nauigation, and Natures shop had not
been opened so soone, to expose her Specieses of liuing
things to the new world, nor yet the doores and
windowes therof so soon had been vnbolted within.
The Mountains then, are as Atlas shoulders; to sustaine
and bear vp the Welkin with. If the earthlie Paradise
be yet on earth, it must be surely on some Mountain
top, or els as hanging in the ayre, and so no earthlie
Paradise. They are the Rocks of the Ayre, against the
which the racking clowds, like Argoseyes, dash and
breake themselues, and suffer shipwrack. They haue
the honour of the first salutes of the glorious Sun, in
the Aurora of his first appearing; and haue his last
kisses, ere he goe to bed. They haue their intelligences
with the Intelligences themselues; and were they
not so pursie and vnweildie, might euen dance to
their musicks, howsoeuer they may listen to them as
they stand.



THE MORALS.

IN VERTICE MONTIVM.

THere is nothing honourable, that is not
good;The Motto. nothing good, that is not equitable;
and nothing equitable, that is not
wholy opposit to al deordinations.
True honour consists in fearing GOD;
and to spare neither life nor ought that is deerest, in
augmentation of one's glorie. It stands not vpon its
Ancesters, in seeking so much to borrow luster from
them, as to earne it of itself. So as if it can not arriue
to their vertue, who haue left it anie Title by inheritance,
it blushes more for its owne infirmitie therin,
then vaunts of the blazon of its House, whose greatnes
makes it not haughtie or imperious, but rather,
as the fixed starres, the higher it is, the lesse it desires
to appeare; nor regards it so much an outward pomp,
or swelling o^te^tation, as the solid veritie of a Soule
truly noble. Courtesie and sweetnes can no more be
seuered from it, then the bodie from the soule, to remayne
true honour; nor doth it of anie base facilitie
to insinuate with, but out of a natural courtesie coming
from a true esteeme of its self. None more enclined
to compassion towards the afflicted, or more
disposed to succour them, then it; and then most,
when they haue least help otherwise, and lesse possibilitie
to requite. It is more careful to yeald true honour
to the Creatour, then to receaue it fro^ anie one.
In a word, it so behaues itself, as it holds the Bodie of
true honour, to consist not in the bloud or dignitie
only, but the Soule in the eminence of vertue aboue
others. This true Nobilitie and honour the glorious

Virgin had in high measure, who being lineally descended
from the race of Kings, and, which is more,
exalted to the soueraigne degree of the Mother of
GOD, and consequently raysed aboue al the hils of
the blessed Spirits in Heauen, yea the Cherubins and
Seraphins themselues; stiled herself, the handmayd of
our Lord, being arriued, I say, to sit IN VERTICE
MONTIVM.


THE ESSAY.
MOVNTAINS are one of the gallantst
things in Nature, especially if we
regard the Prospect they afford, to
deliciat the eyes with;The Reuiew. when taking
a stand vpon some good aduantage,
you behold from thence a goodlie
riuer vnderneath; which in token of homage, as it
were, runnes kissing the foot therof, along as it goes.
But the most delicious it is, whe^ you see on the other
side, a vast playne suspended before you, and diuersifyed
with litle risings, hils, and mountains, heer and
there, which bounding not the view too short, suffers
the eyes with freedome to extend themselues into
the immensitie of Heauen, while the Riuer, creeping
along the meadowes with Meander-windings encloses
the Hil about, in forme of an Iland, whence manie
vessels of al sorts riding there at ancker, may be discryed,
the neerest questionles very easily discerned,
and the rest farther off through interposition of ba^cks
between, not perceaued, the tops of the masts only
appearing, like a Groue or wood in winter without
leaues; the litle closes or fields thereabout, with the
hedge-rowes enuironing the same, seeming as Garden-plots
hedged in with prim; and the lanes and
high wayes as dressed into allyes. The verdures giue
forth themselues delicious to behold, like a La^dskap

in a table, with al the greenes to be fou^d in the neck
of a mallard, heer a bright, there a dark, and then a
bright and a dark againe, and al by reason of the leuels,
with the risings, and fallings togeather, with the
lights and reflectio^s caused through the dawning of the
day in the morning or twylight of the euening, the
rayes of the sunne being an open enemie to such neer
prospects, offending the view with too much simplicitie
and sinceritie of dealing. It is a great curiositie in
Nature, to enquire how these Mountains first came vp,
so to surmount the lesser Hils and lower vallyes; or
whether Nature intended them first, or no. If so; how
came she partial? if not, how came they to be so? and
a thousand other diuels they rayse besides, which no
ordinarie Coniurer can lay. But such would I haue to
aske the Vallyes, how they came to be so beneath
the Hils or higher Mountains? which if they satisfye, I
vndertake, the Mountains shal as much. But the truth
is, he that puts generositie in some aboue the rest,
and made not al of the same euennes and tenour of
mind: and so in other things he made a Cedar and a
shrub, a Pine and a bramble, an Alexander and a Diogenes,
a Caesar and an Irus, a Giant and a dwarf: so made he
Mounts of Pelion and Ossa, and the vales of Mambre and
Iosaphat. These, fro^ the first, were so created mountains
and vallyes; vnles perhaps, as with the Angels, al were
once as mountains, til Lucifer and his Complices aspiring
higher then they should, were throwne headlo^g,
and made the vales of Hellish feinds: So such as wil
aspire to be so wise, to search into the secrets of God's
hidden Architecture, shal be rankt in the number of
the sillie vales, in punishment of their daring follie
to presume so much.



THE DISCOVRSE.
BVT then to speake of the Mount of Mountains,The Suruey.
placed in the Garden of the Empyreal
Heauens, where al are Mounts, and this
the Mount paramount aboue them al; is a
work of a higher nature, the Incomparable
Virgin MARIA, I meane, that admirable and mysterious
Mount, so like in name and qualitie to that of
Mo^nt-Moria, a certain hil in the Cittie of Ierusalem. For
as on that Mount-Moria, Salomon first founded his Temple,
the house of GOD: so in this our Montain Maria,
was the heauenlie and Celestial Temple of the true
Salomon raysed indeed, which he sayd within three
dayes should be re-edifyed againe, in case it were ruined,
to wit, the Temple itself of the humanitie of
IESVS CHRIST. Moria signifyeth the land of vision; and
what land more worthie to be seen the^ Marie, the Mother
of GOD? Moria is sayd to be a high and statelie
land, and next to GOD: and there is nothing so high
and sublime as Marie is, no not the Angels nor Archangels,
nor yet the Cherubins or Seraphins themselues.
Moria is interpreted shining o^ illuminating: and
Marie being clothed with the Sun, illumines Mortals,
and truly shines, as being truly the Starre of the Sea.
Moria,Pagnin as some Authours say, is deriued of the Hebrew
Mori, which signifyes my mirrh, and Iah, which is
GOD, as much to say as GOD is my mirrh. And was he
not truly her mirrh indeed, when she stuck him so in
her bosome, as he lay in her lap, being taken from
the Crosse, according to that: my beloued to me is a bundle
of mirrh? and she herself no lesse then mirrh; if we look
into her name, which is Marie, quasi amarum mare, a Sea
as bitter as mirrh itself;Eccl. 24. of whom is sayd: As a choice

mirrh haue I yeaded a sweetnes of odour: Maria is deriued also,
as some wil haue it, from the Hebrew mereh, which
is teaching, and iah, GOD; teaching; who taught indeed,
when being seated as Salomon in his Throne, or
rather Wisdome it-self in its Scholastical Chaire, in the
Womb of the Virgin-Mother, for so manie months,
he read to the world such a Lecture of humilitie, patience,
charitie, and al vertues particularly in his Incarnation;
but especially in the Crib, and armes of his
Mother, when teaching both Iew and Gentil, in the
Shepheards and Magi, at his Birth and Manifestation,
he so taught them the Ghospel. It is finally interpreted
the Rayne of GOD, where you may iudge what a
showre of grace by this our Marie was powred into
the world, when Anna, as a dry and barren clowd, for
manie yeares before, was at last deliuered of her; and
she powred into the world, as a showre of rayne, after
a tedious famine, to fertilize and fructify the earth.
Nor is Marie our Mount restrayned to Moria only, but
Sinaj also seemes to represent her, no lesse in regard
that Hil is accompted the Mount of mercie and promise,
as wel as she. This Sinaj is scituated in the prouince
of Madian, wherof Oreb is a part, and where our Lord
appearing to Moyses in a bush, and taking compassion
on the affliction of his people, promised to free
them, from the bondage of the Egyptians, through
the power of this mightie hand,Exod. as we haue it in Exodus.
And so was the Blessed Virgin Marie, as the Queen
of mercie, promised and prefigured in the same
Bush, wherin our Lord appeared to Moyses; and for
the rest, were the promises likewise performed
in her, of the Redemption and deliuerance
of the Human kind, from the thraldome and slauerie
of the Diuel, while the Sonne of GOD
tooke flesh of her for our ransome and deliuerie.

Our Lord descended on mount Sinaj etc. That mount was
likewise as the Rendeuous and haunt of our Lord; for
there the Angel appeared ofte^ on behalf of our Lord,
and spake familiarly to Moyses; and therefore it is said of
him in the Acts:Act 7. He appeared to him in the desert of mount
Sinaj, in the flame of a fierie bush. And so was the Blessed
Virgin saluted, and as frequently visited by the Angel,
and instructed no lesse of the Word of life. Sinai was
a Mount of rayne, and Deaw: and so was the Blessed Virgin,Psal. 71
in conceauing the Sonne of GOD; according to
that: He shal desce^d as rayne on a (...). Sinaj was the Mount
of the Diuine habitation; for so, according to Iosephus
was the co^mon opinion in those dayes. And the Blessed
Virgin was truly the habitation and dwelling of
GOD.Ps. 110. She was the mount in whom GOD took much delight.
Sinaj was the Mount of wisdome aud learning; for therin
was the Law deliuered to the people by the hand
of Moyses: so likwise the Blessed Virgin-Mother brought
him forth to the world, who is the Word and Wisdome
of the Father; who is our Captain and Law-giuer,
through who^ do Kings raigne, and the giuers of Lawes
decree iust things. She was a Mount distilling the oyle
of mercie; a Mount of peace and alliance; a Mount of
pastures to feed on; a Mount, where it pleased GOD to
inhabit,Psal. 75. 67 41. as Dauid sayd, the Mount of GOD, the fat Mo^ut,
the holie and litle Mount, which Esay fortold of, which
should be prepared,Isai. 2. and to which al the world should
resort for pleasure, and repayre for sweet consolation;
the Mount familiar to the Angels, in their frequent
visits.



THE EMBLEME.






THE POESIE.
AGaine is rays'd (while Mortals feigne, and erre)
The Statue of Nabucodonozer.Th. P^
Heresie on feet of Clay and Iron stands,
Which haue no Vnion. Lo, cut without hands
A stone falles from a Mountaine. Sh' had a Sonne,
Who (hauing vow'd) sayd: How can this be donne;
I know no man. 'Twas then the work alone
Of th' Holie-Ghost: Thus without hands the Stone
Fel from the Mountain. Head, brest, armes, and al
By striking of the feet, demolisht, fal.
O, with that Stone, this Monsters feet misled,
May she breake downe, that crusht the Serpe^^^


THE THEORIES.
COntemplate first, that as Libanus is a Mount of
indeficient waters;The Contemplation. for that, there, according
as we haue it in the Ca^ticles, are springs of liuing
waters, which flow with a force and violence; and Libanus itself

is a fountain and spring of flouds; while on the foot
therof, two fountaines arise, the one Ior, the other
Dan; which sliding and falling into one, do make the
Iordan at last, as S. Hierom sayth. So our Incomparable
Virgin is truly a Libanus likewise of endles and indeficie^t
waters, whose graces and fauours continually flow
to Mortals; nor can those springs of hers be euer dry,
to wit, her perpetual virginitie, and stupendious humilitie;
which being so vnited in her Annunciatio^; produced
such a Iordan of al graces in the person of her
deerest Sonne our Sauiour Christ.
Consider then, that as Mount Libanus is a Mount of
fragancie and sweet odours; and therefore it is sayd;
Like Libanus hauing the odour of sweets. For there are trees
that beare the incence,Ec. 39. and many odoriferous herbs
besids, do there grow. So in our sacred Libanus, the
Virgin Marie; are the delicious odours of al vertues,
with the Incence of sublime prayer and contemplation;
the perfumes of sanctitie and holie conuersation,
the mirrh of mortification and memorie of death,
while her life was nothing els, but a continual languor
of perpetual mortification, as wel in denying
herself the pleasures, contentments, and delights of
the world, as in sighing and groning so much after heauen,
where her whole conuersation was. And therefore
is it sayd in the Canticles: Fly my beloued, resemble the
goat and fawn of the deer on the Mountains of spices, as much
to say, as fly from the vanities of the world, and hygh
you to Libanus the mount of Spices, to the Blessed
Virgin the Libanus of al graces.
Ponder lastly, that as Libanus is interpreted white,
for the candour of the snow, which perpetually couers
the same: so is our Libanus no lesse white, yea a
great deale more, through the candour of perpetual
Virginitie, which is a kind of whitnes of the flesh; and

as Libanus through the abundance of the Deawes, and
much quantitie of raynes, that fal vpon it, abounds
with principal hearbs, fat pastures, and excellent
fruits: so in our Libanus of the Blessed Virgin; do flow
the deawes of Diuine grace, and the raynes of spiritual
knowledge: and therefore abounds she so with
the rich pastures of the sacred Scriptures, and Celestial
vnderstandings of high Mysteries, with plentiful
hearbs of the flourishing green of al vertues, and especially
loaden with the galla^t fruits of soules.Oset. 14. Her
root shal break forth, as that of Libanus; her boughes shal
grow out, and her glorie shal be as the Oliue, and her odour as
of Libanus; sayth the Prophet.


THE APOSTROPHE.
O Queen of Angels and Archangels,The Colloquie. of Patriarks, Prophets;
and Euangelists; of Apostles, Martyrs, and Confessours;
of Doctours, Anchorits, and Hermits, and especial^y the
Crowne and glorie of Virgins, Widowes, and of al holie Woemen,
in the coui^gal state. o Mountain among the lesser hils
of al those Saints, that haue been euer, are, or euer shal be. O
excellent Mountain, O eminent Mountain. O Mount, whose
aire is temperate and neuer troubled, where no Serens of inordinate
concupiscences euer fal, and where no iniurie of times
euer works anie mischief. Mountain of pleasure, delicious
Paradice, the Libanus of sanctitie, the Sinaj of Maiestie,
and terrour to the reprobate, the Caluarie of compassion of thy
Sonne's passion, the Thabor of Diuine mysteries, the Oliuet
of ioy and eternal happines: In a word, O mount of heauen and
fayre habitation of the Heauen of Heauens, O Virgin, Alas,
make me of thy condition, draw my soule from the seruitude of
sinne, from the affection of the world, and tyrannie of the flesh;
and put my feet on the Mountain of perfectio^, that so approching
neerer to thee, I may come to inbabit with thee, aboue the
clowds, O grau^t this same, I beseech thee, for his sake, who came
downe from heauen to meet thee, in the clowds, acco^panied with
miriads of Saints, and blessed Spirits, at thy glorious Assumptio^.




THE XXI. SYMBOL.
THE SEA.

THE DEVISE.






THE CHARACTER.
THE Seas, are the great Diet, or Parliament
held of Waters, at the first creation
of the world,The Im^resa when GOD himself
was the onlie Speaker of the House;
where they met of compulsion rather
then faire accord, while euerie whispering of sinister
breath puts them al into combustion, when for
the time, there wil be no dealing with the^, so implacable
they are, that the stoutest are faine to vale-bonet
and stoop vnto them. They are great Vsurers, and likelie
neuer let go anie pawnes they once lay hold of,
which they extort ful sore against their wils who
leaue the^ in their clutches. They are infinit rich with

such booties, and may wel compare with their neighbour
Pluto or Mamo^ himself. They wil sometimes notwithstanding
be very calme, courteous, and seren: so as they wil inuite the houshold-Nimphes and Halcions
to sing and dance to the noyse of their musick, and of a
sudden change the key and tune so, as none but Dolphins
ca^ brook the stage, or keep measure with their
boysterous time, in the vnrulie Reuels they keep. As
the Earth, haue they also their mines of richest
wealth, lying in the bowels of their Abysses, which
enioy no other light, the^ their owne lusters, nor euer
are like to do; such couetous misers they are of their
pelf. They haue likewise their dales and mountains to,
but those so restles, as no beasts can graze vpo^ them,
going vpon foure, but such as take anie benefit of
those pastures, are faine to go on their breasts. They
are the humid firmament without firmnes, where al
the starres are mouing Planets. They are the clowdie
or waterie ayre, where the birds make vse of fins insteed
of wings. Only the Element of fire hath no
frienship with the^, but is at deadlie fewd with them,
and therefore goes as farre fro^ them, as possibly it can,
because they neuer meet, but it payes wel for it, with
its owne destruction. They scarcely acknowledge
anie deitie aboue them, or homage due to anie but
the Moon, to whome they are very punctual and obsequious,
nor misse her a moment with their seruice,
at her beck to go and come as hawkes in a line, or horses
with the bit, that dare not go amisse. Most think,
they are flegmatick, because so humid, but rather I
take them, to be of a melancholie complexion, with
the guift of teares only, for that their waters are
euer brackish and bitter as teares are. In fine, they are
another world in the^selues, wherin GOD hath plu^ged
and drencht the diuersities of al earthlie creatures.



THE MORALS.

AB A MARO MARE, A MARI MARIA.

THE Egiptians for characters,The Motto. had pictures; of
pictures, made they books; wherin they had
need to haue been excellent Morallists, and
consequently good Naturallists, to know the natures
and properties of al creatures. I adde withal, some
part of their wits also, should haue layne in their fingars
ends, to shape forth with cole or chisel, so manie
diuersities of things. Adam our first Parent, gaue them
the first ground therof, when fro^ the beginning he so
called and assembled al the new-born creatures to giue
the^ names, as a Baylif of some great Lord should goe
about, to marke this Maister's sheep, with special
marks, notes, or signes of whose they are. And this he
did, by the pattern and exa^ple first giue^ him by GOD in
himself and his consort, the first that euer took anie
name; while he was called Adam, as signifying, de terra
terrenus, and she Virago, a viro desumpta. The Patriarks after
him stil practized the same, which Adam did; assigning
names very apt to al their children, as the present occasio^s
put them in the head, or rather as diuinely inspired
by him, that best can skil, to single out and cal
each thing by its proper name. He^ce Ioseph, as his type,
was called a Sauiour and Iosue likewise, for the same
reason. S. Iohn the Baptist his Precursour was called
Grace, which Iohn imports, to signify the coming and
approach of Grace indeed, in the Messias at hand. Yea
IESVS, which signifyes Sauiour, came at last with that
name assigned him from al eternitie, and lastly giuen
him by the Paranymph Angel, with the surname of
Emanuel, as much to say, as Deus nobiscum. And so the Inco^parable
Virgin, was Diuinely sorted with the name
of MARIE, that fitted her so right. For she was indeed
a Sea of bitternes, through the seauenfold sword of

sorrow, that pierced her hart; and therefore rightly.
AB A MARO MARE, A MARI MARIA.


THE ESSAY.
THE richest pieces of Eloquence,The Reuiew. and Poetry are
borrowed of the Sea; be it for descriptions of
some notable shipwrack, or to expresse the blustering
winds, which furrow the face of that liquid Element,
raysing vp billowes, that dash and wash as it
were the very face of the Heauens, and seeme to
plunge the Starres in the surges of the wrathful Nemesis
or Thetys rather; or lastly in expressing some Naumachias,
or sea-fights, or that of the Remora, that Caesar
of Caesars in captiuing so, in a floating Castle, Caligula
the Roman Monark, to the stupour and amazement
of the world. These are the vses Poets make therof,
but Philosophers goe further yet, and tel vs stranger
things of this stupendious work of Nature, of the
Flux and Reflux therof, and faire correspondences it
hath with the Moon. The fabulous Antiquitie hath
reckoned euer the Sirens those chanting Nimphs, and
great enchantresses, to be the Hostesses of the Sea; and
euen the sagest of them in their follies, take it for a
grace to their Goddesse Venus, to fetch her extraction
from the impure flames of the waues. This we know
by experience, the fome and froth of the Sea,
being dryed with the rayes of the Sun, conuert to
sponges, and they againe into pomice-stones, as light
as Venus herself; it is ordinarily veyled with vapours,
curtened ouer with clowds, enwrapped with fogs,
and sometimes buryed in Cimerian darknes; then
of a sudden it changes the countenance, and becomes
a cerulean Sea, as various in hew, with as
manie coulours, as the changeable neck of a
Doue giues forth with the reflection of the Sun;
when the former furrowes al of wrath in

the face of this stern Ocean wil turne to smiles and
daliances with his amorous Tethis; the Halcion, the
ioy of Marriners wil streight appeare vpon the decks
of ships to glad the passengers, and the Dolphins da^ce
before them with a pleasant glee; the waterie pauements
seeme as swept the while, to inuite them likewise
to dance laualtoes with the^; and the gentle Eurus
and Zephirus in disposition to tune their pipes for the
purpose. And for Cosmographers (whome we must beleeue,
vnles with measuring the world ourselues, we
wil disproue the^) they tel vs, the Ocean is that vniuersal
Choas of waters, which enuirous the land of al sides:
for looke what coasts soeuer they sayle vnto,
they alwayes find the Seas to waft the^ thither; which
on the east is called the Indian Sea: on the West the
Atlantick: on the North and the Regions opposit, the
Pontick and the frozen Sea: and on the South, the Red or
Ethiopian; beyond al which, manie striuing to reach to
the vtmost shores, haue made vast nauigations, and
haue sooner found their victuals to fayle them, then
ample spaces of immense waters vndiscouered.


THE DISCOVRSE.
BEhold heer a singular Symbol of cur Inco^parable
Virgin,The Suruey. a vast and immense Sea of
Charitie; for so is she pleased to go shadowed
at this time, nor may it seeme to anie strange, she
should do so, or we presume so to stile her, since lo the
Blessed Cyprian tearmes her, not a Microcosme only,
as we are al, but euen an ample, co^pleat, and vniuersal
World within herself, adorned with the Species of al
creatures, I reade, sayth he, and vnderstand, that Marie
is a certain intelligible and admirable world, whose
land is the soliditie of humilitie; whose Sea, the latitude
of Charitie; whose heauen, the height of Co^templation;
whose sunne, the sple^dour of Vnderstanding;
whose moone, the glorie of Puritie; whose Lucifer,

the brightnes of Sanctitie; whose cluster of seauen
starres, the seauen-fold Grace; and whose other starres
are the beautiful ornaments of the rest of her admirable
Vertues.
The Histories report, that Helena amo^g the Grecian
Beauties carried the prize away; and that Zeuxis, a most
exquisit painter, in the Age immediatly following,
would needs draw her pourtraict, though he had neuer
seen her while she liued: and therefore gathered he
togeather al the fayrest damzels in those parts, and
whatsoeuer he found rare and excellent in anie, he
would exactly put into his peece, not leauing, til he
had finished a most admirable peece of work, delineated
from them, which euen rauished the eyes and
harts of al. So may we say of our blessed Ladie, Mother
of the eternal King, that she was an abstract of al
the perfectio^s possible, dispersed not only in that sex,
or the huma^ kind, but euen likewise in the Angelical
nature itself; and therefore wel might be called a Sea
of al perfectio^s; since both her name, in the Hebrew,
sounds as much as Sea; and as the Sea is nothing els,
but a certain congregation togeather of al waters,Gen. 1. so is she
no lesse an assemblie and congregation of al graces
and perfections to be found elswhere.
The Sea indeed hath three properties; It is the Spring
and origin of al fountains; it is alwayes ful; and is bitter
and brackish in tast. Our Ladie likewise is the
spring and origin of al graces, from whose virginal
womb did IESVS flow, the fountain of this Fountain,
the increated Grace, from the plenitude of whose
grace, we al receaue grace, in what measure soeuer
we become capable of. And as from the sea do flow
great quantities of waters which it receaues againe,
not being kept; so do graces flow fro^ the Sea of Marie
in great plentie; yet with flowings and ebbings,
through our ingratitude, and not making vse therof.

But if after our neglect of her fauours we returne,
as we ought, to beg them againe, though we receaue
no effectual benefits by her first offers which we refused,
yet doth she dayly offer them againe; with this
differe^ce from those flowings of the liquid seas, that
they go and come to and fro of course, and at certain
times with stints; but she is readie euerie moment to
communicate her fauours without limits, so we wil
but open the chanels of our harts to let them in.
As al Wels, Springs, and Fountaines deriue from
the Sea, the Sea virtually containes the nature and
qualities of al Well-springs, current fountaines, and
riuers. By which waters are aptly vnderstood the
three degrees of graces, which through our Ladie
flow into our harts; to wit, the Incipient or preuenient
grace, in the first beginnings of our conuersio^s;
the Proficient, by which we proceed; to vertuous
actions through grace receaued; and the Perfect grace,
which is the ful consummation therof, and is indeed
a constant perseuerance to the end in al vertues. This
Incipient or commencing grace, is signifyed by the
Well or spring of liuing waters; because these springs
haue their waters secret and hidde^ vnder ground; they
suddenly arise, and no man knowes from whence, and
so preuenient grace, is by vs not merited at al, but
springs, and is powred into vs, through a secret and
hidden inspiration of GOD, no man can tel how, or
whence, but often comes through the intercession of
the Inco^parable Mother of mercie, and the Sea of graces,
being called the liuing Waters, for that by this
grace, are sinners dead in sinnes, as viuifyed to life.
The Fountain-water, is vnderstood to be grace Proficie^t;
wherof is sayd: the Fountain of the Gardens; which
gardens of GOD, are the good Proficients in grace, and
vertues; in whome are the hearbs and plants of al vertues,

in a flourishing state; which yet could not spring
at al, nor grow a whit, much lesse seeme to prosper and
flourish, vnles by this fountain they were watered
with grace, being a Fountain indeed ascending from the
earth,Gen. 2. which waters the vniuersal face therof. By the Riuer-water,
which flowes with viole^ce, is perfect grace to
be vnderstood, which is sayd to flow with violence, because
such as are replenished therwith, are very earnest
and sollicitous in the works of vertue, and proceed
with feruour therin.Esech. 1 Looke where the force of the spirit
leads them, thither wil they go with a violence and impetuositie
as it were.
The Sea is alwayes ful, and neuer wasts; and so our
Ladie was announced by the Angel, to be ful of
grace, as truly she was a vast and immense Sea of al
graces. Of whom the mellifluous S. Bernard sayth vpo^
those words of,^ern. Aue gratia plena: In the mouth truly was
she ful of affabilitie; in her womb, with the grace of the Deitie;
in her hart, with the grace of chatitie; in her hand or work,
with the grace of mercie and liberalitie. So likewise are the
waters of the Sea exceeding bitter; and our Virgin
Marie was amarum mare, that is a bitter Sea, for diuers
respects, First for sorrow, for the losse of her Sonne in
the Temple: Behold thy Father and I haue sought thee with
sorrow. Then was she bitter, meerly of compassion, in
beholding the Spouses in the Nuptials to be abashed
and confounded for want of wine; she had compassion
of the Iewish nation, while she saw them to be reprobate
and forsaken of GOD; She pittied the Apostles in
seing them dispersed in the passion of her Sonne; But
especially was she bitterly sorie at the passion of her
Sonne, when the sword of sorrow tra^sfixed her hart;
and lastly was she bitter for her tedious pilgrimage
heer so long:Psal. and therefore would she say: Alas, how my
^i^grimage is prolonged!



THE EMBLEME.






THE POESIE.
NO sooner was the infant-world disclos'd,The Pause.
But that God's Spirit on the Sea repos'd:
Borne on the waters did impart a heat
By influence diuine: a fertil seat
He made that vast and barren Ocean's wombe
Twas fruitful when the Holie-Ghost was come.
The sacred Virgin was a Sea like this,
But darknes on the face of the Abysse,
Was neuer on her Soule, that shined bright
From her first being; for GOD sayd: Let light
Be made: the Word was in this Sea compriz'd,
When th' Holie-Ghost the waters fertiliz'd.



THE THEORIES.
COntemplate first, that when the world was
first created, and that the waters were diuided,
as it were,The Contemplation. by the Firmament, while
part was put aboue the Firmament and
part beneath, the waters beneath on the earth, were
called by the name of Maria, or Seas; and the Spirit of
GOD, as we haue it in Genesis, did incubare super aquas
couer, as we say, or ouershadow the waters: Which
was a work of the first Creation. So in the work of
our Redemption, where the blessed Virgin, Maria by
name, which signifyes the Seas also, it pleased the
Eternal Word, leauing the delicious bosome of the
heauenlie Father to descend into this Sea, of human
miseries to take them vpon him; and the Holie-Ghost
likewise to ouershadow her withal.
Consider then in the Temple of Salomon, that as besides
other riches and ornaments there, as the Propitiatorie
aboue; the Cherubins and Seraphins of each
side therof, the golden Candlestick in the midst, the
Altars of Perfumes and of Propitiation, heer and
there, with the lamps, the Veyle, the Ark, and the like
in their places, was planted a great vessel of Brasse,
ful of water, at the entrance of the said Te^ple, where
the Priests were to cleanse themselues, before they
entred to Sacrifice; and this Vessel was called, Mare
aeneum, or the brazen Sea. So ought the Priests in our
Churches before they enter or approach vnto the
dreadful Sacrifice of al Sacrifices, the Sacrifice of the
Masse, to recurre to this Mare aeneum, our Blessed Ladie,
to procure them a puritie of soule, to assist therat, or
approch thervnto.
Ponder lastly, that as GOD, the soueraigne Lord of
al things, communicates his offices and charges to
men according to his most holie and Diuine dispensation

very suitable and agreable to euerie one: as to
Moyses the office of a Law-giuer to his people of Israel;
to Aaro^ the office of high Priest; to Iosue, of Captain and
Leader of them into the land of promise; and consequently
gaue them talents accordingly to discharge
the same very punctually in al things. So is it likelie,
that in choosing his Mother, he vsed the self-same tenour
in his fayre dispositio^ therof, to wit, in appointing
her so to be the Starre of the Sea, he ordeyned her
no doubt to be the Ladie of the Sea, as her name imports.
Now then as in the Seas, he hath drencht and
plunged, as it were, an other world, since there is no
liuing creature but hath its like in the Sea also implicitiuely,
he hath likewise appointed her to be the Ladie
and Mistris of al the world. For how should she
saue from shipwrack, if were not Ladie and Mistris of
the waues and winds? And how should she be Ladie
of the Seas alone, if she were not the Ladie likewise of
the land? Since she who is stiled the Ladie of the Seas,
is the true and natural Mother of him, who is Lord
both of Sea and land, and al the world.


THE APOSTROPHE.
O Ladie of the Ocean,The Colloquie. Starre of the Sea, Sea of graces,
Fountain; of life, Spring of liuing waters, that flow fro^
the Libanus of the candour of glorie! Thou great Abysse of
limpid waters, whose bottome, none can reach vnto; whence nothing
ariseth, but the purest exhalations of Paradise; light clowd,
whence nothing falles but deawes and showres of graces. O
immense Ocean of Charitie, which bearest vp al things, and
where easily nothing sincks; bitter, but in the dolours and passions
of thy Sonne; sweet to the creatures, that liue of thee, or
depend vpon thee. O grant, I beseech thee, that wholy relying on
thee, I perish not, and by neglecting thee and thy seruice, I incurre
not thy disgrace, nor so running on the rocks of thy displeasure,
I split not on them, nor suffer shipwrack of my soule.




THE XXI. SYMBOL.
THE SHIP.

THE DEVISE.






THE CHARACTER.
THE Ship is the artificial Dolphin of the
Seas,The Impresa that much addicted to musick, is
neuer set on a merrier pin, then when
the winds whissel to her dancing. It is
a floating Castle, that hath the gates
open indeed, but trusts to her Battlements, which
she hath wel planted with Canons and Sacres, wherin
she more confides, then manie do in Sacred Canons;
her whole saluation depending vpon them. It
is a litle Common-wealth, whose whole Reason of
State consists in iealousies, and spyes, which she sends

vp to her turret-tops, to discouer, if the coasts be
clear, stil standing on her guard, against the neighbour
waues, that seeke but to swallow her vp. And
al her care is, to walke vpright amidst her enemies,
least vnawares they arrest her, and cite her to appeare
at Pluto's Court, for euerie errour or default
of the least ship-boy. There is no Bride requires so
much time to dresse her on her wedding-day, as she
to be rigd, whensoeuer she goes to sea. If they haue
their fillets to bred and wreath their haires with, she
hath her tacklings to trim her vp; whose ropes are as
manie and as intricate as they; if they haue their veyles
to spread vpon them, she hath her sayles, to hoyse
vp to go her wayes. It is the Lion of the seas, that feares
no Monsters, but is as dreadful herself, as anie
Monster, hauing as manie mouthes as Gun-holes, and
in euerie mouth a Serpent tongue, that spits and vomits
fire, and which euen spits her teeth too, in the face
of her enemies, which often sincks them vnder
water. It is one of the prettiest things in the world,
to see her vnder sayle, how like a Turkiecock she
strouts it out, as brauing euen the Elements themselues,
both aboue and beneath her, wherof the one
she ploughes with her slicing share, and braues the
other with her daring look. She is an excelle^t swimmer,
bnt no good diuer at al; which she neuer doth,
but sore against her wil, and that with so il successe,
as likely she is neuer seen more. The first that euer
was seen to our Antipodes, was thought by them to
haue had indeed a liuing soule with her; els would
the simple people say, how could so great a bulk, so
easily wind and turne it sell euerie foot; and this, because
they knew but the Oare only, and not the Rudder.
What would they haue said then, had they knowne
the effects of her Card and Compas? doubtles she had
a reasonable soule. She likely neuer goes without

her Pages with her, to wit, her Long-boat and her
Cockboat, wherof she makes such vse now and then,
as without them, she might starue for ought I know.
She is very ciuil, if a Marchant-man; but when she is
a Man of warre, then Marchants beware, and looke
to your selues.


THE MORALS.

DE LONGE PORTANS PANEM.

IN the Te^ple of Salomon, no gold would serue his
greatcuriositie,The Mott^. but that of Ophir. Which the Southern
Quee^ of Saba knowing wel perhaps, thought no
doubt her presents would be gratful to him, coming
so fro^ parts remote. Who is he that is not take^ much
with verie toyes that come fro^ China, which carrie I
know nor how in themselues, (at least in our opinio^)
a kind of luster with the^, greater farre then otherwise
they would. The prese^ts which the Magi brought vnto
the Crib, coming from the East were deemed by
them sit presents for a King, yea for a GOD. And how
were Iosue and Caleb the Spyes and Intelligencers of the
people of Israel extolled and magnifyed at their returne
with those rare and admirable booties fetched from
Canaan? And yet the gold of Ophir was but gold, a yellow
earth; the presents made by Saba, such as that Countrie
afforded; and those India^ toyes, but toyes indeed.
Yea the guifts the Magi brought, had greater luster
with them from the giuers harts, then fro^ the^selues;
and more respected for the place to which, the^ whe^ce
they came. And for those forren fruits, they came indeed
fro^ the la^d of promise, fro^ Palestin, which was but
the figure only of the Heauenlie countrie. But lo, our
Inco^parable Virgin like a Ship, most richly fraighted,
hath brought vs Bread fro^ farre. What bread; but the
true and liuing bread? How farre? As farre as Heauen.
But how bread? Bread whose corne was haruested in
the Mightie man's rich Boozfield, framed by the
hand of the Maister Baker himself of a most pure

meale or flower, to wit, of the immaculate Bloud of
the holie Virgin herself, baked in the Ouen of an arde^t
Loue, which She hath brought into the world. And
therefore is truly sayd: DE LONGE PO^TANS PANEM.


THE ESSAY.
I Can not tel, whether in the world besides,
be a more statelie fight to behold,
then an English Ship vnder sayle, riding
in the Ocean, and cutting the watrie playnes
with her sharp keel,The Reuiew. in case she haue
a galla^t gentle gale in the poop; for then they feast it,
and make good chear, who are the liuing soules abiding
in this bulk of human art, compiled togeather
in despite of Nature, to frame a liuing creature more
then she intended, that neither should be fish nor
fowle, yet liue in the ayre and water. But if the Seas
proue rough, and al the marine Mo^sters vise vp against
her, co^spiring with the blustering Spirits of the ayre;
to sinck her quite, it is a sport to see, how she rides and
prances on his crooked back, sporting herself the
while, and making a meer scoff at al their menaces*
There is an infinit number of seueral sorts of these
artificial creatures in the world, each country almost
hauing their kinds. There are Ships, Pinaces, Hoyes,
Barkes, Ketches, Galleyes, Galeons, Galleasses,
Frigots, Brigandines, Carackes, Argoseyes, for the
Seas; to say nothing of Lighters, Barges, Tiltboats,
Lighthorsmen, Oares, Canoas, and Gundeloes, for the
Riuers. The Ships do fly and swimme togeather, with
the help of ^ayles only; the Galleyes and their like, as
Swans do sometimes fly, and sometimes paddle with
the oare. They haue maine masts, crosse sayles, top and
top galla^ns, they haue stern, poop, rudden, ancker, cable,
decks, tacklings, gunnes, andigun-holes, where
they haue Canon Demy-cano^, Saker, Culuering; not

to speak of the smal shot, as muskets, harkebuses, and
firelocks, and a thousand more. And so much for the
sensles bodie of this bulk in it-self. But then to speak
of the soule, or policie, and oeconomie of this admirable
artificial creature, or mouing world, it is a busines
no lesse, to set them downe. For as for the Officers
which are simply necessarie either in the Admiral
or Vice-admiral of a Fleet or Royal Armado at
the seas, there is a General, a Lieutenant General, a
Captain, a Pilot, and the Pilot's mate; a Maister, and
the Maister's mate; a Marchant, and a Marcha^t's mate;
the Maister of the Ship-boyes, a Secretarie, a Chirurgion;
a Boatswain, a Purser, Dispensers, Cooks, Canonier,
and his mate, with vndergunners, ship-boyes and
marriners without number. The Captain commands
absolutely in al things; the chief marcha^t hath power
ouer the marchandize and commerce only. They
double so the principal Officers, that one may supply
the others want. The Secretarie sets downe the marcha^dize
the Ship is fraighted with, and takes accompt
of goods vnladed. The Pilot hath no other comma^d,
but in what concerns the nauigation. The Maister
hath co^mand ouer al the Mariners and saylers of the
Ship; and of al the prouisions and victuals; he places and
remoues the Officers at his pleasure. The Maisters of
the boyes are the ablest of al the marriners, and haue
the care of the cordages, sayles, and tacklings, and the
like, and command the yong marriners, and do only
giue correction to the Ship-boyes.


THE DISCOVRSE.
Bvt now come we to our mystical Ship,
whose wayes in the vast seas the Oraculous
Salomon admired so much.The Suruey. This had
for Architect and Shipwright no lesse
then the Blessed Trinitie it-self, wherin

the Diuine perso^s bestowed their chiefest Architecture.
For the Heauenlie Father employed his Omnipote^cie
therin as farre as the subiect was capable of,
the eternal Word made vse of his wisdome, in preseruing
so entire the seale of integritie, and the Holie-Ghost
shewed his Loue, by infusing such a plenitude of grace
into her. The matter she was framed of, tels vs she
was of herself, of wood doubtles most sacred and mysterious.
As the Cedar am I exalted in Libanus, and as the
Cypresse in mount Sion;Eccl. 24. as the beautiful; Oliue in the fields; and
am exalted as the Planetree neer the waters in the streets. This
Ship then was made of the Cedar of virginitie, in that
the Cedar is odoriferous and incorruptible; and therefore
signifyes her virginitie, which made her grateful
and odoriferous to GOD, and kept her flesh immaculate
and incorrupted. It was made of Cypresse, which
is a wood so strong and solid, as shrincks and yealds not
with anie burden, being qualities most apt for shipping:
nor would the charitie of the blessed Virgin permit
her euer, to shrinck vnder the weight of tribulations.Cant. 8.
For Loue is strong as death. She was made of the
Oliue of pietie, which alwayes flourisheth, and looks
green, in that her pietie neuer fayled any, either in the
Spring of their youth, in the Autumne of their age,
in the Winter of tribulation, or in the heat of inordidinate
concupiscences. She was further made of the
Plane-tree of humilitie; for the Plane is a most spacious
and ampletree; and humilitie made the Virgin most ample
and illustrious; because thereby she receaued him
into her womb, whom the Heauen of heauens was
not able to containe, since S. Bernard sayth: She pleased
with her virginitie, but conceaued through Humilitie.
Her stern, is her wisdome and discretion; her Oares
most sacred and holie affects; the Mast, high and sublime
contemplation; the Galleries, pure and chast conuersation;
the ropes and tacklings, the cords of loue,

vnitie and concord; the Anckor, firme hope and confidence
in GOD; the deckes and hatches, external and holie
example and edification; the sayles, cleanes and puritie
of bodie, ioyned with the blush of shamfastnes,
The Pilot or Maister of the ship, the Holie-Ghost, which
steered, guided, and directed her in the whole nauigation
of her sacred life. For if they be led by the Holie-Ghost,
who are the sonnes and children of GOD, how
much rather shal she be gouerned by it, who is acknowledged
to be not only the Daughter but likewise
the natural Mother of GOD!
The forme and figure of a Ship we know to be open
aboue, close beneath, streight in the beginning, narrow
in the end, broad in the midst, and very deep. And
this ship of ours the Incomparable Virgin, according
to the superiour part of the Soule, was open to receaue
Celestial guifts, but as for the inferiour, wholy
shut vp fro^ terrene affectio^s; and moreouer so strict in
the beginning of her Co^ception, as Original sinne could
find no place to stayne her in; She was narrow in the
end of the Passio^, while for the death of her Sonne she
was put to diuers streights; in the midst she was most,
capacious or broad, because, as we sayd, Who^ the heauens
could not hold, she held and co^tained in the lap of her wo^b;
Lastly she was deep through humilitie, when being
raysed to the top of the highest dignitie of being the
Mother of GOD, she calles herself his lowlie ha^dmayd
saying: Behold the handmayd of our Lord. But for the M^st
indeed,Luc. 1. and tree of this Ship, it was CHRIST Our
Lord,Luc. 23. the verie same, who called himself green wood,
saying: If this be done in green Wood, what shal become
of the dry? Erected also,Heb. 7. as S. Paul sayth: Being made
higher then the heauens; raysed in, and born of the
Virgin Ship. Of which tree or mast,Ex. 27. we haue this
in Exodus: They took out a Cedar from Libanus to make

be no other then Christ erected in this Ship of our Virgin
heer.
The Ships are made for burden; and for as much as
Nations oftentimes stand in need of each other, they
serue for transportation of commodities to and fro,
and especially corne from the fruitful to barren
countries, with the abundance of the one to supply
the necessities of the other. And therefore the blessed
Virgin, as we haue in the Prouerbs, was made as a
Marchants ship,Pro 31. bringing her bread from farre and remote parts.
For euen from the fertile and most fruitful soyle of
the Celestial Paradise, brought she indeed that supersubstantial
bread, into the barren coasts of this
world;Lue. 6. which bread sayes of itself: I am the liuing bread,
who descend from heauen, wherewith the faythful are fed
and nourished. Whence appeares, how farre off this
mysterious ship brought the Celestial Bread vnto vs,
being no lesse then from heauen to the earth, an immense
distance; shewing yet a greater distance of
natures, in that this Bread consists of the Diuine and
human nature, which are infinitly distant one from
the other, togeather with the distance of merits;
because no merits had euer deserued, that for our
sakes GOD should become Ma^; Which bread it seemed
she likewise made her self, so signifyed by that Woman
in the Ghospel, who mingled togeather the
three ha^d-fuls of meale, as heer are vnited the soule,
the bodie, and the Diuinitie itself. O glorious Baker
of so heauenline bread! O Diuine bread so mysteriously
made! And most rich and precious Ship, that conueighed
the same to vs from parts so remote!
Lastly, as the Ship vseth the Winds only to sayle with,
and the Galley passes not to and fro without the help
of oares: So likewise between the blessed Virgin,

and the rest of Saints, this difference is; that they, as
Galleyes, performe the nauigation of this life, with
the strength of the oares, as it were, against the
wind and tyde of carnal difficulties, and trauel
with infinit encounters of worldlie assaults, vnto
their heauenlie Countrie. But the blessed Virgin with
the gentle gale of the Holie-Ghost, and the most sweet
push thereof, was conueighed thither. And as the Ship
is driuen with twelue sorts of seueral winds; the blessed
Virgin like a prosperous Ship, with the twelue
fruits of the Holie-Ghost, which S. Paul reckons vp, as
with so manie fauourable winds, without rebellion
or impugnation of sinne, or anie Remora, to stop her
course, was sweetly wafted to the hauen of the Celestial
Countrie.


THE EMBLEME.







THE POESIE.
A Iewish Rabby sayes, the Angels fed
On Manna; But an other,The Pause. better read,
Affirmes' twas Light condens'd (and so made meat.
For men, (which shin'd before God's glorious seat,
As food of Angels. True; for one of three,
The Second Person of the Trinitie
Descends, and sayes, He is the liuing bread,
He was the light whereon the Angels fed:
Which, when the Holie-Ghost o'er cast his shade
Was first condends'd, when Flesh the Word was made
In Maries womb, wherewith our Soules are fed.
She is the Ship, that brought from farre her bread.


THE THEORIES.
COntemplate first,The Contemplation. Reg 3. that as Ships of Salomon,
as we read of in the book of
Kings, brought most precious gold
from Ophir, to adorne the Temple he
had built to the Maiestie of GOD;
So our mystical Ship, brought forth
our Lord, the finest gold; not from Ophir truly, but
from the most precious Mines of Heaue^; with whose
merits, as the daughters of Hierusalem, deckt their
heads in memorie of Salomon's yealow hayre and
Crowne: So the Catholick Church is most gloriously
enriched, honoured, and delighted, by our second
Salomon's glorious merits, through whose valew and
inestimable price, great su^mes of debts are defrayed;
with whose admirable vertue, as with a most
present antidote, are the sick and infirme cured, and
the harts of the faythful co^forted; and finally through
his meruelous luster and bright splendour, the Temple
of the Church incredibly shineth.
Consider then, that wheras other Ships are subiect to
infinit dangers in the Seas, being tossed with te^pests

and oftentimes cast away and swallowed vp in the
waues, or dasht against the Rocks; for Ecclesiasticus
sayth:Ec. 43. Who trauel on the seas, do recount their perils: either
tyrannized by the winds, or falling into the hands of
Pirats or running on the Sirtes or Scylla, and falling
sometimes into the gulf of Charibdis, and lastly allured
through the Sirens songs, to their owne destruction:
Yet this Ship of our Ladie heer, while of the one side,
the stormes of Original sinne had no power vpo^ her,
so as she felt not the least internal rebellion of the
bodie or mind, against the rectitude of Reason; and
of the other was inuincibly through the Diuine assistance
preserued against the assaults of the ghostlie
Enemie: So as neither the Syrtes or Scylla of riches, nor
the Charibdis of worldlie honour, nor the Pirats of
Concupiscence, nor the Sirens of eternal delights,
could stopp or hinder her, in the fayre nauigation,
she made vnto the heauenlie Countrie.
Ponder lastly, that as heretofore in the vniuersal
Deluge and floud of Noe, in that general inundation of
the wrath and furie of GOD, was no ma^ saued or anie liuing
creature besides, except such only, as fled to the
Arck of Noe, built in effect as a goodlie and statelie Ship:
So no sinner escapes the indignation of GOD, but such
as hye the^selues and fly vnto the Virgin-Mother for refuge,
according to that of S. Bernard. If thou darestnot
approach to the Maiestie of GOD, least thou melt as
wax before the fire; go to the Mother of Mercie, and shew
her thy wounds, and she for thee wil shew her breast
and paps, and the Sonne to the Father his side and wou^ds.
The Father wil not deny the Sonne requesting; the Sonne
wil not, deny the Mother crauing; the Mother wil not
deny the sinner weeping. My children, why feare you
to go to Marie? she is not austere, she is not bitter, but
milke and honie is vnder her to^gue. This is the Ladder

and honie is vnder her tongue. This is the Ladder
of sinners, this my great confidence, this the whole
reason of my hope. And what meruel? For can the
Sonne repel the Mother? or be repelled of the Mother?
Neither one, nor other. Let not therefore humane
frailtie feare to approach vnto her; For she is wholy
sweet, and sweetnes itself.


THE APOSTROPHE.
O Thou ^al and goodlie Arck,The Colloquie. thou valiant Woman,
valiant by excellence, more faire then Rachel, more
gracious then Hester, more pleasing then Sara,
more gentle and generous then Iudith, more sweet and chast
then Abiseig the Sunamite, more officious and prudent then
Abigail, more magnanimous then Debora, more illumined
then Marie the Sister of Moyses. Thou who hast found grace
before the eyes of GOD, work with thy prayers most dear
Ladie, O my most noble Princesse, that I may alwayes find
grace before thy Sonne. Thou who through thy Sonne
hast broken the head of the Serpent; crush likewise
through thy holie prayers his head vnder thy Seruants
feet. Thou Ship of the great GOD, who from those
counries so farre remote hast brought to vs the bread of Paradise,
true GOD in flesh Grant, I beseech thee, I may be fed with
the bread of grace, of life, and wisdome; and that receauing the
sacred bread of Angels, which is the precious Bodie of sweet
IESVS thy Sonne, I may euen suck in the fountain itself, the
most sweet pleasures, and the most pleasing sweetnesses of the
Diuinitie, and be wholy inebriated with the torrent of Diuine
consolations.




THE CONCLVSION TO HIS
PROPER GENIVS.
NOW heer, my Genius, shalt thou
dismisse thy Reader, with his Ship
ful fraught with the prayses of
the sacred Parthenes; and shutting
vp thyself in this Parthenian Paradice,
walk in it vp and downe by
thyself alone, without eye or arbiter,
to witnes the secret aspirations
of thy hart; while contemplating with thyself,
this great rich Magazin of the treasures of Nature,
enclosed in this spacious and ample GARDEN of our
SACRED PARTHENES, thou enter into thyself a while,
gathering the fruits and flowers, at least of good desires,
from the obiects themselues. Not be a whit dismayd,
though they put thee to the blush, to be
taught thy dutie so, from irrational and insensible
things; but yeald and submit thy hart, to learne of
each creature, how to serue the common Creatour of
vs al. And as thou walkest vp and downe, taking a
view of those curious knots of euer-flourishing and
green hearbs, say this vnto thyself: When shal I order
and compose my greener and inordinat affections in
so faire and goodlie a decorum, and so sweet proportion?
Walking in the Allyes, say: Lord, conduct me
by the streight and readie way; and shew me thy
kingdome. Noting the neatnes of those walkes, how
trim and smooth they are, say: When shal it be, I be so
curious, to purge and take away the impurities from
my hart? The great diuersitie of flowers, wil present

to thee, the great multiplicitie and wel-nigh infinitie
of thy thoughts, as various as numerous, and al as tra^sitorie
as they. If thou seest a swarme of Emo^ts at thy
feet, charged and loaden al with graynes of corne,
and carrying them with toyle, vnto their litle Grayneries,
one groaning with his load, another newly
discharged therof, most lightly and nimbly running
for another, say vnto thyself: Oh slothful wretch,
looke on these people heer, how they labour to
mayntaine that paltrie litle carkas of theirs, of smal
continuance; and thou to mayntaine thy soule, in
good estate, so created for Eternitie, art so litle laborious,
and industrious. When thou beholdst the trees,
ful loaden with their fruits, so faine to be shored vp
beneath; remember the menace of fire, the Sauiour
made against the barren tree. When thou seest the
plants, to be watered so, against the scor ching of the
Sun, thinke and say inwardly in thyself: When shal,
we with our teares appease the auenging Wrath of
the Diuine Iustice? The faire and beautiful Pansyes,
but without al sent or odour, wil tel thee, of the vnprofitable
agitations of thy soule; the Tyme, the
bitternes of displeasures; the Poppie, that lulles the
soule a-sleep, wil admonish thee of the sweet extasies
and rauishments of heauenlie Contemplation,
thou neglectest so much; the Rubarb, or hearb called
Patience, wil put thee in mind of that Vertue, which
giues it the name; the Balme, of a good and faire
reputation. Nor stay thou heer, but runne to resalute
the proper and peculiar Familie likewise the genuine
Symbols of the Sacred Parthenes, so mentioned
aboue; and note the documents they wil yeald thee,
for thine owne behoof; and then take thy leaue of
al. The priuate Garden wil teach thee to keep thy

vertues close, if thou hast anie; and not very easily
to loose their odour, through a voluntarie publishing
the same to others. Saluting the Rose, enuironed
with thorns, think, there is no contentment to
be found, without displeasures. Beholding the Lillie
among bryars, imagin Chastitie is so conserued
amid austerities. The Violet wil figure thee a low
and humble esteeme of thyself; which yet is a fragrant
and delicious flower. The Heliotropion, which
hath alwayes its look to the Sun-wards, and followes
it by day, and closes vp agayne with the
night, wil put thee in conceipt of the true Sun of
Iustice indeed thou oughtst to follow, and should
be the whole obiect of thy soule. The Deaw, that
falles from Heauen, wil remember thee of the
heauenlie graces, that were shed and distilled from
Heauen, by the coming of the Holie-Ghost in forme of
fierie tongues. The busie and industrious Bee, which
bounds and rebounds so aloft in the ayre as she
flyes, wil cal to thy mind, those words of thy great
Maister: Work, and negotiate while tune lasts. The
Heauens, wil attract thy thoughts, to heauenlie
things; the Rain-bow, moue thee to pardon iniuries,
and immediatly to reconcile thee, to thine
enemies. The Moon wil tax thee of inconstancie,
like to hers; the Starre, rayse vp thy thoughts to a
vertuous emulation, to become a Starre indeed,
in the heauenlie Hierarchie, as it is so fixed
in the celestial Firmament. The Oliue wil
warne thee, to be alwayes green in thy good
purposes, and fruitful in good works. The
Nightingal, wil let thee heare a taste or relish, as
it were, of the heauenlie Quiers, and sacred
Alleluya's, sung by the Angels in Heauen. The

Palme, wil stirre thee to Martyrdome; at least, to fortitude
in difficult atchieuements. The House, wil cal
the heauenlie mansions and Tabernacles into thy
thoughts, which are permanent for euer. The Hen, wil
cause thee to fly, to the heauenlie protection. The
Pearl, wil inuite thee to sel al thou hast, to purchase
that of the Heauenlie Kingdome. The Doue, wil retire
thee, and draw thee into solitude. The Fountain, wil
allure thee, to drinck of the waters, which the Sauiour
mentioned, that spring to eternal life. The Mount, wil
cal thee to a higher degree of perfection; the Sea, represent
to thee an Ocean of grace, to launch forth
thy Soule, as a webrigd Ship, into that Mayne, to arriue
at last into the Hauen of Eternal Happines; and
that especially through the steering of our Sacred
Parthenes,
Cui Laus and gloria in secula, Amen.

