



STrike saile, poore soule, in sins tempestuous tide,
That runst to ruine and eternall wracke:
Thy course from heaven is exceeding wide,
Hels gulfe thou ent'rest, if grace guide not backe:
Sathan is Pilot in this navigation,
The Ocean, sin; the rocke, hell and damnation.


Warre with the dragon, and his whole alliance,
Renounce his league, intends thy utter losse;
Take in sinnes flag of truce, set out defiance,
Display Christs ensigne with the bloudie crosse:
Against a Faith-proofe armed Christian knight,
The hellish coward dares not mannage fight.


Resist him then, if thou wilt victor be,
For so he flees, and is disanimate;
His fierie darts can have no force at thee,
The shield of faith dooth all their points rebate:
He conquers none to his infernall den,
But yeelding slaves, that wage not fight like men.



Those in the dungeon of eternall darke,
He hath enthralled everlasting date,
Branded with Reprobations cole-blacke marke,
Within the neveropening ramd up gate:
Where Dives rates one drop of water more
Than any crowne that ever monarch wore.


Where furies haunt the harttorne wretch, despaire,
Where clamours cease not, teeth are ever gnashing,
Where wrath and vengeance sit in horrours chaire,
Where quenchlesse flames of sulphur fire be flashing,
Where damned soules blaspheme God in despight,
Where utter darkenesse stands remov'd fro^ light.


Where plagues inviron, torments compasse round,
Where anguish rores in never stinted sorrow,
Where woe, woe, woe, is every voices sound,
Where night eternall never yeelds tomorrow:
Where damned tortures dreadfull shall persever,
So long as God is God, so long is ever:

Finis:




 Of the punishments which our Lord threateneth unto such as live a sinfull life.
ONe of the principall meanes that our Lord hath used oftentimes to bridle the harts of men, and to draw them unto the obedience of his

commaundements, hath beene, to set before their eyes the horrible plagues and punishments that are prepared for such persons as be rebels and transgressors of his law. For althogh the hope of the rewards that are promised unto the good in the life to come, may moove us very much hereunto: yet are we commonly more mooved with things that bee irkesome unto us, than with such as bee pleasant: even as wee see by dayly experience, that wee are vexed more with an injurie done unto

us, than delighted with any honour, and wee are more troubled with sickenesse, than comforted with health: and so by the discommoditie of sickenesse, we come to understand the commoditie of health, as by a thing so much the better perceived, by how much more it is sensibly felt. Now for this cause did our Lord in times past use this mean more than any other, as it appeareth most clearly by the writings of the Prophets, which are every where full of dreadfull sayings and threatenings,

wherewith our Lord pretendeth to put a terrour into the hearts of men, and so to bridle and subdue them under the obedience of his law. And for this end hee commaunded the prophet Ieremie, That hee should take a white booke, and write in the same all the threatnings and calamities which he had revealed unto him, even from the first day he began to talke with him, untill that present houre, and that he should read the same in the presence of all the people, to see if peradventure they

would be moved therwith unto repentance, and to chaunge their former life, to the end, that hee might also chaunge the determination of his wrath, which hee had purposed to execute upon them. And the holy Scripture sayth, That when the Prophet had done according as he was commaunded by almighty God, and had read al those threatenings in the presence of the people, and of the rulers; there arose such a feare and terror amongst them, that they were all astonished, and as it were

bestraughted of their wits, looking one in anothers face, for the exceeding great fear which they had conceived of those words. This was one of the principall meanes which almightie God used with men in the time of the law written, and so hee did also in the time of the lawe of grace: in which, the holy Apostle sayth, That as there is revealed a justice, whereby God maketh men just, so is there also revealed an indignation and wrath, whereby hee punisheth the unjust: for which

cause, S. Iohn Baptist (the glorious forerunner of our Saviour Christ) was sent, with this commission and embassage to preach unto the world, That the axe was now put to the roote of the tree, and that everie tree that brought not foorth good fruite, should bee cut downe and cast into the fire. Hee said moreover, That there was another come into the world, more mightie than hee, that carried in his hand a fanne, to winnow and cleanse therewith his flower, and that hee would put up the corne into

his garner, but the chaffe hee will burne in a fire that should never bee quenched. This was the preaching and embassage which the holy fore-runner of our Savior Iesus Christ brought into the world. And so great was the thunder of these wordes, and the terrour which entered into mens hearts, so dreadfull, that there ran unto him of all estates and conditions of men, even of the very Pharisees and Publicanes, yea, and souldiours also (which of all others are woont to bee most dis

solute, and to have least care of their consciences*) and each of them demanded for himselfe particularly of that holy man, what hee should doe to attaine unto salvation, and to escape those terrible threatenings which hee had denounced unto them, so great was the feare they had conceived of them.
And this is that (deare Christian brother) which I doe at this present (in the behalfe of almightie God) deliver unto thee, althogh not with such fervencie of

spirit and like holinesse of life, yet that which importeth more in this case, with the same truth and certainetie; for so much as the faith and Gospell which S. Iohn Baptist then preached, is even the same now taught.
Now, if thou bee desirous to understand in few words, how great the punishment is, that almightie God hath threatened in his holy Scriptures to the wicked, that which may most breefely and most to the purpose bee spoken in this matter, is

this: That like as the reward of the good is an universall good thing, even so the punishment of the wicked is an universall evill, which comprehendeth in it all the evils that are. For the better understanding whereof, it is to bee noted, That all the evils of this life are particular evils, and therefore doe not torment all our sences generally, but only one, or some of them. As taking an example of the diseases of our bodie, wee see, that one hath a disease in his eyes, another

in his eares: one is ficke in the heatr, another in the stomacke, some other in his head. And so diverse men are diseased in diverse parts of the bodie; howbeit, in such wise, that none of all these diseases be generally throghout all the members of the bodie, but perticular to some one of them. And yet for all this, wee see what greefe onely one of these diseases may put us unto, and how painefull a night the sicke man hath in any one of these infirmities, yea, although

it bee nothing else but a little ach in one tooth. Now let us put the case, that there were some one man sicke of such an universall disease, that hee had no part of his bodie, neither any one joint or sence free from his proper pain, but that at one time and instant hee suffered most exceeding sharpe torment in his head, in his eyes, and eares, in his teeth, and stomacke, in his liver and heart: and to bee short, in all the rest of his members and joints of his bodie, and that hee

lay after this sort stretching himselfe in his bed, beeing pained with these greefes and torments, everie member of his bodie having his particular torment and greefe: Hee (I say) that should lie thus pained and afflicted, how great torment and greefe of mind and bodie (thinke yee) should hee sustaine? Oh, what thing could any man imagine more miserable, and more woorthie of compassion? Surely, if thou shouldest see but a dogge to be so tormented and greeved in the street,

his verie paines would move thy heart to take pittie upon him. Now this is that (my deare Christian brother, if any comparison may bee made betweene them) which is suffered in that most cursed and horrible place of hell, and not onely during for the space of one night, but everlastingly, for ever and ever. For like as the wicked men have offended Almightie God with all their members and sences, and have made armour of them all to serve sinne,

even so will hee ordaine, that they shall bee there tormented everie one of them with his proper torment.
There shall the wanton unchast eyes bee tormented with the terrible sight of devils: the eares with the confusion of such horrible cries and lamentations which shall there bee heard: the nose with the intollerable stinke of that ougly, filthie, and loathsome place: the tast, with a most ravenous hunger and thirst: the touching, and all the members of

the bodie with extreame burning fire. The imagination shall bee tormented by the conceiving of greefes present: the memorie, by calling to mind the pleasures past: the understanding, by considering what benefites are lost, and what endlesse miseries are to come.
This multitude of punishments the holy scripture signifieth unto us, when it sayth, Math. 15. Psalm. 10. That in hell there shall bee hunger, thirst, weeping, wail^ng, gnashing of teeth, swords double edged,

spirits created for revengement, serpents, worms, scorpions, hammers, wormewood, water of gall, the spirit of tempest, and other things of like sort. Whereby are signified unto us (as in a figure) the multitude and dreadfull terrour of the most horrible torments and paines that be in that cursed place. There shall bee likewise darkenesse inward and outward, both of bodie and soule, farre more obscure than the darkenesse of Aegypt, which was to bee felt even with

hands, Exo. 20. There shall bee fire also, not as this fire here, that tormenteth a little, and shortly endeth, but such a fire as that place requireth, which tormenteth exceedingly, and shall never make an end of that tormenting. This beeing true, what greater wonder can there bee, than that they which beleeve and confesse this for truth, should live with such most straunge negligence and carelesnesse as they doe? What travell and paines would not a man willingly

take to escape even one onely day, yea, one houre, the very least of these torments? and wherefore doe they not then, to escape the everlastingnesse of so great paines and horrible torments, endure so little a travell, as to follow the exercise of vertue. Surely, the consideration of this matter were able to make any sinfull soule to feare and tremble, in case it were deepely regarded.
And if amongst so great number of paines, there were any manner hope of end or release, it would be

some kind of comfort: but alas it is not so, for there the gates are fast shut up from all expectation of any maner of ease or hope. In all kind of paines and calamities that bee in this world, there is alwais some gap lying open, whereby the patient may receive some kind of comfort: sometimes reason, sometimes the weather, sometimes his friends, sometimes the hearing that others are troubled with the very same disease, and sometimes (at the least) the hope of an end may cheare him

somewhat: onely in these most horrible pains and miseries that be in hell, all the wayes are shut up in such sort, and all the havens of comfort so embarred, that the miserable sinner cannot hope for remedie on any side, neither of heaven, nor of earth, neither of the time past, or present, or of the time to come, or of any other means. The damned soules thinke, that all men are shooting darts at them, and that all creatures have conspired against them, and that even they themselves are cruell against themselves.

This is that distresse whereof the sinners doe lament by the Prophet, saying: The sorrowes of hell have compassed mee round about, and the snares of death hath besieged me: For on which side soever they looke or turne their eyes, they doe continually behold occasions of sorrow and greefe, and none at all of any ease or comfort. The wise virgins (sayth the Evangelist) that stood readie prepared at the gate of the bridegroom, entred in, and the gate was foorthwith locked fast. O locking everlasting,

o enclosure immortall, o gate of all goodnes, which shall never any more bee opened againe. As if hee had said more plainely, the gate of pardon, of mercie, of comfort, of grace, of intercession, of hope, and of all other goodnesse, is shut up for ever and ever. Six dayes and no more was Manna to bee gathered, but the seventh day, which was the Sabboth day, was there none to bee found: and therefore shall hee fast forever, that hath not in due time made his provision aforehand. The sluggard

(sayth the wise man) will not till his ground for feare of cold, and therefore shall hee beg his bread in summer, and no man shall give him to eat. And in another place hee sayth: He that gathereth in summer, is a wise sonne, but hee that giveth himselfe to sleeping at that season, is the sonne of confusion. For what confusion can there be greater than that which that miserable covetous rich man suffereth, who with a fewe crums of bread that fell from his table, might have purchased to himselfe abundance

of everlasting felicitie, and glorie in the kingdome of heaven? But because he would not give so small a thing, he came to such an extreame necessitie that hee begged (yea, and shall for ever beg in vaine) onely one drop of water, and shall never obtaine it. Who is not mooved with that request of that unfortunate damned person, who cried, O father Abraham have compassion on me, and send down Lazarus vnto mee, that hee may dip the tip of his finger in water, and touch my tongue,

for th^se horrible flames doe torment mee exceedingly. What smaller request could there bee desired than this? Hee durst not request so much as one cup of water, neither, that Lazarus should put his whole hand into the water, nor yet (which is more to bee wondered at) did he request so much as the whole finger, but onely the tip of it, that it might but touch his tongue; and yet even this alonely would not be granted unto him. Whereby thou maiest perceive, how fast the gate of all consolation

is shut up, and how universall that interdict and excommunication is, that is there laid upon the damned, sith this rich glutton could not obtaine so much as this small request. So that wheresoever the damned persons doe turne their eyes, and on which side soever they stretch their hands, they shall not find any manner of comfort, bee it never so small. And as hee that is in the sea choaked, and almost drowned under the water, not finding any stay wherupon to set his foot, stretcheth

foorth his hands oftentimes on every side in vaine (because all that hee graspeth after, is thinne and liquid water, which deceives him) even so shall it fare with the damned persons, when they shall bee drowned in that deepe sea of so many miseries, where they shall strive and strug*gle alwayes with death, without finding any succour or place of stay, whereupon they may rest themselves. Now this is one of the greatest paines wherewith they be tormented in that cursed place:

for if these torments shold have their continuance li^ mitted but for a certaine time, though it were for a thousand, yea, a hundred thousand millions of years, yet even this would bee some little comfort unto them, for nothing is perfectly great, in case it have an end: But alas, they have not so much as this poore and miserable comfort: but contrariwise, their paines are equall in continuance with the eternity of almightie God, and the lasting of their miserie with the eternitie of Gods glorie. As

long as almightie God shall live, so long shall they die: and when Almightie God shall cease to be God, then shall they also cease to be as they are. O deadly life, o immortall death! I know not whether I may truly tearme thee, either life or death: for if thou be life, why dost thou kill? And if thou be death, why doest thou endure? Wherefore I will call thee neither the one, nor the other, for so much as in both of them there is contained something that is good: as in life there is rest,

and in death there is an end (which is a great comfort to the afflicted) but thou hast neither rest not end. What art thou then? Marry, thou art the worst of life, and the worst of death; fo^ of death thou hast the torment, without any end, and of life thou hast t^e continuance without any rest O bitter composition, o unsavorie purgation of our Lords cup! of the which, all the sinners of the earth shall drinke their part.
Now in this continuance in this eternitie, I would

wish that thou (my deare Christian brother) wouldst fixe the eyes of thy consideration a little while: and that as the clean beast cheweth the cud, even so thou wouldest weigh this point within thy selfe with great deliberation. And to* the intent thou maiest do it the better, consider a little the paines that a sicke man abideth in one evill night, especially if he be vexed with any vehement greefe, or sharpe disease. Marke how oft hee tumbleth and tosseth in his bed, what disquietnes he hath, how long and tedious

one night seemeth unto him, how duly hee counteth all the houres of the clocke, and how long he deemeth each houre of them to bee, how hee passeth the time in wishing for the dawning of the day; which notwithstanding, is like to helpe him, little towards the curing of his disease. If this then bee accounted so great a torment, what torment shall that bee (trowyee) in that everlasting night in hell, which hath no morning, nor so much as any hope of any dawning of the day?

O darknesse most obscure! o night everlasting! o night accursed even by the mouth of almightie God and all his Saints! That one shall wish for light, and shall never see it, neither shall the brightnesse of the morning arise any more. Consider then what a kind of torment shall that bee, to live everlastingly in such a night as this is, lying not in a soft bed (as the sicke man dooth) but in a hote burning furnace, foming out such terrible raging flames. What shoulders shall be able to abide those

horrible heats. If it seeme to us as a thing intollerable to have onely some part of our feet standing upon a panne of burning coales, for the space of repeating the Lords prayer, What shall it bee (thinke you) to stand bodie and soule burning in the midst of those everlasting hot raging fires in hell, in comparison of which, the fires of this world are but painted fires. Is there any wit or judgement in this world? Have men their right sences? do they understand what these words import? or are they

peradventure persuaded, that these are onely the fables of Poets? or doe they thinke, that this appertaineth not to them, orels that it was onely meant for others? None of all this can they say, for so much as our faith assureth us most certainely herein. And our Saviour Christ himselfe, who is everlasting trueth, crieth out in his Gospell, saying, Heaven and earth shall faile, but my word shall not faile.
Of this miserie there followeth another as great as it, which is, that the

paines are alwaies continuing in one like degree, without any manner of intermission, or decreasing. All manner of things that are under the cope of heaven, doe moove and turne round about with the same heaven, and do never stand still at one state or beeing, but are continually either ascending or descending. The sea and the rivers have their ebbing and flowing, the times, the ages, and the mutable fortune of men, and of kingdomes, are evermore in continuall motion. There is no feaver

so fervent, that dooth not decline, neither greefe so sharpe, but that after it is much augmented, it dooth forthwith decrease. To be short, all the tribulations and miseries are by little and little worne away with time, and as the common saying is, Nothing is sooner dried up than teares. Onely that paine in hell is alwaies greene, onely that feaver never decreaseth, only that extremitie of heat knoweth not what is either evening or morning. In the time of Noahs flood, Almightie God rained forty daies and

fortie nights, continually without ceasing upon the earth, and this sufficed to drowne the whole world. But in that place of torment in hell, there shall raine everlasting vengeance, and darts of furie upon that cursed land, without ever ceasing so much as one onely minute or moment. Now what torment can be greater, and more to be abho^^^d, than continually to suffer after one like manner, without any kind of alteration or chaunge? Though a meat bee never so delicate, yet in case wee

feed continually therupon, it will in very short time be very loathsome unto us: for no meat can be more precious and delicat than that Manna was, which almightie God sent downe unto the children of Israel in the desart, and yet because they did eat continually therof, it made them to loath it, yea, and provoked them to vomite it up again. The way that is all plaine (they say) wearieth more than any other* because alwais the varietie (yea even in punishment) is a kind of comfort. Tell me then, if things that

bee pleasant and savorie, when they be alwaies after one manner, are an occasion of loathsomenesse and paine: what kind of loathsomnesse will that be which shall bee caused by those most horrible paines and torments in hell, which do continue everlastingly after one like sort? What will the damned and cursed creatures think, when they shall there see themselves so utterly abhorred and forsaken of almightie God, that hee will not so much as with the remission of any one sin, mitigate somwhat their

torments. And so great shall the furie and rage bee which they shall there conceive against him, that they shall never cease continually to curse and blaspheam his holy name. Vnto all these pains, there is also added the pain of that everlasting consumer, to wit, the worme of conscience, wherof the holy Scripture maketh so oftentimes mention, saying, Their worme shal never die, and their fire shall never bee quenched. This worme is a furious raging despight and bitter repentance, without anie fruit,

which the wicked shall alwais have in hell, by calling to their remembrance the oportunitie and time they had whiles they were in this world, to escape those most greevous and horrible torments, and how they wold not vse the benefit thereof. And therefore when the miserable sinner seeth himselfe thus to be tormented and vexed on every side, and doth call to mind how many daies and yeares hee hath spent idly in vanities, pastimes, and pleasures; and how oftentimes he was advertised of this perill, and

how little regard he tooke thereof: What shall hee thinke? What anguish and sorrow shall there be in his heart? Hast thou not read in the Gospell, that there shall be weeping and wailing, and gnashing of teeth? The famine of Aegypt endured onely seven yeares, but that in hell shall endure everlastingly. In Aegypt they found a remedie, though with great difficultie and charge, but for this, there shall never any remedie be found. Theirs was redeemed with monie and cattell, but this can never bee redeemed

with any manner of exchange. This punishment cannot be pardoned, this paine cannot bee exchaunged, this sentence cannot bee revoked. Oh, if thou knewest and wouldest consider, how everie one condemned to hell, shall there remain tormenting and renting himselfe, weeping, and wailing, and saying: O miserable and unfortunate wretch that I am, what times and oportunities have I suffered to passe in vaine? A time there was, when with one cup of cold water I might

have purchased to my selfe a crowne of glorie, and when also with such necessarie workes of mercie in releeving the poore, I might have gained life everlasting. Wherefore did I not looke before me? How was I blinded with things present? How did I let pa^^^ the fruitfull yeares of aboundance, and did not enrich my selfe? If I had beene brought up amongst Infidels and Pagans, and had beleeved that there had been nothing els but onely to be borne, and to die, then might I have

had some kind of excuse, and might have said, I knew not what was commanded or prohibited me: but for so much as I have lived amongst Christians, and was my selfe one of them professed, and held it for an article of my beleefe, that the hour should come when I should give up an account after what order I had spent my life: forsomuch also as it was daily cried out unto mee by the continuall preaching and teaching of Gods embassadours (whose advertisements manie following,

made preparation in time, and laboured earnestly for the provision of good workes:) forsomuch I say as I made light of all these examples, and persuaded my selfe very fondly, that heaven was prepared for me, though I took no pains for it at all: what deserve I that have thus led my life? O ye infernall furies, come and rent me in peeces, and devour these my bowels, for so have I justly deserved, I have deserved eternall famishment, seeing I would not provide for my selfe while I had time. I

deserve not to reape, because I have not sowne; I am worthie to be destitute, because I have not laid up in store; I deserve that my request should now be denied mee, sith when the poore made request unto mee, I refused to releeve them: I have deserved to sigh and lament so long as God shall bee God; I have deserved, that this worme of conscience shall gnaw mine entrails for ever and ever, by representing unto me the little pleasure that I have enjoied, and the great felicitie which I have

lost, and how far greater that was which I might have gained, by forgoing that little which I would not forgoe. This is that immortall worme that shall never die, but shall lie there everlastingly gnawing at the entrailes of the wicked, which is one of the most terrible pains that can possibly be imagined.
Peradventure thou art nowe persuaded (good Reader) that there can bee added no more unto this, than hath beene said. But surely the mightie arme of God wanteth not force to

chastice his enemies more and more: for all these paines that are hetherto rehearsed, are such as doe appertaine generally to all the damned: but besides these generall paines, there are also other particular paines, which each one of the damned shall there suffer in diverse sort, according to the qualitie of his sinne. And so according to this proportion, the hautie and proud shall there bee abased and brought low to their great confusion. The covetous shall bee driven to great necessitie: the

glutton shall rage with continuall hunger and thirst. The letcherous shall burne in the very same flames which they themselves have enkindled. And those that have all their life time hunted after their pleasures and pastimes, shall live therein continuall lamentation and sorrow. But because examples are of very great force to moove our hearts, I will bring only one for this purpose, whereby somewhat of this matter may the better bee perceived. It is written of a certaine holy man, that he

saw the paines (in spirit) of a licentious and worldly man in this sort. First hee saw how the devils that were present at the houre of his death, when he yeelded up his ghost, snatched away his soule with great rejoycing, and made a present thereof to the prince of darkenesse, who was then sitting in a chair of fire, expecting the comming of this present. Immediatly after that it was presented before him, hee arose up out of his seat, and said unto the damned soule that hee would give him the preheminence

of that honourable seat, because hee had been a man of honour, and was alwaies very much affected to the same. Inconti nently after that hee was placed therein, crying and lamenting in that honourable torment, there appeared before him two other most ougly devils, and offered him a cup full of most bitter and stinking liquour, and made him to drinke and carouse it up all, perforce; saying, It is meet, sithence thou hast beene a lover of precious wines and bankets, that thou

shouldest likewise prove of this our wine, whereof all we doe use to drink in these parts.
Immediately after this there came other two, with two fierie trumpets, and setting them at his eares, began to blow into them flames of fire, saying, This melodie have wee reserved for thee, understanding that in the world thou wast very much delighted with minstrelcie and wanton songs: and suddainely hee espied other divels, loaden with vipers and serpents, the which they threw upon

the breast and bellie of that miserable sinner, saying unto him, that forsomuch as he had been greatly delighted with the wanton embracings and letcherous lusts of women, hee should now sollace himselfe with these refreshings, in stead of those licentious delights and pleasures, which hee had enjoyed in the world. After this sort (as the Prophet Esay sayth in the 47 chapter) when the sinner is punished, there is given measure for measure, to the end, that in such a great varietie and proportion

of punishments, the order and wisdome of Gods justice, might the more manifestly appeare.
This vision hath almightie God shewed in spirit to this holy man for advertisement and instruction, not that in hell these things are altogether so materially done, but that by them wee might understand in some manner the varietie and multitude of the pains which be there appointed for the damned. Whereof, I know not how some of the Pagans have had a certaine knowledge: for

a Poet speaking of this multitude of paines, affirmed, That although hee had a hundred mouthes and as many tongues, with a voice as strong as yron, yet were they not able only to expresse the names of them. A Poet hee was that spake this, but truly therin he spake more like a Prophet or an Evangelist than a Poet. Now then, if all this evill shall most assuredly come to passe, what man is hee, that seeing all this so certainely with the eyes of his faith, will not turne over the leafe,

and begin to provide for himselfe against that time? Where is the judgement of men nowe become? Where be their wits? yea, Where is at the least their selfe-love, which seeketh evermore for his own profite, and is much afraid of any losse? May it be thoght that men are become beasts, that provide onely for the time present? Or have they peradventure so dimmed their eye sight, that they cannot looke before them? Hearken (sayth Esay) Oyee deafe and yee blind, open your eyes that

you may see, Who is blind but my servant? And who is deafe but ye, unto whom I have sent my messengers? And who is blind, but hee that suffereth himselfe to bee sold for a slave? Thou that seest so many things, wilt thou not suffer thy selfe to see this? Thou that hast thine eares open, wilt thou not give eare hereunto? If thou beleeve not this, how art thou then a Christian? If thou beleeve it, and doest not provide for it, how canst thou bee thought a reasonable man? Aristotle sayth, That

this is the difference between opinion and imagination, that an imagination alone is not sufficient to cause a feare, but an opinion is: for if I doe imagine that a house may fall upon mee, it is not enough to make me afraid, unlesse I beleeve or have an opinion it will be so indeed: for then it is sufficient to make mee afraid. And hereof commeth the feare that murderers alwaies have, by reason of the suspition they conceive, that their enemies do lie in wait for them. If then the opinion and

only suspition of danger is able to cause the greatest courage to feare, how is it that the certaintie and beleefe of so many and so great terrible miseries (which are farre more sure than anie opinion) dooth not make thee to seare. If thou perceivest, that for these many yeares past thou hast lead a licentious and sinfull life, and that at the last, according to present justice, thou art condemned to these horrible torments in hell: if also there appeare by probable conjecture, that there is no more

likelyhood of thy amendment for ensuing years to come, than there was in those alreadie past, how happeneth it, that running headlong into so manifest a daunger, thou art not at all afraid? Especially, considering the sinfull state wherin thou livest, and the horrible paines and torments which doe attend for thee, and the time which thou hast lost, and the endlesse repentaunce which thou shalt have therefore in the most horrible torments of hell. Assuredly, it goeth beyond the compas

of all common sence and conceit of humane reason, to consider, That there should bee such negligent, wilfull, grosse, and carelesse blindnesse, able to enter and take such deepe rooting in the soule of man.




WHo loves this life, fro^ love his love doth erre,
And chusing drosse, rich treasure doth denie,
Leaving the pearle, Christs counsels to preferre,
With selling all we have, the same to buy:
O happie soule, that doth disburse a summe,
To gaine a kingdome in the life to come.


Such trafficke may be tearmed heav'nly thrift,
Such venter hath no hazard to dissuade
Immortall purchase, with a mortall gift,
The greatest gaine that ever merchant made:
To get a crowne where Saints and Angels sing,
For laying out a base and earthly thing.


To tast the ioyes no humane knowledge knowes,
To heare the tunes of the coelestiall quires,
T'attaine heau'^^ sweet and mildest calme repose,
To se^ Gods face, the summ^ of good desires:
Which by his glorious saints i^ (...) ^yde,
Yet sigh* with seeing, never satisfide.



God as he is, sight beyond estimate,
Which angels tongues are untaught to discover,
Whose splendor doth the heavens illustrate,
Vnto which sight each sight becomes a lover:
Whom all the glorious court of heaven laud,
With praises of eternities applaud.


There where no teares are to interprete greeves,
Nor any sighs, heart dolours to expound,
There where no treasure as surpris'd by theeves,
Nor any voice that speakes with sorrowes sound:
No use of passions, no distempered thought,
No spot of sinne, no deed of errour wrought.


The native home of pilgrime soules abod,
Rest's habitation, ioies true residence,
Ierusalem's new citie built by God,
Form'd by the hands of his owne excellence:
With gold-pav'd streets, the wals of precious stone,
Where all sound praise to him sits on the throne.

Finis.




@ Of the glorie of the blessed Saints in Heaven.
TO the end there might want nothing to stir up our mindes to vertue, after the paines which Almightie God threateneth to the wicked, he dooth also set before us the reward of the good:

which is, that glorie and everlasting life which the blessed Saints doe enjoy in heaven, whereby he dooth very mightily allure us to the love of the same. But what manner of thing this reward, and what this life is, there is no tongue, neither of angels nor of men, that is sufficient to expresse it. Howbeit, that wee may have some kind of savor and knowledge therof, I intend here to rehearse even word for word, what S. Augustine sayth in one of his meditations, speaking of the life everlasting (ensuing this

transitorie time) and the joies of the blessed Saints in heaven. O life (sayth he) prepared by almighty God for his friends, a blessed life, a secure life, a quiet life, a beautifull life, a cleane life, a chast life, a holy life, a life that knoweth no death, a life without sadnesse, without labour, without greefe, without trouble, without corruption, without feare, without variety, without alteration, a life replenished with all beautie and dignity; where there is neither enemy that can offend, nor delight that

can annoy, where love is perfect, and no feare at all, where the day is everlasting, and the spirit of all is one: where almightie God is seene face to face, who is the only meat whereupon they feed without lothsomnesse: it delighteth me to consider thy brightnesse, and thy treasures do rejoice my longing heart. The more I consider thee, the more I am stricken in love with thee. The great desire I have of thee, doth wonderfully delight me, and no lesse pleasure is it to me to keep thee in my remembrance.

O life most happie, o kingdome truly blessed, wherin there is no death nor end, neither yet succession of time, where the day continuing evermore without night, knoweth not anie mutation; where the victorious conqueror being joined with those everlasting quires of Angels, and having his head crowned with a garland of glorie, singeth unto Almightie God one of the songs of Syon. Oh happie, yea, and most happie should my soule bee, if when the race of this my pilgrimage is ended, I

might bee worthie to see thy glorie, thy blessednes, thy beautie, the wals and gates of thy city, thy streets, thy lodgings, thy noble citizens, and thine omnipotent king in his most glorious majestie. The stones of thy wals are precious, thy gates are adorned with bright pearles, thy streets are of very fine excellent gold, in which there never faile perpetuall praises; thy houses are paved with rich stones, wrought throghout with Zaphirs, and covered above with massie gold, where no uncleane thing

may enter, neither dooth any abide there that is defiled. Faire and beautifull in thy delights art thou o Ierusalem our mother, none of those thinges are suffered in thee, that are suffered here. There is great diversitie betweene thy things and the things that we doe continually see in this life. In thee is never seene neither darkenesse nor night, neither yet any change of time. The light that shineth in thee, commeth neither of lampes, nor of Sunne or Moone, nor yet of bright glittering

stars, but God that proceedeth of God, and the light that commeth of light, is he that giveth clearenesse unto thee. Even the very king of kings himselfe keepeth continuall residence in the middest of thee, compassed about with his officers and servants. There doe the Angels in their orders and quires sing a most sweet and melodious harmonie. There is celebrated a perpetuall solemnitie and feast with everie one of them that commeth thither, after his departure out of this

pilgrimage. There bee the orders of Prophets; there is the famous companie of the Apostles; there is the invincible armie of Martyrs; there is the most reverent assembly of confessours; there are the true and perfect religious persons; there are the holy Virgines, which have overcome both the pleasures of the world, and the frailtie of their owne nature; there are the young men and young women, more auncient in vertue than in yeares; there are

the sheepe and little lambs that have escaped from the wolves, and from the deceitfull snares of this life, and therefore do now keep a perpetuall feast, each one in his place, all alike in joy, though different in degree. There, Charitie raigneth in her full perfection, for unto them God is all in all, whome they behold without end, in whose love they be all continually inflamed, whom they doe alwaies love, and in loving, do praise, and in praising, doe love, and all their exercises consist in praises,

without wearinesse, and without travell. O happie were I, yea, and very happy indeed, if at what time I shall bee loosed out of the prison of this wretched bodie, I might bee thought worthie to hear those songs of that heavenly melodie, sung in the praise of the everlasting king, by all the cittizens of that so noble cittie. Happie were I, and very happie, if I might obtaine a roome among the chaplaines of that chappell, and wait for my turne also to sing my Alleluia. If I might be neare to my

king, my God, my Lord, and see him in his glorie, even as he promised mee, when he said: O father, this is my last determinate will, that all those that thou hast given unto mee, may bee with me, and see the glorie which I had with thee before the world was created. Hetherto are the words of S. Augustine. Nowe tell mee (Christian brother) what a day of glorious shine shall that bee unto thee (if thou lead thy life in Gods feare) when after the course of this pilgrimage, thou shalt passe from death

to immortallitie; and in that passage, when others shall begin to feare, thou shalt begin to rejoyce, and lift up thyhead because the day of thy deliverance is at hand? Come foorth a little (sayth S. Ierome unto the Virgine Eustochia) out of the prison of this body, and when thou art before the gate of this* Tabernacle, set before thy eyes the reward that thou hopest to have for thy present labours. Tell mee, what a day shall that bee, when our Lord himselfe with all his Saints, shall come and meet

thee in the way, saying unto thee: Arise and make hast O my beloved, my delight, and my Turtle dove, for now the Winter is past, and the tempestuous waters are ceased, and flowers doe begin to appeare in our land. Cant. 2. Howe great joy shall thy soule then receive, when it shall bee at that time presented before the throne of the most blessed Trinitie, by the hands of the holy Angels (especially by that Angell, to whom thou was committed, as to a faithful keeper) and when this Angell, with all the rest, shall

declare thy good workes, and what crosses, tribulations, and injuries thou hast suffered for Gods sake. Acts 9. S. Luke writeth, That when holy Tabitha, the great almes giver, was dead, all the widdowes and poore folke came about the Apostle S. Peter, shewing unto him the garments which she had given them: where with the Apostle being moved, made his prayer unto Almightie God for that so mercifull a woman, and by his praiers he raised her again to life. Now what a gladnesse will it be to thy

soule, when in the middest of those blessed spirits thou shalt bee placed, with remembrance of thy almes deeds, thy praiers and fastings, the innocencie of thy lise, thy suffering of wrongs and injuries, thy patience in afflictions, thy temperance in diet, with all other vertues and good workes that thou hast done in all thy life. O how great joy shalt thou receive at that time for all the good deedes that thou hast wrought! how clearly then shalt thou understand the value and the excellencie of

vertue! There the obedient man shall talk of victories; there vertue shall receive her reward, and the good honoured according to their merite. Moreover, what a pleasure will it bee unto thee, when thou shalt see thy selfe to bee in that sure haven, and shalt looke backe upon the course of thy navigation which thou hast sayled here in this life: when thou shalt remember the tempests wherein thou hast been tossed, the straits through which thou hast passed, and the daungers of theeves and pyrats, from

whom thou hast escaped. There is the place where they shall sing the song of the Prophet, which sayth, Had it not ben that our Lord had ben mine helper, it could not be but my soule had gone into hell. Especially, when from thence thou shalt behold so many sinnes as are committed every houre in the world, so many souls as doe descend every day into hell, and how it hath pleased Almightie God, that among such a multitude of damned persons, thou shouldest bee of the number of his elect, and one of

those to whome hee would grant such exceeding great felicitie and glorie. Besides all this, what a goodly sight will it be to see those seats filled up, and the citie builded, and the wals of that noble Ierusalem repaired againe? With what chearfull embracings shall the whole court of heaven entertaine them, beholding them when they come loaden with the spoiles of their vanquished enemies? there shall those valiant men and women enter with triumph, which have together with the world conquered the

weakenesse of their owne fraile nature. There shall they enter which have suffred martirdom for Christs sake, with double triumph over the flesh and the world, adorned with all coelestiall glorie. There shall also daily enter many young men and children, which have vanquished the tendernesse of their young yeares with discretion and vertue. Oh, how sweet and savorie shall the fruit of vertue then be, although for a time before her roots seemed very bitter: sweet is the cold evening after the hote sunnie

day; sweet is (...) ^ountaine to the weary (...) travailer; sweet is (...) sleepe to the tired servaunt: but much more sweet is it to the Saints in heaven to enjoy peace after warre, securitie after perill, eternall rest after their paines and travels: for then are the warres at an end, then need they no more to goe all armed, both on the right side and on the left. The children of Israel went forth armed towards the land of Promise, but after that the land was conquered, they laid downe their speares, and

cast awa^ (...) armour, and forget (...) and turmoile (...), each one under the shaddow of his pavillion and harbour enjoied the fruit of their sweet peace. Now may the watching Prophet come down from his standing, that did watch and fix his feet upon the place of the Sentinell. There is no more feare of invasion by the terrible atmies of the bloudie enemies: there is no place for the subtill crafts of the lurking viper: there cannot arrive the deadly sight of the venomous Baseliske,

nor yet shall the hissing of the auncient serpent bee heard there; but onely the soft breathing aire of the holy ghost, wherein is beholden the glorie of Almightie God. This is the region of all peace, the place of securitie, situated above all the elements, whether the cloudes and stormie winds of the darke aire cannot come. O what glorious things have been spoken of thee, o cittie of God. Blessed are they (saith holy Tobias) that love thee, and enjoy thy peace. O my sould praise our Lord,

for he hath delivered Ierusalem his citie from all her troubles. Happie shall I bee, if the remnant of my posteritie might come to see the clearenesse of Ierusalem: her gates shall bee wrought with Zaphirs and Emeraulds, and all the circuit of her wals shall bee built with precious stones, her streets shall bee paved with white and pollished marble, and in all parts of her territories shall be sung Alleluia. O joyfull countrey! o sweet glorie! o blessed companie! who shall bee those so fortunate and

happie that are elected for thee? It seemeth a presumption to desire thee, and yet I will not live without the desire of thee. O yee sonnes of Adam, a race of men, miserably blinded and deceived. O yee scattered sheepe, wandering out of your right way, if this be your sheepcoat, whether goe you backeward? What meane you? Why suffer you such an excellent benefit to bee wilfully lost for not taking so little paines? What wise man would not desire, that all labour and paine of the

world were imposed unto him? that all sorrows, afflictions, and diseases were even poured upon him as thicke as haile; that persecutions, tribulations, and greefs, with one to molest him, another to disquiet him, yea, that all creatures in the world did conspire against him, being scorned and made a laughing stocke of all men; and that his whole life were converted into weepings and lamentations, so that in the next life hee might find repose in the heavenly harbor of eternall consolation, and be thought meet to have a

place among that blessed people, which are adorned and beautified with such inestimable glorie. And thou, o foolish lover of this miserable world, goe thy way, seek as long as thou wilt for honors and promotions, build sumptuous houses and palaces, purchase lands and possessions, in large thy territories and dominions, yea, commaund if thou wilt whole empires and worlds, yet shalt thou never bee so great as the least of all the servants of almightie God, who shall receive that treasure which this world cannot

give, and shall enjoy that felicitie, which shal endure for evermore, when thou with thy pomp and riches, shall bear the rich glutton companie, whose buriall is in the deepe vault of hell: but the devout spirituall man shall be carried by the holy Angels with poore Lazarus into Abrahams bosome, a place of perpetuall rest, joy, sollace, and eternall happines,


 Of the benefites which our Lord promiseth to give in this present life, to such as live a iust and godly life.
PEradventure thou wilt now say, that al these things before rehearsed, bee rewards and punishments only for the life to come: and that thou desirest to see something in this present life, because our mindes are

wont to bee mooved very much with the sight of things present. To satisfie thee herein, I will also explaine unto thee what may answere thy desire. For althogh our Lord do reserve the best wine, and the delicat dishes of most delight, untill the end of the banket, yet he suffereth not his friends to bee utterly destitute of meat and drinke in this tedious voyage: for he knoweth very wel, that they could not otherwise hold out in their journey. And therfore when he said unto Abraham, Feare not Abraham,

for I am thy defendor, and thy reward shall bee exceeding great: By these wordes hee promised two thinges, the one for the time present, that was, to be his safegard and defence in all such things as may happen in this life; and the other for the time to come, and that is, the reward of glorie which is reserved for the next life. But how great the first promise is, and how many kinds of benefites and favours are therein included, no man is able to understand, but onely hee, that hath with

great diligence read the holy scriptures, wherein no one thing is more often repeated and set forth, than the greatnesse of the favours, benefits, and priviledges, which Almightie God promiseth unto his friends in this life. Hearken what Salomon saith in the third chapter of his Proverbes, as touching this matter. Blessed is that man that findeth wisdome, for it is better to have it, than all the treasures of silver and gold, be they never so excellent and precious: and it is more worth than all the riches

of the world, and whatsoever mans heart is able to desire, is not comparable unto it. The length of daies are at her right hand, and riches and glorie at her left. Her waies be pleasant, and all her passages be quiet, she is a tree of life to all those that have obtained her, and hee that shall have her in continuall possession, shall bee blessed. Keepe therefore (O my sonne) the lawes of Almightie God, and his counsels, for they shal bee as life to thy soule, and sweetnesse to thy tast. Then shalt thou walke safely in thy waies, and thy feet shall not

find any stumbling blockes. If thou sleep, thou shalt have no cause to feare: and if thou take thy rest, thy sleepe shall be quiet. This is the sweetnesse and quietnesse of the way of the godly, but the waies of the wicked are far different, as the holy Scripture doth declare unto us. The paths and waies of the wicked (sayth Ecclesiasticus) are full of brambles, and at the end of their journey are prepared for them, hell, darkenesse, and paines. Doest thou thinke it then a good exchaunge, to forsake the waies of Almightie God,

for the wayes of the world, sith there is so great difference betweene the one and the other, not onely in the end of the way, but also in all the steps of the same? What madnesse can bee greater, than to chuse one torment, to gaine another by; rather than with one rest to gaine another rest? And that thou maist more clearely perceive the excellencie of this rest, and what a number of benefits are presently incident therunto, I beseech thee hearken attentively even what Almightie God himselfe

hath promised by his Prophet Esay, to the observers of his law, in a manner with these words, as diverse interpreters doe expound them. When thou shalt doe (saith he) such and such things, which I have commaunded thee to do, there shall forthwith appear unto thee the dawning of the cleare day (that is, the sonne of justice) which shall drive away all the darkenesse of thy errours and miseries, and then shalt thou begin to enjoy true and perfit salvation. Now these are the benefits which almighty God

hath promised to his servants. And albeit some of them bee for the time to come, yet are some of them to be presently received in this life: as, that new light and shining from heaven; that safetie and abundance of all good thinges; that assured confidence and trust in the almightie God; that divine assistance in all our praiers and petitions made unto him; that peace and tranquilitie of conscience; that protection and providence of Almightie God. All these are the gracious gifts and favours which almightie

God hath promised to his servaunts in this life. They all are the works of his mercie, effects of his grace, testimonies of his love, and blessings, which hee of his fatherly providence extendeth.
To bee short, all these benefits do the godly injoy both in this present life, and in the life to come: and of all these are the ungodly deprived, both in the one life, and in the other. Wherby thou maist easily perceive, what difference there is betweene the one sort and the other, seeing

the one is so rich in graces, and the other so poore and needie: For if thou ponder well Gods promised blessings, and consider the state and condition of the good and the wicked, thou shalt find, that the one sort is highly in the favour of Almightie God, and the other deeply in his displeasure: the one be his friends, and the other his enemies: the one bee in light, and the other in darkenesse: the one doe enjoy the companie of Angels, and the other the filthie pleasures and delights of swine: the one

are truly free, and lords over themselves, and the other are become bondslaves unto Sathan, and unto their owne lusts and appetites. The one are joyfull with the witnesse of a good conscience, and the other (except they be utterly blinded) are continually bitten with the worme of conscience, evermore gnawing on them: the one in tribulation, stand stedfastly in their proper place; and the other, like light chaffe, are carried up and downe with everie blast of wind: the one stand secure

and firme with the anker of hope, and the other are unstable, and evermore yeelding unto the assaults of fortune: the praiers of the one are acceptable and liking unto God, and the praiers of the other are abhorred and accursed: the death of the one is quiet, peaceable, and precious in the sight of God, and the death of the other, is unquiet, painefull, and troubled with a thousand frights and terrours: To conclude, the one live like children under the protection and defence of Almightie

God, and sleepe sweetly under the shaddow of his pastoral providence; and the other being excluded from this kind of providence, wander abroad as straied sheep, without their sheep heard and maister, lying wide open to all the perils, daungers, and assaults of the world. Seeing then, that a vertuous life is accompanied with all these benefits, what is the cause that should withdraw thee, and persuade thee not to embrace such a precious treasure? what art thou able to alledge for excuse of thy

great negligence? To say that this is not true, it cannot be admitted, for so much as Gods word doth avouch the certainetie hereof. To say that these are but small benefits, thou canst not, for so much as they do exceed all that mans heart can desire. To say that thou art an enemie unto thy selfe, and that thou doest not desire these benefits, cannot bee, considering that a man is even naturally a friend to himselfe, and the will of man hath ever an cie to his own benefit, which is the very object or marke that his desire

shooteth at. To say that thou hast no understanding nor tast of these benefits, it will not serve to discharge thine offence, for so much as thou hast the fayth and beleefe thereof, though thou hast not the tast, for the tast is lost through sin, but not the faith: and the faith is a witnesse more certaine, more secure, and better to be trusted, than al other experiences and witnesses in the world.
Why doest thou not then discredit all other witnesses with this one assured testimonie? Why doest thou

not rather give credit unto faith, than to thine owne opinion and judgement? O that thou wouldest make a resolute determination, to submit thy selfe into the hands of almightie God, and to put thy whole trust assuredly in him. How soon shouldest thou then see all these prophesies fulfilled in thee: then shouldest thou see the excellencie of these divine treasures: then sholdest thou see how starke blind the lovers of this world are, that seeke not after this high treasure: then shouldest thou see

upon what good ground our Saviour inviteth us to this kind of life saying: Come unto me all ye that travell, and are loaden, and I will refresh you; take my yoke upon you, and you shal find rest for your souls: for my yoke is sweet, and my burden is light. Almightie God is no deceiver, nor false promiser, neither yet is he a great boaster of such things as he promiseth. Why dost thou then shrinke backe? why dost thou refuse peace and true quietnesse? why dost thou refuse the gentle offers and sweet callings of thy pastor? how darest thou

despise and banish away vertue from thee, which hath such prerogatives and priviledges as these bee; and withal, confirmed and signed even with the hand of Almighty God? The queen of Saba heard far lesse things than these of Salomon, and yet shee travelled from the uttermost parts of the world to trie the truth of those things that she had heard. And why doest not thou then (hearing such notable, yea, and so certain news of vertue) adventure to take a little paines to trie the truth and sequell therof? O

deare Christian brother, put thy trust in Almightie God and in his word, and commit thy self most boldly without all feare into his armes, and unloose from thy handes those trifling knots that have hetherto deceived thee, and thou shalt find, that the merites of vertue doe far excell her fame: and that all which is spoken in praise of her, is nothing in comparison of that which shee is indeed.



 That a man ought not to deferre his repentance and conversion unto God, from day to day: considering hee hath so many debts to discharge, by reason of the offences committed in his sinfull life alredie past.
NOw then, if on the one side there bee so many and so great respects, that do bind us to chaunge our sinfull life; and on the other side,

we have not any sufficient excuse why wee should not make this exchange. How long wilt thou tarrie, untill thou fully resolve to doe it? Turne thine eyes a little, and looke backe upon thy life past, and consider, that at this present (of what age soever thou bee) it is high time, or rather, the time well nigh past to begin to discharge some part of thy old debts. Consider, that thou which art a Christian regenerated in the water of holy Baptisme, which doest acknowledge Almightie God for thy father, and the

Catholicke church for thy mother, whome shee hath nourished with the milke of the Gospell, to wit, with the doctrine of the Apostles and Evangelists: consider (I say) that all this notwithstanding, thou hast lived even as loosely and dissolutely, as if thou hadst been a meere Infidell, that had never any knowledge of Almightie God. And if thou doe denie this, then tell mee what kind of sinne is there which thou hast not committed? What tree is there forbidden that thou hast not beholden

with thine eyes? What greene meddow is there, in which thou hast not (at the least in desire) feasted thy letcherous lust? what thing hath been set before thine eyes, that thou hast not wantonly desired? What appetite hast thou left unexecuted, notwithstanding that thou didst beleeve in almightie God, and that thou wert a Christian? what wouldest thou have done more, if thou hadst not had any faith at all? If thou hadst not looked for any other life? If thou hadst not feared the dreadful day

of judgement? What hath all thy former life been, but a web of sinnes, a sinke of vices, a way full of brambles and thornes, and a froward disobedience of God? with whome hast thou hetherto lived, but onely with thine appetite, with thy flesh, with thy pride, and with the goods and riches of this transitorie world? These have beene thy gods, these have beene thine idols, whome thou hast served, and whose lawes thou hast diligently obeied. Make thine account with the Almighty God, with his laws,

and with his obedience, and peradventure thou shalt find, that thou hast esteemed him no more, than if hee had been a god of wood, or stone. For it is certaine, that there be many Christians, which beleeving that there is a God, are induced to sinne with such facilitie, as though they beleeved, that there were no God at all: and do offend no whit the lesse, though they beleeve that there is a God, than they would doe, if they beleeved there were none at all. What greater injurie, what

greater despight can bee done, than so to contemne his divine majestie? Finally, thou beleeving all such things as Christs church doth beleeve, hast notwithstanding so led thy life, as if thou wert persuaded, that the beleefe of Christians were the greatest fables or lies in the world. And if the multitude of thy sinnes past, and the facilitie thou hast used in committing of them, do not make thee afraid, why doest thou not feare at the least the majesty and omnipotencie of him, against whom thou

hast sinned? Lift up thine eyes, and consider the infinit greatnesse and omnipotencie of the Lord, whom the powers of heaven do adore, before whose majestie the whole compasse of the wide world lyeth prostrate; in whose presence, all things created, are no more than chaffe caried away with the wind. Consider also with thy selfe how unseemely it is, that such a vile worme as thou art, should have audacitie so many times to offend and provoke the wrath of so great a majestie. Consider

the wonderful and most terrible severitie of his justice, and what horrible punishments hee hath used from time to time in the world against sin; and that not onely upon particular persons, but also upon citties, nations, kingdomes, and provinces, yea, upon the universall world: And not onely in earth, but also in heaven; and not onely upon straungers sinners, but even upon his owne most innocent sonne, our sweet Saviour Iesus Christ, when hee tooke upon him to satisfie for the debt that

we owed. And if this severitie was used upon greene and innocent wood, and that for the sins of others, what then will he doe upon drie and withered wood, and against those that are loden with their owne sins? Now, what thing can bee thought more unreasonable, than that such a fraile* wretch as thou art, should bee so saucie and malapert as to mocke with so mightie a Lord, whose hand is so heavie, that in case hee should strike but one stroke upon thee, he would at one blow drive thee downe

headlong into the deepe bottomelesse pit of hell, without remedie. Consider likewise the great patience of this our mercifull Lord, who hath expected thy repentaunce so long, even from the time that thou didst first offend him: and thinke, that if after so long patience and tarrying for thee, thou shalt still continue thy leaud and sinfull life, abusing thus his mercy and provoking him to further indignation and wrath, he will then bend his bow, and shake his sword, and raine downe upon thee

even sharpe arrowes of everlasting wrath and death.
Consider also the profoundnesse of his deepe judgements, whereof wee read and see daily so great wonders. We see how king Salomon himselfe, after his so great wisdome, and after those three thousand parables and most profound mysteries uttered by him, was forsaken by Almightie God, and suffered to fall down and adore idols. We see how one of those seven first deacons of the primative church, which were ful of the holy ghost, became

not onely an hereticke, but also an arch heriticke and a father of heresies. Wee see daily many starres fall downe from heaven unto earth, with miserable fals, and to wallow themselves in the durt, and to eat the meat of swine, which sate before at Gods own table, and were fed with the very bread of Angels. If then the just and righteous (for some secret pride or negligence, or els for some ingratitude of theirs) be thus justly forsaken of almightie God, after they have bestowed so many yeares in

his service. What maiest thou looke for, that hast done in a manner nothing els in all thy life time, but onely heaped sinnes upon sinnes, and hast thereby offended almighty God most greevously?
Now, if thou hast lived after this sort, were it not reason that thou shouldest now at the length give over, and cease heaping sinne upon sinne, and debt upon debt, and begin to pacifie the wrath of Almightie God, and to disburden thy sinfull soule? Were it not meet,

that that time which thou hast hetherto given to the world to thy flesh, and to the devill, should suffice? and that thou shouldest bestow some little time of that which remaineth, to serve him, who hath given thee all that thou hast? Were it not a point of wisedome, after so long time, and so many great injuries, to feare the most terrible justice of Almightie God, who the more patiently hee suffereth sinners, the more hee dooth afterwards punish them with severitie and justice?

Were it not meet for thee to feare thy long continuance so many yeares in sinne, and in the displeasure of Almightie God, procuring thereby against thee such a mightie adversarie as hee is, and provoking him of a mercifull loving father to become thy severe terrible judge and enemie? Were it not meet to feare, least that the force of evill custome may in continuance of time be turned into nature; and that thy long vicious usuall manner of committing sinne, may make of a vice, a necessitie;

or little lesse? Why art thou not afraid, least by little and little thou maiest cast thy selfe downe headlong into the deepe pit of a reprobate sence, whereinto after that a man is once faln, he never maketh account of any sinne, bee it never so great.
The Patriarke Iacob said unto Laban his father in law: These fourteene years have I served thee, and looked to thine affaires; now it is time that I should look to mine owne, and begin to attend unto the affaires of mine owne houshold.

Wherefore if thou hast likewise bestowed so manie yeares in the service of this world, and of this fraile transitorie life, were it not good reason, that thou shouldest now begin to make some provision for the salvation of thy soule, and for the everlasting life to come? There is nothing more short, nor more transitorie than the life of man; and therefore providing so carefully as thou doest for all such things as bee necessarie for this life, which is so short, why doest thou not

provide likewise somewhat for the life that is to come? which life shall endure for ever and ever.




@ The conclusion of all the premisses.
IF now all this bee so, I beseech thee even for the bitter passion of our sweet saviour Iesus Christ, to remember thyselfe, and consider that thou art a Christian, and that thou beleevest

assuredly for a most undoubted truth, whatsoever the true faith instructeth thee. This faith telleth thee, that thou hast a judge above that seeth all the steps and motions of thy life: and that certainely there shall a day come, when he will require an account of thee, even for every idle word. This faith teacheth thee, That a man is not altogether at an end when he dieth, but that after this temporal life, there remaineth another everlasting life; and that the souls die not with the bodies,

but that whiles the bodie remaineth in the grave, untill the generall day of judgement, the soule shall enter into another new countrey, and into a new world, where it shall have such habitation and companie, as the faith and workes were which it had in this life. This faith telleth thee also, that both the reward of vertue, and the punishment of vice, is a thing so wonderfull, that although the whole world were full of bookes, and all creatures were writers, yet shold they all bee wearied, and

the world come to an end, before they should end their description, and make a perfect declaration what is comprehended in each one of these points. This faith informeth thee also, that the debts and duties which we owe to almightie God, are so great, that albeit a man had so many lives as there bee sands in the sea, yet would they not suffice, if they were all employed in his service. And this faith likewise telleth thee, that vertue is such an excellent treasure, that all the treasures of the world,

and al that mans heart can desire, are in no sort comparable unto it.
Wherefore, if there be so many and so great respects that doe invite us unto vertue, how commeth it to passe, that there bee so few lovers and followers of the same? If men be mooved with gaine and commodity, what greater commoditie can there be than to attaine life everlasting? If they be moved with fear of punishment, what greater punishment can bee found, than the most horrible everlasting dreadfull

torments in the lake of fire and brimstone, to continue even world without end? If that bonds of debts and benefites; what debts are greater than these which we owe unto the almightie God, as well for that hee is which he is, as also for that which wee have received of him? If the feare of perils doe move us; what greater perill can there bee than death, the houre thereof being so uncertaine, and the account so strait? If thou be moved with peace, libertie, quietnes of mind, and with a pleasant life,

(which are things that all the world desires) it is certaine, that all these are found much better in the life that is governed by vertue and reason, than in that life which is ruled by the affections and passions of the mind, forsomuch as man is a reasonable creature, and no beast. Howbeit, in case thou account all this as not sufficient to move thee thereunto, yet let it suffice thee to consider further, that even Almightie God so abased himselfe for thy sake, that he descended from heaven

unto the earth, and became man, and whereas he created the whole world in sixe dayes, hee bestowed three and thirtie yeares about thy redemption, yea, and was also contented for the same to leese his life. Almightie God died, that sinne should die: and yet for all this doe wee endeavor, that sinne might live in our hearts, notwithstanding, that our Lord purposed to take away the life of sinne with his owne death. If this matter were to be discussed with reason, surely this alreadie spoken

might suffice to prevaile with any reasonable creature: for not onely in beholding Almightie God upon the crosse, but whether soever we doe turn our eyes, we shal find, that every thing crieth out to us, and calleth upon us to receive this so excellent a benefite: for there is not a thing created in the world, (if we duly consider it) but dooth invite us to the love and service of our Saviour Iesus Christ, insomuch, that looke how many creatures there be in the world, so many preachers there

are, so many bookes, so many voices, and so manie reasons, which doe all call us unto almighty God.
And how is it possible then, that so many callings as these are, so many promises, so many threatnings, and so many provocations, should not suffice to bring us unto him? What might almightie God have done more than hee hath done, or promised more greater blessings than he hath promised, or threatened more greevous and horrible torments than he hath threatned, to draw us unto him,

and to pluck us away from sinne? And yet all this notwithstanding, howe commeth it to passe, that there is so great (I will not say arrogancie, but) bewitching of men, that doe beleeve these things to bee certainely true, and yet bee not afraid to continue all the dayes of their life in the committing of deadly sinnes? Yea, to goe to bed in deadly sinne, and to rise up againe in deadly sinne, and to embrue themselves in every kind of lothsome, detestable, and odious sinne, even as though all

their whole endeavours intended by the practise of sinne, to resist all grace and favour in the sight of God? And this is done in such sort, so without feare, so without scruple of mind, so without breaking of one houres sleepe, and without the refraining of anie one delicate morsell of meat for the same, as if all that they beleeved, were dreames, and olde wives tales, and as if all that the holy Evangelists have written, were meere fiction and fables. But tel me thou that art such a desperate

wilfull rebell against thy Creator and Redeemer, which by thy detestable life and dissolute conversation, doest evidence thy selfe to be a firebrand, prepared to burne in those everlasting and revenging horrible fires of hell: What wouldest thou have done more than thou hast done, in case thou haddest beene persuaded, that all were meere lies which thou hast beleeved:?; For although that for feare of incurring the daunger of the princes lawes, and the execution of their force upon thee, thou

hast somewhat brideled thine appetites; yet doth it not appeare, that for any feare of Almightie God, thou hast refrained thy will in any one thing, neither from carnall pleasures, nor from taking revenge of thine enemies, nor from backbiting and slandering thy neighbours, nor yet from fulfilling thine inordinate lusts and desires, in case thine abilitie served thee thereunto. Oh, what dooth the worme of thy conscience say unto thee, whiles thou art in such a fond securitie and confidence,

continuing in such a dissolute and wicked life as thou doest? Where is now become the understanding, judgement, and reason, which thou hast of a man? Why art thou not afraid of so horrible, so certaine, and so assured perils and daungers? If there were a dish of meat set before thee, and some man (albeit he were a lier) should say unto thee, refraine to touch and eat thereof, for it is poysoned; durst thou once adventure to stretch out thy hand, to take a tast thereof, though the

meat were never so savorie and delicate, and hee never so great a lier that should beare thee thus in hand? If then the Prophets, if the Apostles, if the Evangelists, yea, if Almightie God himselfe doe crie out unto thee, and say, Take heed thou miserable man, for death is in that kind of meat, and death dooth lie lurking in that gluttonous morsell, which the devill hath set before thee? Howe darest thou reach for everlasting death with thine owne handes, and

drinke thine owne damnation. Where is the applying of thy wits, thy judgement, and the discourse and reason which thou hast of a spirituall man? Where is their light, where is their force? Sith that none of them doe bridle thee anie whit from thy common usuall vices. Oh thou wretched and carelesse creature, be* witched by the common enemie Sathan, adjudged to everlasting darkenesse, both inward and outward, and so doest goe from one darkenesse to the other.

Thou art blind to see thine owne miserie, insensible to understand thine owne perdition, and harder than any Adamant, to feele the hammer of Gods word. Oh, a thousand times most miserable thou art, woorthie to be lamented with none other teares, than with those wherewith thy damnation was lamented, when it was said, Luke 19. Oh, that thou knewest this day the peace, quietnesse, and treasures, which Almightie God hath offered unto thee, that doe now lie hidden from

thine eyes. Oh miserable is the day of thy nativitie, and much more miserable the day of thy death: forsomuch, as that shall bee the beginning of thine everlasting damnation. Oh, how much better had it beene for thee, never to have beene borne, if thou shalt bee damned in the horrible pit of hell for ever, where the torments are perpetually durable. How much better had it beene for thee never to have beene baptised, nor yet to have received the Christian faith, if through

the abusing thereof by thy wicked life, thy damnation shall therby be the greater? For if the light of reas^n onely sufficeth to make the Heathen Philosophers inexcuseable, because they knowing God in some degree, did not glorifie him nor serve him (as the Apostle s^yth in the first to the Romanes;) how much lesse shall he be excused, that hath received the light of faith, and the water of Baptisme, yea, and the holy Sacrament of the bodie and bloud of our Lord and Saviour Iesus Christ,

hearing dayly the doctrine of the Gospell, if hee doe nothing more than those Pagan Philosophers have done.
Now, what other thing may wee inferre of the premisses, but breefely to conclude, That there is none other understanding, none other wisdome, none other counsell in the world, but that setting aside all the impediments and combersome daungerous wayes of this life, wee follow that onely true and certaine way, whereby true peace and everlasting life

is obtained. Hereunto are wee called by reason, by wisedome, by law, by heaven, by earth, by hell, and by the life, death, justice, and mercie of Almightie God. Hereunto are wee also very notably invited by the holy Ghost, speaking by the mouth of Ecclesiasticus in the sixt chapter, in this wise: My sonne hearken to instruction even from the first yeares of thy youth, and in thy latter dayes thou shalt enjoy the sweet fruit of wisedome: Approch unto it, as one that ploweth and soweth,

and with patience expect the fruitfull encrease which it shall yeeld unto thee. The paines that thou shalt take, shall be but little, and the benefites that thou shalt speedily enjoy, shall be great. My son hearken to my words, and neglect not this my counsell which I shall give thee, put thy feet willingly into her fetters, and thy necke into ^er chaines: bow downe thy shoulders, and carrie her upon thee, and bee not displeased with her bonds: approch neare unto her with all thy heart,

and follow her wayes with all thy strength, seeke for her with all thy diligence, and shee will make her selfe knowne unto thee, and after that thou hast found her, never forsake her: for by her shalt thou find rest in thy latter daies, and that which before did seeme so painefull unto thee, will afterwards become very pleasant. Her fetters shall be a defence or thy strength, and a foundation of vertue, and her chaine shall bee a robe of glorie: for in her is the beautie of life, and

her bonds are the bonds of health. Hetherto Ecclesiasticus. Whereby thou maiest understand in some degree, howe great the beautie, the delights, the libertie, and riches of true wisdome are, which is vertue it selfe, and the knowledge of Almightie God, whereof wee doe intreat. But if all this bee insufficient to mollifie our stonie hearts, lift up thine eyes, and fix thy thoughts constantly to behold our omnipotent God in his mercie and love towards sinners upon his dying crosse,

where hee made full satisfaction for thy sins. There shalt thou behold him in this forme: his feet nayled fast, looking for thee, his armes spread abroad to receive thee, and his head bowing downe, to give thee, as to another prodigall sonne, new kisses of peace and attonement. From thence hee calleth thee (if thou wouldest heare) with so manie callings and cries as there bee wounds in his whole bodie. Hearken thou therfore unto these voyces, and consider well with thy

selfe, that if his praier bee not heard that hearkeneth not unto the cries of the poore, how much lesse shall he be heard, that maketh himselfe deafe to such cries as these, beeing the most mercifull cryings of our loving saviour, and intended for our soules salvation. Who is hee that hath not cause to resolve himselfe wholly into teares to weepe and bewaile his manifold offences? Who is he that can lament, and will not lament at this? Vnlesse hee bee such a one as seeth not, nor careth not

what great shipwrack, wast, and havocke he maketh of all the riches and treasures of his soule.
FINIS.

