


The Riddles of Heraclitus
and Democritus.

1

IT seemes that Tunis is an auncient towne
Neere to the ruines of Carthage once so prowde,
Whose stately buildings now are cleane pulled downe,
And calmde her bruit, that sounded sometime lowde:
But roome, that is their auncient far away
Doth holde, and shall, though cities all decay.


Roome is more large, then spacious Millaine faire,
Or Venice or the Tartars great Camball,
Boeams three Prages, or Egypts rich Alcaire,
Or Quinsei in Cataie, biggest of them all,
And more I say, after the day of doome
Hell shall be no where, vnles it be in roome.



2
ROome is a taker, Poets say,
And lawyers are so too, you see
Roome is a taker by my faie,
No learned man can disagree,
And roome shall take, beleeue well me,
At least till something, no where be.


3
MAny a man doth speake of mee,
But no man euer shall me see,
For all in one, doe full agree
That no where must my dwelling bee.


4
NOt Marke, but Mercurie keepes her warme,
And Neptune hugs her in his arme
Infertill, fertile of all good things,
Her Lord her seruant her children kings.



5
SAy what it is and if you can,
That neither was by God create,
Nor framed by the hand of man,
Nor by the fiend that doth him hate;
But caused it was for tyrants strong,
As things are many of great woorth,
Which made it straight and woondrous long
When at the first, they brought it foorth:
And good it doth, and none ill deedes,
Feeding vpon greene grasse and weedes.


6
A Prince, for his delight, erected a spacious forrest, which beareth
euen in the coldest monthes of the yeeres, store of sweet flowers,
holsome herbs, and faire trees, some blossoming, and some bearing fruit.
The forrest is diuided into fiue partes, euery one of them containing
birdes, beasts, and fishes of diuers kindes and qualities.
A keeper hath this forrest in charge, that in a woonderfull sort
attendeth ouer it, to the preseruing, refection, creating and recreating
of euery thing vegetant or sensitiue. A wife or sister he hath that
is as diligem as himselfe, who with a sconce in the one hand, and a watering
pot in the other, goeth about continually watering the herbes.
The keeper hath no residence or abode, but taking with him his footeman,
and the blackesmithes wife, they crosse the forrest continually,
trauelling from one Inne vnto another. And when he comes once to
the signe of the Dolphine, the Phenix beginneth to die, which first begun
to liue, when he entred, at the signe of the Ramme. The true Phenix,
of which we haue neuer but one at once, and in euery of her wings
are 182 feathers at the least, so that she flieth fast, and dieth quickly.


7
BEleeue me now I tell it for notale,
There is a Queene, or else a Goddesse t'one,
That without helpe of man, or any male
Conceaueth daughters by her selfe alone:
But at their birth, be it by night or day,
Some skilfull man, the midwiues part doth play.

When they be borne, and perfectly brought foorth,
Both olde and yong doe greatly them desire;
Their beautie and their power is of such woorth,
That all mens harts, therewith are set on fire:
And in all times, they beare as great a sway
As if on earth, there were no queenes but they.


8
A Creature is that humane flesh deuoures,
From out whose howels fatnesse may be taken,
That being dried by fire, a certaine houres
Will waxe as hard, as crust of bread well baken,
Which fat dissolued, and with the leane confused
Of that bodie, from whom you must it take,
May be with skill and industrie so vsed,
That a confection thereof we doe make
Greatly helping, though it be held no woonder
Against all tempest, lightning and thunder.


9
HAndsome she was, and well beseene,
As fresh as any of them all,
Her raiment for the most part greene,
Her stature good and meetely tall.
Mounsier did take her by the arme
And friendly entertained her,
His countenance said he meant no harme,
But well I wot he strained her,
That (as lamenting her mishap)
She cried, perhaps she cracked too,
Yet Mounsier would not leaue her lap
For any thing that she could doo,
This was a scholler by S. Anne,
A ciuill, sober, honest manne.


10
I Wrinkled am and passing olde
But gallant is my motion,

Abhorring aie to be controulde
By any ones deuotion.
Come all that list on me to mount,
Sure I will not forsake them,
But let them make their iust account,
That finely I shall shake them.
Ne doe I aske men ought for hose,
For shooes, for drinke, or meating,
Come all that list with me to close
Sans paying or intreating.
And they may chaunce finde in my wombe
To make them wish they were at home.


11
WHilst Phebus lodgeth in his southerne Inne,
His auncient Inne, at signe of Capricorne,
His northren lasse, her raiment waxeth thinne,
And for her Lord she seemes to pine and morne,
I meane the lasse that many brings to scorne,
And makes men oft reueale their proper shame,
Her maker once, tooke to himselfe her name.


12
A Female, produced first in a rude lumpe, as they say a yong beare
is, not by licking, but by pressing, became beautifull. For she
hath as many friendes as the Queene of England, As many subiectes
as the King of Spaine, As many rulers as Athens euer had, or Venice
hath. And though shee can neither write nor reade, yet is she lettered,
a Phisition, a Rhetorician, and a Chronicler.


13
AS Pallas was ingendred from her fathers braine,
So was one other guest, that I see men doe entertaine,
She sprang from neither grift, nor plant, nor egge nor seede,
Ne is she fish, or flesh, or graine, or pulse or herbe or weede,
With Ladies and great Lordes, she is both day and night,
And clergie men, and prelats graue, sometime in her delight.

Some thinke that the deuill, begat her on his dame,
Because that he much euill doth, and mischiefe by her frame:
I thinke not so, but wish, she soberly were vsed,
That neither she nor men by her, might hencefoorth be abused.


14
A Virgine faire, betwixt whose milke white
Paps I sometime lay,
When I was borne, the midwiues part
And nurses too did play,
To whom I spent, my formost age
Working both day and night,
And recompensed her taken care
With profit and delight,
Vntill by fate, without my fault
In prison I was cast,
And held in giues, which I had made,
From which breaking at last:
Such change and chaunces hath the world,
A dotage made me blinde,
In amorous sportes I kild my selfe
Foole: propagating kinde.


15
VPon some pale, or pearch,
Or stond, or rotten tree,
In watrie lowes and fennie grounds
Where store of fishes bee:
There will he gazing stand,
And fish be faine would eate,
Bur he disdaines to touch a fish
If that it be not great.
Right good ones he lets goe,
For better still to stay,
Till that the sunne is welnigh set,

And gone almost the day:
Then downe vnto the ground
In stately sort he hies,
Where he a hungrie supper makes
On wormes and butterflies.


16
THe welkin is welnigh, out of our seeing,
Our eies and thoughts are on the ground remaining,
On th' earth or no, where is our happie being,
Yet there we euer grudge, and are complayning,
But turne vs so, that heauen hang in our spying,
And straight we leaue, our murmur, and our crying.


17
ONe rips the earth, another cuts the seas,
And runs the world in circuite round about,
All for my sake, I doe all men so please,
That all doe seeke, which way to finde me out.
In Diadems in scepters, and in Crownes,
In robes, in rotchets, in a Cardnals hat,
In scarlet, silkes, in costly furred gownes,
In stones and pearles, and in I wot not what,
In horses, haukes, bounds, harlots, and in bookes,
One flieth for me, vp into the skies,
Another downe to Plutoes raigne he tookes,
Where all this glistering Or and argent lies.
This search declares, how greatly men doe leeke me,
But they are mad so far from home to seeke me.


18
A Neuer wearied, but euer bearing mother, was deliuered of children,
all (in a maner) of stature equall: which though they were
(being yong) very like one vnto another, yet by diuer sitte of bringing
vp, they were transmuted so, that vnneath they might be discerned to
be of one linage Some of them were made carters and plowmen, some
serued in cities, as porters, sergeants, and hangmen: some became mariners,
and serued at sea. Some were fine lier trained vp, and for their

delicacie, waxed in fauour with faire virgins great matrones, gentlewomen
and great Ladies. To all which they were so inwarde and
neerely conioyned, that scarcely brother or husband was permitted to
be with them of equall trust. Many of these waxed so skilfull, and stored
with all manner of learning, that more of them became diuines,
lawiers and states-men, then are to be found in Paris, Padua, Bononia,
Venice or Vienna. Of this last sort, sundry which grew to be embassadours,
secretaries, and intelligencers, were finally brought to violent
death by fire, or interred in so fowle a fashion, that not knowing with
what termes to expresse it, I must of force leaue it, to be deuined at.


19
AFter midnight, ere it was day
His eies he did vnclose,
And striuing for to get away
From prison he arose,
With bodies two as colde as Leade
He wrought so fine a feate,
That other two which seemed dead
Receiued life and heate.
Then dead men came about him round,
I wot not who they were,
But of much thing deepe and profound
With them he did confer.


20
WE are in number not fiue times fiue,
No one of vs two handfull long,
Nor any of vs takes care to thriue,
Yet all together we doe so throng,
That if a man would list to striue
T'extinguish or to doe vs wrong,
Were he the greatest prince aliue,
We should be found for him too strong,
And could make him infamous in time to come,
Though most of vs beene deafe and dombe.



21

BY helpe of fiue, and sixe, and seuen
And lines and distances betweene,
A scale is made that brings from heauen
A virgine sweete that nere was seene,
Nor any man euer see her shall,
Though heauen and earth together fall.


Vnseene, of louers she hath choice,
That are not led by wanton eies,
But they doe loue her Angels voice,
And he that rules aboue the skies
Doth daine a listening eare to lend,
Her earnest praiers to attend.



22
I Am not, but am said to bee,
And many things are told of mee,
As first for sooth that I am blinde,
And bushed before, and balde behinde:
And that I halting come to one,
And flie when as I will be gone:
With fooles my godhead is not small,
With wise men it is none at all.


23
SVch as the companie is, such am I,
And I thinke some other folke are so too,
To two Ladies great I euer am nie,
And we with the world haue much to doo:
Tis hard for a lowte to tell ye my name,
And shame for a clerke if he hit not the same.


24
IT is not more fabulous what Prometheus did, then ridiculous what
Paracelsus promiseth: yet there is one (to no man of great vnderstanding
vnknowen) that not onely maketh persons at her pleasure,
but also bringeth them from hell or heauen to life againe when they

be dead. Yea she maketh pillers, wals, or any thing to speake, not by
sorcerie, witcherie, or imprecation of deuils, but by fine arte to the
face of iudges, for iustice, she hath heretofore practised her skill, and of
her propertie, a long time borne speciall denomination.


25
THis is the age that I would haue,
These times for me are woondrous fit,
Each Ladie that is fine and braue,
With me delights to goe and sit.
My liuing lieth not in my lands,
Yet I am daintie, fine and sweete.
The Ladies take me in their hands,
Their lips and mine full often meete.
Their paps, their cheekes I well may touch,
In smiling sort with me they play,
Their husbands thereat thinke not much,
No: though I downe with them doe lay:
In sooth it is a foolish sin,
When foolish husbands iealous bin.


26
TWo forward went, and one did seeme to stay them:
Foure after ran, and fiue did ouerlay them,
Of which one dead, foure quicke was comprehending:
And all these twelue vnto one marke were tending.


27
FIrst I was small, and round like a pearle,
Then long and slender, as braue as an Earle,
Since, like an hermit, I liude in a cell,
And now like a rogue, in the wide world I dwell.


28
THere is a bodie without a hart,
That hath a toong, and yet no head,
Buried it was, ere it was made,
And lowde it speakes, and yet is dead.



29
FArre in the west I wot not wheare
Are trees men say which oisters beare,
I woonder how that comes about
Those oisters she not, out of doubt
And fall straight like a swarme of bees
At home here on our apple trees.
Growe they on trees, those oisters? fie:
Me thinkes it soundeth like a lie,
A kinde of trees, I know tis true,
In purpoole lane beare oisters new
And fish and flesh, and now and then
They beare (I tell you) honest men.


30
THe new world, is enuironed with a deepe ditch, whereinto many
riuers do fall continually: in so much that it would ouerflow the
whole world, were it not that from the water of this ditch, there riseth
and is ingendred great store of barnacles and other sea fowle of
diuers colours and proportions, some of them being bigger by great
ods, then is any crane, bustard, swan, camell, elephant, whale, or whirlepoole.
And euen as flies will sticker in the night season, about a torch or
great light, till sometimes their streamers be sindged: so assuredly
these which I tell of* and which neuer fall to the ground, till their death,
or dissolution, euen from their first naisance, making towards the sunne
and starres, are inforced to shed their feathers in such abundance, that
thereof are yeerely made beds, a hundred times as big againe, as the
great bed in Ware. If I saide a thousand times, it were no more then a
thousand, which haue seene them as well as I, might maintaine and verifie.


31
I Sawe one stately stalking like a crane
Strike at a stripling, something like a man,
At the first stroke, he gaue the wretch his bane,
Threw him in the dirt, and with him ran
Vnto the water, where he washt and beate him,
And at a mouthfull at the last he eate him.



32

A Murtherer, a prisoner, barelyfed
Was first of all depriued of the light,
And then straightwaies vnto the gallowes led,
Which did belong to him of very right:
Where hanged he was something against my will,
Though some good folke could wish him hanged still.


But one of power, the power of law to stay,
That ere this time, did a companion make him:
The prince himselfe came passing by that way,
And from the gallowes graciously did take him:
The best is though he did enjoy this fauour,
He standeth bound vnto the good behauiour.



33

WHen one by one, men fearefull are
They quickly are affrighted,
And wanting weapons fit for warre,
Not daring be vnited:
Whether it be in towne or field
To th' enimies forces soone they yeeld.


A simple souldier God doth knowe,
In Norfolke bloudie warres doth make,
And heapes of foes, doth ouerthrowe
Alone: and oft doth prisoners take:
Yet they haue fortes, so hath not hee,
Marry fearefull, and ill armed they be.



34

ALowe bred squire
Borne in the mire,
That neuer knew who was his sire,


Being armed light
After midnight,
(No remedie) would needes go fight.



In corslet bad
The youth was clad,
And sarcenet sleeues for sooth he had.


But at a word
He had no sword,
Nor other weapon woorth a etc.


Newas he strong,
Nor large nor long,
But foorth he came with a hideous song.


And Tartar leeke
He me did seeke,
Lighting at first full on my cheeke.


This thing of naught,
At face still raught,
As Cesar once his souldiours taught


When they should fight,
Against that knight,
Pompey defending countries right:


So in like case,
This varlet base
Was euer poring at my face.


I could not rest
Within my nest,
The rascall did me so molest.


I had the Iacke,
Soone brought to wracke,
Had he not euer retired backe.


But he comes, he goes,
He fell, he rose,
He bit me by the very nose.



It made me sweare,
And God to teare,
I could not for my life forbeare.


That such a knaue
Should be so braue,
Would make (I trowe) a Saint to raue.


But clod or stone,
Or sticke or bone,
Or gunne or crosbowe had I none.


That truth to showe,
I did not knowe,
Which way I might him ouerthrowe.


So that at last
I waxt agast,
And longing t'haue the combate past.


I hid my head
Within a bed
And slept like one that had been dead.



35

A Target bearer to a gallant man of warre
Was bidden by his Lord, t'attend him at a doore,
Whilst he should get him in, about t'appease a iarre,
That lately risen was, betwixt him and his whoore:
And heare ye (saide he) Sirra: if any body come,
Or stirring be this way, alowde see ye crie hum.


The scutiger had tarried but a little while,
Ere Morpheus gan vpon his forehead for to creepe,
His stomacke vapours sent, which did his braines beguile,
And ere he was aware, he falleth fast asleepe:
The Master hoping well, that well his man did watch,
Accorded with the girle, her husbands coate to patch.



To kissing first they fell, and after that to play,
Souldiers fight sometimes, ye wot it well in sport,
And I can tell no more, what they did doe or say,
God knowes I haue no skill of warring in this sort:
But as the neighbours tolde, such warre the souldier maked,
That at the locke they lay, and both of them were naked.


Tacitum petiuit, my captaine falles asleepe,
One in at window lookes, where close he them espied,
And tarrying not a whit, either to laugh or weepe,
He backward with the newes, vnto the husband hied,
Which calde his friends vnto him, these pigeons for to get,
And soone he had them both, caught fast within his net.


The lookers on did laugh, the captaine was ashamed,
The husband was as angrie, as any man could be,
And though the wife by friends, and by her man were blamed,
Yet made she her defence, and chid as fast as he:
Thou hast (said she) ere this, thy slouens armefull borne,
By stealth as we did now, of many a neighbours corne.


She praies to be diuorced, but he would not agree
To heare that motion made, it made his hart full sore
To set them in a sheete, alas why should it bee,
They had been sheeted now three howers and somwhat more.
Forgiuenesse, that was best, the soulder him reuested,
The goodman kissed his wife, all quarrels were digested.


His squire still at the doore, this while lay fast asleepe,
His helmet clapped close vnto his drowsie head,
He dreamed that he sawe, a louely lasse to weepe,
Inchained with his Lord vpon a feather bed:
And in this dreame he lay still in a mischiefes name,
Vntill his captaine came, and found him in the same.


By shoulders he him tooke, he quickly made him wake,
What was to him befalne, he did describe and tell,

His angrie looke and noise, did make the wretch to shake,
Villaine he cried, how saiest, hast thou not serude me well,
Thou varlet base, thou asse, thou drunken headed ape,
I thee coniure straight way, leaue of thy souldiers shape.


His spurres to bodkins turned, his lips conuert to horne,
His beard turned all to flesh, gone was his manly face,
His shirt of maile and helmet, that he long had worne,
To plumes and cockscombe turned, this was a foule disgrace:
Behold and see, what tis, an angrie one to serue,
That for a toy forgets, what seruing did deserue.


He liueth still, and still retaines a souldiers minde,
With Switzers he will go, when they are waged to fight,
Vnto a lasse he is, more then his captaine kinde,
And fiue or sixe at once, doe lodge with him all night:
Remembring still the fault, that did him ouerthrowe,
He cries at peepe of sunne, Looke to your windowes hooe.



36
SInce the rebellion in the North, an host of light horsemen, issued,
as from Scotlande and inuading England, came as farre as Northampton
shire, where they hurt and killed many, sparing neither
age nor sexe. At last they enuironed a worshipfull knights house, and
had assuredly won entrance into it, had not his seruants beene, who
with such woonderfull resistance, stopped their passage; that no one of
them, were he much lesse then a Pigmei, could make any irruption, yet
left they way for a friend, which got in, of stature greater than euer
was Atlas, or the goodly sonne of Grandgosier.


37

WIth cordes they haled her from the ground,
And did about them lay,
Like lustie ringers of the bels,
Vpon some holiday.


Her legs and armes close to a tree,
She tottered vp and downe,

Cla^^^^g her iron lined breech
Close to a lubbers crowne:


Whome she strooke downe into the ground,
Full twenty foote and more,
And yet he neuer did complaine,
Or felt that he was sore.



38

WHilst I was yong, I dare well say,
I was as fresh as fairest May,
And like a malapert yong elfe,
As proudly did I beare my selfe.


But pride men say, will haue a fall,
Euen so had I, and therewithall
To seruants seruant I became,
And euery puzzell is my dame.


When that I once haue done my worke,
I am inforced in hurnes to lurke,
Expecting when for want of meate,
My fellow seruant should me eate.



39
I Louers had, had words been true,
As many as faire Corinna had,
Yet when my foes me ouerthrew,
My friends looked on, and were right glad.
When he that earst did me defend
Vntill the day of dreadfull death
Did hasten most vnto mine end,
Striking the stroke which reft my breath,
And from my graue men me remoue,
Pretending still they doe me loue.


40

A Coniurer was circling in the aire,
With nimble eies attentiue on the ground,

Where walking spirits, nousled many a paire,
Making a search the harmelesse to confound,
They wrought to reaue poore wretches of their breath,
Which neuer in life did ought deseruing death.


I saide to an abettor looking on,
Those innocents were woorthie of some pittie,
He answere made, and sware by sweete S. Iohn,
In pitying them, I shewed my selfe not wittie:
What skils (saide he) the shedding of their blood,
They doe me harme: but doe they any good?



41
MOunsier Monoculus, with that one eie,
Its not for his personage or his sweete face,
That wheresoere I goe, I doe him espie,
With maidens and wiues in speciall grace,
He is a surgeon, he can let blood,
His pricke is a thing that doth them good.


42
BEfore many monethes be expired, there shall be borne of parents
base and simple, a more silly ofspring, blinde, deafe and dumbe:
which after incision in the head, and drinking a certaine liquour, shall
become great tellers of mens thoughts. Not onely reuealing the deceits
of loue, stratagems of warre, and policies of states: but they shall
haue also power of vniting or setting at variance: maintaining in
England a warre, which shall cost many their liuings, and some their
liues; without ceasing, vnlesse all things growe so common, that ioyners
and locksmithes giue ouer their occupations.


43
I Doe agree with sister and brother,
But I loue neither father nor mother,
If she imbrace me, she makes me die,
If he doe but touch me I cracke and crie,
And surely it is a preatie thing,

^o see how he makes me fart and fling:
Maruell you sirs, who I should bee,
On sunday before noone you may me see.


44
I Haue in the countrie seene at a faire,
Of brethren and sisters many a paire,
That being coupled like man and wife,
Went yet to seruice for terme of life,
But they could neither wash nor wring,
Nor brue, nor bake, nor play, nor sing,
Nor pipe, nor daunce, nor any such thing:
All that they can, is well to keepe
All things, except great flocks of sheepe.


45
OVr parents are euer besmeared with dust,
Our sisters and brethren in very good trust:
Our chaps euer gaping, or if they meete iust,
Some one thing or other in sunder must.


46
LEt neuer woonder fill your head,
For sure the case is plaine and cleere,
By sluggish keeping of my bed,
I lost a thousand pound a yeere:
My brother rose, and did it get,
And I am to his keeping set.


47
THe Miller, and the Millers wife,
That they might merrie make,
Were set downe with a dish of fruite,
A cake, and halfe a cake,
The parson of the towne with them,
His sister and no more:
Now haue you heard of all the guests,
And of their bread the store,

Yet did they vse the matter with
Such cunning, skill, and art,
That euerie one eate halfe a cake,
Before they did depart.


48
THere are two sisters, one faire and cheerefull, the other blacke or
browne. The first for her beautie, is of all desired, loued and longed
for: The second (with good reason) is to be liked for her humilitie.
Supping all winter with the poorest, and making beggers (during
her reigne) more happie oftentimes then mightie monarches. Before
Phebus shined, or Cinthia borrowed light, they were and euer since,
striuing for the worldes gouernance (of which either of them hath
euer one halfe vnder her) they haue chased continually one another,
more swiftly than any ship sadeth on the sea. Long hath this contention
lasted, and cease it shall neuer, till the Turke be ouerthrowne, the
Pope haue resigned his triple crowne, and all be brought to one sheepefolde,
vnder one shepherd.


49
THat which a sheepe did inward hide,
I vse to weare on my out side,
And that which a tree did outward weare,
Within me alwaies I doe beare:
By drowning first I tooke essence,
And hanged was since for none offence:
Still ready by a blast of breath,
To finde a life causing my death.


50
AL day leeke one thats in disgrace,
He resteth in some secret place,
And seldome putteth foorth the head,
Vntill day light be fully fled,
Then in the maides, or goodwiues hand,
The gallant ginnes first vp to stand:
Whom to a hole, they doe apply,
Wherein he will both liue and die.



51
ON an euening as colde, as colde might bee,
With frost and haile, and pinching weather,
Companions about three times three,
Lay close all in a pound together:
Yet one after one, they tooke a heate,
And died that night, all in a sweate.


52
A Remnant of a soule, the water did inclose,
That staide by one, from fire, which did repaire,
That fenced by one, which from the earth arose,
And all kept warme by one, which grew vp in the aire:
The goodwife out of these, did deale about her dole,
Till one did put his nose, euen right into her hole.


53
IF Lords of the land esteeme me not a flie,
If daintie nosed doctors, crie fie on me fie,
If Ladies at Court, none account on me make,
If citizens wiues, doe me all forsake,
Then Ioane in the countrie, for a friend I will take:
What though from my youth, I haue had a white head,
My taile will be greene, vntill I be dead.


54
A Poore Alcumist, out of streight prison, accepted to seruice, fell
presently on eating, and of a starueling, in short time, became
goodly. But such was his gormandize, and quicke digestion, that had
he not been excellent, not onely in transformation of mettals, but also
in preseruing, conseruing, candying, distilling, extracting of oiles,
balmes, quintessences and spirites, with many other things, no man
would haue entertained him: for he could eate doing little worke, but
not worke, vnlesse he were eating. Hauing deuoured to some scarcitie,
things growen and nourished vpon the earth, he was brought to
feede on viler achates, taken from the bowels thereof. But still he eateth,
bringing profit by his seruice, comfort by his presence, and in his
chaps destruction. He hath therefore allowed him, roome from his

trade, and habitation by himselfe, wherein he neuer resteth, but when
he is wrapped vp in his owne excrements, and wert not that he is in
danger of death, by too much fasting, or too much drinking, ye might
iudge him to be immortall.


55
AN idle braine, and wanton eie,
Breedes in the hart, sometime a goose,
Thats often kept full hungrily,
Whilst lecherie, iugling fast and loose,
Doth gaine his bushell for each oate,
That comes into the gozlings throate.


56
ENuie and loue, together hatcht a beast,
Or hag of hell it rather seemes to mee,
That pines if other comes but neere her feast,
And willingly would euer watching bee,
Things that are not, this enuies bird would see:
This parricide, this errour whelping sprite,
This Sibill false, seldome diuining right.


57
THere is a thing, some call it sport,
(That yong and olde, and all will prooue)
Tis musicke in a kind consort,
On tuned instruments of loue,
The fashion something bagpipe like,
With poke and pipe the minstrels plaie,
And if the bommes iust measure strike,
Tis pastime for a wedding day:
Maides that to this their mindes applie,
For Lute and harpe care not a flie.


58
A Tree, a beast, an angell, all in one
Liues, and hath rule ouer both beast and tree,
That oft, is after goatishnesse so gone,
That there is no beast, beastlier than hee.

Bridle the beast, monster, mishapen thing,
Least tree, beast, angell, to the deuill fling.


59

TO th'earth from highest heauen,
Foure virgins were descended,
Sent downe from him that vnto men
All goodnesse hath intended.


And here they staide a while,
And many things amended,
But they were forced backe by those,
That should haue them defended.


Since then the golden age,
The happie daies were ended,
And vice hath raigned most in them,
That vertue most pretended.



60
IN a towne, where the Praetor is wise, the Counsell wittie, is a slouenly
citizen, to whom many are so indebted, that they haue much
to doe, to pay for the forbearance, and no man can get a generall quietus
est at his hand till he be dead; which yet is longed for of very few.
For both the principall agents in the corporation, receiue maintenance
from him: and the Maioresse, with the other good wiues, doe so fansie
him, and the fore man of his shop, Bawdie Brian, that there is many
times much misgouernance thereby in the whole towne:
notwithstanding any edict, proclamation,
or reclamation that the magistrate
can make.

FINIS.



The solutions.
 IT importeth that all things are contained in some place:
and that hell it selfe must needes be locall.
 A variation of the first riddle. So that here is not meant, any
thing of the citie Rome. But onely roome or place, viz. the
hollow capacitie of one bodie conteining or comprehending
another.
 It may perhaps be vnderstood of the winde: but rightlier
I thinke, of that which we call vacuitie or emptinesse. Which
is a name, and none essence. For the penetrant subtilitie of
aire, suffereth nothing to be emptie, as say the philosophers.
Mercurie is fained to be god of merchandizing, which is
the trade that beautifieth the glorious citie of Venice. Neptune
inuironeth her, and her Duke is seruile or of very small
authoritie. For the maiestie and supreme commandement, is
in the senate and magnificoes.
 The high way, wheresoeuer it go, eateth vp the vesture of
the earth. It was not created at the first, but is rather a priuation,
then a thing made. And if men were makers of it, it was
for the more part, rather with feete then with hands. By the
Tyrants are meant, vse and necessitie: great rulers in the life
of man.
 The soueraigne, and dread prince of princes, hath the
great earth, a little forrest of his pleasure. The fiue partes of
it are the fiue Zones, or otherwise the fiue great continents
Asia, Africa, Europa, America and Magellanica. The keeper
is the Sunne: his wife or sister the Moone, that bringeth alwaies
with her light and moisture. The footeman is the planet
Mercurie: the Smithes wife Venus. They crosse the Zodiacke

continually attending on the Sunne. The Phoenix is our
yeere, which beginneth when Sol entreth into Aries, and endeth
when he goeth out of Pisces.
 It is meant, by the faire Ladie Tellus, which conceiueth in
her wombe, the resplendent mettals of golde and siluer, the
vnwoorthie burnished regents of the earth.
 The earth that beares vs shall deuoure vs. And of chalke
which is accounted adeps terrae, the fatnesse of the earth, mixed
with sand (the leanest earth) is made morter, for buildings to
defend vs against all winde and weather.
 A description of a student sitting at his booke in a greene
chaire, wherein he leand and lolled till it cracked.
 A description of the indomable wilde sea, whose waues are
her wrincles: she is as wanton as any Westminster wagtaile,
and for the bodie as perilous.
 The lasse is the vine, a true louer of the Sunne, for whome
she mourneth, when he is run far southward. Her iuice hath
compelled many to reueale their owne secrets, and not a few
to lay open their owne shame. Christ called himselfe the vine.
 Stamped coyne is ruled, and it cureth: also what diseases it
cureth, and what great things it perswadeth, the world knoweth
but too well. It containeth a kinde of chronologie.
 It may well be vnderstood by cardplay.
 In the spring time, a yoong damsell putteth in her bosome,
the egs of a silke worme: which being disclosed, the yoong
worme, ere it be long, will fall to his naturall taske, till he hath
inclosed himselfe in his huske. From which when he is broken
out, he ioineth with the female, for preseruation of his kinde,
and then voluntarily dieth.
 There is a bird, called in Italian, Perdigiornata, the daywaster:
of this qualitie. And some men are of the like, that let go,

all small offers, to expect better imployments.
 Swine saith Plutarch, to whome nature hath not giuen a
looke, vp to the skies, are the most crying beasts in the world,
euer grunting and complaining. But tie them by the heeles,
and carrie them on a staffe whither ye will: so long as they see
the cloudes, they are quiet and silent. And if men could learne
to leaue wrooting in the earth, and place their cogitations in
heauen, their tranquillitie should be the greater.
 But men hunt after felicitie, preposterously, with too much
circuition: for it is best sought at home, in a quiet soule, and
cleane conscience.
 The infatigable earth beareth hempe, which is brought to
diuers trades, mysteries, formes and fashions. There of is made
linnen cloth, for sheetes, shirts and smocks. And if they go
not neerer my Ladies taile, then my Lords lips I haue maruell.
Then, of linnen cloth is made paper: of paper, bookes and
intelligencers, id est, letters of loue and other missiues. They
come very often to the fire, or else to wipe where it is seldome
cleanly, and neuer sweete. But see you not, how many transmutations
here are, before we can haue paper? Well fare he
that taught vs the goose necke. But a quicke ducke had no
fellow: for he could wash himselfe cleane for a new peece of
seruice.
 A student, rising from bed, with his flint and steele, giueth
fire to the match and candle. The dead men which came
about him, were S. Ambrose, S. Augustine etc. or if ye will
Plowden and my Lord Dyer.
 They are the leters of the alphabet: whereof onely fiue are
vocall, and the rest dumbe.
 The scale of musicke, is made with lines and spaces. Fiue
signed cliffes (...) odd. Six voices, vt, re, my, fa, sol, la,
and the seuen diapasons, a. b. c. d. e. f. g.
 It is vnderstood of fortune.
 An excellent expositour of heauenly mysteries, tooke this
to be a looking glasse which receiueth the similitude of any
thing, that commeth trauerse. The two great Ladies, he tooke
to be pride and lecherie. But the propounder vnderstandeth
this riddle, by the planet Mercurie, placed meane betwixt
Venus and Luna: being (say the Astronomers) eiusdem naturae,
cum planeta cui coniungitur.
Paracelsus, in his booke de natura rerum teacheth an artificiall
generation of an homunculus, or little man. Prometheus,
the sonne of Iapetus, was the first maker of images, and thereupon,
was fained to make men. This riddle is ment by Rhetorike,
or the figure Prosopopeia, that to stirre and mooue affection,
attributeth speech to dead men, or to wals and such like.
 A fan of feathers.
 Viz. two cochehorses, one cocheman, fower wheeles, the
bodie of the coche, and fower passengers.
 First an egge, then a worme or canker: then inclosed in a
huske, and last of all a butterflie.
 A bell, when it is cast, is buried in the ground.
 If euery man and woman be an arbor reuersa, then the shril
oister queanes in Graies Inne lane, are trees and plants:
though not so sweete to plant vpon, as be in other groues
about London.
 The new world America, is compassed in with the sea. And
were not the multitude of barnacles, viz. cloudes, which are
drawen out of it, (saith one author) the sea must needes
drowne all the earth. It is the sunne and stars, that draweth vp
those cloudes and vapours. Which when (by coldnesse of the
aire in his midde region) they conuert to snowe, fall downe
againe and make feather beds bigger then any which be in
Ware, though not altogither so holsome, to lie long in.
 It was, if Aesope be a storie, the blocks successour, the woorthie

king of frogs. Viz. a storke, deuouring one of his subiects,
in Claxton garden.
 A hauke, first fed, then hooded, then set on a pearch: was
soone after hanged by the heeles, and rescued by the master
of the house, at Stokesbie.
 The soldier, is our Norfolke tumbler which ouerthroweth
multitudes of conies: that want both armour and courage to
hold together.
 He that hath laien one whole autumne at Stokesbie, shall
vnderstand this aenigma well inough. A gnat is an ill chamber-fellow.
 In Lucians dialog, betwixt the shoomaker and his cocke,
ye shall finde that Mars, when he went to lie with Venus, left
his man captaine Gallous or Gallus, to attend at the doore.
Master Cocke fell in a nap, Phaebus looked in at the windowe,
and discried the adulterie etc. Euer since that day, euery cock
at peepe of sunne (thinking Mars to be at his old occupation,
or martialistes to be at their venerious exercise) croweth to
giue them warning.
 A great snowe, brought with a Northren winde, killed manie
birds and beasts. The seruants at the Knights house, were
the glasse windowes, which kept out the snowe, and let the
light in.
 It describeth, the manner of driuing piles into the ground,
wherewith are made firme, the foundations of buildings, set
in meadowes, marshes and lowe places.
 A broome, when it is well worne, and none other thing at
hand, serueth to feede the fire withall.
 Venison hath many louers. The hunters reioice when the
dogs kill it, and commonly the foster or keeper is the chiefe
murderer. The graue is made of pasticrust: and for sheere
loue we take out the corse and eate it.
 A lanner or falcon, lying in for her game, whilest the dogs
hunted to spring it.
 A needle.
 Goose quils, when they be cut to pennes, are instruments
in great occurrences and affaires. Maintainers of war against
vniust professours, and all manner of offenders against the
Queenes peace, crowne and dignitie. This war shall last, till
meum and tuum be ouerthrowen, and coffers and lockes be
out of vse. For vntill then shall the common lawe last, as prophesied
old Master Barton.
 Salt, receiueth forme by fire, the substance of it is water:
and yet fire or water will destroy it.
 Most of our things, are kept vnder locke and key: except
sheepe here in England.
 It may be vnderstood, of a paire of sheares.
 I knew a gentleman, that would say he lost, a thousande
pounds a yeere, by lying but one hower too long in bed. For
his eldest brother was borne, not past one hower before him.
 The milners wife, was the parsons sister: and so the diuision
not hard to make.
 Day and night, were before the sunne and moone. And
though they seeme to stay with vs, yet in truth they doe not
so: but are in continuall motion, euer slipping from vs. A
yeere runneth away and makes no noise.
 A candle.
 A candle.
 A pound of candles.
 Plants haue a sweete vegetancie. The riddle is vnderstood
of a glasse with sweet water, inclosed with bents, or some such
matter, and also wrapt vp in wooll. Now if the glasse were the

goodwiues glasse, then possessorily though not naturally the
glasses mouth, whereunto one smelled, was the goodwiues
hole.
 Garlicke etc.
 The great chymick, that hath eaten so many houses, blocks
and trees, that poore folke are glad to stop his mouth with sea
coles, flags, turfes, and cowshardes.
 Loue is a foole.
 Ielousie is a feend.
 Lecherie is made a solace.
 Those women and men are happie, whose rationall and
intellectuall part, hath her iust and full dominion, ouer the
materiall and sensuall.
 Amitie, peace, iustice and shamefastnes, are gifts and great
blessings of God. Of which the two first (as I haue red) a great
while since, were chased from earth by princes: the third by
lawyers, and the fourth by women. I had the substance of this
riddle from Italie. Let it therefore tax and reprehend, roitelets,
dukes and potentates, for their diuisions: aduocates for
their iniustice: and women for their impudence, onely in
Italie. We hold it in England, that a shamelesse woman, wanteth
the properest ornament of her sex.
 The corporation or towne, is the perfect frame of a man.
In whom reason is placed, as the Praetor or Maior. The fiue
senses are of counsell, and the slouenly citizen is the bellie.
The Maioresse is mistresse Libido: and the good wiues,
the foolish affections of man: which will fauour
the belly and Brian, let reason
say what he can.
Oremus.

