


AN
ITENERARIE
OF SOME YEARES
Trauaile, through diuers parts of Asia and
Africke, with the description of the
Orientall Indies, and some Iles adjacent.
Especially the Territories of the now
Persian Monarchie: included betwixt
Me sopotamia, Indus, and the
Caspian Sea.
THis Iournall was taken in danger,Begun in the Teare, 1616. which
admits of no curiositie, and craues but the
same fauourable light for Approbation, it
was drawne by. Many stormes it has endured
for company, but more hot dayes,
which haue Sun-burnt my lines, aswell as
face. And though I am on shore, yet I
feare, the Sea is not yet calme; for each
Booke, sent into the World, is like a
Barke put to Sea, and as liable to censures
as the Barque is to foule weather.
When I landed, I thought to haue hoyst saile no more; but Friends
whose breath is powerfull, haue once more lancht mee into the deepe
(and may it proue a faire gale) by commanding these iude and indigested
notions from me, which being accompanied with truth and simplicite
(the soule of Historie) are then like the Elements, In most splendour
and perfection when least mixt and troubled with Quotations or Obseruations
of other men.
I challenge no thankes for what I publish, nor reward, because I plead

guilty to vnworthiness, and all the imperfections you can throw vpon
youth or hast.
None can thinke so ill of mee, as I doe of my selfe, the rather, that
your pardon may flow freely, and worke a kind of miracle vpon mee, in
raising my dead thoughts to life. And that my wel-wishers (who haue
offered, a ciuill violence to friendship, in forcing my priuate satisfactione,
into publique shame) may owne my faults, which must reflect vpon them,
since in my obedience, I haue made all my errours, theirs.
More Authours I might haue vsed, and rendred my selfe, to some
more vsefull in this way. But I was on my way to many Countries, and
Trauellers haue enough to doe with varietie, In men and manners,
which make vp a Librarie to themselues; besides the scituations and present
beings of Cities and Territories, seeming better then to labour in
vncertaine stories, which not only perplexe the hearers, but beget incredulitie,
oftentimes amongst the credulous.
My other trauailes into some parts of Europe, I could haue troubled
you withall, but I loue not repetitions, nor to entertaine you with that
from my selfe, I hate in others, besides, since all Trauellers, are subject
to imputations of vntruths, I had rather goe farre to fetch it, and send
you farre off, to disproue it; then giue you libertie of condemning
mee at home.
If my thoughts haue wandred, I must intreat the wel-bred Reader to
remember, I haue wandred through many deserts, as to afford mee his
helpe to call home my Itenerant Notions, to fixe them (by his fauour)
vpon this Iland of Iles, Great Brittaine: which like a reall Map of the
whole World, containes the summe and abridge of all sorts of Excellencies,
met here like Paralels, in their proper Centre.
At Sea J learnt to pray, though I was taught it from my Cradle, and he
that is more giuen to swearing then praying may see the wonders of the
Deepe for his recouerie, and take the receipt from mee, with a Probatum
est.
This will serue for induction, that the Reader dwell not vpon impertiencies.
The description of our Sea passage, is enjoyned mee.
Vpon good Friday, we tooke ship at Douer,(...). 1626. hauing six great and welmann'd
ships along with vs.
Next day we coasted by the Ile of Wight, where a sudden and violent
gust of winde ore-charged vs, but in lesse then one houre, its fury was abated,
and we enjoyed a happie blast, whereby vpon Easter day, being
the fiue and twentieth of March, we lost sight of the Lizard point.
At our entrance into the Spanish Ocean (which was three dayes after)
vpon the Coast of Biskay, wee descried seuen saile of great ships, wee
bore vp to speake with them, imagining them Enemies and men of war,
but they proued Flemmings and our Friends.
The nine and twentieth day we had verie raging Seas and tempests, but
at night a gentle calme ensued, and on the thirtieth day wee gaue chase

to a Turkish Pirat, after halfe a dayes chase, we gaue him ouer, his celeritie
so much exceeded ours.
The first of Aprill, we entred the great Atlanticke Ocean, where againe
a Barbarian man of warre at Sun-rising came afterne of vs; but
vpon better view he feared and fled vs.
The third of Aprill,A Pirat fled vt. early in the morning, wee had sight of the Holy
Port, belonging to the Spaniard, which Ile at eight leagues distance,
gaue it selfe in this shape vnto vs.




The sixt of Aprill, we discried the Canary Ilands, in former Ages called
Fortunate, they are seuen in number, the first, (...) second,
La Palma; the third, Teneriffa; the fourth, Lancaerota; the fift,
Hierro; the sixt, La Gomera; the seuenth, Forte ventura; they are
now subiect to the King of Spaine. These Iles were vnknowne in
Romes greatness, they were first discouered (as Galuano writes) by a
French Gentleman, called Iohn de Be^ancour, Anno Domini 1417.
though some report it of another, and another yeare, Anno 1330. At
which time the Inhabitants were rather monsters then men.
They knew no God but Nature, were ignorant of the vse of fire, they
shaued their heads with flints and other stones.Their brutish knowledge. Their children were
giuen to Goats to sucke, they cultured the earth with hornes of Goats
and Oxen.
In Grand Canaria,Their common affections. of all things, they most hated the slaughter of
beasts which they accounted a vile and base act, and therefore imposed
it on their prisoners.
In Gomera, they vsed to haue their Wiues in common.
In Teneriffa, they euer had two Kings, one dead, the other liuing,
they gaue adoration to all Aetheriall Bodies. Their Dead they washt
exceeding cleanly,Their Buria^^; put the carcasse into a Caue or Graue, standing
vpright, a staffe in his hand, and a pale of Milke and Wine was placed
by him, good Coadiutors to his Imaginarie Pilgrimage.
These Iles were conquered by Don Henrico Infant of Spaine, Anno
1418.
Grand Canarie at this day precedes the rest in greatnesse and excellencie;
for thither all the other Iles repaire for Trials and Iustice.
Howbeit Teneriffa is thought to equall it in wealth and circuit, in

height I am sure it doth, and not it only, but any other Land in the
World, allowing its immediate ascent from the Ocean. The high peak
is by most Geographers reputed the highest in the World, by some
said to be fifteene miles high: though a third part may well suffice to
beget credulity and wonder. It is seene by Sea-men, in a Serene Skie, a
hundred and twentie English miles, and serues as an apt Sea-mark vnto
Passengers. The top of this Peake or Pyramide (exceeding those artificiall
ones, built by the Aegyptian Pharo^, for their Sepulchres) by
reason of their rare height and affinitie with the middle Aerie Region
are seldome without Snow.
This Ile is distant from the Grand Canarie, twentie leagues, or sixty
English miles. Hierro or Ferrum, beares from the Grand Canarie
South, or South and by West.
This Ile is high, and by reason of its extendure, towards the Tropicke
of Cancer, such time as the Sunne is vernall, becomes exceeding
hot and scalding* and is blessed only in one Tree,A happie Tree. which besides its shade
(like the miraculous Rocke in the Desert) affords the Inhabitants
fresh and delightfull water, which by a heauenly moisture distils it
selfe, to the peoples benefit, the Ile hauing water no where els^, thats
potable.
The great Canarie gaue its representation to vs in this forme.





The twelfth of Aprill, wee had the winde high and large; so that on
the fourteenth day we had the Sunne in our Zenith, his declination
fourteene degrees, where note, that only then, when wee are Nadyr
to the Sunne, we haue no shadow. And againe, whereas to all Inhabiters
in the Temperate Zone, their shadowes are euer North in the
Sunnes Meridian. When you haue past the Zenith, the shade becomes
iust contrary, which made the Sun-burnt Arabs to wonder in their discent
to Europe, as the Poet speakes:
Ignotum vobis Arabes, venistis in Orbem,Vmbras mirati Nemorum, non iresinistras.
And here (the wind something abating) wee felt excessiue heat, that,
and the losse of a Sailer falling from the shrouds into the mercilesse
waues perishing their, was all our sorrow. Yet a little was added, for
vnder sixe degrees, at midnight so violent and forcible a storme of
raine poured on our Ships; that in lesse space then two houres, the
Skiffe, which was fastned to the vpper Decke was fild with it; and which
aggrauated the gust, was the fury of Thunder and flashes, which mightily
raged with the raine. Nor is this weather rare about the Aequinoctiall;
by Marikers termed the Tornadoes: and tis so vncertaine,
that now you shall haue a quiet breath and gale, and suddenly an vnexpected
violent gust, and storme, so fierce, that many times the ships
will feele no helme.
Yet in my iudgement this is most vnhappy to the Sailers, who in
those raines handing in their sailes and standing on the De^kes, after
the action, commonly goe to sleepe (the weather being terrible hot) in
their wet clothes, which stinke very much of that ill digested showre,
and thereby beget long diseases and mortall, as the Calenture, Scorbute
or Scuruie, Feauers, Fluxes, Aches and the like: which (did they
but forbeare Arack or strong liquours, and shift themselues out of
those nasty infectious wet clothes, when they take their rest) might be
preuented.
And besides these, they should be wary, where, and when they was^
themselues: Many heretofore haue beene deuoured by rauenours
fishes, such as iustly we call Sharkes, whose cruell appetite encourage
them to deuoure men aliue, they are alwayes directed by a little specled
fish, called a pilot fish, by guiding their Monster-masters to a
prey. Such attendants Lions haue* like little Dogges called Jackalls,
and here vnder fiue degrees, the aduentrous ship-boyes were
in perill of those Sharkes, swimming so without heed; that some were
in apparant danger.
The shape of which fish I haue here (though vnskilfully) pourtrayed
for your better satisfaction.





In this latitude we were paralell to Sierra Leoou, a place in Afrique,
strong and something more famous for refreshing that aduenturous
Captaine Sir Francis Drake, at his returne from Circumnauigating
the Globe of the whole Earth, and note, that heere and along the
Coast of Guinaea, and Bynnyn, Cape Palmas, Lopez Gonzaluo, and the
rest. The inhabitants are coale blacke Moores.
An English ship not long agoe, coasting out for discouery, here vnder
the Aequinoctiall and elsewhere he anchored, the Negroes repairing
to our ship, earnestly desired one or two of our men to goe ashoare,
leauing hostage in our ship for their safe returne: two Englishmen allotted
by the Captaine went with them, who were no sooner ashoare,
but thousands of the Aethiopians flockt about them, extremely admiring
their Colour, so passing along, they were often presented
with Flowres, Fruits, Toddy, and like things, and hauing in some
measure satiated their immeasurable admirations, our men returned
satisfied and safe aboard.
The Inhabitants are Idolaters,Idolaters* knowing no true God, only what
nature and force aimeth at: such are they, and such their customes
and ceremonies.
And this is memorable, vnder sixteene degrees North, by which
we trauelled, and close by the Iles of Cape de Verde, which head-land
is commander of the small Iles; Mayo, Bonauista, Sal, Vincentio, Iacobo
and Fuogo, discouered Anno 1495.

In old times, some thinke, these were the Hesperides,The Hesperides. so famous
for the Garden of golden Apples, conquered by Alcides, in despight
of that hundred headed Dragon, engendred by aspiring Typhon and
Echydna.
Here was the sumptuous fabricke of Anthaeus, who was seuentie
Cubits tall (as saith Sertorius.) Hee was thrice throwne violently to
the ground by Hercules, and three times recouerd life, by the Earth
his Mother, which seene by Ioues sonne, hee strangled him in the
Aire.
The Hesperides were the daughters of Hesperus, and of the same
Mother withall-bearing-Atlas. Their names Aeglae, Arethusa, and Hesperthu^a;
which three are concealed in the three Iles Mayo, Sal, and
Bonauista: Howbeit some Authenticks haue reduced them to Lixus
neere Gibralter, where is the Ne plus vltra. Others as Natalis Comes,
and Pliny say, the Hesperides were part in Lixus, part in Maeroae, and the
Red Sea, but that I allow not of, the too great distance arguing it.
And Dominicus Niger ghesses them at Berenice, neere the Arabian
Gulfe, where stands the Riuer Laethe so warbled out by Poets. But
we say they were here, and sixe in number, thought by Poets to be
the Atlantiades, and daughters of Atlas, and Hesperia daughter of Hesperus,
his brother, which six are named in the beginning of this superfluous
discourse.
The one and twentieth of Aprill, because we had no wind, and lying
so neere the Sunne, the weather was very sulphurous and raging
hot, so that (albeit we had Deckes and Awnings to shade vs, and were
almost naked) we could enioy no rest, nor eate, drinke, lie still, or
what else without excessiue sweating day and night.
This calme and immoderate heate continued with vs seuen dayes,
only on the fiue and twentieth day, when Phoebus was in his height
and glorie, a long spout of stinking raine Pyramide wise, dissolued it
selfe very neere vs.
This hidious Cataract, as I conceiue is exhaled by the Suns powerfull
Attract, and conuerted into an ill congested Cloud, wanting
height and heate, is forced into a violent eruption, which dissolued
by the penetrating Sunne, effudes it selfe altogether (whence it had
beginning) into the Ocean, and with such fury, that many times great
ships, are sunke or dasht in pieces by it, and when the raine is spent,
out of that Cloud is issuant so forcible a whirle-wind, as breeds feare
and admiration; the wind and raine so impetuously tormenting the
Seas, that sometimes the surges or Sea-flashes doe rebound top-gallant
height.
Vpon May day, we crost the Aequinoctiall,Aequinoctiall Line. the Sunne then being in
the seuenteenth degree, thirtie one minutes, Northerne declination
and in the nineteenth degree of Taurus.
The Aequinoctiall, is an imaginarie Circle, diuiding the World into
two equall parts, and is equidistant from either Pole ninetie degrees.

For the Aequator is Horizon to both Poles, and note that at
two degrees, South declination, we lost sight of the Pole-star, which
is of a third magnitude,Vrsa minor. and fixt in the tip of the little Beares taile.
The sixt of May, wee past by the Ile of the Holy Crosse,Holy Crosse. or Santo
Croix; euery houre expecting those Anniuersarie winds, called by the
Sea-men and Portugals, Monzoons; the property of which wind is to
blow constantly one way, sixe moneths, and the other way, the other
halfe yeare. Whereby the Merchants and Sea-men are bound to a limited
time to imbrace them, otherwise the passage to the East Indies
is very difficult and vncertaine.
Now how preposterous, the Yeare and Winds were else-where in
the World, I know not, this I know, that nothing is more inconstant
than the Winds. The Monzoon proued our Antagonist, whereby
our passage to the Cape of good Hope, became of six weekes longer
continuance than our Captaine looked for, and were forced to runne
into much more longitude, than was desired.
The eight day, we were vnder eight degrees ten minutes latitude,
and neere the Lands of Monomotapa, the Brazelian Coast in America,
siding vs to the West.
The Continent here in Africke, we call Congo, Manicongo, Longa,
Monomotapa, Benomotapa, Angola, etc. all which T^rritories you must
passe by, ere you view the vtmost Promontorie of Africke, the Cape
of good Hope.
Some attribute the Discouery of these Countries, to Bartholomew
de Dios, and others to Vasco de Gama, who sailing about the Cape, called
it first Tormentozo (by reason of those great and continuall stormes
vsually their) he was seruant to Iohn the Second, and thirteenth King
of Lusitania, or Portugall.
In Angola the people are fearfull blacke, their Religion is Ethnick,
their Idols are of great esteeme amongst them,Extreme Paganisme. and called Mokisso, generally
they are so wedded to Superstition, that some adore the Deuill
in forme of a bloudie Dragon. Others a Ram-goat, a Leopard, a
Batt, an Owle, a Snake or Dogge, to whom they ceremoniously
kneele and bow vnto, groueling then vpon the Earth, they throw dust
on their faces, and offer Hearbes, Rice, Rootes, Fruits and such like,
which is deuoured by the Witches, a Monster not a little feared and
esteemed of amongst these Deuillish Sauages.





The Female Sexe against the appearing of the New Moone, assemble
vpon a Mountaine, where turning vp their bare bummes, they
contemptuously defie Dame Cynthia,The Moone derided. who hath this despight, only
for being causer of their monthly Fluxes.
They esteeme much of nouelties, amongst which, Dogges are of
especiall value with them,Dogs esteemed. Insomuch, that twentie slaues haue beene
sold,The coine. for an Europaean Dogge. Their Come are beades of glasse, she is,
stones, and the like. Their Burials thus They first wash the dead body,
paint him, clothe him, and so conueigh him to his Dormitorie,
which is spacious and neat,^uriall of the people. wherein they bury his Armolets, Bracelets,

Shackles and such Treasure, concluding their Ceremonies with
Mimmicke gestures and eiaculations: which, with the Sacrifice of a
Goat, vpon his Graue, puts a period to their Burials.
In Loanga and towards the Mountaines of the Moone or Zair,
(whence seuen-mouthed Nyle, deriues his Origen drawing his discent
into the Mid-land Sea) their Ceremonies for the Dead are these.
They bring the Bodie to an Idoll Altar, where placing it, they pacifie
their Dieties with the Sacrifices of two Goats and a Ram, which
are slaughtered, at the foot of their Pagothaes: the bloud they giue
vnto the Deuill, the rest they bestow vpon themselues, all the deceased
mans kindred in thirty miles compasse assembling to grace his
Funerals: and ere they depart, they repaire vnto the Sepulchre, most
part of the night vsing The aenodies and dolorous complaints, each day
reuelling and making pastime.
Next these,Bloudy inhabitants. inhabit the Anzigues, a Nation endued with many
temporall benefits, as wealth, health; gold, strength, valour, and the
like, yet want these the vertue to make them ciuill, for though
they abound with Natures blessings, yet they delight in eating mans
flesh, more then other food. And whereas other people, infesting
them, content their appetites with the flesh of their Enemies. These
barbarous Anzigui couet their friends, whom they imbowell with a
greedy delight, saying, they can no way better expresse a true affection,
then to incorporate their dearest Friends and Couzens into
themselues, as in loue before, now in body vniting two in one, a bloudy
Sophistry.
They haue Shambles of men and womens flesh, ioynted and cut in
seuerall Morsels and some (weary of life) voluntarily proffer themselues
vnto the bloudy Butchers, who accordingly are sod and eaten.
They are so expert in Archery,Good Archers. and agile, that they can shoot a dozen
Arrowes on high, ere the first touch ground.
Although they trouble themselues but little in deuotion, yet doe
they circumcise Males and sometime Females.
In adding to their beauties, they haue two or three slashes in the face,
and (if to any) they giue reuerence to those two glorious Planets, Sun
and Moone, whom they suppose to liue in Matrimony.
These and other black-faced Africans, are much addicted to rapine
and the euery, they will commit a villany sooner in the day then night,
least Moone and Starres giue testimony against them. The Deuill is
no stranger amongst them, whose Oracles they vse, to offend an
Amazonian people neere them, valiant, though naked, and not fearing
them, as Odo. Lopez lib. 2. speakes of them.
The foure and twentieth of May, we were vnder nineteene degrees
and thirty one minutes of South latitude, where one of the Saylers
espying a Bird filty called a Booby, hee mounted to the top-mast and
tooke her. The foolish quality of which Bird to sit still, not valuing
danger, which Bird I haue simply depicted as you see.





Our obseruation was three minutes aboue thirty degrees, and early
our Admirall descried a Saile, and immediately made towards her
with his Barge and long Boat with eighty men. After two leagues
pursuit, they knew her for a Portugall Carrack of aboue fifteene hundred
tunne, she knew her weaknesse for fight, and on the night escaped
vs, though we diuided our selues all night, some of our fiue ships
hoping to meet her. On the seuen and twentieth day we againe espied
her, but after a little chase, shee got from our view againe, her iournie
lying vnto Goa.
The last of May after a storme wee cut the Tropique of Capricorne,
the vtmost limit of Apolloes progresse, and note that vpon May day
we crost the Aequinoctiall Circle, and the last of that moneth the
Tropicke.
The first of Iune, we had declination of twenty foure degrees, forty
two minutes: the Sunne then being twenty three degrees eight minutes
North, in the twentieth degree of Gemini.
In this latitude we had many sudden gusts and violent stormes, and
so contrary, that we could not hold our direct course, but were driuen
to lee-ward a hundred leagues vpon the Coast of Brazil,Brazil. twenty fiue
degrees of South latitude, and neere twentie seuen degrees of longitude
from the Lizard.
On the seuenth of Iune, wee once more got sight of the Carracke,
and lost her for euer, in two houres after, but heard that she recouered
India, a moneth afore vs. Our course was East South-east, and foure
dayes after we had twentie foure degrees of latitude, ou^ longitude
much varying from the Cape.
In the morning Watch,(...) 13. wee enioyed that desired Fauonius, so long
kept from vs, but it came too fiercely to vs; for veering about, it conuerted
it selfe into extreme fury,A great storm^^ in such horrible blasts and stormes, that

the Mariners became exceeding fearefull, the Cape or Promontorie
of good Hope, being so neere vs.
The winde so impetuously raging, that Heauen and Sea seemed vndevided,
the surges so sublime and terrible, that all these foure days incessant
Tempest, our Fleet lay a hull, without any saile, driving whether
Aeolus and Neptune pleased, each shifting for its owne safetie, wee
lost each other, not meeting againe till we rode in the Souldania Bay.
On Midsomer day our observation was thirtie foure degrees of latitude,
aud twentie fiue degrees of longitude, wanting three degrees of
longitude from the Cape.
The last of Iune we raised the Antarticke Pole, thirty fiue degrees of
longitude, and twenty sixe degrees, the variation of the Compasse three
degrees, our course South South-east, the Sunnes declination twenty
two degrees, twenty six minutes, and twenty two seconds, in the seuenteenth
degree of Gemini.
The seuenth of Iuly, very early we descried land, which proued (as
we desired) that great Promontory, the Cape of good Hope. The
Land at twenty leagues distance) gaue it selfe very high.
That night not fauouring vs, we cast anchor afore a little Iland, which
is by Seamen called Cony Ile, where we landed and kild some conies, they
are greater then any in England, and something resemble a wilde Cat,
they eat waterish and bad, and had they not so good a sau^^ as hunger,
I perswade my selfe they would not be commended.
This little Ile is distant from the mayne, fourteene leagues.
Neerer the road (is another small Ile) seven leagues at most distant
from the Bay, tis now and hath time out of mind beene called Pengwin
Ile. So called from a number of birds white-headed and blacke
intermixt, which bird is rather participant with the water then land,
yet uses both, her diet is at Sea (where shee feeds and diues rarely) her
nest ashore where she breeds and rests: they have wings, but flie nor,
they are better to satisfie the Curious, then to feed the stomacke, except
Oyle be delightfull to it.
And indeed the Analogie of the word induces me to imagine, some
aduentrous Cambrian first arrived here, memorizing it by this name Pengwin
in the Brittish Tongue, Etymologizing so much.
And can any thinke such a rare place could be buried in obscuritie,
till the yeere 1497. by Bartholomew de Dios afore-named.
Many we know allude the Discouery of the West Indies to Columbus
and Americus, though others know they had an Antecessor from
whose Writings and Plats they had their illuminations.
But will any honest man deny the first Discovery of all to the honour
of our Welsh Prince Dauid ap Owen Gwined,Dauid ap Owen Gwynneth, who descended from Prince Rodorick the Great, from whom the Her^^rts are issued. who liued Anno
1169. and if his Actions, extended so farre as to this Cape, who will envie
him. J cannot proue it, but this we can, that he is ecclypst too much
in his Honour, wanting a fit pen to declare his towardlinesse and Travailes.





The eleuenth day of Iuly, wee came to Anchor in the Souldani^
Bay: at the Cape of good Hope, which Cape by reason of the continuall
tempests about it, was by Vasco de Gama, denominated Cape Tormentozo,
but since by the Portugals De Buona Esperanza, for this reason that
it being the halfe way into India, when they recover this Cape, they
are confident of a good Voyage. Many having perisht to arriue at it,
and more forced backe, and lost their passage: besides the good water
and refreshing here obtained.

A Description of the Cape of good Hope
in Aethiopia.
THe Cape of good Hope is a Promontory in the utmost point of
Africa, (though the Needle Cape, or de Aguillas, see me to branch
out more Southerly, it elevates the Antarticke Pole thirty
foure degrees three minutes latitude, and has longitude from the Meridian
of the Lizard about twenty eight degrees.
To what peculiar Potentate it belongs, I dare not determine, finding
each Towne and Canton gouerned by peculiar Captaines, though
to say truly they haue neither Order, Policie, nor Religion.
If I should appropriate it vnto Prester Iohn, Emperour of the
Abizines, tis a question if hee would owne it, the two places so remore,
and the Inhabitants so indomitable; if to any, our King has most
right to it. Captaine Fitz-Herbert some yeares since taking possession
of it for King Iames, calling the ascent to the Sugar-loafe and Table,

two His so named) King Iames his Mount, and another dedicated to
Prince Charles, our now most gracious Soueraigne.
Nor is the Land, not worth the challenging, for in all my life, I never
saw ground more pleasant for view, or healthfull for vse. September
is their Spring, the same time being Autumne in Europe.
The ground by Floraes mellifluent vertue, was ore-spread with
Flowres which only Dame Nature trauels with: Art, nor knowledge
haue no being amongst these Canibals; nor were Tempe and Alcedilion,
but Emblemes of this Elisium.
Quamuis enim montosa appareat, and collibus multis distincta, interim
tamen multis vallibus, syluis, pratisque decorata est, gramina and flores suavissune
olentes, magna copia producit: Ceruosque and faeras, and Leones
multo numero nutrit, quae omnia visu and aspectu longe incundissime existunt.
Praeterea limpidissimis fontibus scatet quamplurimis, qui non sine gratissimo
susurro, de montibas altis prorumpentes, fluminibus sese passim insinuant,
and cum eis postmodum in mare exonerantur.


A Description of the Sauage Inhabitants.
THe people are of a swarthy darke colour (I cannot say complexion)
well limmed and proper, nor want they courage
(though discretion) to their limmes.
Their heads are long, their haire curld, and seeming rather wooll,
then haire; tis blacke and knotty: no part of their attire shewing like
varietie, in shape and manner: some shaue one side, and leaue the other
long and curled. A second shaues all off (one tuft, a top excepted)
a third makes fiue tufts, the skull shaued betweene: others haue
a little haire before, bauld else-where, not vnlike occasion.
Some in opinion, finer then the rest, hang their haire with brasse
buttons, pieces of Pewter, spur-rowels, or what else the mirthfull
Saylers exchange for Ostrich-egge-shels, Tortoises, Wood-so^ell,
Beeues, Mutton, or the like.
Their eares are long and made longer by ponderous bables, they
hang their, extending the holes to a great capacitie, some put a long
linke of Brasse or Iron, others Chaines, Glasse, Blew stones or Bullets
in them.
Such as want that treasure, make vse of singles of Deere, beaks of
Birds, Bels, stones of Dogges, or wilde Catts: of which fopperies
these Troglodites esteeme so much, as we of Gold, Pearle, Amber, or
the like.
About their neckes (for I omit their flat noses, and blubberd lips,

bigge enough without addition) they are ornified with long brasse
chaines, or hoopes, of Iron, such as Mariners affoord them.
Others make shift with Tortoise shels and legges, with greazie
thongs of leather, wreathes of grasse, birds guts, and some with Feathers.
Their armes are loaden with pride, such make the Iron shackles,
beades, twigges of trees and brasse Rings. The women imitate (or
Ape) the men.
Both men and women hidiously cut and slash their flesh in sundry
formes, their browes, noses, cheeks, armes, breast, back, belly, thighes
and legs, are pinckt and cut in more admirable (then amiable) manner.
They contemne apparell, not comparable to the antiquitie of their
weare, Gold, they value not as Gold, but for its colour.
Their clothing at best is a stinking beast skinne, the haire inuerted,
reaching from head to wast* and as a couer to their modest parts, they
gird themselues with a piece of raw leather, and fasten a square peece
like the backe of a Gloue, to it, which almost hangs so low as their
pendants.
Most haue but one stone, the other is forced away in their infancie,
that Venus allure them not from Pallas.
Their hummes and legges are naked, some only haue a broad peece
of leather, which helped by a small string, is fastned to their feet, which
too, when they come into a strangers company, they vsually hold
them in their hands, whereby their feet may haue the greater liberty
to steale, which with their toes, they practise and can performe most
cunningly.
During the night, they sleepe round a fire in the open fields, the fire
secures them from their watchfull, and hungry Neighbours the Lions
(who are so familiar and bold, that one aduentured into our Tent, and
stole some of our Diet, though the Sentinell with his Musquet acrocke
was set to guard it) their stomackes, diet, enmitie, and policie are almost
equall.
In darke weather the Lions vse subtilty to catch and eat the Sauages.
In the day time they digge pits, couer them with boughes, and
traine the couragious Lions thither, where they receiue destruction,
eating them to day, who perhaps were Sepulchres to their friends or
parents the day before.
These wel-bred people, descend each morning from the Mountains,
adorned with two or three raw guts of Cats or Lions, seruing for
chaines or neck-laces, and break-fast too: and in their actiue complements,
salute, eating and speaking both together.
They are very ceremonious in thanksgiuings, for, wanting requitals,
if you giue a woman a piece of bread, she will immediatly pull by her
flap, and discouer her pudenda. A curtesie commanded them, I suppose,
by some Dutch-ill-bred Sayler, for taught it they are, they say, by
Christians. And English men, I know, haue greater modestie.

The female sexe are for the greater sort excised in their hidden
parts, but the men know no such custome, for in place of Circumcision,
they pull away one stone, fearing to beget too many children.
Those few not knowing well how to be ordered, amity; extending
their not to his Neighbour: where though all be Meum, Tuum, yet
they want all, rapine and cruelties, are so practised in generall.
These Troglodites liue sometimes vnder ground, at other, in mansions
like to Ouens, round and without furniture, a whole Tribe vsually
liue, associate, commit villanies, feed and sleepe together, the ablest
in force swaying ouer the other.
Their words are sounded rather like that of Apes, then men, whereby
its very hard to sound their Dialect, the antiquitie of it whither
from Babell or no. The qualitie, whither beneficiall or no, I argue not.
For the Readers content I haue noted some of their Language,
which I haue writ so neere as J could pronounce it, their pronunciation
is like the Irish: their customes not much vnlike the rude ones,
of antique times. Their numbers exceed not Ten, (like those, in some
part of Madagascar) such as follow.

Istwee, is one. Istum; two. Istgwunuy, three. Hackey, foure.
Croe, fiue. Istgunnee, sixe. Chowhawgh, seuen.
Chishow, eight. Cusho, nine. And
Gheshee, is ten.
A Knife, Droaff.
A Quill, Guasaco.
A Hat, Twubba.
A Nose, Tweam.
A Sword, Dushingro.
A Booke, Bueem.
A Ship, Chichunney.
Water, Chtammey.
Brasse, Haddechereef.
A Skin, Gwummey.
A Bracelet, Whohoop.
Egge-shels, Sun.
Seales, Harkash.
A Woman, Traqueosh.
Bread, Bara. Giue me, Quoy.
The Genitor, Gwammey.
Mens stones, Wchraef.
The wombe, Wchieep.
Paps, Semigwe.
Yard, Istcoom.

One word of their food, tis dead Whales, Seales, Grease, raw Puddings,
or mans flesh, which rather then want they will digge Christians
out of their graues.
They delight to dawbe and make their skin glister with grease and
char-cole beat together, which when halfe dried, they then indent it
with their fingers. In a word, they haue all trickes possible to disfigure
themselues, and to proue their Patrimony and Reuersions in
Acheron.

And comparing their imitations, speech and visages, I doubt many
of them haue no better Predecessors then Monkeys: which I haue
seene there of great stature.
The women giue their Infants sucke as they hang at their backes,
the vberous dugge stretched ouer her shoulder.
And though these Sauages be treacherous, yet doubtlesse they esteeme
more of an Englishman then of Portugall or Flemming.
This is sufficient to speake of the Inhabitants. I will adde one line
of the Bay, and so goe on.





That the deceased men such as haue the Scuruy, Aches, etc. so soone
as they taste the shore, and eat three-leafed-grasse, fresh meate, or the
like, and bathe: they become whole and frolicke, in small space, as aboue
three hundred in our company found benefit in.
Many rarities might be obserued, in what probably the earth affords
them, Beasts abound amongst them, brought from more inner
parts of Africa, they traine them so to obedience, that with a Whistle
they will make an hundred of all sorts of cattle follow them. Which
when they sell (for Iron Beads, Looking-glasses, etc. vnto Sea-men,
running away so soone as they haue receiued their bargaine, and with
a call, all the sold beasts will follow them like Dogs, and vse it so oft
that now the Saylers tie them to a stake, so soone as they haue bought
them. Here are many rare sorts of Birds: Many we saw sold, one only
I haue drawne, which though vnworthy the labour, yet in that with
vs they are not, and the colour of their feathers so excellent Crimson
and White: with other colours, that they may compare with Birds of
Paradise.




The ninth of Iune, wee weighed anchor, bending our course towards
Madagascar, at the doubling of Cape Falso, Boraeas spake lowdly
and bid vs expect a storme, and this memorable, that about this remote
Land, you shall see a small blacke Bird long and sharp-winged, constantly
flying vpon the surface of the Ocean; vpon view of this Bird
(which Sea-men improperly call Deuils Bird) an infallible tempest
and storme in lesse then two dayes, assailes the ships. By which forewarning
they haue the benefit of preuention; and Gods mercie is yet

more, that after a storme, when the shippes are tossed they know not
where, wanting their steerage, forty or fifty leagues from Land, they
see many Pantado Birds (so called from their Colours) flying about
them. Whereby we know our being neere the shoare, for in no other
part, are those Birds resident, and the like benefit is vpon the Indian
Coast. For they know assuredly by many Snakes, swimming vpon the
Seas, they are not farre distant from the shore, no where else do these
signes appeare. And about the Cape Sargassoes and Trumbaes floate
fifty leagues into the Seas, eradicated by foule weather, which likewise
giues knowledge to Mariners in stormes where-abouts they are
driuen.
The three and twentieth of Iuly, the storme increased, the Seas
sweld extremely, our surging waue aboue the rest, hit our broad-side
so compleatly, that it turned our ship aboue fiue points of the Compasse
at one push, giuing a cracke like a Canon.
The eight and twentieth day, the Winde veered about, and the Sea-men
steered East North-east.
The seuenteenth of August, the Winde being East by North, our
course was North North-east. So on the eighteenth day wee crost the
Tropique of Capricorne,Trop. of Cap^^. hauing Soffala and Mozambique on the left
side, and Madagascar on the right; the Sea thereabout hauing a great
and insensible current.


Madagascar.
MAdagascar was discouered by the Portugall vpon Saint Lawrence
day, and by them therefore denominated Saint Lawrence.
This Ile is one of the greatest in the Vniuerse, its extendure is from
Cape Roma, vnder the Tropique to sixteene degrees of latitude from
the Aequator, tis in length a thousand English miles, the breadth, in
some part affording two hundred and thirty miles. The best knowne
Bay is that of Augustine where our ships ride.
The Inhabitants are exceeding blacke; haue limbes of great strength
and composure. Both sexe goe naked, a linnen cloth only about their
middles, which stiles them modest.
They vse pinking and cutting their brest and faces; and dilate their
eares much, by those massie weights they fixe there.
Gold and Siluer is of no value amongst them; but the beads of Aggats,
Bracelets, Glasses, Bels and such like, they esteeme well of.
They haue cattle both great, many and good, yea, and good cheap;
for a Bead or two of two-pence value, wee buy sheep and beeues of
good bignesse and taste, the sheepe here (as in Abrabia, Syria, and

Persia) are as heauy in their tailes, as bodies: some weighing sixteene
some twenty pounds. And for Pins and Needles, Bels, Glasses, and
such like, they returne Beeues, Goats, Sheepe, Hens, Egges, Milke,
Tamarinds, Coco-nuts, Palmes, Orenges, Lymes, Lemmons, Plantaines,
Toddy, etc.
The Madagascars, are more addict to Mars then Mercury.
They are giuen much to warres, and their owne Ile affords it them;
they know accuratly how to iaculate their Darts of blacke Ebony
barbed strongly and workmanlike, they vse long Pikes and Targets of
great length and defence.
Their Religion is Paganisme, yet Circumcision tels vs, they haue
heard of Mohomet, some report of them, they neither pray, nor fast,
nor feast: each calls the dayes by seuerall names.
They are of great stomacks in both kinds, no name terrifies them
saue Taiuvaddai; which name in times past was wont to scare them
more than thunder.
They liue more by fishing then Agriculture, Thaetis commands them
more than Caeres.
They hate Poligamy, yet affect copulation too early, the youth
scarce knowing twelue, the maid ten yeares in the World, the title of
Virginity.
Theft and Adultery they punish seuerely (Nature hath taught it
them) and whiles the better sex seeke prey abroad. The Women
(therein like themselues) keepe constant home, and spin.
The Ile abounds with all good things necessary for mans vse, as Copper,
Gold, Iron and Siluer. Cotten they haue store of, but most vberous
in Fruits, the Aery Camelion and fiery Salamander are frequent
there.
Here (as where not) they much delight in nouelties, and dancing
many times, a great multitude passe together, and in Maeanders turne
and winde themselues, now beating, then clapping their breasts and
hands. So with their Fleet they spurne the yeelding sands, oft forcing
the Spectators further off. During which, the women with chanting
melodie, lift vp their hands and eyes, conioyning feet, in true
measures, equall if not exceed the men in their more laborious treadings.
They curle their haire and are proud of it, they loue to make
their bodies shine with melted grease and ^allow.
Their Arithmeticke is soone attained to, their greatest number, not
exceeding ten.Numbers. They are cald, Isso, one. Tone, two. Tello, three. Effad,
foure. Fruto, fiue. Woubla, sixe. Sidday, seuen. Fonlo, eight. Malo,
nine. Nel, ten.
Townes of note are Roma, Augustine, Point Antogil, Antabosta, Sa^to
Iacobo, Matatana, Angoda, Herendo, etc.





Nine leagues of Madagascar, sailing North-east we were neere the
shoales of Iudaea, our Variation was thirteene degrees. Longitude
eighteene from the Cape: the Sunne then being in the third degree
of Virgo, and ten degrees fifteene minutes, twenty six seconds of declination.
Then they steered North-east and by East towards Mohelia:Shoales of Iud^^, dangerous. that time
the Saylers tooke a Sharke, a man-eating Monster, she was nine Foot
long and a halfe by rule, in her paunch were fiftie fiue yong Sharkes euery
one aboue a Geometricall foot in length: that night we were vnder
seuen degrees of South latitude, and twenty degrees, seuen minutes
of longitude from the Cape of good Hope, our variation thirteene
degrees and seuenteene minutes.
And not suspecting danger, at ten at night, the wind blowing strongly;
we were cast vpon the shoales or flats of Mozambique:Sh^^les or Flatt of Mozambique dangerous. where sounding,
we had no more then eight fathomes. Whereupon we gaue them
a-sterne, two Gunnes as warning peeces of great danger, and tackt about,
at next sounding hauing fourteene fathomes, then twelue, after

that fifteene, fourteene, twenie two, twenty foure, thirtie three, thirtie
fiue, and fortie fathomes.
Next morne we perceiued the Coast of Mozambique, which in this
forme at Sea appeares vnto vs, vnder seuenteene degrees, thirtie seuen
minutes of latitude, and twentie degrees twentie minutes of longitude:
our variation thirteeue degrees fiftie two minutes, heere the
current is very violent, and sets, I thinke, South-west.




Leauing that Coast, wee saw another small Ile sixe leagues North-east
from the other land, full of Palmito trees, where being be calmed,
the current set vs twenty leagues in twenty foure houres, this Ile is
called Castle Ile, and lies vnder sixteene degrees, thirty minutes of latitude,
and of longitude twenty one and twentie eight minutes. The
shape was this.




The seuenth of September, wee descried an Iland called Maeottey,
scituate in view of some three other (placed at the South-end yet out
of view of Madagascar, Mohelia, Ioanna and Chomroae, Maeottis rises
very high with a Peake or Pyramidall Spire, East as you faile to Mohelia:
Its latitude is twelue degrees fiftie sixe minutes, its longitude,
twenty three degrees, fifty nine minutes South.





The eight of September, we sent our Boat ashore for refreshing to
that Ile, who for a trifle brought aboard two Buffols or Oxen, some
Grates, Orenges, Coco-nuts, and Plantaines.
And towards night got view of Ioanna Ile, and eight leagues from
the first. This Ile was then gouerned by a Queene, but the rule coheres
at other times with Kings, as are the rest.
Of these Jles Chomroe is both highest and best, but nourishes a people
treacherous and least sociable.
The eleuenth of September, wee anchored at twenty fiue fathomes,
but all the Morne wafted neerer the shoare, and rode in seuenteene degrees
all the West end of the Ile, where is built a strong Towne called
Meriangu^a, the chiefe Captaines name is Alicuzary, whose knowledge
and propertie, precedes the rest in courtesie and merchandize.






Mohelia, its description.
MOhelia is an Ile beneficiall for such ships as saile for India and
the Red Sea, affording them water, flesh, fruits and Toddie.
It eleuates the Antarticke Pole twelue degrees fifteene
minutes, her ^ongitude is twentie foure degrees from the Cape de buona
Speranza, wose Variation is sixteene degrees twenty minutes.
Tis seated in the Asrique Seas; is not aboue twentie miles in length
and breadth sixteene. Their Religion is from Mecha, whence they de^iue
most of their language and customes, and by conuerse with Mestizoes,
and Portugals, they can speake that tongue.

Their colour is (answerable to the Zone they breathe in) blacke and
Torrid, their stature large, they are couragious, affable, and not very
treacherous. Their habit like to Adams, a few Plantaine leaues only
fixt about their middles.
The women are of like complexion and attire. And to seeme more
amiable, are pinckt and cut in seuerall shapes, on face, armes, and
thighes, they esteeme much of Tobacco, and drinke it in long canes or
pipes called hubble bubbles.
The Ile affords Buffols, Goats, Hens, Milke, Camelions, Rice, Toddie,
Coco-nuts, Orenges, Lemmons, Pome-citrons, Ananas, Plantaines,
Cowcumbers, Sugar-canes, Turtle Doues, Pease, berries, good
Rock Oysters, Breames, Tamarind, Poppaes, mother of Pearle (and
good Pearle too, tis probable.)
Two Kings now command the Ile, though formerly but one, who
left two daughters co-heires, one married to a Natiue, the other to an
Arabian Lord.
Their Priests are of esteeme amongst them, so are their Moscheas or
Temples, kept cleane and matted neatly, into which we could not enter
with our shoes on.
They are superstitious and Magicall: this partly cleares it, as my
selfe,A Magique Nation. and another Gentleman, rested one Euening vnder a Palmito-tree,
the weather thundring and storming exceedingly. A Negroe standing
by vs in great feare and agony lift vp his hands, inuocating Mahomet
or the Deuil very seriously, then in rage and sudden rapture drew
out his Knife, which he flourished about his head seuen or eight times,
murmuring his Orizons, that done, he fell vpon his face and rising, in
great sobrietie put vp his weapon, yet gaue not ouer exorcising till the
tempest ceased.
In these Ilands, fruit is cheape and delicate, they will exchange thirtie
Orenges and Lemmons, or sixe Cocoes for a sheet of paper, bels,
or the like. The Coco-nut, is admirable in quantitie and vse.
They are so bigge as a Cabbage, (nut and rinde) the liquor in it is a
pint, and tasted like Wine and Sugar. The kernell is in taste better then
our Filberd, and enough to content two men: from this rare Nut the
people receiue other benefits, as meate, and clothing, furniture for
their houses, mast, cables and ropes. The tree is straight and high, at
the very top, swelling in her beautifying plumes, like which, the leaues
and nuts proportion themselues.
The Today is drawne out of the Palmito-tree, which has affinitie with
the Date or Coco, the liquor at first, is vnpleasant, but afterwards becomes
wholsome and delectable: in the morne tis loosing, at Eue costiue,
and in one dayes (age) becomes good Vineger. A top the tree is
a pith, in taste better then Cabbage; and eating it takes away the future
benefit of growth or fructifying, these and the Date-tree thriue not,
except the male and female be vnited, and haue copulation: the she is
only fruitfull.

Their Canoes or Boats hued our of one tree, and capable of three
naked men, they fish in faire weather with the helpe of them, and in
stormes carry them vpon their shoulders, and though of no vse with
vs, Yet for the raritie of them I shall present their shape, that they may
better be imagined.




The fifteenth day of September, wee left those Iles, and foure dayes
after came within foure degrees of the Aequinoctiall: that night the
Ocean was as white as snow,A white Sea. but how caused I am ignorant. The next
day we had the Sunne in our Zenith.
On the twentie three of September,The Aequinoctiall Circ^^. we sailed vnder the Aequinoctiall
Line, our course North-east, but vnder eight degrees North, the
Monzoon got into East North-east, whereby the ship could lie no neerer
then South-east. And here the Sea-men fell into great extremes,
as Calentures, Fluxes, Aches, Feauers, and the like. They imagined,
the raging heate, stinking water and meate causer of it (though doubtlesse
their too much farcinating and late ore-charging their stomacke^
with fresh victuall, at Mohelia) acted rather their vnhealthinesse.
Here we were Parelell to Socotora, an Ile rich in Alloes, Gummes
and Spices, tis at the entrance into the Red Sea, where at Aden, the
Turke has a Castle well fortified. This Sea is no redder then others
are, the sands are red indeed, yet insufficient to beget that Epehite.
King Erithreoes, sonne of Persaeus and Andromida, in old times, swayed
here, and from his name (which signifies Red) gaue denomination to
this Sea. Some say he liued afore Moses, the great Prophet and first
Historiographer.
The eighteenth of October, wee found by obseruation, the Northpole
elated seuenteene degrees. Our longitude from Moh^lia nineteene.
The fourth of this moneth, Mohomet a Persian Merchant died, twas
thought a Christian, he came into England with Nogd^beg, the King of
Persia's Ambassadour, and returned so farre homeward, with the Ambassadour,
and though he gained richly in his Traffique, yet if he found

this Pearle, true Christianitie, no doubt, hee gained nobly, and with
aduantage, the Captaine gaue him foure Culuerin shot at his buriall,
his bodie was throwne into the Sea, imbowelled in a spacious Coffin;
the Ocean, a sure Treasury, for the Resurrection.
The twentie sixt of October wee arriued into nineteene degrees of
latitude, fortie minutes; and twenty degrees of longitude. The ships
steerage South-east, where we had shoales of flying fishes (in bignesse
of a Herring, and who to auoid the Tyrannicke Fishes, Dolphines,
Bonetaes, and Albycores, make vse of the Ayery finnes, Nature has
inrich^ them with, and wherewith, so long as they continue wet, they
flie aboue two hundred paces, and are caught by the hungry Fowles,
who houer aboue in hope to catch them.




On the seuenteenth of Nouember we discouered the Coast of India
in fifteene degrees of latitude, and thirty two degrees of longitude,
where Goa is seated,Goa. a great and Metropoliticall Citie of the daring
Portugalls, and the residence of their Vice-roy and Arch-bishop.
From thence, passing towards Surrat, a vehement and vnexpected
storme ore-tooke vs, for three dayes raging incessantly, so that wee
doubted a Hero-cane, a Tempest of thirtie dayes continuance, and of
such fury, that ships, trees and houses perish in it, it vses once in nine

yeares to thunder amongst them, but praysed be God, wee mist it;
though not of a second disaduenture, this last foule weather forcing a
Iunck-man of Warre full of desperate Malabars, a bloudie and warlike
people in view of vs, our Skiffs manned with fortie or fiftie Musquetiers
thought to board her, iudging her of small defence, which opinion
deceiued them. For they got fiery entertainment, the Mallabars
pushing them and throwing fire-balls at vs, forcing vs to retrea^,
burnt, grieued and vanquished, aboue thirtie hurt and scalded, this
skirmish was in nineteene degrees fortie minutes of latitude, and twentie
nine of longitude, where the Sea changed colour, and sounding
they had ground at forty fathomes; abundance of Shakes swimming by
our ships, gaue assurance of the Coast of India.
The twenty foure of Nouember, vnder nineteene degrees thirtie fiue
minutes of latitude, and of longitude, twentie nine degrees were descried
neere to the East Indies in that part cald Saint Iohns, a Towne
subiect to the Lusitanian fifteene leagues from Surrat. Saint Iohn is
high land, ambitious in a tall rising of land, cald the Peake, the land
Towres along very high, so farre as Gundaue, a Hill sixe leagues South
from Swalley Road.




Here we tooke a Fisher-man, who told vs of great Portugall forces
neere the Road. We purposed a Combat and tyding, vp with streame.
Anchors, each sixe houres weighing and dropping, in few dayes wee
came against Daman, a beautifull and pleasant Towne, conspicuous to
passers by. At the North end is a Castle, strong, and of white chalky
stone, its Ordnance planted high to play in Mounts vpon the vantage.
Opposite Southerly is a great Church edged a-top with white hauing
houses of like colour, neere her are three more Temples affording
glory to the heart and eye.
The twenty ninth of Nouember, wee descried thirteene sayle in
Swalley Road whom we reputed enemies, yet feared not, in conclusion
(past the barre) wee found them our friends English and Flemmings.
The sixe English ships, three of a thousand tunne, the other three of
seuen hundred, good men of warre, though ships for traffique.
The same day we came to an Anchor in India. Nogdibeg the King of

Persiaes Ambassadour gaue vp the ghost,Persian Ambassadour poysons himselfe. hauing poysoned himselfe
wilfully in foure dayes feeding only vpon ^pium.
The truth is, he dared not to see his Master, nor plead his defence
against his Aduersary Sir Robert Sherley, in our Company aud thitherward,
to purge his honour. I can witnesse that at my being at the
King of Persiaes Court (as I shall discourse of in the fequell) the King
said, it was well he poysoned himselfe, for (...) come to Court, his
bodie should haue beene cut in three hundred sixtie fiue pieces, and
burnt in the open Mydan, or market place with Dogges t^rds.
Anno 1612. after many conflicts, betwixt the Turke and Persian, they
were both so prest by neighbour Countries, whom they had vsurpe
vpon, that they propounded Articles of peace and friendship. To
which end, King Abbas, sends his Ambassadour to Constantinople, in
company of Nassuf Bashaw, the Visier and Generall to Sultan Achmat,
the eight Emperour of the Turkes, and sonne of Mahomet the Third,
which Nassuf in his Expedition into Armenia, Mesopotamia, and Media,
returned fortunately, and enriched with two hundred and thirtie
Mules loaden with treasure of Gold and Pearles.
The Persian Ambassadour (being that Grand Signio^, was not
then in Constantinople) lodged himselfe at Scudaret, opposite to the
Citie, attending the entrance of the Great Turke, who three dayes after
came thither, in magnificent order guarded by twentie thousand
Ianizaries, Agaes, their Captaines and Iemoglans, with many Bassaes of
other Countries.
At whose entrance, there expected him Ambassadours from most
parts of Europe: from the Emperour, King of England, France, Poland,
Hungary, Netherlands, and from Venice.
The Visier Nassuf, a while after receiued the Grand Signiors token of
loue and respect, three Cabbaes or vests of cloth of Gold, a Sword, a
Shash, and a Courser.
Here the Persian Ambassadour finding much ceremonious welcome
from the Turkes, to shew his bountie, as the Sultan Achmat in great
brauerie passed by his lodging, threw amongst his guard a hundred
bales of Silke, which got him much loue and esteeme among them.
At his Audience hee deliuered his Masters present, foure hundred
bales of raw Silke, a rich Dagger, many rich Persian Carpets, and
Clothes of Gold and Siluer, a Bezar stone so bigge as a Hens Egge,
nine bags full of Turquesses and the like.
These gifts were acceptable to the Grand Signior (all the Princes of
Asia, affect complements of that nature) so after many Treaties, at
length the Persian Ambassadour accepted of these conditions, that the
King of Persia should pay a Tribute of two hundred Camels load of
Silke, that the Mirza, or Prince of Persia, should content himselfe
with the title of Bashaw of Tauris, and that the Cadi, or Iudge of
Tauris should thence forth be elected by the Turke.

He departed with these propositions, and at Cazbeen found his Master
the King, who perceiuing the conditions dishonourable and vnfruitfull,
denied the Turkes Chiaux, or Agent, to performe them, receiuing
them with much scorne,King of Persia beheads his Ambassadour. and to recompence his ill-aduised
Ambassadour, in the open Market, made him headlesse three dayes
after.
The example of this seueritie and iustice, so frighted Nogdibeg, that
he chose rather to be his owne Executioner, then to entertaine the
cruell aspect of his Master, and those certaine tortures, he had doubtlesse
receiued, had he stood vpon his Iustification at the Court.
Abraham Bassa, Cycala, Synon Bassa and Nassuf, were all of them, so
great and potent with the Grand Signiors; that few Ambassadours
could be heard or dispatched without their licence and good will; and
which was accomplisht by briberies.
Nassuf, in the height of his fortunes, at the instigations of his wife
(the Grand Signiors daughter) was strangled in his bed by eight Caepigies,
and his treasure (no lesse then eighty bags of gold, and in stones
then two bushels of Diamonds and Pearles) fell to his Master, for
which perhaps this infortunate Vsurer, lost his life, a iust recompence
for thrusting Cycala Bassa, Visier of Babylon, from his principality, vpon
false suggestions.
At his buriall, the Ship hee died in, gaue him eleuen Culuerin
shot.
His owne people conueighed his body to Surat, ten miles from the
rode, and buried him, where not a stones cast further, sleepes Tom
Coriats bones,Tom. Coriats graue. consumed in his pedestriall, ill contriued Pilgrimage.
The last of Nouember, our ships came to anchor in Swalley roade,
so called from a Towne of that name one mile distant. Wee rode in
seuen fathome water, and note that this road is not two hundred paces
from the Barre, ouer which wee passed twixt two Boes placed
in three fathomes and an halfe, the space from one Boa to another, is
an hundred paces or more.
The Bay is on the one side enclosed with the Continent, on the other,
with the sands, which towards Goga, at a low water is like an Iland.
At my being in Surrat, I receiued courteous welcome from the
English Merchants their, whose Chiefe or President was Master Wild,
a modest and vnderstanding Gentleman, and their we had certaine report
of Sultan Curroones Coronation, at Agra, 1627. In ioy of which,
the English Merchants Ships, then in Swally rode shot off two hundred
peeces of great Ordnance. The story of whose being Mogull, because
hapning at our being their, will be pertinent to rehearsall.
These Moguls or Emperours of East India, are descended from the
Tartar, and got the Dominion of these Countries, such time as Tamberlaine

(sirnamed the Scourage of God) passed that way to fight with
Baiazet the Great Turke, in compassion of many distressed Christian
Princes: Which attempt he gloriously finished, ouerthrew the Turks
huge Army, carried him captiue in a Cage, ouer-ran the Turkish Empire,
and in eight yeares subdued more Kingdomes and Townes, then
the warlike Romanes could doe in eight hundred.
From this Tamberlaine (sonne of Ogg, sonne of Sagathay) the now
Moguls fetch their Descent. Curroone, now being in nine Descents extracted
from him; named thus. The first, Tamberlaine; the second, Allancham;
the third, Barcham; the fourth, Emanpaxda, the fift, Shaugh
Mahumed, the sixt, Adabar; the seuenth, Mahumed Selabdyn; sirnamed
Ekbar; the eight, Iangheer, sirnamed Shaw Selym; the ninth, Blockie;
(slaine presently after his Coronation) and the tenth, Curroon; sirnamed
Shaw Iehan.
In October 1627. Shaw Selym (by some cald Iangheer) the great Mogull
died, hauing beene sicke not aboue three dayes, and if the vulgar
sort, may be beleeued) he was poysoned. And that by his only friend
and chiefest Fauourite his brother in law Assaph Chawn; whose
greatnes and pride was eleuated both by being brother to Normall the
Empresse, Iangheers last wife, and Father in law to Sultan Curroon, who
had married his daughter, and by her had issue, for whose only aduancement,
Assaph Chawn, bent all his powers and intreaties with Iangheer,
his aged and inraged Father, to be Successour to his Dignities.
But though this Nobleman, was in great repute with the Mogull, yet
Curroones life was so dissolute and hopelesse of bettering (hauing with
some Rashbootes or wild companies, offended the Moguls Friends and
Neighbours, the Decans; the King of Gulcunday, and seuerall Princes
in Narsinga, and towards Mesulipatan.) That when his Father lay vpon
his death-bed, which was all Cashmeer, three thousand miles from Surrat,
he made all his Vmbrawes or Noble men, sweare by their Alcoran,
to make his Grand-child, Sultan Blockee, Mogull, or Emperour, after
him, and to exclude Curroon for euer; who had most vnnaturally fiue
yeares before caused his elder Brother, and Father to Blockee, be murdred
at Agra, by his seruant Regea Bandor, who afterwards was Executioner
of Blockee the sonne, in the same Citie.
According to which Oath, so soone as Iangheer was dead, Assaph
Chawn, and the other Nobles proclaimed Blockee their King (then, sixteene
yeares old, and well-conditioned) and which they durst not disobey,
aswell to discharge themselues, from their obligation as to giue
satisfaction vnto the people, who affected him.
And with all speed Assaph Chawn (who now thought hee had done
his duty) sent a Post with quicke Expresses to Curroone, with what had
hapned, whom he found retired, in a small Village neere Daita, bordering
the Decans Kingdome and distant from Surrat, sixe small dayes
trauell.

So soone as Sultan Currone, receiued these packets, hee intends a
speedy progresse for the Crowne, which he gaped for, notwithstanding
all his Fathers Legacies: and first imparts his resolutions to his
companion Mahabet Chawn, Champion to Shaw Selym, late Mogull, and
to say truth, the best and most approued Souldier through India,
for many yeares a heauy and mortall Enemy to Curroon, and but
lately reconciled vnto him, by great perswasions and entreaties of Assaph
Chawn, who wrought him, to be his Protector, and with his Army
to safegard him to the Kings Metropolis and Royall seat Agray (a
City first built by Wine-god Bacchus) with this aduantage, that in Mahabet
Chawns company (one much beloued and feard by the people) he
might aduance securely, and without whom, he could neuer haue passed
Amadavad, the way to Agray, nor had hopes to enioy the title of
an Emperour, Curroone was so generally hated by the vulgar.
And that hee might leaue nothing vndone, which might aduantage
his resolutions, (according to the order of the late Mogulls) he changed
his name from Currone to Shaw Iehan (or King Iohn) thinking by
that in some sort to appease the peoples hatred: whom as he past, hee
saw ill-willers to his happinesse, and entending to oppose him in a
battle, being formerly a proclaimed Traitour and a Rebell, which he
wisely fore-saw and feared, hoping by policie more than force to
winne them to him: so that he sent them word, hee came in friendship,
and that rather then offend them, would returne, though his
iourney was to submit himselfe to his Nephew, late made Mogull,
from whom he doubted not to receiue forgiuenesse.
But when the people heard that Mahabet Chawn was in his company,
and had an Army, their thoughts were changed, such was the
great and generall loue and feare they bore that Champion; whom
as they knew to be victorious, and therefore durst not much oppose
him, and most seuere in iustice and truth by which they thought Curroone
Inheritor, and without opposition, suffered him to march, through
all the Country vnto Agra, eleuen hundred miles, from that place
where the messenger found him at, and fiue and twenty hundred, from
Cashmeer, where Iangheer his father died.
In the meane time, Normall, when she saw her Husband the Great
Mogull, was dead, and that by his last Will, had nominated Blockee for
Emperour (to secure which, he had made all the Vmbrawes to sweare)
she was almost distracted.
Fearing her deuices to Crowne Seriare her Sonne (and yongest to
Iangheer) would be preuented, but assuring her selfe, feare nor wishes
without action could performe it, shee assumes courage and with those
forces, she then had (which she euer kept about her for her safety) she
hoped to effect her long desires, which was to seaze vpon Blockee, the
new King, and vpon her Brother Assaph Chawne, whom shee resolued
to strangle, knowing hee was euer against her Sonne Seriare, his Nephew,

to make Emperour, Curroone, who had wedded his Daughter:
and the reason, why she euer had an Army about her, euen in her husbands
time, was this.
Mahabet Chawn, being a most valiant and iust man, and one who all
his Masters life time (whom he knew to be a quiet and good King) he
had done faithfull seruice to, noting her abusiue carriage and command
ouer her aged Husband the Mogull, how shee heaped vp a masse
of treasure, and apparantly discouered her aymes to make her Sonne
Seriare King. And that on the other side Assaph Chawn did what hee
could to conferre that dignity vpon Curroon, and both of them labouring
to disinherit Blockee, the true heire to the Crown, both by bloud,
nomination and descent, for these causes Mahabet Chawn, cryes out
vpon them, and to the World discouers their combinations and deuices;
whereat they were so netled, that they got the good Mogull to
banish him, hoping then, to perfect, what they had begun.
But Mahabet Chawn, was no baby, nor would he suffer such indignities:
And thereupon, gathers an Army of twenty thousand Horsemen,
with which hee set vpon them all vpon a sudden, as they were
passing ouer a Riuer, and so amazed their Army, that hee tooke the
Mogull Prisoner, and conueighed him to a Tent (not for all the world,
purposing any hurt vnto him) whom hee knew to be good, and only
abused by Normall his Queene. Who in this interim had passed safely
ouer the Riuer, with most part of the Lescar, or Army, which shee
immediatly put into Battaglia, and stood in her owne defence, to expect
her mortall Enemy Mahabet Chawn,The Great Mogull and Empresse taken prisoners by a subiect. that straight way gaue her
battaile, slue most of her men, tooke her prisoner, and commanded
her head off, to satisfie his fury, with her brothers Assaph Chawn, who
being wiser of the two, in the skirmish fled amayne to a strong Castle,
where he entrencht himselfe till hee had petitioned the Mogull for his
liberty and reconcilement, with Mahabet Chawn.
Who so soone as the Battaile was ended, gaue order to his Army to
pursue Assaph Chawn, and to behead him, and brought forth Queene
Normall to receiue her iudgement, but shee got so much fauour from
Iangheer, the olde Mogull her doting Husband, That with teares hee
begd her life, from this his Champion, who though hee knew, would
be destruction to him or his: yet to shew his loyaltie to his Master, he
released her, and became friends.
Then Assaph Chan, became so intimate with Mahabet, that hee preuayled
with him to goe into Decan, to Sultan Curroone, to conduct him
to the Court, to beget his pardon from his Father, which hee accordingly
did by his power and respect, conueighed Curroone to Agra, and
set the Crowne vpon his head, as is and shall be better spoken of hereafter.
Queene Normall, euerafter, by licence from her Husband, kept a
a peculiar Army for her safety, and vnder colour of that, so soone as

the great Mogull was dead (as I haue said before) shee sought to
seize the new Mogull, and her Brother Assaph, to make them headlesse,
and then doubted not to set the Imperiall Crowne vpon her
sonne (Sultan Seriare's) head, his yeares being twenty, and capable
in her opinion to rule so vast an Empire.
But Assaph Chawn, not ignorant of her intents and malice to him,
so soone as Iangher was dead, and Blockie proclaimed Mogull, hee
forth-with raises an Army, and approaches hers, where hee pitched
and sends vnto her, to assure her of his loue and diligence to do her
seruice, excuses what hee had done, being bound by oath, and that
vpon better considerations, hee had forsaken Blockie, to conioyne
with her, not fearing any opposition, when both their Armies were
vnited, and that hauing the young King in their power, shee might
then commit herselfe vnto security, and rule as formerly.
The Queene, knowing who it was, that profered this, euen her
owne Brother, and then farre from his Sonne in Law Curroone, belieues
him and admits of him. Imagining this occasion, ministred
security to her designes, and by which (whiles she bleared him with
shew of friendship) shee might more easily kill him, and the new
King, on a sudden.
But Assaph Chawn knowing her ambitious qualities, when hee
had well viewed her seuerall forces, and got out of her, where her
sonne Seriare lay (which was at Lohore, with foure thousand horse,
for feare of Mahabet Chawn, as was divulged) hee suddenly raised
his Army and forsooke her, desiring all the Nobles with their forces
to accompany him, and Blockie to Lohore, to apprehend the traitour
Seriare (as he called him) then in Armes and in competition for
the Empire, with those his forces, entending to strengthen Queene
Normall, his mothers Army, the better to attempt it.
When Normall perceiued her brothers treachery, she blamed her
credulity, and sorrowed, that she had not strangled him: but hoping
to confound him, shee followed with a resolued Army to encounter
him.
But Assaph Chawn, though this power was more then hers, and
therefore feared her not, yet hauing other things to execute, and
to hazard the victory at Sea, might hinder his other designes, he passed
speedily through the Mountaines, and to preuent her speed to
ouertake him, made great stones be cast downe thither to stop the
passage, which is so narrow that scarce two men can passe together;
this so hindred his sisters speed, that ere she could cleere the passage,
Assaph Chawn met with Sultan Seriare, who with eight thousand
men, was comming to ioyne with the Queene his mother, as she
had willed him.
His Army was small and quickly vanquisht, himselfe imprisoned
and sent so backe vnto Lahore, where so soone as he arriued: Blockie

was againe proclaimed Mogull by his Protector Assaph Chawn, who
thereupon sent a Herald to Normall, to come submissiuely vnto the
Court, and he offered her faithfully to haue remission, and that the
Infant Mogull out of his clemency should forget all former Quarrels,
and that shee should not want all honour due to so great a
Queene, with maintenance agreeable, for the wife of so great a
Monarch.
Normall when she had wisely accounted her distresses and misfortunes,
that her sonne was a Prisoner, her owne life in danger, and
no possible meanes left to make Seriare King: came and submitted
to Blockie, who gaue her assurance of life and liberty, with the continuance
of her former Guard or Army. And during Blockies raigne
she liued happily and with content. But when Currone came to be
Emperour, he tooke her Army from her, ransackt her treasures, slue
her friends, and confined her to a priuate Castle for her life, where
now she liues in no small misery.
But to continue our History,Queene Normals miserie. when Assaph Chawn saw all the
Princes of the bloud then in his power, in Lahore, to wit, the Mogull,
Sultan Blockie, Sultan Seriare his Vncle, two sonnes of Sultan Perues,
elder brother to Sultan Currowne (and poysoned by Azaph
Chawn, the yeare before at Brampore) two sonnes of the old Kings
elder brother Morad, or Amurath, who because they should vtterly
be incapable of the Crowne and Kingdome, caused them to
be baptized into the Faith of Christ (against their wils conferring a
greater glory on these two despised Princes then the Monarchie and
beliefe of all Mahometan Dominions could doe) by some Portugall
Iesuites. For the Alcoran (their Law booke) forbids a Christian to
weare a Crowne, where Mahomet is worshipped. These fore-named
Princes who were Christened, were by all the Indians, knowne to
be of the bloud Royall, and from them therefore receiued esteeme
and good respect, but by all the Court, were slighted, despised and
cald Christians, which title and other indignities (so reputed of by
them) they obediently suffered, expecting one day some deliuerance,
which now was giuen them by Assaph the Duke, who sent them to
Lahore, and there destroyed them.
The other Princes were reserued to a more opportune massacre,
vntill Sultan Currown had entred Agra, and receiued the Imperial
Crowne and Scepter, with other Ceremonious rites due to the Coronation,
of the Great Moguls,
Which so soone as Currown's Father in Law Duke Azaph was
certaine of, banishing all pittie and loyaltie from his heart, flesht in
former murthers, by his trayterous killing and poysoning Sultan
Blockies Father (Currowns elder Brother) and the Mogull himselfe
Iangheer with some others, he giues order to the same Rascall Reia
Bander to come to Lahore, to perpetrate like villany on the other

Princes, who according to his commission, and Currowns liking came
thither and found them in an Euening, bathing themselues in a secure
Hummum: whereinto Azaph Chawn (who only had the keyes
for entrance) admitted him, who straight way cut all their throats,
and carried their heads as a Trophie and sure testimonie of his villany,
vnto Agra, where Currown expected them.
This cruell Act,A bloudie murther of the bloud Royall of Indostant. was threatned, to be reuenged by many Nobles,
all imputing it to Azaph Chawn, who sware his innocency, and that
he had no hand, in the bloud of these slaughtered Princes.
The Nobles, when they saw no remedie, none else that had title
to the Crown, being aliue: they vnanimously trauelled to Agra, and
submitted to Curroon. Who (for his greater safety) forgaue them
and embraced them, but awhile after, his old humour shewed it
selfe, for by degrees, vpon small occasion he beheaded and strangled
most of them, to the terrour of the rest, and to settle himselfe
in a more quiet tyranny: after the murther of Father, three Brothers,
three Nephewes, and two Cozen Germans.
Since which, his Queene (Assaph Chawns Daughter) died, and hee
hath taken his owne Daughter to be his wife. These crying sinnes,
haue apparantly drawne downe Gods heauy iudgements vpon those
Countries: by those immediate and late plagues of Pestilence and
Famine, neuer heard of the like in those parts before, the Sword
will doubtlesse follow in Gods appointed time. For hee will haue
glory by punishing those from whom he cannot haue his glory. And
Curroon (or Shaw Iehan) is not yet sensible of those castigations.
At our being their Curroon came within two dayes iourney to vs,
and in way of congratulation, the English Merchants ships bestowed
on him two hundred great shot. He is the tenth in Descent from the
Tartarian Tamberlaine.


Surat.
SVrat is scituate within the burning Zone, in the Latitude of
twentie one degrees, twenty minutes, in the Kingdome of Guzurat,
and tributary to the Great Mogull: tis ten miles from
the Bay, and is watered by a Riuer (not so broad as is our Thames)
which I imagine deriues its originall from some streame of the Riuer
Indus.Inus.
The City of Surat is for quantity comparable to Plymmouth, her
houses of sun-dried mud, trellized and flat a-top: at the South end
it enioyes a Castle planted with great Ordnance and Ammunition,
but of small vse, in that the Riuer is not nauigable, but with

Shallops and Frigots, that draw not much water.
There are many large and handsome Houses in it. And at the
North-west end the English Merchants haue a residence, and vnder
a President:The Merchants in India courteous. their House is very great and magnificent in bulke and
entertainment, for any Forreiner. I am their Debtor for loue and
courtesie,
The Inhabitants are alike in colour, though different in Religion,
they are of three seuerall compositions: Moores, Bannyans, and
Persae.
The Moores are Lords, and Supreame ore the rest, their Religion
is Mahometicall. They affect much the Language of Persia, which
has got the best repute in the Mogols Court, most of whose Sultans
and Captaines are by birth Persians, more resolute and victorious
than these Indians, and no lesse faithfull to him; although mercenarie.
They regard not Letters, their Armes are Sword and Buckler,
Bowes, and Arrowes, Iauelins, Kniues, and the like. The Indians
are sawcie, proud, bloudy, trayterous and cowardly; much addicted
to Venery.
The Persae are reliques of the old inhabitants, from Alexanders
time, who conquered them.
The Bannian Priests called Bramini, are the Pythagorian Sect of
the Gymnosophists. They hate Mahumed, and acknowledge one
God and Creatour of all things. The better sort are called Mockadams,
or Masters; their behauiour very good and tolerable.
I referre the description of their Religion to a Booke late written
by Master Lord a Preacher to the Merchants in Surat. His
Booke is called A Display of two Sects in India. Persae and Bannyans.
I shall represent the garbe of the Bannyan, that it may the better
possesse your imagination.





A Description of the Bannyans in India.
THe Bannyans are tawny in complexion, are craftie, faire spoken,
exquisite Merchants and superstitious.
They weare their haire long, paint their faces, and put Rice
vpon the paint, a holy remedy for each dayes chances: their habit

is a long coat of white quilted Callico, tied vnder the left side with
Ribbands, their head, has a Tulipant or Shash, sometimes of one,
sometimes of many colours. They weare shooes without latchets,
and often Sandals.
Their Religion is rare and wonderfull, beyond apprehension, and
scorne Mahomet. The seuerall casts of them are Cutteries, Shudderies
and Wyses. They neuer marry out of their owne Triball vocation,
as Bannyans, Bannyans; Persae, Persaes; Moores wed Moores, and in their
owne Trades. They haue many Taylours, but no slaughtermen. For
they so much detest the slaughter of any creature, though a Louse,
that they not only abhorre to eat it, or destroy it, but buy their liues,
of those that would destroy them. Imagining as did Pythagoras, the
transmigration of mens soules into other creatures.
They wil not feed on ought has bloud and life. Their food is Rice,
Plantaines, and many other dainty fruits, their liquour, water and
Rose-water, Sugar and iuice of Lemmons, which they drinke out of
a spout, and powre it into their mouthes, without touching the pot
to auoid pollution, some haue beene assest at twenty thousand Mammoodaes,
or shillings; by Judges of their owne Religion, for tasting
Wine or strong Water.
The two Elements of Fire and Water, are of diuine esteeme amongst
them, and grieue to see those creatures abused in needlesse,
or profane vses. So that at their Funerals, their bodies are incorporated
with those sacred flames, which burns to ashes, those corps which
duly worshipt this consuming Deitie. They belieue no Resurrection
of their bodies, therfore giue the foure Elements their peculiar dues.
Some of this Sectadore the Trees, and adorne them with Streamers
of silke Ribands and the like.
Their Priests are of venerable account their, and in some places
haue the first nights embraces with the Bride, reputing their Issue
holier and more fortunate.
They come each morning through the streets, and bestow a
Charme vpon them, beautifying their faces with streakes of red,
blue and yellow paint, on which they affixe Rice, which is the signall
of their Baptisme.
The women are of a little better colour, some haue louely countenances,
they weare long haire and loose, and yet couered with a
fine thinne vaile of Callico Lawne. Their eares hung with fiue, six,
or eight Rings, some so great and ponderous, that their eares are extended
and ^^acerated very much. They also hang their noses with
Rings and Iewels of Gold inammeld and set with stones of worth
and lustre, the shapes of which you may see elsewhere depicted.
They worship the Deuill, in sundry shapes and representations.
I haue seene some of their Pagothes or Idols, in wood, resembling
a man, painted with sundry colours, his legs stradling, very wide, vnder

him two Lampes, not alwayes burning. In other Fanes they haue
three or fiue great Pagods, to which they pray, though they be mishapen
and horrible.
They adore the fire also, and conceiue diuine thoughts of Kine and
Heifers.
Their mariages are sometimes secret, other times performed with
much superstition. They hate Poligamy, but so extreamely honour
Wedlocke, that they seldome are vnmarried at seuen yeares of age.
The men goe in triumph about the streets one day, and the Bride
next, and if it chance, a childe die, ere he be married, the parents of
him that died, procure some Damsell (to whom for a Dowrie, they
giue some Dynaes of Gold to betroth him) to lie one night with
the deceased.
Their Funerals are these, they bring the dead corps neere to their
Churches, where they sacrifice him to ashes, in costly perfumes, in
Aromatique Gummes and Spices. Sometimes the woman throwes
herselfe into the fire, and burnes together with her husbands carcasse
deriuing to themselues much reputation and glory amongst the
suruiuers.Indian Fun^ralt. But at Surat, Brampore, Amadavad, Lohore, Agray or Cabull,
where the Moores predominate, they are not suffered, though
in other parts of India, towards Bengala and the Coast of Chormandell,
they continue that louing custome deuoutly to this day, as
shall be spoken of in my description of those parts following.
Another Ceremony in Funerall pompe among the Persae is this:
They put the dead body into a winding sheet, all the way his kindred
beat themselues till they come within fiftie or an hundred paces
neere the monument or buriall place, their the Herboods or Priests,
oppose them, attired in yellow Skarffes and Turbants, who take the
dead body (leauing them their, where they stand, till the action be ended)
the Nacesselars, Priests carry it to a little shed, or furnace, and exercise
hidden raptures by fire, vnto the fire. Which done, they place
the corps, a top of a round stone building twelue foot high and eightie
about, the entrance only to the North-east side, where is a small
grate, through which they conueigh the body, into that monument:
which is flat aboue, wholy open, and plaistered with smooth white
loame, in the midst is a hole, discending to the bottome, which receiues
that putrefaction and vncleannesse, issuing from the melting
bodies, which are laid there naked, and in a twofold roundnesse, exposed
to the Sunnes fiery rage, and deuouring appetites of Vultures
and Cormorants, who vsually prey their: tearing their flesh, and disordering
it, so that the vglinesse and fearefull stench of the vnburied
bodies (in some Dormitories three hundred) is so violent, that (vnlesse
the raritie of wonders vrge a Trauellour to view them) they are
better to be spoken of, then seene. And note that after the corps are
laid there, the Persae will neuer approch to see the buried, nor doe

they enquire after them, but grieue exceedingly, that a Christian
should goe thither to view them, or tell them of it. The good are
laid in one, and the bad in others; all are carried in Iron coffins, because
wood is sacred to the fire, which they adore.




These Persae are descended of the ancient Persians, who adored
fire. For the Persians, that now inhabit Persia, are extract from Scythia,
and came hither with Tamberlaine, or the Turko-mans.
A like people now liue among the Persians, called Gowers, who
were of the old inhabitans. They yet pray to the fire, and are much
abased by the Moores.
The vtmost point South of this Indian tract is cald Cape Comri or
Comrein from the Aequinoctiall eight degrees to the North. That vtmost
point is in Mallabar, a Kingdome ruled by the Sambreyn or King.
On the otherside the point, is the Kingdome of Narsmga Negapatan,
and Maesulipatan. In which Countries are found Wonders and heathen
Entertainments.
So soone as a stranger arriues, of what Countrey soeuer, hee shall
presently haue his choice of many Virgins, and choosing one he fancies,
for a small price; she guides him to a lodging, and performes his
domestique affaires what euer, at bed and board, all the time of his

abode their discharging her duty and priuacie very punctually: and
he during that season must beware of familiarity with other women,
which if he subiect himselfe to, she aymes to poyson him.
At his departure,Strange customes of the Indians. he payes her wages to her parents, she returnes
home, with credit and oftentation.
Here also, when any Noble or Inferiour person enters wedlocke,
he takes it for a courtesie, that any stranger will accept the first nights
ceremonie with his Bride.
Some (but most are Peguans) weare bels of gold fixt to their Genitors,
within the bell is an Adders tongue dried, which sounds harmoniously.
The women goe most part naked, except a cloth which should
couer those parts, made to be priuate.
In some of these Cities, the Paynym parents, sow vp almost the
wombe of their female children, which is only then dissected, when
she is married.
Their vilest ceremony is this. That at the marriage of a Virgin,
the Bridegroome, to honour the Deuillish Idoll, brings her afore
the Pagode, or Idoll; who commonly is of a tall stature, and shaped
vgly, in his priuy parts he has a bodkin of gold or siluer, an intended
Instrument, to violate her chastitie. Which, they suppose obtained,
by the Pagotha, such time, as she is forcably put vnto his Engine, the
the sharpnesse being such, that the bloud issues not only thence, but
from other parts of her wounded body, this done, with great ioy
and applause she returnes to her Pagan husband, and if shee be with
childe that yeare, tis supposed the Pagod got it.
The vsuall Coine in India,Moguls Coine. within the Moguls Territories are Pice,
Mammoodees, Rowpees, and Dynaes, thicke and round, and engrauen
with Arabique Sentences (for Mahometisme allow not Images)
a Pice is in English money, a half-peny, a Mammoodee is twelue
pence, a Rowpee, two shillings three pence, a Dyna thirty shillings,
an English shilling values twentie two Pice, or a Mammoodee and
one Pice. A Spanish shilling (which is a fourth part of a Dollar) giues
twenty fiue Pice, a Riall of eight giues fiue Mammoodees wanting
three Pice, and an English twentie shilling peece (too many of which
are conueighed among the Indians) will at Surat giue twentie two
shillings sixe pence, and in Persia twentie fiue shillings at least.
In Swalley Road (such times, the ships come thither) the Bannyans,
haue Tents and straw houses pitcht neere the water side in abundance,
their they sell Callicoes, Cheney Sattin, Cheney ware, Aggats,
Turquesses, Sugar and such like. Many little boyes at your
going ashore will desire to doe you daily seruice, which they will
carefully performe for two pence a day, they prattle English and
Portugall prettily.
The vsuall sort of trauell is by Coaches, poorely furnisht and
drawne with Oxen and Buffols.

These people will neither eat nor drinke, with any Christian, yet
they will conuerse and cozen one without scruple: the Deuill
warrants them.
They will not entertaine a stranger to their houses, iealous of
their Wiues and Daughters; who (as many report) are extreme venerous
or lustfull.


Cambaya.
THree dayes iourney from Surat, is seated a pleasant Citie
cald Cambaya, subiect at sometimes to that potent Monarch
the Mogoll, and in the Kingdome of Gougurat: it is watered
by part of triumphing Indus, and giues Amadavad (by some wrongfully
cald Ardavat) supremacie ore all her Cities. The limit of this
Kingdome is from Sanga to Dulcinda, (a name inuented by Maffaeus)
North, on the East it has Mandao, on the West Gedrosia, the South
is terminated by the Sea. It is a Kingdome of as great wealth as extent,
of as great fame as wealth, and of as sundry delights and rarities
as fame. The Inhabitants of Cambaya, are a mixture of Mahometans,
Moores, Persians, Bannyans and from Arabia.
They are crafty and deceitfull, the Priests are singularly reputed
of, the women proper, but vailed and obscure in their best aspect,
their faces they colour, their teeth blacke, thinking that shewes most
delight and beautie, and to differ from Dogs, whose teeth are white.
Their apparell is like the other Indians.
Hence went the Grecian Captaines Nearchus and Onesecritus (sent
out for discouery by Alexander) vp the Persian Gulfe, as sayes Arrianus,
in his eight Booke, the Kingdome is much populate, for the
quantitie, not any part of India shewing more men or Cities, for
before its subiection, about an hundred and ninety yeares, they haue
come into the field seuen hundred thousand men; but the Citie of
Cambaya not exceeding three miles compasse cannot containe eight
hundred thousand men, as some haue guessed at.
This place was heretofore lorded ouer by the Kashboots, a noble
and valiant (but now a Theeuish) people, in the yeare of our Lord,
1423. they were expeld their Country by one Mahumed an Arabian,
who left his sonne Mamudeus (from whence the Coine Mamudees has
denomination) to succeed him, and see Badur who out of a Tyrannique
mind, sent defiance to Galgee King of Manda, who to make his
party stronger, inuites the Great Mogul Myramud a Zagatayan Tartar
to his aide, who came to helpe him, and in the battaile slue King
Badur, tooke his Kingdome from him, and cut in peeces all his Army,

which Histories report to be an hundred and fifty thousand horse;
and fiue hundred thousand foot, eight hundred peeces of great Artillery,
fiue hundred waggons full of powder and shot, two hundred
Elephants, and fiue hundred chests of gold and siluer.


The Citie Diu.
NEere this place, along the Gulfe of Persia, is the Citie of
Diu, it is in the latitude of twenty two degrees, odde minutes
North. It has a Castle of great strength and beautie,
built and possest by the Lordly Portugall, tis placed in a small peninsula
made by the Riuer Indus, which their ingulfes herselfe into the
Indian Seas, after her long and swift descent from Caucasus.


Muskat.
MVskat, is a Citie in Arabia the Happy, vpon the Persian Gulfe
and almost Nadyr to the crabbed Tropique, tis not farre from
that point of Land cald Cape Rozelgate and paralell to Surat,
tis possest by the Portugall, and is his best Port and Defence, for
their Frigots and Iunckes, Their Vessels of Traffique and Warre.
From Mallabar, Decanee, Gouzurat, Cambaya, and other places:
tis strengthened by a wel-built Castle, and peopled by the Reliques
of late captiued Ormus, tis a place rather boasting of profit than renowne,
and is a little obscured, by her opposite Antagonist Diu.
I will offer you a little of the Arabian Tongue as is now spoken
in that Countrey.
English.Arabique.Sunday,Ahad.Munday,Esteaninea.Tuesday,Salassa.Wensday,Arbaw.Thursday,Ghameese.Friday, is their
Sabbath,Dumaad.Saturday.Sabtu.
The seuen dayes of the Moguls
and Persians.Sunday,Yecksumbea.Munday,Dosumbea.Tuesday,Teensumbea.Wensday,Charsumbea.Thursday,Panohsumbea.Friday,Yowma.Saturday.Sambea.
English.Arabique.September,Maharram.October,Sawfor.Nouember,Rabbioul-owl'December,Rabbioul-auchor.Ianuary,Yowmadul-owl'February,Yowmadul-awchor.March,Radiab.Aprill,Sabaan.May,Ramulan.Iune,Schowull.Iuly,Heidul-kaida.August.Heidul-beidghea.
Arabique.English.Persian.Mallee,Salt,Namac,Sammack,Fish,Mohee.Moyhea,Water,Obb.Narr,Fire,Attash.Hattop,Wood,Yzom.Beet,A house.Conna.Degang'Hens,Morgh.Salet,Oyle,Rogan-cherough.Sammon,Butter,Rogan.Beddo,Egges,Toughmorghwe.San,A Dish,Shecky.Cobbeer,Great,Buzzurk.Sackeer,Little,Cowcheck.Annestre,I buy it,Man Mechoree.Vntan-aphea.Haue you.Dare Suma.


Iasques.
IAsques is a Towne famous in nothing except her prospect into
the Gulfe of Persia. Their the Pole Artick is eleuated aboue the
Horizon twenty fiue degrees, fifty eight minutes, is now of no
account, Ormus her neere Neighbour being desolate; it belongs to
the King of Persia, whose Territories are, neere this place, and neerer
Indus limited, a riuer diuiding the Mogull from the Persian. Tis
from Ormus Ile forty leagues due South, is scituate in the Kingdome
of Carmania or Carpella, no great matter where, only here lies buried
one Captaine Shilling, vnfortuately slaine by the insulting Portugall:
but that his bones want sence and expression, they would
tell you the earth is not worthy his receptable, and that the people
are blockish, rude, treacherous and indomitable.







Ormus.
ORmus is an Ile within the Gulfe, in old times knowne by the
name Geru, and before that Ogiris (but I dare not say from
a famous Thaeban of that name) its circuit is fifteene miles,
and procreates nothing note-worthy, Salt excepted, of which the
Rockes are participant, and the Siluer-shining Sand expresseth Sulpher.
At the end of the Ile appeare yet the ruines of that late glorious
Citie, built by the Portugals, but vnder command of a Titular King
a Moore. Twas once as bigge as Exeter, the buildings faire and spacious,
with some Monasteries, and a large Buzzarr, or Market.
Of most note and excellencie is the Castle, well seated, entrencht
and fortified. In a word, this poore place, now not worth the owning,
was but ten yeares agoe, the only stately City, in the Orient,
if we may beleeue this vniuersall Prouerbe.

Si terrarum Orbis, quaqua patet, Annulus esset,
Illius Ormusium gemma, decusque foret.


If all the World were but a Ring,
Ormus the Diamond should bring.

This poore Citie, was defrauded of her hopes, continuing glory,
such time as Emangoly-Chawn. Duke of Shyras or Persepolis, tooke
it with an Army of fifteene thousand men, by command of the King
of Persia, who found himselfe bearded by the Portugall. Howbeit,
they had neuer triumpht ouer them, had not some English Merchants
ships (then too much abused, by the bragging Lusitanian and so exasperated)
helped them, by whose valour and Cannon, the City was
sackt and depopulated. The Captaines (seruing the East India Merchants)
were Captaine Weddall, Blyth and Woodcocke.
Their Articles with the Persian Duke were to haue, the liues of
the poore Christians at their disposall, some Cannons, and halfe the
spoile, and accordingly when the Citie was entred, after a braue and
tedious resistance (forst to yeeld by Plague, Fluxes and Famine) euery
house of Quality, Magazen and Monastery were sealed vp, with
the Signets of the Duke and Merchants. By which good order, the
Company had no doubt been enriched with two millions of pounds
(though but their share) had it not beene preuented, by a Rascall Saylers
couetousnesse, who though hee knew the danger of his life and
losse of the Christians credit, yet stole into a Monastery sealed with
both consents, commits Sacriledge vpon the siluer Lampes, Chalices,

Crucifixes and other rich Ornaments and stuft so full, that in
descending, his Theft cried out against him, was taken by the Persians,
led to the Duke, confest, and was drubd right handsomely, but
the greatest mischiefe, came hereby vnto the English, for the perfidious
Pagans (though they knew the Merchants were not guiltie of
his transgression, and consequently had not broke the Order.) Notwithstanding
the Souldiers went to the Duke, saying, shall wee sit
idle, whiles the English, by stealth and secrecie exhaust all our hopes
of benefit and riches, whereat the Duke (glad of such aduantage)
replyed, if so, then goe and haue your desires, whereupon they broke
open the houses, and store of what was valuable, and made themselues
masters of all they found, whiles the confident Sailers, lay
bragging of their victories a ship-board. And when they were possest
of what was done, they exclaimed, as men possest, but the Persians
vnderstood them not, nor cared they what their meaning was, seeing
they terrified the Adye, giue loosers leaue to prate.
Yet they found enough to throw away, by that small, sufficiently
shewing their luxurious minds and prodigalitie, if they had gotten
more: dicing, whooring, brawling, and tipling being all the relicks
of their husbandry and thankfulnesse.
Only Captaine VVoodcocke had good luck and bad, lighting vpon a
Frigot that stole away, vnwitting to the Enemie, loaden with pearles
and treasure, that he tooke for prize and kept all to himselfe, perhaps
worth a million of Rials, or better, but see ill Fortune. The VVhale
(of which he was Captaine) rich laden with his Masters and his owne
goods, hard by Swally Road without the Barre, sunke and was swallowed
by the Sands, occasioned by a hole, neglected by the Carpenter,
and failing to carine or mend her, the Ports were open and
tooke in water, which to proue that euen Whales are subiect to destruction
perished in that mercilesse Element, VVoodocke not long
after ouerwhelming his life with too much care, too vnable to moderate
so great misfortunes.
This poore Citie is now disrobed of all her brauerie, the Persians
each moneth conueigh her ribs of wood and stone, to agrandize Gombroone,
not three leagnes distant, out of whose ruines, shee begins to
triumph.
Ormus Iland, has no fresh water, saue what the fruitfull Cloudes
weepe ouer her, in sorrow of her desolation, late so populous, those
are preserued in Vrnes or earthen Iarres, and are most comfortable
to drinke in, and to giue bedding a coole and refrigerating-sleeping-place,
to lenifie scorching Phaeton, who is their potent in his flames
and sulphur.



Gombroone.
GOmbroone, is by the Natiues, cald Bander, (or Port Towne)
it eleuates the Articke Pole twentie seuen degrees nine minutes.
Is distant from Ormus nine English miles at most. Is
seated vpon the Gulph and in the Ormusian Kingdome (whose
limit was of old into Arabia) yet some say in Carmania, and others in
Larr, which was a Kingdome.
It was a dozen yeares agoe, so short from the title of a Citie, that
it could not boast of twelue houses, at this time, hauing very neere
a thousand.
Tis gouerned by a Sultan and Shaw-bander (or King of the Port)
one has the Sword of Iustice, the other the Scale of Weights, both
whose houses conioyne the Market-place or Buzzar.
In Iunuary here arriue yeerely ships from India, English and Dutch,
and here the English Agents receiue custome of all strangers, that honour
being granted them from the Persian King for their good seruice
at Ormus against the Portugals, yet I beleeue the Pagans are by
this time weary of their courtesie, and beginne to deny the English
that honour any more. The English and Dutch Merchants Houses
are apparant from the rest by their Ensignes flying a top their Tarrasses.
The Towne in Winter is inhabited by sundry Nations as Persians,
Indians, Arabs, Iewes and others: all which flie away in Summer to
auoid the intolerale heat their, caused both by the burning sands and
great height of a mountaine towards the North, anticipating the
coole breath or aire.
Of all sorts of people, the Bannyans exceed for number, they are
the most subtle and faire spoken Merchants in the Orient. Here they
sell all sorts of Fruits, Seeds, Roots, Drugs, and Rose-water. The
Arack and Wine sophisticated and brought from Shyras, is sold by
Iewes and Moores. The Bannyan is tied from it by Religion, the Inhabitants
are of an Oliue colour, and the poorer sort clothed but to
the middle. The women are attired in linnen of white or other colours,
they weare, in their Noses, Rings of Siluer and Buttons of
Gold. As also a Bodkin or long Iewell of Gold, enammeled and set
with Rubies, Turquioses and Garnats. The shape of which is here
described.





Their Eares haue twelue or fourteene siluer rings, their armes loden
with shackles of Brasse and Iuory. Vpon their fingers they haue
many siluer rings, and on the thumbe commonly one with a Glasse
to looke in, and no wonder, their beauties are so delicate and charming,
and such as preuaile in my iudgement, towards chastitie, more
then Ouids Remedy of Loue.
They are the most vgly and impudent Whoores, in all Persia, and
infect that corporation with their Heathenisme and numbers.
The vehement heat something excuses them, and in Summer to
coole their bodies and affections, they sleepe in Troughs and Tancks
of water, which kind of bedding was vsed very much when Ormus
had any glory.
The houses are of mudde, thicke and hardned in the scorching
Sunne, they are flat and tarrased a top, where in hot weather, when
Serenes fall not, they sleepe on Carpets. The Windowes are large
like those in Italy, and in stead of Glasse vse wooden trell^^es or casements.

The people are superstitious and owe much ceremonie to their
Goddesse Luna, they are more valiant and generous then the Indians,
affect complement, and hate walking, all their delight and brauery is
on horse-backe.
Though the Country about Gombroone be sterrile and sandy, yet
in the Winter season, there is abundance of all things necessary,
chiefly fruits and flowres, as Orenges, Lemmons, Pomegranats, Pomcitrons,
Quinces, Peares, Apples, Almonds, Currans, Figs, Dates,
and Lillies, Roses, Tulips, with other things, as abundance of Egges,
Hens, Kids, Rice and the like: most of which are brought from other
places hither.
In the Towne are some Moscheas and Synagogues of Iewes, and three
miles from Gombroon, right against Ormus Ile, growes a tree, which
we call the Bannyan tree, whose circumference in the leaues and
boughs fixt in the earth, is two hundred and nine of my paces, as I measured.
Within, the boughes are lopt off, so that it seemes a Theater.
And wherein, may ambush very priuately three hundred Horse.
A Chappell sacred to the Bannyans Numen, is built close to the bole
included and hidden, to those without, by her thicke spreading branches,
neere which, is the Caue or Hermitage of an ancient Braminy,
a deuout Wretch,A Monke of Charitie. hauing constantly serued his Master the Deuill aboue
threescore yeares. At the Marriage of a Bannyan maid, the custome
is, she sits the first night by the Pagod (which is an Idoll of vgly
caruing) expecting some reuelations. At mid-night the Bramini enters
in a hidden ha^^^ and vnresisted reaps her Virgin honour, which is the
more shame, in that at nine or ten yeares old, they desire to lose it.
The (...) Salli^n, sometimes will priuately condition
with a Trauellor, to take his mid-night Offerings, which (as I was
told) none but ^ortugals do^ accept of.
The tenth of Ianuary, Sir Robert Sherley entred Gombroone, after
our arriuall there out of the Gulph of Persia:Our Ambassadors entertainment at Gombroon, Ian. 10. which knowne, the
Sultan of the Towne came to visit him: Sir Robert Sherley being
Ambassadour from the Persian, and speaking the Turkish Tongue, demanded
of him pompe and entertainment for Sir Dodmore Cotton,
Ambassadour from our Soueraigne, as also Horses, Mules and Camels
for his iourney to the Court, which hee grudged at* the King then
being at the Caspian Sea. But vpon sight of his Phirman (or Letter
of command) hee agreed willingly and accordingly prouided
for him.
At his landing,Cozelbashaes with the Persian, as the Spahi with the Turks. the Captaines of the English ships (riding their)
gaue him an hundred Culuerin shot, for a farewell from them. At his
going vp to the Towne, the Sultan, the Shaw-bander (or King of
the Port) and many Couzel-bashaes (or Horsemen of the best ranke)

met him, and very ciuilly conueighed him to the Town. The Castle
of Gombroon gaue him ten great shot.
All the way from the water-side to the Sultans house, (wee rode
twixt two rankes of Persian Archers and Musquetiers) where our
Ambassadour, the Gentlemen his followers and Sea-captaines were
welcommed to a very neat and curious Banquet and musique from
the ships. Thence we rode to the English Agents house, where wee
receiued a second entertainment.
And after fourteene dayes repose, wee begun our Land Trauaile
into Persia, furnisht with twenty nine Cammels, and twelue Horse,
by the Sultan, who after a Piscash or Present giuen him (fiue miles
accompanying vs) returned.


Our departure from Gombroone, towards
Persia.
THe first night wee lay at Bannarow, is sixteene miles from
Gombroone, where is a Carrauans-raw (as they call it) or
common receptacle of all Trauellers, such being at euery
Manzeil or resting places, through these Kingdomes, in regard their
be no Jnnes, and vnlesse they carry with them their Kitchin, they are
like to want prouision to eate, in all places through their Iourney.
And note that neere all or most of the Carrauans-raws, are Tancks
or couered ponds of water, fild by the beneficiall raines, for the vse
and drink of Trauellers and their Cattle: in very few places, Springs
being found, except where Cities and Townes are placed.
From Bannarow, next night we got fiue leagues (or fifteene English
miles) further* and next to a place cald Cawrestan, their and at
other places our Mammandore or Harbinger, prouiding for vs.
The fourth night wee lay at Tangee-Dolon (or the narrow way)
where is a pretty Carrauans-raw and the more praise-worthy, for the
excellent water wee found their: which issuing from a mountaine
three miles distant, has passage through another towring hill where
we lay, the Aqueduct being merualously cut through the bottome of
this mount, and thence runs into an Euen and champagne soyle,
which containes twentie miles circuit, surrounded with Hils of stupendious
height and vneuennesse to ascend, within which Tempe is a
Towne (of thirtie houses) cald Dolon, possessors of that pleasure.
The first night our Manzeil (or Iournies end for that day) was at
Whorwoote, where a little from vs, wee viewed a Blacke Tent, and
going thither found three old Arabians, with each his Booke, out
of which they chanted dolefull Requiems to their Cozens soule,

ouer whose graue they sat, and were to mourne their fiue dayes for
him, according to their Ceremony.
Next night we trauelled sixe leagues further, and two dayes after
into Larr, into which old City, the Cawsee (or Iudge) and Calen^ar
or Gouernour, with many other men of note gallantly mounted,
with great courtesie brought vs thither; neere the Citie a Persian,
out of a Poetique fury thundred vs a speech of welcome, and thereupon
the Kettle-drums and other their Iingling Instruments stroue
to deafe vs. After this a Venus (like in honestie, though not in beautie)
attired in an anticke fashion, presents her selfe, accompanied
with more Syluanes, where they danced Lauoltoes, their armes and
legs were adorned with Bels, which with the other musique, made a
consort. During this Anticke, Bacchus (a great Dietie among those
people) crept in amongst them: so that the iangling of their discording
pipes: the Whoores bels, roaring of the Mules and Asses, with
the shooting and clamour of two thousand people all the way before
vs till wee entred Larr, so amated vs, that had Vulcan and his
Cyclopes beene working there, there noise had beene preuented. After
we were lodged, they without more ceremony (tired, I suppose,
with the former) left vs.


A Description of Larr.
LArr is a Citie vnder the Latitude of twenty seauen degrees
and forty minutes North, tis vnder the Iurisdiction Royall of
Emang Ally, the Chawn or great Duke of Shyras, from whence
tis distant fourteene easie dayes iourney, and from late passed
Gombroon, seuen dayes, or sixscore English miles or thereabouts: all
the Countrey for foure hundred miles together, is desart, sterile
and full of loose sand and dangerous, it also shewes huge high Hils,
on euery side, trauell which way you will: without grasse, riuer
herbes, or what else, a Pilgrim, in those inhospitable Desart might
desire (a few Date-trees excepted, which stand rather as markes to
passe by, than other seruice) and did not the Tancks (their watery
Magazens) assist them, neither were the people able to abide there,
or Trauellers to find passage.
The Citie of Larr, is the principall place for Iustice and Commerce
within that sandy Kingdome (cald by some by the same name,
though in my iudgement in Susiana) Shushan being not many dayes
trauell distant thence.
The Citie is very ancient, and thirty yeares agoe had fiue
thousand houses in her, of which three thousand were turned topsie

turuy by an Earth-quake, two thousand at this day is her number.
Tis now famous for nothing but a Castle and Buzzar, which is
large, strong, and beautifull, tis in a sort Quadrangular, though of
vnequall Angles. The extent from North to South is an hundred
and seuentie paces Geometricall, and from East to West, an hundred
and ninetie.
The Castle is built at the North end vpon a high aspiring Mountaine,
well stored with Ordnance brought from Ormus: the order
and scituation of this Fort and Fabricke, equalizing if nor preceding
any other in Persia.
In this poore City is a Mesquite or Temple, framed in some
part with Mosaique worke and round in Figure: at the entrance
hangs a Mirrour or Looking-glasse, wherein Mahometa^s behold
their deformities, this Church lodges the great Long-named-long-buried
Prophet Emyr-Ally-Saddey a meer, whose sleepe (they say)
has beene fifteene hundred yeares long in that Sepulchre. They expect
his Resurrection shortly to waite on Mahomet (of whom hee
prophesied fiue hundred yeares before his knaueries.) And tis sure
great Pluto loues them so dearely, that hee will not part with them,
because he expects these Mussulmen there also.
This Towne affords Dates, Orenges and Aquauita, o^ Arack, the
riuer water I may call Aqua-mortis. The basenesse of it such, that so
little came in my belly, as was possible, because it corrupts the body,
hurts the eyes, and breeds long Wormes like a Lute-string in their
legges that loue it, these Wormes they vnwinde with a Pinne and
come out daintily: sometimes they breake, and then danger to that
legge ensueth it.
The people are blacke and needy, many miserable Iewes inhabit
there and haue their Synagogues, but their only receptacle is North-west
from Larr sixtie miles, at Iaaroone, in which Citie are a
thousand Families all Iewes, transported thither in the Babylonish
captiuitie, and this they named in memory of their old Kyria^h Iaarim.
About thirty yeares since, the Duke of Shyras (commanded by
the King) subdued this Kingdome, ruined one Castle and built another,
slue many of the Citizens, ransacke the Towne and sent home
to Shyras so much Treasure as burthened seuen hundred Cammels;
much, in respect of the great famine and pouertie of this Kingdome,
but most part raised, I beleeue, out of those great and many Carrauans,
from Babylon, Tauris, Cazbeen and Spawhawn, traffiquing to the
Portugall, while Ormus had Trade and Riches.
The poore King, though his life was granted him, when hee was
dreaming of other matters, an vnexpected Semiter, (to end his stratagems)
cut off his head, and by death of all his Progeny establisht
the Soueraignty vnto the Persian.
Some Maps place Larr by a great Riuer, wherein they are mistaken

so exceedingly, that within a hundred miles is not any Riuer or
Riuolet.
After nine dayes abode in Larr, wee continued our iourney to
Shyras, most of vs mounted vpon good Mules, who though slow, are
sure of foot, and Emblemes of Sobrietie.
Our first night we pitcht our Tents not far from Larr, and could
not trauell next day, by reason of an immoderate showre, that made
the earth very slippery, whereby the Camels could not foot it.
The raine as it seldome fals here (not a showre sometimes in fiue
yeares) when it fals, brings incredible ioy and profit to this people,
and Sun-burnt Countries, and with which happinesse, it often brings
with it mischiefe and sorrow, for we were told here, that six yeares
since, such a violent storme of raine vnburthened it selfe neere this
place, and caused such a sudden Deluge and Cattaract, that a Carrauan
of two thousand Camels perisht, and were cast away by it.
Next night we slept in Techoa, or Ded-chow, (which signifies the
Towne vnder a Hill) where the Calenter of Larr, Cogee-Obdruza
tooke farewell of vs.
At this Techow, are many pretty Tombes, not any buried without
memorials, a mile from this Towne we see threescore blacke Pauillions,
wherein we found nothing, but what gaue mirth and beautie.
These are a people, who liue wholy in Tents, and obserue the
customes of the Tartars, they haue no certaine habitation, they delight
in motion, they graze and feed here and there, with all their
substance.
The Persians stile them Vloches, or Shepheards, these Nomades are
well described by the Poet.

Nulla domus, plaustris habitant, migrare per Arua,
Mos, atque Errantes circumuectare Penates.


They haue no constant dwellings, but delight
To wander with their House-gods, day and night.

Next day we roade by a huge wall, cut by incredible labour out of
the solide Rocke, as a secure defence against the inuading Persian, the
Kingdome of Larr their terminating.
Thence we came to Berry, a small Towne, and Schoole for the
Arabique Tongue, this has a Mosquit, or Church, promising much afarre
off, but deceiues the expectation neerer hand, howbeit tis much
honored by the people, for being an euerlasting Dormitorie as they
belieue, to their Learned Pseudo-prophet Emaum-zaddey-a-meer-amaddey-Ally,
a man of great length in name, power, and eight hundred
yeares antiquitie: his Tombe is foure foot high, and eight in
length, couered with a white linnen cloth, the sides painted and set

forth, with Poesies of Arabique, neere him are fixt two Speares and
Ensignes curiously wrought, and vpon the Coffin lie a set of great
Beades, with which he vsed to worke miracles, a top of the Chappell
hangs a Globe to expresse his power and greatnesse, in the wall
are round Glasses (such as are in Doue-houses) in which these people
see representations of their sinnes. And (which is not least esteemed)
I perceiued a stone pendent neere the wall which they preserue
for a valuable Relique, they say, the Prophet vsed to lay this
stone on the shoulders of the erronious, the miraculous waight and
vertue of which was such, as reduced him into a right path. A little
pot comes next to our description, it has an vnguent of great vertue
and Antiquitie in it, which it seemes cannot be spent, and is of Soueraigne
force for weake eyes:The Alcoran, or Alfurcan, is their Booke of Religion. to crowne all, his Booke, yet no Alfurcan,
of deuotion is laid vpon him as too worthy the vse of sinners.
The Church vnder foot is neatly matted* and as the Church has superstition,
so the Priests haue ceremony, none can enter with boots
or shooes on, because the place, they say, is holy.
Hence we trauelled to Bannarow, at which Towne the Gouernour
met vs with musique and welcome; three Drummes and sixe
Muskets. The ruines of an ancient Castle, lately demolist by
the Persians, shewes its ribs vpon the top of a stupendious mount,
the view of one side inclining to the Towne, the other to the Deserts.
Our next nights Manzeil was at Goyoam, a Towne at least of a
thousand Houses,A Iugler. after our reposing there, a Persian Hocus-Pocus,
affronted vs, he performed rare trickes with hands and feet, hee trod
vpon two very sharpe Persian Semiters with his bare feet, then laid
his naked backe vpon them, and suffered a heauy Anuill to be laid
on his belly, on which two men beat two Horse-shooes forceably:
that tricke done, he thrust Kniues and Arrowes thorow many parts
of his armes and thighes, and by meere strength of his head, tooke
vp a stone of sixe hundred pound waight, which was fastned to the
ring with his haire, and in like sort tore asunder a Goats heads with
his fore-locke, still crying Allough whoddow, or great God to helpe
him, we gaue him perticular requitals, and so left him and the towne,
where lies entombed the Prophet Meleck Mahumet, one very famous
for fomenting the precepts of his master Mahumet, when opposed
by the Sarazens.
Thence our Trauaile was through the Wildernesse, riding so
long and carelesly that some of vs lost our company, straying in
that comfortlesse Desart, but next day wee found out the Carauan,
At this time such raine, thunder and lightning fell vpon vs, that wee
were imprisoned in our Tents. Yet on we went next day, and lodged
at night in Whormoot (or Towne of Dates) by the way was a Tombe
of the harmelesse Shepheards, hung with threeds tripartite, each

threed beautified with parti-couloured wooll, and at each end was
placed a Puppet or Pagod to protect it.
The two and twentieth day we dislodged a wilde Bore, but neither
shot nor Dogges preuailed against him. That night wee slept in
Cutbobbow, and next in Mohouck, in which is a Monument of foure
famous Prophets, Hodgee, Mohomet, Izmael and Ally, buried foure
hundred yeares agoe.
Thence to Caughton, next night to Vngea, next to Moyechaw,
thence to Pully Potshaugh, so to Syras: the description of which it is
now, and was, I haue here deciphered.


Persepolis.
PErsepolis (out of whose ruines is come Siras) was built by Sosarinus,
as some suppose, who liued in the Median Dynasty, he
was the third Emperour from Arbaces, who gaue end to Sardanapalus,
and the Assyrian Monarchie, which had continued from
Belus, Father of Ninus 1480. years, in succession of one and forty
Monarchs, howbeit she was most beautified by Cambyses, sonne to
Cyrus, and second King of the second Monarchie, which Cyrus obtained
by ouerthrow of Astyages, who had kept the Soueraigntie to the
Medes, from Arbaces, in nine Kings, to two hundred ninetie seuen
yeares.
This Citie continued mightiest in Asia from Cambyses, to Darius
Codoma^^s sonne to Arsamus in the line of thirteene Monarchs two
hundred and thirtie yeares, at which time the valiant Greeke Alexander,
by conquest of all As^a, more easily gaue a Period to this glorious
Citie, by one blaze, at the whoorish councell of Athenian Thao^,
so that, through his riot and her villany, this Imperiall Citie felt the
flames of Warre, which Alexander afterwards deplored with teares,
but helplesse.
I cannot beleeue Quintus Curtius his report of Cedar trees, of
which he would haue this Citie builded, the Countrey no where
producing any, if he meant Cypresses, tis credible, albeit they had
whole mountaines of excellent blacke Marble ioyning to them, and
out of which the Imperiall Palace was extracted and cut out, as to
this day appeares in that ruinous monument.
This Citie when the Macedonian Victor ransackt it, gaue him in
Gold a hundred and twenty thousand Talents, his Souldiers hauing
spoiled what they pleased.
This Citie, saith Diodorus Siculus, was the richest and most louely

City vnder the Sunne. It had saith the Historian, a high stately
Tower, enuironed with a three-fold wall, the first wall was sixteene
Cubits high, beautified with battlements. The second, was as high
againe, and the third as much exceeded that to sixtie Cubits, composed
of hard Marble (no^ strange thing, all the mountaine being
the best black Marble in the World, in many of which polisht stones
I could see my face) fixt with brazen gates: to the East of which
was a Hill of foure Acres, wherein were entombed the Monarchs
of the World. Nor was the glorious Temple of Diana, of lesse cred^t
that being (as writes Iosephus) couered with refined gold, which
greedy Antiochus thought to haue ransackt, as he did Ierusalem, from
whose holy Temple he tooke no lesse then ten tun of Gold.
Arist. lib. de mundo auerreth, the admirable ingenuitie of the Magi,
such, combined with the immense Power of those Emperours, that
they could heare in one day, of all affaires, through that bulkie Empire,
euen from the Hellespont vnto India.
In this Palace, the Kings Throne was Gold and Orientall
Gemmes, the Palace roofe shined with Gold, Amber, Siluer
and Iuory, his lodgings were rich too, for in one Chamber
was a Vine, studded with Pearles, the artificiall clusters, were
Pearles and precious Rubies, his Beds pillow (saith the Authour)
was bolstred with fiue thousand Talents of Gold, his Beds
feet with three thousand both Gold and Vine was giuen Darius, by
the Bythinian Pythius, many rare things more are reported of this
louely Paradice. But how time has demolisht her glory, as most of
all the Wonders of the World, how she lies now subiected giue me
leaue a little to rest vpon her pleasant bankes of Byndamir, and I
shall truly set downe what is now left of her.


Chil-manor, or forty Towres.
THe great Palace of Persepolis, is by the inhabitants (who little
respect Antiquitie) cald Chil-manor, (or forty Towres)
by which, it seemes they haue seene so many in their Predecessors,
though now there be but nineteene standing, and one below,
to the East, howbeit the ruines and ground of fourescore more,
are yet visible, this great roome was the Hall, and cut out of the
blacke shining Marble, wherein were placed a hundred white marble
Pillars, which gaue admirable beauty to it, each Pillar or Towre
is about fifteene foote high, each in rotundity forty squares, each
square three inches.





From this roome, is a stately prospect of all the Plaines thirty
miles about it.
The ascent to this is cut out of the marble Rockes, the staires (reseruing
their durance and beauty to this day) are ninetie fiue, and so

broad that a dozen Horsemen may ride vp abreast together; the immediate
ascent is twenty two foot high, at which is the gate (or entrance
into the said Hall) the breadth of the Gate is sixe of my paces,
the height of each side or Gate (engrauen with a mightie Elephant
on one side, a Rhynoceros on the other) thirty foot high, very rarely
cut out of the marble, fixt and durable for euer.
A little further from the entrance are two Towres of like shape and
bignesse. Neere which is another part of the gate, wherein is engrauen
a Pegasus: an inuention of the Sculptor, to expresse his workemanship,
these are the portals to that Apollo, supported by a hundred
white marble Pillars, a top of which now inhabit the pious
Storkes: the fashion of this roome exceeds all the other in circuit,
and brauery.
Adioyning is another foure-square roome, whose blacke marble
wals are yet abiding. Tis I say foure square, each square ninetie paces,
all foure amounting to three hundred and sixtie, it has eight
doores, foure of which are sixe paces broad, the other foure of halfe
that breath, euery doore has seuen engrauen marble stones fixt one
vpon another, each stone in length foure yards and height fiue quarters,
all which eight doores are exquisitely engrauen with Images of
Lions, Tygres, Griffins, and Buls of rare sculpture and proportion,
a top of each doore is of stone the Image of an Emperour in state,
holding in his hands a staffe and Scepter.
A third Chamber ioynes to the former, which (these people tell vs)
was a receptacle for the Queene and Ladies, tis of a Quadrangular
but not equall forme, two sides sixtie, the other seuentie paces.
A fourth Chamber is next, two sides twentie, the other two, thirtie
paces, which Nurserie, though of blacke shining marble, is not
yet obscured in her glorie: the wals are rarely engrauen with Images
of huge stature, and haue beene illustrated with Gold, which
in some places is visible, the stones in many parts so well polisht, that
they equall for brightnesse a steele mirrour: this Chamber has its
wals of best lustre. But Age and Warres, two great consumers of
rare monuments, has turned topsie-turuie, this, as many other things,
and left nought but wals to testifie the greatnesse of that glory and
triumph it has enioyed.
At the highest of this Palace, is cut, out of the perpendicular
mountaine, the Images of a King (which may be Cambyses) adoring
three Deities, the Fire* the Sunne, and a Serpent.
The mountaine on the other side is also cut perpendicular, vp
which is no ascending, this is sufficient for this Theame, on which
I should not haue so much insisted, but for its worth, and that none
hath formerly in truth described it.
These Persians say one Iamshet was the structor, whose Image is
frequently carued in most places, hee ruled ouer Persia, in nine Discents

from Noe, and is by Historiographers supposed sonne of Ouchange
King of Persia.
Halfe a mile from Persepolis, is a Towne of two hundred houses,
cald Mardash, whose inhabitants so little know or value memory,
that they daily teare away the monument, for Sepulchres and benches
to sit vpon.
Which they cannot doe, where the Rockes are fixt, in one of
which Hals described, is excellently engrauen, Battailes, Hecatombes,
Triumphs and the like.
And though, some imagine, Persepolis to haue stretcht so farre as
Syras, which now is thirtie English miles distant. The distance does
not so much diswade me from it, as those high craggie mountaines
interposing them, and vnder the olde Persepolis is a plaine Horizon
East, another way.
No doubt, but Syras may haue risen from her ruines, though built
in a distant place, as we see Tauris from Ecbatane, Bagdat from olde
Babell, Ierusalem toward mount Caluary, Cayro from Memphis, Tunis
from Carthage, Constantinople from Bizantium, Rome now in Campus
Martius, and many other Cities, which altering their seats though
but a league, some also haue got other denominations.
From Chihilmannor fiue miles West is the Image of their great
Champion Rustan, cald Nocta Rustan: his Tombe is vpon an apparant
high Hill three miles from Hispahan, they beleeue such Wonders
of him, as our boyes doe of Bellianys, or of the Knight of the
Sunne,
I come now to describe Syras, which though spoken of after Persepolis,
yet in our trauell we came thither first.


Description of Shiras.
SYras or Sheiras (as the Persians pronounce it) has North Latitude
twenty nine degrees forty minutes. Some would haue her
built by Cyrus, and from him called Cyropolis. Others from
Iamshet, fist King of Persia, and so from Noe. But I rather thinke its
deriuation is from Sheir or Milke, as Aleppo from Halip, which Synonymies
are taken from plentie and pleasures: many Towns in these
parts agreeing so, as Whormoote, which is a Towne of Dates, De-Achow,
a Towne vpon a Hill, De-Gardow (a Towne of Walnuts, etc.
The compasse of this Citie is about eight or nine miles, the greatest
extent from the South-east to North-west neere three miles, a farre
lesse compasse then those that write, it has twenty miles compasse,
and in it sixty thousand houses. Tis seated at the North-west end of

a large euen plaine, twenty miles long, and sixe broad, the sides enuironed
with mighty Hils, vnder one of which this Citie is placed.
At the first view, it affords a very pleasing obiect, and by reason of
abundance of high Pyramidall Cypresse-trees, circumuoluing the
Towne, it seemes, a Garden, till at the entrance the Hummums, (or
hot Baths) and Moscheas, their Churches, by the refulgent splendour
of their bluenesse, gaine admiration in the beholders. The prime
beautie of this Citie* is her Churches and Gardens.
Within the Citie are fourteene or fifteene Churches, most of
which are round like Theaters, their outside tyling, pargetted with
azure stones, resembling Turquoises.
Two of these are more eminent then the rest, the one, for brauery
has two Pillars or Steeples (as high as Pauls in London) couered
and wrought with blue and Gold, the Inside vast and vnfurnished,
shewing onely one small place allotted for deuotion. The other for
vse, whose superficies is Mosaicke worke, enterlaced with Arabian
Characters out of their Alcoran, in the entrance, yet speakes it selfe
rather a Royal Carrauan-raw, then a Temple, though nightly a thousand
Lamps adorne it.
Other Churches, haue beauty in them, and are most respected for
the buriall places of some famous Prophets, seruants to their adored
Ally sonne in Law and equall with them to Mahomet, whose Iugling
trickes, haue so bewitched these Infidels, that Zeale and Wealth together
haue richly adorned their monuments with precious fragments
of Brasse and Stone, and what Art is defectiue in, Nature and
Gold has made vp its wants, each Sepulchre boasting of an hundred
Lampes and siluer Sockets: in one of which is embalmed that Prophetick
man Shaw-Meer-Ally-hamzey, who this seuen hundred yeares
has waited vpon Ally in Acheron, for doing as was written in his Alcoran.
The length of his Temple is sixtie paces, and the breadth so
many.
In another, sleepes Sandan Emyr Amahow, a man who became Mahomets
deare Disciple, when he taught his owne Law, and the longer
time runs on, the more increases this Sandants power and vertue,
they say, to worke Miracles.
The Houses are of Sun-burnt bricks, flat a top, the windowes trellized
very curiously. And though generally they haue within, no
Ornaments after our fashion, yet some peculiar Houses, as the
Dukes. Shock-Ally-Beg. Ally-chon, and others may be competitors
for delicacie with most in Europe.
Sultan Shock-ally-Beg (in whose House we had a Banquet and ciuill
welcome) his Chamber was large, high, and round, the windowes of
painted glasse (no common ware) the roofe and sides imbost and
wrought with gold and Images most exquisitely, the floore was spread
with Carpets of Silke very rich and comely.

This Sultan had beene twelue times in battaile against the Turke,
and most times Victour, and in a single Combate with Aly Bashaw
(whom he slue) receiued a lamenesse.
I will added a little of the Great Dukes Entertainment to vs, and
goe on.
Hee is cald Emangoly Chawn (Chown is Duke) is now Protector of
Persia, during Soffees infancy. His Father and Grand-father were
Dukes afore him. A Genealogie of that Antiquitie as many Sultans
and Dukes in India and Persia, cannot equall it, they know so little
that way.
Hee is one of the Kings foure great Dukes, each of which has
twelue Sultans, each Sultan fiue thousand Couzel Bashawes (a better
Warriour then the Ianizaries) his Titles without ostentation, are
these.
Emang Ally Chawn Lord of Persia (which they call Farsee) Great
Duke of Shiras,Titles of the D. of Shyras. Sultan of Larr, and of the mountaines of Iaaroon*
Lord of Ormus, Ruler of Carmania, Mergiana, Susiana, Gedrozia, Aria
and Sigestan, Prince of the Gulph of Arabia, Great Beglerbegg,
Commander of twelue Sultans, Flowre of Courtesie, Second in
Glory, Protector of Mussulmen, Nutmeg of Comfort, and Rose of
Delight.
He got an Oath from the late King Abbas, that he neuer should be
beheaded, a recompence for small reason too vsuall from their Emperour,hi^ conquests,
He subdued all Larr, Ormus, and vnto Iasques for his Soueraigne,
and got a footing in Arabia, in this manner. Two Princes of
Arabia, contending for Soueraignetie, hee that was vanquisht, demands
succour from this Duke, who entertaines him willingly, and
with twenty thousand Horse fights with his Aduersary, kils him and
becomes Lord of both Territories. The relieued Prince, thankes
him and desires to returne home. Emangoly Chawn cryes fie, at that,
could he with any honesty leaue him,perfidie that so had succoured him: the
Prince must stay, and in fine, becomes his Sonne in Law, and Father
at one time, for hee weds the Dukes Daughter, and the Duke his
Lands and Signiories, and keeps him prisoner.
His Reuenues (as Merchants say) is foure hundred thousand Tomaynes
a yeare (a Tonian is three pound sixe shillings) his Plate and
Jewels valued at three hundred thousand pounds,wealth he has three hundred
women in his Seraglio (called here Haram) when he hunts the
Tygre, Lion, Bores and such like (which, hee does once in foure
yeares) he sets twentie thousand men to rouze them, and when they
are together on some mountaine, he impales it with a huge toile, of
Wire,aud sports. Cords, aud Wood, a toile and burthen for sixe hundred Camels,
and so commands them.
At our entrance into his Metropolis, hee was two dayes iourney
thence, at his House of pleasure. Sir Robert Sherley rode to him, to

acquaint him with our Ambassadours being there: hee knew it well
enough, and thought we should attend his leasure: so after wee had
reposed sixe dayes in the Citie, our Ambassadour acquainted Shocke-Aly-Beg
with his desire to part. What; replyed hee, would you goe
ere you see the Dukes face, he answered, his businesse swayed him
to another end, he came to see his Master. So the next day the Duke
came to Shiras, followed with two thousand horses, and rested two
dayes without sending or taking notice of vs.
At length hee sent a Gentleman to our Ambassadour, with a complement
of welcome, and bade him to visit him: our Ambassadour
sent him word hee had come so great a Journey, as excused him, if
the Duke would please to ride thither, he was his seruant.
The Duke stormed exceedingly to see his greatnesse slighted, and
after a pawse fearing to affront him (because the King of Persia, had
before hand writ to him, and others through his Kingdomes as wee
traueld to respect vs) sent word, hee would come next day and see
him, but he did not, his sonne (a Gentleman of eighteene yeares old)
came to excuse his Father, and without any stay departed.
Next day our Ambassadour sent the Dukes sonne word by Shocke-Aly-Beg,
he would trouble him, the Duke was not well pleased his
sonne should haue the visit, so that at our Ambassadours alighting,
we were conueighed into the Dukes Gallery, which was very long
and richly furnisht with Plate, rich Carpets, dancing Wenches and
Ganimeds.
The Duke was set at the very end crosse-legged like a Taylour, but
his fierce aspect and brauery denied that title, hee stirred not one
foot, till our Ambassadour was at him, and then standing vp, embraced
him, we had Wine, Women and a Banquet to accompany vs, and
after two houres stay departed.
Next day (being the two and twentieth of March) we were inuited
to a Solemne and Royall Banquet.
We were vshered into the Banqueting-house, a large open roome,
and supported with twenty Pillars richly gilded, the Roofe of imbost
gold, the ground spread with rich silke Carpets, this looked into
a large foure-squared Court, round, in which were placed the prime
men of the Citie, and in another Court fiue hundred common people,
all which the Duke had inuited to declare his greatnesse.
The Banqueting Hall had a State at the end, of Crimson Satten,
embroydered with Pearles and Gold, vnder which hee sat directly
vpon the Carpets crosse-legged, on his right-hand was placed the
Prince of Tartarie, on the left our Ambassadour, next him sate the
Dukes eldest sonne, or Beglerbeggee (whose head three yeares after,
viz. in the yeare 1632. was strucke off, at command of the young
King vpon small reason) and to him the captiued King of Ormus (who
has fiue markes a day allowed for his maintenance) neere him sate

the two desolate Princes his sonnes, in whose company wee were
placed, such as were Gentlemen.
On the other side next to the Prince of Tartary, sate the Prince
of Georgia, a Gentleman of as braue a looke as euer liued, and no
lesse braue in Armes; his faith is Christian.
During their stay, they were sad and melancholy, whose being
there, I could perceiue, was more to content others, then themselues.
The rest of the Hall was fild with Sultans, chiefe Merchants and
Coozel-bashawes, the Banquet was very costly and plentifull, of Candid
dried meates, Dates preserued, preserued Peares, Pistachoes,
Almonds, Duroyens, Quinces, Apricocks, Myrabilans, Iacks, and
a hundred other Fruits and Spices, the Ganymeds, young Boyes in
Wanton habits, powred out Wine to such as loued it.
At the end of the Banquet, the people without gaue a great shout,
crying Yough Ally Whoddaw Bashat (which was God be thanked.)
Then the Duke himselfe entred, with thirty Gentlemen, viz.
slaues, in Crimson-satten-quilted-Coats and Turbants, euery Turbant
wreathed about with chaines of Rubies, Turquoises, Emeralds, and
the like of great lustre and value.
The Duke himselfe was attired in a Coat imbrodered with siluer,
vpon it, he had a Vest or Gowne of great length, so thick powdered
with Orientall glittering stones that the ground of it could scarce
be seene, and twas inualuable, his Tulipant and Sandals had like
lustre.
His not entring till the Banquet was finisht, so grieued our Ambassadour;
that when he came (all the Company bowing their heads to
the ground) he sate still as discontened. For the truth is, the Duke
forbare of purpose, that his people might wonder at his greatnesse.
Sir Robert Sherley bending very low, made bold to drinke to him,
in a bowle of pure gold, which the Duke bid him accept of for his
paines: the Duke perceiuing our Ambassadour so silent, smiled vpon
him, drunke his health, and after a few complements, departed.
I had forgot the Trophies of his Ormus Victory, which is painted
in Gold by a Portugall Captiue, wherein are set downe the incamping
vpon the shoare. The assaults and massacres of the Ormusians,
some beheaded, some led in chaines with their fellowes heads hung
at their girdles: as also the English Ships and Colours, by whose assistance,
the Towne was taken.
I will speake a little of the Citie, and so passe on.
This Citie,A description of Shiras. the Metropolis of Persia, (for Spahawn is in Parthia)
is fabricated about with spacious Gardens, some of which are eight
hundred paces long and foure hundred broad, and that of the Kings
cald Hony Shaw, is twice as much. These Gardens abound more in

fruits then flowres, as Pomegranats, Pome-citrons, Muske and Watermelons,
Quinces, Peares, Apples* Orenges, Grapes, Almonds, Figs*
Currans, Pistachoes, Plums, Cheries, and Apricockes, to which are
added the comely Cypresses, Pines and Chenor-trees. And remember
this, that though these things be in the Citie, because they haue
a Riuer, which procreates their Garden delights. Yet if you exceed
three miles trauaile from the Towne, you shall finde no motiues to
beget Alexanders Riot, except barren Mountaines, Sand and salty
Desarts, can procure Epicurisme.
Indeed within this Citie is the best Grape in Asia, the name of Sheraz
Wine is famous farre and neere. The Wine is like the French, but
better tasted.
In a word, it wants, nothing so much, as water, yet wants not that
altogether, but I am of opinion, that this place for Wine, prettie
Women, Fruites and gallant People, compares with any part of
Persia.
The fiue and twentieth day of March, or Lady day we left Shiras,
and thence the first night rode thirtie miles, to olde Persepolis, of
which I haue already spoken.
From Chil-manor, we rode to Moyown, eight Farsangs, or foure and
twentie miles, twixt which two Townes is a high impregnable
Mount, at whose top has stood a Castle, so fortified by nature and
industrie, that it was thought impregnable.
A late rebellious Sultan, wearie of slauery manned it against his
Prince, the late victorious Abbas, who in person came against him,
and in sixe moneths could see no signe of victory,A siege and victorie. whereat enraged,
he proposed a great reward to him could enter it. An old couetous
Magician vndertakes it* and wrought so by his damned Spels, that
the Sultan came downe, forced by the Deuill, who assured his
pardon.
The Blocke rewarded him, and the old Wizard (ignorant of his
end) demands his gold, which the King grudgingly gaue him, but secretly
took off his head for coniuring, a Quality, the King praised at
other times, but now cried shame on it, to recouer his beloued
Gold againe.
Moyown is seated delightfully, it had good water, Woods, greene
Pastures, and good Wine, tis a peculiar Towne* giuen by ancient
Kings to the Prophet Ismael, buried there. His Scpulchre is cald ^moom
Ismael, or Prophet Ismael, the Towne payes yearely to the enriching
and keeping this Prophet* twelue thousand Mawn of P^ice
and Barley (a Mawnd is six pounds.)
Next night we lodged in O-jone, a Village of thirtie houses. This
Towne brags not a little, of her holy Inhabitants, for they are all of
them Prophets or Prophets children.
Next night, to a place where is buried a great Vncle of King Abbas,

neere whose Tombe we slept that night. Thence ouer the most
craggie steepe and dogged Hils in Persia, that night wee lay at Assepose,
a small Towne, yet has a Castle and Garrison, for it holds some
captiue Sarcassens and Georgians, fortie thousand of which poore
Christians are imprisoned, thereabouts forced from their Countrie
by the Persians.
They are faire, proper and comely people, and so valiant that they
scorne a Pagan. If the King can preuaile with any to forsake his Sauiour,
and acknowledge Ally or Mahomet, hee is preferred aboue
common merit. The poore soules hearing we were Christians, flockt
about vs and wept to see vs.
Thence wee rode to Commeshaw two and twentie miles distant,
next day to Cuzauzar two and twentie miles, so to Deagardow (or
Walnut Towne) foure and twentie miles, so to Yezdecawz (denominated,
it may be from Yezdcawd, the fiue and fortieth King of the
Persians from Kayumarras) where is the best Carrauans-raw about her.
This Towne is seated in a low narrow Valley, sunke downe in midst
of a large Plaine, whereby you cannot see it till you be at it, did not
an eminent Castle mounted higher, point it out.
Next night in Amno-baut, a place of thirtie houses, included in
one, the wall about it, ore-tops the Houses, in it liue thirtie Apostate
Georgians, the Towne is Dauid Chawns, a Brother of the Duke of
Shiras, and he is Lord of three Titles. In this Towne is a Carrauans-raw,
and a pretty Garden Lodge, which has fiue roomes, rich imbost
with Gold and Pictures.
Next night we lay in Commeshaw, (foure and twentie miles from
Anno-baut) at which Towne the Authoritie and Territorie of Emangoly
Chawn Duke of Shyras is limited. Commeeshaw has a thousand
houses, tis distant from Spahawan, six and thirtie English miles, twenty
yeares agoe, it was vnder command of an Apostate Prince of
Georgia, cald Chonstandoll-chawn, and vnder him Sir Robert Sherley,
but it seemes, they are vnthankfull people, for though they knew of
his being in our company, and that an Ambassadour was with him,
they tooke no notice of vs, but let vs goe by without any Ceremonie.
Next night wee came to Moyeor, one and twentie miles from Commeshaw,
that Towne has the like bignesse of a thousand Families,
and exceeds in this, their Doue-houses, are so finely builded, that
they excell their dwellings.
Thence we came to Spawhonet, a Towne sixe miles distant from
Spawhawne, wee rested in Spahawnet, three dayes, at the entreatie
of Meloyembeg the Kings Treasurer, that our Ambassadour might be
entertained into that Citie, with greater triumph.



Our Ambassadours entrance into
Spawhawn.
WE entred Spawhawn, the tenth of Aprill, and I shall
truly relate the order of our enterainment.
Three miles short of the great Citie, we were entreated
to repose an houre in a Garden of the Kings, where wee had a
Banquet, thither came the Agent and some English Factors to waite
vpon our Lord Ambassadour, thence riding in good Equipage, the
Sultan of Spawhawn, Meloym-beg the Treasurer, Hodgea-Nazar the
Prince of the Armenian Christians, with all the Beglerbegs and Coozelbashaes
of the Citie, accompanied with foure thousand Horsemen,
came to welcome vs.
The fields and streets for two miles were fild in our passage with
Bannyans and women from the Citie, ten thousand at the fewest, who
as we past, cried welcome* and shouted strongly: amongst the horse
were aboue fortie Kettle-drummes and Tabrets, nor wanted the
Whores and Boyes their places, all which with Antique Dances,
made the Ceremony more notable.
After our arriuall in the Citie, wee alighted at the Kings Palace,
which is in the great Mydan or Market place, Meloym-beg and Sir
Robert Sherley, kneeled downe three times, and kist the threshold
or ground, at the first entrance, which done, a Souldier made an Oration,
so past to our Lodging, which was one of the Kings best
Houses, and neere the water.
The Emperour or Pot-shaugh of Persia, was then at the Caspian
Sea.
The fourteenth of Aprill* foure dayes after our stay in Spawhawn,
the Agent for the English Merchants inuited vs to a Banquet, where
he shewed a heartie Entertainment: and to honour his Feast the
more, he had at night, a pond of water set round with Wax-lights,
and spent many Squibs and Fireworks which flying high, made all the
Citie wonder.
Next day wee inuited our selues to Hodgee Nazarr the Armenian
Prince, who has the sole rule of a small Citie called Ielphea, whose
Inhabiters are all Christians. This Ielphea, is on the other side the
water, and seated in the same sort, as Southwarke is to London.
Hodgee-Nazarr was glad to see vs, and gaue vs royall welcome, amongst
other meate, wee had a Pigge roasted (a meate abhorred by
Mahometans and Iewes) the Wine bottles and flat cups we drunke in,
were of pure Gold.



A Description of the Ielphelines
in Persia.
THese Armenians, by some are termed Ielphelines, from their
Citie Ielphee, neere to Ararat: they are one in habit with
Mahometans, but differ in their names and consciences (they
adore Christ Iesus) who in old times has had so many faithfull seruants
here, that in Anno 430, when Sapor raigned, no fewer then
twentie thousand Christians suffered Martyrdome.
These Armenians, since their translation from Armenia by the
Persians, haue beene scattered vp and downe, and are without any
certaine abode or Citie, saue here at Telphee (so called in memory of
their other Metropolis.) These here, liue in as great freedome and
securitie as doe the Persians, only their Pole-money is rated at ^ higher taxe.
Their Bible and Beliefe is as ours, they giue credit to the three first
generall Councels, they haue two Patriarchs or Archbishops, one at
Hierusalem, the other at Ielphea, who sometimes resides at Syon, other
times at Syna a mountaine in Arabid the Desart: they haue been
Metropolitans of Antioch, but now are satisfied with another Title.
They haue twelue other Bishops, but very miserable, most of them
are seated in their vnquiet Country, which lying twixt two great
Kings) is a prey many times to the Turke or Persian. Former times
haue called their Nation by other names, some Colchos (now Mengrelia)
the place where Iason and his Argonautes obtained their Golden
Fleece, from iniured King Aeta, vndone by his subtle Daughter Medaea,
who also betrayed her selfe.
Others haue named it Iberia, and some Albania, (now called
Zuria.)
It brings forth the brauest Warriours, in all the East, men so reputed
of (for constancie and valour) that the Sultans of Aegypt had
thence their Mamulukes, and the Persian King has his now Coozelbashaes.
Their Countrey is full of Woods, Hils, Rockes and Ruines, it abounds
with Silke-wormes, Wild Beasts, Hawkes and Fruits. It enioyes
a streame of the old Riuer Cyrus, and viewes Araxis, which
comming from Taurus, where Periardo and Abo are set, runnes
through the Caldoran plaines, and at last is swallowed by the Caspian
Sea.
Their Lent is very strict, they eat no Flesh, Butter, Milke, or Egges,
only Oile, Water, Bread, Honey, Herbs, Fruits, and the like.
Vpon Good-Friday, they represent the Death and Buriall of our

Sauiour, during which they weepe exceedingly till Easter day, when
they take vp the representatiue Bodie, intimating thereby his Resurrection,
the salutation for that morne (according to the Easterne
wont) is (Hee is truly risen) which Angelicall newes they celebrate
vnanimously with ioy and feasting, all which time, the Iewes and
Mahometans dare not mocke nor intrude amongst them. The King
affords them this prerogatiue.
When they enter the Church, they bend low vnto the Patriarch,
who sits in Maiestie neere to the Altar, and after Seruice giue him
like reuerence.
In the yeare 1609. a thousand of these suffered martyrdome by
bloudy Abbas King of Persia. Only (as hee was falsly informed by a
very Rascall, who in enuie to these Georgians and Armenians, had
fained Letters from their Patriarch to the Pope, that they were willing
to become one, with the Church of Rome, and to acknowledge
the Pope their Head, and Vicar of the Catholike Church) at
sight of which counterfeit Letters, the Persian King grew so inraged,
that no lesse satisfaction then the liues of a thousand innocent Christians,
could moderate his Fury, threatning more bloud-shed, if hee
should proue it more apparantly.
Whereat, these distressed Christians send an Ambassadour to the
Turke to helpe them, which he granted and raised a bloudie Scene to
ensuing troubles.
Their Religion, was sithence illuminated, by Lodouic Grangier a
Iesuite and some others, who hearing of their erronious doctrine, in
charitie departed from Pera, neere Constanti^ople, crost the blacke
Sea, and landed in Mengrellia, where Threbis Chawn Prince of Georgia
entertained and encouraged them, to bring saluation to the blind and
irreligious of that Nation. Two of them liue at Mocaury in Iberia,
the rest at Cazbeen and Babylon.
Threbis Chawn a whiles after, was imprisoned by Emangoly Chawn,
and conueighed to Shiras a prisoner, where we had his company at
our Ambassadours entertainment, before spoken of. The Georgians
and Armenians haue since beene often conquered, and againe proued
Conquerours.
Some of whose Tragicall misfortunes, I shall speake of, intreating
the Readers patience, being the discourse of Christian miseries:
and those whose Patron and first Conuerter was Saint George, Bishop
of Cappadocia, beheaded by Dioclesian the Emperour for louing
Christ, and from whom they are called Georgians. A Saint of no small
repute, and honoured by the Order of the Garter in England.
Most of which troubles came vpon them by Cycala Bassa, whose
peculiar attempts I will only write of, hapning in memory of some
to this day liuing.
This Cicala or Cigala, was sonne of a Christian Gentleman, whose

life proued him a profest Enemy of the blasphemous Turkes, and in
that profession and Quarrell sacrificed his life, his wife was named
Lucrece, there abode at Messina within Sicily: both of them vertuous,
and might haue beene counted in the number of the happy,
had not their sonnes vngracious life opposed their best contentments.
He turned Turke, and was Circumcized by perswasion of Ozman
Bassa, Generall against the Persian, for Amurath the Third, and lay at
Van, during those two Battailes, wherein Emyrhamze-mirzay the
vndaunted Prince of Persia, with his own hands, struck off the head
of the Sultan of Caraemit, Generall for the Turke, and wherein died
the Bassaes of Trepizond, and fiue Sanzacks with twentie thousand
Turkes. And that other victory ouer them by the same Prince at Sancazan,
neere Cazbeen, wherein for griefe died Osman the Valiant Bassa
and aboue three and twentie thousand Turkes, the Persians receiuing
very little losse, this was in Anno 1586. and though he boasted
of great matters, so soone, as hee descended into Media, the Persian
Prince, hunted him backe againe, not daring to abide a Combat with
that happy Mirza. So that had not Ozman at his death requested his
good vsage and continuance of Authoritie, the great Turke had vtterly
discarded him. Howbeit all Amuraths Raigne hee was neuer put
vpon any valuable Employment, till in Mahomet the third his rule,
he helped them at Karesta in Bulgaria, after the famous siege of Buda
in Hungary, where, for all their valour and policie, they lost not only
sixty thousand able Souldiers, but gaue ouer their hopes of enioying
those parts of Europe.
Cycala after this, insinuates so farre with Achmat the Great Turke,
Successor to Mahomet, that to be reuenged vpon the Georgians, hee
grants him (power, to torture them, with) an Army of eighty thousand
men, proclayming his cruell entended reuenge vpon them for
Rebellion, and agreeing with the Persian. But after much labour and
hopes, when it came to triall, his expectations and brags deceiued
him, in that, sooner then hee expected (forgetting both his former
mischances and Zellallybegs later ouerthrow) the Georgians (with
whom the Persians as in a common cause had ioyned themselues) set
vpon him, and wel-nigh routed his whole forces, and two moneths
after, by a supply of the Mirza, Shaw Abbas his eldest sonne (and Father
to Shaugh Soffee, now raigning) with twelue thousand Horse,
they chased him to the Confines of Armenia, where Cycala resolued
to try his fortune once againe vpon them, and the fight indeed was
terrible and bloudy, but at last the Georgian and Persian Princes
preuailed ouer him and his amazed Turkes, who seeing resistance of
no worth, fled and gaue the Persians libertie to kill thirtie thousand
of them, the Persians in the battaile hauing lost nine thousand,
which losse to the Great Turke was so great and sensible, that to this

day, hee has cause to thinke on it. For vpon this Victory Cycala
fled into Iberia, and Abbas the King of Persia slaughtered all his
Garrisons in Teflis, Tauris, Cazbeen and Babylon, that yeare regaining
no lesse, then they had anciently lost in the troublesome Raigne
of King Tamas, 1537. to Solyman the Magnificent, fourth Emperour
of the Turkes.
Those vnfortunate attempts could not daunt Cycala Bassaw, but after
his Apologie to the Grand Signior, he enters the Persian Territories
in hostile manner (the same time that Hussau Bassaw marched against
the Bulgars and Hungarians) but his arriuall and forces were
soone knowne too Victorious Abbas, who with Aliculibeg Sultan of
Syras, Lollabeg, Methiculibeg, and other his expert Captaines and thirtie
thousand Coozel-bashes, sent Letters of Defiance to him, and at
the time appointed fought with him, tooke all his Cannons, slue fifteene
thousand of his men, and put him to a shamefull flight: which
ill fortunes, so soone as the Grand Signior, Achmat heard of he raged
extremely, vowed his reward, but first sends the Bassaw of Caramania
to conioyne their forces, to try all wayes of recouery, but Abbas
the King of Persia and his men were so vsed to conquer them,
that with Victory in their fore-heads; they couragiously assaulted
the Turkes, and for seuen houres the Combat seemed equall, till towards
night, vpon an ambush of the Georgians, the day fell to the
Persian, the Turkes very sorrowfull turned backe, and sought to saue
themselues, vowing neuer after to be commanded, by that vnhappy
Generall. Some of which Armie arriued at Constantinople, and vpon
rehearsall of Cycalas ouerthrow, the Great Turke, was so transported
with rage, that he gaue Cycalas treasure there, to the Ianizaries
and Spaheis to prey ouer, and that his memory might be forgot, puld
downe his Palaces.
The Persian King vpon these his Victories, hearing of Achmats
tyrannies and Expeditions into Hungary and other parts of Christendome,
to encourage the Christians dispatcht three Ambassadours into
Europe, some to the Emperour, the other to the Pole, his Ambassadours
are Zeuall Chawn Duke of Tyroau (our small friend, at our
being in his Citie) Methicullybeg and Iusbassahossau, whose newes as
welcome, so they returned home well gratified, and after these,
when he had assured himselfe of Babylon, he sent Ambassadour into
England Nogdibeg, and Shaugh Suares Nephew into France and Netherlands,
and Sir Robert Sherley (to the Pope and other Princes of
Italy) through Muscouia.
One passage more of the miserable Georgians, I will deliuer you,
related by Sir Robert Sherley as we trauelled, in which is apparant the
insulting pride of Mahumetan Kings ouer those that are christned,
and in which is seene the danger of a poore Nation, that would maintaine

its freedome, placed twixt two powerfull aduersaries, distressed
Georgians and Circassians.


A late Tragicall History of the
Georgians, Christians.
SKander (or Alexander) was of late yeares King of Georgia, and
for his Valour, Iustice, Temperance, and other vertues, famous
through most of Asia.
Skander, as fortunate in many things, had this to his contentment
added, the issue of three sonnes, got of his Wife, a Sarcashen,
her beliefe Christian, Descent Noble, and worth equall, to her other
attributes, but to speake poetically as the best beautie, wants not
blemishes, the best wits, vices, nor the fairest day its showres, so albeit
he iudged himselfe, right blest and happy in his children, to shew
perfection is not in mortalitie, the sequell shewes you the weaknesse
of our ioyes, and vncertaine hopes fixt to posteritie.
His father was yet liuing, and participant in all his happinesse, but
regarding his owne great yeares and sonnes deseruings, conferred
the Royaltie and cares vpon Prince Alexander, whose two younger
brothers knowing themselues by law of grace and nature, much inferiour
to Prince Skander. Yet their owne ambition and others assassinations,
begot great opinions of their merits, though grounded
vpon no other, then tyranny and pale Enuie: and neglecting the
names giuen them at their Baptisme, the faith of Christ, wherein
their famous Predecessours had stood, with constant valour to become
Martyrs, The profession they had seene their parents, elder
brother and kindred, yea, and themselues thither to apparantly reioyce
in. All these despised, Thre-beg Apostatizes, and turnes Turke,
embracing without their perswasions the abominations of Mahomet.
And Constandel-chawn flies to the Persian, both, by their Idolatry,
customes and modes of that Nation endeuoring to aduance his
thoughts, though thereby hee reuolted from his Sauiour. In whose
power it was, in this impietie, to haue sent him flaming to Hell, in
choaking Brimstone and other plagues of reuenge and punishment.
This Constandel-chawn (as Fame goes of him) was actiue and ingenious,
nature hauing sufficiently enricht him, with gifts vnworthy
such a Master. Yet some report, by casualtie of riding, or like accident,
his bodie in some sort became imperfect. Which notwithstanding
quenched not, but rather inflamed his daring courage, maliciously

looking vpon the vertue and perfections of other mens minds
and bodies.
Abbas (then ruling ouer Persia) offended with the Turkish insolencies,
resolues to beate them out of Samachand, to effect it, hee
makes Ally-chawn his Generall (a tried Warriour) and to encourage
Constandell, ioynes him in equall command with Ally-chawn the Persian,
the way to affront the Turkes, was through Georgia, which gaue
a fit occasion to the Apostate Georgians ancient practices. So that,
without reuealing his intended Treason to Ally-chawn or others in
his company, and brazen-faced, not fearing to behold his grieued
parents and friends by his Apostasie, he visits them, and to stop their
exclamations (which he saw ready against his Mahometanisme and
Circumcision) he begins to lay open his receiuings, creations, fauour,
wealth, and trust, amongst the Persians, his great command prouing
no lesse then he had cold them. What knew they, but hee did this to
secure his Countrey, who knew his heart, but hee that made it, to
whose rule he deuoted all his actions. And with such heathenish and
detested Oratory, this wretch so blazed himselfe, and in requitall,
instead of ioy and applauses, had no other language retaliated him,
saue teares, sighes, sad countenances, and strange feares in their distracted
visages.
All which moued him to such condolings, that in place of asking
pardon, requesting prayers, promising amends, and sympathizing
with their heartie dolours, he beseeches them, to leaue off wounding
him, (those expressions being more pungent then Swords or Arrowes.)
And if any loue or pittie remained in them, to forgiue him,
who had vowed a satisfaction and preferment to each of them, in memory
of their true affections (Hypocrite, Villaine, that only aymed at
their destruction, and vnwittingly in despight of his hellish purposes)
sent them to receiue a Crowne of Martyrdome.
But to make his Tragedie the cleerer, after some cessation of
their sorrowes, and to mitigate their ill opinions, hee earnestly inuites
them to a solemne Supper, where after great varietie of entertainment,
by his appointment,The Georgian King, Prince and Nobles murdred at a Supper. which succeeded at his watchword
(being the holding vp aloft a siluer Ewre, after washing) immediatly
rush in, his vailed Seruants, the Executioners of bloud and
horrour, who, to accomplish his commandement, without let cut all
their throats, this parracide, the new Mahometan (vnworthy the name
of Constantine or Christian) without ayding them, or flying at these
murderers, but as in astonishment, lift vp his hands and eyes, as if
transformed by a Gorgon, that at least his dying friends, (if soules
then continue memories of sad Catastrophies) might in some measure
opinionate, his innocencie in that murther.
So when he saw, they were immortall (vniustly made so by his villany)
without least shew of remorse or pietie, ere his parents, Prince

Alexander, Magar and other Nobles were cold in death, hee proclaimes
himselfe apparant Heire to the Georgian Diadem. Which
sudden and vnnaturall proiect, as hee knew, carried with it amazement
and detestation, so to become sure in his deuices, hee places
new Guards of Persians, in each fortified place, and where such wanted,
he suddenly built some, and there bestowed Garrisons. After
which, to shew the modester Persians his integritie to Heathenisme,
he sacrilegiously ransacks the Temples or Houses of Christian Deuotion,
trampling vnder. foot (so farre as hee was able) all reliques
and vsefull Ornaments, belonging to Presbytery.
And forcing along with him some troupes of Georgians, to increase
his Army, he and Ally-chawn, in haste and fury marcht to Somachand,
daring the Turkes to aset battaile. Which the Turkish Generall
(who was sonne of Cycala the Bashaw, in this J^enarary some
where spoken of) for the honour of his Master the Grand Signior,
and his owne ingagement, accepts of, and with a resolued Army encounters
them.
Where was fought ((...) these old and inueterate Aduersaries) a
long, and famous battaile, in heat of which the two Generals, full of
spirit and resolution, fought hand to hand, without distraction, and
after equall hopes of victory, at length they parted, but not without
honourable characters of emulation and dexteritie. Constandel-chawn,
was wounded in the elbow, and Sicala's sonne in the thigh, the army
in this interim on both sides, expressing all wayes possible to obtaine
conquest, which yet was anticipated by the nights darknesse
(the Moone, it seemes, vnwilling to patronize their bloud-shed) so
that the Turkes, first made retreat, and entred the Towne. Though
the report giues victory to the Persian (bought at a deere price and
worth little, when obtained.)
Constandell, when he saw the Turkes were entred Samac hand, giues
order that his wounded Souldiers should be cured, and resoluing afterwards,
to bid them battaile or besiege them, hee entrencht himselfe,
pitching his owne and Ally-chawns Tent, one neere the other.
The Georgians (he had forced to this battaile) though tired with
trauaile, and hurt in that dayes combate, sorrowfully remembring
the cruell murther of their aged King and good Prince Alexander,
inhumanely perpetrated by this Mahometan Monster, fearing his apparant
Tyrannies, and ioying little to be copartners with Infidels and
Agents of his base ambition: these and some other reasons swayed
them. That, not respecting his vsurped Title to the Crowne of
Georgia, his power with the Persian, the rigour of armes, forsuch
reuolts, vnanimously and with a faithfull courage, they assaulted the
fearelesse Persians, (that little dreamed of such Conspiracies) and
after some slaughter they came to the Generals Tents, who had escaped

scaped thence, at first newes of this sedition, the Georgians, pulled
downe their new Kings Tent, and instead of Constandell (whom
they thirsted after) they cut in pieces a base Eunuch whom hee of
long time against Lawes of God and Nature had made a Catamite.
In this strange and vnexpected trouble Constandel-chawn to (whose
imagination then were visible, the wounds and hated murthers of
his father, brother and friends) after he had fled his Tent (in wonder
how this tumult tooke beginning, and by whose encouragements)
armed with amazement and nake dues, he followed after Ally-chawn,
his neighbour and copartner. Whom so soone as he espied, he threw
himselfe at his feet (supposing this combustion came from his inuention,
either to murther him, or at best, to manifest how little he accounted
his ambitions) and crying out with a lowd and hideous voice,
exclaimes against cursed Fortune, who when hee thought himselfe,
most free from danger, and in the next degree to securitie and promotion,
had bitterly cast him downe, and made him more abiect,
then in his former beings before he had massacred, his dearest friend^
to become aduanced. And if that Ally-chawn desired his ruine, he requested
him with earnestnesse, his death might be giuen him, by such
a Heroicke hand as his, rather then perish by the rascall multitude,
whose enuie and rage he knew, both insufferable and without mercie.
Especially that his Georgians (whom by this time, hee saw were
principall against him) might not bragge hereafter, of their fortune,
and daring resolutions to cut off him their Soueraigne.
But Ally-chawn, who at first, thought this rebellion, began from
Constandel, when he saw it otherwise, his feare and amazement became
greater, and insensible how to qualifie these bloudle (...),
and seeing the fire and noise grow higher, nothing but clangor and
out-cries possessing both sence and Tents. Hee embraces halfe-dead
Constandel, assures him of his innocencie and ignorance, bids him to
take courage, and conuocate the Persian Horsemen, and without
more inquisition to poste away a little further from the Turke, who
doubtlesse had he knowne of this conspiracie, had entred with them
and routed them vtterly.
The two Generals hauing giuen signall to their Captaines when
and where to follow them, vpon two swift Arabian coursers fled away,
the night and disguised habit furthering their priuie parting,
where being some miles distant, the ablest of their army followed
them. The reuengfull Georgians also another way, retyring into
Georgia, displacing such Garrisons of Persians as Constandell had seated
there, and by each way fortifying all places of resistance and aduantage,
assured of asecond entry of the Persian.
And indeed, this opinion, did not any whit deceiue them, for Constandel-chawn
when he had recouered the rest of his distracted army,

animating them with all reasons possible to prouoke reuenge, vpon
these weake and treacherous Georgians, rebels to the Law of Armes
and Traitors in a high degree to him their Soueraigne. He protested
to receiue none into mercy, his former indulgence of a father, should
now perfectly conuert it selfe into desire of vtter extirpation and tyrannie,
or rather Iustice, that the Persians may see his faith and loyaltie
towards them, and all the World be witnesses of iust and impartiall
retribution, to them his faithlesse and mad-brained slaues
and vassals.
The Persians, wisely conceiuing, their former losses, weaknesses
and remote beings, and that Constandels late Parricides, were incomparable,
able not only to prouoke loyall Subiects to reuenge (and
hauing indeed another King, Temeriscus, sonne of Alexander) but euen
strangers, in way of pitie, and to diuert like miseries from their
owne Nations, they were more addicted homewards, and had returned
quietly, had not Ally-chawns perswasion altered them. Who being
bribed or by great imprecations conjured by Constandel to chastise
them, at last they consented to goe, if but to regaine their late
lost honours, and that the Georgian valour might not seeme too terrible.
Glad of this resolution was Constandel, and no lesse glad, to see
them ingaged in the Quarrell of their reputation, by this, not doubting
to refeat himselfe, and make aduantage of the forfeitures of their
weake inheritances. So to giue more vigour to this action, he, giues
out great words against the Georgians, desiring the Persians to enrich
themselues with the spoiles, of goods or beauties, that they may see
how truly he labours to content and satisfie them to the full.
In this manner proceedes this imperious Constandel, daring to
trample on his Sires ashes, and reioycing how hee should see his
Country in consuming flames, with a hideous massacre of man, woman
and childe (but Almighty God who is the Ancient of dayes
whose arme is neuer shortned, nor power vnable, or vnwilling to defend
his seruants, these poore Bethulians, gaue way to this inraged
Holofernes, so farre as for his glory he saw conuenient, though, long
patient at length confounded him) for this Army of the Persians,
so soone, as they arriued neere to Georgia, was affronted by the
Queene, (wife of late murdered Alexander, eldest brother vnto Constandel)
and being a Lady of faithfull memory to her destroyed husband,
a very good Christian of great wit and courage, and much beloued
of her people, she rather chose to sacrifice her selfe (if that
would be sufficient) then see the downfall of the Georgians her
Countrimen.) So couragiously entring the Persian army, discloses who
she is, and as an Ambassadour required the sacred Law of Nations, to
speake freely and returne to the King her sonne without disturbance,
which granted her, shee desires a parlee with her brother

Constandel, that hearing of her being there, issued forth in brauery
and shew of insolence, demanding her businesse.
This poore Lady, after some signes of sorrow and respect vnto his
person, beginnes to reprehend him mildly, sets before him, his late
murthers, how odious they were to all the Christians (and as she
belieued) vnto Infidels. What could he expect, when he had ruined
his countrimen, burnt all their trees and Cities, hee might easily
know the Persians vsed him for their owne aduantagious attempts,
and that he should neuer be without the brand of Traitour and Parricide,
that as yet, the meanes was open to redeeme the good opinion
of his subiects, which he must looke to doe, if euer hee would be
famous to fight against them, or secure to defend his owne: say they
had offended him, yet no vertue more deified a Prince then Clemencie
and in some measure they deserued mercy, the destruction
of their beloued Princes slaine by him and vndeseruingly, mouing
their choler, and that it might be his owne case, which fidelitie
(no doubt) would please his soule, though in other ioyes, and
with the immortall, hee knew the Georgians could neuer bee vanquisht,
without infinite murther, the valour of one Georgian, equall
to contend with fiue Persians, the very Mameluckes, Ianizaries, and
chiefe Commanders of Persia and India now being Georgians: and
who doubtlesse would beare reuenge in their hearts, if he should be
so cruell to their Kindred. Shee beseeched him (if hee could not be
disswaded) to condiscend thus farre, that they two might next day
meet, conueniently betwixt both Armies: where after discourse,
they would referre peace or warre vnto his iudgement.
This parley ended, proud Constandell, after some notions of pride
and haughtinesse, bids her rest confident of his resolutions, that, as
Nature had graced him with the dignitie of being eldest (his brothers
being murdred) and the safetie of Georgia depended vpon the care
and fame of such a person as he reputed himselfe, hee would, after
some chastisement of his Rebels, take vpon him the defence and gouernment
of that Kingdome, and for Temeriske their supposed King
(her sonne) hee should not want preferment, either the inheritance
of Mengrellia, (a forced right) Charsee or some such Dukedome,
should giue him satisfaction, in the extreame of his desires or merits,
his infancie and doubt of legitimation, secluding him a while,
from enioying any Soueraigntie: and that his deserts and right might
appeare, perfect in view of all men, he accepted of her motion, and
would with twenty horsemen meete her, in an appointed place
twixt both the Armies, where his Title and plea of right and entrance
should defend it selfe, aswell in conference, as battaile.
This granted, after two dayes respire, according to the Articles,
Constandel-chawn and the Queene of Georgia met, at the place appointed:
where shee begun, her promeditated Oratory, perswading

him, to looke with pitie on his Countrey, the Widdowes, aged men,
Orphants, innocent Children, and such Motiues, begging mercy^
then shee represented the weaknesse of his designes, withstood both
by the inraged Armies of the Georgians, resolued to maintaine their
liberty to the last man, The fauour Temeriske had with the Persian,
(in whose Court he was educated, and liued much honoured and affected
by the people and King) who when Canstandell had discharged
the vtmost of his rage, was sure of small thankes from Abbas King of
Persia, In that there was no conquest (the Georgian and Persian being
friends) but a prouocation against their loyaltie and alliance. This
vnder (fraud she spoke that he might be reconciled, and by faire doings,
lay a better ground of his aduancement, and retreat from Persia,
whereby he might become Commander, and haue meanes, to
recouer his faith, which he ought to looke after repentantly and with
more zeale, then the Conquest of the Vniuerse besides. The Georgians
(passing by his irreligion and Mahumetisme) had a very good
opinion of his valour and knowledge in Armes, so that they were
desirous to entertaine him as their Gouernour. By his expertnesse
encouraging them to a defence against the Turkes and Persians, both
whom in all occasions were insulting ouer them, because indefensiue
and without gouernment, And that she had faithfully spoke, what
she desired, though it was in great part against the dignitie and securitie
of Temeriske her sonne, as then in Persia.
Whereto, Constandel-chawn, beyond measure efflated with pride
and high opinions of his worth and conquests (iudging his being
their, no lesse) replyed in few words. That he was fearelesse of his
establishment in his Fathers Royalties, That amongst such haughtie
and perfidious people, he had rather come in as a Conquerour, then
by right of succession, that himselfe and his good friends the Persians
had suffered in their honour so exceedingly, that without battaile
and bloud they could not part well satisfied, that hee had his Army
in Battalia; and resolued to execute, that (notwithstanding hee perceiued
the Georgians ready to receiue them in sury) he doubted not
to massacre the best of them. For as hee had incorporated himselfe
vnto another people in Religion, speech, order and action, and such
as loued him, he would neuer trust his owne Countrimen, who had
with such peaceable faces so lately betrayed him, and whom hee
knew, irreconcileable, and so assured her, in a word, hee sought reuenge
and murther, not excepting the innocents.
At which the Heroicke Queene, sighed, and shooke her Iauelin
(saying, if it will be no better, then God destroy the Homicide) immediatly
vpon that signe hee was shot to the heart, and sunke downe
dead, with a wrathfull countenance,Duke Constandel Slaine by an Ambushment. as only grieuing hee perished in
this base sort, without recompence. At sight of which, the Queene,
and the ambushed Musquetiers (hid of purpose to destroy him) forthwith

with retired to their Army, who expected the euent, and receiued
her ioyfully.
Ally, chawn, when he knew, Constandell was slaine: was cooled in
a further reuenge, only that the King of Persia, might not impute
cowardize or treason to him, hee speedily affronted the Georgians,
who receiued him in warlike sort, with such furie and hast pressing
on the Persians, that they desired to come off without more venture,
and so after losse of some common Souldiers retired home, leauing
the Georgians Victors, though defensiues, who without delay, slue
all such Garrisons of Persians, as eclypsed them, and by all industry
of men and monies, made strong all such places of defence and refuge,
as might defend themselues, and offend their enemies.
So soone as Ally-chawn returnes, he acquaints the King his Master.
In what had hapned. He was no stranger to the Georgian humours,
he knew well, tyranny was of all things, most odious to generous
dispositions, and that mens bodies might, but neuer the minds of the
Georgians be subiugated by violence, or deceitfull manners. Whereupon
he studies how to pacifie and draw them to him, he knew policie
was of more force then power, hee assured himselfe, so ancient a
Nation required a Prince of their owne beliefe and temper, he knew
Temeriscus was he, and thereupon encourages his progresse, affords
him many Complements of Wel-wishes and Alliance, clothes him
sumptuously, returnes him all the ornaments of Right and Royaltie,
were taken from his Predessours, and guarded with a traine of
Coozel-bashawes, sends him home securely, where many thousands of
his people thronged to see him, ioying and enioying his wished company.
And Temeriske to denotate himselfe a thankfull person, requites
with many fauours such Persians as accompanied him, and sends
old Abbas word of his welcomes and inthronization.
Now see how mischiefe appeares in a louely and vndistempered
Scene, when all Asia celebrated this reconcilement, and none could
fasten vpon any colour of futured discontentment.
An Ambassadour of the Grand Signior, arriues at Spawhawn, and
there vnder pretext of other imployments, by all priuate subtiltie,
labours to annihilate this late made Friendship, being very preiudiciall
to the Turkish Empire: so that he first sends secretly to yong
Temeriske and by his Sinon, possesses him, the Persian would neuer
digest their late ouerthrow neere to Armenia, and that Ally-chawn had
a promise of being Visier, or Lieutenant of those Countries for the
Persian, who resolued to make it a Prouince and to extirpate the Title
of a Kingdome. As he had done to Larr, Shushan, Babylon, Hircania,
Candahor, Hery and other Kingdomes, to the preiudice of their
honour, and apparant ruine of Christian Religion.
This inueighing discourse, so preuailed, with credulous youthfull
Temeriske, that he resolues to defend himselfe, the maintenance of

his true beliefe, life, honour and freedome. The lesse fearing them.
In regard the Turkes had sworne to helpe them vpon all occasions.
Now when the politicke Ambassadour, had wrought Prince
Temeriske, as he desired, he then perswades with Abbas, that the Georgians
hated him, that their King had entertained discourse with the
Grand Signior, and sought but an aduantage to betray his trust, that
if his words seemed of no moment, the matter was not consequentious,
and his employment carried him, to other ends then forreigne
Obiects.
The King of Persia, sayes but little. Imagining the more, and being
euer iealous and apt for each suspition, apprehends it fully, and
though he knew the Ambassadour hated their agreement, and would
reioyce to see them disunited, yet to rest confident of Temerisks alliance
and fidelitie, and that the Turke might see his errour, he sends
his Elchee (or Ambassadour into Georgia, and by him entreats Prince
Temeriske to come and visit him.
The Ambassadour found Royall welcome, but all his asseuerations
and desires could not draw Temeriske to visit Persia, he sends excuses,
but those so weake and vnwelcome, that Abbas in no small
choler, sweares his destruction, repenting that he had heartned him
with too much clemencie (a vertue very rare in this old Abbas) and sending
for Aliculibeg, Iolla-beg and other Captains, with a potent Army he
inuades Georgia, where finding small resistance, he gaue leaue to his
needy Army, to destroy and make all vse and meane of benefit,
where ere they trauelled, so that they fired their Villages sacrilegiously
profaned their Churches, defloured their Virgins, and committed
all such villany, as lawlesse and barbarous enemies most hunt
after: and hauing enricht their Treasurie, satiated Reuenge, and
fortified some defensiue places, the victorious Persians returne, crosse
ouer Taurus, and leaue their King at Farabaut at the Caspian Sea, till
more imployment.
In this wretched time, Temeriske fled to the Turke, who readily
receiued him and assures him of re-establishment, this granted, that
he would protest an inuiolable league with them against the Persian.
To which the distressed Georgian assents, and accompanied with a
mightie Army of Turkes and his owne Nation, re-enters Georgia,
in a battle, beats the enemy, and by a foolish pride and securitie of
the Persian Deputy, defeats their best and ablest forces killing the
Deputy, and recouering what formerly they had beene put from,
and finding all things so well ordered the Turkes returne some vnto
Teflis, the rest to other places.
The newes of this came presently to Abbas King of Persia, and as
Fame increases in its progresse, so without question, the Georgian
outrage was aggrauated to the height, by some, that hated them.

He was as a man distracted, his sweet ease and effeminate sports in
Mozendram, so one way swayed him, and point of Honour and Reuenge
the other way prouoked him. At last, after a volly of imprecations
against them, for snatching him from his golden quiet and recreations,
flaming with crueltie, he sends for his Generals, and commands
them leuie a mightie Army, vowing the vtter distruction of
these Georgians, and attiring himselfe in red, his Tulipant, Cabbay,
Boots, Scabberd, and other furniture (as signals of bloud and horror)
In hastie marches he enters King Temeriskes vnhappy Country (who
hearing of the mighty Army and vndoubted threats of the King of
Persia had with all his friends and ablest men, conueighed away their
Plate and Iewels, retired into some protecting places of the Grand
Signiors Countries, not daring to oppose the huge Army of their
Aduersaries at that instant.)
The Persian with like liberty to offend and spoyle, slue all the aged
and infant Georgians they could meet withall: violated the chaste
Matrones, regarded no age nor sexe, committed all possible villanie
in the Churches, vtterly defaced and spoiled their Groues and pleasant
places, massacred all their Cattle, cut downe their Mulberry
trees, and wholy destroyed their profitable Silke-wormes and many
such like out-rages, in so high a nature as could be effected by renenge
or tumult, and full gorged with bloud and bootie, they returned
home.
The Georgians and Temeriske their sorrowing King, thought this
a staine vnto their Honour, but policie and discretion warranted
them, that they might afterward be euen with the Persian, when least
suspected, and so soone as they heard of Abbas departure, they resolued
to fight with or famish all his Garrisons, and hauing obtained a
good force from the relieuing Turkes and Tartars, he easily aduanced
homewards, in all places finding nothing but signes of desolation
and murther, by which this poore Prince refrained not from
teares and prayers to Almightie God, to punish those deuastating
and mercilesse Infidels, and that by his Omnipotencie hee might recouer,
what in right was taken from him, and his miserable subiects^
which his desires, it seemes, were granted him. For in lesse then
two yeares, he againe became Lord of all his Territories, expulsed
the Persian, repaired his Cities, re-built his Temples, and to his
power distributed graciously to each impouerished, and strengthened
more then formerly, his defensiue Cities, Castles, and Cittadels,
ruling with more fame and splendour then he had done before.
And in some measure became euen, with some of their heauiest
enemies, by asubtle deuice of Morad-chawn a Duke of Georgia, who
stomached exceedingly the villany they had acted in his Countrey,
hauing destroyed two pleasant Castles and fruitfull Forrests of Mulbery-trees,

belonging to himselfe, which were both his greatest profit
and contentment.
He flies vnto the Persian, assures them of his friendship and perfect
hatred to his vnthankfull Countrimen, tels them he would deliuer
not only King Temeriscus and his valiant Mother prisoners to
them, but also all the strength of Georgia. And in this, he begets beliefe,
associates twelue Persian Princes, and an Army with him, to
whom he addes some of his owne: and after long trauaile, so soone
as he attained the Georgian Confines, in a darke night, such time as
the Persians slept, and least suspected Treason. Morad with his Confederates
issues armed from their Tents, making an Alarme, as if the
Tartars had come vpon them:Eleuen Dukes and 700, men slaine by the Georgiaus, Anno 1618. by which stratagem, the amazed Persians,
fled, maymed and discouraged, eleuen Dukes slaughtered, and
seuen hundred common men: Morad returned ioyfull of his victory
and the Persians sad, and vowing neuer to credit a reconciled enemy
any more. Old Abbas himselfe, bit his lip when he heard this Tragedie,
but concealed his passion, forced to it by his present warres against
the Turke and Arab.
This shall be enough for this digression, I shall hence-forth recompence
the Reader, with our successiue. Trauailes and descriptions
of Townes, Customes and Places. And (because falling in my
way) will begin with the Metropolis, and best built Citie of all the
Persian Monarchy, Spahawn.


A Description of Spawhawn.
THe Imperiall Citie Spawhawn is in thirtie two degrees thirty
nine minutes North, is seated in the Kingdome of Parthia,
in a faire Plaine and pleasant Horizon. Tis by some called
Spaan, and by others Spahan and Hispahan, as their seuerall Dialects
concorded.
It is a Citie of as great extent as Fame, and as ancient as famous,
and no lesse proud then ancient. At this time triumphing ouer those
once more Royall Cities, Babylon, Niniue, Shushan, Echatan, Pers^polis,
Arsatia and Nabarca.
This Citie was in her infancie cald Dura (but whither in that Dura
where the great Assyrian Monarch Nabuchadnez^ar erected his
golden Coloffe, I know it not.) But this is knowne, that it was called
by the ancient Greekes Hecatompilos, from its hundred gates. For
Hecatonpolis was meant by the Craetan Ile which had so many Cities.

The boasting Persians, named her, for her bignesse (halfe the
World) and this greatnesse of hers was long agoe, for these Scythopersae
know her no longer, then cald Spawhawn, which has no signification.
To say truth shee is beautifull and ancient, her circuit may
be nine miles, and in that, the better halfe is Gardens.
But hee that wrote it was a dayes iourney about on horsebacke,
that it was and is the most stately Citie in the Orient, that it has two
impregnable Forts, with great store of great Ordnance, a deepe
Trench and two Seraglioes, hauing wals glistering with red Marble
and parget of diuers colours paued with Mosaicke worke, euery thing
combining beautie and majestie, I cannot beleeue him, for I was
their aboue twentie dayes, and no time idle, and could see no such
strength, bulke or rarenesse in her, such as it is shall deliuer you,
but first of her antiquitie,
Before it had the denomination of Spahawn, such time as the
World knew her in her Greeke name Hecatonpilon (or hundred gates)
Demetrius Nicannor, sonne of Demetrius Soter, neuer satiated with
ambition and vniust desires, couets no lesse (though none lesse able
to encompasse it) the sole Empire of syria and Hierusalem, willing he
was to attempt it valiantly, but in equall valour and resolution hee
saw many iealous Princes enuious at him, which not knowing how
to withstand, rather then faile of his plot, hee resolues vpon vniust
meanes, periury and murther (qualities degenerating from the nature
of Royall Princes, yea and valiant men.) And first he beginnes
with Antiochus, sonne of Alexander, whom vnworthily he slue, because
interposing the view of his ambition.
Which when valiant Tryphon heard of, he resolues reuenge and accordingly
prepares to finish it, which Nicannor fearing, and labouring
to make his preparations stronger, posts into Media, where then
he found Arbaces the Persian King, who hearing his message, made
him see his weaknesse, to flie for aide to a reconciled enemie, for Arbaces,
remembring some passed iniuries, though triuiall, yet to taxe
his insolence, without any intercession, sent him prisoner to Hecatompilon
(our now Spahawn) where for two yeares hee was strictly
lookt too, and thence, conueighed into Hircania (at that time subiect
to the Persian) where for some moneths he vsed him hardly, and
then supposing he was euen with him, gaue him a little libertie, lest
through griefe and want of exercise, hee might hope to lose him,
which he no way aimed at. For in his heart hee loued him, and the
yeare after, forgaue him his ransome, pitied his hard fortune, and looking
better into his youthfull qualities and person affected him, made
him his sonne in Law, and with a potent Army fought with his Opposers,
and such as in his imprisonment had seized vpon his Kingdomes,
and with great good fortune establisht him in his former
royalties, where for some yeares hee gouerned happily. Which History

I offer you only to memorize Spawhawn in somewhat, out of
her former Title. This hapning afore our Sauiours bodily comming
into this World one hundred and thirtie yeares, or thereabouts.
In the yeare after our Sauiours birth 1030. (such time as Edward
the Confessor ruled England, and Griffith ap Llewellin, Wales. One
Mahomet was Sauldan or Sultan of Persia, who being distrest both by
the Caliph of Babylon and the Indians, he implored aide from Tangrolipix
(or Sadocke, Prince of the Zelzuckian Family) who accordingly
came and immediately ouerthrew the Babylonian Pysastris. For
which good seruice Tangrolipix desires leaue only to passe ouer Araxis,
with intent to see the Turkes, which was denied him by the
thanklesse Souldan, whereat inraged, he lurkes in the Carmanian Desert,
daily doing much mischiefe, to preuent which, Mahomet sends
against him twenty thousand Souldiers, whom Tangrolipix by stratagem
easily vanquisht, and by that victory grew so daring, that hee
affronted the Persian to his face, who fought with him with three
score thousand men,Soldan of Persia breaks his (...). but lost the victory and flying to Spawhawn,
twixt it and Rustans Tombe he brake his necke, by which Tangrolipix
got the Crowne, and brought in the Turkish or Scythique Race.
The Citie is round, like Paris, its circuit I haue said about nine
English miles, her inhabitants three hundred thousand soules at
most.
The chiefe Ornaments of the Citie are the Mydan, (or great Market,
the Hummums, or Hot-houses) the Moscheas, the Kings Palaces
and the Gardens.



The
Mydan or
great Merkitt
in Spahawne.
A. is a Mosque South.
B. is an archt way
to the North.
C. is the Kings house.
D. is a Mosque East.


The Mydan, is in the heart of the Citie, and to say truth, all the

brauery, concourse, wealth and Trade is comprised in her. Tis built
Quadrangular, though of vnequall Angles. From North to South; is
seuen hundred seuenty fiue of my paces, from East to West two
hundred, but accounting the Ile to the North issuing, is at least a
thousand.
It is built in forme of our royal Exchange, with foure Iles, and a court
within, cald the Hippodrome, so cald from their running with horses
there. Tis stored with all Merchandizes, chiefly Drugs, and to this
place daily resort most Nations, as English, Dutch, Portugals, Arabians,
Turkes, Iewes, Armenians, Muscouians, and Indians.
This Citie is distant from Shiras two hundred and odde miles,
from hence to Babylon three hundred miles; from hence to Cazbeen
and Tauris two hundred seuenty miles, and to the Caspian Sea three
hundred and thirty miles English.
The Hummums here are round, spacious and costly, one of which
built by this King, cost fifteene thousand pound sterling, ere it was
finished, they are much giuen to bath, and it is most of their Physick,
it is preualent too against the lues venerea, and that disease not a little
infects the lustfull. The men goe in the afternoone, the women at
morne, and guided by the Eunuches.
The Moscheas, or Churches are large and handsome, that at the
West side of the Mydan is most beautifull, tis round built with good
white Marble fiue yards high from the Sole, the rest is dried Bricks,
coloured ouer with Posies of Arabique and like worke.
In the midst is a Tancke of water, with which they purifie their
hands and eyes, when they prepare to prayer: they performe their
Orisons kneeling, and ducking frequently. They turne their faces
towards Mecha. Neere which at Talnabi rests the bones of their great
Mohomet.
At the appearing of euery new Moone, they goe out to worship it,
and each day at S^n-set in euery Ward of the Towne or Citie they
beat their Kettle-Drummes, till he arise with the Antipodes.
At that time and at his looking in our Horizon, a well voiced boy
from the Tarrasse or top of their Churches sings Eulogies to Mahomet
and Ally, their voices are shrill and heard farre off, and then
each Laycke Pagan fals to deuotion, what exercise soeuer they then
are acting.
Their Prayers are in the Arabique, their Negotiations in other
Languages. Their Alcoran containes many Canons for Deuotion.
Some of which in my Discourse of their Religion I shall present
you.
The Kings prime House is within the Mydan, yet no way entrenching
further then the other Houses, it is two stories high, gilded
and wrought in antique works and posies, to the outward view, within,
the roomes are couered with rich Carpet^, the roofe embost and

wrought with Gold and Blue, and tarrased aboue.
Afore his doore lie vnmounted forty three Demicannons, one and
thirtie are brasse, the rest of Iron, and are Culuerins. These were
brought from Ormus or Babylon.
At the North end of the Mydan, is eight or nine roomes, like
Chappels hung with Lampes, which being many and cleare, giue a
dainty splendour; hither sometimes the King repaires, and sees the
Sodomiticall Boyes and Wenches dance, and sport together, and
when he is away, the people haue them.
At the furthest end, North of the Mydan, is the Kings Mint,
wherein all forreigne Coines are new stampt, with the Persian Characters.
One day is for money, a second for Gold, a third for Brasse,
besides this he hath fourteene other Mints, at Larr, Shiras, Babylon,
Tauris, Cazbeen, Candahor, and other Cities.
The Gardens fall in the next place, to bee spoken of, and in
this, this Citie enioyes many both large and delightfull; I will content
my selfe to speake of one, by which you may coniecture of the
rest.
Tis at the Southwest end of the Citie, to which you passe through
a street of two miles length and better, both sides planted with
Chenor-trees.
The Garden is called Nazar-iareeb, tis a thousand paces from North
to South, and seuen hundred broad. It hath varieties of fruites and
pleasant trees, and is watered with a streame cut through the Coronian
Mountaine, and is forceably brought hither, the first walke is set
with pipes of Lead and Brasse, through which the water is vrged* and
giues varietie of pleasure.
From the entrance to the further end, is one continued open ally,
diuided into nine ascents, each mounting higher by a foot then
other, the space twixt each ascent, is smooth and pleasant. In the
midst is a faire Tancke or pond of water, of twelue equall angles and
rowes set with pipes to spout the water.
At the entrance is a little (but wel-built) house of pleasure, the
lower roomes adorned with Chrystall water, immured with Tancks
of rich white Marble.
The Chambers aboue, are enricht with pictures, representing
sports, hawking, fishing, archery, wrastling, etc. other places in vse
very richly ore-laid with Gold and Azure.
But that which is of most commendation is the prospect it enioyes,
for by being seated so high, it ore-tops and giues the excellent
view of a great part of the Citie, which cannot be obtained
else-where.
Returning to the Citie you passe ouer a Bridge, archt and supported
with fiue and thirtie Pillars, vnder which is a streame of water,
sometimes so broad as the Thames at London, but other sometimes

neere dried vp, and he that looketh to it is called Prince of the Riuer,
a name and employment of great honour and benefit.
Abbas, the late victorious King, with whom few things were impossible.
For many yeares past, hath endeuoured, to cut through many
Mountaines (the Coronian being next the Towne) to bring the riuer
to Spawhawn, by the daily labour of fortie thousand slaues) which
of it selfe runnes quietly fiftie miles distant thence, and has performed
it almost successefully: which when it has perfection, may well
compare with that olde wonder, entended by vain-glorious Nero;
twixt Ostia and Auernus, now cald Lycola.
Out of the Citie (behind that late described Garden) is a Mount
rising in midst a spacious plaine) which by the Persians is cald Darow,
and supposed that place where Darius (in imitation of his Predecessor
Xer^ces) wept vpon view of his innumerous Army, so suddenly
to become nothing.
A little further, vpon a high imperious mountaine is Rustans
Tombe, more eminent for height and perspicuitie, then beautie or
admiration, his Image is cut very artificially vpon a blacke shining
marble mountaine neere Persae-polis, called Nogdi-rustan, he is of
great account among the Gowers, a people liuing subiect to the Persians,
though of old the sole inhabitors heere, till Alexander conquered
them.
They are well grounded in Traditions, and can forge Lyes without
Authoritie, beget wonder and beliefe amongst the admiring Persians.
They say Rustan liued,Story of Rustan. when Artaxerxes surnamed Longimanus
flourisht with the Persian Diadem. In the yeare after the Creation
3500. he was sonne of Xerxes, who entred Greece to ruine Athens,
(which attempt, set Persae-polis on fire, not long time after) with an
Army of two millions, so great, that Historians report, they drunke
Riuers dry. And yet were vanquisht at Sea by Themistocles at Salamis,
and by land at the Straights of Thermopilae by Leonidas, with a
handfull of men.
This Artaxerzes was that Ahashuerus, who married Hester, the
great friend and preseruer of her people the Iewes. And this was hee
who gaue order to Esdras, to re-build Hierusalem.
In his time this Champion Rustan liued and was of great account
with his Master, whose loue a while protected him from domestique
Aduersaries, other-whiles his owne valour was his safeguard. By
which two he enioyed great dignities and reports, till old age ouertook
him, which kild him not, but his traiterous brother Shawgad, out
of no other cause then pale Enuie, sought his destruction, and effected
it; by digging pits, couered with boughes, which seeming harmelesse,
gaue him miserable ruine, into one of which as he was in chase;
he fell, and calling out for helpe, his deuillish brother affoorded it*
with death-bringing-darts, basely destroying a valiant Champion, and

one who most of all others, gaue glory to him and his owne Family,
who notwithstanding ere hee died with two arrowes shot out of
the pit, slue his trayterous brother and his father in Law. In memory
of him, the people bestowed this erected Monument, which by
all ensuing Conquerours has scaped defacing, finding better dealing,
then the man himselfe could from his Fratricide.
These Gowers, are of the same opinion and antiquitie, with the
Persees in India.
The Persians, now ruling ouer them, thinke basely of them, they
adore the Fire and other Elements: When they salute at morne,
they sprinkle their vrine, in one anothers faces, they delight to haue
their apparell tinctured with yellow, the women goe vnuailed, and
ha^e a flame coloured Scarfe hanging behind them. They neuer
marrie out of their owne Tribes, Trades and Religion, the dead they
carrie to a Tree,Funerall of the Gowers. hollow within, in which they place the carcasse
clothed as he liued standing vpright, supported by the bole, each side
releeuing him. Their he stands, till his Sonne or Nephew (who diligently
in a secret place is opposite) markes which eye the Vultures
(who smell him and come to prey there quickly) first feeds vpon, by
which they vndoubtedly imagine where his soule is. If the right eye
first, they feast for ioy, presuming hee is in Paradice, if his left, they
mourne, imagining the Deuill has him, and this knowne, they in their
fashion bury him.
In Spawhawn (at our being there) were two Couents of Spanish
Friers, Augustines and Carmelites (which last if they eat no flesh, I
feare, can here get little fish, to grow wanton by.) They haue a pretie
Chappell there, gilt and furnisht with Church Ornaments, Tapers,
Chalices, Crucifixes, Images, Altars, and Organs. They would
conuert Mahometans to the knowledge of Christ, but the Armenians
loue them not, nor doe the Persians Images. They serue well to giue
Intelligences vnto God, and for Christendome.
In this Citie is a Columne, compact of seuerall heads, of men, Antilopes,
Buckes, Goates, Buffols, Elephants and Camels, tis at the
Base about twentie foot in compasse, and, I suppose, the height three-score.
It was erected vpon this occasion, when Abbas was proclaimed
King, the Spawhawnians would not let him enter, but charged him
with the death of Mahomet his father, and the murther of Emyrhamze
the Prince, his elder brother.
This netled Abbas, and made him sweare stoutly by his Crowne,
by his fathers Soule, the eight refulgent Orbes, the eleuen hundred
names of God, and the honour of his Prophet Mahomet, for this
rebellion he would chastice them brauely, cut off fortie thousand of
their heads, to raise a Pillar of terrour and admiration, as a readie sacrifice
vnto Mahomet.
After much Adoo, he conquers them, ransacks the Citie, kils a thousand

of them, and mindfull of his oath, giues order to behead fortie
thousand, a lamentable cry was raised, and much entreaty vsed, but
to small purpose. The vow of the Persians neuer alters, nor could he
be disswaded, till the Muftie, or sacred messenger, assures him, Mahomet
by reuelation told him, his oath might be dispenced with, so fortie
thousand were beheaded, no matter what, to which at length he
is content to, whereupon a generall massacre of all sorts of beast executed,
the harmelesse often suffering for the nocent, and this monument
of mercilesse mercy, was reared higher then any Mosque in
that Citie, though now growne ruinous.





A like Trophee, was built by cruell Mustapha Bassaw, Generall for
the Great ^urke Amurath the Third, who with a hundred thousand
men entred Persia, and was repulst by Sultan Tocomack the Persian
Generall, where, in the Caldaran Plaines thirtie thousand Turkes lost
their liues, and only eight thousand Persians, of whose heads Mustapha
made a monument for his deare bought victory, and horrour to
the Persians.
Hence we iournied towards the Court which then was in Hircania,
neere the Caspian Sea, first night to Reig, hence forward trauelling
all the night and reposing (I cannot say sleeping, the Gnats so
troubled vs) all the day.
We had guides and a Conuoy to direct vs, the Starres were theirs,
without whose ayme there is no certaintie. The Sunne is so fiery
and makes the Sands so scalding on the day time, that it then prohibits
Pilgrimages.
Hence to Sardahan, sixteene miles from our last Manzeil, next
night to Whomg seuen and twentie miles, and next to Tawgebawt, a
House and Garden of the Kings, giuing place to few in Parthia. The
house is small in compasse, not affoording aboue a dozen Chambers,
but the Ornament is Gold, enameled and pargeted very daintily: the
Garden is North from the House yet ioyning to it, it has six seuerall
discents, each part giuing eightie paces, and seuentie broad, tis watered
by a cleare riuolet (tho litle) by whose vertue it abounds in Damaske
Roses and other flowres, plentie of broad spreading Chenor-trees
(which is like our Beech) with Pomegranats, Peaches, Apricockes,
Plummes, Apples, Peares, Chesnuts and Cherries. It has Ecchoes,
naturall Grottoes and Labyrinths, made by art and nature. It enioyes
a Hot-house well built and paued with white Marble, and these are
the rarer, because they are seated and walled about, in a large euen
Plaine, rich in nothing but Salt and Sand.
Hence wee rode to Bawt, (which signifies a Garden too) next in
Obigarmy, both these are Houses belonging to the King, who twixt
Spawhawn and the Caspian Sea has a House at euery twelue miles for
entertainment.
This nights trauaile was bettered by Cynthia's candor, and behooffull,
because wee trauelled through a miserable inhospitable wilde
Desert of Sand,A sandy Desart. ten miles broad, and the length ten times so much.
The sands by the fury of Tempests lies in great drifts, like mountaines,
so light and vnstable, that the high wayes are neuer certaine,
whereby passengers are oft inuolued and ouer-turned, they and their
Camels, and so perish in the mercilesse sands; to preuent which danger
(as much as can be) the King causes euery three miles a Castle to
be builded for a safegard against stormes, which though strong and spacious
yet (because their foundation is sandy) are in March or September

yearely torne asunder in peece-meale, and no signe left of their once
being there.
That night we rode thirtie miles, and next night to Suffedaw one
and twentie miles, next to Siacow, wherein is a Carrauans-raw of
white free stone, and the first building of that materiall, I saw in those
parts of Parthia.
That night we rode thirtie miles, most of which was ouer a broad
causey built by incredible labour and expence, ouer a miserable Desert,
nothing but Salt (not vnlike pure Snow) where note that the
whole Wildernesse is so deepe and boggie,A Salt Desart. that Horse, Camell, or Elephant,
if they goe from the Causey are plunged and buried in the
Salt and Bogge, yea, many out of curiositie and ignorance haue perisht
in it. The danger is added, by reason of Theeues who keepe
the passage, no way but backe vpon the same Causey shewing way
for flight or defence, and so soone as wee had past securely the Salt
Desart, we rode ouer, and about hils so high and glomerating, as if
Olympus had beene cut into Dedalian Labyrinths.
From Siacow, we rode next night ouer another salt and vast Desart,
the ground of like danger and trouble, in which many thousands
haue also perished, and would yet be lost, had not the King caused a
like large and deepe grounded Causey be built for their securitie,
this nights iourney was two and twenty miles.
Whence next night vnto Gezz a Lodge of the Kings, eighteene
miles distant from our last dayes rest, which moonlight night, we rode
through the bottomes of transected Taurus, whose stupendious forehead,
wets it selfe within the Airy middle Region. The lane or passage
is fortie yards wide, the hils on either side towring as I haue
spoken of, the inhabitants say that Mortis Haly (their renowned
Prophet) cut this marualous passage with his slycing Semiter, that
his people might passe more easily.
How false soeuer that be, this is certaine, that twelue yeares past,
a very valiant and famous Thiefe, with fiue hundred horse and three
hundred shot, was Lord of this straight, and receiued tribute from
all passengers.
This aggrated the Persian King exceedingly to be so bearded,A famous Christian turnes Mahometan, and is slaine. and
proposed a great reward and honour to any that could vanquish him.
'Twas knowne to most of them, this Thiefe neuer refused the Combat
against one or twentie: Yet an Armenian Christian of more courage
then grace affronted him, fought with him a long space, and after
much adoe slue him. When suddenly the Mountainers fell vpon
him, and to his succour an ambush of Persians opposed them, ouercame
and cut them all in peeces.
The Armenian returnes to the Court with victory, had his reward,
and became so full of vain-glory, and hopes that hee turned

Mahometan, and was made a Sultan, but see the vengeance pursuing
him (for who can be secure without a Sauiour) he continued happie
in many fights and imployments against the Tartar, yet the iealous
King, notwithstanding his deserts and expectances, three yeares afore
our being here, by secret warning from the Emperour, by Lolla-beg,
had his head cut off, and felt a terrible reward for his Apostasie,
which drew aforetime many a teare from the distressed Christians
their inhabiting.
Hence we trauelled to a Towne called Hal^ary, eighteene miles
from our last Manzeil, this place affoorded plentie of good Water,
Wood, Oliues, Corne and Walnuts.
Next night we came to Periscow, eighteene miles distant, which
Towne is in the latitude of thirtie sixe degrees: Tis famous through
all Media, is gouerned by a seuere Iustice called Mahomet-beg a Darraguod,
who at our entrance, cut off the nose and eares of one, the
hands of a second, and hanged the third, their fault only the stealing
a trifle, of two shillings value from a footman seruing an English Merchant
liuing in Spawhawn. Another peece of Iustice happened that
eue.Iustice of Mahomet-beg. A Farmer for lying with a Whore (as she said) against her will,
Mahomet-beg commands an Executioner to geld him, the poore man,
entreated hard for his vsefull parts, so did his Wife, and by mediation
of friends, and thirtie pound fine to the Darraguod or Iustice, he satisfied
for his errour.
Periscow is famous for the Court oft there residing, yet is the Kings
House of no great beautie, it shewes the ruines of a Castle, and is
most louely in this, that her water is sweet and the earth produces
grasse and fruits in some measure, the Towne is set vpon the brow
of a great Hill, and thence takes her denomination.
On the fifteenth of May, as we ranged on some part of Caucasus,
at our first view of the Caspian Sea, so great a storme of wind and
raine beat vpon vs that wee not only lost our way,Caucasi^ port^. but our selues, and
at length wrastled to Geer, hauing first past through the Straits of Mozendram.
That nights iourney was foure and twentie long miles,
next night foure and twentie more, and next to Alliauarr, one and
twentie miles distant from our last nights lodging, which Towne is
full of wood and water, and abounds with Partridge and Pheasant,
next night to Nekaw, fiue and twenty miles, and so to Asharaffe,
where the King of Persia then was. The King hearing of our Lord
Ambassadour, sent the Gouernour of the Citie and about fiftie horsemen
to conuoy him to his lodging.



A Description of Asharaff in
Hyrcania.
ASharaffe or Ahasuraffe, in the Kingdome of Hyrcania, is in
the latitude of thirtie eight degrees seuenteene minutes, and
full North from Spawhawn, as the Pole-starre (which is of a
third magnitude, in the tip of the little Beares taile) assured vs; this
Citie is distant from Spawhawn three hundred and thirty English
miles.
Hyrcania is now called Mozendram, is limited on the North with
the Caspian Sea, on the South with Mount Taurus, hath Zagathia on
the East (which is part of Scythia intra Imaum) and to the West
Media, or rather some part of the lesser Armenia, vpon whose tops
the Arke rested. The Countrey is full of Woods, amongst which
are Oakes, though the people vse them little on the Hyrcan Sea.
Araxis, from the Taurisian Mountaines, (as Ptolomy writes from
Sagapene, Colthyan and Seducaene) waters and fattens this peacefull
Countrey, to perfect which, shee is diuided and sub-diuided
so oft and into so many streames and Riuolets, that from an ample
Riuer, ere she kisse the Caspian, she loseth her pride and giues leaue
to wade through her deepest channell.
The Country of old, and yet abounds with Tygres, according to
the Poets Songs, Hyrcanaeque admorunt vbera Tygres, whose like
companions, are Wolues, Lions, Wild-cats, Bores, and Scorpions,
amongst which rabble may be cataloguized, the swarmes of Gnats,
Flies and Snakes, that pestered vs to our wofull remembrances.
By some, this Kingdome, has beene called Corca, by others Girgia
(meaning perhaps Georgia, which is Iberia, twixt the two Seas) some
againe Caspia, Steana, and Diurgument, which Titles, as questionlesse
they haue beene subiect to inuention, so the errour is not great, since
we are sure it is old Hyrcania, knowne with trouble to the victorious
Macedohian Alexander.
The people are ciuilized (as say the Persians) since they haue called
Abbas their Conquerour. Their Country is vsefull for passage into
Tartarie and Turcomania, and therefore has endured no small
troubles to defend its right. Tis pleasant and rich, and therefore
a bait to allure her Sun-burnt and famisht Neighbours to extenuate
her plentie.
The people of old,Alexander the Great. thought to forbid Achilles successor his desired
entrance, by twisting one tree to another, forcing the vnwilling
boughes to bad subiection.
But hee that had dissected Gordions knot, though very mysticall,

with the same sword annihilated their simple policies, and sub^ugated
them.
The Countrie is (as I haue said) full of Wood, which, both befriends
them against Winter colds, and shades them from the parching
Sunne, both which in their seasons are there extreame; in those
Woods lurke sauage creatures, Leopards, Tygres, Wolues, Foxes,
Apes, Antilopes, Red and Fallow Deere and such like, but in greatest
number and offence, swarme of Gnats and Flies, and stinging
Scorpions: they are small in bulk, but fierce in their venemous dispositions,
he that is stung if he escape death, is frantique twentie houres
at least: and no better remedy then (like Achilles Speare) to turne a
Scorpion into Oile,Remedie against Scorpions. and apply it to the place offended. The Hyrcanians
thinke to preuent their poyson, by Charmes which they tie
about their armes, yet it sometimes failes them, and then the cause
is there that dayes sinne, themselues excusing it.
The prime Cities of this Kingdome are Farrabaut, Asharaffe, Periscow,
Omoall, Barsrushdea, and Derbent, most of which places are watered
by the Riuers, Araxis, Connack, Obsel, Cyre, Rha and Cheisell,
from the Desarts of Lorr, and together with seuentie mouthed Volga,
from Muscouia, emptie themselues into this Caspian Sea, which
though turbulent, wee saw neither ebs nor flowes (yet neuer ouerflowes)
and has no commerce or entercourse with any Sea, except
(as is credible) it be subterranean, into the Euxine: and is lesse wonderfull,
remembring the floud Zioberis, which arising out of Taurus,
hides it selfe thirtie miles vnder ground and opens it selfe againe, and
mixes with another Riuer in that Countrey called Rhodago, both
which run into the Caspian Sea. And Tradition tels vs that the Monarch
Alezander to find the truth of this report, made two Oxen be
throwne into Zioberis, who were seene to rise againe at Rhodago.
The like is reported of the Riuer Niger in Afrique.
The Caspian Sea is in compasse neere three thousand miles, tis from
North to South, seuen hundred and odde miles, and from East to
West sixe hundred, tis in forme Ouall.
Hyrcania affoords Rice (neere which fields tis vnwholsome dwelling,
by reason of the water which stands so long ouer it) with Barley
and Rie, and fruits in great plentie.
The people speake the Language of Persia, their apparell like the
Irish Trooses, their heads haue a high woollen Cap, furred with
their sheep-skins. They are affable, and delight in nouelties.
Howbeit the Persians, if one may beleeue them, report merrie
stories of these Hyrcanians, making the men brutish and the women
vnchast, that they are very faire and amiable (which we credit, finding
so) and so kind and louing vnto Trauellers, that vpon any signall,
they will receiue them, and hold it a point of rudenesse in the Virgins,

if they he coy or disdainfull vnto strangers, this the Persians say
of them: but in all such reports, sure I beleeue them not.


Asharaff.
ASharaffe has two thousand houses in her, shee is seated in a
Plaine, and not aboue two miles from the Caspian Sea, the
Towne has but of late got the Kings residence there, a^d
therefore is not so great nor beautifull as Farrabaut, fiue miles West,
where also the King has a stately Palace, but two miles from Asharaffe
he has a most pleasant house called Abassebaut, excelling all the rest
for prospect, imagery and deuices by water-workes.
The Buzzar in this Towne is but homely, nor enioyes shee any
Mosques, or Prophets to be spoken of.
I will giue a relation of the Court, and of our Ambassadors Entertainment
and Audience, and so will on, in the illustrating otherplaces.


The Ambassadours entertainment by the
King of Persia.
AFter our Ambassadour had reposed himselfe foure dayes in
Asharaffe, the King sent a Coozel-bash to him, with commendations,
and that next day he would giue him Audience,
accordingly next day, which was our Sabbath, and with them a day
of Ceremonie, being the first day of their great Fast and Feast (for
on that day tis not permitted to eat or drinke, but after Sun-set they
doe both excessiuely) this Feast is called Ramazan,Ramdam, is their Lent, and Byram their Easter. Ramdam or Ramadan,
our Ambassadour, with Sir Robert Sherley, and seuen or eight
English Gentlemen his followers, set forwards to the Court: and
this I remember our Ambassadour tooke it ill, none came to vsher
him, or shew the way. For that morning hauing sent to Mahomet
Ally-beg the great Fauorite to that end, the Infidell returned a footman,
whom our Ambassadour scorning, sent backe, and so proceeded
with his owne Company.
At our alighting at the Court gate, an Officer led vs in to a little
place, hauing a prettie Marble Pond or Tancke in Centre. The rest
spread with silke Carpets, where our Ambassadour and the rest stayed

two houres, and then were feasted with a dish of Pelo, which is
Rice boyled with Hens, Mutton, Butter, Almonds and Turmerack:
but how meane soeuer the diet was, the furniture was excellent, pure
beaten gold, both dishes, couers, flaggons, cups and the rest.
Thence we were led by many Sultans, through a large, delicate,
and odoriferous Garden, to a house of pleasure, whose Chambers
both viewed the tops of Taurus and the Caspian Sea.
Into this Lodge we entred, the low-roome was round and spacious,
the ground spread with silke Carpets, in the midst a Marble
Tancke full of Chrystaline water (an Element of no small account in
those Torrid habitations) and round about the Tancke, vessels of pure
Gold, some fild with wine, others with sweet smelling flowres.
Thence into a Chamber, furnisht in manner as the former,The Kings (...). but
with three times more vessels of Gold, set there for pompe and obseruation.
At the end sate the Potshaugh or great King, crosse-legged, and
mounted a little higher then the rest, his seat hauing two or three
white silke shags vpon the Carpets.
His attire was very ordinary, his Tulipant, could not out-value
fortie shillings, his coat red Callico quilted with Cotton, worth very
little, his sword hung in a leather belt, its handle or hilt was gold,
and in regard the King was so plaine attired, most of the Court, had
like apparell on for that day.
Yet the Plate and Iewels in that House argued against pouertie, a
Merchant then there, imagined it worth twenie millions of pounds.
So soone as our Lord Ambassadour came to him, hee by his Interpreter
deliuered briefly, the cause of his iourney which was to congratulate
his victorious successe against the Turke, to renue the Traffique
of Silke, and other things to benefit the Merchants, and to see
Sir Robert Sherley purge himselfe from those imputations laid on
him by Nogdibeg the King of Persia his late Ambassadour.
The King gaue him a very gracious reply, and whereas he thinkes
it honour enough to let the great Turkes Ambassadour kisse the hem
of his Coat, and sometimes his Foot, he very nobly gaue our Ambassadour
his Hand, and with it puld him downe and seated him next to
him crosse-legged, and calling for a cup off wine drunke to his Master
our famous King, at which he put of his Hat, and the King seeing
it, put off his Turbant, and drunke the cup off, which our Ambassadour
pledged thankfully. And the people thought it a strange
thing to see their King so complementall, fortis a shame with them
to be bare-headed.
The Chamber wherein he was entertained, had the sides painted
and gilded very beautifully, though indeed the Verse may be inuerted,
Materia superabat opus, and not materiam.
Round about, with there backs to the wall, were seated fiftie or

sixtie Beglerbegs, Sultans and Chawns, who sit like so many Statues,
rather then liuing men. The Ganymed Boyes goe vp and downe with
flaggons of wine, and fill to those that couet it.
The day before this Ceremony, the King rode to hunt the Tygre,
accompanied only with two hundred Women, his Wiues and
Concubines, most of them were attired like couragious Amazons,
with Semiter, Bow and Arrowes, the Eunuchs riding abroad to prohibit
any to come in view of them, the penaltie is no lesse then losse
of life, a deare price for Nouelties.
And though for the most part, when the King is in a Progresse,
he has sometimes ten thousand, other times twentie thousand Cozelbashawes,
or Souldiers of best reckoning, yet at our being then at
Court, two thousand was the most, then attending him.
I will relate his seuere iustice, acted at our being in Hyrcania, a
poore man who had trauelled from Cabull in India a place though
belonging to the Mogol, yet Candahor and much of Arachosia conioyning
it, is wonne from them by the Persian) this poore man after so
long a iourney, got to the Court, and the weather being very sulphurous,
affected rather the grasse to sleepe on then the Towne, tis
so pestered with Musketoes, Flyes and other vermine, his businesse
was not much, yet had better, beene none at all.
It was his ill fate, to be a sleepe, as old Abbas was going a hunting
within the path, the King saw him not, but his pamperd horse startled
at him, whereat immediatly the King sent a broad Arrow into the
poore mans heart, and ere all his followers had past, the man was
kild a hundred times ouer, if so many Arrowes could haue forfeited
so many liues, in imitating the King, as if the deed were good and
commendable.
A Souldiers Wife abounding with more Lust then Loue, complaines
to the King, her Husband did not satisfie her, whereat hee
makes her be coupled to an Asinego, whose villany and lust tooke away
her life.
A Cozel-bash here presented him a Petition,The Kings crueltie. the writing did not
please him, he sends for the Clarke, cuts off his hand, and made the
Petitioner be almost drubd to death.
Two needie Knaues were brought afore him, and condemned for
stealing.
The King threatned them more for being ragged and lousie, there
by to disgrace his Court, then for the theft. And that they might die
neatlier then they liued, he causes new Coates to be put vpon them,
and forthwith commanded they should be carried out of Towne
and impaled vpon two stakes, thrust through their fundaments.
He has other tortures, as poysons, strangling with bow-strings,
men-eating Dogs (some of which the Merchants or Sea-men bring
out of England, and sell there) and men from their infancie educated

to Canibalisme, with many other tortures rather beseeming a bloudie
Tyrant, then so famous a King.
A Duke who is his Vice-roy for Hyrcania, seeing a Boy, whose
Father was poore (and vnder his command) against the Boyes will,
his parents knowledge and the Law of Nature, makes him a Sodomite
(which crying sinne, though licensed by their Alcoran, yet
force is not to be vsed, and therefore haue Ganymeds in each great
Citie tolerated) the Father of this wronged child prostrates himselfe
before the King, and acquaints him with that villany, the King seeing
sorrow and truth in the Peasants looke, demands of the Duke,
who then was sitting there, how true it was: his countenance bewrayes
him. The King hauing at that instant, a Knife in his hand,
giues it the poore Father and bids him Eunuchize him, punishing
those parts, that had offended. The Duke durst not startle or entercede
the Law of the Persian, neuer alters the poore man, executes, as
was enioyned him. The King though, continues his iurisdiction to
him, and has him yet, his obedient slaue or seruant. His Seraglio only
lost most by that bargaine.
The King by a Hyrcanian Lady (which Countri-woman the Beggoon
his mother also was, wife to Mahomet) had two sonnes, Ismaell
and another, Mirza. Ismaell died, hauing not attained twenty yeares,
and the yonger brother by right and law of birth and Nations then
became heire apparant to his dignitie and expectations.
Shaw Abbas his Father by his other Paramours had many children,
but this Mirza as endued with the prerogatiues of yeares and birthright,
preuailed more in his Fathers affection, and the establishment
of succession, then the other children, obtained by his affabilitie (a
vertue of especiall lustre and value with the Persian) courage, bountie,
experience in Armes and other Princely Qualities requisite for
the place he liued in, the sonne of such a father, and the report hee
aimed at, to beget loue and admiration amongst his friends, and terrour
with his enemies. Whereby hee got leaue at sundry times, to
command his Fathers ready Armies, men apt for action, and no longer
satisfied, then when employed, either to enrich themselues by
spoile or other aduantages of Warre and Fortune, and by whose skill
and his owne valour, he much enlarged the Persian Territories, and
got somewhat from the Mogull towards Candahor, from the Arabian
neere to Balsora, and the Tartar East of the Hyrcanian Sea. So that
this Mirzaes prowesse and good lucke became newes of ioy and sorrow
to the Persian and their enemies. His friends from secret welwishes
breake out into acclamations of prayses and extreme Desarts,
and in peculiar fancies eleuated him. Some commend his person,
some his excellencie and delight in armes, others his eloquence and
all his liberalitie and care. In a word they esteemed him without
comparison, and left nothing vnsaid or vndone that could adde either

honour or contentment to him, who for all this (not like our
common spirits, who vpon small aduancement or other attributes
deifie themselues and suppose all such additions tributary, and vnder
their deseruings) stood immoueable, and sorry they accounted him
so worthy, in modestie blaming them for doubling his merits, and accusing
himselfe of hypocrisie and neglect, to suffer his Acts to be so
gilded, and least hee might eclypse the King his Father either in his
splendour or content.
And to say truth, his popularitie begot iealousie and contempt in
the King his Father, who out of his suspitious nature, grounded on
Tyrannie, his feare of the Mirzaes ambitious designes, the inconstancie
of the Persians, and irritations of some Cabinet Counsellours (enemies
to the Prince) about him, beganne to feare him and desirous
(though his sonne) to haue him strangled, thus we see how cruell iealousie
is, more cruell then the Graue, and the bloud-thirstie degenerating
of Tyrants and cruell men from grace, who as they are by
Gods Soueraigne pleasure seated in more eminencie then others, to
defend and relieue the distrest and wel-deseruing, turne it into pride
and crueltie, diuiding mercie and iustice who delight each other, and
such appeares in this old Abbas, that so farre forgot repentance, for
murthering his eldest brother Emir-hamze-mirza, a Prince so compleatly
valiant, victorious, and each way worthy, that though the
Turkes (whose scourge he euer was like another Scanderbeg) reioyced
at it, yet it drew flouds of teares and incessant lamentations from
the Persians, for the vntimely and treacherous downfall, of such a
hopefull, beautifull, and delightfull Cedar, and in memory of whom
(being all and the vtmost reuenge they durst to expiate) they solemnized
his Funerals with annuall teares, and for many yeares exceedingly
hated his Fratricide Abbas, then ruling ouer them and who
by all acts of conquest against their aduersaries, and indulgence for
their safeties laboured his ingratiating into their loue, and by a counterfeit
deploring what had beene perpetrated, at length obtained it:
the thought of this, and posting his pur-blind Father into Paradice,
in time forgotten, especially seeing they enioyed their seuerall pleasures
in like sort as anciently, and that by Shaugh Abbas his victories
against the Turke and Tartars, they became redoubted and feared in
most of Asia. So that for many yeares hee gouerned fortunate and
iustly, beloued and honoured, and neuer at a higher pitch attained
it, then now, crowning his hostile employments by the victory and
brauery of his sonne the admired Mirza (himselfe tumbling in wanton
pleasures and varietie of delights.)
The Prince in some attempts into Arabia, heard of, saw, admired,
and after some reciprocall fauours, espouses an Arabian Princesse to
his Wife, a Ladie (if report of a Persian man of note, be worth the
crediting) endowed with such gifts and ornaments of minde, birth,

beautie and loyaltie, as parelleld the best their liuing, and enstiled
the possessor rich and happy. And the rather, because without exceptions,
in the quarrelsome opinions of the King his father.
By this Lady he had two children, Soffie and Fatyma: both accounted
of, by Parents and Grandsire, and pleasing to the Persians,
who honour the issue of such as descend from Ancestors of courage,
high birth, beautie and the like, all which flowed into these two
Princes.
All terrene ioyes are mixt with discontent and periods, and old
Abbas, day by day increasing his iealousie and enuie to his sonne,
intends to hinder his further progresse into glory or other happines*
he durst not banish him, least hee should conuert his rage, to affront
his vnnaturall Father, and when he thought of killing him by treason
in his Army (the innocent Prince at that time, sweating in bloud
to redeeme the honour of his Countrimen against the Turke) that
frighted him, lest when his cruelty disclosed it selfe, vpon apprehension
of the murderer, his men in reuenge and detestation of his Tyranny
might rebell, or ioyning with the enemie, to his irreparable
losse of purse and honour. So that he resolued to execute him at the
Court, when farre from friends and where he could best faine an inuented
crime, so without more procrastinations, he sends a shooter
or footman to him, and (all excuses set aside) to post to Court:
where the businesse should then be told him.
The Prince, to forfet their amazement and ill opinion of him, declares
the message and assures them of his flying speed thither and
backe againe, and without more ceremonie hastens to receiue instead
of thankes, destruction.
His arriuall was quickly knowne to his father Abbas, who sends
him word he was not very well, and desired him to repose where
they should carry him, and ere long hee would come and welcome
him.
The credulous Prince, without any suspect of treachery (inuincible
signes of honestie and a sincere mind) followes the man appointed
to shew his lodging, whereinto, (so soone as that seruant was departed)
enters at a trap-doore, seuen great Villaines, deafe and
dumbe, armed with Bow-strings and bloudie minds, whose habit and
weapons without other Interpreters, assured the amazed Prince
that he was betrayed, and sealed to destruction. If oratorie or other
submissiue signes of entreatie could haue begot pitie or intermission
from these hel-hounds, but only till he knew the cause of this vnnaturall
proiect, he had affoorded it, but knowing they were deafe in
bodie and soule, inflamed with rage and sorrow, that hee wanted a
Sword or other Weapon to defend himselfe, hee flew vpon them
all, one after another, offending them by rare force and agilitie, a
long time preuenting the noozes to fasten on him, which they threw

incessantly towards his necke, presenting pale death in their terrible
twangs, and armed with integritie and innocence, ere they could
strangle him, he sent three of them to the Deuill, to receiue their
recompence, the other foure seeing their danger, re-enforced their
actions, and at last fastned on him, who quite spent with rage and opposals,
fell downe dead, and as crauing a cessation of that horrible
fight, and that they would not equallize him in the manner of his
death, to abiect Dogs. But these Canibals continued their cruell
cowardize both dead and liuing, and had surely finisht their villany,
had not the King then entred and preuented them (who some say,
was a secret spectator of this vnparalleld barbarisme) hee forthwith,
commands his tired armes to be pinnioned, and ere he had fully recouered
his sences, makes a hot flaming steele be drawne afore his
eyes, which though giuing no great paine, yet tooke away his eyesight:
forbidding him for euer any more sight of what hee loued,
wife, children, friends, and endeared Souldiers. And by this excessiue
impietie, Asia lost her chiefest Iewell, Mars his Darling, and
Persia her incomparable treasure, now vndone, blind, imprisoned,
and hopelesse of any ioy or honour euer after.
This could not be so secretly committed, but in time, all Persia
knew it, and lamented it with teares for him, and imprecations of
all mischiefe vpon the Authours of it: his Army were of long time
implacable, but when they saw it was past remedie, and the King
would in time, serue them with like sawce, if they continued refractorie,
they retired, and buried in murmure and forced silence, what
their hearts fully and freely discourst vpon.
So soone as the blinded Prince, perceiued himselfe imprisoned
(which hee saw with the eyes of griefe and vnderstanding) hee was
more then half-distracted, exclaimed vpon his bloudie father, curst
his birth-day, and vowed the Kings destruction and his Fauourites,
if it lay in his power to see or touch them: but when he cald to mind
his impossible desires, he roared hideously, and in a word, exprest all
true symptomes of madnesse and desire of reuenge, till his afflicted
Kinsmen and companions, flockt about him, and dictated patience:
which they bettered, by relating their owne quondam greatnesse in
bloud and offices, till by the like dislike and mutabilitie of Shaw Abbas
his humours, they were digraded, trod vpon, mutilated, some
their eyes put out, some their eares and noses cut off, and others in
other members, here captiued and almost famished.
In those discontented times, the King mouing like Saturne in the
highest Orbe, deliciously tooke his pleasure, and on all sides stood
free and firme against stormes or other accidentall causes, able to
withstand his quiet.
He surfeited in varietie of pleasures, but none tooke him so much
as the beautie and pretie discourse he obserued in Fatyma (daughter

to his blinded and enraged sonne) which Ladie, though not seuen
yeares old, in such sort inchanted doting Abbas, that nothing rellisht
well without Fatyma, none gaue him mirth, saue Fatyma, and if inraged
against any, no better reconcilement then by Fatyma, so that
Court and Kingdome wondred at his loue to this wittie Ladie his
beloued grand-child, whom when aged two yeares more, he purposed
a marriage with an Arabian King.
Nor had King Abbas all the benefit of this little Lady, for though
she had all possible delight and pleasure at the Court: yet neglected
she no part of dutie, but came very oft into the Cittadell to ioy her
father and releeue his wants; for that none saue shee, durst aske the
King for their allowances, without apparant danger of displeasure
and life withall, if it hapned he was displeased, though in other matters,
whereby the royall (but most miserable) prisoners at sometimes
were neere famished, none daring to releeue them, lest the iealous
King might haue them in suspition.
Thus by this good Lady gained they what formerly they pined
for, euen food and comfort. But as the Deuill is neuer fild with villany,
bloud, or horrour, so he exasperates this blinded Prince her father
to a strange reuenge (sonne of a father both vnnaturall) for thirsting
after it though neuer so terrible, in a Deuillish apprehension, hearing
of his fathers immoderate ioy and pleasure hee tooke in Fatyma,
whom too (reuenge excepted which whirld him headlong to perdition)
he affected exceedingly the law of Nature, (for wee name not
grace in these Catastrophes) her infinite deseruings, as loded with
admirable beautie, a delicate spirit, sweet behauiour and charitable
acts surpassing child-hood, forced him to conceiue well of her, and
wish he had some meanes to be reuenged, but this word reuenge he
still harpt vpon: it was his food, rayment, sleepe and chiefe delight,
for all the rest were comprehended in bloud-thirstinesse. Which
wicked designe at length he accomplishes, for one time when his sad
Wife and sonne were sitting by him, prettie Fatyma came in with
reliefe vnto her father, and by all actions of loue and dutie to shew
her selfe obedient, such time (cursed time) as this young Princesse
plaid about him, the Prince called her, who readily came to be made
much of, but see a horred entertainment, for in stead of loue and
kindnesse, with admirable celeritie and rage, grasping her tender
necke with his strong and wrathfull hands, whirli^g her about, ere
shee could begge for pittie or helpe, the cruell father threw starke
dead vpon the floore his daughter Fatyma, and in her the ioy of parents,
excessiue delight of the aged King, and sole ornament and
comfort of all that Kingdome: the poore Princesse strugled and
cried out against him, that it was Fatyma, little thinking, hee therefore
kild her, because Fatyma. But hee hearing his sonne Soffie was
there too, in blind sort pursued him, who to his good fortune escape

downe staires, and some yeares after at his Grand-sires death, was
crowned King of Persia at our comming thence.
So soone as old King Abbas heard of this sad accident, hee fell into
such passions of rage and sorrow, that each man feared he would become
his owne Executioner: and though many pittied him and
were sorry for the cause, yet none durst comfort hm, fearing his
impatient nature, but left it to time and the Kings owne courage and
prouidence to mitigate his dolours.
Yet, to expresse how ill he tooke so foule a murther (hypocritically
masquing his former cruelties) sends threats of terrible satisfactions,
as famine, strapadoes and other punishments to the inraged
Prince his Sonne. Who, by the Messinger retuned his father many
curses, hopes of better reuenge and wishes of ten thousand miseries
to fall vpon him, and in this cholloricke and melancholy
temper he spent two sad dayes, and in the third gaue a period to
his miseries in this World, by supping a delighted cup of extreame
poyson, and when his death was told the King, he commanded some
Noble men to see him buried, but not where harmelesse Fatyma
was entombed.
The sad Princesse his wife, surfeiting with sorrow and discontent
mewed her selfe vp, and since that time has seldome beene seene to
any, so that the certaintie of her life is doubtfull vnto many. Except
now her sonne Soffie-Shaw, (succeeding his royall Grandsire Abbas,
in the Persian dignitie, and crowned at our comming thence) hath
since disswaded her from that solitary and vnfitting life, and to afford
her some ioy then, rather then for euer to liue without it.
But of what courage, ingenuitie, or inclination King Soffie shewes
himselfe, I cannot giue the Reader satisfaction in, in that we parted
thence, iust at his Coronation, and his yeares cannot yet beget discretion
in full measure (being not aboue fifteene) but it appeares
partly* that he is truly of the Abasian pedigree,Mahomet the Great Fauourite beheaded, and the Beglerbeg of Shir^^. for so soone as he got
securitie of the Diademe, hee cut off Mahomet-ally-begs head (his
Grand-fathers only Fauourite) to be heire to his estate, and to content
his Guardian Emangoly Chaw^, Duke of Shiras, and since has
shewed his Guardian such another curtesie, Anno 1631. by making
headlesse the Beglerbeg his eldest sonne, vpon small ground of reason,
except to beget terrour in other his high-minded subiects.
The beginning of Iune the King departed Asharaffe, by the straits
of Mozendram, going to Cazbeen, where hee bid our Ambassadour
meet him for his dispatch.
Hee sent vs another way by Mount Taurus, that wee might see the
rest of Hircania the better.
Sir Robert Sherley left vs awhile, and trauelled to the Court in
company of a Georgian Ambassadour, and at this time an Ambassador
from the Tartar, tooke his leaue and departed home by Samarch^nd.

From Asharaffe, wee rode to Farrabaut (into which wee entred
vpon Whitsunday) a Citie extending to the Sea of Bacu, Hyrcan or
Caspian Sea.






A Description of Farrabaut, and the
Caspian Sea.
FArrabat or (Baut) lies one mile from the Caspian Sea, it is the
best Towne for beautie, greatnes and wealth in the Kingdome
of Hircani^.
Tis watered with a streame of fortie paces broad, which arising
from Mount Taurus, here embowels it selfe into that Sea, it abounds
with fish of most sorts, and is furnished with a few little Canoes
or Boats made of one Tree, and is capable to receiue eight men
in faire weather, in this Riuer are some long, deepe prams, sowed
together with hempe and cord (but vnpitcht or calkt.) In these the
Muscouian Merchants, saile downe Volga, ouer the Caspian Sea, and
arriue at Farrabaut, to traffique for raw silkes, which they transport
to Mosco, and through Russia. These ships ordinarily come thither
in March and returne in Iuly, so that with a faire winde from Farrabaut,
they doe crosse the Sea, and get to Astraoan in eight or ten
dayes saile.
Farrabaut glories aswell in her two large and beautifull Buzzars,
and fragrant Gardens, as in a sumptuous Palace of the Kings, seated

neere the riuer at the North end of that Citie, the Court and shades
of pleasant trees affoord delight from each Chamber in the House,
the roomes are vniforme, three of them especially rich in furniture,
the ground laid with Crimson Veluet, stuft with Downe, the Casements
of broad cleere Muscouian glasse^ the top richly imbost with
Gold, the sides all Mirrours or Looking-glasses. And these Chambers
are his retiring parts for recreation with his Concubines, other
Chambers in this Palace, are wrought with Pictures of vile and vnseemely
pastimes, better forgot then memorized.
From thence we trauelled to a Towne called Chacoporo, twelue
miles from Farraba^t, feated vpon the Caspian Sea, it has a Riuer a
stone cast ouer, which the people say is eleuen moneths fresh and
one extreame salt. Next night we lay in Bar^rushdee, a Towne both
great and happy, in wood and water, but has no wine, the reason is,
the Law there takes away his life that drinkes any, this is from the
last twelue miles:
Next night we got to a pleasant Towne cald Omoall, seated at the
foot of Mount Taurus.


A Description of Omoall.
OMoall is a Citie built vnder the North side of the Imperious
Mountaine Taurus, has three thousand houses, and those
not builded in the meanest fashion. Tis inhabited by diuers
Nations, Armenians, Georgians, Iewes, Persians, Hircans, Curdies,
Taurisians and others whereby seuen seuerall Languages are spoken
in this Citie.
The place is fruitfull and blessed, aswell in her present prosperity
as antique greatnesse, shee was anciently cald Nabarca, and famoused
for a dreaming Oracle, long time of diuine Aesteam among
them. In which age it was the Metropolis of that Kingdome, to this
houre testified by her ruines about her, howbeit as yet she excels in
the rarenesse of a Castle (second to none about her) which besides
the well composed Architecture, affoording no small pleasure to the
eye, it has sweet Gardens, repleat with fragrant flowres and choisest
fruits. And for her defence is inclosed by a deepe trench, which fild
with water yeelds aswell profit as defence.
Close by is a Church or Mosque, in which lie intombed foure hundred
fortie foure Princes and Prophets of that Kingdome, many of
whose Tombes yeeld admiration to the beholders, principally that
of Meer Agowmaden, to whose adored Shrine are daily offered serious
Deuotions; at my entrance I found twenty ancient well apparelled

Arabians, close by Prince Agoomadens Graue, set round with
each an Arabian Booke before him, out of which with great Modesty
and wel-tuned Songs they celebrated to those dead Princes, a
long continued lamentation, wherein they were so serious, that
though they saw me, they continued their dolours till the end, and
then very curteously arose and bid me welcome, shewing mee all I
desired in their Temple.
The people are very courteous and the women beautified with complement
and daintie feature: one day, when the weather was exceeding
hot, I went to the water-side (neere the bridge ouer which the
night before we entred the Citie) where thinking by helpe of many
Popler-trees to shade my selfe from outragious Phaeton, seuen or
eight beauteous (but not bashfull) Damozels suddenly, naked, came
forth of the riuer to admire my habit, hauing neuer seene any European
there before, some wonders at my clothes, some my spurres, o^thers
my haire (differing from the mode of that Nation) by which I
became iealous of their honesty and left them, but by enquiry I perceiued,
it was an affected nouelty, and when the men (such time vsually
as the sonne, is in his Meridian) goe to sleepe, the women
then enioy the riuer, and coole their heate, in both kinds too much
abounding there.
Their habit is only a smocke of Callico Lawne, wrought at hands
necke and skirts, with silke and gold.
From Omoall, wee roade to a place cald Larry-Iohn, the distance
thirty miles, at which Towne, ends the Kingdome of Hircania, and
the entrance to Mount Taurus takes beginning.


Mount Taurus.
OVr journey lay sometimes through inhospitable Straits, other
times ouer most stupendious Hils, the breadth from
one side to another neere fifty English miles, the length
fifteene hundred, towring in a ledge of Hils from Armenia vnto India:
indeed after two dayes ascent we got so high, that we might see
the middle Region vnder vs, and we involued in it.
But the height did not so amate vs, as the danger of descending,
the path was so vneuen and craggy, and the Rockes cut so vnskilfully,
that great heed must be taken in the treading, or a terrible downfall
into a bottomlesse Lake will threaten vs.
Tradition tels vs that Prometheus is chained here, his heart is
gnawed by a Vulture, his fault only for stealing fire from Iupiter, the
Allegory is familiar. Hence wee passe on to a Village cald Ryna,

where is a Castle so built, vpon the best aduantages of art and nature
that it seemes inuincible; aboue, it wants no ground for benefit and
resistance, helped with Gardens, flowres, and fruits, and is most happy
in a Riuolet of pure water, which pleasantly and plentifully
streames through the Castle into the bottome.
In this place, fiue and twenty yeares agoe ruled a King Meleck Bahaman
by name, who commanded like another Pluto, through these
Hils and Dales in Taurus, a Prince though confined to small limits,
and forced with great cost and care to maintaine his Royalties against
the Tartar and Persian, his great and quarrelsome Neighbours,
yet such was his good fortune, his policie, valour and loue vnto his
subiects, that though often inuaded and by many Princes, hee stood
secure, and liued to see the r^ine and downfall of many, his late enemies.
His only ayme tending to preserue, what his Predecessours
had made him heire to, and that his gray haires might goe in peace
to an eternall Dormitory.
Thus thought Bahaman, and added his endeuours to preserue his
thoughts. But Abbas the Persian and victorious King, whose resolutions
were all for conquest, whose doings were euer turbulent, and
whose aspiring conceits most wonderfull: In his returne from the
conquest of Mozendram (or Hyrcania) which he got by perswasion
more then force, and by helpe of his Herians and Ouz-beg Tartars,
resolues to be no longer bearded by this mountaynous Prince, who
from his dwellings could not only view farre into either Kingdomes
Mozendram and Sheirvan, but thereby tooke opportunitie to ransacke
his Carrauans, anticipate his progresse to the Caspian Sea, and
turne those Riuers into other sources, which springing from the
Taurisian Hils, flowed through the Persian Territories, and was the
sole delight and wealth of all those Kingdomes.
Now though these reasons were coniecturall, in that hee neuer
knew Prince Bahaman a deceitfull or grating Neighbour, yet Abbas
playd the Wolfe, who drinking at the Fountain-head, quarrels with
the harmeles Lambe for quenching his flagrant thirst at the streame
below. And impatient of longer tryall, conuocates a great Army of
Timariots and Coozel-bashaes, ouer whom hee appoints Methiculi-Chawn
and some other expert Warriours, to see his designes succeed
with good hap and victory ouer those defenced Nations.
This could not be so secretly entended, but aged Bahaman heares
of his aymes and prouisions, at which though somewhat terrified.
In that his great yeares were more propense to ease then tumult,
yet that his faithfull people might not in any thing receiue discouragement
or cowardize from his example, whose interest and honour
was most, and most engaged: hee prouides as a common father for
them, and performes each act, requisite in a carefull and experienced
Souldier.

Hee plants Garrisons in places of defence and seruice, leaues naked
and destitute of all helpe his Countrey, lest the Persian Armie
might prey vpon it, and mewes himselfe, his Wife, two sonnes and
ten thousand men in this aforenamed Castle, stored with prouision
and victuals, sufficient for a fiue yeares siege against the Enemy.
The Persian Generall with thirtie thousand men, hasten towards
Taurus, where at their first ascent, they were troubled by some
Mountayners, set their purposely by King Bahaman, these with
Darts, and rowling stones vpon them, for some time endamaged
the Persian, but could not preuent their resolued passages: and after
some small skirmishes, encampt themselues before this Castle, hauing
heard by some prisoners, that Melech Bahaman, the two Princes
and force of all the Kingdome was there included.
Methiculi-beg, when he had well viewed this inaccessible Fortresse,
halfe despayred of subduing him, for besides the strength of men
and wals, he saw it was impregnable, such was the great height of the
Castle and the perpendicular ascent, two mayne defences wherewith
nature and industry had graced it.
Some attempts he vsed but inualidable; to shoot Darts or Arrowes
at it, was one with ayming at the Moone. Some small shot they had,
but too weake to penetrate Rockes, and great Ordnance (which
only was auailable) they had not, wherewith either to affright or
batter them.
So after many tedious brauadoes (wherein the Persian receiued
stones for their arrogancy) the Generall (not daring to returne without
the victory) finding force nor patience of any value, turnes Machiauillian.
He summons them aboue to parley with him, which being granted
by his Herald he presents him many protestations of loue and desire
of friendship, that his Warre was grounded only to satisfie Shaw
Abbas, who had sworne to be reuenged vpon them, for offering in
old times some hostile affronts vnto poore passengers, and to preuent
his conuerting the Riuers other wayes then hee enjoyed them,
that seeing his surmises were without true ground or reason, hee
saw no obstacle, that ought to forbid a new league of peace and vnitie,
and to strengthen his Ambassage, that it might shadow truth, and
beget beliefe the readier, presents the aged King with Tulipants, Semiters,
Pearles and some other inticing Iewels, withall entreates
him to come downe and taste a Banquet, swearing by Mortis Ally and
King Abbas heads, by Paradice and the eight Orbes, that he should
returne in safety, and he most desired it, that some Articles of agreement
might ensue their parley.
The King (who euer affected peace) heares his messages, receiues
his presents, and becomes too credulous of the Persians honestie, his
Wife and Sonnes disswade him from it, tell him examples of their

hypocrisie, and by many wayes seeke to diuert his iourney, but neither
those, nor the teares his Souldiers showred to begge his stay,
(vowing to mayntayne the defence, to the last man) could hinder
his destiny, but downe he goes, and finds the Generall ready to embrace
him, leads him to his Tent, bestowes a Banquet on him, and
at night imprisons him, regarding neither his vow, honour, nor ingagement.
Meleck Bahaman, perceiues the losse of his liberty when past recouery,
rememorizes his sonnes aduice and teares shed by his loyall
subiects to diuert him, which now hee resents and tearmes Elegiac.
And in these fruitlesse sorrowes, the Persian Generall summons
the youthfull Princes to descend, if they respected the addition of
new honours to themselues, a period to this warre, and (which was
most) security and life to their indulgent King and Father, all which
by discord, and denying to come downe would be denied them,
be an infallible Theame of endlesse troubles, and beget an eternall
monument of shame to their posterity.
The two Princes considerately first demanded their imprisoned
father, and then they might worthily credit the Persian, otherwise
he might iudge them, worse then Ideots, the villany and breach of
promise towards their Soueraigne, being so true and fresh amongst
them. They might aswell desire the Castle and other Royalties, as
demand the Owners of them, and by whom subsisting, other answer
they would make none, this excepted, that the King of Persiaes ill-grounded
ambition would neuer prosper, that though of long time
he had politely auoided the Epethite of a Tyrant. This would rub afresh
his former injustice and anatomize him, so cleerely, that all Asia,
would not only suspect him, but account him odious, that all men
might see apparantly his auarice, who commanding ouer many and
fruitfull Prouinces, could not be contented, without subjugating a
Nation, neuer wronging him, a King whose Ante-cessours had for
more ages gouerned Larry Ioon. Then the posterity of Ismael had
done Persia* and a Countrey so cold and barren, that more then title,
the Persian could not make any vse of nor benefit of addition, saue
ostentation.
When these words were rehearsed to the Generall, hee was mad
with anger, and (without more Ceremony) inuites them from their
Castle, to view their Fathers head off. They resolutely bid him doe
as pleased him, and remember, that murther was not excused in their
Alcoran.
This enraged the Generall more then the former, verily imagining
they would yeeld to any thing rather then the slaughter of
their King and Father.
Whereupon, he againe in vtmost rage and fury assaulted them, and
for a recompence of his haste receiued, besides the losse of many

Cozel-bashes, a plaine protest from his men, of returning homewards,
arguing that they had got the Countrey, that Shaw Abbas with more
benefit and credit could imploy them against the Turke or Indian,
that Meleck was with them, and by his perswasions might recouer it,
without battaile, as he had lately done Larr, at any time.
The Generall by this was drawne into a twofold danger, if he dissented
from their humours, he knew all past was to no purpose, and
would inferre dishonour to his Master. On the other side, if hee returned
without victory, hee knew his head should off: so in great
anguish, he first releases Meleck Bahaman, assures him, hee vsed this
discourtesie but to try him, that if hee pleased hee should safely returne
againe or stay with him, where he should possesse all content
and honour possible. That hee was sent for by the King: and had
order to compound this difference: he desired the Princes his sonnes
to descend and to articulate, or let him goe vp and their seale an agreement,
but that he judged vnworthy his good meaning, who
thereby might be thought a Spy: with which discourse, the olde
King was so ouer-joyed, that he referd the choice vnto the Generall,
which hapned as he aymed at, and so without delay desires the
Princes to come downe.
A Messenger inuites them to it, assures them of King Bahamans
welfare, deliuers them his doting letters and perswasions: enterlaces
these with Piscashes or gifts of worth, and shewes them a pretended
Copy of the easie Articles.
The poore and wel-nigh distracted Princes, knew not what to do,
on the one side their refusall might cost the King his life, and irritate
the Persian to further mischiefe, on the other, their Discent, might
bring deceit, distraction and losse of life and liberty not only to the
King and Princes, but to all those loyall subjects pent aboue, and
who vndoubtedly after them must to the shambles.
They argued long time too and fro, and though the Souldiers
disswaded them, yet the Queene, to enjoy her Husband prouoked
them downe. In obedience to whom, and confidence in the Generals
oaths and promises, they sorrowfully forsake the Castle, and are
securely guarded to the Tents, where they feasted, and vpon sight of
their beloued Lord and Father, had noble entertainment from the
Generall.
But when these three were blessing their good destiny, smiling
one vpon another, (the Generall then in company) at sight of a priuate
token, three Cozel-hashawes standing by, in an instant whipt off
all their heads, with their slicing Shamsheers or Semiters, and ere it
was divulged abroad,The King and two Princes treacherously murdered. by counterfeit seales and signes, made them aboue,
descend and yeeld the Castle, some of which receiued destruction,
others mercy. By this detested policie the Persian got the

Soueraigntie, and yoakt in tyranny this late thought indomitable
Nation.
Such was the end of Meleck Bahaman, and two hopefull Princes,
forgetfull of Warres stratagems, and how Aladules King of Anti-Taurus,
for playing fast and loose with Seylim the first Emperour of
the Turkes, in the end, crediting their promises, gaue a like period
to his life and Kingdome.
Opposite to the Castle is erected the Sepulchre of Maleck Bahamans
beloued Queene, in sight of passengers, tis of foure Aequilaterall
squares, eleuated eight yards high of stone, and playstered with
white, very apparant and comely.
A mile higher, we climed vp with much difficultie, to the top of
the high Peake of Damoan, whose top like a Sugar-loafe is viewed
aboue all the aspiring Hils, on those defatigating ledges, and from
whence we saw the Caspian Sea, though a hundred an eighty miles
distant; tis aboue composed of Sulphur, which makes it in the
night sparkle as does Vesuvius, tis so offensiue to mount vp, that you
cannot doe it without a Nose-gay of strong Garlicke, and hence all
Persia and Chaldea has their Brimstone.
Here are famo^s hot-baths, three of which are walled about, and
two open, to which resort decrepit and vnsound people from afarre
in mightie multitudes.
Now whither this high Peake be denominated from the Towne
of Damoan fiue leagues distant, or the Towne from it, I cannot argue.
But this is so, that Damoan in their Language signifies a second
Plantation, from which, and the height of those Hils, with the vncertaine
place of the first Seminary from Armenia, the Iewes here inhabiting,
say Noahs Arke there rested, and though the Zone be good,
the Country healthy, the Vines excellent, and the name point at it,
yet I referre my selfe here to the Iudicious, it contents me only to
recite the Iewes opinions.
Here the Hils conioyne of old cald Amanus, Niphates, Choatras,
Zagrius, Oronti, Parathoatras, and which inuironed the Territories
of Ragiana and Sygriana.
Hence also run those titles of people, the Saces, the Saeres, the
Messagetes, the Taburaei, the Suebi, and the Alinorzi: which I suppose
only Dukedomes, confining Hyrcania and Sacazini.
On the other side of Damoan is the Towne of that Persian Merchant
that died in England 1625, whose sonne Mahomet died in our
trauaile. The Towne is called Noua, and has a hundred Families
within it. A youth his other sonne, hearing of our passing by, accompanied
with all his kindred (who in these parts loue one another
dearely) came to meete vs; apparrelled in a long Roabe of cloth of
Gold, and on his head a Shash or Tulipant of Silke and Gold, hee

gaue vs a Banquet, and thence we rode to Damoan, where descending
a high mount, we rode by a large blacke Tent, in which were
about thirty women, and so many Taurisian men, to solemnize a
Wedding, the Bride was ten yeares old and beautifull, the man thirty,
in condition a very Carle, and in his visage vgly some of the bridemaids
came out vnto vs, and after a Sallam or Congee began a Morisko,
their faces, hands, and feet painted with flowres, Castles, and
Birds, their legs chained with voluntary fetters of brasse and siluer,
with such they performed the dance of Bac^hus, by inquiry wee
found these were pastorall, and in their Genealogy from the Tartars,
whose vagrant habitacles, are no where permanent: in that
part where those Nomades honour their discent, liue those Nations
cald by Authenticks, Essedones, Scytho-Tauri, Gryphaei and the Tapereni,
as also the Orgasi, Erymni, Norozbei, Nonossi, and the Catagi, placed
sometimes twixt Taurus and the Riuer Iaxartes.
And more North towards Candahors and Arachozia, are accounted
dwellers, the Galactophagi, Azpisty, Tabureni, or Thabreni, Samnitij,
Pamardi, and others, whose strange names would rather burthen, then
profit the Readers memory.


Damoan.
DAmoan, is a Towne well knowne among the Persians, more
for its limiting of Media, then other Rarities, it shewes not
more then two hundred houses, and those few, are meane
and most inhabited by hatefull Iewes, (whom the Persians name Iehuds
this Towne is seated vnder the South end of Taurus, and has
a Buzzar aloft, but scarce worth the climbing too, vnlesse to buy
Wine, or Fruits, both which there are valuable.
Media, now called Sheirvan (or milkie Plaine) is by some deriued
from Madai, third sonne of Iaphet, sonne of Noah, others from Medeus
sonne of Iason and Medaea, daughter of King Aeta, tis bounded
on the North with the mountaine Taurus, on the South with Parthia,
hath to East Aria or Sablestam, and West Armenia minor, or
part of Georgia.
It was a rich and puissant Countrey in the Worlds infancy, but
now whither by the al-consuming hand of Warre (here euer acting)
or by the Iustice of God, for massacring so many good Christians in
Chozroes time, tis now a very barren and miserable kingdome, chiefly
if you compare it with our Phoenix great Brittaine, who in her
selfe exceeds, all the best compacted riches or pleasures, of these Asiaticall
Empires.
Media was first subiected by that simple husband of Semiramis,
Ninus, who liued in the age from Adams Creation, Anno 1900. hee
was sonne of Belus, by some reputed Iupiter Babylonicus, a man deified
by the Pagans of those times by name of Bell and Baal.
This Belus was sonne of the great Hunter Nimrod, who was the
only founder-master of that monster Babell, the Assyrians (which
name they tooke from Ashur, second sonne of Shem) haue called
Nimrod, by other names, but is chiefly taken for Saturnus of Babylon,
sixt sonne of Chush, Chams eldest sonne, from whom the Sun-burnt
Aethiopians haue a Pettigree and curse withall. His Descent is this,
Noah had Cham father of Chush, (begot, as some say, in the Arke) father
of Nimrod, father of Baladan or Belus) father of Berodach, of
whom descended Nebuchadnezzar, father of Euilmeredoch, father of
Belshazzer, who according to Daniels Prophecie was the last of his
Family in the Empire, the Medes and Persians falling from his rule
into the hands of that great Warriour Darius sirnmed Medus, Anno
Mundi 3426. called by some Cyaxares secuudus, and Grand-child to
the first, his Daughter and Heire was married to Cyrus the Fortunate,
who after the ouerthrow of the Babylonian Balthazer or Belshazzer,
and that Monarchie, slue Astyages, by which hee became
Lord of Persia and the Medes. This is he so famoused by Xenophon,
and is father to that magnificent Cambyses, of whom I spoke in the
description of Persae-polis.
I will now speake of this kingdome, which I haue said is barren,
though if we may credit Pius the Second, and other Writers of this
place, one pastue has heretofore nourisht fifty thousand Mares. They
write of the Oyle Medicum, which doubles its flame in water of
Naphta and some other Ceremonies. I will adde the description of
the Villages and Cities which haue beene badly done by some moderne
Authours, and leaue the beliefe of those other rarities, to some
more credulous.
The great Cities of Media, are Cazbeen, Tabris, or Tauris, Ardauil,
Tyroan, Cashan and Coom, whose seuerall descriptions truly
follow.
From Damoan we rode through Bomaheem into Tyroan, fiue and
twenty miles.


Tyroan.
THis City is scituate in the midst of a faire large Plaine, which
although inuironed in some parts, with Hils of stupendious
height, yet some wayes affoords an ample Horizon, tis within

the Kingdome of Media, Atropatia, and in the Prouince or Shire
of Sultania, a place famous for winds, and some ouerthrowes of late
giuen the Turkes, by the inraged Persian.
This Citie is now gouerned by a Duke, called Zenal-chon, a man
of more title then worth, as wee found there by his discourtesie
and entertainment.
This City is built of white Sun-burnt brickes, is watered with a
small streame, which runs in two parts through the Towne, and meloes
most of the Gardens and Groues within her, whereby shee
yeelds a thankfull tribute of sundry fruits. The Towne is most beautified,
by a vast Garden of the Kings, succinct with a great towred
mud-wall, larger then the circuit of the Citie.
It has a Buzzar or Market, which though diuided, shewes a combined
beauty in her separation.
The House where we lodged, ore-topping all the other, from its
Tarrases, I could view ouer all the City, each house top spred with
Carpets, wheron slept a man and his peculiar Seralio, some had three,
some sixe, others twelue female beauties sleeping by him. Twas indeed
rashly done of me to view them. Their Orders punish it, with
no lesse terror, then by shooting an Arrow into his braine that dares
to doe it.
Tyroan has a sweet though hot aire in the morning, but in the
Sunnes ambition, hot and fiery, shee has three thousand dwelling
Houses. In few of which are fewer, then a dozen people. Her Carrauans
lodge exceeds her Mosque, yet neither, of power to beget admiration
with the curious.





Thence we rode towards Taurus, the first night sleeping in Charah
a filthy Towne affoording no reliefe against the frying Sun and hot
sandy earth, both which afflicted vs. From Tyroan to Tauris is foure
good dayes iourney.


Tauris, or Ecbatane.
TAuris deriues her name from her seate; neere mountayne
Taurus is now a Citie both great and famous, yet incomparable
to what shee was in Ecbatans time. Her founder was
Deioces, by some called Arphaxad and Arbactus, Predecessor of the

valiant and victorious Phraartes, (liuing in the yeare 3300. from the
Creation) and sixt in succession from Arbaces, who Anno 3146. begun
the Median Dynasty.
Ecbatan was once in compasse fifteene miles, her wals seuenty
Cubits high and fiftie broad, adorned within by a gorgeous Palace
built of Cedars, the roofe studded and plated with burnisht Gold.
Tis distant from Hierusalem twelue hundred miles, and from
Babylon foure hundred.
Here the Prophet Daniel, built himselfe a stately Palace, which
remayned vndemolisht for many ages, and wherein for some Descents
lay buried the Median Kings, swaying in their successiue Dynasties.
Hither Tobias remoued from Niniuie to Raguel father to his wife,
where ere hee died hee heard of Niniuies destruction, by the great
Babylonian Monarch Nabuchodonozer at that time Gods Instrument
to fulfill his threatnings. Tobias at a hundred and twenty seuen yeares
old died here and had noble buriall.
Tauris, or Tabris, though builded from the others ruines, is
comparable to olde Ecbatan neither in beauty nor greatnesse, her
circuit now six miles at most, and some miles distant from her Antecessor.
Being placed by a Riuer, which some vnjustly cald Orontes, the
Hill Baronta shades her, and to the South shewes a large and pleasant
Plaine.
Tis well peopled and much resorted to for traffique, which makes
it famous through all Asia, but her fame is larger by a Garrison kept
there against the daring Turkes who too oft haue made this Citie, a
subiect of their bloudy cruelty.
Tis inferiour to Spawhawn and Cazbeen, in circuit, wealth, and
beauty it has a small mud wall, of little seruice, the houses are flat aboue
and built of Bricks dried in the Sunne, her Buzzar is inferiour
to some about her, her best ornament is a Garden, to the South-east,
which was planted by Shaw Tamas sonne to Izmael, and great great-Grand-^ire
to Abbas lately reigning.
This poore City has endured sundry violent stormes of war, wherby
though made more famous, she is lesse flourishing. Anno 1514.
twas ouerturned by Selymus the Grand Signior, and sixteene yeare
after by Solyman his Successour: when it was wholy ruined by the
insatiate Souldiers, who not only pillaged it, but made a Chaos of
those elaborate walkes and sweet Gardens planted by King Tamas,
which together with the Buzzar was set on fire.
But the greatest ransack and villany, was Anno 1585. by Ozman
the luxurious Bashaw and slaue of Amurath the Third, and groaned
vnder their subiection, till thirty yeares after by Emyr-hamzae-mirzey
eldest sonne of Mahomet the blinde (father of Abbas) it was relieued,

re-built, and regained from Turkish thraldome, and in memory
of which tyrannies, Abbas the Hemirs yonger brother and late
King, in few yeares following beat him out of Babylon, Bulsora, and
most of Mesopotamia.
Next night we lay in Sangurrabat, where we buried a ciuill Gentleman
Master Welflit our Comrade, vnder a broad-spreading-Chenor-tree,
and fixt a brazen Scroule ouer him, which spoke his name
and Nation.
Next night we lay in the open fields vnder a bespangled Canopie
the Firmament, and next in Shawdee (or the Kings Towne) a Towne,
none so couetous as to desire it: for if that Kingdome haue a purgatory,
so a conspiracie of loose and scalding sand, the burning Sun, and
vn-receiueable Cottages, can make; one there it is next day to
Cazbeen.


Cazbeen.
CAzbeen, is that City which of past ages was cald Arsatia, buile
by that famous Conquerour Arsaces, from whom the ensuing
Kings were cald Arsacidae, hee liued Anno Mundi 3720. and
was the first that laid the foundation of that Empire, in despight of
Seleu^us, sonne of Antiochus Theos King of Syria.
The North Pole is there eleuated thirty six degrees,Anno1517. Iewes Messias receiues them. fifteene minutes.
It was by Tamas sonne of Ismael, (the Iewes reputed Messias,
till they found him worse then Titus) made the Metropolis of his
Kingdomes (as Spawhawn by Abbas now) aswell for the commodiousnesse
of the place, as bordering the Turks, his detested enemies.
By interpretation it is (Exile) a phrase giuen of old vnto the Parthian.
By some tis thought to be that City Rages, whither Tobias
and the Angell Gabriel trauelled vnto the Parthians, to demand the
ten Talents (which is about two thousand pound of our money) his
father lent to Gabael sonne of Gabrias, nor am I ignorant, that many
imagine Edissa in Mesopotamia to be Rages, which cannot be, that Rages
was in Media and Edissa, is not aboue fiue hundred miles from Ierusalem,
no part of Media being so neere by many more miles.
It was after that cald Europus, by command of Nicannor, and lost
that name too, when other people came to conquer it.
Cazbeen is distant from the Caspian Sea, sixty fiue Farsangs, or a
hundred ninety fiue English miles. From Spawhawn two hundred and
ten miles. Tis seated in a faire euen place, no Hill of note in thirtie
miles affronts it, it has small quantity of wood or water, or such other
blessings, as make a City exquisite, only by the peoples industry, and

helpe of a small Brooke (scarce worth a name else-where) it produces
sundry hearbs and fruits: as Vines, Orenges, Lemons, Muske, and
Water-Melons, Plums, Pome-granads, Cheries, Beries, Figs, Apples,
Peares, Peaches, Apricocks, Pistachoes, Nuts, Walnuts, Almonds
(but no Dates except brought from farre) etc.
The compasse of this Citie is seuen miles: her Buzzarr is large
and pleasant (but not so regular as many are about her.)
The Kings House and Haram or Seraglio, are (neere the Market)
built of raw Bricks, trellized with carued Windowes, both painted
and varnished with blew, red and yellow, mixt with Arabique knots
and poesies of Gold and Azure. Afore his doore, is a great Tancke of
water made at our being there.
Mosques and Hummums or Baths (which the Turks call Bannias) there
are, resplendent with the Azure paint wherewith they are ceruleated;
for the other buildings, they content the inhabitans, but to the
affected Traueller yeeld small wonder or amazement.
The King of Pers^a got into Cazbeen two dayes afore vs.
At this time, forty Camels loaden with Tobacco, out of India,
came hither, which Mahomet-Alli-beg the Fauourite hearing, acquaints
the King with it, who commanded forth-with the Camelmen
to haue their noses and eares cut off, the forty load of Toback*
(as they call it, or Tewton) was put into a large earthen Pipe (the
ground) and fired, whose blacke vapour vpon free-cost, gaue the
whole City infernall incense, two whole dayes and nights together.
It seemes some late Edict had forbid it, and then tis death or as bad
as death to drinke it,Forty load of Tobaccovaporized. for he sometimes tolerates and forbids the same
thing three or foure times in two yeares as the humour pleases him.
Some Occurrents in Cazbeen are note-worthy, and may be excused,
if rehearsed, because obuious.
Mahomet Codoband (or pur-blind) King of Persia, was all his raigne
much troubled with the insolent attempts and brauadoes of the
Grand Signior Amurath the Third, sonne of Selym the Second, whose
tyrannies and ambition made him feared through Asia, entitling himselfe
in his Letter to the Polanders, God of the Earth, Gouernour of
the whole World, Messenger of God, and best seruant of Mahomet
his diuinest Prophet; adding to his Epithites such actions of warre
and good lucke, that his words vnto the simple seemed modest.
His three great Captaines (and to say truth, by whose sole valours
he became terrible) to the World: were Synan, Ferat and Mustapha
Bashawes, of which last I shall anon speake of, in a memorable matter,
hapning in this Citie.
I will first speake of the King of Persia (father of Abbas now reigning)
he was eldest sonne of Tamas King of Persia, who by a Georgian
Princesse had twelue Sonnes, Mahomet the first, Izmael the second,
Ayder-chawn the third, Solyman the fourth, Emangoli the fift,

Mamut the sixt, Mustapha-chawn the seuenth, Ali-chawn the eight,
Amet-chawn the ninth, Abraham the tenth, Hamze the eleuenth, and
Isma-chawn the twelfth.
Mahomet by reason of some imperfections in his body was thought
vnworthy (by his Father) to succeed him in his dignity, and thereupon
made knowne vnto his subjects, the great deseruings of his second
sonne Ismael, who at his fathers death lay at Cohac, twixt Cazbin
and Tauris, and vpon newes of the King his fathers death hasted to
Cazbeen, where he was joyfully receiued, both by the Sultans and his
virago sister, the Lady Periaconconna, whose loue to Izmael was more
then to her other Brethren, notwithstanding was much perplext
knowing her ingagements and promises to Ayder-chawn his yonger
brother, who also aymed at the Kingdome, and thought himselfe in
some possession, hauing had the Imperiall Crowne vpon his head
put their by his owne hands, such time as his noble Father lay a dying,
and in these doubts, foure dayes after, by meanes of Zal or Zenal-chawn
Duke of Tyroan his faithfull friend, had his desires. The
Crowne once more was set vpon his head and he proclaimed King,
but he enioyed it not aboue two dayes, for when he least suspected,
his head was strucke off, by his Vncle Sahamal-chawn, and throwne
in great contempt vnto the people,Prince Ayder slaine. as a iust recompence, for his ill-grounded
ambition.
The report of whose slaughter, came suddenly to Ismael his brother,
who without more feares or ceremonies, accounted himselfe
no lesse then King led to it by his Father will, his sisters desires, and
the peoples expectations.
But to omit nothing that might strengthen his hold, he comes to
Cazbeen,Eight Princes beheaded. where with wonderfull ioy and acclamation of the multitude
hee is saluted King, after which by example of the bloudy
Turkes, hee causes eight of his innocent brethren to be beheaded, all
that were in his power.
His elder brother Mahomet he aymed at, whose fight though dim,
yet in iudgement saw his danger, which happily he fled from, strengthening
himselfe by an assembly of his friends and kindred, who loued
him (for his inclinations and humours were good and tolerable)
and euery day his Army increased, into such hatred was Ismael falne
among his people, for that beside his fratricides and murther of
thousand others, he endeuoured all he could to apostatize their great
Prophet Mortis-Aly, affirming that Abubicher, Omer, and Ottoman
Successors to Mahomet at Mecha (the only hatefull men vnto all Persians)
were true Prophets, and to be preferred before Mortis Aly,
which report of his and others of like distast and sorrow to the people,
got him so much hatred with them, that they curst him deeply,
amongst whom his valiant sister Peria-con-Conna, confederating with
foure Sultans then in Cazbeen, Calil, Emyr, Mahumed, and Curchychans,

habited like foure Virgins, entred his Bed-chamber, and with a silken
halter strangled him, sending him to receiue his deserts for his vnnaturall
bloudy cruelties with his God Mahomet, whom he so fauoured.
This hapned in Cazbeen the foure and twentieth of Nouember
1577.
This Monster being taken away, Mahomet, by perswasion of Salmas-mirza,
his deere friend, accepts the Empire, thereby annihilating
the hopes and practices of Emyr-chawn and Peria-con-Conna (second of
them that murdred Ismael) and to be euen with his aspiring sister (who
had made away the two last Kings his brothers, and enterprised the
like against himselfe) gaue secret order to Prince Salmas, that hee
should without much noise enter the Citie, and by some meanes or
other, behead her, which accordingly he did and sent her head, with
the haire disheueld about her shoulders, vpon a Speares point, vnto
the King her brother, to the terrour and admiration of all men, especially
her complices, who thereupon fled, some into Georgia, and
others vnto Babylon.
Immediately after this (at the instigation of the false Armenian
Vstrefbeg) the Great Turke Amurath the Third sends Mustapha his
victorious Basha, with aboue a hundred thousand men, enters Media,
and in the Caldaran-fields was suddenly confronted by Sultan
Tokomac the King of Persiaes Generall, who very valiantly with
twenty thousand men assailed him, whereupon ensued a most bloudy
and furious battaile, in which the Turkes got the greatest losse,
and were disheartned to proceed further, sixe and thirty thousand
Turkes were slaine, and eight thousand Persians, with whose heads
(to terrifie the Persians further, and to make his losse seeme lesse) he
made a fortification. But this cruelty cost him deerely afterwards,
the same yeare (what against Tocomac and Emangoly-chawn and what
with passing Conac towards Hyrcania) he lost neere thirty thousand
men, and returning out of these parts with conceited conquest, lost
all he got by the valour of Arez-beg, Emangoly Chawn, and other Persian
Captaines his ancient enemies.
The Tartars (ancient friends vnto the Turkes) informed of Mustaphaes
retreat, and that his Garrisons were defeated by the Persians,
they descend in great troupes into Hyrcania, where they committed
many insolencies, and in Media sought to command the whole
Country.
But their hopes deceiued them, for staying to ioyne with Osman
Bassa, (left by Mustapha, to guard these Territories) they grew so secure,
that vnawares, Arezb^g with ten thousand Persians, routed a
great part of their forces, and had vtterly destroyed them, had not
their Captaine Abdilcheri, came so suddenly vpon Arez-chawn, that
in amazement the Persians fled, and Arez was sent Prisoner to Ozman

at Sumachia,Persian Generall hanged. who cruelly made him be hanged for his former victories
against them.
The news hereof came speedily to Mahomet the King of Persia,
who sorrowed for the losse of so good a Captaine, and thirsting for
reuenge, sends his victorious sonne (the braue Prince Emyr-hamzemirza)
with twelue thousand men, who from Cazbeen in nineteene
great dayes trauailes so furiously and hastily assailed the Tartars, that
first he recouered the Citie Erez, and massacred the bloudy Turkes,
there too confounding Caitas the Bassa and his companies, recouering
also the two hundred peeces of Artillery, wonne from them
formerly in the Reigne of Tamas King of Persia, which Ordnance
he conueighed some to Cazbeen, and the rest to Spawhawn, where
aboue thitty yet lie vnmounted in the great Mydan neere to the
Palace.
Thence this actiue Prince runs along, with his speedy Army and
encounters Abdilcherai and his Tartars, most of whom hee cut in
pieces, and sent the youthfull Captaine Prisoner to Eres, where the
Begun (or Queene mother) then resided.
The Prince from thence hastens to Sumachia, where he besieged
the Sultan Ozman and his Turkes, who seeing no resistance, pretending
to yeeld next day, that night stole away not looking backe
till they came into Hyrcania, to Derbent, where they stayed in
safety.
But Sumachia for her rebellion and perfidie was set on fire, and
most of her Inhabitants put to the Sword, which victories so suddenly
and brauely finished, Emyr-Hamze-mirza returnes to Eres, taking
along with his Army, his Mother and the Tartar Captaine, they entred
Cazbeen with great ioy and Triumph.
And during Abdilcherais imprisonment in Cazbeen, hee got so
much loue and respect from the King and people, that hee became
pittied and admired, especially his valour and beauty tooke such
place in the Queene mothers heart, that of an Enemy shee became
exceeding amorous of this Captaine (who was to marry Emyr-Hamzes
sister shortly) deseruing her for these respects, that hee was
very boble (as brother to the Great Cham) and that by this vnion, his
power might be ioyned vnto Persia.
But the report of his vnchast conuersation with the Queene, so
exasperated the Sultans in Cazbeen, that one day in great choller,
they entred the Place,Queene of Persia, and Prince of Tartarymurdered. where finding him and the Queen together,
they cut both their throats, but first dismembred him, concluding
so the end and triumphs of this Praecopensian Tartar, Anno 1578.



Occurrents in Cazbeen.
AFter some stay in Cazbeen, our Ambassadour, desirous of his
dispatch visited Mahomet-Aly-beg, and by him intreated answere
of his Letter.
The Pagan in short told him, if hee had any more to possesse the
King he should first acquaint him, and consequently haue an answer,
to which our Ambassadour replyed little, tho discontented much,
perceiuing by this, he should haue no further accesse vnto the King,
but willing to be gone, and loth the Fauourite should see him danted,
he trusted him with his businesse. Some part the continuation
of amity betwixt their Masters, with some words of the Merchants
Traffique, and an acknowledgment from the King, that Sir Robert
Sherley was his true Ambassadour into Europe.
To the two first Mahomet-Ally-beg vndesired, bolted out, that hee
knew his Master the King of Persia or Potshaw, stood more affected
to no one Prince of the World, then to our King: and that the
Trade and Exchange betwixt their Merchants, was both pleasing and
profitable to his King: and for Sir Robert Sherley (whose enemy
Mahomet euer has) he knew and had heard the King himselfe say, he
cared not for him, and that his Ambassies and Messages to the Princes
of Christendome, were friuolous and forged, tis true, quoth hee,
the King gaue him (as an argument of fauour) at the Caspian Sea, a
Horse and Garment, but it was more to satisfie the other Ambassadour
himselfe, then out of any respect the King had vnto him.
And when our Lord Ambassadour told him, Sir Robert Sherley had
the Kings Letter of Credence or Firman, to testifie the truth of it,
and thats if he were an Imposture, he were the veriest Foole liuing,
to vndertake a iourney of that length and danger, knowing with all
the Kings seuerity.
To which the Pagan answered not, but told him, at their next
meeting he would giue him ampler satisfaction, intreating him for a
sight of Sir Roberts Testimoniall Letter, and a Copy of what Sir
Robert Sherley had treated about in England, or other places.
Two dayes after, attended by some Gentlemen, he visited Mahomet-Ally-beg
againe, and gaue him the Copy of what he last desired,
and with all shewed him, Sir Roberts Letter of Credence signed by
his King Shaw Abbas in Spahawn.
He bid him looke vpon it, and tell him if it had the Image of a
Counterfeit, the malicious Fauourite thought it had, but being vncertaine,
craued it to shew the King, which accordingly he did (if
we may giue credit to an enemy and Infidell) vnto the King three
dayes after, who (as he told Sir Dodmore Cotton) viewed them, denied

them for true, and in rage had burnt them, wishing Sir Robert
Sherley to depart his kingdome, as old and troublesome.
He was amazed at it, but knew no remedie.
For my owne part I am verily perswaded, the Kings Seales and
Phirman were true, and that either Mahomet-Ally-beg jugled with
him (for wee had but his word, for all wee knew, and neuer more
came in presence of the King) he might forge other Letters to shew
the King, else why kept he them two dayes without deliuery, or he
might haue slandered the King, to say hee burnt them, being an act,
not worthy so iust a Prince as Abbas was reputed for.
This argument may proue his being true Ambassadour, because the
King hearing he came in that defence, and to cleere his honour from
Nogdi-begs aspersions in England, as the King gaue him no apparant
satisfaction yet because he neuer questioned an injury done him (that
had he beene an Imposture had beene one) it followes he was guarded
with innocencie and truth.
And but that Nogdi-beg had done Sir Robert Sherley injury, wherefore
should Shaugh Abbas say, twas well for him hee poysoned himselfe
(guiltie of reuenge) for had hee come to the Court of Persia,
he would haue sliced his body into as many parts as there be dayes
in a yeare, and burnt them with Dogs Turds, in the open Market
place.
Againe, his sonne in our company, durst not come at Court to
account for his vnluckie Father, till Zenall Chawn the Duke of
Tyroan his kinsman enterceded, and bribed for his peace and entrance.
The truth is Sir Robert Sherley had deserued well from the Persian,
but being old and vnable for further seruice, got this recompence, to
be slighted in his honour, euen then when he hoped for most thanks
and other acknoledgments.


The death of Sir Robert Sherley at
Cazbeen.
THese and the like discontents (casuall to mortall men) so
much afflicted him, that immediatly a Feuer and Apoplexie
ouer-charged him, so that on the thirteenth of Iune, he gaue
an vltimum vale to this World. And wanting a fitter place of Buriall,
was put into the earth at the doore of his owne House in Cazbeen
where he died.
He was brother to two worthy Gentlemen Sir Anthonie and Sir

Thomas Sherleys, his age exceeded not the great Clymacterick, his
condition was free, noble, but inconstant. He was the greatest Traueller
in his time, and had tasted liberally of many great Princes fanours:
of the Pope he had power to legitimate the Indians, and from
the Emperour receiued the Honour and Title of a Palatine of the
Empire. His patience was better then his intellect, he was not much
acquainted with the Muses, but what he wanted in Phylosophy, hee
supplyed in Languages. He had beene seruant to the Persian neere
thirty yeares, and merited much better then you see, he then obtained
when he most expected it.
Though, it may seeme impertinent, I cannot passe by in silence,
without iniury to her memory, whom I so much honoured, the
thrice worthy and vndanted Lady Terezia, his faithfull Wife, to this
sad time, constant to our company, her Faith was euer Christian, her
parents so, and noble, her Countrey Circashia, which joynes to Georgia,
and to Zuiria, neere the Euxine and Caspian Seas.
At that time when her Husband, lay dead by her, and herselfe very
weake by a long Dissentery, a Dutch Painter (who had serued the
King of Persia twenty yeares) complies with Mahomet-Ally-beg, and
pretending an Ingagement he was in, to one Crole a Flemming (for
some monies Sir Robert Sherley had long since borrowed of him)
he is beleeued, and got a Warrant from the Cawsee or Iustice to
seize vpon the Ladies goods, which wicked plot could not be so priuate,
but was knowne by a faithfull honest Gentleman Master Hedges,
a Follower of our Ambassadour, who straight-way acquaints
the Lady with it, which as she knew was false, so seemed it strange,
yet recalling herselfe, she tore a Sattin Quilt with her feeble hands,
and trusted him with her treasure, a Cabinet, some Iewels, rich
stones and the like, with which hee was no sooner gone, when the
Pagan Serjants, with Iohn the Flemming, entred her Chamber, carried
away what was valuable or vendible, his Horses, Camels, Vests,
Turbants, a rich Persian Dagger, and some other things, but after
narrow search finding no Iewels, (for they had seene him weare many
and twas them, hee had woorried in his Ostrich appetite) mad,
angry and ashamed, they departed vnsatisfied.
The Gentleman when the storme was past, re-deliuered her her
Jewels, of a double value now, cause of that conquest, which had
she wanted, I doe not thinke her fortunes left her would haue made
vp fifty pound, a small reuenue for so deseruing a Lady, and most
vsefull in those vncharitable Regions against Woman-kind, of whom
though much esteemed by the Persians, yet seeme rather, in those
parts created for slauery and fancy, then to enjoy liberty or praises,
prizes not a little sought for and desired by those female weake
ones.



The death of Sir Dodmore Cotton
Ambassadour, at Cazbeen.
AFter some discontents and fourteene dayes sicknesse of a
Fluxe, got either by eating too much fruits, or cold on Taurus,
that religious Gentleman our Ambassadour Sir Dodmore
Cotton died in Cazbeen the three and twentieth of Iuly 1628.
we obtained a Dormitory for his Body among the Armenian Christians
residing there, who with their Priests assisted vs. His Horse
was led before, with a mourning Veluet Saddle on his backe, his
Coffin had a Crimson Sattin Quilt lined with purple Silke, ouer
him was laid his Bible, Sword and Hat: Such of his followeres as were
able, waited on it, and Doctor Goch (a reuerent Gentleman) put
him into the ground, where though his memory and vertue cannot
die, yet I would he had a Monument, a more emient memoriall.
After a moneths stay in Cazbeen, where wee left buried our two
Ambassadours, the king sent each of vs two long Coates or Vests of
Cloth of Gold in signe of fauour.
And after much attendance vpon Mahomet-Ally-beg, got licence to
depart with Letters from the Potshaugh, for our safer Trauaile, hee
deliuered vs with all a Letter to our Gracious King from the king of
Persia, sowed vp in a piece of cloth of Gold, fastned with a silke
string, and sealed with a stampe of Letters after their fashion.
Where before we goe on any further, I shall tell you of Mahomet-Ally-beg,
his rising and destruction.
His birth-place was Parthia, (cald so from Parah, to fructifie) and
neere Spahawn. His parentage so worshipfull that hee knew no further
then his father, a man both meane and poore.
Mahomet, it seemes, had no stomacke for the Warres, and hauing
a large Bulke to maintaine, and no Camelion, his education being
simple, he became Costermonger, and by that became wealthy and
capable to maintaine himselfe.
In a happy houre, the king (then in the Hippodrome, and in Spawhawn)
tooke notice of him, viewd him, lik't him and prefered him,
so as in small time he became sole Fauorite, and then was feared and
honoured euery where among the Persians, for so shall it still be
done to him whom the king honours. Not any Prince, Duke, Sultan
or other, who depended vpon the Potshaughs smiles, but in an
awfull complement sent him yearely some gift or other to cherish
his fauour, whereby his wealth became wonderfull.
His presence was very good, a good and smiling countenance,
big body, great mustachoes, and full eyes (a great beautie among

Mahumetans) his yeares vnder forty, a third part of which age hee
liued in Honour and generall account, till to his vtter confusion at
Cazbeen, Abbas the king (though loth) gaue way to Atropos, who
could shee haue beene bribed, might yearely haue got large Tribute
from now dead Abbas, till hee had out-spun the yeares of old Methusala,
so loth are Tyrants to goe to Erebus.
The king was low of stature, aspect quicke, low fore-head, fiery
eyes,King of Persia described and dies. his nose long and hooked, ouer his eyes he wanted haire, his
Mustachoes very long and bending downwards, his chin sharpe, his
tongue fluent.
He was king of Heri (neere Tartaria) by birth, but vnnaturall ambition
(though hee remoued father and brother for it) soone made
him Monarch of Persia, and a terrour to the Turke, Arabian, Tartar
and Mogull.
He dead, his Grand-child Shaugh Soffee is inuested with his Diadem,
aged sixteene, his courage hopefull.
Emangoly-chawn, the braue Duke of Persae-polis, is by his Grandsires
will made his Protectour,Mahomet beheaded. which Mahomet-Ally-beg (now no
Fauourite) looking after, for his late ambition and bribes euen then
was made shorter by the head. His estate was confiscate to the yong
king for want of Issue in headlesse Mahomet.
Our Phirman or Letter to passe safely, is thus interpreted.


The Emperour of Persia's Firman.

ABBAS.

THe high and mighty Starre, whose Head is couered
with the Sun, whose Motion is comparable to the Aaeriall
Firmament, whose Maiesty is come from
Asharaff, and hath dispatched the Lord Ambassadour of
the English King: The Command of the Great King is,
That his Followers shall bee cnducted from our Pallace of
Cazbeen, to Saway, and by the Darraguod (or Maior)
of Saway to the Citie of Coom, and by the Gouernour of
Coom, vnto the Citie of Cashan, etc. through all my Territories.
Faile not my Command, I also command them a
peaceable Trauaile.
Sealed with a Stampe of
Letters in Inke.





Titles of the King of Persia may
be these.
ABbas is King of Persia, Parthia, Media, Bactria, Chorazon,
Candahor, and Heri, of the Ouz-beg Tartar,
of the Kingdomes of Hircania, Draconia, Euergeta,
Parmenia, Hydaspia, and Sogdiana, of Aria, Paropaniza,

Drawgiana, Arachosia, Mergiana, and Carmania, as
farre as stately Indus. Sultan of Ormus, Larr, Arabia, Susiana,
Chaldea, Mesopotamia, Georgia Armenia Sarcashia,
and Uan, Lord of the Imperious Mountaines of Ararat,
Taurus, Caucasus and Periardo: Commander of all creatures
from the Sea of Chorazan to the Gulph of Persia, of true Discent
from Mortys-Ally. Prince of the foure Riuers, Euphrates,
Tygris, Araxis, and Indus: Gouernour of all Sultans,
Emperour of Mussulmen, Bud of Honour, Mirrour of Vertue,
and Rose of Delight.
Although (to the modest Reader) a great deale of ostentation,
appeare in these blustering Epithites and Titles, yet know that tis no
newcustom vsed among Pagans to this day in other places, and of old.
We read that after the Creation 3419, when Cyrus the Fortunate
Persian, wrested the Monarchy from Astyages, Ezra the Prophet to
declare his greatnesse writes thus.

The Lord God of Heauen, hath giuen me all the Kingdomes of the
Earth.
Domitian in all his Proclamations began thus:
I am your Lord God Domitian.
Caligula cald himselfe, Deum optimum maximum, and Iouem Latialem,
The great and best God and safeguard of Italy.

And Sapores, sonne to Mizdates, Monarch of Persia, in the yeare
after our Sauiour 315. wrote thus to Constantius the good Emperour.
I Sapores King of Kings, Equall to the Starres, and Brother to
the Sunne and Moone.
And Chozroes (Father of Ormizda) who ruled Persia Anno Dom.
543. enstiles himselfe thus, in humble manner to the Emperour
Mauritius (Master of bloudie Phocas, who gaue Pope Boniface the
Antichristian Title of Vniuersall Bishop) in this sort.
I Chozroes, great King of Kings, Begler-beg (or Lord of Lords)
Ruler of Nations, Prince of Peace, Saluation of men, Among
the Gods (a man good and euer) among men (A God most
glorious) the great Conquerour, arising with the Sunne, giuing
lustre to the night, a Heroe in Discent.
These blasphemous Epithites may accuse him of arrogancie, but
when tis granted he was a Pagan, tis lesse admirable.
For in these our times those forreigne Potentates are so haughty
and ignorant of the World, that the China not thirty yeares agoe,
sending an Ambassador to the King of Persia, Abbas. The Letter was
thus directed To his Slaue the Sophy of Persia, the vndaunted Emperour

of all the world sends greeting. For which, his Ambassadour got
durtie welcome. His thoughts are puft vp by his great power and riches,
for tis reported he has sixe hundred large Cities, two thousand
walled Townes, a thousand Castles, sixty millions of Subjects, and
a hundred and twenty millions of Zechynes or Crownes yearely.
They call him, the beautie of the whole earth, Heire apparant to
the liuing Sunne and vndaunted Emperour.
The great Cham or Emperor of Tartaria,The Emperour of China. has no lesse ambition then
the former, imagining all the World is tributary to him, hee is sirnamed,
The Sonne of the highest God; and Quintessence of the purest
Spirits, and euery day so soone as he hath dined; at his Court-gate
causes a Herald by sound of Trumpet to proclaime, that all other
Kings and Potentates of the Earth may goe to dinner: supposing he
affoords them no small fauour who perhaps are set at meate before
him.
And as he assumes such majestie on the earth, so at his death, that
he may want no seruitors, a thousand or ten thousand sometimes are
(vnwillingly) sacrisiced to serue him in another Kingdome, as Venetus
assures vs was acted when Mango Cham was buried, in the Tombe
where Allan Cham or Chawn,The Emperour of Tartaria. and Tamerlaine or Tamyr Cham, his
Grandfather lie intombed.
The Kings of Pegu, Mattacala and among the Manicongoes, are so
sublimated, that when an Ambassadour comes before them, they must
doe it creeping, and hiding their faces with their hands, and so long
as they be in presence, after one looke, they sit crosse-legged, their
elbowes fixt vpon their thighes, and with their hands couer their
shamefast faces.
Amongst which Ceremonious Princes, hee of Monomotapa is not
least, who when he goes abroad, is not publicke to his people, lest
his Majestie should too much dazell them, and when he drinkes or
coughes, tis so remarkable among them, that by mightie shouts and
clamours they make the whole Citie sound againe.
The great Christian of Aethiopia, vulgarly cald Prester, Precious, or
Priest-Iohn,The Emperour of the Abyssi^^s or Pr^ter Iohn. has no lesse names of honour, then any yet, for besides
the rehearsall of his fifteene Territories, he cals himselfe, The Head
of the Church, the Fauourite of God, the Pillar of Faith, descended
from Salomon, Dauid, Iudah and Abraham, Sions prop, extract from
the Virgins hand, Sonne of Saint Peter and Saint Paul by the Spirit,
and of Nahu by the flesh. This great Prince appeares among his people
not very often publiquely to become a Nouelty vnto them, his
life and gouerment is not vnlike the Tartars. Hee seldome resides in
Cities, or any one place long, but affects perpetuall motion.



Our departure from the Persian Court.
WE left Cazbeen at ten at night (thereby auoiding Sols too
much warmth) and got by Sun-rise to Perissophon,
where we found good water to quench our thirst (a
thing not to be past ouer without memory through
all Asia) next night to Asaph) next to Begum, where is a goodly Fabricke,
built by King Tamas, for a lodge to passengers, but the water
there is brackish. Next night to Saway a Citie of twelue hundred
Families, seated vnder a rising Hill, and watered with a streame flowing
from Baronta. The Inhabitants are industrious, such as the Turks
call Tymariots: who for their Lands are bound to till the yeilding
Earth, and vpon all occasions to bring each his light-horse, and are
curious to stop insurrections or tumults at the first appearance.
Next night, we rode ouer Plaines (in which are artificiall Mounts
and ruines of Warre) vnto a Citie called Coom.
In these Plaines was fought that famous battaile betwixt Lucullus
and Methrydates King of Pontus, wherein the Romans got the Conquest.
Marcus Crassus the rich Roman, after his impious sacriledge of the
holy reliques and treasure in the Temple of Ierusalem, valued at six
tunnes of Gold, three and fiftie yeares before the Natiuity of our
Sauiour Christ, puft vp with his great wealth, and forlorne amongst
the Iewes with fifty thousand men marched against the Parthians,
who with Herodes their King, sonne of Mythredate the third, Anno
Mundi 3915. couragiously came against this greedy Generall, and encountred
him at Haran in Mesque, The Towne where Abraham liued
with Terah his Father, and successefully vanquished the insulting
Romans, slue thirty thousand of them and tooke Crassus prisoner, inflicting
Gods iust iudgement on him, for knowing what he had done
at Ierusalem, and the couetousnesse of his mind, they powred downe
his throat melted gold, bidding him quench his thirst, with that hee
had so long lusted after, and by this victorie the Parthians became
Masters of that Kingdome. Some notwithstanding referre the place
of Battaile to these Plaines, how true I know not.
But fiue yeares after Marke Anthony by his Generall requited the
Parthian, not only putting his men to flight who then could not
make good that Prouerbe of Seneca, Terga conuersi, metuendi Parthi,
but besides their owne destruction, lost their succeeding hopes,
Prince Pacorus slaine with the rest by the chafed Roman.
And a little after, Herodes whom though vanquisht could not be
taken by the Romans, at home by the parracide Phraortes his vnnaturall
sonne hee lost his life, to reuenge which villany and the rest,

Anthony came against him with no small force, but returned beaten
and disconsolate. But Augustus (in whose time our Sauiour tooke
flesh of the blessed Virgin, and a generall peace was through the
World) preuailed with Phraortes, to submit vnto the Roman Empire,
which hee did and gaue leaue after that to the Romans, to nominate
their Kings, that being all their tribute or acknowledgment.
But for all this subiection, they lost not their Empire wholy (for formerly
sixteene seuerall Kingdomes were vnder them) till the yeare
230. or thereabouts, such time as Artaxerxes Father of Sapores the
first, and second of the second descent of the Kings of Persia aimed
at it, and though fiue hundred and thirty yeares were past, since
Darius slaine by Alexander the Great had the Monarchy, yet no
Persian borne got the Crowne, till this Artaxerxes by ouerthrow
of Artabanus the third, (sonne of King Vologesus the third) got the
Kingdome and liberty of the Persians restored, which from Arsaces
in the yeare 3718. To this Artabanus, for aboue fiue hundred yeares,
had acknowledged the Parthian for their Gouernours.
And Artaxerzes, puft vp with this three dayes deere bought victory
(for so long the valiant Parthians fought resolutely against their
Aduersaries) he sent a challenge to Alexander Seuerus (the foure and
twentieth Emperour from Iulius Caesar, and next to Heliogabalus or
Bassianus the lustfull Emperour) to restore those kingdomes in Asia,
anciently belonging to his Monarchy. Seuerus likt it not, but came
to correct his insolencie, where arriuing as far as Euphrates, Artaxerxes
met his diuided Army and destroyed it. The Emperour, though
he came in anger and hast, returned full of those passions in a double
measure, and had no better lucke at home, for a while after the Thracian
Maximinus tooke his Empire from him, and to make his losse
the greater, was by some Villanes in Germany bereaued of his life
aswell as Empire. His vertuous mother Mammaea (Origens Proselyte)
now pertaking death with him, as she had done glory formerly.
And about eighty yeares after, Lycinius Valerianus the Roman
Emperour (sirnamed Colobus, the thirtieth from Iulius Caesar) hoping
to reuenge these losses by the Persians, entred Asia with a stronger
Army.Slauery of a Roman Emperour. Where in this Countrey, by Sapores the then king, his
Army contrary to his expectation was vtterly defeated, himselfe taken
prisoner, and to his dying day, made a foot-stoole, when euer
Sapores got on Horsebacke. And this was a iust iudgement of Almighty
God vpon this cruell Emperour, who (amongst other holy
Saints and Martyrs) tormented Saint Lawrence on a broyling Gridiron
vnto death.
This shall be sufficient in this place to renew the memory of the
Parthians, in whose kingdomes wee now are entring. And first of
Coom, where we reposed our selues three dayes.



A Description of Coom.
COom is a Citie placed in the halfe way betwixt the two Royall
Cities Cazbeen and Spawhawn, it is scituate in a faire and sensible
Horizon, and in Front of both Kingdomes, Media and
Parthia.
It was in ages past cald Guriana, and afore that Arbacta, perhaps
built by Arbaces, who in the yeare from Adam 3146. gaue end to
the Assyrian Monarchy (rapt from effeminate Sardanapalus, the sixe
and thirtieth from Ninus, first Emperour and Monarch of the
World) and by which, a beginning to the Median Dynastie.
The now ruines about her, may gaine beliefe to the Inhabitants,
who say it was once comparable in pride and greatnesse to mightie
Babylon, but what euer it has beene, tis now a pleasant fruitfull and
healthy City and the people curteous.
By some tis called Coim and by others Com, vnfitly, for they pronounce
it Coom. The Citie has two thousand Houses in her, wel-built
sweet and wel-furnished, her streets are wide, her Buzzar faire,
and her Mosque of most honourable esteeme among them, therein is
richly entombed Fatima, daughter and heire of their greatest Prophet
Mahomet, and married to Mortis Haly.Falimaes Tombe. The King and much reuerenced
Prophet of the Persian. Her Tombe is round like other
Mosques, the Ascent three or foure steps of siluer.
This City is watred with a sweet but small Riuer, which deriues
her spring out of the Coronian Mountaines, the aire here is second
to none for freshnesse, nor wants this Towne any fruit requirable for
the Zone tis placed in it, has Grapes good and great store. Melons
of both sorts, Cowcumbers, Pomegranads, Pome-citrons, Apricocks,
Peaches, Plums, Pistachoes, Peares, Apples, Quinces, Almonds, Figs,
Wal-nuts, Cherries, Berries, and the best wheat bread in Persia (Gombazellello
excepted.)
Neere abouts was that great and terrible combat of Hismael, and
thirty thousand Persians, against Selymus the First and three hundred
thousand Turks, where the victor Turks lost more then the vanquisht
Persians and had been defeated, had not the great Ordnance terrified
the Persian Horse: this battaile was fought Anno Domini 1514. begun
at Coy in Armenia and ended here, and by the Turkes is cald the
Day of Doome.
From Coom we rode to Zenzen, and thence to Cashan six and thirtie
miles from Coom.



A description of Cashan.
CAshan is a famous Citie in Parthia, whose Metropolis is Spawhawn,
whence she is distant sixtie miles and odde.
The antiquitie of it is not much, in this name, either taking
beginning from Cazan-Mirzey, sonne to Hocem, or from Cassan, who
in the yeare 1202. was vtterly ruined by the Great Cham, the rule
being kept but three Descents from his Grand-sire Tangrolipix and
his Father Axan: or from Cushan, which in the Syriacke, is heate or
blacknesse; but most likely from Vsan-Cashan, Anno 1470. who from
his Armenian rule, vanquishing Malaoncres, the last of Tamberlains
progeny in this Countrey, got the Crowne of Persia, whose issue
from Hismael sway now that Scepter, of which alteration this Citie
and Coom are joyfull, in reuenge of that terrible and violent destruction
Tamberlaine made in his Expedition against Baiazet, Anno Domini
1397, whom he brought away imprisoned in an Iron Cage; hauing
ouerthrowne him in that place where Pompey the Great ouercame
Methrydates King of Pontus, at mount Stella: This Tamberlaine
was sonne of Ogg, sonne of Sagathai, and got the Crowne by
marriage of Gyno Chans (Daughter and Heire) sonne of Barr Chan,
sonne of Hocuchan, sonne of Cyngis-chan, who Anno Domini 1162,
subdued vn-chan, the last of the Kings of Tenduck. These two Cities
aboue others parched in his fiery anger.
Cashan is well seated, well peopled, and well built: ouer-topt by
no Hill, nor watered by no great streame, which augments the heat,
chiefly when Sol resides in Cancer, in which there is no lesse violence
then the Sun, the stinging Scorpion in too great plentie liuing
amongst them, whose loue and vnderstanding is such to Trauellers
(as say the Inhabitants) they neuer hurt them. Here the curse (may a
Scorpion of Cashan sting thee) is frequent among them.
The people are orderly and more giuen to trade, then in some
greater Townes about her. Silkes, Sattens, and Cloth of Gold are
here in great aboundance, and at reasonable prices.
The Carrauans-raw, the Mosques and Hummums or Banneas: are
her only ornaments, of which the Carrauans-raw not only precedes
them, but all other I saw in Persia, Twas built by Abbas, and is able
and fit to entertaine the greatest Potentate of Asia. Yet built for Trauellers
to lodge in, vpon free cost by act of Charitie.
Tis two large stories high, the materiall bricke varnished and coloured
with knots and Arabian letters poeses of azure, red and white,
from its Basis tis built six foot high of good stone. The Fabrique is
Quadrangular, and each proportionable Angle two hundred paces,

in the middle is a faire large Court, where, in midst is a foure square
Tancke, or pond of pure water, about it are spacious and fragrant
Gardens.
And though there be no affinity in the names, yet Ctesiphon was a
prime Citie of the Persian Arsacidae, and there are some who iudge
her reuiued in Cashan, but I beleeue it not. Yet be it so or no, the
memory of that infamous Apostate Iulian cals mee to speake his
end.
This Iulian succeeded Constantius (the eight and fortieth Emperour
from the first Caesar) who deceased at Mopsocriue,Iulian the Apostale. a Towne vnder
mount Taurus) Iulian was first a Christian, but reuolted and became
a most bitter and constant Persecutour to all that honoured
Christ.
He thought to subiugate the Parthians, who proued his destruction,
for in an vnexpected alarme and on-set by them, he ran out of his
Tent weaponed with Sword and Shield, where rage transported
him and ventured so farre that a common Souldier strucke him into
the guts with a Dart, whereby he was forced to take his Tent, and
entring the battaile againe, his bloud issued so strongly from him
that he returned backe, perceiuing his end at hand, and as he had liued
a Tyrant vnto Christians, so in his death throwing his bloud into
the aire, cried out, Vicisti Galileae. And at midnight vnder these
wals, bequeathed his loathsome soule and body to him he serued, and
his Empire to Iouinianus who succeeded him.
On the three and twentieth of August wee left Cashan, that night
making Bizdeebode our lodging six leagues distant or Farsangs, as the
Persians call them, a Farsang is three of our English miles. Thence
we trauelled to Natane or Tane, the place where Darius last breathed
at by the Bactrian Bessus his villany, after his three great ouerthrowes
by Olympias victorious sonne Anno mundi 3635 at Granuicus, Cilicia,
and at Arbela, where he consummated life and Monarchie. The
lodge here is in a craggie place immured betwixt two Hils, but looking
ouer, you see a large Champaigne ground full of streames and
Villages. This Manzeil was ten Farsangs or thirty miles. Next night
seuen Farsangs, next to Reig, a place scarce worth the memorizing.
This place is from Spawhawn nine miles, and note that from Cazbeen
to Spawhawn, is eighty eight Farsangs, or two hundred sixtie
foure English miles.
Hence (that I defraud the Reader no longer of his patience) to
Babylon thus. To Corranda, to Deagow, to Miskarroon, to Corryn,
to Lackaree, to Corbet, to Nazareil, to Sabber-Chawn, to Buldat, to
Bagdat, or Babylon, a hundred and thirty Farsangs, or three hundred
and ninetie English miles.



A description of Babylon in Chaldaea.
BAbylon (now called Bagdat) is seated in the Vaile of Shinaar,
whose first inhabiter was Arphaxad, some of Sem, sonne of
Noah.
The Citie Babylon has its signification from Confusion, because
there first hapned the diuision of Languages from one (which was
the Hebrew, though Goropius will haue it Dutch) to seuentie two by
Nimrods vngodly designe, Anno mundi 1788. A hundred and thirty
yeares after the Floud, and before Christs Incarnation 2180 to frame
a mighty building able to secure them against a second Deluge, not
regarding the Majesty of God Almighty. This building was hastned
by fiue hundred thousand men, so that in small time they made it
rise from its Basis (no lesse then nine miles of ground) to aboue fiue
thousand paces towards the Skie, so that the Poet tels vs:
The Heauens looke pale with wonder to behold,With what attempts and rage the Gyants boldSeeke to affront the Gods, by rearing hie,Mount vpon mount t'inhabit in the Skie.
intending to equalize it with the Starres, but hee that sits aboue, and
accounts the best of mans judgement but meere folly, not only
preuented this designe, but seuered them into seuentie Companies,
and so many Languages.
The Tower, though it stood for euer vnfinished, the Citie notwithstanding
went on in his greatnesse, and by Semyramis receiued
most perfection, by whom twas walled about, the circuit of which
wals (as Solinus relates) were sixtie English miles (or foure hundred
and eighty Furlongs) Diodorus Siculus makes it three hundred sixty
fiue, each day in the yeare performing one Furlong, and Quintus
Curtius affirmes it three hundred fifty eight, the thicknes and height
corresponding to its circuit. Some say two hundred Cubits high and
fiftie thicke, so that a-top might driue together sixe Chariots, and to
effect this miracle of buildings, three millions of men were daily labouring
at it.
This Nimrod (sonne of Chush, or Iupiter ^elus, sonne of Cham the
accursed sonne of Noah) liued sixe and fifty yeares after his founding
Babell, and was buried there. In memory of whose acts and greatnes
the superstitious Chaldees deified him, by the name of Sudormin, conuerted
after by the Romans into Saturne.
His sonne Ninus followed him, in his tyranny and victories is making

compleat his fathers late intended Monarchie by conquest of his
Neighbour Nations after which he built Niniue, though some allude
it to Assur, who gaue title to the Assyrian, and suppose by some to be
this Ninus: who in his dotage gaue Semirani s his wife, so much
libertie in his Imperiall power, that tis thought she deposed him, and
during her sonnes infancie sate as Emperour, doing wonders, walled
Babylon, built Gardens in Media of admirable workes and greatnes,
conquered into India, and became feared throughout all Asia
And burning in lust with her owne sonne, hee to reuenge his fathers
death, slue her in stead of her wisht imbraces.
This young Ninus is called Amraphell, and hee who with Arioch,
Tydall and Chedorlaomer came against Sodome and captiued Lot, rescued
by his Vncle Abraham, with the slaughter of those Kings, in
whose returne Melchisedecke King of Salem the High Priest met and
blessed him.
But I cannot approoue altogether of their Opinions, that make
this Ninus to be Amraphell, for wee know, Ninus was but six Discents
from Noah, and Amraphell must needes be ten at fewest, except you
will allow Ninus and Abraham, to liue in the same age together.
This Citie after sixteene hundred yeares tyrannicall gouernment,
was subdued by Cyrus, Anno Mundi, 3432. and before Christ fiue hundred
thirty six yeares (seuenteene yeares after the Captiuity of Israel
and Iuda by Nabuzaradan Generall for Nabuchadnezzer, as in
the last of Ieremy.)
In the seuenth yeare of Artaxerxes Longimai^us King of Persia, A.
Mundi, 3511. and before out Sauiour Christs Incarnation, foure hundred
fifty seuen, the Prophet Esdras went hence to Ierusalem to rebuild
the Temple of God, and thirteene yeares after that, Nehemiah
went from Sushan to further it.
Of the greatnesse of Babilon, Aristotle reports, when Alexander
tooke it, A. Mundi 3633. one part of the Citie knew not in three
dayes after, that it was taken whereby though it may seeme wonderfull.
It will seeme the lesse, excused either in their solemne Sa^rifices,
or by comparison of other Cities in China, and other places,
the Imperiall Citie Sun^yen, or Quinzay affecting no lesse compasse
then a hundred miles, (if a Friers Trauailes can be credited) in which
is a Lake thirty miles about, and in which City are twelue thousand
bridges. Consider also the Citie Nanquin, (subiect to the same Monarch)
in compasse thirty miles, inuironed with three strong walls,
and including two hundred thousand houses, which Cities and wonderfull
reports of that Kingdome, as most consequentious for knowledge
and instruction, so I wish with all my heart, some Gentleman
of worth might from some Christian Prince be sent of purpose for
that action, that these doubts and wonders might be assured, and with
truth discouered.

The chiefe ornament in Babilon was two Royall Pallaces, built
by the magnanimous Queene Semiramis, (daughter or sister to Euilmerodach
slaine by Astyages) one in the East of the City of thirty
Furlongs, the other West comprehending sixtie, immured with
wals of wondrous height.
But of most admiration was the Tower consecrated to Iupiter Belus,
or Cush in the Centre of the Citie, strengthened with brazen
gates, the frame foure squared, each square a thousand paces, in midst
eleuated a strong built Tower, on which were eight others one vpon
another, in top of all were set three great golden Images sacred to
Iupiter, Ops and Iuno, statues loden with gemmes of great lustre and
value, and which continued till Cyrus, after the Creation 3406.
yeares, when he made himselfe Master of these and the Empire, by
drayning Euphrates into pits and other channels.
Yet some Historians, say Ninus and Semiramis, begun to make Babilon
glorious, and that Nabuchadnezzar and Nytocris his Wife enlarged
it, A. Mundi 3350; shee was sayes Herodotus daughter of Alyattes.
This Assyrian Monarch was so taken with its brauery, that hee
could not forbeare to boast, Is not this great Babeil, which I haue
built for the house of the Kingdome, by the might of my power, and for
the honour of my Maiestie. At which instant God decreed his transmutation
and the renting away his Empire, which hapned soone after
by Cyrus, when we got the victory at Borsippa. These state alterations
no doubt extenuated Babilons greatnesse, in the Monarchies
remoouall. Yet Pliny in his sixt Booke and sixe and twentieth Chapter
tels a greater cause of subiecting her, occasioned by Seleuchus Nicanor,
An. Mundi 3645. Alexanders Captaine and Gouernour after
his death in Assyria, who to vex the Babylonians and impouerish
them, built a Citie after his owne name called Seleucia, fiftie miles
lower then Babel to the gulph of Persia, where because of his greatnesse,
and the wel-seating it (in the bowels of Tygris and Euphrates)
he allured out of Babilon sixe hundred thousand soules, so that the
late triumphant Citie became halfe desolate.
Alexander when he entred it, found to satiate his trauell, two hundred
thousand Talents of Gold, deliuered him by Bagophanes, where
this Worlds greatest Victor, in his returne from India found his buriall.
Another City in Aegypt called Al-Cairo, is by some called Babilon,
but that name is not so authenticall as the former, because built in emulation
of the others memory and quondam greatnesse.



Bagdat, or Babilons ruines.
OVt of Babilons ruines, is reuiued Bagdat, seated not farre from
the old Citie: it signifies Arabically a Garden, but then it
must be Bawdt-dat and not Bagadat: it is with more reason
denominated from Bugiafer Caliph of Babilon, An. 758. who spent
two millions of Gold, to rebuild it, after that cruell deuastation by
Almericke King of Iewry, An. Dom. 1170.
But long, shee enioyed not her glory, for An. Dom. 640. Chyta a
Prince of Tartary, sends his brother Alacho against it, who tooke it
and sickt it, with a Tartarian greedinesse, cruelly putting to death
the then Caliph Musteadzem, the foure and fiftieth and last of the Abasian
Pedigree. After which it was taken by Tangrolipix or Sadot
Lord of the Zelzucchian Family, A. Mun. 1031. and from him discended
to the Turkes, and remayned in the Ottoman tyranny till the
yeare 1625. when Abbas the victorious Persian King beat them out of
it* as also out of Tauris, Van and the greater Asia.
And tis very probable, that if the King of Persia had not taken Babilon,
whereby hee was forced to keepe continuall Garrisons against
the Turke in many places, he had made a conquest of all India. For
he got Candahor and other places from the Mogull, and kept them
without any difficulties, the Indians are so effeminate, and rule more
by policie and mony with the helpe of other Nations, as Per and
Geo. who are their Chans and greatest Princes.
The Citie is now of no great wonder, her circuit and building equall
to Cazbeen, rage and time giues her nothing to boast off, but her
memory, but the Bridge is eminent in her, so is her Buzzar and the
Sultans Palace and Gardens, more large then louely, of more Quantitie
then vse, shewing no more artificiall strength, wealth, or beautie
then neighbouring and late start-vp-townes about her.
Twelue miles thence is a grosse confused Mount, which Tradition
only assures vs of, was part of Nimrods Tower the place seemes bigger
at distance then neere at hand, slimy bricks and morter are digged
out of it: which are all the liuing testimonials of this monument.
To which I apply that old and much vsed Verse.

Miramur perijsse homines, monumenta fate scunt?
Interitus saxis, nominibusque veni^.


Why wonder we that people die? since monuments decay:
And flintie stones, with mens great names, Death's tyrannies obay.

A little lower is seated Shushan, a place (though signifying a Lilly,

a Rose or Ioy) deriuing it selfe from the Kingdome in which shee is
placed, Susiana.


A description of Sushan.
SHushan was one of three Royall Palaces of the Median Emperours,
one at Babilon, another at Ecbatan, a third at Susa or
Shushan.
This Palace is mentioned in Hester the first Chapter, that Ahasuerus
An. Mundi 3500. ruling ouer the Medes and Persians and ouer one
hundred seuen and twentie Prouinces, made a feast in Shushan, lasting
a hundred and eighty dayes (which custome, it seemes, is yet among
them. For yearely to this day the King celebrates a Feast of
Roses, and the Duke of Shiraz or Persae-polis (who is Lord of Susiana,
a Feast of Lillies or Daffadillies of like continuance.)
Nehemiah and Daniel make it situate in the Prouince of Elam (or
Persia, and when Alexander tooke it, hee found fifty thousand Talents
of vncoyned Gold, besides siluer wedges and Iewels in abundance.
Some say Laomedon built it, such time as Thola iudged Israel, but
more likely it was first built by Memnon, sonne of Tython, (slaine by
the perfidious Thessalians, sent by this Tewtamos or Tythonos, in aide
of Priamus, sonne of Laomedon, his brother against Agamemnon, Anno
Mundi 2783. with twenty thousand men, as saith Diodorus Siculus
in his third Booke and seuenth Chapter. This we beleeue that Memnon
so ioyed and gloried in this worke that Cassiodore in his seuenth
Booke and fifteenth Epistle reports, hee mixed gold with stones (a
costly morter) and made it the glory of the World, which perhaps
made out that fiftie Talents Alexander extracted out of it. And Aristagoras
after him, told his Souldiers, it would make each of them
compare with Ioue for riches. Tis written that the three wise men
went hence (where then flourisht a famous Academie) to Bethlem
with their gifts vnto our Sauiour. Because it is not probable they
came from Aethiopia, which was North East from Ierusalem.
It is now called Valdack, is watered by Choses or Choazpes, which
in Meanders circumuolues her, and at lenghth imbowels her
streames into the Persian Gulph not farre from Balsora, where the
two famous Riuers Tygris from Lybanus and Euphrates from Taurus
or Ararat, become one with the same deuouring Gulph.
The Riuer Choazpes was of such esteeme with the Persian Monarchs,
that no other water would serue their pallat, no wine but
the Chalybonian in Syria, nor no bread but what grew at Assos in Phrygia,

and their salt from Aegypt, truly verifying the Prouerbe (things
farre fetcht and deare bought are rarest) for Ormus neerer hand by
much, affoorded much better.
This Choazpes is the same riuer which Pliny cals Eulaeus, and the same
which Daniel in his eight chapter cals Vlai, one streame of this Riuer
runs twixt Syras and old Persae-polis, ouer which is a wel-built
bridge, cald Pully-chawn, as wee trauelled in nine and twentieth degrees
of latitude.
The ruines of this and other noble Cities about her are such that
we truly say with King Dauid, Psal. 46. Verse 8. Come and behold the
workes of the Lord, what desolations he hath made in all the earth.
I will adde one side concerning Paradice, and then will goe on
without digression.


Paradice.
THe true place of the Terrestriall Eden is much doubted of.
Some confining it to an Allegory, others to a locall place.
Some say it was East, aboue the Ayrie middle Region,
whence they will force the foure great Riuers spoken of in Genesis,
to procreate their springs.
Some will haue these foure Riuers to signifie foure Cardinall vertues,
and that the word Paradice is only a place for delight and pleasure;
mans fall, his banishment, the torrid Zone, the fiery Sword.
Others say all the World was a Paradice till sin^e abrogated its glory.
Some say it was in the mountaines of the Moone (those are in
Aethiop whence Nilus runs) some place it in the circle of the Moone
(and those without doubt, first found out him, that drinkes Claret
there.) other some vnder the Circle of the Moone, and that thence
the foure Riuers begin their course, run vnder the large Seas, and so
into Paradice, these brainsicke fancies, sure made the Hermians and
Seleucians, sweare there neuer was a Paradice.
But the more iudicious allow the being, only vary in its place and
progresse. Many imagining the true compasse ten miles and in that
Ile in Meso-potamia, as yet cald Edens
Some others giue it more existence, that it stretcht ouer the Vaile
of Shinar, incircling Babylon, and went with Euphrates, comprehending
Meso-potania, Armenia, Seleucia, Mo^ut Taurus, and what was
watered by Tygris.
Others yet and not a few nor those vnlettered, carry it further, allowing
the limits so farre as Nilus and Ganges hold in distance. Yet
this opinion is oppugned by many, agreeing vnanimously that neither

of those Riuers watered Paradice, as too large a compasse for
any Garden. Nilus arising from Zaire or the mountaines of the Moon
in Afriq^e, empties it selfe into the mid-land Sea. And Ganges in the
vtmost India from Imaus the huge mountaine ingulphing it selfe in
the Bengalan Ocean, places too remote and incongruent.
The Inhabitants in the Ile Seyloon affirme twas there, and to authorize
their Axiome shew Adams old footsteps imprinted in the sacred
ground, and preserued since then by miracle.
Other-some include Aegypt, Syria, and Iudaea, and say that the
Tree of knowledge grew on mount Caluary, in that very place
where our Sauiour Christ was crucified (the second Adam suffering,
where the first offended) and there want not others who imagine
Paradice remoued to a high mountaine aboue the middle Region,
where is no alteration of weather, and there they suppose Enoch and
Elias are corporall to this day.
The best opinion is this, that Nile nor Ganges had no being there,
and that the Septuagints were troubled at it, in translating Pison to
be Ganges and Gyhon, Nyle: now this is probable, that Meso-potamia
is East from Arabia where Moses wrote, and that the Riuer going out
of Eden to water it is Tygris, which conioyning there with (...)
diuides it selfe into foure branches. The first being Pison, which
compasseth the land of Hauilah, it must be a branch of Tygris called
Hiddekel, or else Choaspes which encircles Hauilah, which is Susiana.
The second is Gihon, which encompasseth Aethiopia or Cush, Gihon
is the West part of Euphrates and Cush not yet in Afrique is Susiana,
or Chushiana, as some Writers doe well denotate.
And to make it easier, because many old Writers will haue Hauilah
to be in India, that is not denied, but againe tis prooued there
were two Hauilahs, one tooke its name from Hauilah sonne of Ioctan,
sonne of Eber, the fourth from Shem; who with his brothers
Ophir and Iobab Soone after the diuision of the Earth inhabited
India.
The other Hauilah from Hauilah sonne of Chus, eldest sonne of
Ham or Cham, and he afore his Discent into Aethiope, gaue name to
Susiana or Chusiana, also which is Hauilah.
Now the extent of Paradice may be allowed vnto Indus, which
terminates these lands and the other way vnto Hircania, watered by
Araxis. Which if so, then Tygris, Euphrates, Araxis and Indus, must
be supposed the foure riuers: I for my owne part, cannot maintaine
it but this I can, that euen Hircania then and now giues place to no
one place in the Orient for delight and plenty, were the Inhabitants
agreeable to its worth, so that if it were no part of Paradice then,
tis now no whit inferiour to any part where that pleasant Garden
stood for comparable qualities, which I referre to a riper braine for

definition. This being too much I feare vpon this subiect.
For the Readers easier vnderstanding and memory I will orderly
digest such Cities and Townes now being, betwixt the gulph of
Persia and the Caspian Sea through which we trauelled, aswell to benefit
the future Traueller, as to furnish our moderne Geographicall
Maps with names of truth, being indeed stuffed with false ones, and
but inuented, together with the Farsangs or Leagues (each accounted
three miles English) that the true distances may be knowne, and
the Caspian placed in a better height.

From Ormus to Bander-Gomroon, three Farsangs or
Dutch leagues.
To Band-Ally 4
To Gacheen 7
To Cawrestan 5
To the desart of Tanghe dolon 4
To Whormoot 11
To Larr 9

The distance betwixt Ormus and the Citie of Larr (from which
the Kingdome is denominated) is three and forty Farsangs or a hundred
nine and twentie English miles.

Fro^ Larr to Techoo, in the Wildernesse of Larr foure
Farsangs.
From thence to Berry 4
To Bannarow 4
To Goyome 4
Three nights to the Desart 11
To Wchormoot 3
To Cut-bobbaw 3
To Mohack 4
To Coughton 5
To Emoom 5
To Vnghee 4
To Moyechaw 4
To Pully-pot-shaw 4
To Shyras or Syras, three and a
halfe.

The distance betwixt Larr and the Citie of Shyraz in Persia, is sixty
two Farsangs, or a hundred eighty six English miles.

Frow Shyraz to Pully-chawn seuen Farsangs:
To Chilmanor 3
To Camber-Ally 3
To Pull 2
To Tartang 4
To Deorden 3
To Cafferr 4
To Whoomgesh 2
To Baze-bachow 6
To De-gardow 6
To Gumbazellello 4
To Yezdecoz 4
To De-moxalbeg 6
To Comme-shaugh 5
To Moyeor 6
To Spahonet 6
To Spahawn. 3

The distance betwixt Shyraz and the famous Citie of Spahawn in
Parthia, is seuenty foure Farsangs, or two hundred two and twenty
English miles.

From Spahawn to Reigue, three Farsangs*
To Sardahan 5
To Whoam 9
To Tagebawgh 3
To Bawt 6
To Obygarmy 10
To Suffedow 7
To Syacow 10
Through the Salt Desart to Gezz 13
To Periscow 6
To Gheer 8
To Alliauarr 15
To Necaw 9
To Asharaff 4

From Asharaff to Farrabaut, a Citie vpon the Caspian Sea, 10.
Distance betwixt Spahawn and the Caspian Sea by Periscow, (for
another way is by Cazbeen) is a hundred and eighteene Farsangs, or
three hundred fifty foure English miles.


A discourse of the life and habit of the
Persians at this present.
ALbeit I haue (with what breuitie I might) described our Manzeils,
and the best Cities and Pallaces belonging to the Persian,
yet I may say something more compendiously of the
habit, diet, customes and ceremonies of these Persians, otherwise
that which is written would seeme harsh and imperfect.
I haue formerly noted the Countries deriuation from Elam, sonne
of Sem, sonne of Noah, and then cald Elamites, such time as Chedorlaomer
of ten Disce^^s from Sem ruled ouer them, slaine by Abraham
in rescue of his Nephew Lot. It was after that cald Panchaya, and by
Seleuchus the Greeke (...): prophane Historie deriues Persia
from Persaeus, Ioues sonne by Danae. And although it has since then
been ruined and rigned ouer by Princes of many Nations, yet they
haue neuer altered the Dialect from its vtter sence, at this day being
cald Pharsee: Frasie and by Mercator, Farsistan; in the Chaldee Tongue,
implying a horse hoo^^, a hooked nose, or a diuision. The Kingdome
of it selfe is not much, not were her Monarchs at any time content,
with her bounds, but haue euer either beene Victors, or vanquished
For before Chedo^laomers time, they became subiect to the Assyri^ns,
vnder Ninus and his warlike Empresse, Anno Mundi 1915. in

which Empire it lay obscured till the yeare 3146. at which time the
vicious Emperour Sardanapalus, by an abhorred life gaue way to
those two great Captaines Belocus and Arbaces, who rent away his
Monarchie and life, which as he had prodigally spun out, so died he
no lesse costly, for perceiuing no escape he burnt himselfe in his Castle
amidst his Women together with a hundred millions of talents
of Gold, and a thousand millions of talents of Siluer, as Iustine relates.
Phul Belochus tooke Assyria, Mesopotamia, and Chaldae^.
Arbaces tooke Media and Persia, whereby hee begun the Median
Dynasty, and continued Lords of Persia, till Cyrus establisht the Monarchy
to the Persian, by ouerthrow of Astiages his cruell Grandsire,
Anno Mundi 3406. which Cyrus sonne of Cambyses, and Mandana
daughter of Astiages, is equalized by Xenophon to any Prince before
him for valour and bountie. Hee inlarged his Monarchy, but at
last fighting against Tomiris the Scythian Queene lost his life, but his
Monarchy endured till the yeare 3635. when Alexander the great
and famous Macedonian translated it to the Greekes, after his fatall
Battailes against Darius, the last Monarch; and a few yeares after
himselfe was conquered at Babilon by deadly poyson.
After whom for aboue fiue hundred yeares Persia groaned vnder
many Lords and Tyrants, till the yeare after our Sauiour Christ 228,
Artaxerxes a Heroicke Persian regained her glory and freedome,
killing Artabanus, last of the Parthian Monarchs, and the twelfth King
from Artabanus, who by treachery tooke the rule from Tyridates
the last of the Arsacidae.
Since when it was vanquished by Tangrolipix the Turke, An. 1030.
and after that, in three Discents by the Tartars, who for two hundred
yeares kept the Diadem till the yeare 1430. Vsan Cassan an Armenian
Prince tooke it from the Tartar. His daughter (bego^ of Despina,
daughter of Calo-Iohannes Emperour of Trepizond a Christian)
was married to Sultan Ayder, father of Ismael Sophy of Persia 1495,
which Ismael was a most victorious King, and discended lineally from
Mus^ Ceresin, the twelfth sonne of Hussan or Ossan, sonne of Mortis
Haly who married Fatima sole Daughter and Heire of Mahomet the
great Imposture. Ismael had Tamas, father of Ismael, father of Ayder-Mirza,
father of Mahomet cald the blind, father of Abbas, grand-father
of Shaw Sophy now reigning An. 1631. which Genealogy shall
in this Bookeelfe-where at large be decyphered.
It remaynes now to speake of the habit and disposition of the
Persians. It is therefore first, to be noted that though the Turkes be
not comparable to the Persian for magnanimity and noblenesse of
mind, yet are the Persian from the Duke vnto the Peasant slaues vnto
the King, who is Supreme in and ouer all.
Thats the reason, hauing so much good marble, they build with
vnburnt clay, because their lands and houses be not hereditary. The

King by a forced will, becomming Lord and heire to all, both Mahometans,
Iewes and Christians liuing vnder his protection (merchants
excepted out of Europe.)
They are valiant, proper for the most part, Oliue-coloured, mirthfull
and venerious.
They haue no haire on head nor chin, on the vpper-lip they haue
it very long and turned down-wards. Some reserue a locke vpon the
top of the head, as a certaine note that Mahomet at Doomes Day,
will distinguish them from Christians, and by it lift them vp to Paradize:
their eyes are generally blacke (the Georgians grey) their
noses high as be their fore-heads.
About their heads they winde great roules of Calico, some of
silke and gold, somewhat higher and not so bungy as the Turkish
Tulipants. A little fash of gold or fringe hangs downe behind, as
doe our Skarfes, which ornament, they lately borrowed from the
Arabian.
Bands are not amongst them, they are signes of peace and quiet,
the King weares the contrary side of his Tulipant forwards, which is
all the difference in habit, twixt him and others.
In Triumphs I haue seene them wreath long chaines of Pearles
and Rubies about their Turbants, of great value and beautie.
Their out Garment or Vest is commonly of Callico quilted with
Cotton, some weare them of parti-coloured silkes, some of Sattin
and some of rich gold or siluer Chamlets, and other of cloth of gold
and Tinselled: they affect varietie of colours as Emblemes of diuersitie
of Ioyes and pleasure. Blacke is not knowne among them, they
say tis dismall and a signe of hell and sorrow: their sleeues are strait
and long (therein different from the Turkes who haue them wide
and short) the coat reaches to their calues and beares round, by being
ingirted with a towell of silke and gold eight or nine yards long: vnder
this garment they weare a smocke couloured like our Scottish
plad, and in length agreeing to our demi-shirts: their breeches are like
Irish troozes, hose and stockings sowed together, and sometimes
they reach but to the ancles, two or three inches naked to their
shooes which haue no latchets, are of good leather, and what colour
you will (blacke excepted) they are vsually sharpe at the toe, and
turning vpwards, the heeles shod with thin Iron, and end with small
nailes in seemely order. Some againe (especially such as trauell
much) haue short coats or calzoons of cloth without sleeues, lined
with Furres of Persian Sheepe, Sables, Foxes, Mushwhormaes or
Squirrils, and can suffer short wide stockings of English cloth or Kersies,
the heeles faced with coloured leather which too when they
ride they make vse of, their Boots are well sewed, but ill cut, saue
that their widenesse beats off the showres. They vse no Gloues, nor

Rings of Gold, some paint their hands with an herbe or juice, which
colours and keepes coole the hands. They commonly haue their
nailes parti-coloured, Vermillion and white, they vse siluer Rings
and Seales, the first set with an Aggat, the other with Ara^ique letters,
not one noble Warriour of a thousand among them, knowing
how to write.
They neuer goe without their Shamsheers or Swords, which are
crooked like a Crescent (and is their Armes) of so good mettle that
they preferre them afore any other, and so sharpe as any (...), nor
will they buy one, vnlesse they can cut an Asinego asunder at one
stroke, the hilts are without ward, must haue them of steele some of
Gold, the poore of wood, the scabberds well made and fit: which
in solemnities are set with stones of value.
They neuer ride without Bowes and Arrowes, the Quiuer and
Case, wrought and cut ingeniously, the Bowes are short and bended,
not vnlike a Crossebow, which though not comparable to the
Gun (an instrument they now make practice of) yet they haue been
famous for their Archery. Such made Crassus, going to encounter
them cryed out hee feared Sagittarius and not Scorpio) when an Astronomer
told him it presaged danger respecting Sol, and accordingly
he lost both life and victory.
Nor are they now reputed of, except they can cleaue an Orenge
which hangs in a string, a-thwart the Hippodrome, and when past
the marke, with an other ready Arrow, can strike the rest looking
backwards, which he easily accomplishes, riding so short in his stirrops.
This is enough for description of the men, their forme and habit.
The women as vnseene may passe vnspoken of, what may be expected
I shall publish it.
Their stature is meane but straight and comely, and incline rather
to corpulency then leannesse, their haire blacke and curling, their
fore-heads high and pure, eyes Diamond-like, hauing blacke lustre,
their noses high, mouthes rather large then sparing, thicke lips and
cheekes fat, round and painted, so that without errour, their complexions
cannot be deciphered: those that come in assemblies are best
reputed of, though by profession Whores, they are rich habilimented,
their heads rounded with a golden caule: their cheekes tinctured
with Vermillion, their noses and eares hung with Iewels of price
and bignesse, and about their faces (tied to the chin) a rope of orient
pearle of exceeding value, if not counterfeit: their hands are painted
with flowres or posies, as be their feet and legs, both which are
denudated in their dances, which elaborately they performe with
bels and antiques: their habit or gowne is to their mid-legs, some of
Sattin, some of Tissued-stuffes, of rich imbrodery in gold or siluer,

these looke wantonly, drinke strongly, laugh extremely and couet
really mens monies, esteeme, reputation and honesties.
The other women belonging to Seraglioes or Haramms, liue discontented.
Eight or ten lustfull women, by the law subiected to one
(and he perhaps an impotent man) their only libertie is to haunt the
Gardens, which being spacious, receiue many, where they parly at
pleasure, but not free from Eunuchs their iealous Argoes, whose sole
care, is from out of the womens lauish abundant talke, to screw out
some thing may be gratefull for the King, touching the Nobles (anotomized
by these women) by which many great ones come to vnexpected
destruction.





Other women when they goe abroad, wrap themselues in a large
receiuing sheet, which tyed to the head reaches to her feete, opening
only to the eyes a very little to beget passage, they passe and repasse
vnknowne and vnrespected: nothing lesse among them then
praise of beautie, because nothing so familiar with them as cruell
Iealousie.
Their houses (to speake generally) within are poore and sordid,
a Carpet, a Pan, and a Platter, epitomizes all their Furniture,
The better sort sleepe vpon Cots, or Beds two foot high, matted
or done with girth-web: on which a Shagg or Yopangee which riding
serues as an Vmbrella against raine, and sleeping for a bed and
couerture.
Those that haue slaues during (or rather to beget) rest, receiue
breath and coolnesse from their fanning them, who also driue away
those bold Muschetoes or Gnats which too turbulently sting and
buzze about them. Their diet is soone drest, soone eaten, soone digested
and soone described.
The better sort sit vpon Carpets crosse-legged, and feed soundly
vpon Pelo, Chishmee-pelo, Sheere-pelo, Chelo and the like, that is,
Rice boiled with Butter, with Mutton, with Hens, with Almonds,
or with Rice without Butter: they vse no spoones, for hands are ancienter:
some colour their Pelo blacke, some yellow, some white,
and twenty other wayes, which though all but Rice, are counted
so many seuerall dishes. But though the meat be particoloured, or
party named. Yet the ground and meate is Pelo and no other. They
vse Sallads Acharrs and rosted Egges, all which are of sundry colours
tinctured, sad and hard that they may stay the longer in their
bellies, and strengthen heat and moysture in their stomackes. They
drinke cold water out of a Hussinee or Pitcher, but they want no
wine nor appetites to drinke it, a sure signe Bacchus once conquered
them, and rules no lesse then their Alcoran: at meales they are merry
and no way offensiue (if no women sit among them, who out of
wantonnesse ouer-load their mouthes with Pelo or other meat, and
by a sudden laughter exonerate their chaps, and throw the ouerplus
into the dish whence first they had it, which was to vs strange and offensiue)
they will be drunke, but it is voluntary, no man compels it.
Nor is it admirable or losse of credit with them, they are so quiet and
free from censure, and though with vs drink irritates quarrels and comparisons,
yet here they neuer differ; the law is so seuere, the act so
strange, and the vnity of Mussulmen (or true beleeuers) so ioynt and
efficatious: nor is this want of spirit in them, but order and conformity.
No Nation in the Vniuerse has better nor more daring spirits
in fight or exercise, then Persia has.
They are very facetious in discourse, they are not very inquisitiue

about forreigne affaires, they are content with home occurrents, and
affect more sensuall delights for their lustf^^l bodies, then by vncertaine
stories to perplexe their mindes. When so ere they receiue a
mandate from the King or Nobles, they kisse it in diuers places and
then vse it. They sweare very vsually, and those Oathes are, by Serrey
Mortis Ally, the head of Mortis Ally, by Shawambashee or Serreyshaw
by the Kings head, as by putting one finger vpon their eye. And
then (if you please) you may beleeue them.
The poore eat Rice sometimes, but most commonly Roots, Melons,
Fruits, Garlicke, Opium, Honey, and Fraize like to our Thlummery.
These are seldome drunke, but the cause is preualent, they
cannot get it. They haue Arack or Vsquebagh, distilled from Dates
or Rice, both which are Epidemick in their mirth and Festiuals.
The sheepe are sweete, and fattest in the taile, whose weight oft
ponderizes twenty pound, and many times their whole body. Cheese
and Butter is among them, but such as squemish English stomacks wil
disdaine at: Dates preserued in sirrup mixt with Butter-milke, is
precious diet: the Spoones to eat with are halfe a yard in length, and
aske a contented mouth to entertaine their bignesse.
They hate Swines flesh, Veale, Beefe, Hares and Buffoles. Mahomet
forbad it them, and they obserue it.
But Camell, Goat, Sheepe, Hens, Egges, and Phe^sants are tolerated:
they are no great Rost-meat-men. But it may be Ignorance
more then disliking has made it of some wonder there: In some
Buzzars they haue Camell or Mutton cut in mammocks or small
bits put vpon scuets and carbonaded or rosted in the fire, of this they
sell three or foure spits for two pence, some practize the art of baking,
and to proue it, put a whole Lambe into an Ouen, without
paste or better cookery, when tis throughly tosted, though blacke,
they eat it and say it tasteth daintily. The truth is, they are all Martialists
and are not daintie.
They vse another potion, faire water, juice of Lemmons, Sugar,
and Roses, which Sherbets are vsed more commonly in India.
Twixt meales (which are three aday at eight, twelue, and foure)
they meet often in houses, like our Tauernes. Where is vendible
Wine, Arack, Sherbet, Tobacco suckt through water by long canes
or pipes, issuing from a boule or round vessell: they spit but seldome
(the Iewes lesse) and that liquour which most delights them, is Coffa
or Coho, a drinke brewed out of the Stygian Lake, blacke, thicke and
bitter; distrained from Berries of that quality, though thought good
and very wholsome, they say it expels melancholy, purges choler,
begets mirth, and an excellent concoction.
Opium (of which Nogdibeg tooke so much as poysoned him) is of
great vse and vertue with them taken moderately, they are alwayes

chawing it, tis good against vapours, cowardize and the falling sicknesse:
it makes them strong and long in Venus exercises, the footmen
vse it too as a preseruer of strength, and which is strangest, so
giddies them, that in a constant dreame or dizzinesse, they run sleeping
not knowing whom they meet, and yet misse not their intended
places: and by its power protract their trauell, to deceiue their body
of seasonable rest of lodgings.
Their Coines are Mammoodees, which value eight pence, Larrees
fashioned like point-aglets, and are worth ten pence, Shawhees foure
pence, and Bistees two pence: etc, they haue sundry Coines of gold,
as Sultanees, etc. but I saw very few of them. The Coz-begs or small
Copper money is engrauen with the Emperours Coat Armour, a
Lion passant, gardant, the Sunne Orient vpon his backe.
The men account it a great shame to vrine standing, and because
they hate pollution they after it wash themselues, for which end
their slaues are euer attending them with Ewres of siluer filled with
water. They cannot endure it in themselues, nor to see others walking,
so that when they goe but to the next doore they doe it riding.
Their Horses are of Arabian breed, small, swift and fiery, they
haue round cutting bitts, their bridles long and platted with gold, as
are their saddle-pomels and stirrops for the better sort, their saddles
of Veluet, some like the Morocko, others hard, small and close, which
they borrow from the Tartar.
The Horses feed vsually of Barley and chopt-straw put into a bag,
and fastned about their heads, which implyes their manger: they are
strictly tied to proportion of prouant, any surplusage brings death
or diseases. Their mules are of great price and vertue, chiefly where
the iourney is ouer Sands, Desarts, or craggie Mountaines. They
serue better for patience and sure footing then the Horses, but in
Warres they are for baggage, wanting courage for more honourable
employment: the women of note trauell vpon Coozelbash-camels,
each Camell loaded with two cages (or Cajuaes as they call them)
which hang on either side the beastframed of foure small woodden
Pillars, boarded to sit vpon, but so low that they affoord not standing,
and are couered with Crimson Veluet or Kers^es. They are guarded
by Eunuches weaponed with Bow and Arrowes, and threaten
death to any bold opposer or such dare come within shot of their
mercilesse shafts, with which they are loaden as they trauell: so that
the best and brauest company, knowing the custome of those Countries
and the Eunuchs iealousies, giue them larger and contented
passages.
I might here content my selfe with this description, did not some
expect a little of their Religion: which being so oft and so well related
by others, may warrant me to passe in silence, for which,

I will runne on more swiftly ayming only to content the Ignorant.


The Religion of the Persians.
THeir beleife is in Mahomet, yet haue they Mortis Haly in no
lesse account among them. I will acquaint you with the
tradition of them both.
Mahomet was by birth an Arabian, his father Abdar a Saracen (or
rather of discent from Ismael sonne of Hagar, and so a Hagaren) Emma,
his mother a Iew: from which two hee suckt the knowledge of
both religions, to whom was added Sergius a Sabellian Heretique,
that denied the Trinitie, from him hee receiued Baptisme, though
formely circumcised. And from these three he deduced his Alcoran.
This was about the yeare after our blessed Sauiours Incarnation
597. at that time Heraclius the Emperour and Chosroes King of
Persia, contending for Soueraigntie, against both whom Mahomet set
himselfe with a troope of Tartars and Arabians, to whom he descyphered
the Roman bondage, and though they seemed willing to
reiect them, yet scorned they so vnworthy a Commander, to effect it
be, being but lately from his prentiship, which Mahomet salued by his
ingenuitie, telling them of the manners of the Romans in their infancie,
and that though his knowledge and fame in Battailes were
not much, yet assured them, he knew it by reuelation, himselfe was
borne to actuate no small matters.
The people both admire him and beleeue him, so that by his own wit
and their valour he became victorious in seuen great and wel-fought battailes,
and desiring to eternize his fame, in a more continuing way, perceiuing
most part of his Followers, Heathens and profane wretches,
divulged himselfe to be a mightie Prophet ordained before Adams
fall to come into the World to correct the Law of Moses and the
Prophets, and preferres himselfe before Christ, so much as hee preceded
Moses, both whom notwithstanding he esteemes of, and tolerates
them to helpe him at Doomesday to iudge the World.
This aduantage the Deuill gaue him, to shew his people how deuided
and cruell the Christians were. At that time, Boniface the third
obtayning by grant of vsurping Phocas the bloudie Emperour, ouer
the three other Patriarchs and whole Church of Christ, the Title
of Vniuersall Bishop: though but little before, Gregory his Predecessour,
branded him for Christs enemy that went about it, in that

threescore and sixe Bishops formerly in that Sea from Lynus, seuen
yeares after Christ to this Boniface neuer intended it: and whereby
Iohn Patriarch of Constantinople gaue it ouer because vniust, and no
way agreeing with humility.
And that Mahomet might not want his lying Miracles, he perswaded
them, he had daily instructions from the holy Ghost, which he
shewed them to be the Doue, accustomed when shee was hungry, to
feed in his eare, and that his groueling and foming (a disease much
troubling him) was caused by the exceeding glory, the Angell Gabriel
brought with him; who hee pretended told him all that is comprised
in the Alcoran.
Though some, finding his subtletie gaue no credit to him, yet he
wonne the hearts of most of those Idolatrous Pagans, then about
him, and in time, by money and force subiected the rest, so that hee
begun to broach his Traditions, which after by Ozman his Successor,
were compiled together and cald an Alcoran, writ in the Arabian
Tongue consisting of eight Points or Commandements, and in
Verse, to which he added Miracles, Visions, Fables, and the like:
many of which are not authenticall amongst the Persians.


The Persian's Commandements.

The first is that much sung Verse, a-top of Churches.
Llala-ylala, Mahummed-resullula: translated thus:
Their is one God, the great God and Mahomet
is his Prophet.
ANd by this they interdict all superstitious worship of Images,
Pictures, and such like, hated exceedingly, and therefore haue
Popery in abomination, and though Mahomet be supreme of all,
yet the Alcoran commends many Fathers in the old Law: as Enoch,
Abraham, Moses, Elias, and as most excellent, Iesus Christ, whom
they repute a great and holy Prophet, but not to be the Sonne of
God, or that hee died vpon the Crosse, but that it was another Iew
whom the people crucified in his place, they beleeue he was sonne
vnto a Virgin, but not conceiued by the Holy Ghost, but by smelling
to a Rose giuen her by the Angell Gabriel, and that hee was
borne out of her beasts, In some things they speake very reuerently

of him, and punish seuerely, such as speake against him, so that because
the Alcoran stiles him the vertue of God, a powerfull Prophet
good and just, if they casually finde a piece of paper that has his
name in it, they preserue it from all bad vses. And beleeue hee
shall appeare againe forty or fifty yeares before Mahomet, like to Elias
or Iohn the Baptist.


The second Commandement.
Tis not good nor iust, that any should liue vnmarried,
lest the Professours of Mahumetisme
should thereby be diminished.
THis Commandement sprung most from his owne carnall lust
and ability, for as Calius reports he had forty Wiues, and
liked so well of Venery, that he reputed him best deseruing
and worthy most honour could play his part best in bed, often glorying,
that by diuine strength, hee exceeded any ten in that point of
valour, and that it was fit it should be so, that the greater number of
Prophets and holy men might issue from him. And in his Paradice
hee promises them rare Women, strong and louely, with eyes like
sawcers, strength in Venery, coole shades, rich Carpets, nimble Attendants,
with Gold, Pearle, sweet Flowres, Perfumes, Violets and
such sensuall pleasures in abundance.


The third Commandement.
It behooues Mussulmen (or true Beleeuers)
to be charitable, and to hate Contention.
THis third Precept ties them to beneuolence, and this is a
mayne cause of their pittie to Storkes, Doues, and other
Creatures. That there are such noble places of Receipt or
Carrauans-rawes for Trauellors to rest in, that such order is taken
for the poore and impotent: and that seldome or neuer any one jars
or wrangles with another.



The fourth Commandement.
It behooues all Musselmen to inuocate their
Prophet, each day fiue times with Sobrietie, and to
expect his Comming patiently.
WHich they carefully accomplish, and haue such regard
to it, that when they heare the Boy cry aloud vpon
the Steeple, they fall to prayer, though neuer so busie
in prophane talke, drinking, wenching, or the like:
they euer turne their face to Mecha, (neere which Mahomet is intombed
in an old plaine Monument) they kneele, bend and ducke
at euery Epithite of Mahomet, and entring, wash themselues: this is
the most vsuall prayer with them.
IN the Name of the good and religious God, praysed be the Soueraigne
of all Worlds, the only pittifull and mercifull God of Doome: thee we
serue, thee we cal vpon, shew vs the best way, that which thou hast reuealed
to Mahomet, but not that whereby thou punishest the vngodly. This they
say at Morne, Noone, Euening, mid-night, and two houres after in
these formes.


Prayers to Mahomet.
Lala ylala Mahummed resullula:
Another vsed by the Indians, Iauans, Arabians
and Persians.
BIzmilla raugh mawn, arawheam Alhumdill Ally, Etto hyatto
Almo Barachatto, assulwatto, Attayo Batto, Leila, heessalam, Aleika,
I, Iaanna, nebeen rawmaet, Wallaw heeweeber-catto.
Esselamalena, walla-Ebadulla, hesolaheam eshaddo, awla-Elaha, El-alaho
eshaddo Mahumed resullula, l'alla Essalamaleena, Ebadulla-Solaheem,
Essalamalekam, Essalamaleka, Aly homma Sullea. Allaw Mahomet don
wallaw, wessalam chamma Salleata, Alhumdillalley Whoddaw.
All or most of which, are Epithites of God and Mahomet.

The Alcoran bids a seuen-fold daily worship, they neuer pray
with their shooes on, and being entred sit without distinction of degrees
or qualities (as things not to be challenged in places of deuotion)
they neuer looke aside vpon any occasion, till they are come to
Mahomets All-humdillallaw, and then they looke ouer either shoulder,
beleeuing he will come to Iudgement suddenly, iust when they
are praying that particle.
Their seruice is sometimes performed by Songs and Rimes, but of
vnequall numbers.
The Abdall a voluntary Monke amongst them, is reputed by
the wiser sort a Wolfe in a Sheeps skin, but of the superstitious
is reported holy and venerable, he is clad with a sheep-skin and professes
pouerty, they will in the Markets or Assemblies preach lying
wonders, and expound the Alcoran according to their inuentions,
supposing their spirituall abilities superiour to others in that exercise,
his Image is in the Title page. Howbeit I referre the discourse
of these vnto a fitter place, and will here goe on with the description
of other matters.


The fift Commandement.
See that thou obserue yearely a moneth Lent,
and a Byram.
THis they keepe very wisely, all day they abstaine from euery
kind of meate, but vntill mights, for so soone as the Sunsets,
and the Kettles beat, then they bowze it lustily, with
varietie of meates and pleasure, only Trauellers and weake men, are
euer exempted: And commonly Shaw Abbas during this Ramdam
or Rammazan (the moneth wherein Mahomet got the Alcoran from
Gabriel the Angell) did vse to trauell, to be priuiledged from fasting
deuotions. In this solemnitie they adde a double proportion of
Lamps about the Prophets, and hang the Steeples with lights, which
burne past midnight. Two more Feasts they haue, the Byram and
Nowrowz: the former as our Easter, is celebrated by the Abdals,
Hodgees, Deruisses, and Frier^s, all which rabble receiue liberally
from such as meet them, Offerings of good will and Charitie. The
Nowrowz is their Newyeares day, beginning the tenth of March, such
time as the Sunne dwels in the Aequinoctiall. At which Feast the Sultans
and Chans bestow Pishcashes, or gifts one on another.



The sixt Commandement.
Reuerence thy Parents.
WHich though they commend in others, they seldome
practice in themselues. Many late examples accusing
them, treated of in most Histories where Mogul, Tartar,
Turke, or Persian Soueranize, few of them attending patiently
the death of their Predecessours, but by impious meanes labour their
vntimely establishment.


The seuenth Commandement.
Cursed be the Slayer.
ANd truly this is kept vnanimously, this precept and the rigour
of the Caddies or Causae in the Divanoes, or Iudgement
Hals so bridle them, that among the Inferiour and better
sort of men I neuer saw a combat or causelesse brabble, though they
be very apt in prompt occasions, to demonstrate valour and resolution.
Onely the King and great ones flight this Law, for they delight
in tyranny, and account Emperializing a qualitie proper for
great Personages, who otherwise are no Nymrods vpon earth, in their
opinion, vtterly ignorant of true Humanitie and Philosophie, which
commands clemencie and vertue in them, as publique examples to
all Inferiours.


The eight Commandement.
Doe so to others as thou wouldest haue them doe
to thee.
BY which hee wils them to be louing, iust, and wise, and the
keepers of these his Lawes, he rewards with Paradice, which
hee thus brings them too. Hee transformes himselfe at

Doomes-day into a great Ram, and all Musselmen into Fleas, they
shall hide themselues in his spacious Fleeces, and thus burthened, shal
trauell till hee come where he can skip into Paradice: there hee assumes
his proper glory, and giues them new shapes, new strength,
Wine, braue Women, infinite of Treasure and Ptouisions, Riuers,
Trees, Amber, Gold, Odours of Arabia, and continuall joy, all new
and better then now imagined: they exclude no Religion^ out of
their heauenly Paradice, Moses shall bring the Iewes, Christ the Christians,
and Mahomet Mahometans: but the chiefe place and glory shall
be theirs: theirs is the best Gold, sweetest Riuers, and the most beautifull
Damozels.
These are commanded in the Alcoran, and for the Authour himselfe,
Bonfinus writes that he permitted Sodomy: and lay with beasts.
So that Master Smith arraignes him of blasphemy, pride, lies, Sodomy,
bloud, subtiltie, and entitles him heire apparant vnto Lucifer,
no lesse then twelue thousand falshoods contained in his fabulous
Alcoran.
This false Prophet (sore against his will) died in his sixtie third
yeare (his great Clymatericke) and gaue his seduced Followers a
sure promise of his miraculous Resurrection the third day after; till
when they kept it vnburied, and as Authonius writes, thirty dayes aboue
the reckoning, but this is certaine, that smelling he was a lyer,
they kept him no longer, forced to it by a monstrous and filthy
stinke proceeding from his carcasse: yet by Abubecher his Father in
law and successor in the Popedome of Mecha, hee was purified, entombed
and laid in a new built Sepulchre at Medina Talnaby, three
dayes iourney from Mecha: to which place is daily resort, by such of
his Religion as haue zeale to Pilgrimage: and those not only, are
euer after accounted Syets or Holy men, and cannot fable from that
time forward, but their Camels and Apparell also are of such esteeme,
that they neuer after doe them seruice in vile carriages or occasions
of that qualitie.
Mahomet promised them his second glorious comming after a
thousand yeares, which they seriously lately looking for, and seeing
themselues guld by such credulity began to stagger, till the Mufti assured
them, the figures were mistaken, and that vpon better view
of the Originall hee found two thousand for a thousand, when hee
would not faile to visit them: till which first thousand yeares, the
Kings of Persia, euer kept a Horse sadled and well lookt too, which
with one of his daughters, hee reserued for Mahomet, or for Hoce^^-Mahumed-Mahadin,
last sonne of Mortis Haly, who the Persians to
this day verily iudge yet liuing: first come, first serued. So that for
aboue eight hundred yeares the Turke and Persian, differed not in
points of Religion, til Siet Guynet a Persian born at Ardouile in Media.
Anno 1375. (a little before Tamberlaine ouer-run Asia) sought how
to recouer Halies memory, as a plot to make a perpetuall hatred
twixt the Turkes and them, and to re-establish the Scepter in the
time of Mortis Haly, from whom he lineally deriued his pedigree)
This his proiect was begun by Gunet, but accomplished by Ismael his
Grand-sonne King of Persia, who got the Kingdome by ouerthrow
of King Iacob his mothers brother, sonne to Vsan-Cassan an Armenian
Prince and Emperour of Persia: Siet Guynet, I say perswades the
Persians that Abubecher, Omar and Ozman, the three immediate Caliphs
or Successours to Mahomet, were Villanes and Impostures, that
most vniustly they opposed Mortis Haly, Mahomets sonne in Law,
and heire by Legacie. Which till they were all dead, he could neuer
enter into: and that Osman who compiled the Alcoran out of Mahomets
loose paper, had put in new inuentions of his owne, that hee
had put out some and added other stories at his pleasure, that in comparison
of Haly, they were Knaues and Impostures, and though the
Turkes pray to them, magnifie them aboue Haly, and thinke them
holy. Yet let all true Persians thinke otherwise of them, as enemies
to Mahomef, and all good men, and that all their Disciples were
Toades, the of-scum of the earth and vile Apostates, and so framed this
Prayer, Cursed be Abubecher, Omer and Ozman, and God be gracious
to Haly, and well pleased with him, and all true Persians. Which
Prayer and opinion they haue since maintained stifly, and (in some
sort not only to make him excell the three great Turkish Prophets,
but euen to equallize the great Mahomet himself) as the whole rabble
of them else-where say to Mahomet, lala ylala, Mahomet resullula.
The Persian new composer Siet retorts the like eccho to Mortis
Haly, and since some others to Izmael Siets Grand-chile in this sort,
lalay-lala Mortis Aly Vellilula. For which the Turkes hate them like
Dogges, and call them Rafadi and Caffarrs, or Schismaticks, and
themselues Sonnj, and Mussulmen, which is truly faithfull.
This aforesaid Ali had by Fatima his Wife, Daughter of Mahomets
two sonnes Hussan and Ossan, Hali after his victory against Maui
Lord of Damasco lost his life by Muavias, who succeeded him in
the Sea at Mecha, and to establish his Title, slue Ossan and eleuen of
his sonnes, all whom with Hali, were buried at Massad, Hali, Telnab
neere Cafe, two dayes iourney from Babilon: where the Kings of
Persia discended from him, oftentimes were enthronized and kept
their Coronation Ceremonies.
The twelfth sonne of Ossan, Hussan, or Hocem escapt slaughter,
his name was Musa, or rather Mirza Cherisim, or Prince Chersim, by
some called Mahumed Mahadin, who had issue, and from whom this
Siet, Guned or Iuned, Grandfather of Ismael did discend, and from
him the now ruling King of Persia.

The Persians themselues contract their Alcoran into a lesser Volnme
then doe the Arabians, reiecting most of those Commentaries
or Glosses made by Ozman and Ibnul, and content themselues with
Gunets reformations, preferring the Imamian Sect which is their own
from Hali, before the Melchian, Anefian, Benefian, or Kefayans broached
by Abubeche* Omar, and Ozman, and from which foure are
sprung aboue seuenty seuerall sorts of Religious Orders, as Morabits,
Abdals, Deruisses, Papassi, Rafadi, Cobtini, etc.
Their greatest Doctour of Antiquitie is Elhesin-Ibnu-Abilhasen,
borne at Balsora in the Persian Gulph, hee taught the Persian and Arabs
eighty yeares after Mahomets death, and by his fluent language
and austere life got no small reputation with those pur-blind Nations,
yet could his Disciples neuer preuaile with him to register his
doctrine, so that leauing all to their memories, so soone as hee was
buried, they grew among themselues to an immediate difference,
which could not be reconciled till a hundred yeares after a Babilonian
Siet, cald Elharu-Ibnu-Esed, imployed his vtmost wits, not only
to agree but eternize the fore-named Elhesius Paragraphs. Howbeit
the Mahometan Doctours of other parts bended themselues against
this late Opinionist, and by a common vote condemned them
all as Heretiques and Villaines to the Alcoran, so that about ninetie
yeares after by their instigations, Melick-shaw the Turkes Antecessor
came against them, and vtterly confounded them, men, Bookes and
all other monuments of their reformation.
Howbeit a while after they got breath, and screwed into their
good fauour and opinion King Cazell, Nephew to their great enemy
King Meleck, and by request and valour of their noble friend Nydam-Emul,
they got the dignity of their former Treatises and points
of Religion restored againe, so that Elgazzuli a man of no meane
fame and ingenuitie was imployed by them, not only to apologuize
but to dispute strongly against their opposites, which hee did at first,
and after that moderated twixt the Cadies and his owne Reformatists:
After which generall agreement they fell into abundance of errours
and obscene opinions, turning most of their doctrine into lasciuious
Poems and Songs of lust and carnall pleasures, alledging for
themselues euen Mahomets owne Tenents for authoritie: to correct
which, start vp a seuere Scholler Essebrauer Diserauerd of Chorasan
who tooth and naile, cries out against their filthinesse, against whom
arises Elfargani. and takes vpon him to defend his brethren, by a charitable
Commentary of their discourse and actions, so that some applauded,
and other-some exploded this busie Cabalist.
At last to conduce things to some order out of this Chaos of confusion,
their most learned Historian Elifarni, tooke vpon him to
make straight these crooked postures: so that of seuenty two feuerall

Sects of Heresies he reduced all to two, the Leshari and Imamiae, the
first magnifying eulogically their Great Mahumed, and receiued by
all his Sectaries in Thrace, Aegipt, Greece, Palestine and Syria. The other
no lesse eleuating Mortis Ally his sonne-in-law, (who with a
Sword of a hundred Cubits length, cut off at one blow ten thousand
Christians heads, and transected Taurus, as I haue formerly noted) and
his worth and equalitie is receiued by all the Persian Empie and some
Indians: And this is able to giue reason, in the vnderstanding their
debate, and of their Alcoran.
This added that as we compute from our Sauiours Natiuitie, so
they begin from Mahomets compiling his Alcoran, deliuered on a
Friday, then made their Sabbath: that accout (they call) the Hegir^^
or yeare of deliuerance.



Emperours, Kings, and Caliphs of
Persia successiuelie.
I Dare not goe about to trouble you, with the Chronologie and
succeeding Raignes of such Monarchs and Kings as haue swayed
Persia, without a requested pardon, aswell demanded, In respect
of many that formerly haue named them, both Chaldee, Greeke and
Latine Writers, as for the incertainty of most Historians. And although
to some it appeare not pleasant, not much profitable, it may
notwithstanding happily adde some content and ease vnto a Traueller,
if he haue it vpon the report and credit of their Natiue Authorities.
Their owne Traditions writ long agoe, and preserued hitherto amongst
them, is that Kayomarraz first wote a Crowne and commanded
ouer them, and foolishly they imagine he was Adam, but I will
rather beginne with Elam (from whom the people were called Elamites
and Persae-polis from them denominated, Elanis) sonne of Sem,
sonne of Noah. And if we may beleeue those Authours that suppose
this Patriarch Sem, was that Melchisedeck, who blessed Abraham,
then may Kayomarraz be reputed Noah: but the Scripture tels vs that
Abram was in a lineall line from Sem, no lesse then ten Discents, and
though Noah himselfe, liued till the confusion of Languages at Babilon,
(hapning a hundred and thirty yeares after the Floud) yet it is
not probable he was Melchisedecke, by that description of him in the
Hebrewes, that he was without Parents, Discent, beginning or ending,
most of which are apparant in this Sem, or Shem Predecessour
to our Sauiour in humanity.

I will begin with Kayomarraz, next whom ruled these succeeding
Emperours.

1. Kayomarraz.
2. Syamech.
3. Owchang.
4. Iamshet, first Founder of Persae-polis.
5. Zoak.
6. Fraydhun, from whom discend the Sacae, Saxons, and English
men.
7. Manucher.
8. Nawder, or Chedorlaomer, one of those Kings slaine by Abraham.
In rescue of his Nephew Lot.
9. Asraciab.
10. Bazab.
11. Kaycobad.
12. Salomon.
13. Chozrao.
14. Lorazpes.
15. Guztap.
16. Bahaman Ardchir (or Axtaxerxes Longimanus.)
17. Queene Omay, Wife of Ochus.
18. Darab.
19. Darab-kowcheck (or little Darius) who after a carelesse securitie
and scorne of Alexander the Great (or as the Persians call
him) Askander Buzzurk, lost vnto him the Monarchie of Asia, in his
last battaile neere to Tane.

And in him ended those Kings or Monarches of Persia, begun in
the yeare after the Creation 1700. and ending, Anno mundi, 3636.
Askander Buzzurk, fell in loue with Rowchank, King Darabs
Daughter, but left no issue, whereby the gouernment of Persia (as
all the other Countries) fell amongst his Captaines, so that confusedly
for about fourescore yeares they were pressed by Greekes and
Syrians, and foure hundred and fifty by the valiant Parthians, who
recouered the Monarchie to themselues, vnder Arsaces (after whom
the Kings were cald Arsacidae) in the yeare after the Creation 3718. and
kept the Diadem till the Raigne of Artabanus, slaine in the yeare
after Christ two hundred twenty eight by Ardchyr, or Artaxerxes a
Nobleman of the discent of the subiected Persians.
But we will follow the Persian tradition, which reports that after
Alexander (buried at Babilon) the Persians nominated themselues a
King, who by reason of his spirit and force was called Shaw-pur, he
was brothers sonne vnto Darius, and according to that order so called
himselfe: he liued seuenty yeares after the valiant Macedonian.

1. Shaw-pur, or Sapor

2. Ardchir-baba-chawn (or Father and Lord) in whose time, was
incarnate our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ: Augustus Caesar the
second Emperour then swaying ore the World.
3. Shaw-pur the second sirnamed Zabell.
4. Cherman-Shaw.
5. Yerzdgerd.
6. Baharan.
7. Yezgird.
8. Hormuz, from whose name perhaps Ormus tooke her name.
9. Feruz.
10. Belax.
11. Chobad.
12. Chezer.
13. Hormuz.
14. Chozrao, where note, that though these differ from some other
Authours, yet they may be reconciled with very little industry.
Next Chozrao raigned
15. Chobad.
16. Ardchir.
17. Shawryr.
18. Ioon, first planter vpon Taurus.
19. Shin-shaw.
20. Turan Daughter of Chozrao.
21. Iasan-zeddah.
22. Shezir.
23. Ferrogzad.
24. Yezdgird.
25. Bornarint, and
26. Hormuz, or Hormisda the last of the Persian Princes of true
Discent. This Prince ruled Anno Dom. 630. In whose Raigne sprung
vp Mahomet; borne at Itrarip in Arabia, from which time begins the
Hegira, or Mahomet an account.

Next these came in the Babilonian Caliphs, who by perswasion to
obey the Alcoran, were forced to accept the Saracens, though at
first vnwillingly, at last, were compelled to it by Omar, that pretended
all those Countries Tributarie to the Caliph-ship, and Sea of
Mecha (neere which, at Talnabi, is buried their greatest Mahumet.)
Albeit we bring in Mahumet himselfe as Regent here, and succeeded
by his three fathers in Law, Abubacher, Omer, and Ottoman, yet by some
he is left out, the Regencie beginning in those three successiue and
only enemies of Mortis Ally (Mahomets sonne in Law) Prophets for
long time honoured with the Persian, but now growne extreame odious,
albeit wonderfully reputed of by the Turkes, as good and holy
men, this diuersitie of opinion causing that great opposition and

hatred twixt the Turke and Persian, apparant to this day, to the generall
good of Christendome.

1. Mahumet.
2. Abubecher.
3. Omer,
4. Ottoman.
5. Mortis Aly slaine by Muavias, and buried at Cafe neere Babilon,
where the Persian Kings haue euer since vsed to be consecrated.
6. Acem, or Hocem Mahumed Mahadin, sonne of Hali.
7. Muauias, first of the Race of the Ben-humians, A^no Dom. 657.
8. Yhezid, who ruled the Caliph-ship in Arabia.
9. Muauia, Abdalla, or Mutarr.
10. Meruan.
11. Abdelmalek.
12. Oyledore.
13. Solyman.
14. Omer the second.
15. Yeyzd.
16. Ebrahim, or Euelyd.
17. Maruan, last of the bloud of Ben Humia, slaine by Soffa, or Salin,
sonne of Saint Azmulli, a Lord of Candahor, who with Lamonit
inuaded Persia, and put to flight Hiblin, Maruans Generall and a hundred
thousand men, and after that, Maruan himselfe with three hundred
thousand, forcing Maruan into AEgipt, where the said Soffa Azmullis
sonne met, fought with and foiled him vtterly, by which encouragements,
Azmulli seized on Persia, and reuiued Muters tenents.
In which were anathamatized the three successors of Mahomet, and
renued long time after Siet, Gunet of Ardouile.

This hapned in the yeare of our Lord, 750. and of the Hegira,
131. in which time Carolus Martellus King of France, plagued the
Mahumetans, in the Quarrell of Christs honour through Christendome,
Thus the line of Ben-humia, being extirpt, begun by Muauias, Anno
Dom. 657. ending Anno 750. in Maruan: where note that these
were not all fathers and sonnes, but such as occasion and the voice of
men made choice of, as are the Popes of Rome.
And now speake we of the Family of Ben-Abbas, the first of whom
we account Safa or Salim, sonne of Azmully, sonne of Hocem, sonne
of Aly.

1. Safa or Salin.
2. Abubecher, Bugiafer or Abbiafer is next, this repaired Babilon and
made it be called Bagdat, Anno Dom. 758.
3. Mahady.
4. Elady-mirza, or Musa.

5. Arachid, or Aron.
6. Mahamed Amin.
7. Mahamun Ben Amin.
8. Malla-chawn.
9. Vuacek.
10. Almoto Vuakell byla Iafar.
11. Montacer.
12. Abul-Abbas.
13. Mustad-zem.
14. Almatez-bila.
15. Motadi-Bila, flourisht Anno Dom. 870.
16. Almat Hamed bila hamed Eben Emoto V^akell.
17. Matzed bila, or Mutezad.
18. Muctafy bila.
19. Mocktader bila.
20. Iafar ben Matazed, or Elhaker.
21. Ratshaw, or bila Mahamed.
22. Kazi bila.
23. Muctafi bila.
24. Mostachfi Abdula.
25. Moriah.
26. Tayaha Abdell carin.
27. Kader Hamed.
28. Alkahem Abdula.
29. Almoctadi bila.
30. Almostazer, or Albumazer.
31. Almostarched, or Musterashaw.
32. Rached bila.
33. Almochtafi, or Mustenged.
34. Almostawget.
35. Almostauzi-Benur-Elah-Acen.
36. Nacer, or Narzy.
37. Altaher Mahumed, slaine at Spahawn, by Tangrolipix or Sadoc
Princes of the Zelzucchian Family.
38. Mustenatzer, or Almonstaucer, and
39. Mustadzem, or Almostacem bila Abdala, the last of the Caliphs
that ruled Persia, Arabia, and Babilon: he died Anno Dom. 1258. and
of their Hegira 655. Mustadzem was thrust out by the Tartars, vndet
command of Allan-chawn, or Cyngis-chawn, son of Badur, son of Partan,
son of Phil-chawn, son of Fonama-chawn, son of Byzan-chawn, son
of Shawdub-chawn, sonne of Tomin-chawn, sonne of Buba-chawn,
sonne of Buzamer. Next to Cyngis or Allan-chawn is rallied,
2. Octaka-kawn.3. Gwioc-kawn.
4. Vlakuk-kawn.5. Habka-kawn.6. Nikador-oglan (or youth)7. Tangador, or Argon-chawn, an extreme enemy of all Christians,
and being ouercome by Argonus sonne of Abaga, in reuenge of
his cruelties, he commanded Tangadors belly to be cut open, and his
bowels cast vnto the Dogges.8. Giuiatuc-chawn or Regato.9. Badu, or Baduham, of whom many good things are spoken,
and died a Christian.10. Gazun.11. Aliaptu Abuzad.12. Hobaroc-mirza, slaine by Tamerlang, or Tamberlan.13. Tamerlange.14. Olough mirza, father of Abdel, father of Abdula, (or Malaoncres) slaine by Vsan Cassan an Armenian Prince, Anno 1470. yet Tamerlaines
issue ruled towards Candahor, in more splendour, euen in
the Moguls now being. For Abdula had Sultan-mirza, father of Hamed-mirza,
father of Babermirza, father of Fidiager, father of Ocem,
father of Bahadi, father of Homer-mirza, father of Mirza Abubecher.

For then came in the Family of the Guzpan chara chy onlu, or
black Sheepe, viz:
1. Karassaph.2. Emir-ascander.3. Ioon-shaw.4. Acen-ally, to whom succeded the Race of white Sheepe, or
Guzpan Acuculu.

1. Ozun Azembeg, or Acembeyus, and by some cald Vsan Cassan.
2. Sultan Chalile.
3. Iacup sonne of Ozun or Vsan Cassan, and poysoned by his wife.
4. Baysangor mirza.
5. Rustan-beg.
6. Hagmat-beg, these three last intruded.
7. Aluan-beg, sonne of Iacup, and slaine by Izmael his Couzen
Germane.
8. Sultan Morad, or Amurath.
9. Abdel sonne of Olough, and father of Malaoncr.
10. Chugcubeg.
11. Abuzed-chawn.
12. Obed-chawn.
13. Abdula-chawn.
14. Adelatif, who died Anno Dom. 1499. and left the Empire to
Ismael, sirnamed Sophy, sonne in law, though some thinke Grand
sonne to Vsan-chashan, which he got hauing slaine Iacup sonne of Vsan,
and Eluan his sonne.


This Izmael Sophy is famous for his victories against Bainzet the second,
and Selym the first, and Emperours of the Turkes.
He was sonne of Cheque Aider, sonne of Siet Guinet borne at Ardouile,
that first altered their Religion the better to be reuenged of
those Prophets who opposed Mortis Ally his Ancestor, his Genealogie
is thus: Izmael was sonne of Aider, sonne of Siet Gunet, sonne
of Cheque Ebrahim, sonne of Cheque Ally, sonne of Cheque Mucha,
sonne of Cheek Sofy discended in a right Line from Mirza Ceresin the
twelfth sonne of Hocem or Hussan, (and only of all the twelue who
escaped murther from Mnauias) and Hussan was sonne of Mortis Haly.
So from Izmael discend lineally the Emperours of Persia, to
Abbas late raigning, thus
1. Izmael.2. Tamas.3. Izanael the II.4. Mahomet Codoband, or purblind.5. Abbas who died Anno 1629, leauing the Empire to his Grandchild
Soffy-shaw, or King.6. Soffy aged about twenty yeares, Anno Saluationis 1634.
They celebrate the death of Hussan eldest sonne of Hali, yearely
with many Ceremonies, I haue seene them nine seuerall dayes in
great multitudes, in the streets all together crying out Hussan, Hussan,
so long and fiercely, that many could cry no more hauing spent
their voices, they ninth day they find him (whom they imagine lost
in a Forrest) or one in his place, and then in a huge hurly burly, men,
girles and boyes, crying out Hussan, Hussan with Drummes, Fifes,
and the like, they bring him to the Mosque, and so after some admiration
and thanksgiuing they put an end to that their Orgee.
Other Feasts are performed by the Abdals, (who take their
name from Abdala, father of Mahomet) these haue no abode, vow
pouerty, lodge in Churches (which made our Lodgings louzie after
them) and haue prouision brought them by the charitable, they are
couered with a sheep-skin, and though poore, yet trauell with dangerous
weapons, with which tis thought they oft doe villany and get
by, a horne is tied about their necke, which they vse to blow in Markets,
when they would haue the people to heare Orations, their
picture is in the Frontispiece.
The Circumcision of their male children, is at eight yeares old,
but some at eight dayes, most commonly when hee can in some sort
render his profession.
When they purpose it, they conuocate his Kindred, who with
themselues present him gifts, and what may then delight him. That
done, they all mount and carry with them the boy brauely mounted
and attired, a Sword in his right hand, the Bridle in his other. Afore

him are carried a Speare and a Flambeaux, or torch linkt to it, the
Musique accompanies him, with the father next and according to
bloud or degree, the other follow. The Hodgee or Priest meets
him at the Mosque, and takes him downe, and entring the Church,
one holds him on his knee, another vnclothes him, a third holds fast
his hands, the rest giue some triuiall discourse to diminish the expectation
of his paine: and then the Priest dilating his prepuce, in a
trice with his siluer Cissers circumcises him, and applyes a healing
powder of Salt and Marmalate of Dates, which stanches the bloud
and mitigates his griefe, thence-forward hee is called Mussulman, or
true Beleeuer, sometimes they elate a finger, smile and pray to Mahomet.
The poorer sort want Circumcision, and are ignorant wholy of
the Alcoran.
Such women or girles of Christians that liue in slauery, by price
or conquest, are excized forceably, by which they repute them Mahometans,
though their beliefe and heart be otherwise
Their Marriages haue not much Ceremony, Poligamy is tolerable.
Their Burials are exactly performed by hired women, who for
fiue houres space, scratch their vgly faces, howle bitterly, teare
their false haire, swoone and counterfeit sorrow abominably, these
their ejaculations continue till his placing in the graue, which is after
they haue washt him (for they thinke purification in life and
death is very necessary) they persume him, wrap him in fine linnen,
bid him commend them to all their friends, lay him with his head to
Medina Talnabi, place him where neuer any was formerly buried (because
they thinke it an extreme injury to molest the bones of such as
sleepe) place two stones writ with Arabique letters, to signifie his
lodging, its length and breadth, then bid farewell.
After the death of some noble Gentleman,The Authours sicknesse. my course came next,
though not to die, yet to goe neere the Graue, whether the cause was
cold got vpon Mount Taurus, where wee exposed our heated bodies
to vndigested vapours which easily penetrated vs, or rather our immoderate
gormundizing their delicious fruits, which abounding we
affected in too great measure, these and Gods will first so ordered it,
that I begun a tedious sicknesse, in twelue dayes I had a thousand
bloudy stooles (which excesse kild our Lord Ambassadour Sir Dodmore
Cotton at that time, and for forty dayes more, continued with
such cruelty, that neuer any man was brought lower and into greater
feeblenesse than I was.
I wanted not the helpe and opinion of the Kings best Doctours,
who though they hoped of my recouery, gaue me small appearance
of it, yet I tooke what they prescribed mee, and gaue them Gold
what they desired, so that it became a hard question, whether my
spirits or Gold decayed faster.

In this weaknesse, I was forced to trauell 300. miles, hanging vpon
a Camell, and when I most hoped for recouery, Morod their famous
Aesculapius, seeing no more money, limited my life to fiue dayes
more existence, It was the more terrible, cause hee had seene Mecha
and neuer after lied, as was told me.
But he that sits on high, and accounts all humane reason but meere
folly, in foure and twenty houres after proued this great Oraculizer
a compleat lier.
For at that time, an old Tartarian Hecate my seruant to whom I
allowed eight pence daily, inuocated her Succubi to succour mee,
which not a little hurt me, by forcing me to raile and curse her Orisons,
shee whether to hasten the Doctours sentence concerning
me, or rather to possesse my linnen (of which I had no small store)
aimed to poyson me, and shee knew strong drinke was vtterly forbid
me, for feare of inflammation, yet forced by inordinate thirst to call
for water, she returnes me old intoxicating Shiraz Wine, which insensibly
I powred downe, and so immeasurably, it immediately ouercharged
my vitall sences, and put mee for foure and twentie houres
into a deadly trance, so that it was a thousand to one, but it had kild
me: yet by Gods mercy after a virulent vomit and sleepe (which for
a moneth before I tasted not to any purpose) I recouered (in that
time once destinated to be buried by the Natiues, for few friends I
had to helpe me) but when they saw me liue, they both admired and
reioyced at it, so that by the binding qualitie of that wine and sleepe,
I became bound and in small time got strength and action; the olde
Whore in this season, opened my Trunckes (while my other seruant
sorrowed forme) tooke away my linnen and some moneys, and run
whether I neuer pursued her: this sicknesse hapned to mee, in my
age of one and twentie, which is one of the Clymactericks.
I will shew the Persian Alphabet, and so continue my trauaile. They
haue nine and twenty Letters which they write, as doe the Arabians
and Hebrewes, with which they haue affinitie in Prayers and
Language.

Aleph. bea. tea. sea. Icam he^ chea* taul. zaul. rea. zea. zean. sheen. saut. zaud.
(...)
ctea. zcea. ine. kine. phea. caufe. coffe. Lom. meam. nuen. wow. hea.
(...)
Loomealephloy. yeae.
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
(...)
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
(...)
Cumque supeeba fo^^t Babilon spolianda t^op^^eis.
And as I haue in some order giuen you the description of these
people and Countries. It will not offend all (in that vsefull to some)
if I adde a little of their language in most familiar Dialogues, the
English, and Persian explaying one the other, in these agreeing sequences.



The Persian Language.

English
Persian.


GOD
WHoddaw


The Sunne
Afta


The Moone
Mawe


A Prophet
Emoome


A Prophets sonne
Emoomseddy


The Earth
Zameen


Emperour
Pot-shaw


King
Shaw


Queene or Empresse
Beggoon


Prince
Mirzey


Duke
Chawn


Marquesse
Beglerbeg


Earle
Sultan


Lord
Beg.


Lords Sonne
Beg Zedday


Gentleman
Awgam


Merchant
Soldager


Souldier
Cowzel-bash


Lord Ambassadour
Elchee-beg


President
Visyer


Iustice
Darraguod.


Constable
Calentar


Purueyour
Mamendar


A Christian
Franghee


A Pagan beleeuer
Mussulman


A Iew
Iehewd


An Armenian
Armenee


Persian
Farsee


Indian
Mogull


Georgian
Gorgee


Sarcashan
Carcash


Turke
Turke


Iudge
Causee


Lady
Connam


A holy man
Hodgee


a Frier Mendicant
Abdall


a Saint
Meere


a Prophets sonne
Siet


a holy Father
Padree


a Mother
Madree


a Mother
Mamma


a Boy
Pissar


a Girle
Daughter


a Woman
Zan


a Wench
Whotoon


a Seruant
Marda


a Slaue
Colloom


a Foot-man
Shooter


a Taylour
Chiat


a Groom
Myter-bashee


A Horse
Asp


a Saddle
Zeen


a Saddle-cloth
Zeen-push


a Shooe
Cosh


a Naile
Cheat


a Cooke
Ashpash


a Barber
Cyrtrash


a Butler
Suffragee


A Friend
Memam


a Sister
Quar


A Scribe
Vikeel


an Interpreter
Callama-chee


Wine
Sherap


Water
Obb


Fire
Attash


Wynd
Bawd


The Sea
Deriob


a Ship
Kishtee


a Boate
Kishtee-cowcheok


Fish
Mohee


a Sheepe
Guspan


a Goate
Booze


Rost Meate.
Cobbob


Rice
Brindg


Boyld Rice
Peloe


Wood
Yzom


Apples
Sib


Pomegranads
Narr


Muske-Melons
Corpoos


Water-Melons
Hendoon


Dates
Wchormaw


Almonds
Bodoom


Raisins
Kishmish


Walnuts
Gardow


Sugar
Sucker


Small Nuts
Pistachoes


Sirrup of Dates
Dooshab


Pleasant liquour
Sherbet


Bezar
Pezar


a Rose
Gull


Grapes
Angwor


Figges
Anger


Orenge
Noreng.


Lemmons
Lemoon


Carroway seed
Gizneese


Anny-seed
Zera


Nutmeg
Goose


Cloues
Mekut


Mace
Basbas


Cinamon
Dolcheen


Spice
Filfill


Nightingale
Bulbull


Ginger
Gingerfill


Pepper
Pepperfill


Ophium
Triacke


Rubarbe
Rhubarr


Onions
Peose


One Yeare
Yeck Sol


One moneth
Zeck-maw


A day
Rowse


To day
Amroose


Yesterday
Diggroose


To morrow
Subbaw


Two dayes hence
Past-Subbaw


Soone
Zood


Much
Pishaar


More
Digger


Good
Cowbass


Bad
Baddass


Naught
Cowb-nees


Great
Buzzurck


Little
Coucheck


Small
Cham


Lesse
Andack


Bread
Noon


Butter
Rogan


Cheese
Paneer


Milke
Sheer


Sower milke
Mosse


Hony
Dowshabb


Salt
Namack


Water
Obb


Raine water
Ob-baroon


Salt water
Ob-namack


Hot
Garmas


Cold
Sermawas


A Booke
Catobb


A Chest
Sandough


A Carpet
Collee


A Man
Addam


A League
Farsang


Halfe a League
Nym-Farsanga^


A resting place
Manzeil


Common Inne
Carrauans-raw


A Nursery
Haram


A house
Conney


A place
Ioy


Straw
Io


Barley
Cow


Wheat
Gandowm


Money
Zarr


White
Seuittas


Red
Sourck


Iron
Pholot


A Knife
Cord


A Sword
Shamshere


A Gun
Tophangh


A Needle
Suzan


A Glasse
Shusha


A Cup
Paola


Shooes
Cosh


A Candle
Sham


A Bed
Mafrush


A Pillow
Nazbolish


Paper
Coggesh


A Quill
Callam


A Garden
Baugh


A Towne.
De


The Deuill
Shitan


Hell
Iehendam


Rogue
Haramzedday


Slaue
Colloom


Whore
Cobba


Cuckold
Gyddee


Foole
Dooanna


Villaine
Haramsedda


Base Whore
Moder Cobba


The Kings euill
Boagma


Dogge
Segg


Horse
Asp


Mule
Astor


Cow
Gow


An Asse
Owlock


Camell
Shouter


Mule-man
Astor-dor


Camel-man
Sheuter-dor


Horse-keeper
Myter


Sheepherd
Vloch


Bird
Quoy


Beefe
Goust de gow


Hen
Morgh


Hens Egges
Tough morgh


Boyld
Poactas


Halfe boyld
Nym-poact


All boyld
Hamay-poact


Kitchen
Mawdbaugh


A Cooke
Ash pash


A Towre
Manor


A Needle
Suzan


Thread
Respun


A Looking-glasse
Oyna


A Whip
Chawbuck


Rose-water
Gul ob


Vineger
Cyrca


Old
Chonnay


New
Nou^s


I
Man


Thou, he
San O


Euen so
Hamshe


Beate him
Besome


It is day
Rouse hast


It is night
Shab hast


It is darke
Tareekas


Write
Binweese


Sing
Bowhoo^


Say thou
Gu^ta


Oh braue
Shaw Abbas


Brauely done
Barra-collas.


Braue Game
Tama^sha^


A Towell
Dezmall


Nothing
Heach


A Garden
Baugh


A high way
Raw


A Tree
Drake


A Turquoyse
Pheruzay


A Pasport
Phyrman


A Cap
Mandeel*


A Coate
Cabay


A Key
Cleet



A Glasse bottle
Suzan


A riding Coat
Bolla-push


A hill
Achow


A hot-house
Hummum


A Sweet heart
Ionanam


A Physician
Hackeam


The stones
Sechim


The Yard
Keeree


Matrix
Cus


Belly
Shechem


The Market
Buzzarr


The great Market
Mydan


You lie
Drugmagues


You say true
Rosmaguee


Very right
Dreustas


Neere, farre off
Nazeecas, duras


Bring it higher
Beare ingee


Goe, call him
Bro, Awascun


He is a sleepe
Cobbedat


He is abroad
Swarshudat


He is not within
Conneyneese


He eats and drinkes
Moughwhorat


Come quickly
Zood beaw


Goe quickly
Zood burro


Know you, yes,
Medanny baly


Where is he
Quo iaas


Who, my father
Che, pader man


I know not
Che medannam


Can I tell you,
Che cunnam


Not farre off
Dureneese


God blesse you
Wchodaw bashe


I drinke to you
Esco-sumaw


I thanke you,
Bizmilla


With all my heart
Allhumderalley


Much good do it you
Awpheat



Doe you loue me
Dooz me dare


Strength, soone
Zoor, Zood


Full
Pooras


Fill full
Poorcunne


Boile the meate
Goust buppose


Strait
Tunghea


Weake
Sangheneese


In health
Choggea


Sicke
Na chaggea


Dead
Mordasse


Gone
Raftas


Here
Ingls


Aboue
Bolla


Below
Pvin


Angry
Ianghea


Hungry
O lam


A Colour
Raugh


A Misbeleeuer
Caffar


A Priuy
Adam Conney


A Close-stoole
Obb Conney


Sope
Saboon


Broken
Shekestas


Laden
Barkonnas


Lost
Gumshottas


Found
Paydcun


A Cradle
Caguey


Tobacco
Tombacco


Giue me
Bedde


Stop
Bast


Wash
Bushure


Take away
Verdure


You trifle
Basim^cunne


A Gift
Piskash


A Platter
Langaree


A Pl^te.
Nalbuchee.





Persian.
English
Turkish.


Yeck
One
Beer


Do
two
Echee


Se
three
Ewch


Char
foure
Dewrt


Panch
fiue
Beash


Shesh
sixe
Altee


Haft
seuen
Yedte


Hasht
eight
Seckez


No
nine
Dockoz


Da
ten
One


Yezda
eleuen
One-beer


Dozda
twelue
One-eche


Sezda
thirteene
One-ewch


Charda
fourteene
One-dewrt


Pounzdata
fifteene
One-beash


Shoonzdata
sixteene
One-altea


Haft-data
seuenteene
One-yedte


Hasht-data
eighteene
One-setkez


No data
nineteene
One-dockoz


Beest
twentie
Ygarmy


Yec-beest
twentie one
Ygarmy beer


Dota beest
twentie two
Ygarmy echee


Se beest
twentie three
Ygarmy ewch


Charbeest
twentie foure
Ygarmy dewrt


Pouncbeest
twentie fiue
Ygarmy beash


Se
thirtie
Otooz


 
fortie
Coorgh


 
fiftie*
Ally




Babylon
Bagdat


Tauris
Tabris


Syras
Shyraz


Hierusalem
Kursakaleel


Constantinople
Stambull


Alexandretta
Skandrown


Grand Cairo
Al-Cayr





English.
Persian.


A good morrow or God blesse you Sir,
Sallam-alleekam


The like I wish you Sir
Aleekam-sallam


Whether doe you goe?
Quo ia merue?


Not farre
Dure neese


How doe you to day?
Chaldery Amrooz?


Well I prayse God
Choggee Shoochoro-Whoddaw


Good, I am very glad thereof,
Koobas, Whowddaw bashat


Where haue you beene?
Quo ia boodee?


Now I am your seruant
Hali man Merda sumaw


Welcome, Sir, heartily welcome.
Hoshomedee, Agaw, Suffowardee


Tell me, how you doe, healthy,
Gufta, chehaldery? choggee


Where is your house? at Babylon,
Quoiaas chonna sumaw? Bagdat


Haue you a Wife?
Zan darre?


Yea truly, fifteene Sir,
Bally, pounsdata beg


How old are you? twenty foure.
Chan sol daree? char-beest


How are you called?
Che nome Daree sumaw?


My name is called Teredoro,
Noma mannas Teredore


Is this the way to Tauris?
Eeen raw hast Tabyris?


Yea, but how many leagues thither?
Bally, o chan Far sangas vntraf?


I suppose, tis twenty,
Man medonam, beest


Is the way good or bad?
Raw koob o baddas?


Is there good Wine?
Vnjee koob sherabbas?


Yea, in the high way.
Bally, raw hast


Whose Garden is that?
Een baugh mally chee?


Tis the great Kings,
Mally-pot-shaughas


Know you Cazbeen?
Cazbeen medanny?


I doe Sir, haue you seene it?
Manbali beg, sumaw dedee?


Why not, I know all Persia,
Cheree-na, hamma Farsee dedam


Come hither good Boy,
Ingee bear koob pissar


Giue me some Wine soone
Sherap bedee zood


Fill me but one cup
Pourcun yeck paola


Then saddle my Horse
Asp zeen pushee


I thanke you Sir
Whoddaw-negaturat


It growes darke, Ile sleepe
Tarreekas, man mechobed


Giue me some water slaue
Ob bedee colloom


Here Sir, take it
Ingee Agaw, hast bede


Much good doe it you brother
Awpheat bashat-broder


What businesse haue you?
Che Corr daree sumaw?


Little, but stay a little
Coocheck, andac wyst


I haue some occasions
man corr daram


Tell me where is the King
Gufta? pot-shaw quo iaas?


I beleeue in Hyrcania,
Man medonam Mozendram


God blesse you,
Whoddaw bashat.




On the thirteenth of Aprill, we set saile for other parts, when
being three or foure leagues at Sea, the winde came faire, so that on
the fifteenth day we were parallel to Saint Iohns, seuenty miles from
Swalley Road, on which day the expedition bearing vp to speak with
vs, the ships fell foule or thwart one another, whereby her bole-sprit
broke our mizen shrowdes, no more harme comming to either at
that time.
The nineteenth of Aprill we made our selues Nadir to the Sunne,
which had Northerne declination fifteene degrees at which time we
sayled close by the Iland and Citie of Goa, the seate of the Archbishop
and Vice-roy of Portugall in the East Indies, this time being
becalmed and without winde, we had the weather exceeding sultry
and hot, our course lay still from Swalley Road all along the Coast of
India, Decan, and Malabar, South and South and by West, as farre as
the vtmost Cape of India, cald Cape de Comerin vnder seuen degrees
North, and all the way we failed close by the shore, hauing fourteene,
fifteene and sixteene fathome water.
The three and twentieth of Aprill being Saint Georges day we sailed
close by Mangalor, a Citie of the Mallabars, where were riding
thirty or forty Frigots Malabars men of warre, who all hoyst sayle
towards Goa, we steering contrary, only one Frigot came by chance
neere the Ionas, who sent her Barge after her, but she both rowing and
making large saile got away, howbeit the Barge once gaue her a volly
of small shot, but to small purpose.
On the three and twentieth of Aprill wee came to an Anchor at
Mount Elly, or Delyn, a Towne belonging to the Malabars, and in
that Countrey, our Anchorage was nine fathomes, but at the shore
was only three.
Wee durst not land, the people are so treacherous, and bloudy,
howbeit they came aboard vs in their small Canooes, and sold vs for
other trifles, Coco-nuts, Mangoes, lacks, greene Pepper, Carauances
or Indian Pease, Hens, Egges, and Buffols, which because rare
are deere. And for euery tun of fresh water, they demanded and
was payed a Royall of eight, or foure shillings and foure pence.
The Bannians of these parts, as they liue in superstition, so they
affect Ceremony in their Burials. For according to the qualitie and
wealth of the deceased, such and so costly are their Funerals, aboue
those that be inferiour. Many sweet Gummes and Aromaticke Odours
from Arabia, are incended and put in flames about the dead
body which is inuolued in linnen pure white, sweete and delicate,
or Taffataes of transparant finenesse: amongst other Wood^
both rare and precious, they affect that cald Aquila and the older Calamba,
trees of admirable height and euennesse, found most commonly
in the loftie Mountaine of Chaemoys, in Cochin-China, which those

people sell at excessiue rates, both in regard of the Bannian Obsequies,
and esteeme, the Inhabitants of Iapan hold of it, imagining no
pillow wholsomer nor more efficatious for health then that to
sleepe vpon. For they extremely hate such as their heads may sinke
into, which, both heates the bloud and perturbes the fancie.
And amongst other fruits as Orenges (which are sweet, succulent
and daintie) of so pleasant a taste and rellish, that they affect the eater
wonderfully offering the rinde with no lesse pleasure then the iuice,
both which seeme to haue dulcitie and Acrimony mixt together,
are Lemmons, Pappaes, Cocos, both sweete and great, Bananas or
Plantanes (the supposed fruit that Eue was temped with, and with
which Adam clothed himselfe to auoid the shame of nakednes) which
Tree mounts to no great height but spreads in comely manner, the
fruit is long in fashion of a soulsage, they will ripen though you first
plucke them in their greenesse, and become of a dainty yellow, the
rinde or skin peeles off most easily, the fruite then put into your
mouth, melts with mellow ripenesse, and giues a most delicious tast
and rellish, not much vnlike our choicest Peares in England.
The Iacks or Giacks (which the people brought vs) deserue description,
they grow vpon high trees, streight and vneasie to be ascended,
the Iacke is for bignesse comparable to a Pumpion, without tis
yellow and shewes some veines, but within is soft and tender full of
golden coloured Cloues including graines flat and globous, each of
which comprehends a white bone, not eaten with the fruit but being
boyld giue food no lesse pleasant and vsefull to Kine and s^ch creatures
then doe the Date-stones of vse in Persia, the Iacke is at first
taste somewhat vnpleasant, but that is caused rather by its rarenesse
and heat then other reason, tis glutinous and leaues a clammy farewell
in the mouth, but addes a double benefit to the stomacke, being
restoratiue, pleasant and good to strengthen a weake backe, and
therefore not ill for that disease, by vs denominated French, but first
called Indian.
The Ananas for goodnesse and shape may craue attention, which
though it be not inferio^r to the Giacke, for bulke and roundnesse,
yet is the plant she comes of, no way equall, this growes nor from
Tree nor sowing, but of a root agreeable to our Arthi-choake, they
appeare aboue ground at maturity, and affect not aboue two foot
height, the better and with lesse labour to enrich the gatherer, tis
armed on the out side with a rinde moystlesse hard and scaly, the fruit
within good, wholsome, and pleasant, which though too soone satiating
the appetite, yet experience tels vs the stomacke couets it,
and admits digestion easily.
They haue here Silke-wormes, though not in that plenty we saw
in Hircania, nor in the Coast of Cochin-China, and Chormandell, they

will be no where merry nor vsefull, but where are store of Mulbery
Trees, from which they plucke their nourishment, bettered with
that refrigerating aire whispering among them, whence with delight
they spin out their Silke, and actuate their variable cods, bladders
and bottomes in great abundance of pleasure and purenesse.
If it were not troublesome vnto the Reader, I could adde some
other worthy Fruits into this Caralogue, but I feare to be offensiue,
so that I will conclude all in one more, and referre the rest to a Discourse
fitting for that subject.
The Duroyen, one only comming to my view, because rare here,
but in Malacca, some parts of Iana and Malabar, are in no scarcenesse.
This fruit is not much vnlike the Iack, but lately spoke of, the
shape round and out-side beauty no way equall to the inside goodnesse
and vertues, at first opening it giues a smell like that of a rotten
boyled Onion, and to many seemes odious and offensiue, but
proues as an excellent foile to make it rarer. For the meat is whitish
and seemes diuided into a dozen seuerall Cels or partitions fild with
many bones or stones white and restoratiue, in bignesse like a Chesnut,
the fruit in a word is pleasant, nutritiue and dainty and may be
called an Epitome of all the best and rarest fruits in all the Orient.
These Negroes you see haue no famine of Natures gifts and blessings,
and to let passe their perfidie (taught them by the auaritious,
proud and deceitfull Portugall) impart freely of what they haue to
any ciuill Traueller, expecting some small retribution for their curtesie.
After some small acquaintance, they will allow you the common
curtesie, Arecca mixt with Betele, which they make vse of in
all kinds of Exercise and Complements (a little resembling the Irish
wild ones with their sneezing-tobacco-powder.)
Arecca, the trees are high as Cedars, but are liker to Palmetotrees,
are of a fuzzie concaue substance, and decorated with boughes
only at the very top where hangs the fruit in clusters, shaped in bignesse
of a Walnut, white within, not easily penetrated and without
all taste, odour or moysture, in which respect they, neuer eat it alone,
but couer or rap it about with leaues of Betele not vnlike the Iuy,
so laying vpon each piece of the dissected Betele, a little Arecca,
chaw it into many and seuerall morsels, to which (as I obserued formerly
amongst the Mohelians) they often adde a kind of lime made
of white large Oister-shels, all which together cures the wind Collicke,
remoues Melancholy, destroyes Wormes, encreases Venerie,
purges the maw and stomacke, and preuents hunger.
On the fiue and twentieth day at the Bay point, we espied a Mahlabar
Iuncke of seuentie Tunnes, bound for Acheen in Sumatra,
neere this Iuncke lay a Frigat man of warre, with intent to take her,

supposing her loading worth the aduenturing for, to auoid which
Charibdis she fell into as bad a Scilla, the Ionas Barge saw her, chast,
boorded her, and towd her to the Admirall, where after a consultation
amongst the Merchants, and Sea-captaines they concluded she was
good prize and worth the keeping, in her was great store of Cotton,
Opium, and Onions, but what was vnder the Cotton, the Captaine
and Merchants know best: eightie able men were made prisoners,
the Ionas men not content with their wealth and conquest, vnworthily
and without cause beat the miserable Blacks that shewed no
resistance, so that sixtie of them desperately threw themselues into
the Sea, where truly it must needs moue compassion in any, to see so
many wretched soules (vpon the cruelty of the Saylers) rather to expose
their tired bodies, to the mercilesse fury of the Sea, then to be
insulted ouer by their raging Victors. Some of which sixtie Negroes
were drowned, vnable to swim to shore occasioned by age, and violent
course of the Sea, but the Blackes Canoes tooke vp some and
our Boats others, carrying them away to Bantam in Iaua, where each
of them are sold for fifty or sixty Rials of eight. This done they
weighed anchor and steered away South and by West: the Ionas
towed the Iuncke after her, but their Boat we sent away; and fiue
Blackes in her. That night we had a stormy gust and thunder, lightning
and raine, being weather not vnusuall so neere the Sunne, which
had three degrees of declination from vs vnder twelue degrees of
latitude from the Line.
These Mallabars are cole blacke of colour, well limmed, their
haire long and curled, about their heads they tie a Handkerchiefe
wrought with gold and silke, and about their middle a cloth which
couers their priuities, their Religion is Mahometicall, their Priests
vnderstand the Arabique, in which Language are all their Prayers,
they die circumcized and liue subiect to the great Samoreyn, or King
of Calicut, but in some measure at some times are tributary to the
great Mogull. They are to say truly a warlike and valiant but desperate
Nation, excell in the euing, are enemies to the Portuga^; and
foure leagues South at Cananor they haue a Fort, nigh which the
Portugalls haue another, they vse both great and small Ordnance,
but haue no great store of them, or art to make them vsefull, but of
Fire-workes, poysoned Arrowes, Darts and Targets, they haue too
great plenty, and offred to sell vs some; the Country is woody and
mountainous. The Road where wee anchored represents this protraict.
Mountelly is vnder twelue degrees sixe minutes of latitude, variation
thirteene degrees.





Thence we sailed still South, and by the Indian Coast passing by
Cananor, Callicut, and Cochin, great and ancient Cities, at one of
which the King commonly resides, or neere about, the Mallabars
call their King Samoreyn, and here the Portugals had their first trade
in the East Indies, before they found out the other Orientall places.
This day we were vnder nine degrees fifteene minutes North, our
course still lay dew South. Next wee had eight degrees of latitude,
when towards Snn-set wee see the Coast or high land of Brin Iohn,
neerest Cape Comereyn, which lies vnder seuen degrees, thirty minutes,
the variation is fourteene degrees.


Of Mallabar.
Obseruare modum laus est, nimiumque mouende
In dubium trahitur religiosa fides.
ANd that we are now in sight of Mallabar, a famous and weal
thy part of the Orientall Indies, let the patient Reader suffer
me to lead him along in the description of this and other
no lesse famous (then honourable Kingdomes, different in Eleuation,
power, Language, Religion, and other heathen Ceremonies,
which tho they proceed from an vncertaine Obseruation, yet the
author can assure him most part truth. And in this may receiue some
immediate benefit, if by contemplation, hee behold the varietie of
temporary blessings, no part in the Vniuerse exceeding these, not
with-held from Pagan people afforded by Gods al-knowing and
guiding Prouidence, which notwithstanding being mixt with vnthankfulnesse,
damnable Idolatry, and variety of carnall obiects
turne to their greater distruction, and endlesse miseries. And by these
we see Gods infinite mercy towards our selues, to whom hee has

vouchsafed not only a sufficient portion of wealth and worldly
pleasures, but enriched vs aboue all, with that inualuable Pearle the
Gospell, and benefit of his sonnes satisfaction for our sinnes, by which
(though to a Carnalist those triumphs of nature may seeme incomparable)
we see our owne happy difference with their conceited Paradice
and Trophees of consuming pleasure.
I account so farre of East India, as is from eighteene degrees
North latitude to the vtmost point cald Cape Comr^in, vnder seuen
degrees or thereabouts (by the Sea-coast) the Kingdome of Mallabar,
in the first place presenting it selfe vnto description, wherein
are many well built Cities and great, as Goa, Dabull, pertaining vnto
the Portugall, Callicut, Cochin, Cananore, Mangalore and others, it is
gouerned by a King whom they call Samorein, his best sort of people
are termed Nairos, the great Samorein or Emperour commonly
resides at Cochin, vnder whom rule many Vice-royes, they are of
Mahomets Sect, but dissent much from the Turkes and Persians, and
differ much from that kind of Idolatry Lodouicus Vertomanus reports
them for. Their colour is blacke (liuing in the scorching frie of
the Torrid Zone) goe naked from the waste vpwards, saue that
their heads are couered with a low Tulipant (or wreath of silke
and gold) about their middles, they haue a cloth of particoloured
plad, like that with vs in England.
Their thighes and legs are naked, yet haue the poorer sort nothing
more then a small vaile ouer their priuities wholy naked elsewhere,
their haire is blacke and crispe. And in augmention of fashion,
they very orderly cut and pinke their skin of sundry formes
in sundry places.
Their Marriages are rare and ceremonious, one same obserued
from King to Pesant, for who so marries, has not the first nights imbraces
with the Bride, but very honestly bestowes her mayden-head
on the Bramini (or their Priests) who well performe it. And truly
these Idoll Priests are in such great esteeme among them, that it
is vsuall with them to enter the Kings house or any others, discourse
at pleasure with their females, and to vse (I might say abuse) them
with discretion. And note that at such time as the Bramini enters,
the good man of the house leaues him possession, ioying not a little,
that the holy (so reputed) man discends to teach and accompany
their wiues and daughters.
When the King dies, they forbeare to crowne his sonne, but accumulate
that honour on his Sisters sonne (and good cause for it)
for they say who knowes truly, whether his sonne were of his owne
begetting, but the Sisters boy is of his bloud and infallible Discent,
whereby they scorne to erre according to their owne assertions.
The women here (as in other places of India, where we trauelled)

dilacerate their eares to a monstrous proportion, for by the
ponderousnesse of their eare Iewels they teare their eares to that
capacitie: that I haue easily put my arme through their eareholes.
The Gentry are stiled Nairos, are a valiant and well made
people, pleate their haire very decently, and their naked armes are
only clothed with Bracelets of siluer and juory, they neuer walke
the streets without Sword and Target, and if any vulgar fellow meet
them, they presently shake and vibrate their Swords vpon their
Shields, crying aloud Nayroe and so obtaine the way without opposition.
But whereas some haue reported that no poore man dare looke a
Nayro in the face, or meet a Priest or Nairo within fifty paces, thereby
securing themselues from the others fury, it may well be it has
once beene so, but now it is not altogether true nor fabulous.
In Calicut, a great Citie ten leagues whence we tooke our price,
the people are reputed Paynims. For their King adores the Deuill
(whom they call Deumo) the Chappell where this Monster sits is vncouered,
and in height about three yards. As they goe in, the woodden
entrance is ingrauen with hellish shapes. Within, their beloued
Deumo is imperiously inthronized vpon a brazen Mount. His head is
aduanced with a rich Diadem, from his head issue foure great hornes
(such as haue the Rams of Persia) his eyes gleering, mouth like a port
Cullis, beautified with foure tuskes, his nose vgly flat, his looke terrible,
hands like clawes, has Lions thighes and legs, and feet not vnlike
a Monkey. And besides this Grand Pagod are lesser Deumoes
glistering like Glowormes. Some of which are pictured deuouring
soules.
Each morne the Braminy or Priest perfume and wash them, not
going away without crauing his malediction, humbly prostrate hee
requires it (and tis granted him.) For euery Moone they solemnely
bequeath a liuing Sacrifice vnto their Deumo, which vsually is a daintie
Cocke. The Priest in his Sacrifice is apparelled in fine Lawne,
and with a sharp siluer Knife, he nobly destroyes the yeelding Cock,
whose warme bloud is offered to the Deuill, the Sacrificers armes,
and legges are garnished with round siluer plates and other trifles,
which as he moues makes a gingling noyse. The Ceremony ended,
he fils his hands with Rice, and Crab-like goes retrograde from the
Idoll, all the way stedfastly fixing his eyes vpon his Deumo, when
being come to a Lake (like Acheron) there hee embowels his Rice,
therewith aduanceth his hands aboue his head, he returns and makes
himselfe heire vnto the Offerings.
Nor sits the King to meate till such time as the Deumo has it offered
by the Preists, and hauing spread it, with Acheronticke murmors
returne it to the King, but what is left is giuen to the Crowes,

whose modest appetites, make those prettie Birds be dedicated to
the Deuill.
The people in way of mutuall loue and amity, vse to exchange
their wiues, with which the women seeme contented, and here Poligamy
is not forbidden; for as the men haue many Wiues, so haue
the women many Husbands. But the children are giuen to such the
woman fancies and bequeathes vnto, and hee is thereto right well
contented, nor doubting, nor questioning his best right vnto the Infant.
It is an ordinary custome here to wash the body wholy euery
morne, that done they goe vnto the Idoll, where, with vnspeakable
ill-fauoured gestures, and writhing of their mouth and eyes, they
continue their inuocations wel-nigh an houre, which ceremony is so
hideously acted that it raises no small stupefaction in the beholders.
This superstitious people frequently resort to the Citie of Callicute,
in the forme of sober Pilgrimage, which Idolatry deriues not
a little wealth to the Deumo their and his Agents, Concomitants in
his knaueries.


Of the Isle Zeyloon.
THis famous Isle is not farre distant from the point of India
cald Cape Comrein, it eleuates the Articke Pole seuen degrees,
by which we closely trauelled, leauing the Asiaticall
Continent. It abounds with Cinamon and other odoriferous and
Aromaticall Spices. The people (for the greater part) are Paynims,
and know no God. Some haue a smacke of Christ, others of Mahomet,
but those are very few. The people goe naked, not forced to
it by pouerty but heat, they are Owners of the best Smaragds, Rubies
and Amber-greese through Asia. Yet want these inestimable
stones that vertue in their Orient lustre; to lighten them the way to
perfect glory (poore wretched creatures) they are too zealous (foolish
zeale) in their bewitching cursed Jdolatry. For it is apparant,
that on the high peake (cald by the Europaeans) Columbo, tis orthodoxally
held by them, that Adam was their Created and liued there,
they beleeue it rather in regard his vestigatings are yet imprinted in
the earth, but generally the Inhabitants are egregious Paynims. As
testifies the Apes tooth, so highly so generally esteemed, so feruently
prayed vnto, which tooth was taken from them not long agoe,
by the aduenturous Lusitanians, and carried to Goa, where the Archbishop
and Vice-roy burnt it, although the people to redeeme it offered
an incredible masse of treasure, refused vnwisely. For by a

crafty Bannian an other like to the former was brought forth, which
he protested was the same and recouered miraculously, thereby infinitely
enriching himself, and joying not a little these credulous and
well contented Zelonians.
Pilgrims from remote parts apace flocke hither, where a top a
high Mount is conspicuously set the Idaea of a horrible Caco-demon,
touching which Pagod, the Syngales (their Priests) Cronography.
That once Iohna their King held this monstrous Daemon in derision,
but entring the sacred Temple, he (in great agonie) beheld the Idoll
Deuill breath forth fury against him, shewing it by his fiery eyes and
flaming Semiter (threatfully held against him) whereat the relenting
King amazed returnes, becomes penitentiary, and ecchoes sorrow
for his former errours,
The Isle is repleate with innumerable abominations, for in most
corners are seene one vgly monstrous shape or other, which as they
are diuers, so doe they diuersly infect the humours of diuers men,
and to which (as particular fancie feeds them) they bestow Orizons
vpon.
The place where the great Pagotha stands, is inueloped with a
cloud of armes and as sedulously looked vnto (and good reason)
for they verily beleeue that so soone as that tottering fabrique fals,
the finall ruine of the World shall immediatly come after.
And though this Nation disagree in sundry fantasies, yet cohere
they in this one, that when one proues diseased, hee procures some
worthy thing for a more gratefull Sacrifice, reputing the same meritorious
and preualent in their decaying healths, but such as want
memory take a wiser course, by inuocating the head of an Elephant
(an vnderstanding beast) to ease them of that art, taught by Simonides
with greater trouble.


A description of Choromandell.
THe Coast of Choromandell stretches, from the point called
Cape Comerin, and so runnes along Northerly towards the
Bengalan Gulph and Ganges, by the Townes Negapatan, Narsinga,
Armagun, Meliapore, Mesulipatan, etc.
At Negapatan and other places inhabit Pagans (howbeit about Meliapor,
where lies martyred Saint Thomas, are Christians) and in many
other places great Rulers of the Sect of Mahomet and vnder the
Moguls command. The people are of a duskie complexion, and weare
little clothing, saue what is thin and delicate, Gold nor Copper want

they, or fruits, or meates that be right good, the Braminy are with
them in great plenty, who very readily teach and instruct the perfect
way vnto damnation. Their beliefe is beyond their owne expression
and others apprehensions, nor vse these people Circumcision, which
tels me that they loue not Mahomet. They allow Poligamy, and in
their Weddings affoord obseruation for a Traueller. The Priests
and (to be) married couple,A Wedding. with a faire fruitfull Cow (a beast of Diuine
repute amongst them) repayres vnto the water side, where after
Prayers to their Infernall Guiders, they linke their hands vniformely
in the Cowes taile, on which the Braminy powres a Violl of hallowed
Oile and Water, and after Ceremony driues the Cow into
the water, who enters many times so farre that they are couered to
the middles in the Sea. During which they hold fast their hands, till
the Cow fearing Neptune, wisely returnes, they then disunite themselues,
holding that conjunction sacred and powerfull euer after.
Their Epithalamies are done, lets heare their Funerals; such time
the Husband dies, he is embalmed, and shortly after, his dearely louing
Wife in company of parents and children, wanting no attendance
of Musique and Boals Priests, all deckt in neat attire, her head,
armes, necke, nose, eares, legs and toes, each charged with Amulets
and Bracelets of siluer,A Funerall. with other Iewels, her hands hold fragrant
flowres, which as shee goes she sweetly giues to all shee meets
withall, and which distributed, the Bramini shewes her a Magique
glasse, whose art represents vnto her, frolique Birds, fragrant trees,
and sensuall pleasures, at which view (poore soule) shee grants a modest
smile, interpreted, as longing to possesse them, and in her hands
they fixe a gilded ball, which (with her body) she rowles in antique
forme and order, in the way (still gazing in the mirrour) the Bramlni
whispers in her eares, telling her of wonderfull matters* and ineffable
joyes shee should possesse, which so tickle her, as transported
she shewes herselfe beyond all measure, so that being arriued, shee
sees the fire whereinto her late dead Spouses body is put (a hole of
two yards depth and equall widenesse) enuironed with sweet wood
and other perfumes, entranc'd, she sees, she leanes into, she incorporates
herselfe with fire and husband (mercilesse too much adored)
fire, which leaues nothing extant saue fame and ashes, immediatly
shee is consumed, and for her Auc her sacrifice is bettered with a
number of Annulets and Iewels, her Kindred throw vpon her* which
done, the liuing Spectatours returne well satisfied.
But such as deny to burne, are shauen, put away and hated like a
Dogge, yea, liue hourely in danger to be slaine by their owne issue,
a iust reuenge, for their former too much abused liberty, growne
so audaciously impudent, that vpon the least distaste nothing but
the harmelesse liues of their too much louing Husbands, would satiate

their lustfull boldnesse, procured by poyson, till by Parliament
this course was taken (to burne their Wiues with their dead bodies)
to secure themselues from future dangers.
Againe (O griefe to speake it) in these parts, the people are so extreamely
Idolatrous, and ouerswayed by the insatiable gulph of perdition
the Deuill, that they adore a great massie Copper gilded Idol,
whose Statue is gloriously mounted vpon a Chariot which mooues
with eight mighty wheeles, ouerlaid with Gold, the ascent vp to the
Idoll vpon the Chariot is spacious and easie by many and enlarging
steps, on which sit with sober visage, the Priests and other little
Girles who in way of deuotion (impure sanctitie) prostiute themselues
to the libidinous heat of wicked men, the better thereby to
enrich their Pagode, or adored Deuill, and for which their dutifulnesse,
they are entitled, the Pagodes children: these Nemeses with
their Priests giue Sacrifices to the Deuill (fond zeale of their besotted
Parents to destinate their prettie children, from their infancie, to
such an abominable libertie.)
The story followes, when the Idoll goes on procession, the prime
men of the place assemble together, in company of many others to
draw the Chariot, happy is that man or child can lay a hand to help to
draw it. For in this his triumphant progresse, many men and women
(more forward then wise) throw themselues voluntarily in the
Chariots way, who by the ponderousnesse of the Idoll haue their
poore wretched bodies miserably crusht in pieces, thereby becomming
vain-glorious Martyrs, but more vnhappy men.
Yea more, such is the stupid folly of the men their in these parts,
by compelling their Virgins to become base prostitutes (their Religion
shadowing all deformities) that tis a great wonder to behold
so many Girles of so small modestie, to proffer themselues at such
tender yeares.


A description of Casta.
ILL agrees this name with the Quality of that place.
It is a Citie in Chormandell, adioyning Narsinga, where the people
differ not in colour nor condition, from the other afore
spoken of, but their Funerals diffent from the rest. In that these build
to themselues Sepulchres deepe and narrow, and wherein the dead
bodies lie entombed, but (to preuent his melancholy) the too long,
too much, liuing-louing Wife is put therein too, where-out shee
cannot moue, but this poore creature is forced to be partaker in

her Husbands destinie, till Atropos with a dull Knife coequalizes her
warme composure with her mates infecting carcasse.
And tis note worthy that in these parts one trade marry with another,
and neuer out of their owne Triball Vocation.
Their Religion is austere (but irreligious) agreeing with our old
Adage, Quot homine^, tot sententiae; some adore a Cow; others a
Snake, other-some the Sunne, Moone, Starres, Water, Trees, and
other Idols. And it is vsuall, that what they first meet withall at their
going forth of doores at Sun-rising, that same thing (be it bird or
beast) they make their Numen and tutelary God for that day.
Solemne Feasts haue they likewise, in one of which they erect a
Tree, with a crosse-yard fastned to it, nigh thereto is a Pagod (or
Deuill) placed: vpon the yards are nailed two small hookes of Iron,
So that when any vowes (vowes they haue many) vnto the Pagod occasioned
either by sicknesse or disaster, pietie (pitie to see) so eleuates
them, that they readily proffer themselues vnto the Priests who ingeniously
as readily fasten their naked shoulders to the hookes, and
then hoise him vp to his greater height of view (but greatest view of
torture) and being downe, the bloud issuing from his tortured carcasse,
is preserued, and by the vnderstanding Braminy dasht against
the Tree in honour of the Idoll. Then (Caitiffe like) he is drawne
afore the Idoll, to whom submissiuely hee attributes serious (but ill
deserued) prayses, Which done he has free leaue to recure himselfe
and looke better to his needfuller cure then Vowes for future.
Ceremony they haue also in the night, during which, the streets
are splendide with gl^tering Lights and Torches then eight or more
of them filling their hands and pouches full, with Rice and other
meates, they dance together amid the flaming Lights, th^^wing
their meate (as they run along) vpon the ground (as an Offering to
the Deuill) not daring looke blacke least the Deuill should therefore
kill them (whom they imagine followes them the whiles they
run) such is the power of this old Inchanter the Deuill, such the
misery of these fuliginated creatures, who as they vse all Ceremonies
of deuotion vsually on the nights and not at day time, tis they
say because the Deuill is then sole Rulor and delights in darknesse.
The shape of their Boates or Curricurroes haue this representation.





A description of Pegu.
NOw I goe further on, to speake a little of this as famous, as
remote Territory.
Pegow (so they pronounce it) is a mighty Kingdome extra
Gangem but by late affronts some part is subiected to the great King
of Syam (thought the true Cham) I let passe what others afore mee
haue repeated, or to particularize the great riches and maiestie hee
has and liues in. Or of his Elephats, foure monstrons great ones,
three milke white, one cole blacke, all which (poore Prince) he diuinely
worships.
I might speake of his warres and power, or of his apparell, albeit
who is ignorant that trauels their, how he is roabed and laden with
rich orientall glittering Gemmes, on head, eares, armes, legges and
feet, whereby a good eye is dazeled, a good sence amazed with the
glory of them, and on the night (each night he shewes himselfe) by
Torches, he is wonderfull to behold. Such, yea so powerfull are the
refulgences of those Carbuncles, Rubies, Diamonds, Smaragds, and
Saph^res, and such the treasure and wealth of those Torrid Regions,
that affoord it him.

The Religion of the Peguans is Exh^icall, knowing many but
false Gods, they haue among them (inseparable companions of wicked
men) many vgly and deformed Pagods, to whom they pray to,
of great height and bignesse, hels they haue also of like assize, whose
onely tolling beings st^pefaction enough vnto the hearers.
The Priests are called Tallapois, who though they seeme like
Frier mendicants, yet what by awe (for the very infernall Spirits
obey
their in ohantations) and what by policie (for they contempla^^
humilitie, externally very much) the people haue them in (...)
repute and reuerent estimation. I will speake further of them in
Syam.


A description of Syam.
SYam is a Kingdome conjoyning Pegu, and part of the Orientall
I^dia. Patonia and other Kingdomes neere Ganges and
Be^g^la, are tributary to him.
The people are included within the burning Zone, therefore not
faire.
They haue limbes and hearts able enough to stile them proper*
Mahomet has a little crept among them, but for the most part, they
know him not.
They haue beene (in foregoing times) wicked Sodomites; which
filthy sinne was since corrected a Queene Rectrix, commanding
vpon palne of death, that all male children at their births, should
haue a round bell of Gold (in it an Adders tongue dryed) put through
their fore-skin and the flesh, so that if they demand why tis answered
them for deterring them the hatefull sinne of Sodomy.
At such time as the desire of copulation wils him get the bels away
quite from the flesh, only vnto the fore-skin, which knowne,
hee is brought afore some expert Mid-wiues who present him Virgins,
one whom he likes, he chooses, returnes and drinkes a somniserous
potion, whose operation puts him in a sleepe, during which
the bell is loosed from the flesh, and only fastned to the prepuce, an
vnguent is applyed, the cure is ready, then is he at liberty to vse his
body, but some in way of pride haue foure or fiue bels, which harmoniously
resound their melodie in the streets, and preserue them
there of purpose, aswell for ornament, as titulation in venerious exercises.
Moreouer, (which is pittie) a Virgin here, at Virgins yeares, is
resembled to a blacke Swanne: in regard at very greene yeares, they

guie the too forward may dens a virulent potion, which being drunk,
by its efficacious power or diste^^^ their (...) to such a capacitie,
that bels and all may find too easle entrance, and which is as bad (dull
memory compels me write it) the worden are not ashamed here (the
easier to illure the men from Sodomitry) to (...)
in those parts) into their middles, where with a fine (...)
they are couered, for though the loynes are girded with a daintie
I^wne, yet (...) deuice, 'tis (...) made to open, that as they goe along,
the least aire giues all to all mens immodest ve^wes, (...) those
parts, which euery modest eye most scomes, each thought more
hates to see and thinke vpon.
The boyes are foolish too, they paint themselues from top to toe
with a coeruleall colour, which cannot be washt off, till time proue
coadjutor to him in it, the ordinary tricke of cutting and flashing
their skin, they excell in, which (contrary to their assertion) rather
breeds horrour, and admiration, than delight and affectation in the
beholders.
The Priests here as in Pegu, and termed Tullapoi, they euery (...)
day in the open market, (...)
minde of their charitie. Vpon those day (...) arise rightearly and
goe through all the streets in the Citie, w^th^^ Copper Bafon in their
hands, on which they beat aloude, thereby giuing notice of th^i^
intent to preach (but the Abdals in Persta ^inde a great hoine like a
Sow-gelder) in their Sermons aduising them to lone one another,
and to forbeare bloud-shedding, etc. These Tallapois houses are in
trees, to secure them from the Tygres. They eat once a day, are clothed
with a Robe of a red and blacke colour (but the Abdals in Pe^siae
vse a sheeps skin, with the haire vpon it) they haue no haire (...)
any part of their bodie, they lead an austete but hypocritical life
and are outwardly seeming chast, So are the Abdals in Persia twixt
whom because I see such vnisornitie. I the better call to minde what
past twixt me and one of them neere olde Persae-polis, which was
thus. As I was musing one euenieng our Garden their (which wit^
Cypresse and other trees was like a Wildernesse) their came towards
me one of these seemingly deuost Abdals, in his sheeps skin and horne
about his necke and bare-footed, espying me, hee blest himselfe and
suddenly began to mutter his prayer to Mahomet with feruent ardencie,
but seeing me not moue, he came vnto me and prayed for mee, to
requite his loue I proffered him some wine which hee (contrarie to
his Law) tasted of, and liking it, bid me fill his horne, I did so, and he
bedlam-like, made but one draught of it, then grauely elating his
eyes, hands and one legge, he cryed out to Mortis Ally his Propher,
in the Arabian tongue, and with a low Sallam, he bid me Adeiu, but by
and by he came againe, and pointed to one end of the Gatden, where

couertly I espied three ma^dens, to whom hee willed me goe (...)
not a little wondring at him, I denied him, bating his ^ibaldry and fearing
his rillany departe^^ such are the Tallapois of whom I speake
now.
They make vowes in their sicknesse vnto the Deuill, whom they
account sole author of euill, yet dar^^ not displease him. In their
vowes they build a small Altar afore the Deuill, on which they strow
flesh and flowres, thereby (for that season) appeasing his implacoble
malice. And many times, they bring sweete musique to him, with
which, and their harmonious voices they chaunt most pleasantly,
thereby to delight his melancholy. Each yeare they choose a man to
looke vnto him, and to safegard the Deuill, and he is rightly termed
the Deuils Guardian.
Others so soone as Aurona she wes her golden tra^mols, fill a basket
with Rice and other meates, and lighting a (...), they swlloly
run through the streets, to giue their Deuill his breakfast, be ^^^ching
him to doe them no mischiefe that day. But, if by chance a Dog
came by, they giue him the offered meates, being perswade hee
came there by instinct of the Deuill.


A description of Patania.
PAtania is a Towne in the gulph of Bengala extra Gangem, about
eight degrees towards the Antarctique, from the Equinoctiall.
The people are very blacke and goe naked in all
parts, saue a small wreath vpon their heads, and a lung or couer to
conceale their priuy members: haue Sandals for their feete, they
are very humane and indulgent vnto strangers. Mahomet has a little
made himselfe famous among them, but the greatest part are Heathens
and extreme Idolaters.
This Citie is betwixt the Ile Malacca and Syam, subject to a King
or Queene, who liue and fight with great state and power of men
and Elephants, which they vse aswell in warre as triumphs.
They hate and punish Adultery very sore (howbeit there are
great multitudes of Whoores among them) and suffer none to see
their Wiues except of Kindred. They take great delight in eating
Betele and Opium, and loue Arack (or strong liquour exceedingly)
they vsually eat in plates of Gold, and frequently speake three languages,
the Malay, Syam, and that of China. Their writing differs, one
which is the Malay from the right hand to the left, as the Hebrewes,
another which is the Syam, from the left to the right, as we, a third

which is the China, right downe, and bending to way, all very vsuall
and affected by the darefull.
In the Citie are twelue pieces of great (...) of brasse, one
of which is sixe and twentie foot long, very well proportioned in
bord ^^^quaring.
They come (...) from
another in (...)
The (...)
allowes them (...) from one to (...)
them.
Yet such is the it good opinion of Strangers, Trauellers of what
Nation colour or Religion soewer, (...) first (...) many (...)
of note repaire vnto him, and bring along with them their young
Daughters or (...) and friendly (...) them their to his desires.
First (...)
a little money* which done, the foolish made goes with him to his
house, whore (...) (...) performes all Ceremonies at bed and
board (...). And at the end of the fixed
time goes home with her wages, well contented, and (...)
taken as a credit then infamy for her, no way preuenting, but rather
furthering her future marriage.
But note, that during this time the stranger must beware he be not
amorous else-where for (...) at home will seeke to poyson him.
Contrary he, if he find defect in her may ^igorously tortute her. This
Ceremony though to Libidinists may seeme mirthfull and charitable,
yet a perfect Christian values his saluation at a higher rate, (...)
by a Deuillish (...) with Pagan beauties or forceties to (...)
his deare soule into endlesse tortures and perdition.


A description of Macassar, or the
Celebes.
MAcassar is an Iland and Citle, a little South of the Aequator,
and not farre from the Ile Sum^tra, or Taprobane, which
cuts the Line.
The Ile is fruitfull, but very hot, the people of a duskie colour,
but inwardly much more vgly as being too much insnared with Mahomets
Religion.
They are beneuolent and bold in their behauiour, admit Poligamy,
and being dead like all Mahometans, are laid with their heads

towards Meccha, neere which at Medina is the Pseudo-prophets
Sepulchre.
They we are a small linnen roll about their heads, a thin cloth
about their middles, goe naked elsewhere. The women are neatly
adorned with Bracelets, Rings and other things, and well perfumed,
they weare a large long cawle or sack, liknet-worke, which as a garment
hides them wholy, and is so capacious that two more may
creepe into it, as witnesse the vse of it, that as a stranger (not strange
enough to vice) goes in the streets, meets one, shewes her a piece
of Coigne, which without Interpreter speaks her wished language.
Shee agrees, and receiues him (hell-like) into her sacke, or net,
wherein they keepe like Mars and Venus, and pittie it is they haue
few Vulcons.
They drinke Tobacco exceedingly, and such is their base art in
horrid venome, that they can drinke in a poysoned pipe with a stranger,
kill him, and hurt not herselfe (tis very good to hate it in those
parts, to auoid the Dilemma.)
But which is rarest, yet very true, they all vse long Canes (they
call them Sempitans) like our shooting Trunkes, out of which they
can blow a little pricking-piercing quill, which, if it draw the least
drop of bloud in any part of that body, twill make him (though the
strongest and ablest man liuing) die immediatly. Some poysons operate
in an houre, others in a moment, all the wounded body (by the
virulent strength of the venome) in that small space rots and consumes
most rufully and not without much wonder.


A description of Sumatra.
SVmatra is an Ile right vnder the Aequinoctiall Line, anciently
called Taprobane, and by some taken to be Ophir, whence King
Salomons Nauy from Ezion-geber or the Sues at the Red Seas
vpmost channell, in three yeares made a returne not without
wealth and triumph. Tis now a place where many seuerall Kings
sway their Seepters, the greatest is he of Acheen, who as he precedes
the rest in state, wealth and power, so is he formost in tyranny, exaction
and cruell resolutions. He has many Eliphant^ with whose Maiestie
he greatly delights himselfe, the Riuers abounds with Crocodiles
(whom Seamen improperly call Alligators) they grow from a
small Egge to fiue and twentie foote in length, their condition is
subtile (such their bloudie teares when they haue deuoured a man
p^oue them for) cruell and yet valiant.

The Talupoi, their Flameus by Magique sp^ls (the Deuils vertue)
can command them at their pleasure.
The people are in greatest number Mahometans, obserue like
Rites and Ceremonies with the Indians, but exceed them in giuing
diuine honour to Aetheriall bodies, supposing them Deities so transcendent,
pure and vertuous, that they merit no small repute and adoration
with the holiest.
The women here (not differing from all other parts of the Pagan
World) are much vnchast, heate of Phoebus prouokes them more
then Thunder can assuage, both which here rage terribly. They marrie
at tender yeares, are strictly lookt to by their galled Husbands,
and though liuing in excessiue slauery, they endure it patiently, supposing
that all other women in remoter Countries taste like thraldom.
Their colour is quite contrary to white, which darknesse they
thinke without apparell obnubilates their nakednesse. The women
are for courage, Amazonian, and of such account with their tyrannique
Lords, that the safeguard of their bodies (...) committed sometimes
to their care, oft to their valours, but mo^^ to enioy perpetually
their company. For societie with that sex, is much lusted after by
all inflamed Asiatiques.


A description of Poligundee.
NEere to Sumatra is Poligundea, an Ile where not long agoe
the English Merchants entended a Plantation, bringing
thither all such necessaries, an action of that nature and bene
fit required. But whether the heat (which is there extreme) whether
immoderate Venus, or other laborious exercises ouerthrew them,
who knowes it. This is sure, that the Flux and other diseases so troubled
them that they died in abundance. So that this Monopoly, became
of no price nor reckoning in very small space, adding no alteration
to the Iland, saue a new denomination, kill abundance.


A description of Iaua Maior.
IAua is an Ile both great and famous, declining seuen degrees from
the Aequator towards the Antarctique Pole, is judged to stand in
the gulph of Bengala, wherein the holy (so reputed) Ganges

loses himselfe after three thousand miles discent from Scythia or
Sarmatia.
In it are many Kings, most of which are tributary to the Emperour
entitled Mattaran, next whom in honour is the Vice-roy of
Bantam, whose honourable title is cald Pengran, and in authoritie
of Armes precedes all other Substitutes or Deputies within that Ile,
for at our being in these parts, with a great and sudden Army he entred
Iackatra, a Towne re-edified by the Dutch, and cald Batauia,
a second Sodome.
In which extasie the English Factors fled to Bantam, not thirtie
miles thence, where they liue in more securitie and account, then
formerly in Iackatra. Amboyna too apparantly prooues the horrid
villany and hate, they beare an Englishman, where with safetie they
can shadow their bloudie cruelties though acted vpon them, by
whom they haue beene nourisht in their infancie, and liue yet subsisting.
Iana is ouall, and in circuit not much inferiour vnto England, abounds
with sundry sorts of Aromatique Spices, of which store, Pepper
is their best and most seasable merchandize.
The Inhabitants are for the greater (not better) part Mahometans,
poligamy delights them, and Cock-fighting and Rams affect them
in no lesse measure.
Their colour is like night (if blacke, may properly be cald a colour)
such is their haire and actions, blacke, dismall, strong, impatient
and subtle. Tygres and they at hap-hazard, destroy each other.
Their apparell is not costly, their black-long-shag-curld heads,
are wrapt about with valuable Tulipants, the rest, naked vnto the
waste, where they gird themselues with a parti-coloured mantle,
reaching to the knee or a little lower.
They are strong limbed, and expert swimmers, their best weapon
is a Faulchion, or Crest, with which in desperate fights, they defend,
and offend too readily.
They haue a custome, a condemned man may take his flight, from
an appointed place, his Crest in his hand, striking at his opposers,
through whom if he can passe, hee saues himselfe, which is but seldome.
The King of Tuban here in times past was potent.
I will insert some words of the Malayan Tongue spoken in many
Ilands of the Orient, especially in Malacca, Iaua, Sumatra, Macassar,
and indeed no lesse generall then the Arabique, Latine and Sclauonian
are in other Kingdomes.



The Malayan Tongue.

English. Malay.
MY father, Beta-babpa.
A brother, Addal-ally.
A sister, Adde-Paparas.
An Vncle, Niana.
A youth, Monda.
A boy, Catsyon.
An infant, Buda.
A Priest, Cadda.
A Merchant, Fetor.
A man, Oran.
A woman, Paran-poan.
A Nobleman, Orankay.
A Chyrurgion, Goetheing.
An Iron-smith, Goada.
A friend, Marty-lowty.
A Muske-nut, Palla.
A Muske-cat, Gatto Dalgalia.
A Dogge, Hanghee.
A sort of Crabs, Horra.
A Hen, Ayam.
A Ducke, Bebee.
An Elephant, Catgha.
A Goat, Carbow.
An Oxe or Buffle, Camb^.
A Lambe, Domba.
A Bird, Borron.
A stone, Batu.
A Cap or Turbant, Cayo.
A ship, Capall.
A Ring, Chinsim.
A shooe, Apon.
A Wimble, Alforees.
A Sword, Ita, or Padang.
A Knife, Pieson.
A Boat, Praw.
A Boat, Paca Suyra.
A warme thing, Penas.
A Lampe, Pulita.
A Coate, Nassee.
A Needle, Naroen.
A Gun, Bedyll.
A barrell of a Gun, Sombo-bedyl.
A custome, Negry.
A King, Rutgee.
A Lord, Queay.
A Iauelin, Tomba.
A shield, Saluack.
A Looking-glasse, Sarmi.
A Sow, Sabi
A hand, Tanga.
A beard, Tianga.
A command, Tsuyka.
A yeare, Tauwa.
A day, Aris.
A rope, Tali.
Fruit, Tacat.
A foot, Backie.
A marriage-maker, Coemod^.
Copper, Tambagle
Lead, Tyma.
Iron, Negle.
Glasse, Lora.
Inke, Mangsy.
Bloud, Darno.
Merchandize, Dyman^.
Pepper, Lada.
Lignum Aloes, Garro.
Cloues, Chocho.
Sweet Gummes, Daringo.
Sweet Spices, Dingyn.
Cynamome, Cajumayns.
Ginger, Alia.
Mace, Bengo.
Tamarind, Assa.
Rice, Brasse.
Chalke, Capier.

Nuts, Calappen.
Salt, Garram, or Matary.
Flesh Lalier.
Oyle, Nuagia.
Gold, Maz.
Siluer, Peca, or Salacha.
Money, Sarsi.
Arack, Pinanga.
Egges, Teloor.
Mustard seed, Sajani.
A fish, Ican.
Water, Eyer.
A Water-pot, Laude.
The Head, Capell.
The Eyes, Martic.
The Necke, Goulon.
The Teeth, Auton.
The Eye-lids, Alys.
A Tongue, Ilatt.
The Lips, Lambider.
Eares, Talinga.
A backe and shoulder, Balacca baon.
An Arme, Backeyen.
The Fingers, Iary-laree.
A Foot, Backie.
The Belly, Penot.
The priuy part, Perot.
A Toe, Goumo.
An Herbe, Oberbedil, or Lancuas.
Death, Mattu.
Night, Malam.
To stretch out, Dusta.
To remember, Engat.
An Interpreter, Iorbissa.
A Booke, Naymoda.
Better, Parma.
Great, Bazaer.
Paper, Cartas.
Quils, Cazamp.
Plates, Pienig.
To eate, Makan.
Giue place, Lalan.
To choose, Damare.
Come yee, Maree.
Regard yee, Nanthy.
Friendship, Pondarra.
To liue, Iagaua.
Let passe, Ganga.
Neere hand, Gila.
It is, Dalan.
Require it, Mynta.
Goe yee, Pegi.
Wee, Dep.
Yee, (...)
Shee, Dya.
It is found, Botonvum.
To beat one another, Baccalayo.
To pay, Chyny.
What say you, Abba-katt^.
To giue, Berui.
To ashame, Malon.
To arise, Passai.
Early, Pagi.
Yesterday, Bulmari.
The other day, Bulmari-dula.
I haue, Ada.
To buy, Bilby.
Strong, Cras.
Heauy, Brat.
To destroy, Ilan.
We will goe, Maree.
I see, Green.
Scarlet-cloth, Facca lata miera.
To be silent, Dyem.
To obserue, Doduer.
These, Itouven.
To gaine, Menang.
To liue, Iagana.
A Booke, Katab.
Sunday, Ionmaheet.
That couers the head, Kokodang.
Where is it, Manauten.
Leaue it, Iamgemast.
To poyson, Ampo.

To burne, Baccar.
Bring backe, Combali.
Fire, Api.
To kill, Benue.
Needles, Caluenetten.
Bags, Corni.
Merchandize, Bayick.
A Bed, Bantell.
Sloth, Checho.
How much, Bar appe Itu.
Take it, Ambell.
Whats done, Bigimana.
Hard Wax, Caju-^^cta.
Now, Baca-baren.
To sweare, Sempa.
To helpe, Touloug.
To sell, Iouwall.
To doe, Bretoon.
Melancholy, Chinta.
Is he not here Bees.
To know, Kyunall.
Well done, Soosa.
I vnderstand not, Tyeda taw.
To vs, Quia bota.
Woe, Saya.
A good day, Tabea.
To let bloud, Bewangdarner.
Not good, Tieda-bayck.
Betimes, Ysouck.
Giue thankes, Tarrima, Casse.
Haire, Ramboyet.
To die, Bantaren.
I am sicke, Bite-secata.
To question, Betangia.
I care, Tage.
I haue not, Tyeda-da.
I desire not, Tyeda-^aw.
All, Samoanga
To spin, Tyeda.
Little, Kitchill.
Farewell, Tyngall.



The people in Iaua call these thus, somewhat
differing from the Malay.

English. Iauan.
PEpper, Syhang.
Mace, Massa.
Sweet Nuts, Pall^.
Cloues, Syanck.
Water, Eyer, or Baya.
Siluer, Salorcka*
A Royall of eight, Serpy.
Fish, Iuack.
Champions, Crissen.
A Ship, Capell^.
English. Iauan.
It is the least, Courang.
A great torment, Bedil besar.
A Gun, Py^sil.
Meate, Mackan.
Paper, Cartaes.
Wine, Arack.
A Sow, Sieleng.
An Oxe, Alomba.
Christians, Vrangy.
Strangers, Oranleya.




These are the numbers in the
Malayan Speech.

English. Malay.
ONe, Satu
Two, Dua.
Three, Tiga.
Foure, Enpat.
Fiue, Lyma.
Sixe, Nam.
Seuen, Tousiou.
Eight, De lappan.
Nine, Sambalan.
Ten, Sapola.
Eleuen, Sabalas.
Twelue, Dua-balas.
Thirteene, Tiga-balas.
Fourteen, Enpat-balas.
Fifteene, Lyma-balas.
Sixteene, Nam-balas.
Seuenteene, Toufiou-balas.
Eighteene, De lappan-balas.
Nineteene, Sambalam-balas.
Twentie, Dua-pola.
Twentie one, Dua-pola-satu.
Twentie two, Dua pola-dua.
Twentie three, Dua pola-tiga
twenty foure, Dua pola-enpat
Twenty fiue, Dua pola-lyma,
etc.

If I should speake of Iapan or China, I should ouerslip a thousand
lies, and goe but by relation.
A Flemming in my company told me this, that the Iaponian Emperour,
vsually resides at Meacco, in which Citie is a great (...),
or Statue of gilded Copper, to which they pray, and by th^^ and other
things declare themselues extreme Idolaters. To extenuate the
bulke of this their Pagod, they place him sitting, his chaire is eightie
foure foot broad, and seuentie high: his head so notable that
without trouble there upon may stand fifteene men, his body may
be knowne by his proportlonable thumbe, forty inches about, Geometrically
measured.
The Citie has seuenty Temples, in one of which are set three
thousand three hundred thirty three gilded Idols. The Ile (if it be
one) has many poore Christians in it. The forme of their executions
are vpon crucif^tes, in which sort very lately fiue thousand haue
at one time suffered.



Of China.
CHina exceeds the limit of Trauellers, tis by common vote,
reputed the greatest Empire in the Orient, chalenging no
lesse circuit then eight thousand miles. Wee call it China,
from Synarum or Chinarum Regio, they Tabenzoes and Sanglians.
The inhabitants are numbred by some presuming Suppositist aboue
sixtie millions: haue nine Cities, the least containing fifty thousand
Families, of which their heauenly Citie Quinza is cald the Metropolis,
in old times a hundred miles about, now not much lessened.
Next which is Pazquin where the King himselfe is commonly resident.
That wall built (against the Tartars by Zaintzon their one hundred
and seuenteenth Monarch) nine hundred miles long of brasse
and stone, is of no small wonder.
These people are crafty Merchants, but bad Warriours. They
pretend their owne Country and speech, for the anclentest through
all the World, and repute all matters of excellencie and knowledge
amongst other Nations, deducted and borrowed from their inuentions.
They challenge the first art of Printing and inuention of Guns,
and say the vertue of the Adamant was first by them discouered, howbeit
to this day they haue but eight points vnto their Compasse, except
very lately taught them by some Christians.
They say the World is aboue a hundred thousand yeares old after
their Chronologies, and accordingly deriue a Pedigree and tell
of wonders done nin^tie thousand yeares before Adams Creation.
They are great Idolaters, subtle and cowardly, their colour rawny,
their chins, holding fiue or sixe long haires apeece.
They are tulipanted about their heads, their other habit not much
differing from the ciuill Indians.
They are facetious, giuen to Epicurisme, and delight in many but
small dishes, the meate they take and eate with two stickes, hating
with their fingers to touch their mouthes. Venery allures them
mightily, they delight much in May-games and such deuices, and generally
loue play: so that at Passage, or In and In, they will hazard
all their worth, themselues, wiues, children and other substance.
They haue many Mosques beautified with as many richly gilded
Idols, to which they act as sundry ^orts of Superstition.
They haue among them many young youthes, condecorated with
propheticke gestures, who, when many are together, goe vnto the
Pagod, and sit demurely on the ground, not much distant from the
Idoll, grauely and right soberly doe these spectators note the Antique

gestures of these Vaticinating Boyes, who with their longspread
haire fall flat afore the Idoll.
In this their Extasie, the lookers on incessantly warble out soft
trembling Musique, till such time as the boyes arise, who anon (as
from a diuine trance) raise themselues and lie downe againe some
what more leasurely, then suddenly in great hast and feare with gastly
amazed lookes, vibrate a readie sword against the beholders.
The people submissiuely bow vnto the Idoll, till the boyes speake
vnto them some ingenious inuented matter, they harken, belieue,
and then depart well satisfied.

Pectoribus mores tot sunt, quot in Orbe figurae,
Qui sapit, inumeris moribus aptus erit.


Mans heart commands as many wayes, as stars find resting places,
Who trauels must disguise himselfe each way with Ianus faces.

Vpon the seuenth of Iune, sayling from these parts we descryed
land bearing from vs North North-west, and next morne knew it to
be the Ile cald Dygarroys, vnder twentie degrees South latitude,
from which Ile to Mauritius, the course is West North-west, and
distant ninetie leagues, or two hundred and seuentie English miles
or thereabout.
This Ile was first discouered by the Portugall, as Mariners report,
howbeit the name comes fitly from the Welsh word Dygarad,
or desolate.
^Tis full of Wood, Tortoises, Dodoes and wild-fowle, but no humane
inhabitants, it giues it selfe to our view, not very high, sixe
leagues distant, and to the South-west end are long shoales and dangerous.
Thence, after some patience and benefit of good Windes, wee
arriued at the Mauritius, a place not vnworthy the remembrance,
or to be spoken of.





A description of Mauritius.
MAuritius is an Ile scituate within the burning Zone close by
the Tropick of Capricorne, but in what part of the World
tis questionable, participating aswell in part with America,
in respect of the immense South Ocean, as bending towards the Asiatique
Seas from India and Iaua. But most properly adioyning the
great Ile Madagascar, from which it is distant two hundred leagues,
or sixe hundred English miles, whereby I iudge it placed in the Afri.
que Seas, and thereby incorporated into Afrique. But how euer
doubtfull of what part of the three it is, of this I nothing doubt,
that for varietie of Gods temporall blessings, no part of the Vniuerse
obscures it. For what I affirme, I doe it not by fame, but being
an eye-witnesse in part, and partly expert in the rest, I may affirme
the whole, scarce to be paralellized.

Its latitude twentie degrees fiue minutes, longitude from the Meridian
of Cape Comrein, twentie degrees, twenty minutes, Variation,
twenty foure degrees nineteene minutes.
It first was discouered by the Portugals, who (not vnlike a second
Adam, denominating all new places and things) gaue it the name of
Do-Cerne, by some Cygnaea, but since by the Hollanders, Mauritius;
either from the name of Graue Maurice, or more likely by the shipwracke
of a Dutch Ship cald the Mauritius, that laid her bones here,
dead through rottennesse.
It is an Ile abounding with all good things requisite for mans vse,
and requireable for the Zone, tis placed in, the Land is high and
mountainous, chiefly where it beholds the Sea. The compasse or circuit
of the Ile about a hundred miles. The greatest extent declining
from North-east to South-west: it procreates a healthy nourishing
aire, the flourishing fragrant trees, as well lenifying the burning
heate, when Phoebus embraces the Goate, as helped by the sweete
mollifying breath of the Noto-Zephirus, such time as Sol adheres to
Cancer: And as that body is best compounded that partakes indifferently
of all the Elements, which either super-abounding, or
wanting begets defect. So to be blest in all, this place is abortiue in
none.
For water is here in plentie, nor is its goodnesse, and sweetnesse,
exceld by plenty, but as it gently drils it selfe from the high Rocks,
so it trickles downe the Valleyes, as it were besotted at the delightfull
murmure it liueth in, and in some places spreads Meanders, till
too secure in his owne mildnesse, hee is ingulpht into the all-deuouring
Ocean.
It is abounding in diuers sorts of trees, which are as plentifull,
some good for timber, other for food, all for vse, here is store of box
trees, whose growth and greennesse, affoord profit and delight, here
is also great store of Ebony both blacke, red, white, and yellow, the
tree is outwardly couered with barque, but within digests her Ebony:
the best is cole blacke, and good for Mathematicall Instruments,
playing Tables, Bowles, etc.
And as it is plentifull in all things, so no one thing exceeds the
wood, which is in so great quantitie, that I could hardly procure
passage. But the most beneficiall tree to Trauellers is the Palmeto*
it growes like the Date or Coco-tree, saue that her boughes are
more large and round. The tree is long, straight and very soft* hauing
no leaues, boughes or branches, saue at the top* which are but
few, yet those good to couer Tents, or to shelter vs from the raines,
at the top whereof is a soft pith, in which consists the soule and vegetatiue
vertue of that tree, which cut out, the tree expires, its taste is
like a good sweet Nuts kernell, and boyld like Cabbage, but the best

commoditie is the Wine issuing from the tree, which is sweet, pleasant
and nourishing as Muskadine or Alligant, thus wee drinke it:
we come to a place where two or three trees grow together, and
with a Hatchet cut a small hole in euery tree, into which immediatly
effudes the liquour, so that suddenly all the holes I cut are full,
then with a cane or quill we sucke the Wine first out of one tree, and
then the other, and still one trees hole is full againe by that time we
had drunke out of the two other, thus in three trees in lesse then
one houre three of vs bowzed our bellies full. This Palmeto Wine,
is cold in digestion, purges the belly and helpes obstructions, and let
stand, in two dayes becomes good Vineger.




Againe, such is the life and pleasure of this Ambrosia, that (as I haue
noted) we were no sooner gone from the trees, though scarce three
yards, but diuers Birds as Parrats (which here are store of) Kites
and Lizards (of whom here be plenty, and those not a little curious)
would speed to sucke the distilling Nectar.

Diuers other trees here be, strange both in shape and nature, one
out of curiositie I tasted of, which for halfe an houre so malignantly
bit and wronged my mouth and lips, as if Vitrioll and Sulphur had
beene imbrued. This tree procreates nothing that is greene or good,
is wholy naked, without leafe or flowre, and the body very soft and
penetrable, in so much that I thinke a Mukset bullet would wel-nigh
pierce through a tree of fiue yards circuit, whose softnesse, one of
those inuited me to write my name in, which my Knife as easily performed,
as with a sticke you may doe in sand.
Another tree beares a codfull of sharpe prickles, wherein are hid
a round fruit like a Doues Egge, which broken has in it a kernell, in
taste, not vnlike an Acorne, but in digestion, if not the same, little
better then poyson.
Other trees haue fruits like Pine-apples, like Arthichokes, like
Plummes, others like Nuts and Berries, but what vertue, the fruits
or names, or trees doe challenge, I must plead ignorance. This Jobserued
that of these, what the Birds eat not, the Tortoyses doe, and
what they refuse, the Swine deuoure, so that by one or other all is
tasted of.
And againe, as the Ile is prodigall in her water and wood, so shee
corresponds in what else a fruitfull mother labours to be excellent
in, not only boasting in that varietie of feathered creatures, but in
the rarenesse of that varietie, which if run ouer briefly, yet may be
thought too tedious, I feare by some on such a subiect.
First, here and here only and in Dygarroys, is generated the Dodo,
which for shape and rarenesse may Antigonize the Phoenix of Arabia,
her body is round and fat, few weigh lesse then fifty pound*
are reputed of more for wonder then food, greasie stomackes may
seeke after them, but to the delicate, they are offensiue and of no
nourishment.
Her visage darts forth melancholy, as sensible of Natures injurie,
in framing so great a body, to be guided with complementall wings,
so small and impotent, that they serue only to proue her Bird^*
The halfe of her head is naked, seeming couered with a fine vaile,
her bill is crooked downwards, in midst is the thrill, from which
part to the end tis of a light greene, mixt with a pale yellow tincture;
her eyes are small, and like to Diamonds round and rowling: her
clothing downy feathers, her traine three small plumes short and
inproportionable, her legs suting to her body, her pounces sharpe,
her appetite strong and greedy, Stones and Jron are digested, which
description, will better be conceiued in her representation.





In this Ile are sundry other Birds, as Goshawkes, Hobbies, Parrats,
Reer-mice,
or Bats so large as Goshawkes, Passe-flemingoes,
Geese, Powts, Swallowes, Kites, Black-birds, Sparrowes, Robbins,
Herons (white and beautifull) Cacatoes (Birds like Parrats, fierce,
and indomitable: and may properly be so called from the Greeke
(...) proceeding from an euill egge) Bitters, Hens and such like,
which I name, for some mens better information.
Fishes are in huge numbers here, fresh and Sea-fish, of which the
Mannatee or Cow-fish for taste and shape can pose both feeders and
beholders, who because vsing the shore; on which she creepes vpon
her paps, tastes like Veale, though not so delicate. Captaine Euans
hauing struck one with a Fiz-gig lept vpon her, and with his Dagget
after fifty wounds, got conquest ouer her. He bought it deerely,
for she so crusht him with her taile, that he spit bloud vntill he died,
being three weekes after. The head of this Monster is like an Elephant,
some say a Cow, thats no small difference, her eyes small, bodie
three yards long and one broad, her finnes so little that they are
like the Dodoes wings, more to looke at, then for execution, tis a
gentle fish vnmoued, and some say affects the visage of a man exceedingly,
yea haue succoured some that were wounded and like to
perish, more charitable and mercifull then reuengfull man.
In his head is a stone which being pownded, and put in wine, is very
soueraigne for the Stone and Collicke, that is of more value
then his other sixe, which yet to him are farre more vsefull.

If I name what fish we took, twill helpe my memory. One speckled
fish the Seamen fed vpon vnwarily, and for its naughtinesse is called
the poyson fish, tis shaped like a Tench, but meazled, the rest
are Breame, Tench, Trowte, Eeles (excessiue great) Crabs, Lobsters,
Oysters, Caualloes, Porpiece, Grampasse, Whales, Bonetaes, Albycores,
Flying Fish, Gar-fish, Rock-fish, Lympits, Sharkes, Pikes,
Skate, Crafish, Cuttlefish, Soles, Tortoyses, (in which I haue seene
aboue a thousand Egges, great and manducable) and Dolphins, with
many other, whose simplenesse, giue leaue to the starued Traueller
to banish famine and hunger.
The Ile affoords vs withall Goats, Hogges, Beeues, and Kine,
land I ortoyses, (so great that they will creepe with two mens burthens,
and serue more for sport, then seruice or solemne Banquet)
Rats and Monkeyes, all which becomes food to such ships as anchor
here. They were first brought hither by the Portugall, who
may truly say of those parts, as some before times of other.
Quae Regio in terris nostri non plena laboris.
Though now for the English and Dutch forces, they dare not rest
there, nor owne their firstlings.
The birds are so vnused to tyrannicke people, that I haue shot
one Heron in sixe, and kild them all one after another, the one not
knowing or valuing the others danger, but beget destruction to
themselues, by condoling their late dead associates.
The like for the fish, only the Goats are wary and haue their centinels.
The Hens in eating taste like parched Pigs, if you see a flocke of
twelue or twentie, shew them a red cloth, and with their vtmost silly
fury they will altogether flie vpon it, and if you strike downe
one; the rest are as good as caught, not budging a iot till they be all
destroyed.
The Bats, some case like Rabbets, though in my judgement, worse
meate cannot be tasted of. They sqweake and call one the other, in
most offensiue cryes, and hang in swarmes vpon the trees (by clawes
fixed to their wings) with their heads downwards, they are faced like
Monkeyes. Their Images vpon the Coco-trees, will speake best concerning
their description.
One fish like to a Skate we caught, tailed like a Monkey, his eyes
fiue quarters asunder, his finnes ends foure large yards, his mouth
like a Port-cullis, a creature rather made to wonder at, then feed
vpon.





One word of the soile it selfe, tis stonie and troublesome towards
the shore, but within, fat, euen and pleasant, full of shadowing
trees, and drilling Riuolets which giue both deligh and tast to
the eye and tongue (some few places except) which either storming
at the aspiring height of the adjacent mountaines, or proud in his
owne noyse, discends so violently, that it makes meere Cattaracts by
its motion. Yet this fury addes to the benefit of the earth, making it
sweete and mellow, which otherwise would shew too full of stones
and sandy.
At some times Amber-greese is found here, which whether comming
from the Whales sperme, Sea-froth, or other wayes, I leaue it
to other satisfaction, for there are seuerall conjectures about it, here
is Corall, white and louely. Tobacco is here also but whither by the
labour of man or from Dame Nature, that I know not certainly.
The Ile has no humane Inhabitants. These creatures that possesse
it, haue it on condition, to pay tribute (without exception) to such
ships, as famine, or foule weather force to anchor there.
Hence our journey led vs homewards in fiue dayes sayle descrying
land, which bore from vs Southwest, and next day attained it, by
its latitude, knowing it for Englands-Forrest.
Tis exceeding high, full of wood, water, Birds, great Eeles, but
without Hogs or Goats, till our Captaine bestowed some there now
as we passed, tis in compasse fiftie miles, has latitude from the Aequator,
twenty degrees fifty fiue minutes, longitude from Mauritius
one degree, fiue and twenty minutes, and distant thence thirty seuen
leagues. Its Portugall name is Maskarenas.

Hence in seuenty dayes more we arriued at Sancta Helena, an Ile
in sixteene degrees South latitude, in longitude from Soldania Bay
twenty two degrees, Variation of the Needle fiue degrees and some
few minutes.






A description of Sancta Helena.
SAint Helena, was so denominated by Iuan de Noua, the Portugall,
in regard he first discouered it on that Saints day.
It is doubtfull whether in adhere to America or Afrique, the
vast Ocean bellowing on both sides, and almost equally: yet I imagine
she inclines more to Afer, then Vespusi^^.
Tis is circuit thirty English miles, of that ascent and height, that
tis oft inueloped with cloudes, from whom she receiues moisture to
fatten her: and as the land is very high, so the Sea at the brinke of

this Ile is excessiue deepe, and the ascent so immediate, that though
the Sea beat fiercely on her, yet can no ebbe nor flow be well perceiued
there.
The water is sweet aboue, but running downe and participating
with the salt Hils, tasts brackish at his fall into the Valleyes which
are but two and those very small, hauing their appellations from a
Lemmon-tree aboue, and a ruined Chappell placed beneath built by
the Spaniard, and delapidated by the Dutch. Their has beene a Village
about it, lately depopulated from her Inhabitants, by command
from the Spanish King, for that it became an vnlawfull Magazin of
Seamens treasure, in turning and returning out of both the Indies,
whereby he lost both tribute and prerogatiue in apparant measure.
Monuments of antique beings nor other rarities can be found
here. You see all, if you view the ribs of an old Carrick, and some
broken pieces of her Ordnance left their against the owners good
will or approbation: Goats and Hogs are the now dwellers, who multiply
in great abundance (and though vnwillingly) affoord themselues
to hungry and Sea-beaten passagers: It has store of Partrich and Guinea
Hens, all which were brought thither by the honest Portugall, who
now dare neither anchor there, nor owne their labours, lest the English
or Flemmings question them.
The Ile is very euen and delightfull aboue, and giues a large prospect
into the Ocean. Tis a saying with the Sea-men, a man there has
his choice, whether he will break his heart going vp, or his necke
comming downe, either wish bestowing more iocundity then comfort,
and here we left buried our honest Captaine Andrew Euans.
After sixe dayes commorance in Saint Hellen, wee sailed thence
North-west, and on the sixteenth of October, had latitude thirteene
degrees fifty minutes, the Sunne then being in our Zenith, and in
his progresse into Capricorne, then whose station hee neuer trauels
farther South.
Three dayes after, wee were by Ascention Ile, in seuen degrees
fiftie minutes, its compasse is thirtie miles, and from Saint Helens
two hundred and forty leagues or seuen hundred and twentie English
miles.
On the seuen and twentieth we crost the Aequator, where we had
too many* Tornat^oes, and to nine degrees, had little other or beter
weather then high stormes, (...) ra^nes and Iowd thunders* On
the eleuenth of No^ember, were Parallel to the greene Cape, and to
the Gorgades, Iles famo^ed by Poets for their Princesse Gorgon and
Meduza, slaine by Pers^^, that made a defenside and offenside shield
of her Head, whose haires being curled like to Snakes, made them
as stones by admiration of (...) beauty or horrour, that did behold
them.

And with a beneficiall gale past by those parts of the Westerne
World so lately discouered, and much written of, the riuer of Ama^^nes,
Guiae^, Florida, and other parts of Mexico, (and into some of
which I s^thence trauelled) where I will a little defranude the Reader
from concluding with a few lines touching the first Discouerer
of th^se Countries.


A Discourse and proofe that Madoc ap Owen
Gwynedd first found out that Continent
now call'd America.
FOr albeit I haue formerly in two lines vindlcated the honour
of our Countrie, lost in the greater part by protract of enuious
time, or want of wel-willers to defend it. I shall here
somewhat more largely shew the ground of our coniecture, which
which with the most censorious may happily beget admittance, if analogie
of Language and authority of good Authours may finde it,
touching the first Discouerer of the Westerne World, commonly
(tho improperly) cald America, and to redeeme an errour formerly
by a printed mistake of Dauid for Madoc, of whom wee treat of.
We may entertaine some lights out of authentique Story, and peraduenture
whereby at first Madoc, and his brother Dauid aduenture^
vpon those Discoueries, and since them, Colon, vesputius, Magellan,
and others.
Plato may be brought into our first ranke, in that writing Dialogue
wise of Tymaeus and Crici^s, he discourses of a great vast Ile, West of
the Atlantique Ocean, and denominates it from Mount Atlas, supposing
the extendure, comparable to Astique and Asia, ioyned together.
In the next place we may obserue, some small conjectures out of
those Bookes of Rarities, writ two thousand yeeres agoe by Aristotle
and Theophrastus, wherein is set downe a relation of some Merchants
passing from the Straits of Gibraltar, by tempest driuen to the West
where they at length found out an Iland vninhabited (which I imagine
the Azores, many ages after discouered by the Flemmings, and
from them called the Flemmish Ilands.)
And others that suppose Hanno the Carthaginian, light their after
much perill and industry, but though some would haue the great Ile
West from Carthage, yet others as Pomponius Mela, and Lampridus
affirme twas South where hee discouered, which granted, it could be
no part of the West Indies, but some of the Canarie Iles, Atlantiades,
Saint Helena, or Ascention Ile, which though they carry not the

Epethite of great, yet in respect of the noueltie, great aduenture and
distance, may affect that stile, Madagascar if he got so farre (as some
are of opinion) will cleare it. Only then it seemes to me, that after so
long a Sea journey foure mouthes at least, and escape from such terrible
stormes as constantly are noted in doubting the Cape of good
Hope, hee should haue added a little more, and found out the Red
Sea (not distant very much) and abreuiated his progresse home,
through calmer Seas and lesse difficulties euery way.
Seneca, Nero's Master in a Prophetique way, points out at the discouery:
Extant in his Medaean Tragedie.
--Venient annisSecula seris, quibus OceanusVincula rerum laxet, and ingensPateat tell us, Typhisque nouosDetegat orbes, nec sit terris--Vltima Thule.
Marke well my speech:
--The time will one day bee(Guided by prouidence) when you shall see,The liquid Ocean to enlarge her bounds;And pay the earth a tribute of more groundsIn amplest measure: For the Sea-gods thenShall shew new Worlds and rarities to men.And by his leaue who all great acts commands.See Thul lesse North by farre, then other Lands.
To fulfill which, we must introduce our Madoc ap Owen Guynedd,
who (to say truth) was the first and sure discouerer of those Countries,
his Plantations and other Reasons proouing it, which I trust
will not offend any, because hurtfull to none, that wish well to vs or
our Countrie, being withall a great Honor buried in modern silence
and rapt from vs, by all the Christian World, who vnanimously accumulate
the glory of it to the aforenamed Columbus. Americus and
many others.
And least any may thinke the person to whom wee attribute a
Trophee of so great honour subiect to inuention or not worth a memory,
I will first giue you a word of his Discent, with the occasion
of his honourable Voyage and so goe on.
His name was Madoc brother of Prince Dauid, and sonne of that
famous Owen Gwyneth Prince of Wales, who for aboue thirty yeares
gouerned their with great wisdome, courage and good fortune: his
Father was that Gruffith ap Conan that did homage to William the

Conquerour, at Saint Dauids for his Principallties in Wales, and other
places, and lineally descended from King Rodri-mawr, or Rodericke
the Great, who in many conflicts beat the Saxons, especially
is renowned by those ouerthrowes he gaue Burchred King of Mercia,
Athelwolfe King of the West Saxes, and Merick a valiant Prince
amongst them in foure seuerall Battailes at Gwerthen, Bangelu, Monegid,
and Anglesea, Anno Dom. 846.
Enough to satisfie the modest, touching the worth and value of
this Madoc, this added, that so soone as his Father Prince Owen was
dead, a great and implacable enmitie arose betweene Iorwerth (sirnamed
Drwyndwn, by reason of his broken nose) Howell and Dauid
sonnes of Owen.
Iorwerth (or Edward) was thought vnworthy the Crowne and
dignitie both in respect of his deformity and simplenesse, Howell was
excluded by vote of the common short in that his mother was an Irish
woman, and Dauid though inferiour in yeares, yet by marriage of
Emma Plantaginet, sister to King Henry the Second, by generall applause
was judged worthiest, and secured himselfe not long time after,
by that victory he got against his opposite Brethren, wherein
Howell was slaine and Iorwerth escaped, by which Prince Dauid became
secure, till Anno 1194. Llewellin ap Iorwerth recouered his Fathers
right, helped by those actiue Gentlemen, Howell up Meredith
and Conan ap Own Guinedd, his neere Kinsmen.
During which turmoiles and vnnaturall strifes, the said Madoc
loath to be an Agent of Discord to either party, and seeing propositions
of peace ineffectuall, studies by all good meanes to auoid the
knowledge of it, and aymes at some forren place of ease and profit,
neither discouraged by improbabilities nor likely disasters.
These (no doubt) were causes mouing Prince Madoc to this Heroicke
Employment, added by those foretelling Southsayes, before
named, and which without question were knowne vnto this Madoc,
who according to his dignitie was instructed, in seuerall sorts of a^
and learning. And it may be hee called to minde that Prophetique
Song made by that honorable Bardh or Poet Ambrose Teleyssen, who
flourished in the time of Aurelius Ambrosius, brother to Vther-pendragon,
called hither out of Armorica, by the distressed Brittaines, to
reuenge them vpon the vnciuill Saxons in the yeare 490. after
Christ. Teyleyssen in that Song first reprooues the Clergie of Auarice,
Pride, and Superstition (though they boasted of a conuersion made
awhiles before by Augustine the Monke sent to that end by Gregorit
the Great.)
It seemes ignorant that long before, our Countrimen had embraced
Christ by the preaching of Ioseph of Arimathea and Zelotes
in this manner.


Gwae'r offeiriad byd
Nys angreifftia gwyd
ac ny phregetha.


Gwae ny cheidw eygail
Ac ef yn Vigail
Ac nys areilia.


Gwae ny theidw ey ddeuaid
Rhae bleidhic, Rhufeniaid
A'i' ffon gnwppa.


Thus in English:
Woe be to that Priest yborne
That will not cleanly weed his corne
And preach his Charge among.


Woe be to that Shepheard I say,
That will not watch his Fold alway
As to him doth belong.


Woe be to him that doth not keepe,
From Romish Wolues his silly sheepe
With staffe and weapon strong.

And then goes on vaticinating,

Eu Nar a folant
Eu hiaith a godwant
Eu tir a gothlant
Ond gwyllt Wallia.


Vsque laudabunt Dominum creantem
Vsque seruabunt Idioma linguas
Aruaque amittent sua cuncta
Praeter Wallica rura.


Whiles Cambray's issue serue the Lord their Maker*
And with no other Language be partaker
So long, with glory they their owne shall keepe
Whiles other Nations in obliuion sleepe.

Madoc ingeniously perusing the older illuminations and seeing in
some things the prophecie of this authentique Bardh, accomplished

(for till they forgat God no strangers infested them) employing
his Patrimoniall Estate vpon men, ships and prouision, scarce bidding
farewell to Brother or Kindred, lest his honorable designes by
preposterous ceremony and complement (actions when affected, sure
remonstrances of shallow braines and vanity) might find lets or discouragement
to himselfe or seruants, Anno 1170. hee left his Country,
and after long saile and no lesse patience, blest with some happy
windes, at last they discried land in the Gulph of Mexico, not farre
from Florida, a land affoording health, aire, gold, good water and
plenty of Natures blessings, by which Prince Madoc was ouer-ioyed
and had reason to account his happy estate, superiour to that his brothers
stroue for, so eagerly emulating with ambitious hate and bloud
each other, euen for a little Territory, incomparable to that, good
destiny allotted him, being a vast and wealthy Kingdome, obtained
in some part without opposition, and able to satiate the most couetous.
There he planted, fortified some aduantagious places, left a hundred
and twenty men to finish what hee had begun and returned
home after some bad windes, guided by supreame prouidence (his
large compasse) and the benefit the Pole-starre gaue him on the
night.Gods prouidenc^ the best compasse
When he was landed and had accounted his happy and miraculous
Voyage, told the hopes of succeeding Conquests, and other motiues
of perswasion and admiration, these and the worth of Madoc himselfe
drew so many willing minds and purses to a returne, that he attempted
it with ten good Barques, loaded with all necessary prouisions,
a matter of that consequence required. At his arriuall hee
found many of his Brittaines dead, caused by the Nati^es Villany or
alteration of the Clime, which notwithstanding he digested patiently,
and with Edwell and Eneon his Brothers, bettered the first intentions,
liuing with content, and dying in no lesse distance from Heauen,
then when at home, vnhappiest in this, that their owne Nation
forgot them quite, either iudging them lost, because neuer after hearing
from them, or because their owne Beings were turned topsie
turuy, by the fatall end of that last vnhappy Prince Lluellyn ap Gruffith
(who married Elianor Daughter of Simon Mount fort Earle of
Leic^ster) slaine at Buelht by Francton an Englishman, in base and
cowardly fashion, Anno Dom. 1282.
And though the Cambrian issue in the new found world may seeme
extinct, the Language to this day vsed amongst those Canibals, together
with their adoring the Crosse, vsing Beades, Reliques of holy
men and some other, noted in them of Acusano, and other places
testified by Franciscus Lonez, by Columbus and other Spaniards at
their first Discouery, points at our Madocs former being there, being
impossible these ceremonies should come amongst them without instruction.

For Ferdinando Curtez Ambassadour and Generall for Ferdinando
King of Spaine, confesses that Matezuma (second sonne of Antzol, and
Father of Quabutymoc, last King of Mexico) told him, vpon demand
how such venerable things came first amongst them, that they had it
by tradition that many yeares before, a strange Nation liued amongst
them, but whence deriued or how named, hee could not satisfie,
though by any indifferent man it may be granted, it could be no
other saue Madoc, confirmed by the Records yet extant, writ by Cynuric
ap Grono and Guten Owen, and no lesse orthodoxall, by that
language left by the Cambrians to Birds, Riuers, Rocks, Beasts, and
the like.
Some of which words are these Gwrando, signifying in the Cambrian
speech to giue eare vnto or hearken. Pen-gwyn, with vs a
white head, referd by the Mexicans, to a Bird so called, and Rockes
complying with that Idiom. Some Promontories had like denominations,
called so by the people to this day, tho estranged and concealed
by the Spaniard. Such are the Iles Corroeso. The Cape of Brutaine
or Brittaine. The floud, Gwyndowr or white-water, Bara bread,
Mam mother, Tate father, Dowr water, Bryd time, Bu or Buch
a Cow, Clugar a Heath-cocke, Llwynog a Fox, Wy an Egge, Calaf
a Quill, Trwyn a Nose, Nef Heauen; and the like then vsed: by which
in my conceit, none saue detracting Opinionatists can iustly oppose
such worthy testimonies and proofes of what I wish were generally
allowed of. And if recitall of Authours may beget more credence,
were referre the Reader to those Records writ two hundred
yeares agoe and more, by Cynwric ap grono, Gutyn Owen who liued
in King Edward the Fourths time, Humphrey Lloydd, Dauid Powell
Sir Iohn Price, Richard Hackluyt, Purchas, Dauis and others Enough
to the wel-willers of Truth and Iustice, too much for carping Zoylists,
and such as take pleasure in sophistry and opposition.
This, no doubt, had it beene so faithfully knowne and belieued amongst
forreigne and moderne Writers as is merited, then Christophur
Columbus (a man in truth worthy and industrious) Americus Vespucius,
Magellan, and many others had not wholy carried along
with them the immortall honour of that happy enterprize, nor had
Prince Dauid and Madoc beene defrauded of their claime into those
Countries, nor had the Pope nor Spaniard had that immediate interest
grounded vpon their first Discouery as very many Iesuits and
Statists haue late disputed for.
We allow no lesse (I dare say more) honour to Columbus then
they or any other can, but this withall. That this his Nauigation succeeded
Madoc ap Owens, three hundred two and twenty yeares,
and the aduantage is this, hee prosecuted his intents in a happier
Age, and when the World was more addicted to forreigne Employments,

and abler by Nauigation to attaine with lesse perill, actions
much more difficult.
Columbus was borne in Cugureo, not farre from Genoa, a man both
modest and expert in Sea affaires, his helpes left him by a Pilot dying
at his house, soone after his returne from those parts forced thither
by storme and destinie, and comparing those proofes with the
coniectures of ancient and graue Philosophers, and it may be not
wholy ignorant of Madocs former being there (for what Nation formerly
knew not the Acts of Englishmen better than themselues,
else had not Pollidore Virgill (to our shame) vndertooke our Chronologie
with Verstegan, alias Rowley, from both whom wee sucke too
many vntruths and coniecturall testimonies.
Columbus armed with hopes and some assurances repaires to some
Christian Princes for his vndertakers, King Henry the Seuenth louing
money too well, and obseruing simplicitie, in the Messingers deliuery
and lookes (who vnfortunately had beene detained prisoner
by some Rascals in his passage hither) denied him so that immediatly
vpon the Kings refusall and the French Kings, his brother by that
time had drawne on King Ferdinand (though first against it, hauing
his hands full, ere he could vtterly expell the Saracens, too long among
them) so that vpon the commends of Iohn Perez de Marchena,
Rector of the Monastery of Rabida, Colon was trusted with two small
ships and two hundred men.
With which after sixtie dayes sayle after much patience, and no
lesse adoe to quiet the discontented Spaniards, they descried land in
some part of Mexico. Infinitely ioying himselfe and them, and by
this good lucke deriuing no lesse Gold vnto the Spaniard, than all
Europe enioyed formerly, but how meanly this worthy man was after
that rewarded, I leaue it to the Reader to satisfie himselfe in others
Writings concerning it.
Not long after Americus Vespucius (before his Orientall Nauigations)
aduances Southerly, where with small toyle hee found land enough
(but part of that Continent formerly discouered) to glut ambition,
howbeit iudging his labours more excellent then the others,
he denominates that vast and spacious Continent from his owne name,
America, iniuriously assumed and vnwisely giuen him by other Kingdomes,
being that others had the glory of first finding it, and might
more iustly haue called it Madocya, Brittania, Colonia, or Columbina.
But wee see by generall assent Americus has got the honour of it,
and thriues better (tho deseruing equally) then Bathillus the Poetaster,
who thought to haue defrauded Virgill of his elaborate Poem,
and there want not some (yet those not enuious) that wish his reward
agreeable.
Magellan soone after sailes yet more South, and passes that Fretum
or strait, with more reason called Magellan, a hundred others haue
since that gleaned seuerall additions of Titles and new names their
distributed.
Only he that in truth most of all deserued it, Madoc, sleepes, ambitious
of quiet more then vain-glory, yet those that loue his memory
will not passe by such liuing Monuments of his deseruings (my
owne case at this present) without some small testimonie of their affections
and zeale to worth and equitie, and leaue it to a better Authour,
in a better method, to reuiue him clearlier.
I will lead you through no more extrauagancies, lest your entreated
patience turne into exoticke passion: being iealous I haue mounted
higher then can become modestie and small desires, and in truth
am no lesse desirous of home (tyred in a double Trauaile, by scor-Zones
and surfer of presuming ignorance which adde nothing, but
detract from better Notions.)
On the last of Nouember, after much strugling with contrary
windes and some tempests, we got sight of the Azores knowne by other
names, as the Westerne or Flemmish Ilands. In their Origine
knowne best to Flemmings, though now subiect to a higher command,
the Imperious Portugall. They are nine in number, of which
Tercaera is (if not greatest) most famous for a defensiue Warre the
Prior Don Antonio, Titularie King of Portugall, made there against
the insatiate and inuading Spaniard, who finally got that and the rest
of Don Antonioes territories claymed by right of bloud and conquest,
as the Historian Cunestagio in his vnion of the two Kingdomes
treateth of.
They are abounding, with no rich Commodities, their victuall is
small, Wine bad, and water not very excellent. They affoord
much Oade, which has made them most famous and best inriched
them.
This added, that the old account of the first Meridian is transferd
hither from the Canaries, or Iles once Fortunate, for twixt Flores
and Coruo, the Needle finds no Variation, elsewhere saue in that parallel
increasing.
The other seuen are these, Saint George, Saint Michael, Saint Mary,
Fayall, Pyco, Gratiosa, and Tercaera. Some of which I here
tho vn-usefully demonstrate.





Leauing these, wee entred the Spanish or Cantabrian Ocean, where
thinking our selues past all danger (such ioy the sight of the Christian
World and affinitie with our owne Country enricht vs with)
when loe to shew there is no constancie nor trust in incertaine Seas
and terrene pleasures, an horred three dayes continued tempest (not
without much feare and doubt) threw vs vpon Vshents point in Brittany
(a marittime part of France) and immediately againe, when we
expected most danger, the weather fauoured vs, and with a smiling
gale affoorded vs in few watches, sight of our long-lookt-for Ithaca:
And the more desired, that these Relations might find acceptance
from that most noble Lord the Earle of Pembroke, Lord Steward
(now with God) and my Lord of Powys, from whose encouragements
I affected Trauaile: which I cannot passe by without acknowledgement.
To conclude, wee came safe to an anchor in Plymouth Hauen,
where (not without great cause) wee gaue God hearty
thankes, for his former mercies and our
present safeties.
The End.

Stat sua cuique dies: breue and irreparabile tempus
Omnibus est vitae, sed famam extendere factis
Hoc virtutis opus est:






AN ALPHABETICAL
TABLE OF SOME MATTERS
contained in these Trauailes, for the Readers
better ease and direction.

A
ABbas, Emperour of Persia
his Image, pag. 128. His
crueltie in Hyrcania, p. 98
his receiuing his Maiesties Ambassador,
p. 97. his crueltie to the Georgians,
p. 81. his victories against the
Turkes, pag. 71. his seueritie to his
Ambassadour, pag. 29. his speech concerning
Nogdibeg, p. 124 his crueltie
to his sonne, p. 99. his tyranny to
Emyrhamze-myrzey his elder brother,
p. 89. his discent from Mortis
Haly, p. 167. His letter giuen to vs,
and titles of Honour, pag. 128. His
death, p. 127.
Abbas-ebaut, a house of pleasure
neere the Caspian Sea, belonging to
the King, p. 96.
Abrahim Bassa, a great Fauourite
to the Grand Signior, p. 29.
Acheen a City in Sumatra, p. 199
Aden, a Castle and Towne neere
Mocha, at the entrance into the red
Sea, belonging to the Turkes, p. 25.
Agray, the Moguls chiefe seat in
India, first built by Bacchus, p. 30.
Albania spoken of, p. 68.
Alexander the great his death,
pag. 138.
Alliauart a Towne in Hyrcania,
pag. 93.
Amadauad the Metropolis of Guzurat
in India, and vnder the great
Mogull, p. 42.
Amazonian women, p. 200.
Amboyna, p. 201.
Amnobaut a pleasant Village in
Persia, p. 66.
Ambassador of Englands entrance
into Spahawn, p. 67. his entertainment
at the Persian Court, p. 96. his
death at Cazbeen, p. 126.
Aequinoctiall Circle, p. 7.
Americus Vesputius taxed, p. 223
Angola, a Kingdome in Afrique,
the man depicted and described, p. 9.
Anthaeus, a Giant and Tyrant
slaine by Hercules, p. 7.

Antogil, Antabosta and Angoda,
three Townes in Madagascar, pag. 20
Anzigues, a men-eating Nation,
pag. 10.
Arabique Language, pag. 43.
45.
Araxis a Riuer neere Armenia,
running into the Caspian Sea, pag.
95.
Arethusa, the daughter of Hesperus,
p. 7.
An Armenian Christian in single
combate, kils a famous Rebell, turns
Mahumetan, and is slaine, p. 92.
Armagun a Towne in Chorman.
dell, p. 190.
Artaxerxes Emperour of Persia,
p. 137. and 132.
Arbaces King of Persia, pag.
145.
Assaph-kawn, an Indian Duke is
father in law to Curroon the now
Mogul and brother to Normall the
last Empresse, hee plots the yong Moguls
destruction, the fall of his sister
the Empresse, and her sonne Seriare
only to aduance Curroon, hee is put
to flight by Mahabet-kawn, is reconciled
vnto him, sends for Curroon,
murders the Emperour and other
Princes of the bloud at Lahore, and
proclaimes his son in law Curroon,
Mogul: from p. 30. to 35.
Astra-kan a Towne on Volga, p.
105.
Assepose, a Village in Persia of
imprisoned Christians, p. 66.
Asharaffe a Citie on the Caspian
Sea, p. 94.
Atropatia, Media so called, pag.
115
The Authours sicknesse in Media,
p. 168.
The Azores depicted and described,
p. 226.


B
BAbylon described, p. 136.
Badur a King slaine by Myramud
the great Mogul, p. 42.
Balsora a Towne where Tygris and
Euphrates emptie themselues into
the gulph of Persia, p. 99.
Bannarow a Carrauans-raw, pa.
51. and 55.
Bannyans, or Indian Merchants
depicted and described, p. 37, 38.
Bantam a Towne in Iaua maior, p.
201
Barbarian Pirat chased, p. 3.
Bawt, a Parthian Village, p. 91
Bengala, p. 200.
Benomotapa a maritime part of
Africke, p. 8.
Bertholomew de Dios, a Discouerer
of many parts of Africke, p.
8.
Berry a small Persian Towne, p.
54
Bizdebode a Parthian Village, p.
135
Blockee (grand-sonne to Shaw-Zelym
the great Mogul) is proclaimed
Emperour, is abused by Assaph
Chawn, and his mother in Law, is
defended by Mahabet-chawn, fights
with the Empresse, and is murdred
trecherously at Lohore by his Guardian
Assaph-chawn, from p. 33. to
35
Bonauista, one of the Hesperides,
p. 6.
Boobie a bird depicted, p. 11.

Brazeel, ibid.
Braminy, Priests of India, and
reliques of the old Gymnosophists
p. 36
Buzzar, a Market place, p. 46
Bynnyn, a sun-burnt part of
Africke, p. 6.


C
CAmbaya described, p. 42.
Canary Iles depicted and described,
p. 3
Canoo, or Indian Boat depicted,
p. 25
Cape de Verde in Africke, pag.
6.
Cape Roma, a Bay in Saint
Lawrence Ile, p. 19.
Cape of good Hope depicted:
the vtmost Promontory of Africk,
in the Kingdome of Caffaria, p. 14.
17.
Cape de Aguillas, and Cape
Falso, two points neere Cape de
buona speranza, p. 1^.
Callicut, p. 188.
Cocheen, p. 187.
Carrauans-raw depicted, p. 116.
Cashan a Citie twixt Media and
Parthia, p. 134.
Caspian Sea depicted, p. 105.
Cazbeen, the Metropolis of
Media, p. 118.
Casta a Prouince neere Narsinga,
p. 192.
Castle-Iland depicted, p. 22.
Caucasus a mighty Mountaine,
p. 93.
Caughton a Village in Persia,
p. 56.
Chilmanor, or fortie Towers
depicted and described, p. 58.
Chormandell a Kingdome in
East India, p 19.
Cycala-Bassa, his parentage,
turnes Turke, is beaten by the
Prince of Persia, returnes with
eightie thousand men, and againe
is vanquished, he flies into Georgia,
thence with another Army inuades
Persia, and is put to flight,
is out of credit with the Grand
Signior, his house and treasure are
ransackt by the Ianizaries and Spahy
in Constantinople, pag. 70. and
71.
Columne of heads in Spahawn
depicted, p. 90.
Coine of the Indians, p. 41.
Coine of the Persians, p. 151.
Conny Ile neere Cape of good
Hope, p. 12.
Cowrestan a Towne in Persia,
p. 51.
Constandell-Kawn, a Christian
Prince of the Georgians, becomes
Mahometan to beget preferment,
p. 72. Murders his father, brother,
and other Nobles trecherously at a
Banquet, p. 73. Crownes himselfe
King, inuades the Turkes, and is
assaulted in a darke night by his
owne men, p. 74 Hee flies and with
an Army of Persians re-enters
Georgia, is confronted by the
Queene, who entreates for peace,
he scornes her and it, and is slaine
by an ambush, p. 78.
Coom a faire Citie described,
p. 133.
Coco-tree, depicted and described,
p. 214.
Columbus not the first Discouerer
of West India, p. 217.

Crassus the wealthy Romane
slaine by the Parthians, p. 131. and
147.
Curricurre depicted, p. 194.
Curroon, second sonne to Iangheer
the great Mogul, rebels against
his Father, is disherited by
his Fathers will, is called from Decanee
to Agray by Azaph-Kawn
his Father in law, and in company
of Mahabet-chawn goes forward,
conspires the Moguls death his
brothers sonne, and Nephewes, imprisons
the Empresse Normall, is
saluted Mogul, beheads many Noble-men,
his wife dies and he marries
his owne daughter, from p. 30.
to 35.
Cuzcuzar and Commeshaw,
two Townes in Persia, p. 66.
Cut-bobbaw a Village in Persia,
p. 56.


D
DAmoan a Towne vnder Mount
Taurus, p. 113.
Daman a Towne in India, neere
Goa, and belonging to the Portugals,
p. 27.
Dabull a Towne in India neere
Surat, ibid.
Deale a Towne twixt Douer
and Sandwich, where the Ships
bound for India vse to ride, p. 2.
Darius his death, p. 135
De-gardow a Towne in Persia,
p. 66.
Dew or Diu, a Citie vpon Indus,
p. 43.
Discourse of the life and habit
of the Persians, p. 144.
Discourse of the Religion of the
Persians, p. 152.
Discouery of the West Indies,
by Madoc ap Owen Gwynedd,
p. 216.
Dotho described and depicted,
p. 212.
Dygarroys an Ile neere Madagascar,
p. 207.


E
ECkbatan or Taurys, the late
Metropolis of Media described,
p. 116.
Edwall and Eneon, sonnes of
Prince Owen Gwyneth returne
with their brother Madoc, to better
their Plantation in America,
p. 221.
Emangally-Kawn the Duke of
Persae-polis or Syras, his titles,
p. 62. Wealth, and how hee entertained
the English Ambassadour,
p. 63.
Englishmen wondred at, for
their colour by the Sun-burnt Africans,
p. 6.
Englands Forest, p. 214.
European Dogges sold each of
them for twentie Slaues, pag.
9.
Ezion-Geber, or the Sues, a
place in the Red Sea, or the
Gulph of Arabia, whereabout
Moses and the Israelites passed
ouer, flying from the Aegyptians,
whence Salomons Shippes
went for Gold to Ophir, pag.
199.



F
FAtyma, or Falernia, Mahomets
only Daughter, (married to
Mortis Aly or Hally Caliph of
Mecha, and King of Persia from
whom is discended the now Emperour
of Persia) her Tombe, pag.
133
Farrabaut a Citie neere the Caspian
Sea, p. 105.
Fayall and Flores, two of the
Flemmish Iles, p. 225.
A Fish depicted, p. 214.
Fitz-Herbert a Captaine, p. 13.
Forte-uentura one of the Canarie
Iles, p. 3.
Fuogo an Ile in Africke neere
Cape Verde, p. 6.
Flying Fishes depicted, pag.
26.
Funerall of the Indians, pag.
191.


G
GAnges a famous Riuer in
India, discending from Sarmatia,
into the Bengalan Gulph,
p. 200.
Gedrozia the old name of Ormus,
p. 42.
Gee^ a Village in Hyrcania,
p. 93.
Gezz a Towne in Parthia, pag.
92.
Genealogie of the Emperour,
King and Callphs of Persia, pag.
161
Grand Canaria depicted and
described, p. 3.
Great Brittaine, a Compendium
of the World for varietie of Excellencies,
p. 2.
Gombroon or Gummeroon a
Citie neere Ormus in the Gulph of
Persia, p. 48.
Gods of the Persians, pag.
59.
Gowers the ancient Inhabitants
of Persia their Adorations
and Funerall, p. 89.
Gomaera one of the Canary
Iles, p. 3.
Goa a Portugall Citie in East
India, p. 26.
Gratiosa one of the Westerne
Iles, p. 225.
Gulcundah, where the mines of
Diamonds are, tis at some times
tributary to the Mogul, p. 30.
Gundauee a Hill sixe leagues
from Surat, p. 27.
Guten Owen, p. 224.


H
HAluary a Towne in Hyrcania,
p. 93.
Henrico Prince of Spaine, conquered
the Canarie Iles, pag.
3.
Herberts Mount depicted, pag.
17.
Hiero-cane an extreame Tempest,
p. 26.
Hesperides Iles in the Atlanticke
Ocean, p. 7.
Hiero or Ferrum, one of the

Canary Iles blest only in one Tree,
p. 3.
Historie of Sultan Curroon,
p. 30.
Historie of the Georgians, p.
72.
Historie of the King of Taurus,
p. 108.
Hodgee-Nazar, an Armenian
Prince meets the English Ambassadour,
p. 67.
Holy-port depicted and described,
p. 3.
Holy-crosse, an Ile in the Atlanticke
Seas, p. 8.
Hony-shaw a famous Garden,
p. 64.
Hyrcania described and depicted,
p. 95.


I
IAarown a Citie in Persia, full
of Iewes, p. 53.
Iacobo an Ile neere Cape Verde,
p. 6.
Iackatra, a strong Towne in laua,
built by the Dutch, p. 201.
Iamshet a Persian King first
founder of Persae-polis, p. 59.
Iaua major, described aud depicted,
p. 200.
Iangheer the great Mogul his
Discent,I^wis: 53: pag. 30. Hee banishes his
Champion without cause, who takes
him and his Empresse prisoners, p.
32. Fals sicke at Cashmeer, and
bequeathes the Empire to his
grandchilde Blockie, dies and is
buried, p. 30.
Iasques a Towne and Hauen in
the Gulph of Persia fortie leagues,
from Ormus, p. 45.
Iberia or Colchos, p. 68.
Idolatrie of the Mallabars, pag.
188. Of the Seilonians, p. 190. Of
the Chormandalians, p. 192. Of the
Peguans, Chineses, etc. pag. 95.
etc.
Ielphee a Citie in Parthia, inhabited
by Armenian Christians,
p. 67.
Ielphelynes described, pag. 68.
etc.
Iohn de Betancoeur Discouerer
of the Canary Iles, p. 3.
Iohn de Noua, p. 216.
Iulian the Apostates death, p.
135.


K
KIng Iames his Mount, pag.
14.
King Charles his Mount, pag.
17.
Kings, Emperours, and Caliphs
of Persia sucessiuely, p. 161.
Kishmee Castle, p. 45.


L
L Oanga a maritim Countrie in
Africa, p. 8.
Lolla-beg a Pagan Captain kils
an Apostate Christian, p. 93.
Lancerota one of the Canarie
Iles, pag. 3.

Language of the Persians, pag.
171. Of the Arabians, Of the Cape
of good Hope, p. 16. Of the Madagascar,
20. Of the Malayans, pag.
202.
Larack an Ile neere Ormuz, p.
46.
Larr a Citie described, pag.
52.
Larry-Iohn a Territory vpon
Taurus, p. 107.
Lescarr the name of the Moguls
Army, p. 32.
Lodouic Grangier a Iesuite instructs
the ignorant Armenians,
p. 69.
Lopez-Gonzaluo a place in
Africke, inhabited by Negroes, p.
6.
Lycinius Valerianus, a Roman
Emperour made a slaue by the Persian
King, p. 132.


M
MAcassar and Malacca, pag.
198.
Madoc ap Owen Gwynedd
Prince of Wales, discouers the
West Indies before Columbus
three hundred yeares, his Parentage
and reasons of Discouerie,
p. 217.
Madagascar a noble Ile depicted
and described, p. 20.
Magellanus, p. 223.
Magique people, p. 23.
Mallabarr described, p. ^87.
Mahomet a Persian Merchant
dies, p. 25.
Mahomet-Ally-beg the great
Fauourite beheaded, p. 104.
Mahabet-chawn the Moguls
Champion is banisht by the Empresse
Normals meanes, hee raises
an Army and takes her prisoner,
commands her to be beheaded, but
is spared at the Moguls entreatie,
hee ioynes with Curroon, and trauels
with him from Daytae to Agray,
from p. 30. to p. 35.
Mamut Souldan of Persia
breakes his necke at Spahawn, p.
84.
Mangalor a Portugall Citie in
India, p. 182.
Mandao, p. 42.
Mardash a Town adioyning Persae-polis,
p. 60.
Mani-congo a Country in Africke,
p. 8.
Matatana, a Towne in Madagascar,
p. 20.
Mayo, an Ile neere Cape Verde,
p. 6.
Mascarenas an Ile neere Saint
Lawrence, p. 117.
Mauritius depicted and described,
p. 210.
Maria and Michael, two of the
Azores, p. 225.
Marriages of the Indians in
Chormandell* p. 191.
Meacco the chiefe Citie in Iapan,
p. 205.
Media whence deriued, p. 113.
Meleck Bahaman King of Taurus
slaine villanously with his two
sonnes by a Persian Generall, pag.
111.
Meliapore, p. 190.
Meloym-beg Treasurer of Persia,
p. 67.
Melchisedeck King of Salem,
p. 161.

Mesulipatan, p. 41. and 190.
Meso-potamia, p. 118.
Meottey and Mohelay, two Iles
depicted, etc. p. 23.
Mohack a Towne, p, 56.
Monke of Charitie, p. 50.
Mokisso an Idoll or Deuill worwipped,
p. 8.
Monzoones, anniuersary windes
blowing constantly one way sixe
moneths, p. 8.
Monomotapa, part of Africa, p. 8.
Moyechaw a Village in Parthia, p. 56.
Moyowne another Village there, p. 65.
Moyeore a Parthian Towne, p. 66.
Mount Elly a Road and Towne
in Mallabar described and depicted,
p. 186.
Morad-chawn a Georgian
Duke and Christian by stratagem
kils eleuen Persian Dukes and seuen
hundred men, p. 82.
Muskat a City and Portugall
Towne in the Gulph of Persia, and
on Arabia the Happy, p. 43.
Mydan or the great Market
place in Spahawn, depicted and
described, p. 85.


N
NAdyr, the place vnder vs and
directly opposite to our Zenith,
p. 5.
Narsinga, a very rich and noble
part of the Orient all Indies, p. 190.
Nassuff-bassa, Generall to the
Grand Signior Achmat, the eight
Emperour of the Turkes, spoyles
Armenia, Media, and Meso-potamia,
loads two hundred and thirtie
Mules with gold and precious stones
receiues a Vest, a Sword, a Tulipant,
and a Horse in token of fauour
from his Master, is strangled by
dumbe men in his bed by practice of
his wife the Emperours daughter, p. 29.
Nearchus and Onesecritus two
of Alexanders Captaines sent to
discouer the remote Seas from the
gulph of Persia, p. 42.
Nega-patan a part of India adioyning
Narsinga, and Mesulipatan,
and in Chormandell, pag. 190.
Nocta-Rustan, his Image, pag. 60.
Nogdibeg the Ambassadour of
Persia into England poysons himselfe,
not daring to appeare at
Court, is buried at Surat, 28. The
Kings speeches concerning him, ibidem.
Nylus a famous Riuer, arising
out of Lunae-montes or Zayre in
Africke, and emptying it selfe in
seuen monethes into the midland
Sea, p. 10.
Normall Empresse of Indostant
and wife to Iangheer, striues to
crowne her sonne Seriare great
Mogul, but is opposed by Mahabet
Chawn, who is therefore banished,
and is by him taken prisoner with
the Mogul her husband, is spared
execution at his entreaty, flies and
proclaimes her sonne Emperour,
practices her owne brothers destruction,
and the new Moguls is

withstood by Assaphchawn, and after
a battell is imprisoned, and finally,
after her sonnes murther is shut
vp in a Castle close prisoner by
Curroon, from p. 30. to p. 35.
Nimrods Discent and Tyranny, p. 136.


O
OBigarmy a sandy Desart, pag. 91.
O-Jone a Towne in Persia, pag. 65.
Omoall a Citie vnder Mount
Taurus, p 106.
Ophyr, where, p. 199.
Ormus an Ile in the Persian
gulph, possest by the Portugall,
sackt by the English and Persian, p. 46.


P
PAgothaes, Idols or vgly representations
of the Deuill, adored
by the Indians, to whom they
sacrifice Goats, Cocks, Rice, etc. p. 10.
Palma, one of the Canary Iles, p. 3.
Palmeto-tree depicted and described,
p. 214.
Pasquin the Citie of vsuall residence
for the Kings of China, pag. 206.
Patania a Territorie in India, p. 197.
Paradice spoken of, p. 141.
Pengwyn Ile and a bird depicted, p. 13.
Pegu, and Ceremonies, p. 41. and p 194.
Persian Ambassadour beheaded
for agreeing with the great Turk, p. 29.
Persian man and woman depicted
and described, p. 49.
Persees Tombes depicted, p. 40.
Perse-polis described and her
ruines depicted, p. 56, 58.
Periscow a Towne in Hyrcania, p 93.
Persian Generall hanged, pag. 122.
Persian Ladie represented in a
figure, p. 148.
Peria con-connah sister to Mahomet
the Persian Emperour after
many prankes is beheaded at
command of the Emperour, pag. 120.
Prince Ayder slaine by his sister,
ibid.
Princes of Mount Taurus murdered,
p. 111.
Prince of Persia slaine by his
brother, p. 100.
Prince of Persia made blinde by
his father, kils his daughter and
poysons himselfe, p. 102.
Prince of Tartary and Persian
Queene murdered, p. 122.
Prester Iohn, p. 13.
Phul Belochus, Emperour of
Assyria, p. 145.
Poligundee an Ile in India, pag. 200.
Portugall Carriack chased, pag. 11.
Pyco one of the Azores depicted, p. 224.



Q
QVabutimoc, p. 120.
Quinzac, p. 137.


R
RAshboots a theeuish but valiant
people in India vnder
the Mogul, p. 31. and 42.
Red Sea, so denominated from
King Erithraeus (sonne of Perseus
and Andromida) whose name
from (...), signifies red, pag. 25.
Regia-Bander an exquisite villaine,
murders the olde and young
Moguls with other of the bloud
Royall, at command of Assaph-Kawn, p 35.
Rustan a heroicke Persian, aboue
two thousand yeares agoe,
slaine by his persidious brother, his
Tombe, p. 60 and 80.
Religion of the Persians, p. 152.
Ryna a Villageneere to Taurus, p. 107.


S
SAint Thomas martyred, and
where euer since the people haue
one legge bigger then the other,
Christians their, p. 190.
Saway a sweet Citie in Parthia, p. 140.
Saint Lawrence or Madagascar,
p. 20.
Sal, one of the Hesperides Iles, p. 7.
Salt and sandie Deserts, p. 91.
Sangherabawt a Towne in Media,
p. 118.
Sanga, p. 42.
Saint Ellens Ile depicted and
described, p. 130.
Sardahan a Parthian Village, p. 91.
Saint Iohn in India, p. 27.
A Sea-fight, ibid.
Sharke-fish depicted, 6.
Syerra-leoon, a Bay in Africk
where Sir Francis Drake refresht
himselfe after his Circum-nauigating
the earth, p. 6.
Sir Robert Sherleys death, p. 124.
Sir Dodmores Cottons death, p. 126.
Scorpions and their remedie, p. 95.
Shilling an English Captaine, p 45.
Shaugh-meer-All-hamzy and
Sandant-Emir-amaho, two olde
Prophets, p. 61.
Shyraz or Syras described, p. 60. and 64.
Shushan described, p. 140.
Slauery of a Roman Emperour, p. 132.
Shoales of Iudaea dangerous, p. 21.
Souldania Bay, p. 13.
Soffala a part of Africk, neere
Mozambique, p. 19.
Sheir-uan or Media so called, p. 116.
Shawdee a small Towne in Media,
p. 118.
Socotora an Ile at the entrance
into the red Sea, p. 25.
Spahawn the chiefe Citie of

the Persian Emperours, p. 82. and 85.
Spahawnet a Village neere Spahawn,
p. 66.
Surat a Citie in Gugurat in India
described, p. 35.
Sultan Seria^e, yongest sonne of
the Mogul takes vpon him the title
of Mogul by Normals perswasions,
is vanquished by his Vncle
Assaph-chawn, imprisoned and
murdered at Lohore, p. 30. and p. 35.
Sues a Road in the Red Sea,
where the Israelites passed ouer, p. 199.
Sultan Shock Ally-begs house, p. 61.
Sumatra a noble Ile vnder the
Aequinoctiall Line, p. 199.
Swalley Road in India, p. 27. and 29.
Syacow a Village in Parthia, p. 92.
Syam a famous Kingdome described,
p. 195.
Syet Gunet, the reformer of
Mahomet, p. 159.


T
TAleissen an honorable Welch
Poet, p. 220.
Tanghe Dolon a place neere
Ormus, p. 51.
Tallapoi, Indian Priests a^d
Idolaters, p 196.
Tangrolipix a Scythiqu^ Prince
ouer-runs Persia, etc. p. 84. 139, 145.
Taprobane, S^matra so of olde
called, p. 199.
Tauris a great Citie in Media, p. 116.
Taurus a great Mountaine, pag. 107.
Tartarian Prince, p. 64.
Techoa a Persian Towne, p. 54.
Teneriffa, one of the Canaries
depicted and described, p. 3.
Temeriscus sonne of Alexander
King of Georgia imprisoned and
enlarged: refuses to come to the
Persian Court, has his Kingdome
foraged, flies, returnes, is againe
expulst, and returnes againe, aided
by the Turkes, p. 80. etc.
Tercaera one of the Western Iles, p. 224.
Tom Coryats Graue p. 29.
Tormentozo, the Cape of good
Hope, so calld p. 8.
Tormathoes. p. 5.
Tragick Historie of Georgia, p. 72.
Turkish Pirat chased, p. 2.
Tropick of Cancer, p. 11.
Titles of seuerall great Princes, p. 130.
Tyroan a Citie in Media, Atropia,
p. 114.


V
VAsco de Gama a Discouerer
of diuers parts of Afrique, p. 8. etc.
Vincentio an Ile in Aethiope, p. 6.
Vloches or Shepheards of Persia,
p. 54.

Vnghee a Towne in Parthia, p. 56.


W
VVHite-Sea, p 25.
Whoomg a Parthian
Village, p. 91.
Whoomgesh a Towne in Parthia,
p. 143.
Whormoot, p. 143.
Welch words in Mexicana, p. 122.


X
XErxes, p. 145.
Xenophon, p. 114. and 145.


Y
YEzd-cauz a Towne in Persia, p. 66.
Yezdgird King of Persia, p. 163.
Yhezid Caliph of Persia, pag. 164.


Z
ZAyntzon the 117. Monarch
of China, p. 206.
Zenith is a point direct ouer vs, p. 215.
Zenal-chawn, p. 115.
Zenzen, p. 133.



ERRATA.
PAg. 23. grats read goats, pag. 23. for 17. degrees all read 17. fathoms at. p. 23. for strong
Towne read strawy Towne: pag. 33. for compition read competicion: pag. 89. for powers
read Gowers: pag 13. for montibas, read montib^s: pag. 42. for see Badur, read be Budur: pag. 47.
for terrified the Adye, read verified the Adage: pag. 60. for Sofarinus, read Sosarmus: pag 71.
for hope, read Pope: pag ^5 for (...) Lopp* pag. 51. for R^^xarow read, Band-Ally: pag.
131, for forlorne read ^ortune: for Mosque read Mesopotamia: for Dauid ap Owen Gwynedd,
read Madoc ap Owen Gwynnedd: the word Diriad in pag. 220. is to be left out.
FINIS.

