


An Apology for
Actors, and first touching
their Antiquity
MOOVED by the sundry exclamations of
many seditious Sectists in this age, who
in the fatnes and ranknes of a peac^able
Common-wealth, grow vp like vnsauery
tufts of grasse, which though outwardly
greene and fresh to the eye, yet
are they both vnpleasant and vnprofitable,
beeing too sower for food, and too ranke for fodder: These
men like the antient Germans, affecting no fashion but
their owne, would draw other nations to bee slouens like
them-selues, and vndertaking to puri^ie and reforme the
sacred bodies of the Church and Common-weale (In the
trew vse of both which they are altogether Ignora^t,) would
but like artlesse Phisitions, for experiment sake, rather minister
pils to poyson the whole body then cordials to preserue
any or the least part. Amongst many other thinges
tollerated in this peaceable and florishing State, it hath
pleased the high and mighty Princes of this Land to limit
the vse of certaine publicke Theaters, which since many of
these ouer-curious heads haue lauishly (...) violently slandered,
I hold it not a misse to lay open some few Antiquities
to approue the true vse of them, with arguments (not of the
least moment) which according to the weaknes of my spirit
and infancy of my iudgment I will (by gods grace) commit

to the eyes of all fauorable and iudiciall readers, as well to
satisfie the requests of some of our well qualified fauorers,
as to stop the enuious acclamations of those who chalenge
to them-selues a priuiledge Inuectiue, and against all free
estates a railing liberty: Loath am I (I protest) being
the youngest and weakest of the Nest wherin I was hatcht,
to soare this pitch before others of the same brood more
fledge, and of better winge then my selfe: but though they
whome more especially this taske concernes, both for
their ability in writing and sufficiency in Iudgement (as
their workes generally witnesse to the world:) are content
to ouer-slip so necessary a subiect, and haue left it as to mee
the most vnworthy: I thought it better to stammer out my
mind, then not to speake at all; to scrible downe a marke in
the stead of writing a name, and to stumble on the way, rather
then to stand still and not to proceede on so necessary
a Iourney. Nox erat, and somnus lassos submisit ocellos.
It was about that time of the night when darknes had already
ouerspread the world, and a husht and generall sylence
possest the face of the earth, and mens bodyes tyred
with the businesse of the day, betaking themselues to their
best repose, their neuer-sleeping soules labored in vncoth
dreames and visions, when suddenly appeared to me
the tragicke Muse Melpomene
--animosa Tragedia.--and mouit pictis imixa CothurnisDensum Cesarie, terque quaterque Caput:
Her heyre rudely disheueled, her chaplet withered, her
visage with teares stayned, her brow furrowed, her eyes
deiected, nay her whole complexion quite faded and altered:
and perusing her habit, I might behold the colour of
her fresh roabe all Crimson, breathed, and with the inuenomed
iuice of some prophane spilt inke in euery place stained:
nay more, her busken of all the wonted Iewels and
ornaments, vtterly despoyled; about which in manner of a
garter I might behold these letters written in a playne and

large Character.
Behold my Tragicke Buskin rent and torne,
Which Kings and Emperors in their tymes haue worne.
This I no sooner had perus'd, but suddenly I might perceaue
the inraged Muse, cast vp her skornfull head: her eyebals
sparklefire, and a suddain flash of disdaine, intermixt with
rage, purple her cheeke. When pacing with a maiesticke
gate and rowsing vp her fresh spirits with a liuely and queint
action, shee began in these or the like words.
Grande sonant tragici, tragicos decet Ira Cothurnos.Am I Melpomene the buskend Muse,That held in awe the tyrants of the world,And playde their liues in publicke Theaters,Making them feare to sinne, since fearelesse IPrepar'd to wryte their liues in Crimson Inke,And act their shames in eye of all the world?Haue not I whipt Vice with a scourge of steele,Vnmaskt sterne Murther; sham'd lasciuious Lust.Pluct off the visar from grimme Treasons face,And made the Sunne point at their vgly sinnes?Hath not this powerfull hand tam'd fiery Rage,Kild poysonous Enuy with her owne keene darts,Choak't vp the Couetous mouth with moulten gold,Burst the vast wombe of eating Gluttony,And drownd the Drunkards gall in iuice of grapes?I haue showed Pryde his picture on a stage,Layde ope the vgly shapes his steele-glasse hid,And made him passe thence meekely: In those daiesWhen Emperours with their presence grac't my sceanes,And thought none worthy to present themseluesSaue Emperours: to delight Embassadours.Then did this garland florish, then my RoabeWas of the deepest Crimson, the best dye:Cura Ducum fuerant olim regumque poetae.Premiaque Antiqui magna tulere ChoriWho lodge then in the bosome of great Kings.
Saue he that had a graue Cothurnate Muse.A stately verse in an ^ambick stileBecame a Kes^rs mouth. Oh these were timesFit for you Bards to vent your golden Rymes.Then did I tread on Arras, Cloth of Tissue,Hung round the fore-front of my stage: the pillersThat did support the Roofe of my large frameDouble apparrel^ in pure Ophir gold*Whilst the round Circle of my spacious orbeWas throng'd with Princes, Dukes and Senators.Nunc Hederae sine Honore iacent.But now's the Iron age, and black-mouth'd Curres,Barke at the vertues of the former world.Such with their breath haue blasted my fresh roabe,Pluckt at my flowry Chaplet, towsd my tresses.Nay some whom for their basenesse hist and skorn'dThe Stage, as loathsome, hath long-since spued^ut,Haue watcht their time to cast inuenom'd ^nkeTo stayne my garments with. Oh SenecaThou tragicke Poet, hadst thou liu'd to seeThis outrage done to sad Melpo^ene,With such sharpe lynes thou wouldst reuenge my blot.As Armed O^^d against Ibis wrot.
With that in rage shee left the place, and I my dreame, for
at the instant I awaked, when hauing perused this vision
ouer and ouer againe in my remembrance, I suddenly bethought
mee, How many antient Poets, Tragicke and
Comicke, dying many ages agoe liue still amongst vs in
their works, as amongst the Greekes, Euripide^: M^nand^r*
Sophocles, Eupolis, Eschilus, Aristophanes, App^llodorus, A^axandrides,
Nichomachus, Alexis, Tereus and others, so among the
Latins: Attilius, Actius, Melithus, Pla^tus, Terens, and others
whome fore breuity sake I omit.
Hos Ediscit and hos arcto stipata TheatroSpectat Roma potens habet hos, numer atque Poetas.These potent Rome acquires and holdeth deare.
And in their round Theaters flocks to heare:
These or any of these had they liued in the afternoone of the
world, as they dyed euen in the morning, I assure my
selfe wold haue left more memorable tropheys of that learned
Muse, whome in their golden numbers they so richly
adorned. And amongst our moderne poets* who haue bene
industrious in many an elaborate and ingenious poem, euen
they whose pennes haue had the greatest traffi^ke with the
Stage, haue bene in the excuse of these Muses most forgetfull
But leauing these, lest I make too large a head to a
small body* and so mishape my subiect, I will begin with
the antiquity of Acting Comedies, Tragedies, and Hystories.
And first in the golden world.
In the first of the Olimpiads, amongst many other actiue
exercises in which Hercules euer trimph^d as victor, there
was in his nonage presented vnto him by his Tu^or in
the fashion of a History, acted by the choyse of the nobility
of Greece, the worthy and memorable acts of his father
Iupiter. Which being personated with liuely and well-spirited
action, wrought such impression in his noble thoughts,
that in meere emulation of his fathers valor (not at the behest
of his Stepdame Iuno) he perform'd his twelue labours:
Him valiant Theseus followed, and Achilles, Theseus. Which
bred in them such hawty and magnanimous attempts, that
euery succeeding age hath recorded their worths, vnto
fresh admiration. Aristotle that Prince of Philosophers,
whose bookes carry such credit, euen in these our vniuers^^ies,
that to say Ipse dixit is a sufficient Axioma, hee hauing
the tuition of young Alexander, caused the destruction
of Troy to be acted before his pupill, in which the
valor of Achilles was so naturally exprest, that it imprest the
hart of Alexander, in so much that all his succeeding actions
were meerly shaped after that patterne, and it may be
imagined had Achilles neuer liued, Alexander had neuer
conquered the whole world. The like assertion may be
made of that euer-renowned Roman Iulius Caesar. Who

after the like representation of Alexander in the Temple of
Hercules standing in Gades was neuer in any peace of
thoughts, till by his memorable exployts, hee had purchas'd
to himselfe the name of Alexander: as Alexander till
hee thought himselfe of desert to be called Achilles: Achilles
Theseus, Theseus till he had sufficiently Imitated the acts of
Hercules, and Hercules till hee held himselfe worthy to bee
called the son of Iupiter. Why should not the liues of these
worthyes, presented in these our dayes, effect the like wonders
in the Princes of our times, which can no way bee so
exquisitly demonstrated, nor so liuely portrayed as by action:
Oratory is a kind of a speaking picture, therefore may
some say, is it not sufficient to discourse to the eares of princes
the fame of these conquerors: Painting likewise, is a
dumbe oratory, therefore may we not as well by some curious
Pigmalion, drawe their conquests to worke the like
loue in Princes towards these Worthyes by shewing them
their pictures drawne to the life, as it wrought on the poore
painter to bee inamored of his owne shadow* I answer this.
Non ^agis expressi vultus per ahenia signa
Quam per vatis opus, mores animique virorum
Clarorum apparent.--
The visage is no better cut in brasse,
Nor can the Caruer so expresse the face
As doth the Poets penne whose arts surpasse,
To giue mens liues and vertues their due grace.
A Description is only a shadow receiued by the eare but
not perceiued by the eye: so liuely portrature is meerely a
forme seene by the eye, but can neither shew action, passion,
motion, or any other gesture, to mooue the spirits of the
beholder to admiration: but to see a souldier shap'd like a
souldier, walke, speake, act like a souldier: to see a Hector all
besmered in blood, trampling vpon the bulkes of Kinges.
A Troylus returning from the field in the sight of his father
Priam as if man and horse euen from the steeds rough
fetlockes to the plume in the champions helmet had bene

together plunged into a purple Ocean: To see a Pompey
ride in triumph, then a Caesar conquer that Pompey: labouring
Hanniball aliue, hewing his passage through the
Alpes. To see as I haue seene, Hercules in his owne shape
hunting the Boare, knocking downe the Bull, taming
the Hart, fighting with Hydra, murdering Gerion, slaughtring
Diomed, wounding the Stimphalides, killing the Centaurs,
pashing the Lion, squeezing the Dragon, dragging
Cerberus in Chaynes, and lastly, on his high Pyramides writing
Nilvltra, Oh these were sights to make an Alexander.
To turne to our domesticke hystories, what English
blood seeing the person of any bold English man presented
and doth not hugge his fame, and hunnye at his valor,
pursuing him in his enterprise with his best wishes, and as
beeing wrapt in contemplation, offers to him in his hart
all prosperous performance, as if the Personater were the
man Personated, so bewitching a thing is liuely and well
spirited action, that it hath power to new mold the harts
of the spectators and fashion them to the shape of any noble
and notable attempt. What coward to see his contryman
valiant would not bee ashamed of his owne cowardise?
What English Prince should hee behold the true portrature
of that amous King Edward the third, foraging France,
taking so great a King captiue in his owne country, qua^tering
the English Lyons with the French Flower-delyce,
and would not bee suddenly Inflam'd with so royall a spectacle,
being made apt and fit for the like atchieuement. So
of Henry the fift: but not to be tedious in any thing. Ouid in
one of his poems holds this opinion, that Romulus was the
first that broght plaies into Italy, which he thus sets downe*
Primus sollicitos fecisti Romule Ludos.De Arte Amandi. 1.
Cum iurit viduos rapta sabina viros
Tunc neque marmoreo pendebant vela Theatro, etc.
Which wee English thus.
Thou noble Romulus first playes contriues,
To get thy widdowed souldiers Sabine wyues.

In those dayes from the marble house did wau^
No saile, no silken flagge, or ensigne braue.
Then was the Tragicke stage not painted red,
Or any mixed staines on pillers spred.
Then did the Sceane want art, th'vnready stage
Was made of grasse and earth in that rude age:
About the which were thicke-leau'd branches placed,
Nor did the Audients hold themselues disgraced
Of turfe and heathy sods to make their seates,
Fr^m'd in degrees of earth, and mossy peates.
Thus plac'd in order, euery Roman pry'd
Into her face that sate next by his side;
And closing with her, seuerally gan moue,
The innocent Sab^ne women to their loue:
And whil'st the piper Thuscus rudely plaid,
And by thrice stamping with his foote had made
A signe vnto the rest, there was a shout,
Whose shrill report pierst all the aire about.
N^w at a signe of rape giuen from the King,
Round through the hou^e the lusty Romans fling,
Leauing no corner of the same vnsought,
Till euery one a frighted virgin caught.
Looke as the trembling Doue the Eagle flyes,
Or a yong Lambe when he the Woolfe espyes;
Soran the poore girles, filling th'aire with skreekes.
Emptying of all the colour their pale cheekes.
One feare possest them all, but not one looke,
This teares her haire, she; hath her wits forsooke.
Some sadly sit, some on their mothers call,
Som^ cha^e, some flye, some stay, but frighted all.
Th^^ were the ra^^sh'd Sabi^es blushing led
(Be^omming shame) vnto each Romans bed.
If any striu'd against it, streight her man
Would ^ak^ her on (...) knee (whom feare made w^n)
And ^ay; Why weep'st thou sweet? what ailes my deere?
D^y vp these drops, these clowds of sorrow cleere.

Il'e be to thee, if thou thy griefe wilt smother,
Such as thy father was vnto thy mother.
Full well could Romulus his Souldiers please,
To giue them such faire mistresses as these.
If such rich wages thou wilt giue to me,
Great Romulus, thy souldier I will ^e.
Romulus hauing erected the walles of Rome, and leading
vnder him a warlike Nation, being in continuall warre
with the Sabines, after the choyce selecting of a place, fit
(...) so famous a Citty, and not knowing how to people
the same, his traine wholly consisting of Souldiers, who
without the company of women (they not hauing any in
their Army) could not multiply; but so were likely that
their immortall fames should dye issulesse with their mortall
bodies. Thus therefore Romulus deuised; After a parle
and attonement made with the neighbour Nations, hee
built a Theater, plaine, according to the time; yet large, fit
for the entertainement of so great an Assembly, and these
were they whose famous issue peopled the Cittie of Rome,
which in after ages grew to such height, that not Troy,
founded by Dardanus, Carthage layed by Dido, Tyru^ built
by Agenor, Memphis made by Ogdous, Thebes seated by Cadmus,
nor Babylon reared by Semiramis, were any way equall
to this situation grounded by Romulus: to which all the
discouered kingdomes of the earth after became tributaries.
And in the noone-tide of their glory, and height of
all their honor, they edified Theaters, and Amphi-theaters:
for in their flourishing Common-weale, their publike Comedians
and Tragedians most florished, insomuch that the
Tragicke and Comicke Poets, were all generally admired
of the people, and particularly euery man of his priuate
Mec^nas.
In the reigne of Augustus Christ was borne,Imperante Augusto, natus est Christus. and as well
in his dayes as before his birth, these solemnities were held
in the greatest estimation.Imperante Tiberio crucifixus. In Iulius Caesars time, predecessor
to August^^, the fam^us hony-tong'd Orator Cicero

florished; who, amongst many other his eloquent Oratio^s,
writ certaine yet extant, for the Com^dian Ros^ius (pro
Roscio Comaedo) of whom we shall speake more large hereafter.
These continued in their honour till the reigne of Tiberius
Caesar, and vnder Tiberius Christ was crucified. To
this end do I vse this assertion, because in the full and perfect
time our Sauiour soiurned on the earth, euen in those
happy and peacefull dayes the spacious Theaters were in
the greatest opinion amongst the Romans; yet, neither
Christ himselfe, nor any of his san^^ified Apostles, in any of
their Sermons, Acts, or Documents, so much as named
them, or vpon any abusiue occasion, touched them. Therefore
hence (me thinkes) a very probable and important argument
may be grounded, that since they, in their diuine
wisdomes, knew all the sinnes abounding in the world before
that time, taxt and reproued all the abuses reigning in
that time, and foresaw all the actions and inconueniences
(to the Church preiudiciall) in the time to come; Since
they (I say) in all their holy doctrines, bookes, and principles
of Diuinity, were content to passe them ouer, as
things tollerated, and indifferent, why should any nice and
ouer-scrupulous heads, since they cannot ground their curiousnesse
either vpon the old or new Testament, take vpon
them to correct, controule, and carpe at that, against
which they cannot finde any text in the sacred Scriptures?
In the time of Nero Caesar, the Apostle Paul was persecuted
and suffered, Nero was then Emperour, Paul writ his
Epistle to the Romans, and at the same time did the Theaters
most florish amongst the Romans; yet where can we
quote any place in his Epistles, which forbids the Church
of God, then resident in Rome, to absent themselues from any
such assemblies.
To speake my opinion with all indifferency, God hath
not enioyned vs to weare all our apparrell solely to defend
the cold* Some garments we weare for warmth, others for
ornament. So did the children of Israel hang eare-rings in

their eares, not was it by the law forbidden them. That purity
is not look't for at our hands, being mortall and humane,
that is required of the Angels, being celestiall and
diuine. God made vs of earth, men; knowes our natures,
dispositions and imperfections, and therefore hath limited
vs a time to reioyce, as hee hath enioyned vs a time to
mourne for our transgressio^s. And I hold them more scrupulous
than well aduised, that goe about to take from vs
the vse of all moderate recreations. Why hath God ordained
for man, va^^^tie of meates, dainties and delicates, if
not to taste thereon? why doth the world yeeld choyce of
honest pastimes, if not decently to vse them? Was not the
Hare made to be hunted? the Stagge to be chaced; and so
of all other beasts of game in their seuerall kindes? since
God hath prouided vs of these pastimes, why may wee not
vse them to his glory? Now if you aske me why were not
the Theaters as gorgeously built in all other Cities of Italy
as Rome? And why are not Play-houses maintained as well
in other Cities of England, as London? my answere is: It is
not meet euery meane Esquire should carry the part belonging
to one of the Nobility, or for a Noble-man to vsurpe
the estate of a Prince. Rome was a Metropolis, a place whither
all the nations knowne vnder the Sunne, resorted: so
is London, and being to receiue all Estates, all Princes, all
Nations, therefore to affoord them all choyce of pastimes,
sports, and recreations: yet were there Theaters in all the
greatest Cities of the world, as we will more largely particularize
hereafter.
I neuer yet could read any History of any Commonweale,
which did not thriue and prosper whilst these publike
solemnities were held in adoration. Oh but (say some) Marcus
Aurelius banisht all such triuiall exercises beyond the
confines of Italy. Indeed this Emperour was a Philosopher
of the sect of Diogenes, a Cini^ke, and whether the hand of
Diogenes would become a scepter, or a root better, I leaue
to your iudgments. This Aur^lius was a great and sharpe reprouer,

who because the Matrons and Ladies of Rome, in
scorne of his person made a play of him; in his time, interdicted
the vse of their Theaters. So, because his wife Fausti^e
plaid false with him, he generally exclaimed against all
women: because hims^l^e could not touch an Instrument,
he banisht all the Musitians in Rome, and being a meere coward,
put all the Gladiators and sword-players into exile.
And lest his owne suspected life should be againe acted by
the Comedians, as it before had beene by the noble Matrons,
he profest himselfe aduersary to all of that quality, so
seuere a reformation of the weale publike hee vsed, restraining
the Citizens of their free liberties, which till his daies
was not seene in Rome; but what profited this the weale
publicke? do but peruse the ancient Roman Chronicles, and
you shall vndoubtedly finde, that from the time of this precise
Emperour, that stately City, whose lofty buildings
crowned seuen high hils at once, and ouer-peered them all,
streight way began to hang the head, by degrees the forreigne
kingdomes reuolted, and the homage done them
by strange Nations, was in a little space quite abrogated:
for they gouerned all the world, some vnder Consuls, some
vnder P^o-consuls, Presidents and Pretors, they diuided
their dominions and countryes into principalities, some into
Prouinces, some into Toparchyes* some into Tetrarchyes,
some into Tribes, others into Ethnarchyes: but now
their homage ceast, Marc^s Aurelius ended their mirth,
which presaged that shortly after should begin their sorrow,
he banisht their liberty* and immediatly followed their
bondage. For Rome, which till then kept all the Nations
of the world in subiectiue awe, was in a little space awd euen
by the basest nations of the world. To leaue Italy, and
looke backe into Gr^^ce, the Sages and Princes of Grecia,
who for the refinednesse of their language were in such reputation
through the world, that all other tongues were
esteemed barbarous; These that were the first vnderstanders,
trained vp their youthfull Nobility to bee Actors, debarring

the base Mechanickes so worthy imployment: for
none but the yong Heroes were admitted that practise, so
to embolden them in the deliuery of any forraine Embassy.
These wise men of Greece (o called by the Oracle) could by
their industry, finde out no neerer or directer course to
plant humanity and manners in the hearts of the multitude
then to instruct them by moralized mysteries, what vices to
auoyd, what vertues to embrace; what enorm^tyes to abandon,
what ordinances to ob^^^ue: whose liues (being
for s^^e speciall endowments in former times honoured)
they should admire and follow: whose vicious actions
(personated in some licentious liuer) they should despise and
shunne: which borne out as well by the wisedome of the
Poet, as supported by the worth of the Actors, wrought
such impression in the hearts of the plebe, that in short space
they excelled in ciuility and gouernement, insomuch that
from them all the neighbour Nations drew their patternes
of Humanity, as well in the establishing of their lawes, as
the reformation of their manners. These Magi and Gymnosophistae,
that liu'd (as I may say) in the childhood and
infancy of the world, before it knew how to speake perfectly,
thought euen in those dayes, that Action was the neerest
way to plant vnderstanding in the hearts of the ignorant.
Yea (but say some) you ought not to confound the habits
of either sex, as to let your boyes weare the attires of
virgins, etc. To which I answere: The Scriptures are not
alwayes to be expounded meerely* according to the letter:
(for in such esta^e stands our may^e Sacramentall Controuersie)
but they ought exactly to bee conferred with the
purpose they handle. To do as the Sodomites did, vse preposterous
lusts in preposterous habits, is in that text flatly
and seuerely forbidden: nor can I imagine any man, that
hath in him any taste of relish of Christianity, to be guilty
of so abhorred a sinne. Besides, it is not probable, that
Playes were meant in that text, because we read not of any
Playes knowne in that time that Deutero^^^ie was writ,

among the Children of Israel, nor do I hold it lawfull to
beguile the eyes of the world in confounding the shapes
of either sex, as to keepe any youth in the habit of a virgin,
or any virgin in the shape of a lad, to shroud them from the
eyes of their fathers, tutors, or protectors, or to any other
sinister intent whatsoeuer. But to see our youths attired in
the habit of women, who knowes not what their intents
be? who cannot distinguish them by their names, assuredly
knowing, they are but to represent such a Lady, at such a
time appoynted?
Do not the Vniuersities, the fountaines and well^ springs
of all good Arts, Learning and Documents, admit the like
in their Colledges? and they (I assure my selfe) are not ignorant
of their true vse. In the time of my residence in Cambridge,
I haue seene Tragedyes, Comedyes, Historyes, Pastorals
and Shewes, publickly acted, in which Graduates of
good place and reputation, haue bene specially parted: this
is held necessary for the emboldening of their Iunior schollers,
to arme them with audacity, against they come to bee
imployed in any publicke exercise, as in the reading of the
Dialecticke, Rhetoricke, Ethicke, Mathematicke, the Physicke,
or Metaphysicke Lectures, It teacheth audacity to
the bashfull Grammarian, beeing newly admitted into the
priuate Colledge, and after matriculated and entred as a
member of the Vniuersity, and makes him a bold Sophister,
to argue pro et contra, to compose his Sillogismes, Cathegoricke,
or Hypotheticke (simple or compound) to reason
and frame a sufficient argument to proue his questions,
or to defend any axioma, to distinguish of any Dilemma, and
be able to moderate in any Argumentation whatsoeuer.
To come to Rhetoricke, it not onely emboldens a scholler
to speake, but instructs him to speake well, and with
iudgement, to obserue his comma's, colons, and full poynts,
his parentheses, his breathing spaces, and distinctions, to
keepe a decorum in his countenance, neither to frown^
when he should smile, nor to make vnseemely and disguised

faces in the deliuery of his words, not to stare with his
eies, draw awry his mouth, confou^d his voice in the hollow
of his throat, or teare his words hastily betwixt his teeth,
neither to buffet his deske like a mad-man, nor stand in his
place like a liuelesse Image, demurely plodding, and without
any smooth and ^ormal motio^. It instructs him to fit his phrases
to his action, and his action to his phrase, and his pronuntiation
to them both.
Tully in his booke ad Caium Herennium, requires fiue
things in an Orator, Inuention, Disposition, Eloquuti^n Memory,
and Pronuntiation, yet all are imperfect without
the sixt, which is Action: for be his inuen^ion neuer so fluent
and exquisite, his disposition and order neuer so composed
and formall, his eloquence, and elaborate phrases
neuer so materiall and pithy, his memory neuer so firme and
retentiue, his pronuntiation neuer so musicall and plausiue,
yet without a comely and elegant gesture, a gratious and a
bewitching kinde of action, a naturall and a familiar motion
of the head, the hand, the body, and a moderate and fit
countenance sutable to all the rest, I hold all the rest as nothing.
A deliuery and sweet actio^ is the glosse and beauty of any
discourse that belongs to a scholler. And this is the action
behoouefull in any that professe this quality, not to vse any
impudent or forced motion in any part of the body, no
rough, or other violent gesture, nor on the contrary, to
stand like a stiffe starcht man, but to qualifie euery thing according
to the nature of the person personated: for in oueracting
trickes, and toyling too much in the anticke habit of
humors, men of the ripest desert, greatest opinions, and
best reputations, may breake into the most violent absurdities.
I take not vpon me to teach, but to aduise: for it
becomes my Iuniority rather to be pupild my selfe, then to
instruct others.
To proceed, and to looke into those men that professe
themselues aduersaries to this quality, they are none of the
grauest, and most ancient Doctors of the Academy, but

onely a sort of finde-faults, such as interest their prodigall
tongues in all mens affaires without respect. These I haue
heard as liberally in their superficiall censures, taxe the exercises
performed in their Colledges, as these acted on
our publicke stages, not looking into the true and direct
vse of either, but ambitiously preferring their owne presumptuous
humors, before the profound and authenticall
iudgements of all the learned Doctors of the Vniuersitie.
Thus you see, that touching the antiquity of Actors and
Acting, they haue not beene new lately begot by any vpstart
inuention, but I haue deriued them from the first Olimpiads,
and I shall continue the vse of ^hem euen till this
present age. And so much touching their antiquity.
Pars superest coepti: pars est exhausta laboris.
The end of the first Booke.



OF ACTORS, AND
their ancient Dignitie.
THE SECOND BOOKE.
IVLIVS CAESAR, the famous Conquerour,
discoursing with Marcus Cicero,
the as famous Orator, amongst many
other matters debated, It pleased the
Emperour to aske his opinion of the Histriones,
the players of Rome, pretending
some cauell against them, as men whose
imployment in the Common-weale was vnnecessary: to
whom Cicero answered thus: Content thee Caesar, there bee
many heads busied and bewitched with these pastimes now
in Rome, which otherwise would be inquisitiue after thee
and thy greatnesse. Which answere, how sufficiently the
Emperour approued, may bee coniectured by the many
guifts bestowed, and priuiledges and Charters after granted
to men of that quality. Such was likewise the opinion
of a great statesman of this la^d, about the time that certaine
bookes were called in question. Doubtlesse there be
many men of that temper, who were they not carried away,
and weaned from their owne corrupt and bad disposition,
and by accidentall meanes remoued and altered from their
dangerous and sullen intendments, would be found apt and
prone to many notorious and trayterous practises. Kings
and Monarches are by God placed and inthroaned supra nos,
aboue vs, and we are to regard them as the Sun from whom
we receiue the light to liue vnder, whose beauty and brightnesse
we may onely admire, not meddle with: Ne ludamus

cum Dijs, they that shoot at the st^^res ouer their heads,
their arrowes ^all directly downe and wound themselues.
But this allusion may bee better referred to the vse of action
promised i^ ou^ third Treatise. Then to their Dignity,
which next and immediatly (by Gods grace) our purpose
is to handle.
The word Tragedy, is deriued from the Greeke word
(...), Caper a goat, because the goat being a beast most iniuri^us
to ^he vines, was sacrificed to Bacchus: Heer upon
(...) writes, that Tragedies had their first names from
the oblations due to Bacchus; or else of (...), a kinde of painting,
which the Tragedians of the old time vsed to stayne
their faces with. By the censure of Horace, Thespis was the
first Tragicke writer.

Ignotum Tragic^ genus invenisse Camenae
Dicitur,(...) and plaustris vexisse po^mata Thespis.


The vnknowne T^agicke Muse Thespis fi^st sought,
And her high Po^ms in her Chariot brought.

This Thespis was an Athenian Poet, borne in Thespina, a
free towne in Boetia by Helicon, of him the nine Muses were
called Thespiades. But by the censure of Quintilian, Aeschiles
was before him, but after them Sophocles and Eurip^des
clothed their Tragedies in better ornament.Poltd. Virgil. Liuius Andronicus
was the first that writ any Roman Tragedy, in which
kinde of poesie A^cius, Pacuvius, Seneca, and Ouidius excelled.

Sceptra tamen sumpsi curaque Tragedia nostra,
Creuit,(...) at huic operi quamlibet aptus eram.


The sceptred Tragedy then proou'd our wit,
And to that worke we found vs apt and fit.

Againe, in his fift Booke de tristibus Eleg. 8.

Carmen quod vestro saltarinostra Theatro
Versibus and plaudiscribis (amice) meis.


Deere friend thou writ'st our Muse is 'mongst you song,
And in your Theaters with plaudits r^ng.


Likewise in his Epistle to Augustus, writ from the ponticke
Island, whither he was banisht.

Et ded^mus tragicis scriptum regale Cothurnis,
Quaeque grauis debet verba Cothurnus habet.


With royall stile speakes our Cothurnate Muse,
A buskind phrase in buskin'd playes we vse.

The word Comedy is deriued from the Greeke word
(...) a street, and (...), Cantus, a song, a street song, as signifying
there was euer mirth in those streets where Comedies
most florisht.
Haec paces habuere bonae ventique secundi.
In this kinde Aristophanes, E^p^lis, Cratinus were famous^
after them Menander and Philemon: succeeding them Cicilius,
Neuius, Plautus and Terentius.

Musaque Turani tragicis in^ixa Cothurnis
Et tua cum socco, Musa, Melisse leuis.


Turanus tragicke buskin grac'd the Play,
Melissa'es Comicke shooe made lighter way.

The ancient Histriographers write,Alex. Metapol. that among the
Greekes there were diuers places of exercises, appointed for
Poets, some at the graue of Theseus, others at Helicon, where
they in Comedies and Tragedies contended for seueral prises,
where S^p^ocles was aiudged victor ouer Aeschilus:
There were others in the Citty of Elis, where Menander
was foyled by Philomene. In the same kinde Hesiod is sayd
to haue triumpht ouer Homer. So Corinna for her excellencies
in these inuentions, (called Muscalyrica) excelled Pindarus
the Theban Poet, for which she was fiue times crowned
with garlands.
The first publicke Theater was by Dionysius built in Athens,Theaters.
it was fashioned in the manner of a semi-circle, or
halfe-moone, whose galleries and degrees were reared from
the ground, their staires high, in the midst of which did
arise the stage, beside, such a conuenient distance from
the earth, that the audience assembled might easily behold

the whole proiect without impediment. From this the Romanes
had their first patterne, which at the first not being
roof't, but lying open to all weathers, Quintus Catulus
was the first that caused the out-side to bee couered with
linnen cloth, and the in-side to bee hung round with Curtens
of silke. But when Marcus Scaurus was A^dilis, hee
repaired it, and supported it round with pillers of Marble.
Caius Curio, at the solemne obsequies of his father, erected
a famous Theater of Timber, in so strange a forme,
that on two seuerall stages, two sundry playes might bee
acted at once, and yet the one bee no hinderance or impediment
to the other; and when hee so pleased the whole
frame was artificially composed to meet in the middest,
which made an Amphi-theater.
Pompey the great, after his victories against Methridates,
King of Pontus, saw in the Citty Mitelene a Theater of another
forme, and after his triumphes and returne to Rome,
he raised one after the same patterne, of free stone, of that
vastnesse and receit, that within his spaciousnesse it was able
at once to receiue fourescore thousand people, euery
one to sit, see and heare.
In emulation of this sumptuous and gorgious building
Iulius Caesar, successor to Pompeyes greatnesse, exceeded him
in his famous Architecture, hee raised an Amphitheater,
Campo Martio, in the field of Mars, which as farre excelled
Pompeyes, as Pompeyes did exceed Caius Curioes, Curioes that
of Marcus Scaurus, Scaurus that of Quintus Catulus, or Catulus
that which was first made in Athens by Dionysius: for
the Basses, Columnes, Pillars, and Pyramides were all of
hewed Marble, the couerings of the stage, which wee call
the heauens (where vpon any occasion their Gods descended)
were Geometrically supported by a Giant-like Atlas,
whom the Poets for his Astrology, feigne to beare heauen
on his shoulders, in which an artificiall Sunne and Moone
of extraordinary aspect and brightnesse had their diurnall,
and nocturnall motions; so had the starres their true and

coelestiall course; so had the spheares, which in their continuall
motion made a most sweet and rauishing harmony:
Here were the Elements and planets in their degrees, the
sky of the Moone, the sky of Mercury, Venus, Sol, Mars,
Iupiter and Saturne; the starres, both fixed and wandering:
and aboue all these, the first mouer, or primum mobile, there
were the 12 signes; the lines Equinoctiall and Zodiacal, the
Meridian circle, or Zenith, the Orizon circle, or Emisphere,
the Zones torrid and frozen, the poles articke and antarticke,
with all other tropickes, orbs, lines, circles, the Solstitium and
all other motions of the stars, signes, and planets. In briefe, in
that little compasse were comprehended the perfect modell
of the firmament, the whole frame of the heauens, with all
grounds of Astronomicall coniecture. From the roofe grew
a loouer, or turret, of an exceedding altitude, from which an
ensigne of silke waued continually, Pendebant vela Theatro.
But lest I waste too much of that compendiousnesse I haue
promised in my discourse, in idle descriptions, I leaue you
to iudge the proportion of the body by the making of
this one limbe, euery piller, seat, foot-post, staire, gallery, and
whatsoeuer else belongs to the furnishing of such a place,
being in cost, substance, forme, and artificiall workmanship,
most sutable. The floore, stage, roofe, out-side, and in-side, as
costly as the Pantheon or ^apitols. In the principall galleries
were special remote, selected and chosen seats for the Emperour,
patres conscripti, Dictators, Consuls, Pretors, Tribunes,
Triumviri, Decemviri, Ediles, Curules, and other Noble
Officers among the Senators: all other roomes were free
for the plebe, or multitude. To this purpose I introduce
these famous Edifices, as wondring at their cost and state,
thus intimating, that if the quality of Acting, were (as
some propose) altogether vnworthy, why for the speciall
practise, and memorable imployment of the same, were
founded so many rare and admirable monuments: and by
whom were they erected? but by the greatest princes of
their times, and the most famous and worthiest of them all,

builded by him that was the greatest Prince of the world,
Iulius Caesar, at what time in his hand he grip't the vniuersal
Empire of the earth. So of Augustus Caesar.

Inspice ludorum sumptus Auguste tuorum
Empta tibi magno--


Behold Augustus the great pompe and state
Of these thy Playes payd deere for, at hye rate.


(...) tu sp^ctasti spectandaque sepe d^disti.

And could any inferiour quality bee more worthily esteemed
or noblier graced, then to haue Princes of such
magnificence and state to bestow on them places of such
port and countenance, had they been neuer well regarded,
they had been neuer so sufficiently prouided for, nor would
such worthy princes haue striued who should (by their
greatest expence and prouision) haue done them the amplest
dignity, had they not with incredible fauour regarded
the quality. I will not trauerse this too farre, least I incurre
some suspition of selfe-loue, I rather leaue it to the fauourable
consideration of the wise, though to the peruersnesse
of the ignorant, who had they any taste either of Poe^ie,
Phylosophy, or Historicall Antiquity, would rather stand
mated at their owne impudent ignorance, then against such
noble, and notable examples stand in publicke defiance.
I read of a Theater built in the midst of the riuer Tyber,
standing on pillers and arches, the foundation wrought vnder
water like London-bridge, the Nobles and Ladyes in
their Barges and Gondelayes, landed at the very stayres of
the galleryes. After these they composed others, but differing
in forme from the Theater, or Amphi-theater, and euery
such was called Circus, the frame Globe-like, and merely
round.
Circus in ha^c exit ^lamataque palma Theatris.
And the yeare from the first building of Rome, fiue hundred
threescore and seuen, what time Spurius Posthumus

Albinus, and Quintus Martius Philippus, were Consuls, Nero
made one, and the noble Flaminius another; but the greatest
was founded by Tarquinius Priscus, and was called
Circus maximus: In this the Gladiators practised, the widenesse
and spaciousnesse was such, that in it they fought at
Barriers, and many times ran at tilt. Dion records eighteene
Elephants slaine at once in one Theater. More particularly
to suruey the rarer Monuments of Rome, neere to the Pantheon
(the Temple of the Roman Gods) at the discent from
the hil Capitolinus, lies the great Forum, by which is scituate
the great Amphi-theater of Tytus, first erected by Vespatian,
but after (almost ruined by fire) by the Roman Tytus rarely
reedified. It is called Colliseus, also a Cauea, which signifies
a scaffold,Ammianus, lib. 29. also Arena* a place of combate, by Siluianus
and Prudentius, which name Tertullian, Pliny, Ouid, Firmicus,
and Apuleins likewise giue it. It had the title of Circus,
Caula and stadium, by Suetonius, C^pitolinus and Arcadius.
Cassianus affirmes these Theaters consecrated to Diana
Taurica, Tertullian, to Mars and Diana, Martiall to Iupiter
Latiaris, and to Stigian Pluto, whose opinion Minutius, and
Prudentius approue. The first structures were by the Tribune
Curio,Pliny. lib. 36. which Dio, lib. 37. affirmes. Vitruvius lib. 5. saith,
Multa Theatra, Rome structa quotannis. Of Iulius Caesars Amphi-theater
Camp^ Martio, Dio Cassius records,Dio Cassius lib. 43. which Augustus
after patronizied, as Vi^tor remembers of them,
whose charge Sta^ilius Taurus assisted, of whom Dio speaketh
thus (...) etc. anno vrbis,Dio. lib. 51 DCCXXV.
Pub. Victor forgets not Circus Flaminij,Su^tonius cap 21. and Suetonius remembers
one builded by Caligul^, at Septa, whose building
Claudius at first interdicted.Ta^itus lib. 13. A mal^um. Nero erected a magnificent
Theater in the field of Mars. Suetonius lib. Ner. 12.
Publius Victor speakes further of a Castrense Theatrum, a
Theater belo^ging to the Campe in the Cou^try of the Aesquiles,
built by Tiberius Caesar,Pliny, lib. 36. cap. 15. and of Pompies Theater Pliny
witnesseth. The great Theater of Statilius being in greatest
vse, was burnt in the time of Nero, which Xiphilinus

thus speakes of, (...).
This was built in the middest of the old Citty, and after the
combustion repaired by Vespatian, Consulatu suo 8. whose
coyne of one side, beares the expresse figure of his Theater,
yet was it onely begun by him, but perfected by his sonne
Tytus: Eutropius and Cassiodorus, attribute this place soly to
Titus, but Aurelius Victor giues him onely the honour of
the perfecting a place so exquisitely begun: this after was
repaired by Marcus Anthonius Pius, by whose cost sayth
Capitolinus, the Temple of Hadri^nus was repaired, and the
great The^^er reedified, which Heliogabalus, by the testimony
of Lampridius, patronized, and after the Senate of Rome,
tooke to their protection, vnder the Gordians.
Touching Theaters without Rome, Lypsius records Theatra
circa Romani, extructa passim, euen in Ierusalem, Herodes
magnifi^us and illustris rex non vno loco Iudeae Amphi-theatra
aedificauit, extruxit in ips^ vrbe sacra, (...) (as Iosephus saith)
(...). Herod a magnificent and illustrious King,
not in one place of Iudea, erected Amphitheaters, but euen
in the holy Citty hee built one of greatest receit. Also in
Greece, Asia, Affricke, Spaine, France: nor is there any prouince
in which their ancient structures do not yet remaine,
or their perishing ruines are not still remembred. In Italy,
ad Lyrim campaniae Fluvium iuxta Minturnas, remaines part
of an ample Amphi-theater.
At Puteolis, a City by the sea-side in Campania, 8 miles from
Naples, one.
At Capua, a magnificent one of sollid Marble.
At Alba in Italy, one.
At O^riculum in Vmbria one.
At Verona, one most beautifull.
At Florens, one whose compasse yet remaines.
At Athens in Greece, one of Marble.
At Pola in Istria, by the H^driaticke sea, one described by
Sebastian Serlius.
At Hyspalis in Spaine, one built without the walles of the

In (...) at (...) one of squared stone, the length 3^.
perches, or poles, the bredth 2^.
At Arelate one.
At Burdegall one.
At Nemaus one, remembred by Euseb. in Ecclesias^ica Historia.
At Lygeris one.
Another among the Heluetians.
The Ver^ne^se Theatrum Marmoreum, erected before the
time of Augustus, as Torellus Se^ayna in his descriptio^ of
Ver^na, records: but Cyrnicus An^onitanus reports it built in
the nine and thirtieth yeare of Octauian. Carolus Sigonius re^erres
it to the reigne of Maximinian,Sicon. (...). Hist. Occide^. who saith, Maximinian
built Theaters in Medi^lanum Aquilea, and Brixium.
The like Cornelius Tacitus 2. Hist. remembers in Placentia,
but the descriptio^ of the Verona Theater Leuinus Kersmakerus
sets downe. This the great King Francis anno 1539
gaue to certaine Actors, who thirty dayes space together,
represented in the same the Acts of the Apostles, nor was
i^ lawfull by the Edi^t of the King for any man to remoue
any stone within thirty poles of his scituation, lest they
should endanger the foundation of the Theater.
The like haue been in Venice, Millan, Padua. In Paris ther^
are diuers now in vse by the French Kings Comedians, as
the Burgonian, and others. Others in Massilia, in Treuers, in
Magontia, in Agripina, and infinite Cities of Greece, Thebes,
Carthage, Delphos, Creet, Paph^s, Epyrus, also in the Citie Tydena,
so at Ciuil in Spaine, and at Madrill, with others.
At the entertainement of the Cardinall Alphonsus,Archduke Alphonsus. and
the Infant of Spaine into the Low-countryes, they were presented
at Antwerpe, with sundry pageants and playes: the
King of Denmark^, father to him that now reigneth, entertained
into his seruice, a company of English Comedians,
commended vnto him by the honourable the Earle of Lei^ester:
the Duke of Brounswicke, and the Landsgraue of Hesse^
retaine in their Courts certaine of ours, of the same quality.

But among the Romans they were in highest reputation: for
in comparison of their playes, they neuer regarded any of
their solemnities, there ludifunebres, there Floralia, Cerealia,
Fugalia, Bachinalia* or Lup^rcalia.
And amongst vs,Stowe. one of our best English Chroniclers records,
that when Edward the fourth would shew himselfe
in publicke state to the view of the people, hee repaired to
his Palace at S. Iohnes, where he accustomed to see the Citty
Actors. And since then, that house by the Princes free gift,
hath belong^d to the office of the Reuels, where our Court
playes haue beene in late daies yearely rehersed, perfected,
and corrected before they come to the publike view of the
Prince and the Nobility. Ouid speaking of the Tragicke
Muse, thus writes.

Venit and ingenti violenta tragedia passu,
Fronte com^ tor^a palla iacebat humi
Laeua manus sceptrum late regale tenebat,
Lydius apta pedum vin^ta cothurnus habet.


Then came the Tragicke Muse with a proud pace,
Measuring her ^low strides with maiesticke grace.
Her long traine sweepes the earth, and she doth stand,
With b^skin'd legge, rough brow, and sceptred hand.

Well knew the poet what estimation she was in with Augustus,
whe^ he describes her holding in her left hand a scepter.
Now to recite some famous Actors that liued in the preceding
ages: the first Comedia^s were Cincius and Falis^us,Cincius, Faliscus, Minutius. Prothonius. L. Attilius. Latinus. Prenestinu^. Lucius. Ambiuius Turpi^. the
first Tragedians were Minutius, and Prothonius. Elius Donatus
in his preface to Terence his Andrea, saith that in that Comedy
Lucius Attilius, Latinus Prenestinus, and Lucius Ambiuius
Turpi^ were Actors: this Comedy was dedicated to Cibil, and
such were called ludi Megalenses, acted in the yeare that M.
Fuluius was Edilis, and Quintus Minutius Valerius, and M. Glabrio
were Curules, which were Cou^sellers and chiefe officers
in Rom^, so called because they customably sate in chayres

of Iuory. The songs that were sung in this Comedy were
set by Fl^ccus,Flaccus. the sonne of Clodius. Terence his Eunuchus or
second Comedy was acted in the yeare L. Posthumus, and
L. Cornelius were Edil. Curules, Marcus Valerius, and Caius
Fannius Consuls.Protinus. L. Seruius. The yeare from the building of Rome 291.
in his Adelphi one Protinus acted, and was highly applauded,
in his H^^yra Iulius Seruius.Offic. 1. Cicero commends one Rupilius
a rare Tragedian:Rupilius. Arossus. Theocrines. I read of another called Arossus, another
called Theocrines, who purchased him a great applause
in the playes called Terentini. There were other playes in
Rome, called Actia and Pythia, made in the honour of Apollo,
for killing the Dragon Python. In those one AesopusAEsopus.
bare the praise, a man generally esteemed, who left behind
him much substance, which Clodius his sonne after possest.
Quae grauis Aesopus, quae doctus Rossius egit.
LabericusLabericus. was an excellent Poet, and a rare Actor, who
writ a booke of the gesture and action to be vsed by the Tragedians
and Comedians in performance of euery part in
his natiue humor. Plautus himselfe was so inamored of the
Actors in his dayes, that hee published many excellent and
exquisite Comedies, yet extant. Aristotle commends one
TheodoretesTheodorete^. to be the best Tragedian in his time. This in the
presence of Alexander personated Achilles, which so delighted
the Emperour, that hee bestowed on him a pension
of quinque mille Drachmae, fiue thousand Drachmaes, and euery
thousand Drachmaes are twenty nine pounds, three
shillings, foure pence sterling.
Rossius, whom the eloquent Orator, and excellent statesman
of Rome, Marcus Cicero, for his elegant pronuntiatio^ and formall
gesture called his iewell, had from the common Tresury
of the Roman Exchequer, a daily pention allowed him
of so many Sestertij as in our coine amount to 16 pound and
a marke, or thereabouts, which yearely did arise to any noble
mans reuenues. So great was the fame of this Roscius,
and so good his estimation, that learned Cato made a question
whether Cicero could write better then Roscius could

speake and act, or Rosoius speake and act better then Cicero
write. Many times when they had any important orations,
to be with an audible and loud voyce deliuered to the people,
they imployed the tongue and memory of this excellent
Actor, to whom for his worth, the Senate granted such
large exhibition.
--quae peruincere voces,
Eualuere sonum referunt quem nostra Theatra,
Gorganum mugire putes n^mus aut mare Thuscum,
Tanto cum strepitu ludi spect^atur and artes.
What voyce can be compared with the sound,
Our Theaters from their deepe concaues send,
For their reuerberate murmures seeme to drownd
The Gorgan wood when the proud windes contend.
Or when rough stormes the Thuscan billowes raise,
With such loud ^oy they ring our Arts and Playes.
To omit all the Doctors, Zawnyes, Pantaloones, Harlakeenes,
in which the French, but especially the Italians,
haue beene excellent, and according to the occasion offered
to do some right to our English Actors, as Knell, Bently,
Mils, Wilson, Crosse, Lanam, and others: these, since I neuer
saw them, as being before my time, I cannot (as an eye-witnesse
of their desert) giue them that applause, which no
doubt, they worthily merit, yet by the report of many iuditial
auditors, their performance of many parts haue been
so absolute, that it were a kinde of sinne to drowne their
worths in Lethe, and not commit their (almost forgotten)
names to eternity. Heere I must needs remember Tarleton,
in his time gratious with the Queene his soueraigne, and
in the peoples generall applause, whom succeeded VVil.
Kemp, as wel in the fauour of her Maiesty, as in the opinion
and good thoughts of the generall audience. Gabriel, Singer,
Pope, Phillips, Sly, all the right I can do them, is but this, that
though they be dead, their deserts yet liue in the remembrance
of many. Among so many dead let me not forget
one yet aliue in his time the most worthy famous, Maist^r
Edward Allen. To omit these, as also such as for diuers

imperfections, may be thought insufficient for the quality.
Actors should be men pick'd out personable, according to
the parts they present, they should be rather schollers, that
though they ca^not speake well, know how to speake, or else
to haue that volubility* that they can speake well, though
they vnderstand not what, and so both imperfections may by
instructio^s be helped and amended: but where a good tongue
and a good conceit both faile, there can neuer be good actor.
I also could wish, that such as are co^demned for their licentioufnesse,
might by a generall consent bee quite excluded
our society: for as we are men that stand in the broad eye
of the world, so should our manners, gestures, and behauiours,
sauour of such gouernment and modesty, to deserue
the good thoughts and reports of all men, and to abide the
sharpest censures euen of those that are the greatest opposites
to the quality. Many amongst vs, I know, to be of substance,
of gouernment, of sober liues, and temperate carriages,
house-keepers, and contributary to all duties enioyned
them, equally with them that are rank't with the most
bountifull; and if amongst so many of sort, there be any few
degenerate from the rest in that good demeanor, which is
both requisite and expected at their hands, let me entreat you
not to censure hardly of all for the misdeeds of some, but rather
to excuse vs, as Ouid doth the generality of women.
Parcite paucarum diffundere crimen in omnes,
Spectetur meritis quaeque puella suis.
For some offenders (that perhaps are few)
Spare in your thoughts to censure all the crew,
Since euery breast containes a sundry spirit,
Let euery one be censur'd as they merit.
Others there are of whom should you aske my opinion, I
must refer you to this, Consule Theatrum. Here I might take
fit opportunity to reckon vp all our English writers, and compare
them with the Greeke, French, Italian, and Latine Poets,
not only in their Pastorall, Historicall, Elegeicall, and Heroical^
Po^ms, but in their Tragicall, and Comical subiects, but it was

my chance to happen on the like learnedly done by an approued
good scholler, in a booke called Wits Comon-wealth,
to which treatise I wholy referre you, returning to our present
subiect. Iulius Caesar himselfe for his pleasure became an
Actor, being in shape, state, voyce, iudgement, and all other
occurrents, exterior and interior excellent. Amongst many
other parts acted by him in person, it is recorded of him,
that with generall applause in his owne Theater he played
Hercules Fure^s, and amongst many other arguments of his
compleatnesse, excellence, and extraordinary care in his
action, it is thus reported of him: Being in the depth of a
passion, one of his seruants (as his part then fell out) presenting
Lychas, who before had from Deianeira brought him
the poysoned shirt, dipt in the bloud of the Centaure Nessus:
he in the middest of his torture and fury, finding this
Lychas hid in a remote corner (appoynted him to creep into
of purpose) although he was, as our Tragedians vse, but
seemingly to kill him by some false imagined wound, yet
was Caesar so extremely carryed away with the violence of
his practised fury, and by the perfect shape of the madnesse
of Hercules, to which he had fashioned all his actiue spirits,
that he slew him dead at his foot, and after swoong him terque
quaterque (as the Poet sayes) about his head. It was the manner
of their Emperours, in those dayes, in their publicke
Tragedies to choose out the fittest amongst such, as for capital
offences were condemned to dye, and imploy them in
such parts as were to be kil'd in the Tragedy, wh^^ of themselues
would make suit rather so to dye with resolution, and
by the hands of such princely Actors, then otherwise to suffer
a shamefull and most detestable end. And these were Tragedies
naturally performed. And such Caius Caligula, Claudius
Nero, Vitellius, Domitianus, Co^modus, and other Emperours
of Rome, vpon their festiuals and holy daies of greatest consecration,
vsed to act. Therefore M. Kid in the Spanish Tragedy,
vpon occasion presenting it selfe, thus writes.
Why Nero thought it no disparagement,

And Kings and Emperours haue tane delight,
To make experience of their wits in playes.
These exercises, as traditions* haue beene since (though in
better manner) continued through all ages, amongst all the
noblest Nations of the earth. But I haue promised to be altogether
compendious, presuming that what before is discourst,
may for the practise of playes, their Antiquity, and
Dignity be altogether sufficient. I omit the shewes and ceremonies
euen in these times generally vsed amongst the
Catholikes, in which by the Churchmen and (...) religious,
diuers pageants, as of the Natiuity, Passion, and Ascention,
with other Historicall places of the Bible, are at diuers
times and seasons of the yeare vsually celebrated; sed haec pre^er me.
In the yeare of the world 4207. of Christ 246. Origin
writ certaine godly Epistles to Philip* then Emperour
of Rome, who was the first Christian Emperour, and in his
life I reade, that in the fourth yeare of his reigne, which was
the 1000. yeare after the building of Rome, he solemnized
that yeare, as a Iubilee with sumptuous pageants and
playes. Homer, the most excellent of all Poets, composed
his Illiads in the shape of a Tragedy, his Odisseas like a Comedy.
Virgil in the first of his Aeneiads, in his description
of Didoes Carthage.
--hic alta Theatris
Fundamenta locant alij immanesque Columnas,
Rup^bus excidunt scenis decora alta futuris.
Which proues, that in those dayes immediatly after the
ruine of Troy, when Carthage had her first foundation, they
built Theaters with stately columnes of stone, as in his description
may appeare. I haue sufficiently discourst of the
first Theaters, and in whose times they were erected, euen
till the reigne of Iulius Caesar, the first Emperour, and how
they continued in their glory from him till the reigne of
Marcus Aurelius the 23 Emperour, and from him euen to
these times. Now to proue they were in as high estimation
at La^edemo^, and Athens two the most famous Citties of

Greece. Cicero in his booke Cato maior, seu de (...). Cum
Athenis ludis quidam grandis natu in Theat^^m venisset, etc.
An ancient Citizen comming into one of the Athenian
Theaters to see the pastimes there solemnized (which
shewes that the most antient and graue frequented them)
by reason of the throng, no man gaue him place or reuerence:
but the same Citizen being implyo'd in an Embassy
to Lacedemon, and coming like a priuate man into the Theater,
the generall multitude arose at once, and with great
ceremonious reuerence gaue his age place. This Cicero alledges
to proue the reuerence due to age, and this I may
^itly introduce to the approbation of my present subiect.
Moreouer, this great Statesman of Rome, at whose exile
twenty thousand of the chiefest Roman Citizens wore
mourning apparrel, oftentimes commends Plautus, calling
him Plautus noster, and Atticorum antiqua Comedia, where
he proceeds further to extoll. Aesopus, for personating Aiax,
and the famous Actor Rupilius, in Epigonus, Med^a, Menalip,
Clytemnestra and A^tiopa, proceeding in the same place
with this worthy and graue sentence, Ergo Histrio hoc videbi^
in scena, quod non videbit sapiens in vita? shall a Tragedian see
that in his Scen^ which a wise man cannot see in the course
of his life? So in another of his workes, amongst many instructions
to his sonne Marcus, he applauds Turpio Ambinius
for his action, Statius, Neuius, and Plautus for their writing.
Ouid in Augustum.

Luminibusque tuis totus quibus vtitur orbis,
Scenica vidisti lusus adulteria.


Those eyes with which you all the world suruay,
See in your Theaters our Actors play.

Augustus Caesar, because he would haue some memory
of his loue to those places of pastime, reared in Rome two
stately Obelisci, or Pyramides, one in Iulius Caesars Temple
in the field of Mars, another in the great Theater, called
C^^cus Maximus, built by Flaminius: these were in height an

hundred cubits a peece, in bredth foure cubits, they were
first raised by King Pheron in the Temple of the Sunne, and
after remoued to Rome by Augustus: the occasion of their
first composu^e was this: Pheron for some great crime,
committed by him in his youth against the Gods, was by
them strooke blinde, and so continued the space of ten
yeares: but after by a reuelation in the Citty Bucis, it was
told, that if he washt his eyes in the water of a woman that
was chaste, and neuer adulterately touch't with any saue
her husband, he should againe recouer his sight: the King
first tride his wife, then many other of the most graue and
best reputed matrons, but continued still in despaire, till at
length hee met with one vertuous Lady, by whose chastity
his ^ight was restored; whom (hauing first commanded
his Queene and the rest to be consumed
with fire) he after married. Pheron in memory
of this, builded his two Pyramides,
after remoued to Rome by
AVGVSTVS.
Sanctaque maiestas and erat venerabile nomen*
Vatibus--
The end of the second Booke.



OF ACTORS, AND
the true vse of their quality.
THE THIRD BOOKE.
TRagedies and Comedies, saith Donatus,
^ad their beginning a rebus diuinis, from
diuine sacrifices, they differ thus: In Comedies,
turbulenta prima, tranquilla vltima,
In Tragedyes, tranquilla prima, turbulenta
vltima, Comedies begin in trouble, and
end in peace; Tragedies begin in calmes, and ^nd in tempest.
Of Comedies there be three kindes, mouing Comedies,
called Mot^riae, standing Comedies, called Statariae,
or mixt betwixt both, called Mistae: they are distributed
into foure parts, the Prologue, that is, the preface; the Protasis,
that is, the proposition, which includes the first Act,
and presents the Actors; the Epitasis, which is the businesse
and body of the Comedy; the last the Catastrophe, and conclusion:
the deffinition of the Comedy, according to the
Latins: a dicourse consisting of diuers institutions, comprehending
ciuill and domesticke things, in which is
taught, what in our liues and manners is to be followed,
what to bee auoyded, the Greekes define it thus:
(...). Cicer^
saith, a Comedy is the imitation of life, the glasse of custome,
and the image of truth, in Athens they had their
first originall. The ancient Comedians vsed to attire their
actors thus: the old men in white, as the most ancient of all,
the yong men in party-coloured garments, to note their
diuersity of thoughts, their slaues and seruants in thin and

bare vesture, either to note their pouerty, or that they
might run the more lighter about their affaires: their Parrasites
wore robes that were turned in, and intricately
wrapped about them; the fortunate in white, the discontented
in decayed vesture, or garments, growne out of fashion;
the rich in purple, the poore in crimson, souldiers
wore purple iackets, hand-maids the habits of strange virgins,
bawds, pide coates, and Curtezans, garments of the
colour of mud, to denote their couetousnesse: the stages
were hung with rich Arras, which was first brought from
King Attalus into Rome: his state-hangings were so costly,
that from him all Tapestries, and rich Arras were called
Attalia. This being a thing ancient as I haue proued it,
next of dignity, as many arguments haue confirmed it, and
now euen in these dayes by the best, without exception, fauourably
tollerated, why should I yeeld my censure, grounded
on such firme and establisht sufficiency, to any Tower,
founded on sand, any castle built in the aire, or any triuiall
vpstart, and meere imaginary opinion.
Oderunt Hilarem tristes tristemque iocosi.
I hope there is no man of so vnsensible a spirit, that can
inueigh against the true and direct vse of this quality: Oh
but say they, the Romanes in their time, and some in these
dayes haue abused it, and therefore we volly out our exclamations
against the vse. Oh shallow! Because such a man
had his house burnt, we shall quite condemne the vse
of fire, because one man quaft poyson, we must so* beare to
drinke, because some haue beene shipwrak't, no man shall
hereafter trafficke by sea. Then I may as well argue thus: he
cut his finger, therefore must I weare no knife, vond man
fell from his horse, therefore must I trauell a foot; that man
surfeited, therfore dare not I eate. What can appeare more
absurd then such a grosse and sencelesse assertion? I could
turne this vnpoynted weapon against his breast that aimes
it at mine, and reason thus: Roscius had a large pension allowed
him by the ^enate of Rome, why should not an Actor

of the like desert, haue the like allowance now? or this, the
most famous City and Nation in the world h^ld playes in
great admiration: Ergo, but it is a rule in Logicke, Exparticu^aribus
nih^l fit. These are not the Basses we must build
vpon, nor the columnes that must support our architecture.
Et l^tro, and cautus, precingitur ense viator.
Ille sed insid^ (...), ^ic ^ibi portat opem.
Both theeues and true-men, weapons weare alike*
Th'one to defend, the other comes to strike.
Let vs vse fire to warme vs, not to scortch vs, to make ready
our necessaries, not to burne our houses: let vs drinke
to quench our thirst, not to surfet; and eate to satisfie nature,
not to gormondize.
--Comediarecta si mente legatur,
Constabit null^ posse nocere--
Playes are in vse as they are vnderstood,
Spectators eyes may make them bad or good.
Shall we condemne a generallity for any one particular
misconstruction? giue me then leaue to argue thus: Amongst
Kings haue there not beene some tyrants? yet the
office of a King is the image of the Maiesty of God. Amongst
true subiects haue there not crept in some false
traitors? euen amongst the twelue there was one ^udas, but
shall we for his fault, censure worse of the eleuen? God forbid:
art thou Prince or Peasant? art thou of the Nobility, or
Commonalty? Art thou merchant or Souldier? of the Citty
or Country? Art thou Preacher or Auditor? Art thou Tutor
or Pupill? There haue beene of thy function bad and
good, prophane and holy. I induce these instances to confirme
this common argument, that the vse of any generall
thing is not for any one particular abuse to be condemned:
for if that assertion stood firme, wee should run into many
notable inconueniences.
Qui locus est templi^ angustior hau^ quoque vitet,
In culpam si qua est ingeniosa sua^.

To proceed to the matter: First, playing is an ornament
to the Citty, which strangers of all Nations, repairing hither,
report of in their Countries, beholding them here
with some admiration: for what variety of entertainment
can there be in any Citty of Christendome, more then in
London? But some will say, this dish might be very well spared
out of the banquet: to him I answere, Diogenes* that vsed
too seede on rootes, cannot relish a March-pane. Secondly,
our English tongue, which hath ben the most harsh,
vneuen, and broken language of the world, part Dutch,
part Irish, Saxon, Scotch, Welsh, and indeed a gallimaffry of
many, but perfect in none, is now by this secondary meanes
of playing, continually refined, euery writer striuing in
himselfe to adde a new florish vnto it; so that in processe,
from the most rude and vnpolisht tongue, it is growne to a
most perfect and composed language, and many excellent
workers, and elaborate Poems writ in the same, that many
Nations grow inamored of our tongue (before despised.)
Neither Saphicke, Ionicke, Iambicke, Phaleuticke, Adonicke,
Gliconicke, Hexamiter, T^tramitrer, Pentamiter, Asclepediacke,
Choriambicke, nor any other measured verse
vsed amongst the Greekes, Latins, Italians* French, Dutch, or
Spanish writers, but may be exprest in English, be it in blanke
verse, or meeter, in Distichon, or Hexastichon, or in what
forme or feet, or what number you can desire. Thus you
see to what excellency our refined English is brought, that
in these daies we are ashamed of that Euphony and eloquence
which within these 60 yeares, the best tongues in the land
were proud to pronounce. Thirdly, playes haue made
the ignorant more apprehensiue, taught the vnlearned the
knowledge of many famous histories, instructed such as ca^not
reade in the discouery of all our English Chronicles: and
what man haue you now of that weake capacity, that cannot
discourse of any notable thing recorded euen from William
the Conquerour, nay from the landing of Brute, vntill
this day, beeing possest of their true vse, For, or because

Playes are writ with this ayme, and carryed with this
methode, to teach the subiects obedience to their King,
to shew the people the vntimely ends of such as haue moued
tumults, commotions, and insurrections, to present the^
with the flourishing estate of such as liue in obedience,Vse of Tragedies. exhorting
them to allegeance, dehorting them from all trayterous
and fellonious stratagems.
Omne genus scripti grauitate Tragedia vin^it.
If we present a Tragedy, we include the fatall and abortiue
ends of such as commit notorious murders,Vse of Historicall playes. which is
aggrauated and acted with all the Art that may be, to terrifie
men from the like abhorred practises. If wee present a
forreigne History, the subiect is so intended, that in the
liues of Romans, Grecians, or others, either the vertues of
our Country-men are extolled, or their vices reproued, as
thus, by the example of Caesar to stir souldiers to valour, and
magnanimity: by the fall of Pompey, that no man trust in
his owne strength: we present Alexander, killing his friend
in his rage, to reproue rashnesse: Mydas, choked with his
gold, to taxe couetousnesse: Nero against tyranny: Sardanapalus,
against luxury: Nynus, against ambition, with infinite
others, by sundry instances, either animating men to
noble attempts,Vse of Morals. or attaching the consciences of the spectators,
finding themselues toucht in presenting the vices of
others. If a morall, it is to perswade men to humanity and
good life, to instruct them in ciuility and good manners,
shewing them the fruits of honesty,Vse of Comedyes. and the end of villany.
Versibus exponi Tragicis res Comica non vult.
Againe, Horace, Arte Poetica.
Et nostri proavi Plautinos and numeros et
Laudavere sales--
If a Comedy, it is pleasantly contriued with merry accidents,
and intermixt with apt and witty iests, to present before
the Prince at certain times of solemnity, or else merily
fitted to the stage. And what is then the subiect of this
harmelesse mirth? either in the shape of a Clowne, to shew

others their slouenly and vnhansome behauiour, that they
may reforme that simplicity in themselues, which others
make their sport, lest they happen to become the like subiect
of generall scorne to an auditory, else it intreates of
loue, deriding foolish inamorates, who spend their ages,
their spirits, nay themselues, in the seruile and ridiculous
imployments of their Mistresses: and these are mingled
with sportfull accidents, to recreate such as of themselues
are wholly deuoted to Melancholly, which corrupts the
bloud: or to refresh such weary spirits as are tired with labour,
or study, to moderate the cares and heauinesse of the
minde, that they may returne to their trades and faculties
with more zeale and earnestnesse, after some small soft and
pleasant retirement. Sometimes they discourse of Pantaloones,
Vsurers that haue vnthrifty sonnes, which both the
fathers and sonnes may behold to their instructions: sometimes
of Curtesans, to diuulge their subtelties and snares,
in which yong men may be intangled, shewing them the
meanes to auoyd them. If we present a Pastorall,Vse of Pastorals. we shew
the harmelesse loue of Sheepheards diuersly moralized, distinguishing
betwixt the craft of the Citty, and the innocency
of the sheep-coat. Briefly, there is neither Tragedy,
History, Comedy, Morral or Pastorall, from which an infinite
vse cannot be gathered. I speake not in the defence
of any lasciuious shewes, scurrelous ieasts, or scandalous
inuectiues: If there be any such, I banish them quite from
my patronage; yet Horace, Sermon 1. Satyr 4. thus
writes.
Eupolis atque Cratinus Aristophanesque Poetae,
Atque alij quorum Comaedia prisca virorum est:
Si quis erat dignus describi, quod malus, aut fur,
Quod Maechus foret, aut sicarius, aut alioqui,
Famosus, multa cum libertate notabunt.
Eupolis, Cratinus, Aristophanes, and other Comike Poets in
^he time of Horace, with large scope, and vnbridled liberty

boldly and plainly scourged all such abuses as in their ages
were generally practised, to the staining and blemishing of
a faire and beautifull Common-weale. Likewise, a learned
Gentleman in his Apology for Poetry, speakes thus: Tragedies
well handled be a most w^rthy kinde of Poesie. Comedies
make men see and shame at their faults, and proceeding
further amongst other Vniuersity-playes, he remembers
the Tragedy of Richard the third, acted in Saint Iohns
in Cambridge, so essentially, that had the tyrant Phaleris
^eheld his bloudy proceedings, it had mollified his heart,
and made him relent at sight of his inhumane massacres.
Further, he commends of Comedies, the Cambridge Pedantius,
and the Oxford Bellum Grammaticale; and leauing them
passes on to our publicke playes, speaking liberally in their
praise, and what commendable vse may bee gathered of
them. If you peruse Margarita Poetica, you may see what
excellent vses and sentences he hath gathered out of T^rence
his Andrea, Euenuchus, and the rest. Likewise out of
Pl^utus his Amphi^rio, Asinaria, and moreouer, Ex Comaedijs
Philodoxis, Caroli Acret^ni: Defalsa Hip^^rita, and tristi Mer^urij,
Ronsij versellensis: Ex Comaedia Philanira Vgolini parmensis,
all reuerend schollers, and Comicke Poets, reade el^e
the 4 Tragedies, Philunica, Petrus, Aman, Katherina, Cla^dij
R^iletti Beluensis: But I should tire my selfe to reckon the
names of all French, Roman, German, Spanish, Italian, and English
Poets, being in number infinite, and their labours extant
to approue their worthinesse.
Is thy minde Noble? and wouldst thou be further stir'd
vp to magnanimity? Behold, vpon the stage thou maist see
Hercules, Achilles, Alexander, Caesar, Alcib^ades, Lys^nder,
Sertorius, Haniball, Antigonus, Phillip of Ma^ed (...), Methridates
of Pontus, Pyrrhus of Epir^, Age^laus among the Lacedemonians,
Epaminond^s, amongst the Th^hans: Sceuola alone
entring the armed tents of Porsenna: Horatius Cho^^es
alone withstanding the whole army of the He^rurian* Leonides
of Sparta, choosing a Lyon to leade a band of Dee^^,

rather then one Deere to conduct an army of Lyons, with
infinite others in their owne persons qualities, and shapes, animating
thee with courage, deterring thee fro^ cowardise.
Hast thou of thy Country well deserued? and art thou of
thy labour euill requited? to associate thee thou mayest see
the valiant Roman Marcellus pursue Hannibal at Nola, conquering
Syracusa, vanquishing the Gauls, all Padua, and presently
(for his reward) banisht his Country into Greece.
There thou mayest see Scipio Affricanus, now triumphing
for the conquest of all Affrica, and immediatly exil'd the
confines of Romania. Art thou inclined to lust? behold the
falles of the Tarquins, in the rape of Lucrece: the guerdon
of luxury in the death of Sardanapalus: Appius destroyed in
the rauishing of Virginia, and the destruction of Troy in
the lust of Helena. Art thou proud? our Scene presents
thee with the fall of Phaeton, Narcissus pining in the loue of
his shadow, ambitious Hamon, now calling himselfe a God,
and by and by thrust headlong among the Diuels. We present
men with the vglinesse of their vices, to make them
the more to abhorre them, as the Persians vse, who aboue
all sinnes, loathing drunkennesse, accustomed in their solemne
feasts, to make their seruants and captiues extremely
ouercome with wine, and then call their children to
view their nasty and lothsome behauiour, making them
hate that sin in themselues, which shewed so grosse and abhominable
in others. The like vse may be gathered of the
drunkards so naturally imitated in our playes, to the applause
of the Actor, content of the auditory, and reprouing
of the vice. Art thou couetous? go no further then Plautus
his Comedy called Euclio.
Dum fallax servus, durus pater, improba lena
Vixerit, and meretrixblanda, Menandros erit.
While ther's false seruant, or obdurate sire,
Sly baud, smooth whore, Menandros wee'l admire.
To end in a word. Art thou addicted to prodigallity? enuy?
cruelty? periury? flattery? or rage? our Scenes affoord

thee store of men to shape your liues by, who be frugall,
louing, gentle, trusty, without soothing, and in all things
temperate. Wouldst thou be honourable? iust, friendly,
moderate, deuout, mercifull, and louing concord? thou
mayest see many of their fates and ruines, who haue beene
dishonourable, iniust, ^alse, gluttenous, sacrilegious, bloudy-minded,
and brochers of dissention. Women likewise
that are chaste, are by vs extolled, and encouraged in their
vertues, being instanced by Diana, Belphebe, Matilda, Lucrece
and the Countesse of Salisbury. The vnchaste are by
vs shewed their errors, in the persons of Phrin^, Lais, ^hais,
Flora: and amongst vs, Rosamond, and Mistresse Shore. What
can sooner print modesty in the soules of the wanton, then
by discouering vnto them the monstrousnesse of their sin?
It followes that we proue these exercises to haue bee^e the
discouerers of many notorious murders, long concealed
from the eyes of the world. To omit all farre-fetcht instances,
we wil proue it by a domestike, and home-borne truth,
which within these few yeares happened.A strange accident happening at a play. At Lin in Norfolke,
the then Earle of Sussex players acting the old History
of Fryer Francis, and presenting a woman, who insatiately
doting on a yong gentleman, had (the more securely to enioy
his affection) mischieuously and seceretly murdered
her husband, whose ghost haunted her, and at diuers times
in her most solitary and priuate contemplations, in most
horrid and fearefull shapes, appeared, and stood before her.
As this was acted, a townes-woman (till then of good estimation
and report) finding her conscience (at this presenment)
extremely troubled, suddenly skritched and cryd out
Oh my husband, my husband! I see the ghost of my husband
fiercely threatning and menacing me. At which shrill
and vexpected out-cry, the people about her, moou'd to a
strange amazement, inquired the reason of her clamour,
when presently vn-urged, she told them, that seuen yeares
ago, she, to be possest of such a Gentleman (meaning him)
had poysoned her husband, whose fearefull image personated

it selfe in the shape of that ghost: whereupon the murdresse
was apprehended, before the Iustices further examined,
and by her voluntary confession after condemned. That
this is true, as well by the report of the Actors as the records
of the Towne, there are many eye-witnesses of this
accident yet liuing, vocally to confirme it.
As strange an accident happened to a company of the
same quality some 12 yeares ago* or not so much,A strange accident happening at a play. who playing
late in the night at a place called Perin in Cornwall, certaine
Spaniards were landed the same night vnsuspected, and
vndiscouered, with intent to take in the towne, spoyle and
burne it, when suddenly, euen vpon their entrance, the players
(ignorant as the townes-men of any such attempt) presenting
a battle on the stage with their drum and trumpets
strooke vp a lowd alarme: which the enemy hearing, and
fearing they were discouered, amazedly retired, made some
few idle shot in a brauado, and so in a hurly-burly fled disorderly
to their boats. At the report of this tumult, the
townes-men were immediatly armed, and pursued them to
the sea, praysing God for their happy deliuerance from so
great a danger, who by his prouidence made these strangers
the instrument and secondary meanes of their escape
from such imminent mischife, and the tyranny of so remorcelesse
an enemy.
Another of the like wonder happened at Amsterdam in
Holland,A strange accident happening at a play. a company of our English Comedians (well
knowne) trauelling those Countryes, as they were before
the Burgers and other the chiefe inhabitants, acting the last
part of the 4 sons of Aymon, towards the last act of the history,
where penitent R^naldo* like a common labourer, liued
in disguise, vowing as his last pennance, to labour and carry
burdens to the structure of a goodly Church there to be erected:
whose diligence the labourers enuying, since by-reason
of his stature and strength, hee did vsually perfect
more worke in a day, then a dozen of the best, (hee working
for his conscience, they for their lucres.) Whereupon

by reason his industry had so much disparaged their liuing,
conspired amongst themselues to kill him, waiting some
opportunity to finde him asleepe, which they might easily
doe, since the forest labourers are the soundest sleepers, and
industry is the best preparatiue to rest. Hauing spy'd their
opportunity, they draue a naile into his temples, of which
wou^d immediatly he dyed. As the Actors handled this,
the audience might on a sodaine vnderstand an out-cry,
and loud shrike in a remote gallery, and pressing about the
place, they might perceiue a woman of great grauity,
strangely amazed, who with a distracted and troubled braine
oft sighed out these words: Oh my husband, my husband!
The play, without further interruption, proceeded; the woman
was to her owne house conducted, without any apparant
suspition, euery one coniecturing as their fancies led
them. In this agony she some few dayes languished, and
on a time, as certaine of her well disposed neighbours came
to comfort her, one amongst the rest being Church-warden,
to him the Sexton posts, to tell him of a strange thing
happening him in the ripping vp of a graue: see here (quoth
he) what I haue found, and shewes them a faire skull, with
a great nayle pierst quite through the braine-pan, but we
cannot coniecture to whom it should belong, nor how long
it hath laine in the earth, the graue being confused, and the
flesh consumed. At the report of this accident, the woman,
out of the trouble of her afflicted conscience,
discouered a former murder. For 12 yeares ago, by driuing
that nayle into that skull, being the head of her husband,
she had trecherously slaine him. This being publickly
confest, she was arraigned, condemned, adiudged, and
burned. But I draw my subiect to greater length then I
purposed: these therefore out of other infinites, I haue
collected, both for their familiarnesse and latenesse of memory.
Thus our Antiquity we haue brought from the Gr^cian^
in the time of Hercules: from the Maced^nians in the age of

Alexand^r: from the Romans long before Iulius Caesar, and
since him, through the reigns of 23 Emperours succeeding,
euen to Marcus Aurelius: after him they were supported
by the Mantuans, Venetians, Val^ncians, Neopolitans, the Florentines,
and others: since, by the German Princes, the Palsgraue,
the Landsgraue, the Dukes of Saxony, of Brounswicke,
etc.Cardinall Al^onsus. The Cardinall at Bruxels, hath at this time in pay, a
company of our English Comedians. The French King allowes
certaine companies in Paris, Orleans, besides other
Cities: so doth the King of Spaine, in Ciuill, Madrill, and other
prouinces. But in no Country they are of that eminence
that ours are: so our most royall, and euer renouned
soueraigne, hath licenced vs in London: so did his predecessor,
the thrice vertuous virgin, Queene Elizabeth, and before
her, her sister, Queene Mary, Edward the sixth, and
their father, Henry the eighth: and before these in the tenth
yeare of the reigne of Edward the fourth, Anno 1490. Iohn
Stowe, an ancient and graue Chronicler, records (amongst
other varieties tending to the like effect) that a play was
acted at a place called Skinners well, fast by Clerken-well,
which continued eight dayes, and was of matter from Adam
and Eue, (the first creation of the world.) The spectators
were no worse then the Royalty of England. And amongst
other commendable exercises in this place, the
Company of the Skinners of London held c^^taine yearely
solemne playes. In place wherof, now in these latter daies,
the wrastling,Times kept tide. and such other pastimes haue been kept, and
is still held about Bartholmew-tide. Also in the yeare 1390.
the 14 yeare of the reigne of Richard the second, the 18. of
Iuly, were the like Enterludes recorded of at the same place,
which continued 3 dayes together, the King and Queene,
and Nobility being there present. Moreouer, to this day, in
diuers places of England, there be townes that hold the priuiledge
of their Faires, and other Charters by yearely stageplayes,
as at Manni^gtree in Suffolke, Kendall in the North,
and others. To let these passe, as things familiarly knowne to

all men. Now to speake of some abuse lately crept into the
quality, as an inueighing against the State, the Court, the
Law, the Citty, and their gouernements, with the particularizing
of priuate mens humors (yet aliue) Noble-men, and
others. I know it distastes many; neither do I any way approue
it, nor dare I by any meanes excuse it. The liberty
which some arrogate to themselues, committing their bitternesse,
and liberall inuectiues against all estates, to the
mouthes of Children, supposing their iuniority to be a
priuiledge for any rayling, be it neuer so violent, I could aduise
all such, to curbe and limit this presumed liberty within
the bands of discretion and gouernment. But wise and
iuditial Censurers, before whom such complaints shall at any
time hereafter come, wil not (I hope) impute these abuses
to any transgression in vs, who haue euer been carefull
and prouident to shun the like. I surcease to prosecute
this any further, lest my good meaning be (by some)
misconstrued: and fearing likewise, lest with tediousnesse
I tire the patience of the fauourable
Reader, heere (though abruptly) I
conclude my third and last
TREATISE.
(...)



To my approued good Friend,
Mr. Nicholas Okes.
THE infinite faults escaped in my
booke of Britaines Troy, by the negligence
of the Printer, as the misquotations,
mistaking of sillables, misplacing
halfe lines, coining of stra^ge
and neuer heard of words. These being
without number, when I would haue taken a
particular account of the Errata, the Printer answered
me, hee would not publish his owne disworkemanship,
but rather let his owne fault lye vpon the
necke of the Author: and being fearefull that others
of his quality, had beene of the same nature,
and condition, and finding you on the contrary, so
carefull, and industrious, so serious and laborious to
doe the Author all the rights of the presse, I could
not choose but gratulate your honest indeauours
with this short remembrance. Here likewise, I must
necessarily insert a manifest iniury done me in that
worke, by taking the two Epistles of Paris to Helen,
and Helen to Paris, and printing them in a lesse volume,
vnder the name of another, which may put
the world in opinion I might steale them from him;
and hee to doe himselfe right, hath since published
them in his owne name: but as I must acknowledge

my lines not worthy his patronage, vnder whom he
hath publisht them, so the Author I know much offended
with M. Iaggard (that altogether vnknowne
to him) presumed to make so bold with his name.
These, and the like dishonesties I know you to
bee cleere of; and I could wish but to bee
the happy Author of so worthy a worke
as I could willingly commit to your
care and workmanship.
Yours euer
THOMAS HEYVVOOD.


