


THE GENERALL PRAECOGNITA OF GEOGRAPHIE.
GEOGRAPHIE is (according to Ptolomey) an imitation of the picture of the whole Earth. But since the methode I intend to followe cannot bee confined within the limits of this briefe definition, it is requisite I should propose another of more large extent, which may be correspo^dent to my purpose. Which before I will here set down, I will briefly explane certaine Geographicall notions, and rehearse some of her generall Praecognita. And since Ovid hath giuen mee so exact a methode, I cannot but make vse of it. The words are these with some little alteration. Met. lib. 2.

Terra, viros, vrbesque gerit frugesque ferasque,
Fluminaque haec super est coelifulgentis imago.
The earth beares men, Citties, Fruits, Beasts, and Flouds,
O're which hang's Heauen adorned with glittering studs.


TERRA.
We take not the earth simply in its owne nature as it is an element, for so it belongeth to Philosophy, but for the terrestriall Globe: so it is the subiect of Geographie, and is defined to bee a Sphericall body, proportionably composed of earth, and water.
The EARTH, is by the best writers* and among them by P^^cer, concluded to be 21600 miles in compasse; who withall coniecture, that if there were a path made round the earth, a nimble footman might easily goe it in 900 daies.
K^^k^rm.The earth is divided
in respect of vs men into the
Right hand.Left hand.In respect of it selfe into parts
Reall.Imaginarie.
To Poets which turne their faces toward the Fortunate Ilands (so often by them memorized) which are situate in the West; the North is the right hand; the South the left.
To Astronomers which turne their faces toward the South, because from that coast come the influences, and thence are obserued the motions of the Planets; the West is the right hand, the East the left.
To Geographers, who by reason of their obseruations of the eleuation of the Pole, turne their faces toward the North; the East is the right hand, the West the left.
To Augures (of old) and (in our daies) to Ministers who vsually at their sacrifices and prayers turne their faces toward the East; the South is the right hand, the North the left.
The reall parts are either
Continents.Ilands.
A Continent is a great quantity of land, not separated by the Sea, in which many kingdomes and principalities are confined, and conioyned.
An Iland (called in Latine Insula, quasi in salo) is a part of the earth enuironed round with waters, as Brittaine, Corsica, etc.
As for the Continent I haue nothing in particular to illustrate: But for Ilands (leauing the disputation of their being or not being before the Floud) there are foure causes to which they owe their originall;L. Gui^ciar^^^^. 1. An Earthquake, which worketh two waies; viz. when by it one part of a country is forcibl^ rent from the other; So was Euboea seuered from the maine land of Attica: or when some vehement and strong winde, or pi^it being shut in the ^arth, which is vnder the Sea, raileth, and as it were thrusts vp the resisting ground; to which cause such Ilands as are remote from any continent, must refer their b^ginnings. 2. Great Riuers at their entrie into the Sea carry with them abundance of grauell, durt, and weeds; which, if the sea bee not the more working, will in time settle to an Iland. So the corne which

Tarquinius sowed in the Campus Martius, being cut downe by the people and cast into Tiber, settled together and made the holy Iland: So the river Achelous caused he Ech nades, as anon we shall more at large declare. 2. The sea violently beating on some small Istmus, weareth it through, and turneth the Peninsula into a compleat Isle. Thus was Sicili^ diuided from Italie, Cyprus from Syria, England from France, and Wight from the rest of England. And 4^v, sometimes as it eateth and worketh on some places, so it voluntarily leaueth and abandon^th others, wh^ch in time growe to be Ilands, and firme land vnder foot. So it is thought that the Isles of Zeland haue beene once p^rt of the maine Sea.Verstogan. And it is proued, because that the husbandmen in tilling and manuring the ground, finde sometimes Anchors here and there fixt, but very often the bones of huge and great fishes, which could by no other accident come thither. To the^e kinde of Ilands Pythagoras in Ovid alluding saith,
--vidi factas ex aequoreterras,Et procul a pelago conchae iac^ere marinae,Et v^tus inventa est in montibus anchora summis.Ovid. Met.O^ haue I seene that earth, which once I knewePart of the Sea: so that a man might viewHuge shells of fishes in the vpland ground,And on the mountaines tops old anchors found.
As concerning the situation of Ilands, whether commodious or not, this is my iudgement. I finde in Machiauell, that for a Citty whose people couet no Empire but their owne townes, a barren place is better then a fruitfull, because in such seats they are compelled to work and labour, by which they are free from idlenesse, and by consequence from vitiousnesse: but for a citty whose inhabitants desired to enlarge their confines, a fer^^le place was more to be chosen then a sterile; as being more able to nourish multitudes of people. The like I say of Ilands. If a Prince desire rather to ke^pe then augment his Dominions, no place sitter for his abode then an Iland, as being by it se^fe and nature sufficiently defensible: But if a king be minded to adde continually vnto his Empire, an Iland is no fit seat for him; because partly by the vncertainty of winds and seas, partly by the longsomenesse

of the waies, he is not so well able to supply and keep such forces as he hath on the continent. An example hereof is England, which hath euen to admiration repelled the most puissant Monarch of Europe; but for the causes aboue named cannot shew any of her winnings on the firme land, though shee hath attempted and atchieued as many glorious exploits as any country in the world.
The Continent and Iland are subdiuided into
Peninsula.Istmus.Prom^ntorium.
Peninsula, quasi pene insula, is a tract of land, which being almost encompassed rou^d by water, is ioyned to the firme land by some little Istmus: as Pelopon^esus, Tauriea, and Per^ana.
Istmus, is that little narrow necke of land which ioyneth the Peninsula to the Continent, as the straights of Dariene in Peru, and Corinth in Greece.
Promontorium, is a high mountaine which shooteth it selfe into the Sea, the outmost end of which, is called a Cape, as the Cape of good hope in Africke, etc.
The other reall parts of the earth, as Mountaines, Vallies, Fields, Plaines, and the like, I will not stand to define, since they are knowne even to infants.
The Imaginary parts of the earth are such, which not being at all in the earth, must yet be supposed to be so, for the better teaching and learning this science; and are certaine circles going about the earth answerable to them in heauen in name.
K^^k^r^s.These circles are either the
GreaterLesser
in both which there are 360 degrees, which in the greater circles are greater then those in the lesser; and every degree in the greater is 60 miles.
The greater circles are either
Immutable as the Aequator.Mutable as the
Meridian.Horizon.
The Aequator is a greater circle going round about the terrestriall Globe from East to West. It passeth through Habassia, Sumatra, and Guiana. The vse of it is to shew the latitude of any Towne, Promontory, etc. Now the latitude is the distance

of a place, South or North from the Aequator or middle of the world; and must be measured by the degrees in the Meridian.
The Meridian is a greater circle rounding the earth from pole to pole. There are many Meridians according to the diverse place in which a man liueth, but the chiefe and first Meridian passeth through the Ilands called Azores. The vse of it is to shew the longitude of any place. Now the longitude of a citty, Cape, etc. is the distance of it East and West from the first Meridian, and is vsually measured by the degrees of the Aequator.
The Horizon is a greater circle, designing so great a space of the earth, as a quick sight can ken in an open field. The vse of it is to discerne the diverse risings and settings of the starres.
The lesser circles either are
Noted with some name as
Tropicall
of Cancer.of Capricorne.Polare, either
Articke.Antarticke.Noted with no name, and are the Paralels.
The Tropicke of Cancer (so called of the celestiall signe Cancer) is distant from the Aequinoctiall 23 degrees northward, and passeth through Barbarie, India, China, and Noua Hispania.
The Tropick of Capricorne equally distant from the Aequator southward, passeth through Aethiopia inferior, and the midst of Peruana. And this is to be obserued in these Tropickes, that when the sunne is in the Tropicke of Cancer, our daies are at the longest; and when he is gone backe to the Tropicke of Capricorne, the dayes are at the shortest: the first they call the Summer, the last the Winter solstice; the first hapning on St Barnabies day in Iune: the last on St Lucies in December.
The Articke circle (so called, for that it is correspondent to the circle in heauen called the Beare, in Greek Arct^s) is distant from the Tropicke of Cancer 45 degrees; it passeth through Norway, Muscovie, Tartarie, etc.
The Antarticke circle (because opposite to the other) is as much distant from the Tropicke of Capricorne, and passeth through Terra australis incognita. The vse of these foure circles

is to describe the Zones.
Dodon^usThe Zones are spaces of earth, included betwixt two lesser circles. They are in number fiue, one ouer-hot, two ouer-cold, and two temperate.
The ouer-hot, or Torrid Zone, is betwixt the two Tropickes, and continually scorched with the presence of the Sunne.
The two ouer-cold, or Frigid Zones, are situate between the two Polare circles and the very Poles, continually wanting the neighbourhood of the Sunne.
The two temperate Zones, are betwixt the Tropick of Cancer and the Articke; and twixt the Tropicke of Capricorne and the Antarticke circles; enioying an indifferency betweene heat, and cold: so that the parts next the Torrid Zone are the hotter; and the parts next the Frigid Zone are the colder.
These fiue Zones are disposed according to the order of the Zones in heauen.

Ovid. Met.Vtque duae dextrae coelum, totidomque sinistra
Parte s^cant zonae, quinta est ardentior illis:
Sic onus inclusum numero distinxit eodem
Cura Dei, totidemque plagae tellure premuntur.
Quaerum quae media est, non est habitabilis aest^;
Nix tegit alta duas; totidem inter vtramque locauit,
Temperiemque dedit mista cum frigore flamma.
And as two zones doe cut the heauens right side,
And likewise other two the left divide;
The midst in heat exc^eding all the rest:
Euen so it seem'd to the Creator best,
That this our world should so diuided be,
That with the heauens in Zones it might agree*
The midst in heat, the outward most in cold
Exceed, and none to dwell in them are bold,
Betwixt these two extreames, two more are fixt,
Where heat with cold indifferently is mixt.

K^ckerm.Parallels called also Aequidistants, circle the earth from East to West, and are commonly tenne degrees asunder. Such are the Parallels which are set downe in our Mappes and Globes. But there are another sort of Parallels, two of which goe to a Clime.

These are called Artificiall Paralels, because they shew the differences of the artificiall daies. They are of vnequall breadth, as you shall see in the table following. The vfe of these latter Parallels, is to shew the Climats.
A Clime is a space of the earth comprehended between two Parallels, or three lesser innominate circles: they serue to distinguish the length and brevity of the daies in all places. For vnder Aequator, the dayes are of the iust length of twelue houres; but after, in every clime they increase the length of hal^e an home, so that there are numbred 48 Parallels, or 24 Climats before the dayes extend to 24 houres of length; which once attain'd, they increase by weeks and months, vntill they come to the length of halfe a yeare: wee therefore are to reckon 24 climats Northward, and as many Southward. The climes toward the north were formerly knowne by the peculiar names, as Di^ M^roes, Dia Sienes, etc. and the climes toward the South by the same names, only with the addition of Anti, as Anti Dia Meroes, and Anti Dia Sienes. Indeed the ancient Cosmographers made but 7 Climes, and some 9; neither needed they to adde more, since they knewe not the extent of the habitable world toward each Pole, so exactly as now we doe.
Now because the climes are not of an equall latitude or extent, for which cause it is impossible to comprehend the nature of them in any rules generall or particular: I haue inserted this insuing Table, taken partly out of Clanius on Sacrobosco; and partly out of Mr Hues discourse of the vse of the Globes. It is divided into 7 columns. In the first is shewed what climes are inhabited by the Amphiscij, Heteroscij, and Periscij tearms which wee will presently expound: In the second is set downe the number of the climes themselues. In the third the number of the Parallels. In the fourth the length of the dayes in summer. In the fift the distance of every Climat and Parallel from the Aequator. In the sixt, the breadth and extent of every climat in it selfe. And in the seauenth, the name of the place through which the midst of the three circles, whereof every clime consisteth, doth passe.
*Pag. 7. The Table of the Climes.
The second part of the terrestriall Globe is the WATER, which making together with the earth but one Globe, is yet in situation higher then it. This is apparant, 1. Because it is a body not so heavy. 2. It is obserued by Saylers, that their ships fly faster to the shore then from it; whereof no reason can bee giuen, but the heighth of the water aboue the land. 3. To such as stand on the shore, the Sea seemeth to swell into the forme of an hill, till it putteth a bound to their sight. That the Sea houe^ing thus ouer the earth doth not ouerwhelme it, must be attributed to him only, Who hath made the waters to stand on a heap, who hath set them a bound which they shall not passe, nor turne againe to couer the earth. The other affections or properties of Sea, as motion, saltnesse, and the like, I willingly omit, as pertaining rather to Philosophers.
The SEA or WATER is diuided into
1. Oceanus,2. Mare,3. ^retum,4. Sinus.
Oceanus, the Ocean, is that generall collection of all waters, which environeth the world on euery side, according to that of the Poet in his Metamorphosis, lib. 1.

Tum freta diffudit, rapidisque tumescere ventis
Iussit, and ambitae circund we littora terrae:
He spred the Seas, which then he did command
To swell with windes, and compasse round the land.

Mare, the Sea, is a part of the Ocean, to which wee cannot come but through some streight, as Mar^ Mediterraneum.
These two take their names,
Either from the adjacent places, as the Brittish Ocean, the Carpathian Sea.Or from the first discouerer, as Mare Magellanicu^.Or from some remarkeable accident, as Mare Rubrum, from the colour of Sands, etc.
Fretum, a streight, is a part of the Ocean restrained within narrow bounds, and opening a way to the Sea: as the Streights of Gibralter, Hellespont, etc.
Sinus, a creeke or Bay, is a crooked shore, thrusting out (as it were) two armes, to embrace the louely presence of the Sea: as Sinus Persicus, or Corinthiacus.



VIROS.
The Earth thus being described, it is necessary wee should speake somewhat of the Lord of the Soyle, viz. Man; who was created last of all, as that creature in whose constitution the perfections of all the rest were vnited. This Epitome of the great Volume of Nature, borroweth from the Angels soule, from the brute Animals sense, from Plants life, from other creatures bignesse: and aboue all inferiours is endowed with this prerogatiue,
Pronaque cum spectent animalia catera terram,Meta. lib. 1.Os homini sublime dedit, coelumque videreIussit, and erectos ad sydera tollere vultus.And where all beasts looke downe with groueling eye,He gaue to man lookes mix't with Majesty,And will'd him with bold face to view the Skie.
Men thus one by originall, are of diuerse complexions of body, and conditions of mind, according to the diuerse climates of the Earth.

O see how full of wonders strange is Nature,Du. Bar^.
Sith in each climate, not alone in stature,
Strength, colour, haire; but that men differ doe
Both in their humors, and their manners too.
The Northerne man is faire, the Southerne foule,
That's white, this blacke; that smiles, and this doth scoule.
Th'ones blith and frolicke, th'other's dull and froward*
Th'ones full of courage, th'other a fearefull coward, etc.

The Northerne man is more strong, the Southerne more politicke; the Northerne more able, and the Southerne more couetous of veneriall combats, etc. Men also are (according as they are treated of in Geographie) diuided either in respect of their shadow,Dodonaeus. into Amphiscij, Periscij, Heteroscij: or in respect of their site and habitation, into Antocci, Perioeci, and Antipodes.
Amphiscij are such as dwell betweene the two Tropickes, so called, because their shadowes tend both wayes: sometimes, (when the Sunne is North) to the South; sometimes (when the Sunne is South) to the North*
P^riscij are such as dwell beyond the Polare Circles, so called, because their shadowes are on all sides of them.
Heteroscij are such as dwell in either of the two temperate Zones; so called, because their shadowes reach but one way; viz. in our Zone to the North onely, in the other to the South onely.
Antoeci are such as dwell vnder the same Meridian, and the same Latitude or parallel, equally distant from the Aequator: the one Northward, the other Southward; the dayes in both places being of a length; but the ones Summer being the others Winter.
Perioeci are such as dwell in the same parallel, on the same side of the Aequator, how distant soeuer they be East and West; the season of the yeare, and the length of dayes being to both alike, and the ones midnight, the others noone.
Antipodes are such as dwell* feet to feet, so as a right line drawne from the one vnto the other, passeth from North to South through the center of the world. These are distant ^80 degrees, which is halfe the compasse of the earth. They differ in all things, as seasons of the yeare, length of dayes, rising and setting of the Sunne, with the like.
In the men moreouer wee will consider Religion (being the soule of life, and the life of the Soule) then their dispositions and customes.


VRBES.
We haue brought man into the world, and cannot but afford him house-roome; wh^ch at first was very meane and vnfurnished: for so saith Ovid, M^t. 1.

--Domus a trafuerunt,
Et densi fiutices, and iuncta cortice v^rga.
Their houses were but hollow caues, and thickes
Of bushie heaths, and hurdles made of stickes.

Many of these houses joyned together, made a Vi^us or street; two or three Vici made a Pagus, or Borough; and two or three Pagi a Towne or City; of whose magnificence and greatnes, Boterus assigneth many causes, we will onely rehearse the principall.


1. First then there is required to the magnificence of a city, a navigable riuer, or easie passage by Sea; by which there may be a continuall concourse of all kind of Merchants, as now at Venice, Amsterdam, London, Constantinople.
2. The Palace of the Prince; for Vbi Imperator, ibi Roma, and where the Court is, there will continually be store of young Nobles to buy, and Tradesmen to sell vsuall commodities: as now Madrid in Spaine, growne from a meane Village, to a populous City, only by the Kings Court.
3. The residence of the Nobility which raiseth a City with stately and beautifull buildings: hence the Cities of Italy excell ours, their Nobles and Gentrie still liuing in the Cities, ours in the Villages, and priuate houses.
4. The Seate or Tribunal of Iustice, which inuiteth Lawyers and their Clients in abundance, to the great inriching of a City; as the Parliamentarie Cities in France doe euidently testifie, and Spiers in Germanie.
5. Publique schooles of good literature, which summon the youth of the adjoyning Countries (as it were) to make their personall appearance, to the great benefite of a towne, as Paris well knoweth, and other townes haue felt.
6. Immunities from taxes and the like oppressions, which draw men from all quarters to inhabite there; their income being in such places greatest, their priuiledges most, and disbursing least; as in Naples, Florence, and Venice: which being almost desolate by a plague, were againe very suddenly peopled, by granting immunities to all commers.
7. Opinion of Sanctity, whether it be for relickes of Saints, for holy shrines, for the residence of some famous man, or for the seat of Religion, is not the least benefit for the inriching and inlarging of a citie: people (I meane the superstitious Papists) gr^edily hunting after these sights and novelties. Thus the Reliques at Aken and T^^ers, the pilgrimages to St Iago and Lore^to, the habitation of that famous Cardinall Boromeo at Millaine, and the seate of the Popes at Rome haue bin the cause that the first cities haue bin much beautified, the last not ruined. So in former times there came so many from the farthest

coasts of France and Spaine vnto Rome to see Titus Liviu^* that St Hierome elegantly saith,En Praefat. ad Biblia. Quos ad sui contemplationem Roma non traxerat, unius huius hominis fama perduxit: qui iam urbem tantam ingressi, aliud extra urbem quaererent.

There are many other secundarie causes, as commodity of conduct, pleasantnesse of site, fruitfulnesse of soyle, and the like; which much further the populousnesse, riches, and flourishing beauty of Cities.
For a generall example we need not go farre. Worcester hath a pleasant site, and fruitfull soyle, Bristoll a commodious Hauen, Oxford is a famous Vniuersity, and Yorke is a seat of Iustice; yet are all but of a meane compasse. But London hauing al the requisite conditions, lifteth vp a head of maiestie as high aboue the rest, as the Cypresse trees aboue the low shrubbes.


FRVGES.
Our most prouident and glorious Creator, so furnished Countries with seuerall commodities, that amongst all there might be sociable conversation; and one standing in need of the other, all might be combined in a common league, and exhibite mutuall succours.

Bart. Col.Hence come our Sugars from Canary Iles,
From Candie Currants, Muskadels and Oyles:
From the Moluccoes Spices: Balsamum
From Aegypt: Odours from Arabia co^e;
From India Gums, rich drugs and Ivorie:
From Syria Mummie: black red Ebonie
From burning Chu^: from Peru Pearle and Gold:
From Russia Furres to keep the rich from cold:
From Florence silkes: from Spaine fruit, Saffron, Sackes:
From Denmarke Amber, Cordage, Firres, and Flax:
From Flaunders and France, Linnen, Wood, and Wine:
From Holland Hoppes: Horse from the bankes of Rhine:
From England Wooll: All Lands, as God distributes,
To the worlds treasure pay their sundrie tributes.

This abundance of all countries in euery thing, and defect of euery Country in most things, maintaineth in all Regions, and euery Prouince, a most strict combination. So that as in the body

of the little world, the head cannot say to the foot, nor the foot to the head, I stand in no need of thee: so in the body of the great world, Europe cannot say to Asia, or Asia to Africk, I want not your commodities, or am defectiue in that, of which thou boasteth of an abundance.


FERAS.
Nature neuer shewed her selfe so exact a mistresse in her art, as in the framing and moulding vp that infinit number of strange and vnheard of Beasts, the rehearsall of whom, though not necessary, yet cannot but be ornaments vnto a Geographicall Treatise, and are (as it were) a dressing and tricking vp Nature in her Holy-day colours.


FLVMINA.
Riuers are said to be ingendred in the hollow concauities of the Earth,Magirus. and deriue both their birth and continuall sustenance from the Aire; which penetrating the open chinks or Chasma's of the Earth, and congealed by the extreame cold of that Element, dissolues into water (as we see the Aire in Winter nights to be melted into a pearlie dew, sticking on our glasse windowes) and being growne to some quantity, will) like Annibal in the Alpes) either find a way, or make a way to vent its superfluity. This beginning is seconded by the Ocean, which running through the hidden passages of the Earth, joyneth it selfe with this aeriall vapour, and continueth the begun current. This Seawater (though in it selfe of a salt and brackish sauour, yet passing through diuers windings and turnings of the Earth, is depriued of all vnpleasantnes: and by how much the Spring-heads of riuers are remote from the Sea, by so much are their waters affected with a delightfull rellish. Riuers hauing thus entred themselues in a good course, are neuer without the assistance of neighbouring springs and riuers, by whose addition they augment their waters, till they dischannell themselues into the Sea. Now there is of riuers a treble vse. First, that out of them, drink may be afforded to man and beast. Secondly, that running through the Earth, as blood through the body, by interlacing it, and sometimes ouerwhelming it, it might make the Earth able to produce those fruits which are necessary for the life of

man. The last vse of riuers is easiues and speedines of conduct, and hereto are required foure conditions. First the depth; because deep waters sustain the bigger burdens, and on them navigation is more safe. Secondly pleasantnes, whereby the passage is easie both with the streame and against it; whereas in riuers of a violent current, or in such as fall down by great locks or cataracts, the sailing or towing vp the water is as dangerous, as laborious. Thirdly, the thicknes of the water; for by how much the more slimie and grosse a water is, by so much can it carry the heauier burdens. So Tiber a riuer of more fame then depth, or bredth, is better for navigation by reason of its fatnes, then the pure and thinne waters of the large and excellent riuer Nilus, Fourthly, the broadnes of the channell, that ships and other vessels may conveniently winde and turne, and giue way to each other. Some of the old Philosophers reputed this conduct so dangerous, that one of them being asked, whether the liuing or the dead were the greater number, would not answere, because he knew not in which ranke to place such as were at Sea. And Cato Maior thought that men neuer committed greater folly in their liues, then in venturing to goe by water, when they might haue gone by land. I am none of that sect, yet I cannot but hold with him that said, dulcissima est ambulatio prope aquas navigatio iuxta terram.
The chiefe riuers of Europe are Danubius and the Rhene; of Africa, Nilus and Niger; of Asia, Ganges and Euphrates; of America, Orenoque and Maragnon.


COELVM.
Heauen is defined to be the most simple body, or most free from an elementary commixture of any: it is transparent, sphaericall, and consisteth in perpetual motion. it vndergoeth a foursold consideration.
Viz. of
The naturall Philosopher, who treateth of Heauen, as of a naturall body, composed of matter and forme: and so it is the subiect of Aristotles book intituled, De Coelo.The Astronomer, who investigateth the reason of the variety of heauenly motions, the diuersity of

circles, asterismes, risings and settings of Starres, and the like.The Astrologer, who discourseth of the variety of constellations, planeticall aspects, disposing of the houses, and by these and their dispositions, conjectureth of future occurrences.The Geographer, who medleth with the Heauens, because on their motions depends the being or not being of all inferiour bodies; and for that the Earth hangeth in the midst of it, like Architas or Archimedes Pigeon, equally poized with its own waight.
Hauing thus briefly and rudely, as I must confesse, glided ouer these generall notions of Geographie, I will now set down my promised definition.
GEOGRAPHIE is a description of the Earth by her parts and their limits, situations, inhabitants, cities, riuers, fertility, and obseruable matters, with all other things annexed therunto. The worth of this science is apparent, if you consider its
Species, or seuerall kindes.Vtilities or profits.
The Species are
Hydographie; which is the delineation of the Sea by her seuerall names, promontories, creeks, and affections, as also of springs and riuers.Topographie* which is the description of a particular place, be it Town, City, or Village.Chorographie, which is a deciphering of any whole Region, Kingdome, or Nation, and is twofold,viz.
Ancient by Tribes and Families, as Germany was diuided between the Chatti, Ch^rusci* Suevi, Tencteri etc.Moderne, into S^^e^ and Prouinces; as Germany now is into Franconie, Saxony, Suevia, Bava^ia etc.
The Vt^lities of Geography, though many in number, are reduced to fine, such
as appertaineTo Mercature and Nauigation.To Astronomy, which by this is informed of the appearance

of diuers starres in diuers places, etc.To Statesmen, which out of this fountaine, draw the knowledge of their Princes bounds, and his neighbours incroachings, etc.To Physick, which is hereby able to know the diuersity of temperatures in different climes, the nature of Simples, and where their growth is most naturall, etc.To History both Diuine and Humane, that we may know in what place euery particular action hath bin effected: for the knowledge of the place, crowneth the delight of the enterprise.



THE GENERALL PRAECOGNitA OF HISTORY.
AS Geography without History, hath life and motion, but at randome, and vnstable; so History without Geography, like a dead carkasse, hath neither life nor motion at all, and as the exact notice of the place addeth a satisfactory del^ght to the action: so the mention of the action, beautifieth the notice of the place. Geography therefore, and History, like the two fire-lights Castor and Pollux, seene together, crowne our happines, but parted asunder, menace a shipwrack of our content; and are like two sisters intirely louing each other, and not without (I had almost said impiety) great pitty to be diuided: so as that which Sr Philip Sidney said of Argalus and Parthenia,
Her being was in him alone,And she not being he was none.
I may justly say of these two Gemini, History and Geography.
Before we come to the definition of History,Pezelius, it is requisite we should distinguish it from such as at first blush doe challenge this name, and then to diuide it into its subordinate Species.
The Treatises to whom this name is generally giuen, and from which History is indeed really distinct, are Commentaries, 2. Annals, 3. Diaries, and 4. Chronologies.

1. Commentaries set down a naked continuance of the euents and actions, without the motiues and designes, the counsels, speeches, occasionsa, nd pretexts, with other passages: so that Caesar modestly rather then truly, applied the name of Commentary, to the best History in the world; though that Archcriticke Lipsius call them, nuda and simplex narratio. His reason is, Commentaria enim sunt, whereby you may perceiue the fe^low had read the title: and nihil pollicentur praeter nomen, by which it seemes, he looked no further. The worth of this History hath a more sacred Advocate,Basilicon Doron. euen our dread Soueraigne, who exhorting his Son to the study of Historie, aboue all prophane Writers commendeth him to his reading, both for the sweet flowing of the stile (I can vse no better words then his own*) and the worthinesse of the matter it selfe. For I haue euer (saith he) bin of the opinion, that of all Ethnick Emperours, or great Captaines that euer were, he hath farthest excelled both in his practise, and in his precepts in martiall affaires.
2. Annals are only a bare recitall of the occurrents hapning euery yeare, without regard had to the causes, and with a generall neglect of Historical ornaments: so that Tacitus named his worthy book much amisse.
3. Diaries containe (as the name importeth) the particular actions of euery day, now not vsed but by Princes in their journeyes, and trauellers in their voyages.
4. Chronologies are only bare supputations of the times, without any regard of the acts then happening, such are the Chronologies of Funccius, Scaliger, and Helvicus. Of which last man, the incredible paines he hath taken in, and the infinite proficiencie which he hath brought vnto this study: I cannot but giue that excellent testimony which Paterculus affordeth

Ouid, Perfectissimus est in forma operis sui.

But History is as it were a quintessence extract out of those 4 Elements, borrowing from them all somwhat to beautifie her selfe withall; especially from Annals, time; from Commentaries, matter; and from Chronologies consent of times, and Coetanity of Princes Hauing thus gotten matter to worke on, and time in which she may effect her enterprises, she addeth of her own store, whatsoeuer ornaments are deficient in the rest, and maketh her selfe complete in euery particular.
Hauing thus distinguished History from its Cognata, it remaineth we should diuide it into its subordinate Species.
Histories are either of the
Greater World,Lesser World, or of man that (...).
Freigij Synopsis.The former is
Vniuersall, of the World, and all things in it; this is Cosmography, and is best handled by Pliny in his Naturall History, etc.Particular
Of Heauen and its affections, this is Astronomie, and is beholding to Aratus and Ptolomey, etc.Of the Earth and her parts; this is Geography, and set forth by Strabo, Mela, etc.
The latter tell
The inward works of man, as his opinions touching Religion or Philosophy, whose History is compiled by Diogenes Laertius, etc.The outward workes which are
Manners, Customes, and Lawes, these belong to Policy, and Statesmen.Actions
Of the tongue
Of some length, and such are Orations and Speeches.Succinct
Of one man, and are called Apothegmes.Of many, and are called Proverbs, digested best by ErasmusOf the hand, which branch themselues
Into two parts; being
Either'of one man alone; such Histories are called Liues, and are best done by Plutarch.Or of many, whose History is
Vniversall, belonging to the whole in generall, with relatio^ to the particular, or such of the^ as are of note.Particular
Ecclesiasticall, which describeth the Acts of the Church, her beginning, increase, decrease, restoring, and continuance.Ciuil, which relate the occurre^ces of co^mo^wealths, their beginnings, etc.
Hauing thus proposed a generall scheme of Histories, and shewed who deserue the greatest applause in penning the first; I will also name such as haue inlightned our knowledge with the relations of the three last.

THE BEST WRITERS OF GENERALL HISTORIE.

1 Moses from the beginning of the World,Bodinus meth. hist. till the confusion of tongues: he liued before Christs nativity 1519 yeares, in the yeare of the World 2443.
2 Berosus a Chaldaean, from the beginning of the World, till Sardanapalus death. Clar. 3630.
3 Trogus Pompeius, epitomized by Iustin, from Ninus to Nero. A.C. 150
4 Diodorus Siculus, till the time of Caesar A.M. 3922.
5 Eusebius, from Adam to the yeare of Christ, 300. Cl. 312.
6 Beda from Adam, to the yeare 700. Clar. 730.
7 Zonaras from Adam to the yeare 1117. Clar. 1120.
8 Abbas Vspergensis from Adam, to Frederick the 2d. Cl. 1229
9 Philippus Bergomensis supplementum supplementi Chronicorum, to the yeare 1503.
10 Carion augmented by Melancthon, to the yeare 1255.
11 Paulus Iovius from the yeare 1494, to the yeare 1540.
12 Augustus Thuanus from the yeare 1543, to the yeare 1607.
13 Sleid^n de quatuor Imperijs, most excellently commentated on by Christoph. Pezelius, and extended to the yeare 1616.
14 Sebastian Munster a Cosmographicall Historian, of all the World, but especially of Germany, till the dayes of Charles 5.
15 The History of the World, composed by Sr Walter Raleigh, a man of whom that may justly be verified which was attributed by Velleius to Scipio Aemilianus, Semper aut belli, aut pecis inservijtartibus, semper inter arma aut studia versatus: aut corpus periculis, aut animum disciplinis exercuit. As for the booke when it meeteth with a judicious and vnderstanding Reader, it will speak for it selfe. For my part I onely say what Martial spake of Salust, it is Primus in Historia.



THE BEST WRITERS OF ECCLESIASTICALL HISTORIE.

First of the Iewes
The Word of God in the old Testament. 2. Philo Iudaeus, 3 Flavius Iosephus, 4. Egesippus from the Maccabees till the yeare of Christ 72. Clar. 130.Bodinus ib.


2. Of the Christians.
The new Testament. 2. Eusebius, Socrates, and Evaegrius for the first 600 yeares after Christ. 3. M. Fox in his Acts and Monuments, till the yeare 1558. Sleidan in his Ecclesiasticall Commentaries fro^ the yeare 1517, in which Luther began to batter down the walls of Popery, till 1560. 5. Historia Magdeburgensis, till the yeare 1200. 6. Platina de vitis Pontificum. 7. Philip Morney, Du Plessis, a History of the Papacie.


3. Of the Heathens.
Irenaeus B. of Lyons adversus Gentes. 2. Clemens Alexandrinus. 3. Arnobius adversus Gentes. 4. Lactantius Firmianus de falsa religione. 5. Oresius against the Pagans. 6. Giraldus de Dijs omnium gentium. 7. Iohn Gaulis de religione veterum.



THE BEST WRITERS OF CIVILL HISTORY.
Bodinus.Of the Assyrians, Chaldaeans, Medes, Persians, and Parthians:

Herodotus. 2. Ctesias Cnidius. 3. Xenophon. 4. Berosus. 5. Metasthenes a Persian. 6. Manothon an Aegyptian. 7. Hegesippus, 8. Procopius.

Of Greece.
Dictys Cretensis de Bello Troiano. 2. Herodotus, whose history containeth 211 yeares.Bodinus. 3. Thucydides from the flight of Xerxes, where Herodotus left writing of Greece, to 90 yeares farther. Clar. A M. 3622. 4. Xenophon beginning where Thucydides left, continued 43 yeares. Clar. 3608. 3. Gemistus continued Xenophons relations: 6. Diodorus Siculus followed Gemistus, and wrote till the daies of Alexander, Clar. 3922. 7. Procopius rerum sub Iustiniano. Clar. A.C. 540. 8. Zonaras from Constantine to Alexius Comnenus, anno 1113. 9. Nicetas from Alexius Comnenns, ad annum 1203. 10. Nicephorus from Theodorus Lascaris, to the ruine of the Constantinopolitan Empire.


Of Rome and Italy.
The Writers of the Roman Histories follow in this order Livy.Bodinus. 2. Florus. 3. Sueton. 4. Tacitus. 5. Spartianus. 6. Capitolinus. 7. Lampridius. 8. Herodian. 9. Cuspinianus. 10. Marcellinus. 11. Eutropius. 12. Prosper Aquitanicus, who endeth in the yeare 447. when Gensericus took Rome, after which, euery Prouince hauing peculiar Princes, had also peculiar Historiographers. 1. Platina for Rome and her Popes, till the yeare 1472. 2. Sabellicus and Bembus for Venice. 3. Pontanus and Collenutius for Naples. 3. Machiavel for Florence. 4. Vergerius for Mantua. 5. Stephanus for Millaine. 6. Bracellus for Genoa. 7. Paulus Diaconus for Lombardie, and 8 for them all, from the yeare 494. to 1536. learned Guicciardine.


Of Germany and her neighbours.
For Germany in generall,Bodinus. Cornolius Tacitus. 2. Beatus Rhenanus. 3. Munster. 4. Otto Frisingensis. 5. Luitprandus. 6. Ave^tinus. But in particular. 1. for Bohemia, Aeneas Sylvius, or Pope Pius Secundus, and Dubravius. 2. for Austria, Wolfgangus Lazius, and Bartolinus. 3. for Hungary, Ioh. Turotius, Ant. Bonfinius, and Melchior Soiterus. 4. for Poland, Cromerus and Calimachus. 5. for Sclavonia, Helmoldus. 6. for Denmarke, Sweueland, and

Norway, Crantzins, and Saxo Grammaticus. 7. for the Gothes, Olaus Magnus, Procopius, Agathias Smyrnaeus, Sidonius Apollinaris, Idacius, Iornandes, Aurelius Cassiodorus, and Leonard Aretine. 8, for Saxony, Crantzius, and Witikind 9. for the Low-Countries, Gerhardus Noviomagus, and Ioh. Petit. 10. for Prussia, Erasmus, Stella. 11. for Helvetia, Stumpsius and Simlerus.


Of France.
Caesar de bello Gallico. 2. Titius Parisiensis, from Pharamond to Henry the 2d. 3. Paulus Aemilius to Charles the 8th. 4. Gregory B. of Tours. 5. Froisardus de bellis Anglorum, and Francorum. 6. Philip Cominaeus, who together with Francis Guicciardine the Italian, are accounted the soundest and most vsefull of any of our moderne Historians, and nothing inferiour to Livy, Salust, or Tacitus. 7. Raymundus for Burgundie and its appendices, viz. Flanders, Holland, etc. 8. Iohn de Serres, extending from Pharamond to Lewis 12th.


Of Spaine,
Francis Tarapha from the beginning, till Charles the fifth. 2. Petrus Antonius. 3. Rodericus Valentinus. 4. Petrus Medina. 5. Damianus a Goes. 6. Marius Siculus. 7. The generall History of Spaine by Maierne a Frenchman. 8. Contestagio of the Vnion of Portugal with Castile. 9. Mariana.


Of the Turkes and Saracens.
Andreas Cambinus of the originall of the Turkes. 1. Leonicus Calchondyles, 2. Guilielmus Postellus. 3. Martinus Barletius, who writ also the life of that worthy Prince George Castriot, vulgo Scanderbeg 4. Paulus Iovius. 5. Knowles in his Turkish History. 6. Leo Af^r. 7. Henricus Dalmata. 8. Rupertus Monachus. 9. William B. of Tyre, these 4. last concerning the Saracens.


Of the Muscovites and Tartars.
Matthias a Michou, de Sarmatia Europea, and Asiatica. 2. Paulus Iovius de legatione Muscovitarum. 3. Sigismundus ab Hebersteine. 4. Paulus Venetus. 5. Haiton Prince of Armenia, de Imperio Tartarorum.


Of Africa and America.
Leo Afer. 2. Francisco Alvarez. 3. Aloyssius Cadamistus. 4. Acosta, the navigations of Columbus, Vesputius, Patritius, and

others: As Oviedus, Cortez, Gusman, Nonius, Gomara, Benzo, Lyrius, etc.


Of the Brittish Iles.
Gildas of Brittaine in generall. 2. Polydor Virgil of England, till Henry 8. a history sufficiently good, if not ouerladen with malicious or accidentary lyes. 3, Geofrie of Monmouths Catalogue of Brittish Kings, a Writer meerely fabulous. 4. Voluminous Stow, and Holingshead, full of confusion and commixture of vnworthy relations. 5. Speed delighting the eare, and not a little informing the mind. 7. Martin from William the Conquerour, to the death of Henry 8, a pithie and worthy Historiographer. For pieces of history (I meane histories of state, not of liues) we haue the reigne of Henry 7, excellently performed by that renowned Scholler the Lord Francis, Vicount S. Albans; the reigne of Richard the 3, by that great restorer of learning in those parts, Sr Th. Moore; the beginning of the preparatiues, to the reigne of Henry 4, by Sr Iohn Hayward; In former times the reignes of the first 7 Kings after the conquest, by Mathew Paris; and to end this bedroll, halfe the story of this Realme done by Master Daniel, of which I belieue that which himself saith of it in his Epistle, that there was neuer brought together more of the maine. Of Scotland I find Hector Boetius to be the true parallel of Ge^srie Monmouth; and Buchanan farre worse then Polydor Virgil. For Wales, Humfrey Lloyd, and Dauid Powell; and for Ireland, and the out-Iles, Giraldus Cambrensis. For them al Andrew du Chesne of the Countie of Touraine in France, who in his own tongue hath taken that paines in composing one body of story for all the Brittaine Iles and states, extending it to the yeare 1612. that neuer any of the natiues durst vndertake, or had hope to atchieue. But for all, and aboue them all, judicious M. Camden in his book intituled Britannia, wherein he hath giuen great light to histories already extant, and to such as future ages shall produce. And if he had taken in hand a plenary History of this Ile, or any one part thereof, it had been (I am sure) matchlesse. But I will suspend my judgment with that of the Historian,Paterculu^ Vivorum ut magna admiratio, ita censura est difficilis.
Thus much of the Authors of Vniuersall, Ecclesiasticall and



Ciuil history, a word or two only of Computation, and then to the Definition.
The two eyes of the body of a well-compacted History, are place and time; the former belongeth to Geography, the latter is the terminus of all Epoches in computation. Now an Aera or Epoche is the terminus a quo, from which euery reckoning of times takes its beginning. These haue among diuers Nations, bin as diuersly different, and as differently calculated by Chronologers, few of them agreeing among themselues in this point* For my part I follow Fr^igius,Fr^igius. who out of the foundest authors thus stateth them. The Christians make their Epoch^ the birth of Christ, which happned in the yeare of the World 3962; but this reckoning they vsed not till the yeare 600, following in the mean time the ciuill accompt of the Empire. The Mahumetans begin their Hegira (for so they tearme their Computation) from the returne of their Prophet to Mecha, after he was driuen thence by the Philarcha, which hapned Ao Chr. 617. The Grecians reckoned by Olympiads, the first of which is placed in the yeare of the world, 3187. but this account perishing vnder the Constantinopolitan Emperours, they reckoned by Indictions, euery Indiction containing 15 yeares, and the first beginning Ao C. 313. which among Chronologers is still vsed. The Romans reckoned first from the building of their City, which was A.M. 3213. and afterward from the 16. yeare of the Emperour Augustus A. M. 3936. which reckoning was vsed among the Spaniards, till the reigne of Ferdinand the Catholique. The Iewes had diuerse Epoches, as the Creation of the World in the beginning of time. 2. From the Vniuersall deluge Ao 1556. 3. From the confusion of tongues Ao 1786. 4. From Abrahams journey out of Chaldea into Canaan, Ao 2021. 5. From the departure of the children of Israel out of Egypt Ao 24^1. 6. From the yeere of Iubile Ao 2499. 7. From the building of Solomons Temple Ao 2^32. and 8. from the captiuity of Babylon Ao 3357. But rejecting the ^^st, we will in our historicall computation of time, vse only the two most ordinary Epochet, of the Worlds Creation, and Christs appearance in the flesh.
The name of History is deduced (...), id est, videre,

and doth properly intimate a relation of such remarkeable actions, at the performing of which, the Author was present. Apud veteres enim (saith Isidore in his Etyma) nemo scribebat historiam, nisi is qui interfuisset, and ea qua scribenda essent, vidisse^. But the customary vse of the word, hath now taught it a more ample signification. History being defined to be a memoriall or relation of all occurrents obseruable, hapning in a Commonwealth, described by the motiues, pretexts, consultations, speaches, and events, together with an especiall care had of time and place.
Cicero beautifieth History with these attributes, Lux veritatis, testis temporis, vitae magistra, nuncia vetustatis, and vitae memoriae; concerning which particle, I find these verses prefixed to a Chronicle of our state, written by M. Martin;
For though in these dayes miracles be fled,Yet this shall of good Histories be se'd,They call back time that's past, and giue life to the dead.
Beside these conditions,P^z^li^^. it is requisite that the relations should be absolutely true, neither swaruing to one side through malice, nor leaning to the other through affection; so that two things are requisite in an Historiographer, ^. a generous and resolute spirit: 2. An vpright and sincere conversation; that so hee may neither be daunted by a tyrannicall Prince, nor transported with partiality; that he might dare to deliuer all the truth with^ut feare, and yet not dare to relate any thing which is false through fauour.
Thus much of H^story, its distinctions, divisions, affections, authors, and properties: now only of its commodities, and so we will hoyse sayle for Europe.
Although to number vp the especiall delight and profit gathered from the reading of histories, be but as it were to light a Candle before the Sunne, and speake of such things as require no Rhetoricke to adorne them: yet I hope I shall no waies doe amisse in laying before you some of the chiefe. The profits then of History are these.

1 It is the rule of direction, by whose square we ought to rectifie our obliquities, and in this sense the Orator calleth it Magistra vitae.
2 It stirreth men to vertue, and deterreth them from vice, by shewing the glorious memory of the one, and stinking repetition of the other: but especially it keepeth many men of place and calling in a continuall feare of ill doing, knowing that their villanies shall there be laid open to the view of the vulgar. Let Tiberius be example.
3 It hath beene not onely the inventor, but the conseruer of all arts, such especially whose end consisteth only in action.
4 It informeth a mans minde in all particular observations, making him serviceable to his Prince and Countrie.
5 It is the best Schoolemaster of war, the teacher of Strata. gems, and giueth more directions then a whole Senate; Alexander learned of Achilles, Scipio of Xenophons Cyrus, and Selim the first of Alex: al which became valiant and politike captaines.
6 It is the Politicians best assistant and chiefe Tutor, who hence suck their obseruations and conclusions, and learne ability to rule both in peace and warre: who like Archimedes in his study, or Demosthenes in his gown, can more dangerously trouble their enemies, than the Syracusans and Athenians in armour.
7 It is most available to the study of Divinity, since the increase, originall, defects, restauration, and continuance of religion is a dependant on History, which also hath many other rare passages for the vnderstanding of the Text.
8 It is (lastly and least of all) the study which affordeth a man the greatest aid in discoursing, it delighteth the eare, contenteth the minde, and is endued with thousands varieties of pleasure mixt with profit, but these shall serue as a tast for the rest.






OF THE VVORLD: AND FIRST OF EVROPE.
THe WORLD is divided into two parts,
Vnknowne,Maginus. or not fully discouered, and it lieth either vnder the Articke, or vnder the Antarticke circle. The former is rather supposed then knowne; the latter a little knowne, and hath the names of Noua Guinea, Terra del fuego, P^ittacoru^ regio, Maletur, etc. of which in the end of this book.Knowne either
Anciently
Europe.Asia.Africa.Lately, as America.
EVROPE is ioyned to Asia by that space of earth between the heads of Tanais and Duina: Asia is ioyned to Africk by the Aegyptian Istmus: America is ioyned (as most coniecture) to none of them. Europe is separated from Asia by Duina, Tanais, Pal^^ Maeotis, Pontus, Propontis, Hellespont, and the Aegean, Asia is parted from Africa by the Red Sea, Africa from Europe, by the Mediterranean: Africa is greater then Europe; Asia then Africa; and America bigger then all.
They which haue taken a delight in resembling every particular countrie to things more obvious to the sight and vnderstanding,

haue likened EVROPE to a Dragon, the head thereof (forsooth) being Spaine, the wings Italie and Denmarke. In like manner they haue beene curiously impertinent in resembling France to a Lozenge or Rhomboides: Belgia to a Lyon, Brittaine to an Axe: Ireland to an Egge: Peloponnesus to a Plantane leafe: Spaine to an Oxe hide spred on the ground: Italy (which indeed holdeth best proportion) to a mans leg, with diuers the like phantasmes of a capricious braine: these countries no more resembling them, then pictures made when painting was in her infancie, vnder which they were faine to write, this is a Lion, and this is a Whale; for feare the spectators might haue taken one for a Cocke, and the other for a Cat.
K^ck^rm.EVROPE though the least (as being in length but 3800, in breadth but 1200 miles) is yet of most renowne: first because of the temperature of the ayre, and fertility of the foyle; secondly, from the study of all Arts, both ingenious and mechanicall: thirdly, because of the Romane and Greek Monarchies; fourthly, from the puritie and syncerenesse of the Christian faith: fiftly because we dwell in it, and so first place it.
EVROPE is diuided into Continent and Ilands; the Continent is subdivided into 1. Spaine. 2. France. 3. Italy. 4. Belgia. 5. Germanie. 6. Denmarke 7. Norway. 8. Sweden. 9. Muscovia. 10. Poland. 11. Hungarie. 12. Dacia. 13. Sclavonia and 14. Greece. The Ilands are also in generall, either dispersed in the 1. Aegean Sea. 2. the Ionian Sea. 3. the Adriatique. 4. the Mediterranean. 5. the Brittish. and 6. the Northerne Seas, of all which in the order and method, here and before proposed.
EVROPE is so called from Europa, daughter to Agenor, King of the Phoenicians, brought hither (as the Poets faine) by Iupiter in the shape of a Bull: but as Histories write, by a Cretan Captaine named Taurus, or in a shippe whose beake had wrought in it the figure of that beast.
Br^erwood.In these Countries aboue particularized, besides the Latine tongue, which is now rather scholasticall then nationall; and besides the Italian, French, and Spanish, being but as so many seuerall corruptions of the Latine; and besides the English, which is a compound of Dutch, Latine, and French: there are in all 14

mother tongues, which owe little or nothing to the Roman, viz: Irish spoken in Ireland, and the West of Scotland: 2. Brittish in Wales. 3. Cantabrian or B^scaine, nigh vnto the Cantabrian Ocean, and about the Pyrenean hills: 4. Arabique in the mountaines of Granada: 5. Finnique in Finland, and Lapland. 6. Dutch (though with different dialects) in Germanie, Belgia, Denmarke, Swethland, and Norwey. 7. Cauchian which the East-Freizlanders (or Cauchi) speake among themselues, for to strangers they speake Dutch. 8. Slavonish, whose extent wee will hereafter shew. 9. I^^yrian on the East side of Istria, and in the Isle of Veggia: 10. Greeke. 11. Hungarian, and 12. Epirotique in the greater and more mountainous parts of these countries. 13. Iazygian on the North side of Hungarie, betweene Dannbius and Tibiscus: and 14. Tartarian in the Taurica Chersonesus, and European seats of that people.
I had almost forgot the Etymologie of EVROPE according to Becanus, who thinking it vnmeet that Europe being first inhabited by the Gomerites or Cymbrians, should haue a Greeke name; maketh it Europe quasi Verhopp by the transposition of the two first letters; Ver forsooth signifying (though I knowe not in what language) excellent, and Hopp a multitude of people: because Europe containeth (oh the wit of man!) a multitude of excellent people.

OF SPAINE.
THe most Westerne countrie of the Continent of Europe,Hist. of Sp. is Spaine, inuironed on all sides with the Sea, except towards France; from which it is separated by the naturall strength of the Pyrenean mountaines, and the artificiall fortresse of Pampelune on the Northwest and Perpigna on the Southeast.
The figure of it is by Strabo compared to an Oxehide spred on the ground, whose necke being the Istmus which tieth it vnto France, is not of such breadth, but that in a cleare day one may discouer the Sea on both sides.
The Countrie hath beene in diuers ages diuersly named, as 1. Hesperia either from Hesperus a supposed King hereof, or

from Hesperus the euening Starre, vnder which it was supposed to be situate, as being the farthest Countrie Westward. 2. Iberia either from the famous riuer Iberus, or from the Iberi, inhabiting the Countrie in Asia, which we call Georgia. 3. Hispania, as their old Legends report, from Hispanus one of the Kings; but as the soundest iudgements agree, from Panus the Iberian Captaine, For the Grecians call it (...) Spania, as may bee proued in many places, that especially of the 15 to the Romans verse the 28, (...), I will come by you into Spaine. No doubt but from the Grecians the old Romans borrowed the name of Spania, which they often vsed, to which the Spaniards according to their custome adding E. (as in Escola, Escuda, etc.) made it Espania and now Hispania.
Grimston et Maginus.The whole circuit is 2480 Italian, or 1893 English miles. It is situate in the more Southernly part of the Northerne temperate Zone, and almost in the m^dd^st of the fourth and sixth C^i^ats, the longest day being fifteene houres in length.
Boterus reckoned the number of the Inhabitants, to be 8 millions of liuing soules, which computation may yet stand good. 1. If the heat of the Country vnfit for generation; 2. the barrennesse of the soyle vnfit for sustenance. 3. the number of Colonies planted in other kingdomes; and 4. The great warres of the last King, haue not d^minished them.
They are a mixt people descending from the Gothes, Sarracens, and Iewes:Hist. of Sp. from the Iewes they borrow superstition, from the Sarracens melancholy, from the Gothes desire of liberty. How the Gothes and Sarracens came in hither, shall be sh^wne in it's proper place. The Iewes were here placed, partly by Vlidor Vbit the Caliph, who sent hither 50000 families of Moores and Iewes: but principally by Adrian the Emperour, who hauing totally banished the Iewes from their natiue country, sent them to people this Region: the whole number of the^ which came hither being no lesse then 500000 men, women, and children. Which seuerall nations by seuerall marriages are in processe of time incorporate into one.Euphormionis Icon Anim. They are much giuen to women, impudent braggers, and extreamely prowd in the lowest ebbe of fortune; as appeareth by the poore Cobler on

his death-bed, who commanded his eldest Sonne comming to him for his last blessing, to endeauour to retaine the maiest^e worthie so great a familie; Memineris (said he) in mai^statem assurgere familia tua dignam. The same Author relateth another story to the like purpose. A wom^n of this Country, attended on by three of her bratts, went a begging from dore to dore. Some French Marchants trauelling that way, and pittying her case, offered her to take into their seruice the bigger of her boyes. But she, prowd though poore, scorning, as she said, that any of her linage should endure a prentiship, returned them this answere; Qui aut tu, aut ego, sciamus, in quae fata sit genitus? For ought that she or they knewe, her sonne (simply as he stood there) might liue to be king of Spaine. Not much vnlike to these is that tale of a Spanish Caualei^o, who being for some faults by him committed, whipped through the principall streets of Paris: and keeping a sober pace, was advised by a friend to make more hast that he might the sooner be out of his paine: but he halfe in choler replied That hee would not lose the least step of his pace for all the whipping in Paris. For indeed their gate is (Gennet-wise) very stately and maiesticall. But not to conceale their vertues and make our selues merry only at their follies, wherein all other nations beare more or lesse a share with them; they are questionlesse a people very graue in their carriages, and in offices of pietie very devout, to their King very obedient, and of their ciuill duties to their betters not vnmindfull. But that which in them deserueth the greatest commendations, is an vnmoued patience in suffering aduersities, accompanied with a setled resolution to ouercome them: a noble vertue, of which in their Indian discoueries they shewed excellent proofes: and receaued for it a glorious and a golden reward.
It is said, that the French are wiser then they seeme, and the Spaniards seeme wiser then they are; wherein they agree with many particular men of other nations, who carry the basest spirits vnder the prowdest lookes, and little found schollership vnder the most promising visages: and according to the Philosopher, Sapientes potius cupiunt videri and non esse,Aristotle. quam esse and non videri. In matters of warre the Spaniards are too slow and dull,

the French too headie and precipitate; the one loosing as many faire occasions by delaies, as the other ouerthroweth by too much hast: but betweene them both, they make one good Souldier; who according to the present opportunities, is to make vse of the spurre of courage; or the bit of respect.
Hist. of Sp.The women are sober, louing their husbands or friends; wonderfull delicate, curious in painting and perfuming: and though they haue wine in abunda^ce, yet are they not permitted to drink it; verifying therein the English prouerbe, that none are wors^ sh^d then the sho^makers wife. They were wondrous strong, and beyond beleefe patient in the throwes of childbed. Strabo telleth out of Possidonius, of a woman that being hired for haruest worke, felt her trauell comming on her; who because she would not lose her daies wages, withdrewe her selfe vnder a bush, where being eased of her burden, she returned from one labour to another.
Brerewood.The language hath much affinity with the Latine. Brerewood in his Enquiries teporteth that he hath seen a letter, euery word whereof was both good Latine and good Spanish. Merula shewes a Copy of the like, pag. 300. By reason of this consonancy with the Latine, the Spaniards call their language Romance. The other ingredients of this tongue are generally the Gotish, Arabique, and old Spanish; and in some places the French also: these people hauing made great conquests, and hauing had great negotiations in this countrie. It is said to bee a very loftie swelling speech, full of complement and courteship.
Hist. of Sp.The Country heretofore was very abundant in Mines, insomuch that it was neuer free from Rouers of al nations. And it is affirmed that Annibal out of one only Mine in the Country of the Turdetani (now part of Andaluzia) receaued 3000l daily. It is enriched also with Sackes, Sugars, Oyle, Mettals, Liquoras, Rice, Silke, Lamb-skinnes, Wooll, Corke, Rosen, Steele, Orenges, Raisons, and fruit of the like nature, which owe most of their being to heat. But in Corne which is the staffe of life, it is very defectiue, and receaueth from Italy, France, and Sicilie the greatest part of it. The Cattle hereof are neither faire nor many; so that their fare is for the most part on sallets and ^ruits

of the earth; every Gentleman being limited what flesh he shall buy for himselfe and his familie. When that worthy Souldier Sr Roger Williams heard a Spaniard foolishly bragging of his Country Sallets, he gaue him this answere, you haue indeed good s^wce in Spaine, but we haue dainty Beefes, Veales, and Muttons to eat with that sawee; and as God made Beasts to liue on the grasse of the earth, so he made man to li^e vpon them. And it is obseru'd that if a Spaniard haue a capon or the like good dish to his supper, you shall finde all the feathers scattered before his dore by the next morning.
For trauelling the Innes and Vents of this Country are very ill provided, insomuch that most men that would not goe supperlesse to sleepe, carry their prouision at their saddle bowes; and men of worth their bedding also. So poore and meane is the entertainement in these places.
Here liued in ancient times the Gyants Gerion and Cacus, which were queld by Hercules: and in the flourishing of the Romane Empire, Seneca the Tragoedian; and a Philosopher of the same name, a man of that happy memorie, that he could repeat 2000 names in the same order that they were rehearsed. Quintilian the Oratour, Lucian, and Martial, excellent in their kindes, and Pemponius Mela the Geographer. In the middle times Fulgentius, and Isidore Bishop of Sevill. And in our Fathers dayes Arias Montanus,Hist. of Sp. Osorius, Tostatus, Masius, etc. The principall Souldiers were Theodosius the Great, Bernard del Carpio, Cid Ruis Dias, Sancho the great of Navarre, Ferdinand the Catholique, Charles the Emperour, etc.
The Christian Religion was first here planted (as they say) by St Iames Anno 37. They were all constant to the Bishop of Rome, insomuch that in the sixt Councell of Tolledo, it was enacted that the King should suffer none to liue in his Dominions that professe not the Roman Catholike Religion; of which their King is so great a Patron, that a late Pope being sicke, and hearing divers moane his approaching end; vttered words to this effect, My life can nothing profit the Church, but pray for the king of Spaine as its chiefe supporter.Sands relations. For indeed the Kings of Spaine, hauing framed to themselues an hope of the Westerne Monarchie;

and finding no fitter means of enlarging their own te^poral, then by co^curring with the Pope in vpholding his spiritual Empire: haue linked the^selues most fast to that See. To this end they haue take^ vpo^ the^ to be the executioners of his exco^municatio^s, by which office Ferdinand the Catholike surprised Navarre; hoping in time to worke so vpon the rest of the interdicted states of Europe: which Monarchie of the Spaniard is by the Iesuites (who in all their perswasions couple, as one God, and one Pope, so one King) taught to be the only meanes to vnite the differences of the Church, and subdue that great enemy of religion the Turke. And though by this office the kingdome of Spaine and Popedome of Rome, be thus straightly combined; yet herein the Popes haue ouershot themselues, in that leaning so much to the Spaniard, and so immoderately increasing his dominion; they doe in a manner stand at his deuotion, and may peraduenture in the end bee forced to cast themselues into his armes as their good Lord and master. For certaine it is that the Spanish Agents haue openly braued the Cardinals, and told them that they hoped to see the day, wherein their King should offer to the Pope halfe a dozen to be made Cardinals, and hee not dare to refuse any: and that they themselues should choose no Pope but one of their masters naming. So great an inconuenience it is more then possible it may bee to the Popes, in making this Prince the one and only string to their bowe.
Hist. of Sp.The chiefe Riuers are 1. Tagus, celebrated for his golden sands, the head of it is in the mountaine Seira Molina neere to Cuenca, from the which it runneth by the citty Tolledo, and then smoothly gliding by the walls of Lisbon, doth pay his tribute to the Westerne Ocean. 2. Ana (now Guadiana) which rising about the same place, runneth afterward vnder the ground the space of 15 miles, and hence the Spaniards bragge, that they haue a bridge whereon 10000 cattle dayly feed. This is an accident common to many rivers, as to Mole a small riuer in Surrey, Erasinus in Greece, and Lycus in Anatolia, of which last thus Ovid.
Sic vbi terreno Lycus est epotus ^iatu,Existit procul hinc, alioque renaseitur ere.So Lycus swallowed by the gaping groundAt a new mouth farre off is rising found.
3. Ba^is (now Guadalquivir) which in the Arabique signifieth a great Riuer. This together with Guadiana augment the south Sea with their liquid currents. 4. Duerus which arising from the hills of Biscay runneth Westward. 5. Iberus, which hauing his head among the fame mountaines, runneth Eastward almost 400 miles, and is nauigable 200: the other I will hereafter specifie.
The chiefe hills are three, 1. Idubeda, Iubalda or Aurentius Sa^us, stretching from the Pyrenai towards Portugal. 2. Seira Morena, declining fro^ the midst of Spaine towards the streights of Gibraltar. A chaine of hills sufficiently famous, were it only in this that Cervanses the wit of Spaine, made it the sceane of of many the warlike exploits atchieued by the flower and creame of Knight errantrie,Brerewood. Don Quixot de la Mancha. And thirdly the Alpuxaras or Seira Nevada, which thwart the kingdome of Granada from East to West: high steepy hills, and among which the people to this day speake the Arabique tongue perfectly.
This kingdome was first inhabited by Tubal the sonne of Iaphet,Hist. of Sp. from whom to Gargarus Melicola, are numbred 25 kings; who lasted 988 yeares: the chiefe of which are said to haue beene, 1 Hesperus, who subduing also Italy, named both countries Hesperia; but so, that Italy was called Hesperia the greater; and Spaine, Hesperia the lesse. 2. Hispanus whence they conceit the name of Hispania to be deriued. 3. Tagus. 4. Baetus, and 5. Anus, whence the three famous Riuers in Spaine so called, must by all meanes be deriued. 6. Idubeda, god father no doubt to the great mountaine so called. 7. Sicileus from whom the Ile of Sicilie is said to take denomination. 8. Hispalus, who is reported to haue built the Citty Sevill or Hispalis. 9. Brigus the founder of Flavio Briga, and other Townes ending in Briga. 10. Lusus who gaue name to Lusitania or Portugall. The Catalogue of these Kings I desire no man to beleeue farther then that of our owne state from Brute to Cassibeline. As for the comming of Tubal hither, it is doubtleffe a meere vanity; though we deny not that the Spaniards are of the progenie of Tubal, as being

the descendants of the ^beri; whom Iosephus saith to haue beene anciently called Thobe^os: a name in which are all the radicall letters of Tubal, and not much differing f^om it in sound. Somewhat before the time of G^rga^us Melicola, the Iberians came in vnder Panus, and immediatly after his death, the country was diuided amongst many Princes and Commonweales, till the comming of the Carthaginians, for the space of nine hundred and odde yeares; in which time we finde nothing obseruable. The Romans first becomming Masters of it, diuided it into Vlteriorem,Maginus. lying from the riuer Iberus westward, and 2. Citeriorem betweene the Iberus and Pyrenean Hills. But having totally wrested it from the Carthaginians, they diuided it into. Tarraconensem, so cal^ed of Tarragon the Metropolis; containing Castile, Navarre, Arragon, Biscay etc. 2. Baetic^m, of the riuer Baetis running through it; comprehending, Granada, Andaluzia, and Estremadura. 3. Lusitanicam from Lusui the 17th King, and Tania, which signifieth a Region, being somewhat of larger extent then Portugall.Brerewood Of these 3 parts, Boetica was in most esteeme vnder the Romans, insomuch that in this Prouince there were reckoned to be 8 Romane Colonies; 8 municipall Citties, and 29 other Townes, endued with the rights and priuiledges of the Latines. The reason hereof was, that the people of this Country hauing beene formerly broken by the Carthaginians, with more quiet endured the yoke of the Romans; whereas the rest for a long time resisted the entrie and Empire of that prevailing Citty.
Hist. of Sp.Scipio Africanus laid the first foundation of the Roman government in this country, which building, though vndertaken by many excellent workmen, was not throughly finished til the dayes of Augustus, being almost 200 yeares since the first attempt. He roofed it, strengthned it, and made it a principall house in his Monarchicall citty.Florus. For the old incolae were exceeding valiant and resolute, sometimes disgracing, sometimes endangering the Romane reputation; insomuch that there were more Commanders lost in these warres than any other. At first the Romanes fought not with the Spaniards, but the Carthaginians in Spaine; then perished both the Scipio's, viz* the father and

the vnkle of Africanus. Viriathus held warre for 20 yeares: Numantia resisted 15 yeares, the Astures remained vnconquered; and also stiffely maintained their particular liberties, that dijundicari non poterat (saith Velleius) Hispanisne Romanis plus esset in armis roboris, and vter populus alteri pariturus foret. Such were the ancient Spaniards. This Country continued a Romane Province till about the yeare 400, when it was subdued by Gundericus and his Vandals: of which people, their beginnings, atchieuments, and period, we will dilate when wee come into Africa, where the glory of them was most eminent, and where they ended like a Candle in a stinke. These Vandals were not warme in their new conquests, whe^ the Gothes (of whom more in Sweden) seazed on this country; confining the Vandals within Baetica, which afterward they left, partly to eschew the neighbourhood of a potent enemy, and partly on better hopes in Africke.
The Gothes now seated in Spaine,Hist. of Sp. had yet the Romans as pearles in their eyes, and pricks at their hearts, neither were they totally expelled till 642. This people were Christians; though infected with Arrianisme, which ended in the dayes of Leonigild, anno 586. Their Kings were chosen by election, and an excommunication laid on such by the fift councell of Tolledo, as withstood the choice of the people. Their lawes most in vse were customary, written Statutes being first made by King Henry, which the ensuing Princes perfected and established.

The Gothish Kings in Spaine.
421
2 Valliae 22
443
2 Theoderic 13
446
2 Thorismund 3
459
4 Theod^r^c II. 14
473
5 Henry 18
491
6 Alaricus 21.
512
7 Gensalario 23
515
8 Amalaric 11
527
9 Theudes 18
543
10 Theodogisdus 3
546
11 Agila 5
551
12 Athanagildus 14
565
13 Luiba 3
568
14 Leonigild 18
586
15 Richared 15
601
16 Luiba II. 2.
603
17 Victoricus 7
610
18 Gundemaris 20
630
19 Sisebulus 9
639
20 Richared II. 2
641
21 Sunitilla 3
644
22 Sisenanda 7
651
23 Sunitilla II. 4
655
24 Tu^gas 2
657
25 Vidisuindus 10
667
26 Recesuind 13
680
27 Bamba 9
689
28 Ering 7
696
29 Egypea 7
703
30 Vitiza
716
31 Roderick, Who sent Count Iulian on an honorable Embassie to the Moores of Africa,Hist. of Sp. and in the meane time deflowred his daughter Caua; which the father tooke in such indignation, that he procured the Moores, amongst whom he had much credit, to come ouer into Spaine. This request they performed vnder the conduct of Musa and Tarif: and hauing made a full conquest,^ MS h^st. of the Sarr. erected their kingdome. It is recorded that at the first comming of Tariff into Spaine, a poore woman of the country being willingly taken prisoner, fell downe at his feet, kissed them, and told him that she had oft heard her father (who was lettered) say, that Spaine should bee conquered by 2 people, whose Generall should haue a mole on his right shoulder, and in whom one of his hands should be longer then the other. Hee to animate his Souldiers against the next encounter, vncloathed himselfe and shewed the marke, which so encouraged them, that they now doubted not the victory. Rodericke had in his army 130000 foot, and 25000 horse: Tariff had 30000 horse, and 180000 foot. The battaile continued 7 days together from morning to night: at last the Moores were victorious. What became of king Rodericke was neuer knowne; his Souldiers tooke one arrayed in their kings apparel, whom vpon examination they found to be a Sheepheard; with whom the king after the discomfiture had changed cloaths.

It is written also that before the comming of thofe Saracens, king Roderick vpon hope of some treasure,Hist. of Sp. did open a part of the Pallace of long time forbidden to bee touched: but found nothing but pictures which resembled the Moores; with a prophecie, that whensoeuer the Pallace was there opened, such ^ people as was there resembled, should ouercome Spaine, and so it happened.
The Moores now Lords of Spaine, by the treason of Iulian, who hauing seene the miserable death of his wife and children, was starued in prison by the Africans: permitted free vse of religion

to the old inhabitants; least they seeking new dwellings for the liberty of conscience, should leaue their natiue soyle desolate. The Moores finished their conquest in fiue yeares, say some; others in two; and some againe in eight mone^hs. To keep the new conquered country in subiection no way was so conven^ent as to plant Colonies: but the Morisco women would not abandon their old seats. Herevpon Musa and Tarif by guifts, pardons, and perswasions drew many Christian women to forsake their religion; whom they married to the Souldiers. Not long after, Vlidor Vbit (whom some call Alma^zar) the great Caliph, sent ouer about 50000 families of Moores and Iewes; assigning them a convenient portion of lands, to bee held with great immunities, and vpon small rents. These politique courses notwithstanding, the Moores long enioyed not sole soveraignty herein; for the Christians hauing now recouered breath, chose themselues Kings: and the authority of the Caliphs declining, gaue the Saracen Moores liberty to erect divers petty royalties; so that at last Spaine fell into a twelue-partite diuision, viz: into the kingdomes and proprietary estates of 1 Leon and Oviedo. 2 Navarre. 3 Corduba, 4 Gallicia. 5 Biscay ^ Tolledo. 7 Murcia. 8 Castile. 9 Portugall. 10 Valentia. 11 Catelogne. and 12 Arragon, of which in order.

LEON and OVIEDO.
The kingdome of LEON and OVIEDO hath on the East and South Biscay and Castile;Hist. of Sp. on the North the Ocean; on the West Gallicia. This country is by a more ancient name called Asturia, from the Astures which were the ancient inhabitants hereof. It yeelded the small, though swift, horses, which from hence the Romans called Asturcones; wee may english them Hobbies: but in processe of time, this Asturco became a commo^ name for Geldings; and Asturco Macedonicus in Petronius is nothing but a Macedonian Nagge.Seldon in tit. of hon. This is the honour or title of the eldest sonne of Castile, who is called Prince of the Asturias; which some suppose to be giuen vnto them, because this was the first principality which held vp against the Moores. But indeed the true originall hereof is to be referred to the time of the marriage of Catharine, daughter vnto Iohn of Gaunt, and



in right of her mother Constance true heire to the realme of Castil: vnto Henry sonne to Iohn the first then in possession of that kingdome. For to this new married couple it was granted, that after the manner of England, where the heire apparant is called Prince of Wales; they should be called Princes of the Asturia's. In succeeding times the townes of Iean, Vbeda, Biatia, and Andutar, were added to the patrimonie; and so vnto this day continue.
The chiefe Town^s of this kingdome are 1 Aviles on the Sea side. 2 Palenza, which first felt the armes of the Sucvi. 3 Oviedo, which gaue title to the first Christ^an Kings after the Moorish conquest. It was ioyn'd in title with Leon Anno 896. and quite left out by Raymir, 904. 4. Aftorga, a Towne happy in this, that it felt not the fury of the lustfull king Vi^iza; who to secure himselfe in vnlawfull pleasures, and weaken his subiects, if they should attempt revenge; dismantled all the townes in Spaine except Leon, Tolledo, and this Astorga. 5 Leon recouered from the Moores 712, and by some called Legio, because they guesse the 1^th Legion to haue here lodged, which was called Legio Germanica.
Hist. of Sp.That kingdomes are to be kept by the same meanes they are got, is an axiom among Politicians: but that they are lost by the same, would seeme harsh vnto them; yet so it hapned to the Moores. The lust of Rodericke, a Spanish king, brought them thither; and the lust of Magnutza, a Moorish Viceroy, gaue the first checke to their fortune, which proued at last the ouerthrow of that kingdome: for Magnutza hauing employed Pelagius, a young Prince of the Asturia's, on an Embassie to Musa, the Captaine Generall of the Moores, then resident at Corduba; in his absence rauished his sister, and at his returne died by the edge of his sword: in applause of which noble act, and hope of greater exploits, Pelagius was by the people made King of Oviedo.

The Kings of Oviedo and Leon.
716
1 Pelagius 20
735
2 Falfila 2
737
3 Alphonsus 23
760
4 Pht^illa 12
772
5 Aurelius 6
778
6 Sillo 6
784
7 Mauregatus 3
787
8 Veramund 2
789
9 Alphonso the chast. 36
825
10 Raymir 6
831
11 Ordogno 10
841
12 Alphonso the great 46
887
13 Garcia 4
891
14 Ordogno II. 5
898
15 Phroilla II. 2
900
16 Alphonso IV. 5
905
17 Raymir II. 19
924
18 Ordogno III. 5
929
19 Sancho 11
940
20 Raymir III. 25
965
21 Veramund II. 17
982
22 Alphonso V. 35
1018
23 Veramund III. 6
1025
24 Sancha Q. of Leon 42
1025
24 Fernand k. of Cast. 42
1067
25 Alphonso VI, 41
1108
26 Vrraca of Leon, 14
1108
26 Alphonso of N. and Ar. 14
1122
27 Alphons. VIII 35
1157
28 Fernand II. 31
1188
29 Alphonso IX. 42
1230
30 Fernand III. who by the power and pollicy of his mother, seazed on the Castiles, which were neuer since disioyned from Leon.

The Armes of this kingdome are Argent a Lyon passant crowned Or, which when the Castiles were ioyned to this kingdome, were quartered with the Armes of those Countries.Camde^s R^m. This was the first time that euer Armes were borne quartered; and was seconded by our Edward the 3d, who to shew his title to the Crowne of France, not only tooke on the title of King of France, but quartered the Armes thereof with those of England as to this day they continue.


2. NAVARRE.
NAVARRE is the second kingdome for antiquity in Spaine. it hath on the East the Pyrenean mountaines, on the West Iberus, on the North Biscay,Mercat^^ on the South Arragon. The old inhabitants hereof were the Vascones, who passing ouer the hills into France, possessed that part of it, called since Vasconia or Gascoigne.
The ch^efe Ci^ties are Victoria, made a Citty by Iohn husband to Q Blanch, king of Arragon and Navarre. Th^s towne is situate in the country which they now call Alava, which in

our ordinary Mappes is placed betweene Castile and Biscay* of which last it seemeth to haue beene a part. 2 Viana the title of the Navarran Prince.Gui^ciard. Nigh vnto this Towne Caesar Borgia was slaine by an ambush: hee was sonne to Pope Alexander the 6, and by his father first made Cardinall, but reliquishing that title, he was by king Charles the 8, made Duke of Valence in Daulphine. During the life of his father hee had reduced many townes to the obedience of the Church; but af^er his death hee was by Pope Iulio the 2, confined. From Rome he stole to Gonsalvo, Viceroy in Naples, for Ferdinand the Catholique; who, notwithstanding his safe conduct giuen, sent him prisoner to Spaine: from hence he escaped desperatly, (sliding down a window) into Navarre, where he was (as we haue said) slaine by an ambush. So many times was Machiavels great Politician ouer-reached by bookemen and souldiers. 3. Sanguessa, whose Inhabitants and neighbours in the beginning of this Pyrenean kingdome, paid a tribute of kine yeerely. And 4 Pampelune the Metropolis of this Countrie, a towne banded by the racket of Fortune, into the hazards of Gothes, Moores, Navarrois, French, and now Castilians.
It took the name of Navarre, either from a town amongst the mountaines, called Navarrin, a place most likely, by reason of its strong situation, to resist the fury of the Moores, and to support the title of a new Potentate: or 2 from Navois, signifying a champion Country. It was also called the kingdome of Sobabre,Hist. of Sp. for that the Pyrenei are in this place so called. The first king was Garcia Ximenes, who with 600 men only, began to oppose the Saracens, and left both title and possession vnto his successours. The sixt from this Garcia, was Inigo surnamed Arista, who began the ceremony of crowning and anointing in this Continent, according to the Spanish History. But the old Romane Prouinciall, cited by Mr Selden in his Titles of Honour, acknowledgeth no such honour due hereto: ascribing it only to the Emperours of the East and West, the Kings of Hierusalem, England, France, and Sicily. The 13th King was Sancho, for his valour and potencie surnamed the great; He was the first that euer did write himself King of Spaine, his predecessours calling

themselues kings of Navarre, his co^temporaries kings of Leon only, the Gothes Kings of the Gothes in Spaine, and so the Vandals and Suevi. The reason was, because being a Prince of great power-ablenesse, he had also almost all Spaine, which belonged not to the Moores, in his possession. The Earledome of Arragon was vnited to this Navarre, Ao 867, when Garcia king hereof was married to Vrraca heire of Arragon* Castile he held in the right of his wife Donna Nugna, sister and heire to Earle Sancho: and as for Leon, he forcibly detained a great part of it vnder his Empire. Had all those Estates continued vnited vnder one head, questionlesse the Kingdome of the Moores had not so long subsisted; but this Sancho louing all his sonnes alike, gaue them alike portions and honours, bequeathing to his eldest son Garcia, Navarre; and that part of Leon which he conquered: to his second son Fernando, Castile: to his base son Raymir, Arragon, both which he had erected into Kingdomes. By meanes of this vnpolitick course, his sonnes being of equall powers and honours, insteed of opposing the common foe, bandied against each other; which, had all these principalities remained joyned, or the latter not dignified with the title of Kingdomes, had bin avoyded. The 30th King was Charles the 2d, whom I mention not for any glorious actions atchieued in his life, for that was full enough of ignominie; but for the strangenes and hideousnes of his death. He was a king much giuen to voluptuousnes and sensuall pleasures, which so wasted his spirits, that in his old age he fell into a kind of a Lethargie. To comfort his benummed joynts, he was bound and sowed vp naked in a sheet steeped in boyling Aquavitae: The Chirurgion hauing made an end of sowing him, and wanting a knife to cut off the threed, tooke a waxe candle that stood lighted by him; but the flame running down by the threed, caught hold on the sheet, which (according to the nature of Aquavitae) burned with that vehemencie, that the miserable King ended his dayes in the fire. The 38th Princes were Katharine Queene of Navarre, and Iohn Earle of Albret in Gascoigne, her husba^d; in whose reigne Navarre was surprized by Fernando the Catholique, as anon I wil more particularly tell you. In the mean time let vs summe vp the Kings of this hillie Realme.


The Kings of Navarre.
716
1 Garcia 42
758
2 Garcia II 44
802
3 For^^o 13
815
4 Sancho 17
832
5 Ximenes 18
840
6 Inigo 27
867
7 Garcia III 18
885
8 Fortun II 6
901
9 Sancho II 19
920
10 Garcia IV 49
969
11 Sancho III 24
993
12 Garcia V 7 (34
1000
13 Sancho the great
1034
14 Garcia VI 20
1054
15 Sancho V 22
1076
16 Sancho VI 18
1094
17 Pedro 10
1104
18 Alphonso 30
1134
19 Garcia VII 16
1150
20 Sancho VII 46
1196
21 Sancho VIII 40
1236
22 Blanch Q. 19
1236
22 Theobald E. of Champaigne 19
1255
23 Theobald II 18
1273
24 Henry 5
1276
25 Ioane Qu. 31
1276
25 Philip K. of France 31
2307
26 Lewis Huttin 10
1317
27 Philip the long 5
1322
28 Charl. the faire 8
1330
29 Ioane Qu. of Navarre. 21
1330
29 Philip E. of Eureux. 21
1351
30 Charles II 37
1388
31 Charles III 39
1427
32 Blanch Q. of Navarre 54
1427
32 Iohn King of Arragon 54
1481
33 Leonora Q. of Nauarre 4
1481
33 Gaston E. of Foix 4
1485
34 Fran. Phoebus 4
1485
35 Katharin Q. of Navarre 32
1485
35 Iohn E. of Albret. 32
1517
36 Hen. of Albret 39
1556
37 Ioane of Albret 6
1556
37 Anth. of Burbon 6
1562
38 Henry of Burbon K. of Fr. and Nav. 48
1610
39 Lewis King of France and Navarre now liuing, with whom remaine the Rights, but not the Possession of this Kingdome. For in the reigne of Catharine, and Iohn of Albret, Ferdinand the Catholique, gathered a great power vnder

pretence of rooting out the Moores, and surprized this Kingd^me altogether vnprouided, and destitute of all meanes to make the smallest resistance, Anno 1512. The pretended reason of this surprizall, w^s an Excommunication, laid on these Prince by the Pope, of which this King took vpon him to be the executioner: but the true cause was an ancient desire which this King had to prossesse this frontire Kingdome, it being a strong Bulwarke against France. It happened then that Lewis the 12th hauing incurred the displeasure of Pope Iulio the second, was together with all his adherents, excommunicated, and his and their estates giuen to such as could or would subdue them. The King and Queene of Navarre were at this time both French sub^ect, he in respect of Albret his paternall inheritance, and she of her Earledomes of Foize and Bearne; and therefore sided with the Fre^ch King.Guicciardin Ferdinand hauing (as we said) levied an army vnder color of extirpating ths Moores, turneth vpon the French King, and demandeth of these Princes not only a free passage through their Countrie, but also to haue certaine places of strength put into his hands for his better assurance. These vnjust demands the Navar^^ys denied, whereupon Ferdinand with all expedition, invadeth the kingdome, which he tooke without a blow giuen; the French King being as backward in affording due assistance, as the other was vnprovided of meanes for defence The French netled with this losse, diuers times attempted the recouery of it, but in va^ne, ^or the Spainiard still keepeth it.

The armes of Navarre are Gu^es a Carbuncle nowed Or.Bara.
In this Kingdome was the order of Knighthood called the Lilly,Grimston. begun by Garcia the sixt: their blazon is a pot of Lillies, on which is graued the portraiture of our Lady; their duty was to defend the faith, and dayly to repeat certain Ave Maries, etc.


3. CORDVBA.
The Kingdome of CORDVBA comprehended And^luzia, the Country of Granada and Estremadura.Ortelius.
ANDALVZIA called by Pl^ny Conventus Cordubensis, is between the hill Seira Morena North, Granada East, and the Sea: it is so called quasi Vandaluzia from the Vandals, who

long time, and till their expulsion into Africa possessed it.
This is the most rich and fertile countrie of all Spaine, watered with the riuers Anas, 2 Odier, 3 Batis, and 4 Teneo.
Martial.The chiefe cities are Corduba the Royall seat of the Moorish Kings: here were borne Lucan and both the Seneca's.

Duosque Senecas, unicumque Lucanum,
Foecunda loquitur Corduba.
Corduba glorying in her fruitfull field,
One Lucan, and two Seneca's did yeeld.

This city is vulgarly called Cordova, and hence commeth our true Cordovan leather, made of the skin of a Sardinian beast. Neere vnto this city is a wood of 30 miles in length, hauing nothing but Oliue trees: and not farre hence by the Village called Munda,Florus. was fought that notable battaile betweene Caesar, and the sonnes of Pompey. The honour of the day fell vnto Caesar, who then made an end of the ciuill warres, which that very day foure yeares before, were begun by Pompey the Father. In this battaile Cneius Pompeius was slaine, and his strength broken; Neither did Caesar escape without great losse, he neuer being before so put to his last trumpe: for seeing his souldiers giue back, he resolutely maintained the fight, bidding them remember they had at Munda forsaken their Generall. Shame, and his noble example, encouraged the souldiers to a new onset, which was honoured with the tropheyes of victory. This was the last field that Caesar euer was in, he being not long after, murdered in the Senate-house. In other places he vsed to say, he fought for honour; in this for his life. 2. Marchena where the best Iennets are, not of this Prouince alone, but of all Spaine: the riuer Baetis (as it is thought) conveying some secret vertue vnto them. Of this race was the horse which Caesar so loued, that at his death he erected his statue in the Temple of Venus: And the ancient Lusitani thought they were ingendred by the wind. 3. Medina Sidonia, whose Duke was Captaine Generall of the invincible Armado 1588. 4 Lucar di Barameda a great Hauen Towne, at which the man which either was the true Sebastian King of Portugall,Hist. of Sp. or else would so haue bin accounted, arriued in a Galley from Naples, where he had bin kept in a darke dungeon

three dayes without any sustenance, but a knife and a halter. If man^ judgments durst herein be free, I could say that the arguments la^d down in the Spanish History on this behalfe, are both vnanswered, and better then such as were brought against him. But he hath bin now long dead, and therefore let all the probabilities and suspitions of his being the same man, be buried with him: though certain it is, that the Spaniards vsed to say, that either he was the true Sebastian, or the diuell in his likenes. 5 Xeres a sea-town also, whence come our Xeres sacke, commo^ly called Sherrie sacks. 6. Tariffa seated at the end of the promontorie toward Africke, and so called, because Tariff the leader of the Moores into Spaine, here landed, And 7. Seuill the fairest city not of Andaluzia alone, but of all Spaine. It is in compasse sixe miles, environed with beautifull wals, and adorned with many magnificent and stately buildings of Palaces, Churches, and Monasteries; amongst which, that of the Gertosins is endowed with 25000 crownes of yearely revenue. Vnder the jurisdiction of this city are no lesse then 20000 small Villages. It is also a most flourishing Vniversity,Lewk^or of cities. wherein studied Avicen the Moore that excellent and learned Scholler; Pope Silvester the second, and Leander. Famous also is it for two provinciall Councels holden here, the first Ao 584, the last Ao 636, and also that here are continually maintained 30000 Gennets for the seruice of the King. The riuer Baetis diuideth it into two parts, both joyned together by a stately and beautifull bridge.Hist. of Sp* It was recouered by Fernand the 2 of Castile, Ao 1248. from hence come our Seuill Orenges; from hence the Castilians hoyse saile toward the Indians; lastly, here is the body of Christopher Columbus with this (I cannot say worthy) Epitaph.Quade.

Christ^pherus (genuit quem Genoa clara) Columbus
(Numine perculsus quo nescio) primus in altum
Descendens pelagus, solem versusque cadentem;
Directo cursu, nostro hactenus abdita mundo
Littora dete^i, Hispano paritura Philippo:
Audenda hinc alijs plura, and maiora reliquens.
I Christopher Columbus whom the land
Of Genoa first brought forth, first took in hand
(I know not by what Deity incited)
To scull the Westerne waues, and was delighted
To find such coasts as were vnknowne before;
Th'euent was good, for I descried the shore
Of the new World, that it might learne t'obey
Philip, which o're the Spanish should beare sway;
And yet I greater matters left behind
For men of more meanes, and a brauer mind.

Maginus.The custome of this town only is worth vnto the King halfe a million of gold yearely. The revenues of the Archbishop hereof are 100000 crownes yearely, as hauing in his whole Diocese 2000 Benefices, besides Frieries, Nunneries, Hospitals. He is next in degree to the Archbishop of Tolledo, and is the Metropolitan of Andaluzia, and the Fortunate Ilands. Isidore so much renowned for his sincerity and profoundnesse in learning, was Bishop here, who is vsually called Isidorus Hispalensis, to distinguish him from another of that name, called Pelusietae.
2 GRANADA is bounded with Marcia on the East, Andaluzia on the West, Castile North, and the Mediterranean South.Lewknor. The chiefe Cities are Granada, a fine and stately Towne, whence come our Granada stockings. The houses hereof are built all of curious free stone, with delicate and artificiall masonry, shewing great magnificence. It is replenished within with abundance of wholesome and pleasing springs, and fenced without with a strong wall, in which are 12 gates, and 130 turrets. Here is still to be seene the palace of the Moorish kings, an excellent and magnificent structure couered ouer with gold, and indented with Mosaicall worke, This City is the ordinary Parliament and Court of Iustice for all the Southerne parts of Spaine, in like manner as Valadolit is for the North; Madrid like the high Parliament of Paris, hauing jurisdiction ouer, and receiuing appeales from both. 2 Alamia famous for her bathes. 3 Malaga or Malaca,Plutarch. a towne sacked by Crassus the rich Roman who flying into Spaine to auoide the fury of Marius and Cinna, who had slaine his father and vncle, hid himselfe and his companions eight moneths together in a caue; but hauing intelligence of their deaths, he issued out, and ransacked amongst

many other cities, this Malaga. From hence come our Malaga Sackes: and to the great prejudice of the Moores was this Towne taken by Fernand the Catholique 1487. ^4 Alm^ri^ a great Hauen-towne. 5. Osuna.
3 ESTREMEDVRA hath on the East and North Castile, on the West Portugal, on the South Vandaluzia, it was once called Baeturia from the Baetis which runneth through it. The chiefe cities are 1 Merida (formerly called Augusta Emerita) nigh vnto which was the battle betweene Val^^a King of the Gothes, and Atace King of the Alani, and Vandals (surnamed Silinges:) the victory whereof falling to the Gothes, caused the Vandals to leaue their first footing in Spaine. This town sprung from the ruine of Norba Caesarea, which by Petronius and Afranius, two of Pompeyes captaines, was laide euen with the ground, for adhering faithfully to Iulius Caesar. It was built and made a Colonie by Augustus, who placing in it his old souldiers, whom the Latines call Emeriti, gaue it the name of Augusta Emerita. 2 Guadalcanall famous for mines of gold and siluer. The first Incola were the Vestones. It was taken from the Moores 1147.
The Saracens hauing made almost a plenarie conquest of Spaine, and vtterly subverted the Gothish kingdome, were first subject vnto the Caliphs of Babylon, but after some few yeares, the vast Empire of the Saracens ouer-burdened by its owne waight, began to bend downewards; and the Sultans who by institution, were but Vicegerents to the Mahumetan Pope of Bagdet, invested themselues with the wreathes of royall authority: euery one plucking some feathers from this Arabian Peacocke to hide his owne nakednesse withall. In this confusion the more potent Saracens of Spaine, fortified themselues as they best could, making as many Kingdomes as Cities, and almost as many Cities as townes. Yet did the more splendide Sunne of Maiestie shine in the Sphere of Corduba.

The Moorish Kings of Corduba.
757
1 Abderamen 30
787
2 Hizen 7
794
3 Haliathan 25
819
4 Abderamen II 20
839
5 Mahomet 35
874
6 Almudix 2
876
7 Abdalla 13
889
8 Abderamen III 50
939
9 Hali Hatan 17
956
10 Hizen II 35
989
11 Zulcimen 4
993
12 Mahomet II 10
1001
13 Hali 2
1003
14 Cacin 4
1007
15 Hiaia 1
1008
16 Abderamen IV 1
1009
17 Mahomet III 1
1010
18 Hizen III 1
1011
19 Ioar 3
1014
20 Mahomet IV

After the death of this Mahomet, the kingdome of Corduba was tossed with diuers fortunes, as being sometimes vnder the protection, sometimes the command of the Kings of F^z and Morocco: but alwayes supported by the Africans against the Christians in Spaine, till at last the kingdome was ruinated by King Fernand of Castile, 1236. after it had flourished vnder 20 Kings almost 260 yeares.Bara. The Armes of the Realme of Corduba were Or, a Lyon Gules, armed and crowned of the first: a border Azrue, charged with 8 towres Argent. Corduba thus taken, the Moores flie to Granada, and there renue their strength and kingdome: Which kingdome, how and when it ended, we shall not be long before we tell you. As for the name and Nation of Moores, it continued in Spaine euen vntil our time; most of that people professing, or at least, seeming to professe the Christian Religion. But in the yeare 1609, to the number of a million of them and vpwards, going about to free themselues from the danger of the Inquisition, and to rec^uer their old liberty again: gaue just occasion to the kings of Spaine, to vse that hard point of seuerity toward them, which he afterwards did, banishing the whole Nation out of his dominions for euer; when this had bin to them their natiue soyle for almost 900 yeares.
The Moorish Kings of Granada.12361 Mahomet Alcamir 361272Hist. of Sp.2 Mahomet Mir Almir 3013023 Mahomet Aben Ezar 713094 Mahomet Aben Evar 013095 Ismael 1313226 Mahomet 1223347 Ioseph Aben Amet 2013548 Mahomet Aben 2313779 Mahomet Vermeil 2137910 Mahomet Guadix 13139211 Ioseph II 4139612 Mahomet Aben Balva 11140713 Ioseph III 16142314 Mahomet Aben Azar 9143215 Ioseph Aben Almud 13144516 Mahomet Osmen 13145817 Ismael II 6146418 Muley Alboacen 16148219 Mahomet Bonbdelin, He was the last King of the Moores in Spaine;Hist. of Sp. For as the kingdome of Granado beganne vnder a Mahomet, a Fernand King of Castile: so it ended vnder a Mahomet, a Fernand being King of Castile. In the tenth yeere of this mans reigne, about the yeere 1492. the Empire of the Moores ended in Spaine, by the valour of Ferdinand the Catholique, and Isabel his wife, after their first entrance into it more then 760 yeeres. Such as after the decay of their kingdome stayed in Spaine, were by a statute in that case prouided, to be Christened; and that they might be known to bee as they professed, the Inquisition was ordained, consisting of a certaine number of Dominican Friers; who finding such counterfeiting Christians, were first gently to reproue and exh^rt them, and after if no amendment followed, to inflict some mulct vpon them. This custome in it selfe was wondrous tollerable and laudable; but from the Moores it is turned on the Protestants, and that with such violence and extremity of torture, that it is counted the greatest tyranny and seuerest kind of persecution vnder heauen: Insomuch that many Papists who would willingly die for their Religion, abhorre the very name and mention, and to the death withstand the bringing in of this slauerie among them. This is it that made the people of Arragon and Naples rebell, countries where the people are all of the Papall side: and this was it which caused the irremediable revolt of the Low-countries; the greatest part of that nati^n at the time of their taking armes,Sauds rela^. of Relig. being Catholickes. Yet is it planted and established in Spaine, and all Italy, (Naples and Venic^ excepted.)

This racking of mens consciences is committed to the most zealous, fierie and rigorous Friers in the whole packe. The least suspition of heresie, affinity, or commerce with Heretikes, reprouing the liues of the Clergie, keeping any bookes, or editions of bookes prohibited; or discoursing in matters of Religion, are offences sufficient. Nay they will charge mens consciences vnder paine of damnation, to detect their nearest and dearest friends, if they doe but suspect them to be herein culpable. Their proceedings are with great secrecie and seuerity: for 1. the parties accused, shall neuer know their accuser, but sh^lbe constrained to reueale their own thoughts and affections. 2ly if they are but convinced of any errour in any of their opinions, or be gainsaied by two witnesses, they are immediatly condemned: 3l^ if nothing can be proued against them, yet shall they with infinite tortures and miseries be kept in the house diuers yeares, for a terrour to others: and 4ly if they escape the first brunt with many torments and much anguish; yet the second questioning or suspition, brings death remedilesse. And as for torments and kindes of death, Phalaris and his fellow-tyrants, come farre short of these bloud-hounds. Each of those Inquisitors is honoured with the title of Lord, and are a great terrour to the neighbouring Peazants. There goeth a tale, how one of their Lordships desiring to eate of the peares which grew in a poore mans Orchard not farre off, sent for him to come vnto him: which put the poore Swaine into such a fright, that he fell sick, and kept his bed. Being afterward informed that his peares were the cause of his Lordships message, he plucked vp the tree by the roots, carrying it with all the fruit on it vnto him: and when he was demanded the reason of that vnhusbandly action; he protested that hee would neuer keepe that thing in his house which should giue any of their Lordships a further occasion to send for him.
The Armes of Granada are Or, a Pomegrauat slipped Vert.


4. GALLICIA.
Gallicia hath on the East the Asturia's, on the West and North the Sea, on the South the riuer Minius. The former Inhabitants were of Gallaici, whence the name is deriued. The Country is

like that of the Asturias, mountainous, and almost inaccessible; and so the fitter to hold out against forreine invasions, and to defend the person of its own Princes, and the common liberty.
The chiefe Cities are 1 Compostella, vulgarly called St Iago, in the honour of Saint Iames, who lieth here buried, and of whom there is an order of Knights.Lewknor. In a Church of this towne are kept the reliques of Saint Iames, which are to this day worshipped with incredible devotion, and visited with a wonderfull concourse of people. This Church hath no Bishop, but is immediatly vnder the Pope. This Church also did Charles the great, make one of the three seates Apostolike, the other two being St Peters in Rome, and St Iohns in Ephesus. This towne is also an Vniversity. 2 Baiona at the mouth of Minius, and 3 Corenna, not farre from the Promontory Nerius. This towne is that which is called the Groyne, so often mentioned i^ our last warres with the Spaniards.
When the Vandals made their first inrodes into Spaine,Hist. of Sp. there entred with them a people called the Suevi, who, according to the diuision made betweene them, the Vandals, and Alani: laide hands on this Prouince, vnder the conduct of Hermeric the first king. The third king Reccaire did receiue the Christian Faith, and with it also Arrianisme: hee surprized Navarre and Arragon; but could not defend his owne countrie from Theodoricke the Gothe; who after gaue the Gallicians leaue to choose a new King. Hereupon ensued diuers bloudie factions betwixt the more potent of the Nobility, till at last the honour fell on Arismund. Finally after this kingdome had endured 177 yeares, it was subdued by Leonigild a king of the Gothes. It was againe made a kingdome by Alphonso the great of Leon, and by him giuen to his sonne Ordogno, Ao 886. and was again incorporated to Leon by Alphonso the sixt, who wrested it from Don Garcia,Bara. 1081. The Armes of this kingdome were Azure, Semie of crosse crosset; fitchee, a Chalice couered Or.


5. BISCAIE.
BISCAIE called formerly Cantabria, is betwixt Navarre East, old Castile South, Leon West, and the Cantabrian Ocean North.Mercator. It tooke name from the Vascones, part of which people

when they le^t their old seates, came into this country; naming it first Viscaia, then Viscaia, and now Biscaia.
The chiefe Cities are 1 Tholosa. 2. Saint Sebastians. 3 F^nterabia both parts on the Sea. 4 Bilbo (anciently called Flavionavia) two miles distant fro^ the Maine; it aboundeth with good wines, much cattle, the best bread, and tryed blades, called Bilbo blades. It is a towne of great trafficke, and consequently of great riches, here be^ng many priuate men which yeerely build three or foure shippes.
The Countrie is mountainous and woodie, out of whose hils arise 150 Riuers, of which Iberus and Duerus are the chiefe. Here is excellent timber to build shippes, and such an abundance of iron, that it is called The Armorie of Spaine.
The people of this Prouince vse a language different from the rest of Spaine, and is reported to haue continued without great alteration, since the confusion at Babel.Brerewood. That it is of this age, I will not stand to proue; though an argument hereof may be, the small or no affinity it hath with other tongues, Yet that it was the ancient language of Spaine, is more then probable, because this people haue euer continued without any mixture of forreine Nations; as being neuer throughly subdued either by Romanes, Carthaginians, Gothes, or Moores; and so they remained, as in their liberties not mastered; so in their language not altered In like manner the Arabique continueth vncorrupt in the hillie parts of Granada; the tongue of the old Brittaines in our Wales, and the ancient Epirotique, in the high and woodie parts of that countrie. Neither doe these Biscaines differ from the rest of Spaine in language, but in customes also, three of which I will set down as a light to the rest. First they account themselues free from taxes, and contributions to the kings of Spaine, yeelding them obedience with their bodies, but not with their purses. And when any of the Spanish kings in their progresses come to the Frontiers of this Countrie, hee bareth one of his legs, and in that manner entreth into it. There he is met by the Lords and Gentlemen there dwelling, who proffe^ him some few small brasse pieces (Marauidis they call them, whereof 600 goe to a crown) in a leatherne bag, hanging at the

end of a lance; but with all they tell him that hee must not take them. This ceremony performed, they all attend the king in his journey, and this I learned from a Gentleman, who hath spent some time in this Countrie.A good place for Puritan^ to dweilin. 2ly they admit no Bishops to come amongst them; and when Fernand the Catholique came in progresse hither, accompanied amongst others, by the Bishop of Pampelune: the people arose in armes, draue back the Bishop, and gathering all the dust on which they thought he had troden, slung it into the Sea. 3ly The women at all meetings doe first drinke; a custome which hath continued euer since Ogn^ Countesse of Castilc, would haue poysoned her sonne Sancho.
The ancient inhabitants were the Cantabri, a people of that courage, that they defended the liberty of their Country against the Romans, when the residue of Spaine was subdued; and were at last not without great effusion of blood, and manifest tokens of manly resolution, and Heroick spirits, on their parts; vanquished by the darling of Fortune, Augustus. Such hillie and mountainous people are alwayes the last that are conquered, and the first that stand on their own guard, as besides these Biscanies, the Navarroys and Asturians here in Spaine, in respect of the Moores: and our Brittaines in relation to the Saxons. Whether it be, that liuing in a sharpe aire, and being inured to labour, they proue on occasion, good and able men: or that the Forts of Natures own building, are not so easily wonne, as defended: or that the vnpleasantnesse of the Country, and vhfruitfulnesse of the soile, yeeld no occasion to strangers to desire and adventure for it, I cannot determine.Hist. of Sp. These Biscanies were the last also that submitted to the fury of the Moores, whom shortly after they droue thence by the valour of Soria a Noble Scot 870; whose posterity enjoyed this proprietary Lordship, till that Nero of Spaine, Don Pedro, violently tooke it from the true Heire, Donna Iane, and her Husband, 1358.


6. TOLLEDO.
TOLLEDO is now accounted as a city of ntw Castile: The kingdome embraced the Towne and Territories extending ouer the Southeast of Castile, now called Campo de Calatrava, and so downward toward Murcia.Lewknor. This Country was of old the

^eate of the Carpentani. The chiefe city is Tolledo, seated on the riuer Tagus: it is beautified with many palaces of rare and excellent architecture; and fortified with 150 towres standing on the wals. It is seated in the very center almost of Spaine, and is passing well inhabited, as well by Noblemen who reside there for pleasure; by merchants who resort thither for commodity; and by men of warre who are garrison'd there for the defence of it. This city was taken by the Moores at their first entrance into Spaine,Hist. of Sp. 715. they therein behauing themselues more advisedly in striking first at the head, then could be expected of such Barbarians. It was first vnder the Mahumetan Calyphs, and their Vicegerents; after it became a peculiar kingdome, and was taken from Haia Alcadu^bir the last king, by Alphonso the first, king of Castile, 1083. This City was the seat of the Gothish Kings, one of which viz. Bamba, walled this towne.

Erexis (fautore Deo) Rex inclytus urbem
Bamba, suae celebrem protendens gentis honorem.
King Bamba (God assisting) wall'd this Towne,
Extending so the ancient Gothes renowne.

Next it was the feare of the Moorish Princes; and now of the Archbishops, who are the chiefe Prelats of Spaine, and Presidents for the most of the Inquisition. Their revenewes are certainly the greatest of any spirituall Prince, except the Popes, as mounting to the yearely value of 300000 Crownes. This City is honored with an Vniversity, famous for the study of the Ciuill and Common Lawes; as also with 18 Nationall Councels here held vnder the Gothish kings. The next City of any note is Calatrava, on the riuer Ana, famous for its order of Knights. It standeth on, or neere vnto the place where in former times stood the strong and famous city Castulo;Plutarch. which being vnder the command of the Romanes, was by the Gyresoeni, a people that dwelt on the other side of the riuer, suddainly entred and taken. But Sertorius entring after them at the same gate, put the^ to the sword; and causing his men to apparell themselues in the cloathes of their slaine enemies, he led them to the chiefe Cities of the Gyresoeni; where the people supposing them to be their companions, opened their gates, and were all either slain or sold

for slaues. The third towne of note is Talbora, vulgarly called Talveira di Roina, a very neat and sweet towne, seated on the Tagus.
The Armes are B,Guillin^. a crowne mitrall imperiall O, garnished with sundry precious gemmes proper.


7. MVRCIA.
MVRCIA was in former times a very rich and profitable country,Maginus. stoored with all fruits of the earth, and so abounding in siluer mines, that the Romanes who were then Lords of it, kept continually 400 men here at worke, and receaued the profit of 25000 Drachmas daily. It is enuironed with New Castile, or the kingdome of Tolledo, West; Granada South; Valentia North; and the Mediterranean East. The chiefe townes are 1 Alicante a faire harbour;, from whence we haue our true Alicant wine, made of the iuyce of mulberries which are here growing in great plenty. 2 Murcia (by Ptolomie called Murgis) on the river Segourg,Hist. of Sp. from whence the whole country is named. 3 Nova Ca^thag^, or Cartagona, built by Asdrubal of Carthage, and ruined in the second Punick warre,Florus. by Scipio Africanus; a man of that rare chastity, that during all his wars in Spaine, he would not permit any of the young Virgins of the Countrie to bee brought before him, least his eyes should betray his heart. It is now famous for the Hauen which it hath, very capacious, and of that safety, that that worthy Sea Captaine Andreas Doria, Admirall vnto Charles the fift, vsed to say, that there were but three safe ports in the Mediterranean, which were Cartagena, August and Iuly: meaning, as I conceaue, that those two months being commonly free from winds and tempests, were no lesse secure to marriners then the port of Cartagena. See, I beseech you, the priuiledge of autority and antiquity; for had a meaner man spoke this in those times, or a greater man in these wherein we liue: neither the one nor the other would haue bin remembred for it. But one inch of greatnesse, and another of age, hath I perceaue, the prerogatiue to put such saplesse and vnworthy conceits vpon the Register, which in our daies would either not be obserued, or else scorned.
Leonigild the Gothe tooke this Country from the Romance:

and it was recouered from Alboquis the last Moorish King, by Fernand of Castile 1241. The chiefe riuer of this Countrie is Guadala quir.


8. CASTILE.
CASTILE is bounded on the East with Navar, Arragon, and the Country of Tolledo; on the West with Portugal; on the North with the Asturias; on the South with Andaluzia and Granada. This was the most preuailing kingdome to which the rest were all vnited, either by conquest, or inter-marriages. It is now diuided into the New and the Old.
The Old Castile is situate on the North of the New. The chief Citties are, 1 Soriae or Numantia, in which 4000 Souldiers withstood 40000 Romans, for fourteene yeares. During which time hauing valiantly repulsed,Florus. and forced them vnto two dishonorable compositions, they at last resolued on a strange and desperate end. For gathering all their armour, mony and goods together, they laid them on a pile, which being fired, they voluntarily buried themselues in the flame: leauing Scipio nothing but the bare name of Numantia to adorne his triumph. 2 Segouia, a Towne famous for cloathing.Lewknor. 3 Valadolit, a neat fine Towne, and an Vniuersity. It was reckoned one of the 7 ancient Vniuersities of Spaine, but afterwards falling to decay, it was restored by king Philip the 2d, whose birth place it was; and who erected here a College among others for the education of young English fugitiues, 4 Avila, called formerly Abule, of which Tostatus was Bishop, and is therefore called Abulensis. Hee was, as the Epistle to his workes informeth me, President of the Councell to Iohn the 2d, King of Arragon; and will bee eternally famous for his learned and paineful Commentaries on the Bible: for so great they are, that it is supposed (if we had all his workes) that he wrote as many sheets as he liued daies; and for the worth of them take along with you this eulogie which Casaubon in his worke against Baronius, affordeth him, Lando acumen viri si in meliora incidisset tempora longe maximi. 5 Burgos built, or rather repaired by Nugno Belides a German; this Towne contendeth with Tolledo for the Primacy of Spaine.Hist. of Sp. 6. Salamanca, the famousest Academy of this Country, instituted

by Fernand of Castile, Anno 1240; and was by the edicts of the Popes, together with Oxford, Paris, and Bononia, created a Generale studium, wherein should bee Professours of the Hebrew, Chaldaicke, and Arabicke tongues.
The ch^efe Riuers of this Prouince, are Kelannos rising nigh to Furgos. 2. Tormes gliding by Salamanca. 3. Duerus the most violent riuer of all Spaine.
The New Castile is on the South of the Old. The chiefe citties there are,Boterus. 1 Madrid the Kings seat, whose residence, though the Count^y be neither fruitfull nor pleasant, hath made that place of a Village, the most populous Towne of all Spaine. It is a custome, that except some composition be made, all the vpper stories belong to the King. 2 Alcala de Henares (of old Complutum) an Vniversity famous for the study of Divinity. 3 Alcantara, of which there is an order of Knights. 4 Signeuca, a small Academy. 5. Cuenca, seated at the spring head of the riuer Xucar. Here also is the Escuriall or Monastery of S. Laurence, built by King Philip the second. A place (saith Quade, who spendeth 13 pages in its description) of that magnificence, that no building in times past, or this present, is comparable to it. The front toward the West is adorned with three stately gates, the middlemost whereof leadeth into a most magnificent Temple; a Monastery in which are 150 Monk^s of the order of S. Ierome, and a Colledge: that on the right hand openeth into diuers offices belonging to the Monastery; that on the left vnto schooles and out-houses belonging to the Colledge. At the foure corners, there are foure turrets of excellent workemanship, and for height majesticall. Toward the North is the Kings Palac^: on the South part diuers beautifull and sumptuous galleries; and on the East side sundry gardens and walls very pleasing and delectable. It containeth in all 11 seueral quadrangles, euery one incloystred: and is indeed so braue a structure, that a voyage into Spaine were well imployed, were it only to see it and returne.
The chiefe riuers are, 1 Tagus. 2. Xaruma honoured with the neighbourhood of Madrid and 3 Yauina.
The old inhabitants of these Castiles, were the Vaccai, Ventones,

Carpentani, Oretani, Bastitani, Dittani, etc. From none of which the name of Castile can bee deduced; so that wee must fetch it either from the Castellani, once the inhabitants of Catelogne, or from some strong fortified Castle in these parts. This last coniecture may seeme probable, because the Armes of this kingdome are Guies, a Castle triple-towred Or: Neither is it any way strange for Prouinces, especially smaller ones (for such at the first this was, though now much exte^ded both in bounds and power) to take their names from a Castle. For (to goe no farther) euen with vs, Richmondshire, was so called from the castle of Richmond, there built by Alaine Earle of Brittaine: and Flintshire tooke denomination from a Castle built of flintstones by Henry the 2d. We may see hereby how much Celius Secundus Curio was deceaued, who writeth that Alphonso the third hauing ouerthrowne Mahomet Enasir the King of Morocco and Granada, and put 60000 of his men to the sword: assumed these Armes, that thus named this kingdome, which was before called the kingdome of the Bastitanes; because that victory like a strong castle (forsooth) confirmed his kingdome vnto him. And for the former Etimologie it appeareth most euidently, in that the people are by the Latines called Castellani, the Countrey Castella.
Hist. of Sp.Castile was an Earledome vnder the comma^d of Leon, till the daies of Sancho the first, whose substitute in this Countrey was then one Fernand Gonsales: who comming brauely accompanied to the Court of Leon, sold vnto the king Sancho an Hauk and an Horse of excellent kindes, on this condition; that if at a day appointed, the mony agreed on were not paid, it should be doubled and redoubled euery day till the payment. This mony by the negligence of the Kings Officers, grew so great a sum; that to satisfie Gonsales, the King made him the Proprietary Earle of Castile 939. The heire to the fift Proprietary Earle, was Donna Nugna married to Sancho the great of Navarre, 1208: by whom this Earledome was made a Kingdome, and giuen to Ferdinand his sonne, 1034.


The Kings of Castile.
1034
1 Ferdinand 32
1067
2 Sancho 6
1073
3 Alphonso 34
1107
4 Varraca 15
1122
5 Alphonso II. 35
1157
6 Sancho II. 2
1159
7 Alphonso III. 55
1214
8 Henry 3
1217
9 Ferdinand II. 35
1252
10 Alphonso IV. 32
1283
11 Sancho III. 12
1295
12 Ferdinand III. 17
1312
13 Alphonso V. 38
1350
14 Pedro the cruel. 18
1368
15 Henry II. 11
1379
16 Iohn 11
1390
17 Henry III. 17
1406
18 Iohn II. 48
1452
19 Henry IV. 21.
1475
20 Isabell of Castile.
1475
20 Ferdinand of Arragon. Of whose Acts and issue we will make more ample mention when we shall come to speake of the Spanish Monarchie, which in the daies of these Princes tooke beginning.

There are in these kingdomes of Castile and Leon three principall orders of Knighthood.Grimston.
Of S Iago; instituted according to Mariana by the Canons of Eloy, and confirmed by Alexander the third, 1175. Their ensigne is a Red crosse l^ke a sword. Others make K. Raymir of Leon the founder, anno 948; and some referre it to Ferdinand of Castile, 1170.
2 Of Calatrava; a Towne abandoned by the Templers, to whom it was giuen by Sancho of Castile, 1158, and defended against the Sarracens by Raimund Abbot of Pisoria He began this order, confirmed by Pope Alexander the 3, 1164: their Roabe is white, on their brests a red Crosse.
3 Alcantara; a towne of new Castile, defended by Fernand of L^on, against the M^ores, where he framed this order, confirmed by Pope Lucio, 1183. Their deuise is a Peare-tree Vert in a field Or to which hanged a paire of Shackles, as a signe of their subiection to them of Calatraua. These Armes were changed anno 1411, into a white Roabe and a green crosse on t^eir brests. These orders, as also the Templers of St Iohn, of the Sepulchre, and the ^ike, are by M Selden (and that deseruedly) thought vnfit, to be put ^mong titles Honorary; in that what they doe is in a certaine place, and for a stipend. I omit the order of the Doue and

Reason instituted by Iohn of Castile.


9. PORTVGALL.
Maginus.PORTVGALL is bounded on the North with the riuer Minius: on the South with the riuer Ana: on the West with the Ocean: and on the East by the Castiles. It is so called from the Hauen towne Port^, at the mouth of Duerus; where the Gaule^ vsed to land with their Merchandize: which was therefore called Por^us Gallorum, and since the whole Country Portugall. The former name hereof was Lusitania, and by the old Romans it was diuided into Vlteriorem, lying beyond Duerus North; Citeriorem lying from Tagus South; and Interamnem situate betweene these two riuers.
Ortelius.The ayre is very healthfull; the Country for the most part hilly and bare of corne: which defect is recompensed with the abundance of Hony, Wine, Oyle, Allum, Fruits, Fish, white Marble, Salt, etc. It containeth 1460 Parishes, and is in compasse 870 miles; the length 320; the bredth 60. The fruitfullest part of all the Countrey is about Conimbra.
The people hereof are of more plaine and simple behauiour the^ the rest of Spaine: and if we beleeue the proue^biall speech, none of the wisest: For whereas the Spaniards are said to seeme wise and are fooles; the French to seeme fooles and are wise: the Italians to seeme and be wise: the Portugalls are affirmed neither to be wise, nor so much as to seeme so* and not much different from this the Spaniards haue a proverbe, which telleth vs that the Portugalls are Pocos y locos, few and foolish. They haue a naturall antipathy to the Spaniards, for bereauing them both of liberty and glory. They are excel^ent Seafaring men, and happy in forraigne discouer^es.
Riuers it hath great and small almost 200. The chiefe are 1 Minius, full of red Lead, which is navigable 100 miles. 2 Duerus. 3 Lethes now Cavada. 4 Mulia^as now Mondego. 5 Tagus, and 6 Ana, these two last common to the rest of Spaine.
The ancient ^^colae were the Oretani, Lubeni, Velionet, etc. The chiefe Cities are Lisbon vpon Tagus, a famous City for traffique, the Portugals in all their navgations setting to sea (...) hence. The Latine Writers call it Olisippo, and Vlisippo, because as some say, Vlysses in his tenne yeares trauels comming hither,

built it. But this is improbable, it being nowhere found that Vlysses did euer see the Ocean; and likely it is, that this town being conveniently seated for navigation, and inhabited at the first by seafaring men, might be consecrated or dedicated, as it were to the memory of that notable traueller Vlysses: as Athons being a place of warre and learning, was to Minerva, whom the Greekes call Athenae.L^wknor. It is in compasse 7 miles, and containeth vpwards of 20000 houses, all of neat and elegant building. Towres and turrets it numbreth on the walls about 67, gates toward the sea shore 22, and 16 towards the Continent. Finally it was taken from the Moores by Alphonso the first King of this Country, 1147. 2 Miranda, 3 Braga the Metropolitan of Portugal, an Archi-episcopall See, and a Dukes honour, 4 Co^imbra a famous Vniuersity, the Masters of which, made the Commentary vpon the most part of Aristotle,Mercator. called Schola Conimbricensis. 5* Porto, or Portus Gallorum.
At the Southerne end of Portugal standeth Algarue, called of old, Regnum Algarbiorum: The chiefe Townes are Favila. 2 Faro. and 3 Silvis. The vtmost end of it was anciently called Prem^ntorium Sacrum, and now the Cape of S. Vincent, because the bones of S. Vincent, religously preserued by the Christians, were here burnt and scattered about by the Saracens,Hist. of Sp. who were the possessours of this Prouince. These gaue way to the good fortune of the Kings of Leon, to whose Crowne this litle countrey belonged: till Alphonso the tenth of that name in Leon, and fourth in Castile gaue it in dowry with Beatrix his daughter, to Alphonso the third, King of Portugal. From this conjunction issued Dionysius or Denis King of Portugal, who was the first that euer vsed the title of Rex Algarbiorum, 1274.
That part of Portugal which remained free from the Moores, was giuen by Alphonso the sixt of Leon, in dowry with his base daughter Teresa, to Henry of Lorreine, whose vertue in the discipline of warre, merited no lesse a reward, Ao 1099. Hee hauing gouerned fortunately as Earle, the space of 12 yeares, le^^ his sonne Alphonso heire to his vertues and possesions, who had title of King of Portugal, conferred on him by the Soueraignes of Leon, for demeaning himselfe so brauely in the battaile of Obrique

Ao 1139. Hee had before the assumption of this regall title, ruled in these parts 27 yeares; and after hee was created king, he reigned here with great honour, as being reverenced by his friends, and feared by his enemies; no lesse then 45 yeares. So that the whole time of his sitting in the Chaire of Estate was 72 yeares; a longer enioying of soueraignty then euer any Prince since the beginning of the Roman Monarchie attained to.Pr^opius. One I meete with, which fell short of this time two yeares onely, namely Sapores the son of Mislates king of Persia; but in one thing he went beyond Alphonso, beginning his reigne before his life. For his Father dying, left his mother with child, and the Persian Nobility set the Crown on his mothers belly, acknowledging thereby her issue for their Prince, before she as yet had felt her selfe quicke.

Hist. of Sp.The Kings of Portugall.
1139
1 Alphonso 45
1184
2 Sancho 28
1212
3 Alphonso II 11
1223
4 Sancho II. 34
1257
5 Alphonso III. 22
1279
6 Denis 46
1325
7 Alphonso IV. 32
1357
8 Pedro 10
1367
9 Ferdinand 17
1385
10 Iohn 48
1433
11 Edward 5
1438
12 Alphonso V. 43
1481
13 Iohn II. 14
1495
14 Emanuel 26
1521
15 Iohn III. 36
1557
16 Sebastian 21
1578
17 Henry the Cardidinal 2.
1580
18 Antonio Gouernor of Portugal, and King elect.

But
158019 Philip the 2d of Spaine, pretended a right to the Crowne of Portugal, and though he made shew it should be lawfully debated, to whom it truly appertained; yet meaning to make sure work, he made Cannons and Sword his Oratours, by maine force tooke it, and so keepeth it.
The Pretendants to the Crowne of Portugal were 1 Philip of Spaine. 2 Emanuel of Savoy. 3 Antonio Prior of Crato, (who though a bastard, had yet a sentence of legitimation) 4 Rain^ccio Farnesis, sonne to the Duke of Parma. 5 Iohn the Duke of Bragance. Their seuerall pretensions appear^ by this subsequent Genealogie.
Emanuel had these children
1 Iohn King of Portugal
Iohn Prince of Portugal
Sebastian king of Portugal.2 Henry the Cardinall, ki^g of Portugall.3 Lewis
Don Antonio a Bastard.
Christopher yet liuing.4 Edward
1 Mary wedded to the Duke of Parma
RainnocioFarnesis.2 Catharine married to Iohn D. of Bragance.5 Mary married to Charles the fifth, king of Castile.
Philip the II. king of Spaine.6 Beatrix married to Charles Duke of Savoy.
Where the right is, may as easily be discerned, as it is generally knowne where is the possession. Thus after the death, or if not death, yet ouerthrow of Sebastian, in that battle of Africa, where three kings fell in a day; the royal line of Portugal which began in a Henry, made its period in a Henry: and that flourishing kingdome was constrained to stoope to the Spaniards, of whose Garland, it is accounted the chiefest flowre; and the chiefest pearle of his Cabinet: The king of Spaine in right of this kingdome, possessing much in Barbarie, Aethiopia, and the East Indies: And in the right hereof, commanding all the Sea-coast from the streights of Gibraltare, vnto the Red seas mouth; from thence along the Arabian shore, vnto the Ile of Ormus, and so to Cape Liampo, in the Indies.
The Armes of Portugall are Argent, on fiue Escotcheons Azure, as many Besants in Saltier of the first, pointed Sable, within a border Gules,Grimston. charged with seuen Towres Or. The fiue Escotcheons were giuen in remembrance of fiue kings, whom Alphonso slew at the battaile of Obrique Ao 1139,
The principall order of this kingdome, is of IESVS CHRIST, instituted by Denis king of Portugal, and confirmed by Pope Iohn the 22d, anno 1321. Their duty was to expel the Saracous from Baetica: they haue much enlarged the Portugall dominion in India, Brasil, and Mauritania. Their Robe is a black Cloake, vnder a white vesture, ouer which a blacke Crosse, etc.


10 VALENTIA.
VALENTIA is environed with Arragon,Ortelius. Castile, Murela,

and the Sea. It is watred with the riuers 1 Xuear, called of olde Sueron, and Surus. 2 Guadalander, signifying a riuer of pure water, and 3 M^llar. The former inhabitants werr the Bast^ani, Aeliani, etc.
The chiefe cities are Valentia, giuing name to the whole Prouince. It is situate not farre from the mouth of the riuer Derias, now called Guadalander, and is by some said to haue beene heretofore named Roma, which signifieth strength. But when the Romanes mastred it, to distinguish it from their Rome, it was called Valentia, which in the Latine tongue is of the same signification with the Greeke (...). Here is an Vniuersity in which St Dominicke the father of the Dominicans studied. 2 Laurigi now a small Village,Plutarch. once a towne of great strength, called Lauron, which Sertorius besieged, took and burned; euen then when Pompey, whose confederate the Laur^nites were, stood with his whole armie nigh enough vnto the flame to warme his hands, and yet durst not succour it. 3 Cullera a sea-town standing at the mouth of the riuer Xucar. It was formerly named Sucron, after the name of the riuer; and is famous in story for the victory which Sertorius here got of Pompey, Pompey's army being not only ouerthrowne, but himselfe with life hardly escaping. 4 Morvedre anciently Saguntum, a towne so faithful to the Romans, that the people being besieged by Hannibal, chose rather to burne themselues, then yeeld. 5 Segorbe.
Here is the Promontorie Terraria, once called Pr^m^nterium Dionium, the refuge of the aboue-named Sertorius, that worthy Captaine, in his warres against Metellus and Pomp^y, both braue souldiers; the first aged, and of great experience; the second young, and of high resolutions; yet the former gaue greater check to Sertorius proceedings, than the latter: so that Sertorius oftentimes said, that were it not for the old woman Metellus, he would haue whipped the boy Pompey home with rods. For he twice ouercame this great Pompey, the first time dangerously wounding him, the second time driuing him out of the field. But when Pompey and Metellus ioyned, he was ouer-matched, and yet seemed to retire out of the field rather then to flie. Certainly the Spaniards behaued themselues very valiantly

all the time of these warres vnder him, to which Florus alludeth, saying; Nec nunquam magis apparuit Hispani militis vigor, quane Romano duce. At the last when he had a long time vpheld the Marian faction, he was traiterous^y murdred by Perpenna one of his associates; and Metellus and Pompey returned in triumph to Rome: so much was the casuall death of this poore Proscript esteemed.
This kingdome was taken from the Moores by Iames the first of Arragon,Bara. Ao 1238. The armes were Gules, a town embattailed Argent, purfled (or pennond) Sable.


11. CATELOGNE.
CATELOGNE is between Iberus on the South, Arragon on the West, the Sea on the East, and the Pyrenaan mountaines on the North.
The present name Catalonia is diuersly deriued, some bringing it from Gothalonia of the Gothes,Hist. of Sp. and Alani; Some from the Castellani the old inhabitants hereof; others from Cattalones, who also had their dwellings here; others from the Catti of Germany, and the Alani; and some finally from Carthalot a Noble man of this Country: of these opinions, all of which (the last excepted) are equally probable, it matters not which is taken.
The chiefe Cities are 1 Girone, the title of the Arragonian Prince, seated on the riuer, Baetulus. 2 Barcelone on the Sea, a town of good strength and antiquity, as rising out of the ruines of Rubicata, an old Colony of the Africans, before the comming of the Romanes into Spaine. It hath belonging vnto it an indifferent faire Hauen, and is the seat of the Vicegerent. 3 Perpigna (called in Iohnsons Map of Spaine, Perpinha) in the County of Rossillon. This town and the Country was pawned by Iohn king of Arragon 1462. to Lewis the 11th of France, for 300000 Crownes: and restored to Fernand the Catholique by Charles the 8th 1493, that he might uot be hindred in his journy to Naples. Francis the first, king of France, partly to requite the Emperour Charles the 5. for the warre he made in Provence; and partly to get into his hands a town, which is as it were one of the doores of Spaine: sent his son Henry (afterwards King) with a puissant

army to force it, Ao 1542. But the town was so well fortified, so brauely manned, and so abundantly stored with munition, that this journey proued as fruitlesse and dishonorable to the French king: as the invasion of Province, and siege of Marseiles, had bin before to the Emperour.
Hist. of Sp.The first Earle of this Country was one Bernard, by the grant of Charles the great, 795. It continued a principality of its own power, till Raymund Earle hereof, marrying Petronilla, daughter and heire to Don Raymir of Arragon; vnited this Earledome to that Kingdome, Ao 1134.


12. ARRAGON.
ARRAGON is limited Eastward with Catelogue, Westward with Castile, Northward with Navarre, Southward with Valentia: the Iberus runneth iust through the middle of the Country.
The ancient In^^la were the Iaccetani, Lucenses, Celtiberi, etc. These last were a mixt people, descended both from the Iberi, and the Celtae; of all Gallia the most potent Nation: who being too populous for their Country, passed ouer the Pyrenaei, and seated themselues here, whence this Nation was called Celtiberi, the Country Celtiberia.
Lucan.--profugique a gente vetustaGallorum, Celtaemiscentes nomen Iberi.Who being chas'd from Gaule their home, did frameOf Celtae and Iberi mixt, one name.
The present name is taken from Tarragon, a city which once gaue denomination to the greatest part of Spaine, and is situate on the borders of this Country, where it is confined with Catelogne. This town was built, fortified and peopled by the two Scipioes, the Father and Vncle of Africanus; to oppose and bridle Cartagena, not long before built by the Carthaginians.
The chiefe cities of Arragon are 1 Lerida an Vniversitie situate on the riuer Cinga, which rising in the Pyrenaean hils, and dividing Catelogne from Arragon, emptieth it self into the Iberus. It was called of old Ilerda, and is famous for the incounter which hapned nigh vnto it,Stadius in Florum. between Herculeius the Questor or Treasurer of Sertorius army; and Manilius Proconsul of Gallia;

wherein Manilius was so discomfited, and his army cons^sting of 3 Legions of foot, and 15 co horse, was so routed; that he almost alone was scarce able to recouer this City, few of his souldiers surviving the ouerthrow. 2 Moson famous for entertaining the King of Spaine euery third yeare; At which time the people of Arragon,Maginus. Valence, and Catelogne, present the king with 600000 Crownes: viz. 300000 for Catelogne, 200000 for Arragon, and 100000 for Valentia. And well may they thus doe, for at other times they sit rent-free as it were: only they acknowledge the king of Spaine to be the head of their Commonwealth. This revenue is proportionably 200000 Ctownes a yeare, all which if not more, the king again expends, in maintaining his Viceroyes in these seuerall Prouinces. 3 Iaca situate on the very Northerne edge of all the Country.Plutarch. 4 Huesca (called of old Osca) somwhat South of Iaca, an Vniversity, a place long since dedicated to learning. For hither Sertorius caused all the Noblemens sonnes of Spaine to be brought, and prouided them of Schoolemasters for the Greeke and Latine tongues: bearing their Parents in hand, that he did it only to make them fit to vndergoe charge in the Common-wealth: but indeed to haue them as hostages for their Fathers faith and loyalty towards him. 5 Tordesillo or Torizilla, and 6 Saragossa on the riuer Iberus or Ebro, an other Vniuersity. It was anciently named Caesarea Augusta: Caesar Augustus being the Founder of it, and vnder the Moores was a peculiar kingdome.Archb. Turpine. One of the kings was Aigoland, who long time made Charlemaigne belieue he would be baptized; and the time now at hand in which he should fulfill his promise, he very gallantly accompanied, came to the French Court: where seeing many Lazars and poore people expecting almes from the Emperours table, he asking what they were, was answered, that they were the Messengers and seruants of God: ou these words he speedily returned, desperatly protesting that he would not serue that God, which could keep his seruants no better. This town was recouered from the Moores by Alphonso of Navarre 1118. 7 Bilbilis (now Calataiub) the birth-place of MartialHist. of Sp.
About the first erecting of the kingdome of Ovicdo and Sobabre,

one Agnar obtained lands in Arragon, with the title of Earle, Ao 775. which he left to his son Galindo, from whom the sixt Earle was Don Fortun: His daughter Vrraca, marrying to Garcia Inigo of Navarre, Ao 867, conveyed this Earledome to that kingdome; of which it continued a member, till that Sancho the Great made it a kingdome, and gaue it to his naturall son Raymir, 1034.

The Kings of Arragon.
1034
1 Raymir 42
1076
2 Sancho 18
1094
3 Pedro 14
1108
4 Alphonso 16
1134
5 Raymir 0
1154
6 Petronilla of Arrag. 28
1154
6 Raimund of Catt. 28
1162
7 Alphonso II 34
1196
8 Pedro II. 28
1223
9 Iames 43
1276
10 Pedro III. 9
1285
11 Alphonso III. 6
1291
12 Iames the II 36
1322
13 Alphonso IV. 14
1336
14 Pedro IV. 51
1387
15 Iohn 8
1395
16 Martin 17
1412
17 Ferdinand 4
1416
18 Alphonso V. 42
1458
19 Iohn II. 20
1478
20 Ferdinand the Great, who by marriage with Q. Isabel, vnited Castile and Arragon, so that adding his other conquests, he deserues to be accounted the first Monarch of Spaine.

Bar^. Grimsten.The Armes are Or, eight pallets Gules.
The principall order of Knights here was of Sr Sauiour, instituted by Alphonso the first of Arragon 1118. to animate the Spaniards against the Saracens.
Hitherto of Spaine, distracted into many royalties, now one word of the Vnion of it in one body, and so an end.


THE MONARCHIE OF SPAINE.
Before the reigne of the last Ferdinand of Arragon, Spaine being diuided amongst many Potentates, was little famous, lesse regarded: the kings, as the Author of the politique dispute, etc. well noteth, being only kings of Figges and Orenges. Their

whole puissance was turned one against the other, and final atchieuements had they out of the Continent, vnlesse those of the house of Arragon in Sicile, Sardinia, and the Baleares. Thuanus a diligent writer of the History of his own times (if in some respects he sauour not more of the party then the Historian) telleth vs, that till this kings reigne, the name and glory of the Spaniard's was like their Country; confined and hemm'd in by the Seas on one part, and the mountains on the other; potiusque patuisse exteris invade^tibus, qua^ quicqua^ memorabile extra suos fines gessisse
But this Prince, worthily named the Great, seized on the Kingdome of Navarre, ruined the kingdome of the Moores in Granaeda, began by the conduct of Columbus the discouery of the Westerne Indies, banished 124. families of the Iewes, surprised the kingdome of Naples, vnited Castile to Arragon, and lastly by marrying his daughter Ioane to Philip, sonne to Maximilian the Emperour, Duke of Burgundie, and Lord of Belgia, laid the foundation of the present Austrian greatnes.Sands in the d^sc. of relig. Between whose successours and that family, haue bin so many inter-mariages, that king Philip if he were aliue, might haue called the Archduke Albertus, Brother, Cousin, Nephew, and sonne; A strange medley of relations. Thus by the puissance of this Prince, Nomen Hispanicum (as the same Thuanus writeth) obscurum antea and vicinis pene incognitum, tum primum emersit; tractuque temporis in tantam magnitudinem excrevit, ut formidolosum ex eo and terribile, toti terrarum orbi esse coeperit. Indeed to his Countrymen the French, the name and puissance of the Spaniard hath ministred no small matter of feare and terrour; yet are there some others, who being weighed in the scales of war with them, would find them to be but light coyne, at least if they knew their own waight. Yet without doubt this Realme is euen to wonder strengthned and enlarged; strongly vnited and compacted with all the ligaments of power and state in it selfe; and infinitly extended ouer the most principall parts of not Europe onely, but of the World also: his dominions beholding, as it were, both rising and setting of the Sunne in his East and Westerne Indies, which before the Spaniard, no Monarch could euer say. A great change, which 140 yeares since, no man would

haue belieued to haue bin possible to be effected.
Concerning the title of the most Catholique King, reattributed to this Ferdinand;Hist. of Sp. I find that Alphonso the first, of Oviedo, was so named for his sanctity: with him this title died, and w^s reviued in Alphonso the great, the twelfth king of Leon and Oviedo, by the grant of Pope Iohn the 8. After it lay dead till the d^yes of this Prince, who reobtained this title from Pope Alexander the sixt: either because he compelled the Moores to bee baptized, banished the Iewes, and in part converted the Ameri^ans vnto Christianity: or because, hauing vnited Castilo to his Dominions, surprized the kingdome of Navarre, and subdued that of Granada, he was in a manner the Catholique or generall King of all Spaine* The last reason seemeth to sway most in the restauration of this attribute; in that when it was granted or confirmed on Ferdinando by Pope Alexander the sixt; the King of Portugal exceedingly stomached it, quando Ferdinandus imperio vniversam Hispaniam (saith Maria^) non obtinere^; eius tum nou exigu^ parte penes reges alios. This title on what consideration soeuer regranted, is assumed by his posterity; it being to them as the most Christian to France, and the Defender of the Faith to England.
The ordinary reuennue of this Monarch, his Crowne, and its appendices,Boterns. are eleuen Millions of crownes; Viz; Foure from hir Dominions in Italy, two from Portugall and her territories, three from the Westerne Indies, and the other two remaining from his other kingdomes of Spaine and the lesser Islands. His extraordinary reuenewes are uery great, as being Master of the Orders of S. Iogo,Hist. of Sp. Calatraua, and Alcantara, incorporate to the Crowne by Ferdinand the Catholique, and that on good pollicie: for the Masters of these seuerall Orders drewe after them such a troupe of the Nobility, that their power began to be suspected to the Kings. On this and other cousiderations the Author of the generall History of Spaine reckoneth his reuenewes according to diuers opinions, to 14, 18, and 23, Millions of Crownes. To make vp the summe, he addeth the first fruits, and some part of the Tithes, amounting vnto three millions; and the Author of the Politique dispute about the happiest, etc. affirmeth

the pardons sent into the Indies, which are giuen him by the Pope, to be worth halfe a million of Crownes yearely. Adde herevnto the fall and disposall of all offices,Maginus. which make vp a round summe, and the free gifts and contributions of his subiects which amount to a good revenew. For the kingdome of Naples giueth him euery third yeare a million and 20000 crownes; and (to omit others) Castile did of late grant him a contributio^ of foure millions to be paid in 4 yeares. Yet is not this Prince very rich, his expences being very great, first in keeping Garrisons in the heart of all his Countries, against the reuolt of the natiues: secondly in maintaining the fortresses on the frontires, against forraigne inuasions: thirdly in continuall pay of an Armada, for the conducting of his gold from America: and fourthly the vnprofitable warres of Philip the second haue plunged the Crowne so in the gulfes of Bankers and mony men, that much of the Kings lands is ingaged for their repaiment.

The Monarchs of Spaine.Hist. of Sp.
1475
1 Ferdinand K. of Arrag. Scilie, Sardmia, Maiorca, Valencia, Earle of Catelogue; surprised Navar.
1475
1 Isabel Q. of Castile, Leon, Gallicia, Tolledo, Murc^a, Lady of Biscay; conquered Granada.
1504
2 Ioane Princesse of Castile, Granada, Leon, etc. and of Arragon, Navarre, Scicily, etc.
1504
2 Philip Archduke of Austria, Lord of Belgia.
1506
3 Charles king of Castile, Aeragon, Naples, etc Archduke of Austria, Duke of Millaine, Burgundie, Brabant, etc. Earle of Catelogne, Flanders, Holland, etc. Lord of Biscay, Freizland, Vtrect, etc. and Emperour of the Germans. A m^n of that magnanimity and puissance, that had not Francis the first, in time opposed him, hee had euen swallowed all Europe. He was of great strength and reputation in Tunis, and other pa^ts of Africa, disposing Kings at his pleasur^; but the Turk^ broke his power there, and being hunted also out of Germanie, he resigned all his kingdomes and died priuate. 52.
1558
4 Philip the II, of more ambition, but lesse prosperity then his father: for whilst he catched after the shadow, he

lost the substance. The Hollanders, and their confederates droue him out of eight of his Belgiqus Provinces; The English ouerthrew his Armada, and awing the Ocean almost impouerished him; onely hee held for a time, a hard hand ouer France; but casting vp his accounts, found that himselfe was the looser: and were it not that the inuasion and detension of Portugall (iust or vniust let the world iudge) had beene a stay vnto him, he had v^done himselfe and his issue for euer. 40.
1598
5 Philip the III, (his elder brother Charles permitted to be put to death by his father in the Inquisition house, for seeming to fauour the miserable estate of the Lowcountrey-men) succeeded. 22.
1621
6 Philip the IV, of the age of 18 yeares, is now liuing.

This Empire consisting of so many seuerall kingdomes, vnited into one body, may seem to be inuincible. Yet had our late Queene followed the counsell of her men of warre, shee might haue broken it in peeces. With 4000 men, shee might haue taken away his Indies from him, without whose gold the Low-country Army, which is his very best, could not bee paid, and so must needs be dissolued. Nay, Sr Walter Raleigh in the Epilogue of his excellent history of the world, plainely affirmeth, that with the charge of 200000l, continued but for two yeares or three at the mo^t; the Spaniards might not only haue beene perswaded to liue in peace: but all their swelling and ouerflowing streames might be brought backe to their naturall chanells and old bankes. Their owne prouerbe saith, the Lion is not so fierce as he is painted: yet the Americans tremble at his name, it's true: and it is well obserued by a great politician, that things which seeme to be and are not,Machiauil. are more feared farre ^ff, th^n m^re at hand.

Damianus a ^oes reckoned in Spaine,
Archbishops 8.
Dukes 23.
Marquesses 45.
Bishops 48.
Earles 106.
Vicounts 10.



Vniversities 15.
1 Tolledo
2 Sivill. And.
3 Valencia
4 Granada
5 S^ Iago. Gall.
6 Valladolit Cast.
7 Alcata He. Cast.
8 Salamanca Cast.
9 Siguenca Cast.
10 Ebora Port.
11 Saragossa Ar.
12 Lerida Ar.
13 Huesca Ar.
14 Lisbon Port.
15 Conimb. Port.

And let this suffice for Spaine.



THE PYRENEAN HILLS.
Betwixt Spaine and France,Hist. of Sp. are the Mountaines cal'd Pyrenaei; and that either because they are often strucken by thunder; or because they were once fired by certain shepheards, 880 yeares before Christ, at which time the Mines of gold and siluer ranne streaming downe for so many dayes, that the fame hereof incited forreiners to make an entry into this country: Or lastly of Pyrene a Nymph, the daughter of one Bebrix, supposed by some fabulous writers to haue been here rauished by Hercules. These hills not only stand as a naturall bound, between the two great and puissant Monarchs of France and Spaine; terminating as it were, the desires and attempts of one against the other, as well as their dominions: but are also that necke of land or Istmus which tieth Spaine to the Continent, the Cantabrian Ocean fiercely beating on the West, and the Mediterranea^ gently washing the East ends of them.Brerewood. The highest part of this continued ridge of hill, is mount Canus, whereon if one standeth, hee may in a cleere day see both the Seas. It tooke the name of Canus from the whitenesse or hoarinesse thereof, as hauing on its top for the most part a cap of snow: in which respect the Alpes tooke their name, that in the Sabine dialect being tearmed Alpum, which in the Roman was called Album: and so also did mount Lebanon, Leban in the ancient Phoenician language, signifying white,Plutarch. and Lebanah whitenesse. The barbarous people inhabiting these mountaines, compelled Sertorius in his passage into Spaine, to pay them tribute or custome-money for his passage through them: at which, when the Souldiers murmured, as a thing dishonourable for a Roman Proconsull; hee replied that

he bought onely time; a commodity which such as aspire to haughty enterprises must take vp at any rates.
Hist. of. Fr.The French side of these hills is naked and barren, the Spanish very fertile, and adorned with trees. On this side standeth R^n^evalles so famous for the battle betwixt the Frenchmen and the Moores; in which 20000 of the French were put to route; together with Rowland, cosen to Charles the great, Oliuer, and other Peere of France, of whom so many fabulous stories are related in old histories. The first that broke the ice was Turpine Archbishop of Rheimes, and one of the 12 Peeres of France, who taking vpon him to write the acts of Charles the great, hath interlaced his story with a number of ridiculous lyes: so that the valour of Rowland, Oliver, and the rest, is much blemished and obscured by those relations, which purposely were faigned to manifest and increase it.


OF FRANCE.
Maginus.FRANCE is bounded on the North with Mare Britannicum, on the West with the Aquitaine Sea, on the South with the Mediterranean, on the Southeast with the Alpes: and on the East, with the River Rheine, and an imaginary line, drawne from Strasbourg to Callice.
It was first called Gallia from (...), milke, because of the inhabitants white colour: and afterwards France of the Francones a people of Germanie, which in the decay of the Roman Empire here seated themselues.
The figure of it is almost square each side of the quadrature being in length 600 miles; it is sited in the Northerne temporat Zone, betweene the sixt, and eight Cl^mates, the longest day being 16 houres.
B^terus.The Country is wondrous populous, supposed to conteine 15 Millions of liuing soules, for the most part being of an ingenious nature, curious, luxurious, and inconstant. As now so in Caesars time they were noted for ouermuch precipitation in all affaires, both Martiall and Civill, entring an action like thunder and ending it like smoake; Primus impetus maior quam virorum,

secundus minor quans faeminarum, was their Character in the time of the historian Florus. Heare if you will, a comparison (homely I confesse but) to the life, and beyond all parallell expressing the nature of the Dutch, French, and Spanish, in matters of warre. The French is said to be like a Fl^a, quickly skipping into a country, and as soone leaping out of it. Such was the expedition of Charles the 8th into Italie. The Dutch is said to bee like a Louse; slowly mastering a place, and as slowly (yet at last) being driuen from their hold. Such was their taking and loosing of Ostend and Gulicke. The Spaniard is said to be like a Crabbe, or pediculus inguinalis, which being crept into a place, almost at vnawares, is there so fast rooted; that nothing but the ex^remity of violence is able to fetch him out againe. I thinke I need not instance, it being generally obserued that the Spaniard never mastered any place, that euer he surrendred on composition. Moreouer this French nation is endued chiefely with Phrygian wisdome;View of Fr. whence it is said, that the Italian is wise before hand, the Germane in the action, the French after it is done. They are very litigious, insomuch as it is thought, that there are more co^trouersies tried there, betweene subiect and subiect in 7 yeares: then haue beene in England since the Conquest. They are great scoffers, yea euen in matters of Religion, as appeareth by th^ story of a Gentleman lying on his death-bead: who when the Priest had perswaded him, that the Sacrament of the Altar was the very body and bloud of Christ; refused to receaue it because it was Friday. Nor will I forget another of that quality, and in the same extremity; who seeing the hoast (so they call the Lords body consecrated) brought vnto him by a lubberly Priest: said that Christ came vnto him, as he entred into Hierusalem, riding vpon an Asse. The women are witty but apish, wanton and incontinent, where a man at his first entrance may haue arquaintance, and at his smallest acquaintance may enter: willing to be courted at all times, and places. Thus Dallington in his view of France, describeth them: but I haue since heard this censure condemned, and the French G^ntlewomen highly magnified for all vertues and gracee, which innoble and adorne that sexe. Between these so different opinions, I will not determine; but leaue my

Reader to moderate the disputation (as I my selfe doe) by his owne charity.
View of Fr.The chiefe exercises are. 1 Tennis, every Village hauing a Tennis-Court, Orleans 60, Paris many hundreds. 2 Dancing, a sport to which they are so generally affected, that were it not so much inueighed against by their straight-laced Ministers, it is thought many more of the Catholiques had beene reformed.
The language of the Spaniards is said to be manly, the Italians Courtly, and the French amorous. A smooth language truely it is, the people leauing out in their pronunciation many of their Consonants, and there withall giuing occasion of this Prouerb, The French-man writes not as he pronounceth, speaketh not what he thinketh, nor singeth as he pricketh: it is a compound of the old Gallique,Br^rewood, Germane, and Latine tongues. The old Gallique tongue was questionles the Welsh or Brittish, which most cleerly appeareth by two reasons. 1 The Latine words are knowne to haue beene receaued from the Romans, and the Germano at the comming in of the Franks and Burgundians: but of the Welsh words no reason can bee giuen, but that they are the remnants of the old language. 2ly, Tacitus telleth vs among other notes of comparison betweene the Gaules and the Brittaines, whereby he firmely proueth the latter to bee the ofspring of the former: that Vtriusque sermo hand multum diuersus. And of these Brittish words continuing in the French language, Mr Camden hath in his Brita^nia reckon^d a great many.
View of Fr.The soyle is extraordinarily fruitfull, hauing three loadstones to draw riches out of other countries; Corne, Wines, and Salt: in exchange of which is yearely brought into France ^ 200000l sterling; the custome of Salt onely being worth to the King 70000 Crownes yearely. It cannot but bee well stoared with Fish, for beside the benefit of the Seas; the Lakes and Ponds belonging only to the Clergie, are 135000. The other Marchandize of this flourishing kingdome, are Beefes, Hogs, Nuts, Almonds, Coroll, Oade, Linnen, Canuis, and Skinnes.
This country could neuer boast of any famous Captain but of Charles the Great, the founder of the Westerne Empire, and one of the three Christian Worthies; and of late glorieth in the

valour of Henry the fourth. For learning it hath bin somewhat more luckie, as producing Ausonius, P Ramus, S Bernard, Calvin Beza, and that worthy Poet the darling of the Muses Salust^us du Bartas.
The Christian Religion was first planted here among the Gaules,Munster. by Martialis whom St Peter sent hither: but among the French, by St Remigius, in the time of Clovis the Great. The people are now diuided, some following the Romish synagogue, others the Reformed Church. These latter are called Hugonots, so named,View of Fr. as they say, of a gate in Tours (where they first began) called Hugo's gate, out of which they vsed to goe to their private assemblies. There were reckoned some 53 yeares since, about 2150 Churches of them: which cannot in such a long time but be wonderfully augmented, though scarce any of the^ haue scaped some Massacre,Hist. of Fr. or other. Of these Massacres, two are most memorable, viz; that of Merindoll and Chabriers, as being the first; and the Massacre at Paris, as being the greatest. That of Merindoll hapned in the yeare 1545, the ^nstrument of it being Minier the President of the Councell of Aixe. For having condemned this poore people of heresie, he mustred a smal Army and set fire on the Villages. They of Merindoll, seeing the slame, with their wiues and children fled into the woods, but were there butchered, or sent to the gallies. One boy they took, placed him against a tree, and shot him with Caliuers: 25 which had hid themselues in a Caue, were in part stifled, in part burned. In Cabriers they so inhumanely dealt with the yong wiues and maids, that most of them died immediatly after: The men and women they put to the sword; the children they rebaptized: 800 men were murdered in a Caue, and 40 women put together in an old Barne and burned. Yea such was the crueltie of the Souldiers to these poore women, that when some of them has clambred to the top of the house, with an intent to leape downe, the Souldiers beat them backe againe with their pikes. The Massacre of Paris was more cunningly plotted. A peace was made with the Protestants, for the assurance whereof a marriage was solemnized betweene Henry of Navar, cheefe of the Protestants partie; and the Lady Margaret the Kings sister.

At this wedding there assembled the Prince of Conde, the Admirall Colligni. and divers others of great note. But at this solemnity there was not so much wine dranke, as bloud shed. At mid-night the watch-bell rang, the King of Nauarre, and the Prince of Conde were taken prisoners; the Admirall most villanously slaine in his bed; and to the number of thirty thousand and vpward, of the best, and most potent of the Religion, sent through this red sea, to the land of Canaan. Anno 1572.
The reuenewes haue much altered. Lewis the 11th gathered one Million and a halfe of Crownes;View of Fr. Francis the first brought them to three Millions; his successour Henry the second to six; Charles they 9th to seuen; Henry the third to ten; and now they are inhanced to fifteene. But what need more be said then that of Lewis the 11th, who said that France was a Meddowe which he mowed euery yeare, and as often as he list: and indeed their impositions cannot but bee great, since there are no lesse then 30000 vnder officers imployed to gather them. Hence I beleeue sprung that wish of Maxim^llian the Emperour, which was, that he, (if it were possible) might be a God: and that hauing two sonnes, the eldest might be a God after him; and the second K. of France. And this also was the cause that in the wars between Charles the fift, and Francis the first, when the Emperours Herald had bid defiance to the King; from Charles ^mperour of Germanie, King of Castile, Leon, Arragon, and Naples; Archduke of Austria, with the rest of his titles: The king commanded the Heralds to returne the challenge from Francis King of France; commanding them to repeat France as many times, as the other had petty Earledomes in his stile.
Sleidan.There are at this time in this kingdome 27400 parishes; which though many,Comment. fall much short of the reckoning made in the daies of Lewis the 11th, when here were esteemed to bee no lesse then 100000 of them. Whether the many ciuill warres haue demolished the greater part, or that Chappells of ease, Oratories and Monasticall Churches went to make vp the number, I wot not.
View of Fr.The lawes of this Kingdome are either temporall: or fundamentall, which no King or Parliament can alter. Of the latter

of these the chiefe are two, the Salique, and the law of Apennages. This of Apenuages is a law whereby the younger Sonnes of the King cannot haue partage with the elder. This law was made by Charlemagne, before whose time France was diuidable into as many Kingdomes, as the King had sonnes. By this law the younger (though sometimes they are content with ye^rely pensions) are to be entituled to some Dutchie, and all the profits and rights thereto appertaining, all matters of regalitie only excepted; as coynage, leuying taxes, and the like. It is deriued from the German word Abannage, which signifieth a portion. The Salique law, is a law whereby the Crowne of France cannot fall from the Lance to the Dist^ffe (as their saying is) which law one vndertaking to proue out of holy writ, vrged that place of Mathew, where it is said, Marke the Lillies (which are the armes of France) and see how they neither labour nor spin. This law they pretend to haue beene made by Pharamond their fast King, and that the words, Si Aliqua, so often mentioned, gaue it the name of the Salique law: Hailan, one of their best writers, saith it was neuer heard of in France till the dayes of Philip the faire 1321. Others say it was framed by Charles the great after his conquests in Germany, where the incontinent liues of the women liuing about the riuer Sala (in the Country now called Misnia) gaue both the occasion and name to this law, the words are these,Selden. De terra vero Salica nulla portio haereditatis mulieri veniat, sed ad virilem sexum tota terra haereditas perueniat. This Terra Salica, Mr Selden in his titles of honour, Englisheth Knights fee, or land holden by Knights seruice. He proueth his interp^e^atio^ by a court ^oll of the Parliament of Burdeaux; where there being produced an old testament, by which the testator had bequeathed to his sonne his Salique land, it was by the Court resolued that thereby was meant his land holden in Knights fee. This interpretation admitted, the sense of the law must be, that in lands holden of the King by Knights fee, or the like military tenure, only the males should inherit, because the women could not performe those seruices by which the lands were holden. In England we deale not with women so vnkindly, but permit them to enioy such lands after their age of 15

yeares, because then they may take such husbands as are able to doe the King the duties and seruices required. But this interpretation, how good and genuin soeuer indeed it be, cannot stand with the French Glosse: For then the Crowne being holden of none but God only, and so not properly called a fee or feife, were vncapable of that priuiledge of exclud^ng women from the Salique land. Giue them therefore their owne Glosse, their owne Etymologie, and originall; and let vs see, by what right their Kings daughters are debarred from the Diadem. For if that were the S^lique land where now is Misnia, how can this law barre Females from the Diadem of France so farre distant from it? Moreouer, is it not against the law of Nations, and (which is more) contrary to the direct word of the most high? For wee read in Numbers cap. 27. that the daughters of Zelopedah were adiudged to possesse the inheritance of their father. All Kingdomes else admit women to the Regency; yea euen France it selfe most seruilely hath submitted it selfe twice, to the imperious command of two women of the Medices. But suppose this law to be made by Pharamond, to concerne France, to bee consonant with the lawes of other nations, and the word of God; doth it therefore appertaine to all France? Nothing lesse. Pharamond had then not so much as the Il^ of France, wherein Paris is seated: and it had beene an absurd and madde thing in him, to giue the law to Princes more potent then himselfe, and to whose territories he had neither right nor hope.
Againe, we see the French for their own particular good, not a whit to haue regarded it, King Pipin hauing put his Master Childericke into a Monastery, to patch vp his broken title to the Crowne, drewe his pedegree from some of the daughters, of the issue of the former Princes. As also Hugh Capet putting aside Charles of Lorraine, the right heire of the stocke of this Pepin; to make his bad attempts more seemingly honest, drewe his title by the Daughters of the issue of Charles the great. And Lewis the ninth, so renowned for his sanctity, neuer inioyed the crown with a quiet conscience, till it was proued vnto him, that by the Grandmothers side, hee was descended from the heires of the fore-mentioned Charles of Lorraine. Thus hath it beene with

them for France it selfe. Haue they dealt thus with other Provinces? Certainely thus and no otherwise. Charles the 8 ^ se^sed on the Dutchie of Brittaine, and his successours since haue kept it by the right of Anne his wife, the daughter vnto Francis the last Duke. I aske then this question; did this law extend to one only part of France (namely the Isle wherein Pharamonds posterity first reigned) or to euery part? If to all ioyntly; with what right could Charles the 8th possesse himselfe of Brittaine, in right of his wife, who no question was a woman: when there were some of the male line of that Ducall family surviuing? If it belong to that part only; with what colour can they dawbe their forcible withholding of it from the true heire of Anne the Dutches; whose daughter and heire Claude, had issue by Francis the 1 her husband, Henry the second, her sonne and heire: whose eldest Daughter and Heire (after the death of her foure brothers, Francis the second, Charles the 9th, Henry the 3d, and Francis Duke of Aniou, all dying without issue) was Elizabeth, married to Philip the 2d of Spaine. So that it is euident by who^soeuer this law was enacted, and howsoeuer it did extend; it is of no such force, but that the Labels of it may easily be cut in peeces, by an English sword well whetted.
Some account this Salique law to be a great happines to the French nation, not so much in relation to the vnfitnesse of women to gouerne (for therein some of them haue gone beyond most men) but because thereby the Crowne o^ France is not indangered, to fall into the hands of strangers. These men consider not how great Dominions may by this meanes be incorporate to the Crowne. They remember not how Maude the Empresse being married to Ge^frie Earle of Aniou, Touraine, and Meine, conveied those countries to the Diadem of England; nor what rich and fertile Provinces were added to Spaine, by the match of the Lady Ioane to Arch-Duke Philip. Neither doe they see that ineffable blessing which England now eni^yeth by the coniunction of Scotland proceeding from a like mariage. Yet there is a saying in Spaine, that as a man should desire to liue in Italy because of the ciuility and ingenious natures of the people; and to dye in Spaine because there the Catholique Religion

is so sincerely professed: so he should wish to bee borne in France, because of the noblenesse of that nation, which neuer had any King but of their owne country.
The chiefest enimies to the French haue beene the English, and Spaniards; the former had here great possessions, diuerse times plagued them, and tooke from them their kingdome, but being call'd home by ciuill dissentions, lost all. At their departure the French scoffingly asked an English Captaine, when they would returne?Camden. Who feelingly answered, when your sinnes are greater then ours. The Spaniards began but of late with them, yet haue they taken from them Navarre, Naples, and Millaine; they displanted them in Florida, poysoned the Dolphin of Vienneys, droue their King Henry the 3d out of Paris and most of his other Citties, all which they possest: at last they caused him to bee murdered, and intended the like to his successours; a Series of iniuries more memorable then marriageable. Concerning the last warres which the Spaniard made in France, when hee sided with the Duke du Maine, and the rest of those Rebells, which called themselues the Holy League, whereof the Duke of Guise was the Author; against the two Kings Henry the 3d and 4th: a French Gentleman made this excellent allusion. For being asked the causes of these ciuill broyles, he replied they were ^pania and Mania: seeming by this answere to signifie (...) penurie, and (...) furie, which are indeed the causes of al intestine tumults; but couertly therein implying the King of Spaine and the Duke of Maine.C^mines. In former times there were no nations more friendly then these, the Kings of Castile and France be^ng the neerest confederated Princes in Christendome. For their league was betweene King and King, Realme and Realme, Subiect and Subiect; which they were all bound vnder great curses to keepe inviolable.
V^iw of Fr.This Countrey is wonderfully stored with riuers, the chiefest whereof is 1 Seine, which arising in Burgundy, watring the citties of Paris and Roane; and receauing into it nine nauigable streames, disburdeneth it selfe into the British Ocean. 2 Some, vpon which standeth Amiens; it hath its head about S Quintins, diuideth Picardie from A^toys, and hauing receaued eight lesser

streames looseth it selfe in the Sea. 3 Loyre; on which are seated Nantes and Orleance; it riseth about the mountaines of Avergue (being the greatest in France:) and hauing runne 600 miles, and augmented his Channell with the entertainement of 72 lesser rivulets, mingleth his sweet waters with the brackish Aquitane Ocean. 4 Rhoane, which springing at Driga, three miles from the head of Rhene, watreth Lyons (where it receaueth Sone hastning from Alsatia) then Avignion, and lastly taking in 13 lesser brookes, stealeth into the Mediterranean Sea at Arles. And 5 Garond, which running from the Pyrenean hills to Blay, standing on the Aquitaine Ocean; glideth by the walls of Burdeaux, and Tholouse, and receaueth 16 lesser riuers. Of these the Seine is the richest, the Rhoane the swiftest, the Garond the greatest, and the Loyre the sweetest.
This fruitfull Region (if we may, as I thinke not, giue credence to report) was first peopled by Samothes, the sixt sonne of Iophet, called in the Scriptures Mesech, in the yeare of the world 1806. The ofspring attributed to him were certainely a warlike nation, without whose loue no king could secure himselfe from imminent dangers. They were very sparing in their diet, and vsed to fine any one that outgrewe his girdle. With these men the Romans fought, rather for their owne preservation, then in any hope by a conquest of them to enlarge their Dominions. Yet at last they vndertooke the warre, but not till they had subiected almost all the residue of the world. And the^ also no^ so much by the valour of the Romans (though the war was managed by the most able Captaine that euer Rome gaue breath to:) as by their own diuisions,Plutarch. were they brought vnder. These men had formerly vnder the conduct of Bremus, said to be the brother of Be^inus King of England, discom^ited the Romans at the riuer Allia; sacked the Citty, and beseiged the Capitoll, Anno M. 3577; V.C. 365. In this cause they so terrified the Romans, that after their expulsion from Rome by Camillus, there was a law made; that the Priests, though at al other times exempted, should be compelled to the warre, if euer the Gaules came againe. From Rome they marched on to Greece, where they spoyled and ransackt the Temple of Delphos, for which sacrilege,

they were visited with the pestilence. Such as suruiued this plague, went into Asia, and there gaue name to that countrey, now called Galatia.
B^rt^s.The antique Gaule in rouing euery wayAs farre as Phoebus darts his golden ray,Seiz'd Italy: the worlds prowd mistresse sacktWhich rather Mars then Romulus compact,Then spoiles Pisidia, Misia doth inthrall,And midst of Asia plants another Gaule.
This countrey after 40 yeares resistance by the valour and good fortune of Caesar became tributary to the Romanes; and so remained till their apparant declining,Hist. of Fr. when the Francones, the Burgundians, and Gothes wrested the most of it from the Romane Monarchie. Betweene these three mighty nations was France diuided in this manner. The Gothes possessed all the country betweene the Rhoane, East; the Aquitaine Ocean, West; the Loyre, North; and the Pyrenean hills, South. The Burgundians had all which lieth betweene the Alpos and the Rhene, East; the Rhoane West; Lorreine, North; and the Mediterranean, South. All the rest together with Belgia belonged to Franks, whose King Charlemaine vtterly ruined the kingdome of the Gothes: and his successours by little and little haue brought to almost nothing, that of the Burgundians. By the Romans this country was diuided into three parts, viz: Belgicam, environed with the Rhene, the Marne, the Seine, and the Ocean: 3ly, Aquitanicam, which reached from the Pyrenean hills to the Garound; and contained also all the sea coasts vp to the Loyre: 3ly, Celticam, which comprehended all the rest; and was subdiuided into Lugdunensem, containing Daulphine, Savoy, and both Burgundies; and Nar^onensem, comprehending Languedocke, and Provence. To Celtica, properly and more strictly so called, appertained Berry, Burbon, Anion, Brittaine. After the comming of these new conquerours, it was diuided into many Prouinces, whereof the chiefe are. 1 Gascoyne, and Guyen. 2 Poicton. 3 Anion. 4 Brittain. 5 Normandy. 6 France. 7 Berry. 8 Limosin. 9 Languedocke. 10 Provence. 11 Picardie, and Campaigne. 12 Daulphine. 13 The Dutchy. 14 The Earledome of Burgundy. 15 Savoy. 16 Lorrain.

Of some of these La No^e passeth this censure. The men of Berry are Leachers: they of Touraine or Aniou Theeues: They of Languedocke Traitors: They of Provence are Atheists: They of Rh^mes (in Campaigne) superstitious: They of Normandy insolent: They of Picardie prowd: and so of the rest.

1. GASCOYNE and GVIEN.
GASCOYNE and GVIEN comprehend in a manner all Gallia Aquitanica bounded with the Pyrenean hills, the Aquita^ne Ocean, and Garound. It took this name from the Vascones, a people of Spaine, who here seated themselues. Next to the Pyrenean hils lieth the Lordship of Berne, belonging to the kings of Navarre, euer since it and the Earledome of Foix were vnited to that Crowne Anno 1481. It continued very faithful vnto Henry of Burbon late King of France and Navarre,Camden. during his troubles after the death of Henry the 3d* insomuch that hee was in mockage called by his enimies the Biernoys. Of this Earledome the chiefe Citty is Oleron. Nigh vnto it lieth the Earledome of Foix, two of whose Earles are of great fame, viz: Iohn de Foix, whom our Henry the sixt for his faithfull seruice in the French warres, created Earle of ^endale; which addition of honour some of that family still retaine: And Gaston de Foix so renowned in the warres of Italie. These principalities were together ioyned by the marriage of Marguerit, heire of Berne, vnto Roger Bernard, Earle of Foix, 1262. and both together connected to the Crowne of Navarre by the matrimoniall vnion of Leonora Princesse of Navarre, and Gastone of Foix. Here are also the Earledomes of Arminacke, Cominges, Bigorre, and Albret. The chiefe Citties in this tract generally are, 1 Tholouse supposed to be built when Deborah iudged Israel: here was a Parliamentary Court erected for the administration of Iustice in these parts,Ortelius. 1302. It was observed that certaine Souldiers hauing stolne sacrilegiously some Gold out of the Temples of Tholouse (when it was sackt by Cepio a Roman Consul) came all to miserable and vnfortunate ends; hence grewe that Adage, Aurum habet Tholosanum,Fr. Hist. applied to vnhappy men. The fieldes about this towne are in old writers called Campi Catalanniel, extending in length 100, and in breadth 70 French Leagues. In

these fields was fought that terrible battle betweene Attila King of the Hunnes, and Aet us the Roman Leistenant in France. Aetius was strengthned by the Gothes, Franks, Burgundians, and Germans. Attilas army consisted of Hunnes, Eruli, Scythes, Sarmatians, and Suevians, to the number of 500000; of which 180000 that day lost their liues; Attila himselfe being dr^uen to that desperate plunge, that making a funerall pile of Horse saddles, he would haue burned himselfe. But his enemies weary of well doing gaue him leaue to retire homeward through Italie, which he harassed with sire and sword, murdering the people, and ruining the townes, so that he was then and long after called Flagellum dei. Aetius notwithstanding this good seruice, was by Valentinian Emperour of the West, rewarded with the losse of his head. By which act, the Emperour (as one told him) had cut off his right hand with his left. And indeed so it hapned, for not long after he himselfe was by Maximianus murdered, and the Empire of Rome irrecouerably destroyed. 2 Burdeaux where our king Richard the second was borne, and all about whose territories there are yet very apparant footstepps of the English tongue. It is honoured with an Vniuersity; as also with Parliamentary authority for the adiacent Countries, Ao 1443. 3 Bazas on the Garond; and 4 Bayen on the coast of Spaine.
View of Fr.On the Northerne end of this Countrey ioyneth the little Province Xaintoigne, the chiefe Towns are Sainctes (olim, Mediolanum) and Rochel, the best fortefied towne of all France, and the best fortresse of the Protestants.
It will not be amisse in this place, to say somewhat of the war^es which the Citizens of this Towne haue diuers times maintained against the French King in defence of Religion. At the end of the second ciuil warres,French hist. Ao 1568 many townes considering how ill the former peace had bin obserued, refused to take in any of the kings garrisons, neither would they permit any of the Papists to beare office among them. Of those, Rochel was one; which also contrary to the kings command, maintained a navie for their safety by sea, and continued their fortifications for their defence by land. So that hither the Queen of Navarre and her son retired as to a place of security, 1570, Rochel

of all the French townes, only held good for the Protestants, and is by M. Iarvill on all sides blocked vp. But the siege is soone raised, and Rochel, Montalban, Sancerre, with some other towns are made cautionarie for the peace ensuing. 1573. It was besieged by Byron the elder, with an army of 50000 men, and 60 pieces of artillery. Here were present at this siege King Charles, Henry D. of Aniou his brother; the Duke of Aumal, etc. It held out from the beginning of March, till the 17 of Iune, and was then freed: the city hauing in one moneth endured 13000 shot; and the king in his whole warre lost 20000 of his men, and among others the Duke of Aumal. 75 and 76, it was attempted by M. Landereau, and the Ile of Re nigh to it was taken, but soon recouered; after which the king of Navarre, and the Prince of Conde entred it in triumph .1577. it is by M. Lansac besieged Seaward, but he being beaten back, peace was made, and 8 other pledge-townes assigned. It was in the troubles of 85 and 88, the place of retreat to the aboue-named Princes; And when the Guisiards had compelled king Henry to make warre vpon the Religion; The king of Navarre issued from thence to divert the Duke M^r^uer from Montagne. The next yeare Henry 3 being slaine, the Rochelers sided with Henry 4, and till the yeare 1621. were neuer molested; Within this litle Prouince of Xaintoigne, is also the well-fortified town of S. Iohn de Angelo.
The chief riuers in all this Tract are 1 Iearn,View of Fr. 2 Lot, 3 Balze, 4 Lisle, 5 Dordone, all paying their tributary streames to Garond, 6 Souson in Gascoigne, and 7 Charent in Xaintoigne filling the Ocean.
The Dutchy of Aquitaine was giuen by Charles the Bald,Paradine. vnto Ranulph a Burgundian, for his good seruice against the Normans, Ao 844. To whose second successour called Eudes, were added the Earledomes of P^ictou and Avergne, anno 902. In this Image it continued till the yeare 1152. When Elenor the daughter and heire to William the 5 of that name, was married to Henry the 2d of England, from whose yongest son Iohn, vniustly detaining the Crown of England from Arthur of Britaine, son to Geofrie his eldest brother; it was taken by Philip of France, anno 1202; the said Iohn being first lawfully convicted

by his Peeres, for Fellony, and the murther of his Cousin Arthur, and by them condemned to forfeit his estates in France. After about the yeare 1259, S. Lewis of France gaue vnto Henry the third of England, the Dutchy of Guien, conditionally that he should renounce all title to his other inheritances. This Dutchy containing the hithermost part of Gascoigne, and the country of Xainton vnto the riuer of Charent, continued English till the yeare 1452: When by reason of the ciuill warres betweene Yorke and Lancaster, the Garison Souldiers were recalled to maintaine factions at home, and Charles the 7 of France recouered Guien, and all the other English possessions, Calice excepted.


2. POICTOV.
POICTOV hath on the North Brittaine and Anion, on the East the Dutchy of Berrie; on the South Xaintoigne, and Guien; on the West the Aquitaine Seas. It is called in Latine, Pictavia, from the Pictones, being the ancient inhabitants, and is a country so great and plentifull, that there are numbred 1200 Parishes, and three Bishopricks: The chiefe Cities are 1 Poicteirs, in Latine Pictavis,Ortelius. seated on the riuer Clavius, famous for the study of the Ciuill Law, and being the next to Paris for greatnes, 2 Mailesay. 3 Lasson. 4 Rocksurion, and 5 Castell Herauld (or Castrum Herauldi) the title of which place, was in the dayes of Henry the 2d,Camden. and Francis the 2d his son, giuen to the family of the Earles of Hamilton of Scotland.
Martin.In the Vine-field of this Country, was fought that memorable battaile between Iohn of France and our Black Prince; who being distressed by the number of the French, would willingly haue departed on honorable tearmes, which the French not accepting, insteed of Conquest, found an ouerthrow. For they presuming on their own worth, alwaies to their own disadvantage, bereft the enemy of all opportunity of retiring; whereas ordinary policy would instruct the leader of an Army, to make his enemy if he would fly, a bridge of gold, as Count Pitelan vsed to say: Hereupon Themistocles would not permit the Grecians to breake the bridge made ouer the Hellespont by Xerxes, left the Persians should be compelled to fight, and so happen

to recouer their former losses: and Charles the 6 lost his Army by intercepting of our 5 Henry in his march to Calice. For where all way of fl^ght is stopt, the basest Souldier will rather dye with glory in the front of his battle, then fly and be killed with ignominie. So true a Mistresse of hardy resolutions is despaire, and no lesse true this prouerbe of ours, Make a Coward fight and he will kill the Diuell. On the contrary it hath bin the vse of diuers politick Captaines, to make their own Souldiers fight more resolutely, taking from them all hope of safety but by battell. So did our William the Conquerour; who at his arriual into England, burnt the shippes which transported his Army, thereby giuing his Souldiers to wit, that their liues lay in the strength of their armes, and courage of their hearts; not in the nimblenesse of their heeles. Tariff the leader of the Moores into Spaine, burnt likewise all his Navy, one only Pinnace excepted, which he reserued to carry tidings of his successe. When Charles Martell encountred that infinite hoste of the Saracens, (of which you shall anon heare more) hee commanded the people of Toures to open their gates onely to the Victors: then he led his Army ouer the Loyre, placing on the bankes thereof certaine troupes of horsemen, to kill all such as fled out of the field: Hereby informing his men, that there was to them no more France then what they fought on, vnlesse they were conquerours. In like manner the same Themistocles cunningly working the Persians to enclose the Greeke Navy on euery side, enflamed the Grecians with such courage by this necessity of fight, that they gaue their enemies the memorablest defeat, that euer hapned on the seas.
This Country is watred with Clavius,Ortelius. Vienne, and Crevise, three riuers which runne into the Loyre: and hath followed the f^rtune of Aquitaine.


3. ANIOV.
ANIOV in Latine Andegavium, though but little, is excellent fruitfull,Ortelius. and yeeldeth the best wines in France. To it are annexed the Provinces of Turraine and Maine; this last formerly inhabited by the Cenomani, the former is diuided by the Loyre. The chiefe Townes of Aniou are Angiers (of old Iulio Magus)

where Lewis the 2d Duke hereof, founded an Vniuersity, Anno 1388. 2 Beaufort a towne belonging to our Dukes of Lancaster, in which Iohn of Gaunt so much delighted,Gamdens Remaines that he caused all the children which he had by Catharine Swinforte his third wife, to be called Beaufortes, a reason not knowne to all: which Beaufortes were afterward Dukes of Somerset and Exeter, and Earles of Dorset. This town c^me to the house of Lancaster by Blanch of Artoys, vnto Edmund surnamed Crouchbacke, second s^n to our Henry the 3d, created by his Father the first Earle of Lancaster. Nigh vnto this town Thomas D. of Clarence, and brother to Henry 5 was slaine, Anno 1422. 3 Saumur, a towne pleasantly seated on the Loyre; and lately one of the pledge-townes in the hands of the Protestants. On the North side of Anion between it and Normandie, lieth Maine, whose chiefe townes are 1 Mans or Maine, the principall towne in all this Country, seated on the riuer of Magenu^; which arising in the Northerne edge of this Prouince, and washing the walls of this towne and Angeirs, emptieth it selfe in the Loyre. 2 Beaumont. 3 Vendosme, standing on the Southeast corner of this Country: a town which belonged to the house of Burbon; and gaue name to Antonio, surnamed Vendosm* Father to Henry the 4. On the Southeast of Aniou, between it and Berrie, lieth the Country of Toureine, whose mother city is Tours (or Turena) where the Protestants first began, and from one of whose gates, called Hugoes gate (as before we haue said) they tooke the name of Hugonots. Some haue derived this name from the first words of an Apologie which they made before the French king, which were Huenos venimus; and as the Protestants were so called, because in their writings to the Emperour, they often vsed the word Protestumus; so from the word Huenos, the name of Hugonots, or Hu^nots must needs be deduced. Not much vnlike to this are the etymons of the Longebards and Wallouns, of whom I shall hereafter haue occasion to speak, which came questionlesse out of the same forge. Neere vnto this towne Charles Martell, Father to Pepin King of France, discomfited an host of 400000 Saracens, led by Abderamen, and slew of them 370000, about the yeare of our redemption 732. 2 Amboyse. 3 Bloys, where

Henry of Loraine, Duke of Guise, the originall and first mouer of the ciuill warres in France, and the great contriuer and enginer of the terrible Massacie in Paris, Ao 1572. was slaine in the Senate-house by the command of Henry the 3d.
Somewhat higher vpon the Loyre standeth Orleance, once a kingdome: a City that long felt the force of an English siege; before whose walls died g^eat Montacute,Martin, and Speed. Earle of Salisbury, glorying in that she cast a bone of diuision betweene the Burgundian and English, to the eternall prejudice of the latter, and disgrace of the former* as also in the education of Ioan the Virgin It was called by Caesar, Genabum; by the Moderne Latinists Aurelia, the Countrie about it Aurelianensis, and worthily. For in the yeare 276. the Emperour Aurelian built it out of the ruines of old Genabum.Lewknor. It was made an Vniversity by Philip the faire, Ao 1312. wherein the Ciuill Law is the chiefe study.
Aniou was giuen to Robert a Saxon Prince,Paradin^. by Charles the Bald, for his valour showne against the Normans 870. The third in direct line from this Robert, was Hugh Capet King^ of France by generall election, who gaue the Earledome of Aniou vnto Geofry Grisogonelle a Saxon Knight, Anno 926. The first of his Successours that possessed Maine, was Foulke the third* 1083. by the right of Sybell his wife, daughter to Helie Earle of Maine Their son Geofry was afterwards inriched with the addition of the County of Tourame; and his marriage with Maude daughter and h^ite to Henry the first of England, and widow of Henry the 4, Emperour. From these two proceeded Henry the 2d King of England* and Farle of Aniou; whose fourth son Iohn lost all his Estates in France by confiscation, 1202. Then it was giuen to Charles, son to Lewis the eight; in right of his wife, Earle of Provence; and by the gift of Pope Vrban the fourth, King of Naples and Sicily, 1262. It was raised to a Dutchy by Charles the 5, Anno 1280. And lastly giuen by Rene tho last Duke, to Lewis the eleuenth, Anno 1480.


4. BRITTAINE.
BRITTAINE is environed with Maine,Camden. Touraine, and the Sea. It is diuided into Hault or high Brittaine, being the Easterne,

and Basse or Low Brittaine being the Westerne parts; and was first called Armerica, quasi Ad mare sita; and now Brittaine, of the Brittaines, which in the reigne of Maximinus came hither and seated themselues; to whom there flocked infinite others at the Saxons tyrannizing in Brittaine. These people both conquered and new named the Country, according to these Verses:
Vicit Aremoricaes animosa Britannia gentes,Et dedit imposito nomina prisca ingo.The ancient Brittaine by the Saxons chacedDu Bartas.From's natiue Albion, soone the Gaules displacedFrom Armorick; and then victoriouslyAfter his name surnamed it Brittanny.
The Brittish or Welch language in part remaineth here still; for such as came out of Brittaine hither first,Camden. and married the women of this Country, did cut out their tongues, lest they should corrupt the language of their children. Notable riuers here are none, which defect is supplied by the neighbourhood of the Sea, which yeeldeth them diuerse Hauens, the chiefe being Ereiste and S. Malo, so often spoyled and damaged by the English in our French warres, since the time of Henry 7. As for their cities the chiefe of them are 1 Nantes, on the bankes of the Loyre, where the Parliament of Brittaine is kept, which was erected Ao 1553. 2 Rhones on the little riuer Vilent. 3 Vannes seated on the South sea. 4 S. Breine, the seate of the chief Bishop of this Province on the No^th sea; and 5 Rohan the title and inheritance of that fauous Prince the Duke of Rohan, who in the late warres adhered so closely to them of the Religion.
The Lords of Brittaine sometime* stiled themselues kings, but afterwards Earles,Paradin. about the yeare 859, and so continued till the time of Iohn the Red, Earle of Brittaine; who by Lewis the 9 was made a Duke, Anno 1250. In his posterity it continued till the dayes of Duke Francis the second, who joyning himself in league with Charles Duke of Berry, and Charles Duke of Burgundy, against Lewis the 11^ drew ru^ne on his head, which he could not possibly auoid Charles Duke of Berry, as it was thought, was poysoned, Charles of Burgundy lost his life

at the battle of Nancie, 1476; and his country was conquered by the French King:Hist. Fr. And Francis this Duke hauing embarqued himselfe in the saiue troublous Ocean, must needes suffer shipwrecke with his Copartners. The King of France inuadeth Britaine, The Duke ouercharged with melancholy, dies, 1488; leauing Anne his daughter and heire, in the power of his enemy Charles the eight: who contracts a marriage with the Orphan, and vniteth Brittaine to France. There were many impediments which might haue hindred this marriage, but Charles breaketh through them all. First Charles himselfe had bin formerly contracted to Archduke Maximilians daughter; but this he held voide, because the yong Lady was not of age at the time of the contract. 2ly Anne the Dutches was also contracted to Maximilian; and this he held vnvalid, because the Dutchesse being his homager, could not bestow her selfe without his licence. and 3l^ Maximilian had by proxie married her, which marriage he consummated by a ceremony in those daies new; For his Embassadour attended by a great traine of Lords and Ladies, bared his leg vp to the knee, and put it into the Dutchesses sheets, thereby taking possession of her bed and body: But Charles consulting with his Diuines, was told that this pretended consummation, was rather an invention of Court, then any way firme by the Lawes of the Church. Certainely God blessed not this wedding; for of three children which they had betweene them, not one liued. Charles being dead, his successor Lewis on the same policie, divorced himself from his own wife, and married this Dutchesse. From this second mariage, the Acrhdutchesse Isabell descended; for whom, when her Father King Philip made a claime to this Dutchy,Hist. of Sp. she indeed being the true heire in lineal descentithe Frenchmen vrged a Law of their own deuising, that no Countrey being once incorporate to the French Crowne, could again be aliened. A proper Law truely, but somewhat newer, and of a worse stamp then the Salique.
Most of our ^or^ or Earles of Richmond,Camden. were Earles and Dukes of this house. The armes are Ermines.


5. NORMANDIE.
NORMANDIE hath on the South Maine,Orteli^^. and the Isle of

France; on the East the Riuer Some, on other parts the Ocean. It was formerly called Neustria, corruptly for Westria, the word Westenrich signifying in the Germane tongue, the Western limit of the Empire: and now Normandie of the Normans.
The riuer Sequana, or Seine, runneth qulte through it, as also two lester riuers Orus and Anon.
In this Country is the little Signiory of Ividot, heretofore a kingdome free and absolute. Clotaire the seuenth King of France, hauing abused the wife of Gawter d'Ividot,Hist. of Fr. (so called because he was here borne) added one wickednesse to another, killing this Gawter as he was at his devotions on a Good-Friday, therein preventing the revenge which he knew he had deserued. After this wicked act, his conscience accusing him, and the Roman Bishop exhorting to repentance, he erected the Lordship of Ividot to a kingdome; assigning the posterity of Gawter all the prerogatiues of a free Monarch, as to make Lawes, coine money, and the like. From hence the French call a man that hath but small demaines to maintaine a great title, a Roy d' Ividot. At last, but at what time I know not, it fell again to a Lordship, and belongeth now to the house of Bellay in Little Brittaine.
This Dukedome of Normandie containeth 8 citties, the chief whereof are 1 Constance,Camden. 2 Cane famous for the long resistance it made to Henry the fift of England. 3 Bayeux on the Sea side, the Bishop whereof Odo, was the Earle of Kent; who hauing displeased King William his brother, was committed to prison by a witty distinction; not as the Bishop of Bayeux, (for then the Clergie was free from all secular jurisdiction,) but as the Earle of Kent. 4 Pontoyse. 5 Roane the Metropolis of Normandie. In the chiefe Chu^ch of this town is the Sepulchre of Iohn Duke of Bedford, Regent of France, whose monument when a foolish Court^er perswaded Charles the eight to deface, God defend (saith he) that I should wrong him dead, whom l^uing all the force of France could not resist. 6 Palaise a town once of good strength.P. Virgil. As Duke Robert passed through this towne, he beheld among a company of yong maides dancing, one Arlet a skinners daughter: whose nimblenesse in her dance, made the Duke

think she was not sluggish in a bed, and therefore he sent for her to accompany him that night. To omit the immodest behauiour she vsed at her lying downe; the Duke on her begat that night William the Bastard, King of England: in spight to whom, and disgrace to his mother, the English call'd all Whores Harlets, a word yet in vse amongst vs. 7 Mortaigne, which was the title or Earledome which was giuen to Iohn surnamed Sansterre, afterward king of England; and 8 Crecie a towne in the Country of Pentheiu, lying on the East of Normandie; nigh vnto which Edward the 3d ouercame Philip of Valoys. 8. Caux. 9 Verneile. It is reported that when Philip the second of France, had besieged this town, and that newes of it came to Richard the first of England; that he should protest in these words, I wil neuer turne my backe till I haue confronted the French: For the performance of which Princely word, he brake a way through his Palace of Westminster, and came so vnexpected to France, that the French raised their siege, and departed.
The chiefe Hauen-townes are Hareflow, and Deepe. Of these the former was the first town which our victorious Prince king Henry the 5 attempted and took in, in France. The latter is famous for its fidelity, and vnmoueable allegeance to Henry 4 of France, euen in the middest of his troubles: at that time when the confederat Papists of the Guisian faction, calling themselues the holy League, had beaten him out of almost all his towns, and in dernion called him King of Deepe. The third Hauen-towne is Newhauen,Camdeni Elizab. in Latine called Franciscopolis, because it was founded by Francis the first. This town was in the first ciuill warres in France about religion, yeelded into the hands of Elizabeth of England by the Prince of Conde and his faction, as a towne of Caution, for such forces as she should on their behalfe leuie. The French king not liking a neighbour so potent, made peace with the Protestants, on that condition that they should driue home the English. By this meanes he weakned their forces for the present; depriued them of all hope of future aide from our Queene; twisted his own plots closer; and the next yeare began a stronger warre vpon them, now ashamed anywhere to demand succour.
The Parliamentary City for this and the adjoyning Prouinces, is Rhoane (of old R^thomagus) erected Ao 150^.
Camd. Brit.The Normans were a people of Norwegia, and made their first irruptions about the yeare 700: when they so ransacked and plagued the Maritime townes, that it was inserted into the Letany, From Plag^e, Pestilence, and the fury of the Normans good Lord, etc. To quiet these people, and to secure himself, Charles the Bald gaue them a part of Neustria, by them since called Normannia: Their first Duke was R^ll^, Ao 900, from whence in a direct line, the sixt was William the Bastard, Conquerour, and King of England, Ao 1067. After this, Normandy continued English till the dayes of King Iohn; when Philip Augustus seized on all his estates in France as forfeitures, Ao 1202. The English then possessing the Dukedomes of Normandy, Guyen, and Aquitaine; the Earledomes of Aniou, Touraine, Maine, Poicteirs, and Limosin; being in all a farre greater and better portion of the Country, then the Kings of France themselues possessed.


9. THE ISLE OF FRANCE.
THE ISLE OF FRANCE is sited in the circlings and confluences of Seine, and other petty brookes, as our Isle of Ely in Cambridgeshire on the confluence of Welland and other Riuers. It tooke its denomination from the Francones, who did first erect their kingdome in this place. These Francones were a people which liued in the great Forrest called Sylva Hercyma in Germany,Pezelius in Sleidan. who driuing the Vangiones out of their Country, there seated themselues, and called it after their own name Franconia. These Iulius Caesar tamed, Maximinus slaughtred, Constantine vanquished, and Iulian the Apostata kept vnder: yet vnder the reigne of Valentinian the first, they began to shake off the clog of bondage, and diminishing their name with their increase of power, called them France, or Franks, that is Freemen. They were gouerned by Dukes till the yeare 420, when Pharamond took on him the title of king. As for France, the first that euer set foot there, was Moroucus, who seeing the Romans on one side put to the worst by Theodoric and the Gothes; entred together with the Burgundians on the other, seazed on the Isle of France, subdued Paris, and made it the seat of his Kingdome.

Afterward when they had fully seated the^selues here, the kings vsed to diuide their kingdome according to the number of their sons:View of Fr. Hence haue we a King o' Orleance, a K. of Austrasia, a K. of Soyssons; a K. of France, which alwaies was he, and he only who had his seat in Paris. This is the chief city of France, and was called formerly Lutetia, quasi Luto sita, as being sited in so clayie asoyle that they vse as a common Prouerb to say, It staines like the dirt of Paris. The Vniuersity here is accounted the first of Europe,Sleidan Comment. containing 55 Colledges, built by Charles the Great at the perswasion of Alcuine an Englishman, Ao 800. Francis the first, whom the French call the father of the Muses, intended, (being perswaded thereunto by Reucline and Budaus, as great restorers of letters in those parts, as Moore in England, or E. rasinus in Germanie) to haue built here a Colledge, wherein should haue bin Professours of all Arts and Languages. He would haue endowed it with 50000 Crownes of yearely revenue, for the maintainance of his Professours and Schollers, whose number in all should haue bin 600. But it went no further then the intent, for death took from him time to actuate it. This City is in compasse 12 miles, and is reported to haue bin built in the time of Amasias King of Iudah. It standeth in a most fertile soile, insomuch that when it was besieged by the Dukes of Berry, Burgundy, and Brittaine, with an army of 100000 men; neither the assailants without, nor the defendants within, felt any want of victuals; and yet the Citizens besides the common souldiers, are reckoned to be 4 or 500000. It is honoured with a Parliament, to which all other may appeale, from which not one. These French Parliaments are as our Law-Courts are, our Parliaments as their Conventus ordinum. It is seated on Seine, which serueth the Town with little boates and barges (as the Thames Westward doth London) the riuer ebbing and flowing no farther then Pontclarch, distant from Paris 75 miles, or thereabout. The Parisians bragge that their town was neuer conquered: the reason is, it is very weak^; and therefore compoundeth with the enemy. This Town was held by the English 16 yeares, and solemnized the Coronation of Henry the sixt of France and England, with all joyfull acclamations, in the Church of Nostre Dame: being long 65 faddome,

broad 24, high 15, aboue which the St^eples are eleuated 34 faddome, Secondly also here is S. Vincents, where victorious Henry the fifth ended his dayes. Thirdly somwhat Eastward, Soysons, once the seat of the King of Soysons, for only the kings of Paris (as we haue said) were called Kings of France. Fourthly Charenton, famous for the assiduous preaching here of that excellent ornament of the French Church, Peter du Moulin. H^ere is also in this Isle the royall Palace of Fountaine bleau, (that is the faire Fountaine) the fairest house not of France only, but (as they say) of all Christendome. Indeed I haue heard travellers (who for the most part vilifie their own Country in respect of others) report, that it farre exceedeth both for beauty and bignesse, the largest and brauest of his Maiesties house; in England.
Northward lieth the Dukedome of Valoys, whose prime City is Senlis, the second Luzarch. This Dukedome gaue name to all the French kings of the second branch of the Capets; which beginning in Philip de Valoys, Ao 1328; ended in Henry the 3d, 1589. Westward to Paris lieth the litle Prouince of La Beause, whose chiefe townes are 1 Chartres,Milles. or (as the Latine writers call it) Carnutum. This town giueth title to a Vidame, or Vieedominus, an honour onely vsed in France, whereof here also there are but foure, viz. this of Charters, 2ly of Amiens, 3l^ of Chalons, and 4ly of Gerbery in Beavoys. The 2d towne of this La Beause or Belsia, is Estampes.

The Kings of France,
420
Freigius.1 Pharamond 11
431
2 Clodius 18
449
3 Meroueus 10
459
4 Child^ricu^ 26
485
5 Clo^oueu^ primus Rex Chr. 30
515
6 Childebortus 45
560
7 Clotarius 5
565
8 Cherebertus 9
574
9 Childeric II. 14
588
10 Clotarius II. 44
632
11 Dagobertus 14
646
12 Clodoueus II. 17
663
13 Clotarius III 4
667
14 Childericus III. 12
680
15 Theodoricus 14
694
16 Clodoueus III. 4
698
17 Childebertus II. 18
716
18 Dagobertus II. 6
722
19 Childericus IIII. 5
727
20 Theodoricus II. 15
742
21 Childericus V, was

the last of the Merouignian Family: he was deposed by Pepin, son to Charles Martell, the Pope giuing assent and approbatio^ to his proceedings.Hist. of Fr. This Pepi^ and his Father Martell we^^ Mayres of the Palace to the former Kings. These Mayres were originally Comptrollers of the Kings house, and had nothing to doe with the affaires of State. But Clotayre the 2d to ease himselfe and his successours of a burden so weighty; made the Mayres Vicars generall of his Empire. From henceforward the Kings followed the^r pleasures, shewing themselues onely on Mayday; and then being seated in a chariot, adorned with flowres, and drawne by foure oxen: As for the Mayre he openeth packets, heateth and dispatcheth forreine Embassadours, giueth remedy to the complaints of the subiects, maketh Lawes and repeateth them; an authority somewhat like that of the Praefecti praetorio, in the time of the Romane Emperours. Vnder Degobert the first, Pepin was Mayre; who continued in that office till the reigne of Clovis the third, and then he died, leauing his authority to Charles Martell his base son. This Charles did to the Kings of France great seruice, for which he was created Duke or Prince of the French. Yet would not he (though the Estate was at his disposure) settle it in himselfe; it being his vsuall saying, that he had rather rule a King, then be one. As for his son Pepin, he succeeding his Father in authority but not in vertuous resolutions, was by Pope Zachary the first invested with the Diademe of France; and the vnfortunate king Childericus, had his powle shauen, and was thrust into a Monastery. For this investiture, both Pepin and his son Charles the great, did good seruice to the Romane Prelates, and they to requite their kindnesses, gaue vnto the last, the Empire of the West; and the title of most Christian King. The sonnes of this most worthy Emperour, did most vnworthily degenerate.


The second Race of French kings.
751
1 Pepin 18
769
2 Carolus M. 46
815
3 Lodovicus Pius 26
841
4 Carolus 38
879
5 Lodovicus Balbus 2
881
6 Lodovicus III. 5
886
7 Carolus Crassus 5
891
8 Odo,Freigius. or Eudes.
900
9 Carolus simplex 27
927
10 Redul. Burgundio 2
929
11 Lodovicus IIII. 27
956
12 Lotharius 31
987
13 Lodovic. V. 2. wa^ the last of the Mongrell issue of Charles the great, in which time forreiners were their kings, and the Rulers of the Prouinces ^ell from the French obedie^ce; and vsurped entire gouernment. These troubles made way to Hugh, surnamed Capet (either of his great head, or because when he was a boy, hee was wont to snatch off his Fellowes cappes) to ascend the Royall Thron^ of France; a Prince of a strange blood, and on^y hoysed vp by the people, to the prejudice of Charles of Lorraine the true Heire of France, as the brother of Lotharius, and Vncle vnto Lodovicus the last king of this line.


The third Race of French kings.
98^
1 Hugh Capet 9
997
2 Robert 34
1031
3 Henry 30
1061
4 Philip 49
1110
5 Lodovicus VI. 28
1138
6 Lewis VII. 43
1181
7 Philip II. 43
1224
8 Lewis VIII. 3
2227
9 St Lewis 44
1271
10 Philip III. 15
1286
11 Philip the faire IV. 28
1314
12 Lewis Hutin, after whose death the Crowne by right should haue descended to Ioane his daughter, deposed by the next King. 2.
1316
13. Philip the long, partly by threats, promises, and intreaty, made the Nobles and Commons to enact a Law for disabling the succession of women; a Law (saith Hatlan) that could not possibly be attributed to Pharamond who was king of the Francones, but neuer had foot of land in in France; his grandchild Meroueus being the first that euer passed the Rhene. 5.
1321.
Martin.14. Charles the faire. After whose decease began the warres of the English for the Crowne of France; Edward 3d of England, being son to Isabel, daughter to Philip the faire, and sister to the three last Kings: but the French chose Philip of Valoys, son vnto Iohn of Valoys, brother to Philip the faire; of which Iohn it is said, that he was son to a king, brother to a king, vncle to a king, father to a king, yet he himselfe was no king. 7.
1328.
15. Philip of ^aloys. In this kings dayes was fought the battle of Crecie. The French army consisted of about 70000 souldiers, the English had but 11800 men; yet God blessed the English by whose valour fell that day, Iohn king of Bohemia, 11 Princes, 80 Barons, 120 knights, and 30000 common souldiers, Ao 1345. 2^.
1350.
15 Iohn. In whose raigne was the Battle of Poicteirs, wherein Edward the Blacke Prince, with an handfull of wearied souldiers, being in all but 8000, ouercame the French Army consisting of 40000 men; flew (besides the Nobles) 10000 souldiers, tooke prisoners king Iohn and Philip his son, 70 Earles, 50 Barons, and 12000 Gentlemen or thereabouts. 14.
1364.
16 Charles IV. called the Wise: which attribute king Lewis the 11 could not approue of; it being (as he said,) foolishly done, to giue his yonger brother Philippe, the Dukedome of Burgundy, and withall, the Heire of Flaunders to wise. 17.
1^81.
17 Charles the VI: in whose life Henry the 5 pursued his ^ight in France; and hauing an army of 15000, confro^ted an host of Frenchmen, consisting of aboue 52000: whereof he slew 5 Dukes, 8 Ea^les, 25 Lords, 8^00 knights and Gentlemen of note, 1500 of the commons: the English loosing but one Duke, one Earle, and 600 souldiers. This vnfortunate Prince lost all that his Predecessour Philip had taken from Iohn of England. 42
1423.
18 Charles VII, who droue the English, then diuided by domestick dissention, out of all France. 38
1461.
19 Lewis XI. who got Prouence with the title of Naples,View of ^r. Burgundy, and Picardy. Of whom ye shall find in the chamber of accounts, a reckoning of two shillings for new sleeues to his old duoblet, and three halfepence for liquor to grease his bootes. 23
1484
20 Charles VIII:French hist. who quickly wonne, and as soon lost the kingdome of Naples. 14
1498
21 Lewis XII. who wonne Millaine* and diuided Naples with king Ferdinand the Catholique; but was depriued

of his part in short space. 17
1515
22 Francis the perpetuall aduersary to Charles the 5; because (as he said) the Emperour could endure no equall, and he no superiou^; he was taken in the battaile of Pavia, and put to a grieuous ransome. 32
1547
23 Henry II, droue Charles out of Germany, took Met^, Toul, and Verdune. 13
1559
24 Francis II. ^
1560
25 Charles IX, the author of the Massacre at Paris. 14
1574
26 Henry III, stript of his kingdome and life, by the Guisians, and Spaniards. 15
1589
27 Henry IIII, king of Navarre, (the first of the house of Burbon) ruin'd the league of the house of Guise^; and hauing driuen the Spaniard out of France, into which hee was called by those of that potent and rebellious faction: after a tenne yeares time of peace, was most villainously slaine by Rauiliac. 21
1610
28 Lewis XIII now liuing. To these 28 kings of the Capets, adde 13 of the Carolouignians, and 21 of the Merouignians: and the whole number of the kings of France will amount to 62.



7. BERRY and BVRBON.
The Countries of BERRY and BVRBON are invironed with Poictou, Limosin, Avergne, the Dutchy of Burgundy, and Champaine.
View of Fr.Berry called in Latin Biturigum Regio, of the chiefe Citty Bituris, now Bourges; is so stored with sheepe, that when they take a man for too much lying in a greater number then truth, they will say, Fy, there are not so many sheepe in Berry.
Th^s Prouince is watered with the riuer Cher, and containeth 33 walled Townes; the chiefe of which are 1 Bourges, formerly called Avaricum; the revolt of which Towne in Caesars time, gaue such a checke to his proceedings, that hee was faigne to stretch his wit and valour on the tente^hookes, before it was againe yeelded to him. It is said to haue beene built by Ogyges Noes grand-child, who called it Bitogyges, which by corruption

fell vnto B^turiges; an Etymologie, that were it as deere bought, as faire fetched, it might haue beene good for Ladies; sure I am it is not for Scholler. Others call it more probably Bituris, quasi Biturris, from two faire Towres in this Citty erected; one whereof is yet in part standing. Herevnto alludeth an ancient Grammarian,
Turribus a binis inde vocor Bituris.From two Towres which were builded hereThe name of Bituris I beare.
Calamenus calleth it the honorour of all learning, and storehouse of learned men, for it is indeed a florishing Vniuersity. 2 Sancerre, called of old Sacrum Cereris, from Ceres, as it seemeth here, worshipped. It is a towne of good strength, and was consigned over vnto the Protestants, 1570, as a towne of caution, for the more sincere obseruing of the articles of peace then newly agreed on. 3 Argenton the title or honour of Philip de Comines, that excellent historian; who diued so deeply into, and writ so plainely of the state affaires; that Katherine di Medices vsed to say, that he had made as many Heretickes in policie, as Luther had in religion. He was from this towne vulgarly called Monseiur de Argenton. 4 Chasleau Rous.
This Countrey after the decease of Harpen,Paradin. who going to the holy Land, sould it to K. ^hilip the first An. 1096. was neuer aliened from the Crowne, vnlesse it were for the portion of the king, younger sonne; which they call the Appennages.
Burbon is watered with the riuers of Loyre, and Allier: The chiefe ci^ties are first Burbon (formerly Boya) naming the whole Province. 2 Molins vpon a little riuulet called Elaner. 3 Nevers honoured with a Dukedome.
This Province in the dayes of the degenerate issue of Charles the great,Paradin. was seized on by the Dampiers: the last of which was Archemb^ld Dampierre, whose daughter and heire Beatrix, was married to Robert younger sonne to Saint Lewis 1308: from whom are descended the present Kings of France and Princes of Conde.
To Burbon belong Beauoys and Averne.

1. Beauoys is a small Prouince, at the Southeast of Burbon. The chiefe Townes are Be^ueiu and Ville Franche. Of the first towne Bea^ieau in the time of our Richard the first,Camd^n. one Philip was Bishop: who being a martiall man, and much annoying our border, was by king Richard in a skirmish fortunately taken, and put in p^ison. The Bishop complained to the Pope, who wrot in the behalfe of his sonne as ^n Ecclesiasticall person, and a shepheard of the Lords. The King sent vnto the Pope the armour he was taken in, and engraued thereon the words, which Iacobs sonnes vsed when they had sold their brother Ioseph, and presented their father with his coat, viz: Vide vtrum filij tui tunica sit velum: which the Pope viewing, swore it was rather the coat of a sonne of Mars, then a sonne of the Church: and so bid the King vse his pleasure.
Paradine.The first Lord of Beauoys was Omphroy, brother to Artand of Lyon^ys, Anno 989: in whose issue it continued till the yeare 1400, or thereabout: when Edward the last Lord dying without issue, gaue it vnto Lewis surnamed the Good. D. of Burbon. 2 Averne is seated on the South of Burbon^ys. It is watered with the Loyre which hath his head in the Mountaines of this countrey, and Eleuer. This Prouince takes its name from the Averni ouer whom Ve^cingetorix, that so long put Caesar to his trumpes with 238000 men, was King. Hee kept his residence at Gergouia (now Clermont) the Metropolis of this Province: the next to whi^h is Saint ^loure, inumcible by reason of its situation.Camden in Scotia. 3 Claudes A^gues* 4 Marignes. Here is also the Towne and signeurie of Aubigny, which was giuen by Charles the sixt, to Robert, second sonne of Alan Steward Earle of Lennox; and is still an honorary title among that noble familie.
Paradin.This Lordship was vnited to Burbon, 1^10. by the marriage of Duke Iohn of Burbon, and Bonne Countesse of Avergne.


8. LIMOSIN.
LIMOSIN is enuironed with Berry, Poicton, X^intoigne, and Auergne: it hath its name quasi in Limo sita, from the dirty soile. This countrey is moistn^d with the riuers Vienne and Vexerew. The chiefe Citties are Tulles on the South, Tuviers and Maignai in the midland, and Limoges on the North. At the taking

of which last Citty newly revolted, Edward the Blacke Prince could by no meanes bee allured to pitty the distressed Cittizens;Du Chos^e. ti^l persuing his enimies, hee saw three French Gentlemen make head against his army; the consideration of whose magnanimity drewe him to pitty, where before hee vowed revenge. And lastly Chaluz, at the besieging of which, our Richard the first was slaine by a shot from an Arbalist, the vse of which warlike engine he first shewed vnto the French. Wherevpon a French Poet made these verses in the person of Atropos.
Hoc v^lo, non alia Richardum morte perire,Vt qui Francigonis Balistae primitus vsumTrad dit; ipse su^^em primitus experiatur,Quamque, alijs docuit, in se v^m sentiat ar^is.It is decreed: thus must great Richard die,As he that first did teach the French to dartAn A^bal^st; tis iust he first should trieThe strength, and tast the fruits of his owne art.
The man which shot him was named Bertram de Gurdon, who being brought before the King (for the King neglecting his wound,Daniels hist neuer gaue ouer the assault till hee had mastered the place) boldly iustified his action, as done in defence of his countrey* and to reuenge the death of his father and brother whom this King had slaine. Which said, the King caused him to be set at liberty, and gaue him 100 shillings sterling. When Henry the 3l of England released his right in the Provinces of Normandy, Aniou, Poicteirs, Toureine, and Maine, Anno 1259. Lewis the 9th, to whom this relea^e was made, gaue him in exchange 300000l of Amo^in money; the Dutchie of Guyen; t^e Countrey of Namtoigne as farre as to the riuer Charen^; and this Limosin. Si^ce which time it hath beene sometimes French, most time^ English, till their generall expulsion by Charles the 7th.
South west to Limosin is the little countrey Perigort, and more South is the Prouince of Querc^, both which vpon the capitulations made by Iohn of France,Martin. then prisoner, and Edward the 3d of England; were deliuered vp to the English, and from them againe recouered by Charles the 7th. The chiefe Town^s of Quercu are 1 M^untalbon in vaine beseiged by the present

French king Lewis in his wars against those of the religion: this being one of their cautiona^ie, or pledge Townes. It is s^tuate on the Garound. 2 Cahors,Maginus. built on the rising of an hill, a beautifull rich Citty, and is of an ovall forme. The chiefe places of note in Perigort are 1 Perigeux, standing on the small riuer Ila, in the very midst of this little country, whereof it is the metropolis. and 2 Sarlat.
In the Northeastward corner of Limosin is an Elme, whose boughes extend themselues into foure Provinces, viz: Berry. 2 Burbon. 3 Auerne. 4 Limosin.


9. DAVLPHINE.
DAVLPHINE is environed with Auergne Westward, Prove^ce Southward, Savoy Eastward, and Bresse Northward: and had this name from Daulphine wife to Guigne, the second Prince of this Prouince. The Rhoane glideth all along the Countrey, washing the walls of Lyons (where it is conioyned with the Zone) a famous Mart towne and Vniuersity, called formerly Lugdunum.Co^tnes. These Marts were in former times holden at Geneva; from thence remoued hither by Lewis the 11th for the enriching of his owne kingdome. And when Iulio the 2d had excommunicated Lewis the 12th, he commanded by his Apostolical authority that they should be transferred to Geneua againe: but therein his pleasure was neuer obeyed. As for the Vniuersity questionlesse it is very ancient, for euen in the time of C. Caligula it was a se^t of learning. For in this Towne before an Altar consecrated to Augustus, this Caligula instituted some Olympicke games, as it were, of the Greeke and Roman eloquence. The victor was honoured according to his merit, but the vanquished were either with their owne tongues to blot out their writings, to be ferulaed, or be drowned in the next riuer. Hence that of Iuvenall, Lugdune^sem rhetor dicturus ad aram. Yet doe I not referre the beginning of the Academic to this, for doubtlesse it is farre younger. It is a very delicate towne, and the Sea of an Archbishop, one of whom was Irenaeus, that renowned man in the Primitiue Church. 2 Valence which was the title of Caesar Borgia, sonne to Pope Alexander the 6, who casting off his Cardinalls hatte was by Charles the 8th made Duke Valentinoys.

3 Vienna to which Archelaeus sonne and successour to Herod the Ascalonite, King of the Iewes, was banished by Augustus. It is now famous in that in giueth name to the first sonne in France being intituled Daulphine of Viennoys. The more inward Citties are Grenoble, where a Parliament was instituted Anno 1453. 2 Romans, etc.
This countrey together with Provence and Savoy,Paradin. were part of the kingdome of Burgundie, and so continued till the yeare 1101; in which Henry the Emperour, being troubled by the thunders of Pope Gregory the 7th, alias Hildebrand, and his successours: Guigne the sat, Earle of Grisinaudon, seized on this Prou^nce, naming it after the name of his sonne, and successours wife; Daulphine. In this familie, it continued til the yeare 1349 In which Humbert the last of this line, being surcharged with warres by Ame Earle of Savoy, entred into an order of Religion: selling his countrey at a small rate to Philip of Valoys King of France, on this condition, that the h^ire apparant to the Crowne, should be instiled Daulphine of Viennoys: quartering his Armes with France, which are a Dolphine Hauriant Or, in a field Azure.
Of all French gouernours he of Daulphine hath the greatest priuileges,View of Fr. hauing in his owne power the disposing of all offices within the Prouince.
In the mountaines bordering on this countrey, and lying betweene it,Hist. of Fr. Savoy, Provence, and Peidmont; there doe dwell a sort of people which the French call Vaudoys. These are the progenie of the Albigenses, which about the yeare 1100, when the popish doctrine and iurisdiction began to settle to a head: manfully stood for the liberty and purity of the Church; and kept on foot the doctrine which from their predecessours they had receaued, which little differed from that renewed by Luther and Calvin in after times. In the yeare 1250, or thereabouts, they were by a long and bloudy warre waged against them by the Popes and French Kings; almost vtterly rooted out: when vnder the conduct of Raimond Earle of Tholouse, they had for 28 yeares made good their side by ^orce of armes. The remainder of this people preferring their consciences before

their countries, retired vp into these mou^tainous places. Here they liued a godly and laborious life, painefully tilling the ground, restoring hamlets, which formerly had beene destroyed by warre; and teaching the very rocks in a manner to yeeld herbage for the nourishment of cattle: insomuch that places which at their comming thither scarce yeelded 4 crownes yearly; were by their good husbandry made worth 350 crownes a yeare vnto the Lord of them. Lasciuiousnesse in speech one with another they vsed not; blasphemy against the honour of God they abhorred; neither was the name of the diuell at any time in their mouths: and this their enimies were enforced to acknowledge and confesse when they were afterward in troubles. All the faults proued against them were, that when they came into any neighbouring Churches they prayed immediatly to God, without relation to any of the Saints: and when they came by Crosses erected in the high way, they bowed not before them. Thus liued this poore people, neither embracing the Popes doctrine, nor acknowledging his supremacie, the space of 300 yeares vntouched and vnquestioned; euen till the latter end of the raigne of Francis the first. But then persecutions raging against the Lutherans, they were accused, and inhumanely handled in the massacre of Merindol and Cabrieres abouementioned. Yet here vnto this day they liue and continue in the faith. If now the Papists aske mee where was our Church before the time of Luther; I answere that here it was; that here God was worshipped according to the manner by himselfe prescribed, and by the reformed Churches followed. Here I say were those few Israelites hidden, which had not bowed their knees vnto Baal.


10. LANGVEDOC.
LANGVEDOC is encompassed with the Pyrenean Hills, Gascoyne, the riuer Rhodanus, or Rhoane, and the Mediterranean Sea. Whereas the other Frenchmen in an affirmation say O^y these of this countrey say Oc; and therefore C^telues coniectures it was called Langue d' oc: but the truth is, it tooke denomination from the Goths, who raigning long in this country, left behind them a smacke of their language; and therefore it was called

Languegotia, and now Euphoniae gratia, tearmed Languedotia, or Languedoc, that is the Gothes language.
It is moistned with the currents of the Riuers Auraurius. 2 L^cran. 3 Orbe. and 4 Alby; from which last the Albigenses or Waldenses (who first stoutly resisted the Popish doctrine and Supremacy) tooke their name. The first of these disburdeneth it selfe into Rhen^, the last into the Sea. The chiefe Citties are 1 Narbon, the first Roman Colonie (next after Carthage) out of Italy.Brerewood. In Italy it selfe were no lesse then 150 Colonies; 57 in Africke, 29 in Spaine; 26 in France; in England foure onely; in Syria 20; and in other Countries some, but very few in respect of the largenesse of the territories. These Colonies were instituted partly to represse rebellions in the conquered countries; partly to resist a forraine enimie; partly to reward the ancient Souldiers; partly to relieue the poorer sort; and partly to purge and empty the Citty of the superfluity and redundance of her people. Now if the question bee asked whether a Colonie or a Fortresse be more behoofefull, I answere with Boterus in his Ragg^^ distato, that a Fortresse is more fit for suddaine vse; and a Colonie for continuance: the former are quickly erected, and perhaps as soone lost; the other require some time of setling, and are after of good sufficiency to defend themselues. As we see in our times the Spanish Colonies of Septa and Tanger in Africke: and our owne in Calais, which was the last towne wee lost on the firme land. This Narbon was in the infancy of the Romane Empire, the most populous and greatest Towne of all France: insomuch as from it all this part of France was called Gallia Na^boncusis, a Prouince of which Plinie delieureth vs this censure; Narbonensis Gallia agrorum cultis, morum virorumque dignatione, ^pum amplitudine nulli prouinciarum postponenda: brevi^er^ (...) potius quam provincia. It was also called Gallia (...), from the garments that the inhabitants did weare; which were much like to the Trouzes which are worne by the Iriso footmen, and are called in Latine Bra^ca. 2 ^Mons pessulanus, or Montp^ller, where the present king of France i^ his wars against those of the religion receaued a memorable defeat. It is seated on the Sea side, and is an Vniuersity famous for the study

of Law and Physicke. 3 Nismes, where are to bee seene the reliques of a Pallace built by Adrian the Emperour. 4 Agde. 5. Lodove.
Hist. of Fr.In the falling of the Roman Empire, the Gothes not onely spoiled Italy, but also France; erecting the kingdome of Ostrogothes in Italy, of the Visigothes, or Westerne Gothes, in Languedoc: and leauing Italy by compulsio^, erected another kingdome of Ostrogothes, or Easterne Gothes, in Provence. Charles the great broke the necke of this kingdome, being sensibly salne almost to nothing; and gaue the title of Earle of Tholouse, being the Metropolis of the Gothish Empire, to Thursin one of the race of the ancient kings,Ha^lla^, on the condition he would be Christened: since which time the name and Lordship of this Countrey lay buried vnder the title of Tholouse. In this race it continued till after the yeare 1222. When Raimond the fist of that name, and last of this race; fauoring the doctrine of the Albigenses, was condemned for an Hereticke, cursed by the Pope, persecu^ed by the French Kings, Philip the second, Lewis the 8th, and St Lewis: which last willing to make a peaceable composition maried his brother Alphonso, to Iane, daughter and heire to Count Raimond, with this clause, that if it should happen these two to die without issue, then Languedoc should be incorporated to the Crowne. Raimond agreed, the marriage was solemnized, Anno 1249. They both died without issue 1270; and Languedoc returned to the Crowne, in the daies of Philip the third.


11. PROVENCE.
PROVENCE is enuironed with Languedoc, Daulphin, Peidmont, and the Mediterranean Sea. It tooke its name from the Romans, who being called in by the Marsil^a^s to reuenge a priuate wrong, wholy possessed themselues of this cou^try, calling it (...) The Prouince.
The riuer Durance runneth through, and Rhoane diuideth it from Languedoc. It is now diuided into three parts, whereof the greatest belongeth to the Crowne of France. the next to the Bishops of Rome, and the last to the Princes of Orange: the causes of which diuision follow.
There is no meanes so easie to ruine a flourishing Commonwealth, as vpon a priuate grudge, to call in a forraine power. This the Marsilians felt,Hist. of Fr. when making a gappe by their priuate d^ssentions for the Romanes, they submitted themselues to the yoake of an imperious nation: to whom notwithstanding they continued subiect, till Stillico Captaine to Honorius the Emperour, called the Burgundians into France, to expell the French then newly entred. This people erected their Burgundian kingdome, of which this Countrey was a member, till from them it was wrested by the Ostrogothes, Anno 504. But this Empire decaying, it fell to the lot of Lewis, sonne to Lewis the Gentle, sonne to Charles the great: together with Burgundy and Italie. The daughter of this Lewis, Hermingrade; was married to Boson Earle of Ardennes, from whose second sonne Lewis, the Berengarij tooke both Italy and Provence. Their issue inioyed it, till the Lady Doulce conueied it by a marriage to Raymond Earle of Barcelone,Hist. of Sp Ao 1082: whose sonne being called to the crown of Arragon, brought Provence and Catelogne for his dowrie. His sonne Alphonso the second, gaue it to his second Sonne Raimond: and by the marriage of Beatrix daughter of Raymond, with Charles Earle of Aniou, this Countrey fell into the lappe o^ France, Anno 1262. This Earle Charles, by Pope Vrban th^ fourth, was crowned king of Naples; whose fourth successour Q. Ioane being driuen out of Naples by Lewis of Hungary, and againe restored by Clement the sixt; gaue to him as a recompence of his fauour, the Citty of Avignion, and the territories about it, Anno 1352. This Countrey is called the Countrey Venusine, the Metropolis is Avignion, a very fayre City seated on the Rhosne: famous for that it was the seat of the Popes for 70 yeares, which time the people of Rome remember till this day, by the name of the Babylonian Captiuity; euer since ministring an Oath at the confirmation of their Pope, that hee shall neuer returne to Avignion. The first Pope that remoued his seat hither,Stephanu^ was Clement the 5, Anno 1305, when as yet the Popes were not absolute masters of it; and it was returned againe to Rome by Gregory the 9th, Anno 1376. In this Citty are said to be 7 Pallaces, 7 parish churches, 7 Monasteries, 7 Nunneries,

7 Colleges. 7 Innes, and 7 Gates. It was made an Vniversity about the time of the Popes first setling there and still continueth so. Alciate the great Emblematist was Professour here.Sands relat. This Countrey containeth also 3 Citties (viz: 1 Ca^pentras. 2 Cavailan 3 Veson) and 80 walled Townes. The profits the Pope gathereth from hence are not great, by reason of the ill neighbourhood of the Protestants of Orange: nay rather the keeping of this Country is a charge vnto him; So that the people like well to be vnder his gouernment, as bringing more vnto them then he taketh from them.
Hist. of Fr.The fore-mentioned Ioane dying, made Lewis Duke of Aniou, brother to Charles the first, her heire: who possessed by this donation, this Provence, and the title of Naples. His grandchild Rhene, dying without any issue suruiuing him, gaue all his titles and possessions to Lewis the 11th King of France 1480. This Lewis in that troublous warre against the three Dukes, made Iohn of Chalons, a Tributary Prince of Orange, of free power and absolute iurisdiction: to make lawes, coyne money, pardon all crymes, with to write himselfe By the Grace of God Prince of Orange: and all other prerogatiues fitting an absolute Potentate, Anno 1275.
Ortelius.This principality is watred with the riuers Durance. 2 Seille. 3 Meine. and 4 Ecque, all helping to augment the Rhoane.
The chiefe Citties are Orange on the riuer Meine; famous for her rare and wonderfull antiquities: in Latine Aurlacus, or Aurengia. 2 Estang. 3 Boys de St Poll.
Re^sner.Claudia daughter and heire to Iohn Prince of Orange, sonne to Iohn the first free Prince of this territory* was by Francis the first giuen in marriage to Henry Earle of Nassaw, comming in an embassie from the Emperour Maximilian, Ano 1515. Rhe^^ sonne to this Henry dying without issue, made William his Vncle heire to all his estates; whose sonne William so renowned for Martiall exploits, and deeds of Armes in the Netherlands, was slaine treacherously by a Partizan of Spaine, Anno 1584. leaving Maurice Prince of Orange, and Earle of Nassaw heire to his fortunes and vertues.
The revenues of this principality are about 30000 crownes yearely.
The Armes are quarterly,Bara.1 Gules, a bend Or. 2 Or, a hunters horne Azure, stringed Gules. The third as etc. ouer all an Escutcheon of pretence, chequi, Or and Azure. More briefly thus. Quarterly Chalons and Aurange, vnder an Eschotcheon of Geneua.
In the king of France his part, are 1 Marseiles, a famous Mart Towne, a Colonie of the Phocians. 2 A^x, wher^ a Parliament was instituted, Ano 1501. This towne was of old called Aquae Sextiae,Plutarch. of Sextius its founder, and the hot bathes. By this town were the Cimbri discomsited by Marius; who vnwilling to venture his army on the enimie vnited, (for they were no lesse than 300000 fighting men; and lately fleshed in the ouerthrowe of Manlius and Cepio, two Consulls:) permitted them quietly to passe by his Campe; the Barbarians in their passage scorneful^y asking his souldiers what service they would commande them to Rome. But when for their easier march through the Alpes, the Cimbri had diuided themselues into three companies; Marius seuerally setting on them al, put them all to the sword, by this victory only giuing the Romans cause not to curse his natiuity. 3 Arles (Arelatum) the Metropolis of the Burgundian kingdome, lately strengthned and new fortified by Henry the 4th. In this towne was called a Councell by Constantine, Anno 313, for the quiet establishing of the Church: wherein was present Restitutus Bishop of London, and diuers others: Ausonius calleth this towne the Rome of France, and indeed so highly was it prized in old time, that Constantinus Flauius being chosen Emperour by the Brittish Legions, intended to haue made it the seat of his Empire. 4 Brignolls, etc.


12. PICARDIE and CHAMPAGNE.
PICARDY and CHAMPAGNE are hemmed round with Normandie, Belgia, Loreyne, both the Burgundies, Berry, Burbon and France.
Picardy is diuided into the higher and the lower. In the higher are these townes, 1 Calais distant from Douer about 28, or 30 miles, called by Caesar, Portus Iccius. This Citty was taken by Edward the 3 d after eleuen months siege, Anno 1347: and lost againe by Queene Mary after 200 yeares possession, Anno

1557. in lesse then a fortnight. The losse of this Towne was a great blowe to our state, we til then hauing carried the keyes of France (for so the French vsed to say) at our girdles. And as great a griefe was it to the vnfortunate Queene, who shortly after dying, told such as attended her, that if they opened her, they should finde Callice to lay next to her heart. 2 Bullen taken by Henry 8. Anno 1544. and yeelded againe in Edward the sixts daies. 3 Terwin taken by the same king Henry. To him lying at the siege of this towne,Guiceiardin the Emperour Maximilian came and served in person, wearing on his brest the English crosse, and fighting vnder the colours of St George. At this siege the French intending to victuall the Towne, receaued a great ouerthrowe; insomuch that had the Englishmen followed their fortune, they had opened a faire way to haue made the^selues masters of a France; and certaine it is, that the French King vpon the newes, had prepared himselfe to flye into Brittanie But the English more minded the spoyles and riches of Terwin, then the sequele of an absolute victory, and frui maluerunt victoria, quam vti, as Florus said of Annibal.
In the lower Picardie, the chiefe townes are 1 St Quintins. 2. Abbeville, two strong frontire Townes. 3 Peronne. 4 Ami^ns, the losse of which towne much blemished the reputation of Henry the 4th, the recouery thereof as much repairing it. I omit the stratagem by which this towne was taken from him. In the great Church hereof, our Edward the 3d did homage to Philip de Valoys,Hist. of Fr. for the Dutchie of Gui^nne; and because the like duties are seldome by Kings personally performed, I will describe the formality. Edward came with a traine rather to honour himselfe, then the French King. Hee was royally att^red with a long roabe of crimson Veluet, powdred with Leopards of gold; his Crowne on his head, his sword by his side, and golden spurres on his heeles. Philip attended by the chiefe officers of his Realme, sate in his Throne: hee was ^pparelled in a long robe of purple Veluet, powdred with flowre delyces of Gold, his Crowne on his head, his Scepter in his hand. Vicount Melun great Chamberlaine of France, commandeth Edward to take off his Crowne, Sword, Spurres, and to kneele downe: which he

doth. Then he tooke both his hands and ioyned them both together, saying, You become a leige ^an to the King my Master, who is here present, as Duke of Gu^en, and Peere of France; and you promise to be fa^^hfull to him and loyall: say yea. And Edward said yea; and aro^e. 5 Monstreville, and 6 Guise ^a^^us only for the Dukes which in our age it hath yeelded to the realme of France. The first was Claude sonne t^ Rene Duke of Lorreine, and husband to Antonietta, daughter to the Duke of Vandosme: in respect of which alliance he was honoured with this title. The 3d was Francis,Paradin* who endangered the Realme of Naples; who resisted the great siege of the Emperour Charles at Mets; droue him out of Provence; and was at last slaine at the seige of Orleans, Anno 1572. This was he which tooke Callice from Queen Mary; so that had Monseiur de Cordes now liued, hee might haue had his desire: for he vsed to say, that he would be content with all his heart to lye in hell 7 yeares, on condition that Callico were taken from the English. The 3d was Henry that great enimie of the Protestants: who contriued the great massacre at Paris, and almost dispossessed Henry the 3d of all France. He beganne the holy league, and was finally slayne at Bloys; the league suruiuing the author.
Picardie had once diuers Lordshipps, some fell to the Kings of France, by confiscation, others by conquests; some held of Arteys,Haill^^. others of Flaunders, and lastly of the Dukes of Burgundie, as Lords of these Provinces: and after the death of Charles Duke of Burgundie, at the battle of Nancie, Anno 1476; were all seized on by Lewis the 11th of France.
The chiefe Citties of Champaigne so called, for that it is a Champion countrey, are 1 Rheimes, where the Kings of France are most times crowned, and annoynted with an oyle kept in this Towne; which they say came downe from heauen and never decreaseth.Selden. How true this is, may quickly be perceaued, co^sidering how Gregory of Tours, who is so prodigall of his miracles, maketh no mention of i^ but especially, (for ab autoritate non valet argumentum negatiue) since the legend informing vs how this oyle was sent from heauen, at the annointing of Cloui^ the first Christian King of France, is absolutely contradicted by

their best and most iudicious writer Du Haillan: who affirmeth Pepin to haue beene the first annointed King, and that there was none de la primiere lignee oinct ny sacre a Reimes, nyalleiurs: none of the first or Mer^vignian line of kings, were annointed at Rheimes or elsewhere How euer the truth be, the Frenchmen wonderfully reverence this oyle, and at the Coronation of their Kings fetch it* from the Church where it is kept, with great solemnity. For it is brought by the Prior sitting on a white ambling Palfrey,Sl^^d. com. and attended by his Monkes; the Archbishop of this Towne, and such Bishoppes as are present, going to the Church doore to meet it; and leauing for it with the, Prior some gage; and the King when it is by the Archbishoppe brought to the Altar, bowing himselfe before it with great reuerence. This towne taketh name from the Rhemi, once a potent nation of these parts; and is an Vniuersity, wherein among other Colleges, there is one appointed for the education of young English Fugitiues. The first Seminary for this purpose erected, was at Doway 1568. a second at Rome, by Gregory the 13th: a third at Valadolit by Philip the 2d: a fourth at Lovaino: a fif^ (so much is the gaining of our nation to the Roman faith sought after) at this place by the Guisians. The Priests here liuing translated the new Testament into English, which we commonly call the Rhemish Testament,Martin. so learnedly confuted by Dr Fulke, and Mr Cartwright. The second towne of note is Troys, famous for the meeting of Charles the sixt and Henry the fift, kings of France and England: in which that victorious K. Henry was espowsed to the Lady Catharine, daughter to the aboue-named Charles the sixt. It was here also agreed that Charles the Dolphin, and afterwards the 7th of that name, being disherited; King Henry should be proclaimed, and acknowledged for the heire apparant to the French Crowne: that hee should bee Regent of the Realme during the life of the old King: with divers other articles, framed as best suited with the honour and will of the conquerour. 3 Brie which was once fellowe in the title of Earledome with Champaigne. 4 Montargis. 5 Sons. 6 Auxerre. 7 Chalons.
The chiefe riuers of these two Prouinces, are 1 Marne.

2 Aube. 3 Yone, which empty themselues into Sequana, or Seine: and lastly Some, which runneth into the Ocean, at the Hauen towne St Vallerie.
Hugh Capet at his first enthronizing in the French chaire ofParadine. Estate, fortefied himselfe by seuerall donations of rich and rertile Provinces; confirming on the Normans, Neustria; giuing to Geofrie Grisogonelle, Aniou: to Od^ a man of great power, Brie, and Champaigne: well knowing that a gift willingly giuen, cannot but be gratefully receaued, and requited by an ingenuous spirit. This Odo then was the first Earle of Brie, and Champaigne, Ao 999. This Earledome by the marriage of Earle Thibauld, and Blanch Queene of Navarre, Ao 1196; was annexed to that Pyrenean kingdome; vnder which it continued till 1284, when Philip the faire of France marrying Ioane Queene of Navarre, and Countesse of Brie, and Champaigne, vnited it to his Diadem: which his successours haue since kept, as lying too nigh Paris, to be in a forraine hand; giuing in exchange to the Navarroy's, certaine townes, and lands in Languedoc.


13. THE DVTCHIE OF BVRGVNDIE.
THE DVTCHIE OF BVRGVNDY is environed with Champaigne,Hist. of Fr. the Countie Bress, and Burbonoys. It takes its name from the Burgundians, who called by Stillico to represse the Francones, here seated themselues; and erected their kingdome, containing both the Burgundies, Savoy, Daulphine, Provence, and many other places of lesse note. But of these Burgundians we shall speake more anon.
That which Queene Katharine was wont to say, that France had more riuers then all Europe beside; may in like manner bee said of this Prouince in respect of France: hauing in it these Rivers. 1 Armacon, 2 Seram, 3 Cure, 4 Torney, 5 Valence, 6 Daue, 7 Soane, 8 Brune, 6 Senie, 10 Louche.
The chiefe Citties are 1 Digion,Ortelius. prowd in her Parliament instituted Ao 1476. and that it was built by the Emperour Aurelian, and that in her Saint Bernard was first shewne vnto the world. 2 Antun, sometimes the capitall Citty of the Dukedome, and a Bishops Sea. 3 Beaulne, where there is an hospital equall

to the Palace of any Prince in Europe. 4 Verdu^'s Sologne 6 Chalons belonging to the house of Ora^ge. 7 Alize more notable for what it hath beene,Plutarch. then what it is. For this, though now but a small Village, was once that famous Citty of Alexia wherein Iulius C^sar besieged Vercingetorix King of the Auernians, hauing in the City for the defence of it 70000 fighting men: and being himself* besieged by an army of no fewer th^n 300000 Gaules, which came to relieue their fellows. Caesar was now driuen to the triall of his valour, which he notably man fested. For ^he fortified his Campe with two wals one against the^. within the Citty, and the other against them without; and so providently kept watch and ward, that the besieged knewe the discomfiture of their friends, before they heard of their comming. To conclude, Vercinget^rix yeelded the Towne, and being brauely mounted, he rode round about Caesar, then sitting in his chaire of state; which done he alighted from his horse, vnarmed himselfe, tooke of his horses caparisons, and laying all on the ground, sate downe at Caesars feet, as his prisoner.
Within this Prouince standeth the Earledome of Charoloys, the vsuall title of the elder Sonne of Burgundie,Bara* who is called the ^arle of Charoloys. The Armes of it are Gules, a Lyon passant regardant Or, armed Azure. The chiefe Townes are Clugni, and Mascon.
Hist. of Fr.Burgundie, which with the sorementioned Prouinces, made a kingdome, was by the issue of Charles the Great, divided into two parts: the Countie, which was to appertaine to the Empire; and the Dutchy, the lot of the French kings. These g^ue it to one Richard of the house of Saxonie, 890, whose son Rodolph had his temples invested with the royal garland of France. This Richard was first son to Robert Earle of Aniou, whose eldest sonne Eudes was King of France; his third Robert Earle of Aniou, and this Richard Duke of Burgundy.Paradin. For wa^t of Heires thi^ Dutchie divolued to the Crowne, was by Henry the first, giuen to Robert h^s brother, Ao 1004 This Line again expired, it was giuen by King Charles to his brother Philip the hardy, Ao 1363. together with the County; which had bin formerly vnited to the Dutchie, by the marriage of Ioan, Countesse

of Burgundie, to Duke Eudes, Ao 1331. Philip, grandchild to this Philip, vnited to his Dutchie well nigh all the Belgick Provinces, and died leauing Charles his son; who imbarquing himselfe in a troublous warre against Lewis the eleuenth, lost his men, money, and life, at the battailes of Granson, Morat, and Nancie, 1476: after whose death this Dutchie was seized on by the French^
These Prouinces are all incircled in the girdle of the French gouernment,View of Fr. containing besides Cities, 34 Hauens, hauing all some properties of a good Harbour, viz. 1 Roome, 2 safety, 3 easinesse of defence. 4 concourse of forreiners.
The Armes of France in the daies of Pharamond,Paradin. were Gules, 3 Crownes Or: Clouis the great, altered them to Azure, Semi of Floure de Luces, Or: Charles the sixt to Azure, 3 Floure de Luce^, Or.
The chief orders of Knighthood in this Kingdome were first of the Gennet,Grimston. founded by Charles Martell, Maior of the French Pallace, and so called, either from Iane his wife, as Hailan would haue it: or ^rom the Gennets of Spaine, ouer whom hee triumphed at the battle of Tours, as Bellay writeth. It ended in the dayes of S^ Lewis: the knights of the order wore a Ring, wherein was engrauen the forme of a Gennet.
2. Of the Pa^rrie or twelue Peeres,View of Fr. so called, quasi pares inter se, instituted by Charles the Great in his warres against the Sarac^ns. Sixe of these were of the Clergie. 1, the Archbishop and Duke of Rhemes; 2 the Archbishop and Duke of Laon. 3, the Archbishop and Duke of Langers; 4 Bishop and Earle of Beauoys. 5 Bishop and Ea^le of No^on; And 6, Bishop and Earle of Chaelons. And sixe others of the temporalitie, 1 The Duke of Burgundy; 2 Duke of Normandy; 3 Duke of Guyenne; 4 Earle of Tholouse; 5 Earle of Champaigne; 6 Earle of Flaunders. These are they so much memoriz'd in the Legends of the old French writers. At this time the ancient Pairries of the Temporality are returned to the Crowne, and new erected in their places.
3. Of the Star^e, begun by Iohn of France, Ao 1352. They wore about their neckes a Coller of gold, at the which hanged



a Starre, the word, Monstrant regibus astra viam: this order was disgraced by his son Charles, in communicating it to his guard, and so it ended.
4. Of Saint Michael, instituted by King Lewis the eleuenth, Anno 1469: It consisted of thirty six Knights, which afterward were augmented to 300. They wore a Collar wouen with Cockle shells;Seld^^. the word, Immensi tremor Oceani. It tooke the name from the picture of Saint Michael, conquering the diuel, which was annexd' to the Collar. Some thinke that the invention of Saint Michael, was in allusion vnto the 10th of Daniel: Others say he took Saint Michael in regard of an apparition of that Saint, to his Father Charles the 7 on Orleance bridge, in the warres against the English.
5. Of the Holy Ghost, ordeined by Henry the third, Ao 1570. The Knights are sworne by solemne Oath, to persecute the Hugonots, and fauour the Romish Catholiques. Their Robe is a black veluet mantle, powdred with Lillies, and flames of gold and siluer; none are admitted to this order, who cannot proue their Nobility, by three descents at least. The Collar is of Flowers de lys, and flames of gold; with a Crosse, and a Doue on it, pendant. The reason of the institution was, because the order of Saint Michael began to grow too common among the vndeseruing; which order he took not away, but mingled with this; it being by him ordained, that the next day aster the Collar of the Holy Ghost is giuen; that of Saint Michael should bee added, if the honoured had it not before. It was called by the name of the Holy Ghost, because this Henry was on a Whitsunday chosen King of Poland.
I omit the other petty orders: as those of the Cock and Dog, by them of Montmorencie; of the Porcupine, by them of Orleance; and the Thistle by them of Burbon.


14. COVNTIE OF BVRGVNDIE.
Ortelius.Within the limits of France are three Countries which as yet acknowledge not the French command, viz, 1 Savoy, 2 Lorrain, 3 the COVNTY of BVRGVNDY. The last is environed with Champaigne, Lorreine, Switzerland, Bress, and the Dutchie; the

length of it is ninety miles, the breadth sixty.
The people are much renowned for warlike affaires, marching vnder the colours of diuers Princes, vnder the name of Wallons. This name is giuen vnto this people by the Dutch, who vsing W for G, insteed of Gallons (or Galloys) cal them Wallons. Others report, that when the Burgundians came first into Gaul, they asked the people of the Country running to see them, On allons, that is, whither goe wee; and that thereupon they got the name of Wallons: a proper invention, and of the same pitch as that of the Hugonots.
The ground is so exceeding fertile, that as France may bee called the Garden of all Europe; so may this be termed the Epitome of France, or the fairest flowre of that Garden.
The ancient inhabitants of the Dutchie were the Segusiani, of this County the Hedui.
This Country is enriched with the riuers,Ortelius. 1 Soane, 2 Loue, 3 Dayne, and 4 Doux, vpon whose bankes leaneth the faire and strong city of Besanson, the Metropolis of both the Burgundies. It was made an Vniuersity, Ao 1540; by the joynt authoritie of Iulio the 3, and Charles 5. 2 Dole seated on the same riuer; a town for strength, riches, and beautie, to be preferred before any in Burgundie.Sands r^l. Here is an Vniversity of long continuance, and therein a Colledge of the Iesuites, who fearing left the reformed doctrine might creepe in vpon them, haue not onely debarred the people of the Protestants bookes; but expressely also forbid them to talke of God, either in good sort, or bad. 3 Sal^es, glad of her rich salt Fountaine. 4 Gray, 5 Arbois, 6 Poutenant, 7 Ch^stilion, and about 23 more walled townes, and 160 Lordships.
The Burgundians were a Nation bordering on the Vandalls;Pezelius in Sleidann^. or as some coniecture a ^ept or tribe of them. At the time that Drusus and Tiberius warred in Germanie, they were a people vtterly barbarous, dwelling in tents onely here and there clap^ed vp. These tents are in that la^guage called Burgs, whence it is probably thought, the name of Burgundy was giuen vnto them: in the same sense that the name of Sceni^ae, was giuen vnto the^ of Arabia for the like kind of liuing. In the yeare 416. at the instigation

of the Vand^ls they left their own seates, and first planted themselues in the townes and Villages, which now belong to the Marquesses of Baden,Munster. and ^lectours of the Rhene. Hence wi^h an army of 80000 men, they passed the riuer, and subdued all France between the Rhene and the Alpes, East and West: Lorreine and the Mediterranean, North and South: in which tract are comprehended both Burgundies, Daulphine, Lyonoys, Bresse, Savoy, and Provence. The seate royall was Arles. In this kingdome reigned successiuely 1 Tibica, 2 Gund^mar, 3 Gundeband, 4 Sigismund, and 5 Gundecar, who lost himselfe and his kingdome to the French. Yet did the people euer and anon try all meanes to regaine their liberty and kingdome, till the dayes of Charles the Great, who vtterly subdued it. In the diuisions of his conquests by the sonnes of Lewis the gentle,French hist. Burgundie was diuided into the Dutchie, which was allotted to the Kings of France; and the County, which together with the incorporate Prouinces, was the portion of Lewis, entituled king of Burgundie, and Italy, (for this last also fell to his lot.) Hermingrade daughter and heire to this Lewis, was married to Boson Earle of Ardennes, (which is a part of Luxenb^urg^) and had by him two sonnes, Lewis and Ralph. To Lewis was assigned the Kingdome of Arles, containing Italy and Provence: to Ralph the Kingdome of Burgundy, comprehending this Countie, Daulphine, Savoy, Bresse, and Lyonoys. This Ralph being in the yeare 919, vanquished by one Burchard a Germane Prince,Munster and not able to subsist of himselfe; put himselfe and his Realme into the protection of Otho the ^irst, Ao 930. To Ralph succeeded his sonne Conradus, and after him an other Ralph; lastly a second Conradus, who Ao 1025. gaue his kingdome vnto Conradus Salicus, Emperour of Germany; vnder whose rule it continued entire. But in the raigne of his successour Henry the 4th, grieuously troubled with Hildebrand,Paradin. and the Popes; Otho of Flanders laid hold on this County, defended ^t, and left it to his children, Anno 1101. The other three which Paradi^e putteth before this Otho Guillaume, I take rather as Gouernours for the Emperor, then themselues. This Otho pretended title to it as being son to the sister of Conradus Salicus; a weak title, did we not see greater

estates surprized on lesser pretences. This notwithstanding, the succeeding Emperours of Germany, claimed not onely a supe^i^tendencie ouer, but a disposall of all the Countries that euer were vnder the command of a King of Burgundie.Daniell. Henry the sixt, Emperor; receiuing no small part of the money, which our Richard the first payed to the Duke of Austriae for his ransome; gaue vnto the said Richard the kingdome of Burgundie; the soueraignty of Provence, Viennoys, Marseiles, Narbon, Arles, and Lyons; together with the homages of the King of Arragon, and of the Earle of Digion, and Saint Giles. A royall gift, if either the Emperor had had any domination ouer those countries; or if they would haue receiued any officer of his appointing.
Anno 1331;Paradine. the County and Dutchy were vnited by the marriage of Duke Eudes, and Ioane the Countesse, which was daughter to Philip the long, and Ioane daughter to Earle Otheline. Their issue failing, the County together with the Dutchy were giuen to Philip, surnamed the Hardie, Anno 1369. This Philip had to wife Marguerit, Countesse of Flanders, which was the first of the Belgick Prouinces, that was incorporated into the house of Burgundie* Ph^lip the Good, grandchilde to this Philip, vnited vnder his Empire almost all the Netherlands, as you may see in the descr^ption of those Countries. After his death, and the death of his son Charles, Burgundie Dutchy was surprized by Lewis the 11, who pretended an escheat thereof for want of heires male. But the County as heing holden of the Empire, he left vnto the Lady Mary, daughter and heire to this Charles. She was married to Maximilian Emperour, and Archduke of Austria; whose son Philip married to Ioane Queene of Castile and Arragon, had two sonnes, Charles and Ferdinand: to the latter he bequeathed his inheritances in Germany; to Charles Spaine, Burgundy, and Belgia; whose great grandchild Philip the 4th, now goue^neth these countries.
The armes of this Earledome are B, a Lyon rampant O, Semie of billets, A. The armes of the Dutchie are Bendwaies Or and Az^re, a bordure Gules. This last coat is vsually marshalled among the armes of the King of Spaine; but why the armes of

the Earledome are there omitted, I cannot say, vnlesse it be to put the king in mind of his pretences to the Dutchy, or that this as being worthier, comprehends vnder it the rest also.


15. LORREINE.
Ortelius.LORREINE is compassed about with part of Belgia, Alsatia, the County of Burgundy, and Champaigne: The former name of it was Austrasia, being then of a farre greater extent then now it is: it borrowed the name of Lotharingia, from Lotharius, Nephew to Charles the Great, by his sonne Lewis.
The length of it; is about some foure dayes journey, the bredth almost three; and is sufficiently famous in that that famous warrier Godfrey surnamed of Bulloigne, which wonne Hierusalem from the Turkes, was Duke here.
This Countrey aboundeth with corne and wine, an excellent race of horses, plenty of mines, store of salt and fish.
Grimstons estates.The people (as neighbours to both) participate of the French complement, and German drinking, but more moderatly then either: They are hardie and politick, as they which cannot otherwise maintaine their state, bordering vpon so many Princes. They liue in a very happy condition vnder their Duke, grow daylie more rich, and are not oppressed at all with taxes: which make them affectionate vnto him, and louing one towards another.
Here is in this Countrey good store of Lakes replenished with fish; but one there is of most note, being 14 miles in compasse, the fish whereof yeeldeth to the Duke 2000l yearely.
The riuers of chiefe note are 1 Martha, or the Meure; 2 Mosa, or Meuse,Grimston and 3 Moselle: this last riuer is famous for the designe which Lucius Verus, gouernor here vnder Nero, had vpo^ it. For whereas it ariseth in the mountaine Vogese, not far from the head of the riuer Soane; and disburdeneth if selfe into the Rhene at confluence: he intended to haue cut a deep and large channell from the head of this riuer, to the head of the Soane, that so there might be a more quicke and easie passe from the Mediterranean into the Ocean; the Soane emptying it selfe into the Rhone; and the Moselle into the Rhene.
The chiefe townes are 1 Nancie seated on the Meure, the

Dukes seate; and famous for the discomfiture which Charles Duke of Burgundy here suffered, with the losse of his life. 2 Saint Nicholas a towne so populous, well seated, and neatly built, that w^re it walled, it would hardly yeeld precedencie to Nanci^ It tooke name from the body of Saint Nicholas, here buried, whose relicks haue purchased no small reputation and riches to this towne. 3 Va^eoleur, the place of Ioane the Virgin, to whose miracles and valour, the French attribute the deliuery of their countrey from the Empire of the English; but being at last taken prisoner, she was by the Duke of Bedford then Regent of France, condemned, and burned for a Witch. 4 Ponta Moson so called for a bridge built ouer the Meuse. 5 Neufe Chateau. 6 Vaudemant. The^e are also three townes, of right belonging to the Empire, within the precincts of this Dutchy, viz: Mets, ^oul, and Verdun: all which were taken by the French, Anno 1552, in the warres betweene Charles the 5, and the Princes of ^ermany.
There belongeth herevnto the country of Barroys, standing between it and Champaigne, and is environed with the two streams of the riuer Marne; whereof the one rising in the edge of Burgundy, the other in the edge of L^rreine, meet together at Chalens in Champaigne. The chiefe townes are 1 Barleduc a strong towne, 2 La Mott, 3 Arg, and 4 Ligni. The eldest son of Lorreine is entituled Prince of Barri. Lorreine also containeth one Marquesse, fiue Earledonies, and diuerse Baron^es.
When the Germans chose themselues an Emperour, this Province was the cause of many troubles betweene them and the French; the former keeping possession, the latter pretending a title Charles sonne to Lewis the 4th king of France,Hist. of Fr. being left to the curtesie of his brother, and by him not regarded; was invested in this Dutchy by Otho the Emperor, Anno 981. for which cause he shewed himselfe so alienated from the French, and wedded to the Germans; that the French after the death of his Cosin Lewis the 5, reiected him, and chose Hugh Capet for their King. This Charles had one sonne name Otho, (who leauing no issue male, instituted one Godfrey, from whom descended Godfrey of Bulloigne, his successour) and one daughter called

Hermingrade, from whom came Isabell, wife to Philip the second; vniting the bloods of Pepin, and Hugh Capet, to the great content of her grandchild St Lewis, who being a man of very tender conscience, is said neuer to haue joyed in the Crowne of France, till it was proued that by his mothers-side hee was the right Heire of Charles of Lorreine, whom Hugh Capet had so vniustly dispossessed. This principality continueth to this day without any great alteration of linage.
The Armes of Lorreine are Or, a Bend Gules, charged with three Larkes Argent. But herein I find Bara the old and expert Herauld, to differ from Paradine, the most exact Genealogist of the French Nation. For Bara saith that the Bend is charged not with three allouettes Larkes; as Paradine, but with three Allerions, or Allelyons, which are in blazon, small birds wanting beak, feet and legges. Of this last opinion is that most worthy Antiquary Camden Clarencieux, who withall telleth vs, that when Godfrey of Bulloigne was at the siege of Hierusalem, shooting at Saint Dauids towre there, he broched three feetlesse birds called Allerions vpon his arrow,Grimston. and thereupon assumed this armes.
The revenues of this Prince are 700000 Crownes, whereof 200000 arise from the customes of the salt made in his Countrie, and the other 500000 from his Coron^t lands. He is an absolute Prince and giueth for his deuice an armed arme, comming as it were from Heauen, and grasping a naked sword; to shew that he holdeth his estate by no other tenu^e, then God and his sword.


16. SAVOY.
The Dukedome of SAVOY is confined with Daulphine, Bresse, Switzerland, and Peidmont.
This Countrey for the streight and narrow passages, and them too full of theeues, was once called Malvoy; till a worthy adventurer of the Countrey, with industry and exemplary iustice, reformed both the vilenesse of the people, and the passages: then was it called Savoy, or Salvoy, quasi Salva via.
Within the limits of this Dukedome standeth the famous city of Geneva, being yet but two English miles in circuite, and hauing territories streaching no farther then two leagues and a

halfe on each side: The revenue therof is about 60000 crownes. The towne standeth at the end of the Lake Lemanus, and by Rhoane is diuided into two parts. The gouerment is by a common Councell, consisting of 200; the foure chiefe whereof are called Syndiques.
Their Ministers cannot but be poore, hauing no tithes but stipends; the greatest whereof comes not to 80 pounds yearely: and after this rate also is it with the Clergie, in all the Churches of France and Germany, which follow the Discipline of Geneva: For the tithes are taken by the Ciuill Magistrate, and distributed partly among the poore, partly layde vp in the co^mon treasury: But out of this there is againe some portion deducted, to bestow the daughters, and bring vp the sonnes of such of the Ministers, who die poore, or leaue their children vnprouided; the most commendable part in my conceit, of the whole Discipline.
The Church-gouernment consisteth of a Miscellany of Laymen and Ministers,M. Hooker which gouernment was begun by Mr Calvin, Anno 1541: and hath since without mature consideration bin headily receiued in most Churches of France and Belgia. The people had banished their Bishop 1535, and then seeing Calvin, and two of his Fellow-Ministers, vsurpe the prerogatiue, though not the title of Bishops, banished all three. Desiring to recall him againe, they were content to receiue a Discipline, if not ouer-prejudiciall to the City: Calvin framed this, consisting of two Laymen annually chosen for euery one Minister; which also with much grumbling was receiued by them.
This City was once diuided betwixt the Bishop and the Savoyen; till at last the Bishop got the entire possession, leauing the Duke the soueraignty and homage; in whose name, lawes were made, and mony was coyned. But the people hauing banished their Bishop, haue stood since on their owne liberty; and aided by England with 13000; by Venice with 24000 Crownes; and by Florence with intelligence, resisted the great siege of the D. of Savoy, Anno 1589. They allow all manner of honest recreations vpon Sundaies; Fornication they punish with nine dayes fasting; Adultery with death. They haue a law,

that if any Malefactour flie to them for refuge* they punish him after the custome of the place in which the crime was committed: otherwise,Sands rel. their towne being on the borders of di^ers Provinces, would neuer be free from Vagabonds. Examples hereof I will assigne two; the first of certaine Monks, who robbing their Convents of certaine plate, and hoping for their wi^ked prankes at home, to be the welcomer hither, were at th^i first acquaintance advanced to the gallowes. The second is of a Spanish Gentleman, who hauing fled his country for clipping and counterfeiting the Kings gold; came to this towne, and had the like reward. And when for defence he alledged that he vnderstood their City being free, gaue admission to all offenders; true (said they) but with an intent to punish them that offended; a distinction which the Spaniard neue^ til then learned, but then was too late.
The chief Cities of Savoy are first Chamberie, the se^te of the Duke when he sojourneth in these parts.Grimston. It is seated in a pleasant Valley among the mountaines, and is full of neat ho^^es belonging to the Gentrie of this Prouince. It is now fortified with a strong Castle, and some out-workes, though not yet fully recovered of the damage it receiued, when it was taken by Henry 4th, in the warres against this Duke, Anno 1600. 2 Tarantaise, which commandeth the passage ^nto Italy, through the hills called Geneura. 3 Bramont* 4 Aquebelle, situate at the foot of a huge rocke. 5 Carboneirs, and 6 Maurienne, which gaue the first title to the Princes of Saxony, called afterwards Earles of Savoy. Here are also the two strong Forts of Mount Melian, and Saint Katharines: the first of which held out foure moneths against many thousand shot of forty French Canons, Ao 1600. The lat^er is the Fort, whose gouernment being den^ed to Byron, plunged him in the irrecouerable g^lp^ of discontented treasons.
On the Northeast of Savoy is the Countrey of Bresse, the chiefe Townes whereof are 1 Chat^^ion. 2 Mon Reall, and 3 Bourge, a towne so well seated and fortified, that it is n^t much inferiour to the invincible Fortresses of Saint Catharines and Mount Melian.Hist. of Fr. The gouernment of this towne was also greedily

sought by Byron; but it being suspected that be held intelligence with the Duke of Savoy, it was also denied him. It was of old called Forum Seracusianorum. This little Prouince was joyned to Savoy by the marriage of Isabel, daughter and heire to Vlic^e the l^st Lord of it; with Amee the 4th of Savoy, Anno 1215: and was giuen by Duke Charles Em^anuel, to Henry the 4th of France in exchange for the Marquisate of Saluzzes; to which the French king pretended a title, Anno 1600.
The Marquisate of Saluzzes is sited in Peidmont, a part of Ita^y, being now wholy vnder the Savoyen, and Mantuan Dukes: thei^ latter possessing the Marquisate of Monferrate onely; the rest belonging to the Savoyard, whose eldest sonne is intituled Prince of Pe^dmont.
This Peidmont called in Latine,Grimston. Regio Pedemonta^a, (both names telling vs that it is a countrey seated at the foot of the Alpes) is bounded on the East with Millaine, on the West with Savoy, on the North with the Switzers, and on the South with the Mediterranean. The Country is wonderfull fertile if compared with Savoy, yet thought to be some what inferiour to the rest of Italy. It containeth about 160 places walled, and is so populous, that once a Peidemontane Gentleman being asked of the extent of his Countrey, said, that it was a City 300 miles in compasse. It containeth also besides Lordships, and Barronies; 50 Earledomes, and 15 Marquisates. It is diuided (as we haue said) betweene the Dukes of Savoy, and Man^ua, the riuer Tener or Tanarus parting their possessions. The principall townes belonging to the Savoyard are 1 Tu^in, called of old Augusta Taurinoru^, because it was the mother town of the Tau^^^, who here dwelt, and from which Taurini, the name of Turin ought rather to be deriued, then (as s^me fancie) from the riuer Duria, on whose bankes it is built In this City is the Palace and Court of the Duke of Savoy;Lewkno^. the See of an Archbishop; a^d an Vniuersity, wherein that renowned Scholler Erasmus proceeded Doctor of Divinity. 2 Augusta Praetoria, vulgarly called Aoste, situate in the Northerne bound of this Countrie^ 3 Vorcelli a strong towne bordering on Millaine, to which it once belonged, and was giuen by Philip Maria Duke of Millaine, vnto

Amadeus the third Duke of Savoy. It was the chiefe towne of the Libyci, who together with the Salassi and Taurini were the old incola of this Countrie. 4 Inurea, called by Ptolomy, Eporedia. 3 Niza an hauen towne seated on Varus. 6 Mondoni, or Montevicum. 7 Susa. 8 Saluzzes (which as yet retaineth some affinity with the Salassi) a Marquisate and Bishops See.
The people in this Dukes Dominions are numbred 800000, of which 70000 are Gentlemen.
We may read in Livy that Bitulto King of this Country (or the Allobroges) was taken by Fabius Maximus; as also how Hannibal pacified a discord betwixt Bruncus and his brother for the Diadem. This kingdome was ouerthrowne by the Romans, from them taken by the Burgundians, of whose kingdome, both when it was absolute and vnder the Empire, this Country was a member,Paradine. till the yeare 999. In this yeare Berald of Saxony, brother to Otho the third, for killing Mary the lasciuious wife of his Vncle, fled from Germany, and settled himselfe here in France. His esonne Humbert (surnamed Blanchmanis, that is, White-hand) was by the especiall fauour of the Emperour Conradus Salicus, made Earle of Maurienne, which is a towne of this Country, Ao 1027. The fourth from this Humbert, being Ame the second, stiled himselfe Earle of Savoy, 1109. His successour Thomas 1210, and Peter (from his manif^ld conquests surnamed Charlemaigne the Iunior) Anno 1256, by conquest got Peidmont; to which the Marquisate of Saluzzes containing almost all the rest, was vnited by a marriage of the daughter of the Marquisate, to Charles Duke of Savoy, (for it was erected into a ^^^^dome by Sigismund the Emperour, 1397.) Anno 1481. And though he died without issue, yet his successours kept it till the French pretending title to it, possessed the^selues of it. It was againe recouered by the Savoyen, during the French ciuill warres, Anno 1588; and now is peaceably possessed: The Countrey of Bress being giuen to the French for their pretention to the Marquisate, Anno 1600. These Dukes of Savoy haue a long time beene devoted to the Faction of Spaine, especially since the French kings took in the lesser States bordering on them, as Burgundy, Brittaine, etc. Charles the third sided

so constantly with the Emperour Charles the 5, the denying Fran^^s the first, a passage for his army through his countrie, into Italy, he was by that King despoiled of his Countrie, Anno 1536. The Emperour to recouer it, left no hing vndone; but in vaine: for the French encountering his For^es in the open field, vanquished them with the slaughter of 15000 of his men. In the yeare 1558. peace being made betweene Henry and Philip, successours to those great Princes: Emanuel Philibert, s^nne to Duke Charles, was restored to all his Rights. The present Duke Charles Emanuel dependeth also much on the Spaniard, (howeuer of late there haue bin some jarres between them) ^is sonnes receiuing thence great pensions and honours. His second sonne D. Victorio, is knight of Malta, Gouernour of the Kings gallies, and hath 100000 Crownes per an^um. His third sonne D. Amadeo, is made Cardinal, and hath halfe the profits of the Archbishopricke of Tolledo. His youngest sonne D. Thomazo hath thence also a liberall pension.
The order of the Annunciada was ordained by Amede duke of Savoy,Selden. at what time he defended Rhodes from the Turke, Ao 1409. Their Collar is of 15 linkes, to shew the 15 mysteries of the Virgin; at the end is the portraiture of our Lady, with the history of the Annunciation. Insteed of a Motto, these letters; F. E. R. T. id est, Fortitudo Eins Rhodum Tenuit, is ingrauen in euery place or linke of the Collar; each linke being interwouen one within the other, in forme of a true-louers knot. The nu^ber of the Knights is 14; the solemnities are held annually on our Lady-day, in the castle of Saint Peter in Turin. So f^om this victory; (for euery repulse of the besieger, is a victory to the besieged) there arose a double effect; first, the institution of this order: secondly, the assumption of the present armes of this Dutchy, which are G, a crosse A: This being the Crosse of St Iohn of Hierusalem, whose knights at that time were owners of the Rhodes:Paradin^. where as before the armes were Or, an Eagle displ^id with two heads Sable, armed Gules; supporting in fesse, an eschotchion of Saxonie; that is Barrwise six pieces, Sable and Or, a Bend flowred Vert. A coat belonging to the German Emperours of the house of Saxonie, from whom the first Earles of

Savoy are extract. The revenues of this Duke, are a million of Crownes and better.

Vniversities in France are 15.
1 Paris. Fr.
2 Poicteirs. Poict.
Lewknor.3 Lyons. Da^lp.
4 Angiers. An.
5 Orleance. An.
6 Avigni^n. Pr.
7 Burges. Ber.
8 Ca^e. Nor.
9 Burdeaux. Gasc.
13 Tholouse. Gasc.
13 Rhemis. Cha.
12 Nismes. Lang.
13 Montpelier. Lang.
14 Besanson Burg.
15 Dole. Burg.


Boterus not long since reckoned in France

Archbishops 17


Dukes 18


Vicounts


Bish^ps 107


Marquesses.


Earles 48


Thus much of France.



THE ALPES.
The naturall mounds by which Germany and France are parted from Italy,Plutarch. are the ALPES, mountaines which require fiue dayes to be ascended; they take their name ab Albis nivibus being hils continually couered with snow, which descendeth with a violencie, resembling the Cataracts of Nilus. Through these hills Annibal made a way, with fire and vineger, for the passage of his army into Italy: whence it was said of him, viam aut inveniet Annibal, aut faciet.
They begin at Savona, and hauing runne a good space, in a continued hill,Boterus rel. at last are diuided into many parts, as Nigrasylva in Switzerland, and the Hercynian wood about Bohemia. The ancient inhabitants were the Salij, Vacontij, and Medull^, all vanquished by Caesar: the present by ouermuch drinking of snow water, are troubled with a swelling in the throat, or the Kings Euill, as we vse to call it; Quis tumidum guitur miratur in Alpibus?
Merula.There are fiue passages ouer these hills into Italy, viz: three out of France, and two out of Germany; the first from France is through Provence, and so close vpo^ the Tyrrhenian seas, through

Liguria, which is the easiest, The second is through the hills called Gen^ura, into the Marquisate of Saluzzes, and so to Lombardic: this is the place through which the invincible Annibal trauelled with such difficulty; and through which also Charles the 8 marched toward Naples. The third is ouer Mount Conis, through the country of Turin, which was first hanselled (if we beleeue antiquity) by Hercules. From the passage of these captaines, were these latter hills called Alpes Graiae* and the former Alpes Penninae, or more truly Paeninae from the Paeni, or Carthaginians. The first way out of Germany into Italy, is through the Country of the Grisons, by the Town of Veltlyn; which the Spaniard hath seased into his hands: so that by the keeping of this Veltlyn, or Valtolin, and manning of the Fort Fuentes, which he also erected; he is in a manner the Lord of this passage, not only to the discontent of the Natiues, but to the distaste of his neighbours the Savoyards and Venetians. The other way out of Germany into Italy, is through the County of Tirolis, by the towns of Inspruch and Trent. This passage is commanded by the Castle and Fort of Eresberge, seated on the confines of this Country towards Suevia, and from Inspruch is two dayes journey distant. This Fort in the warre which the Protestant Princes made against Charles the 5, was surprized by Captain Schertelin, so to hinder the comming of the Popes Forces into Germany: for which the Emperour so hated him, that when all the rest of the faction were pardoned, he only continued a Proscript, his head being valued at 4000 Crownes. The taking also of this Fort, and the Castle adjoyning, to D. Maurice of Saxony* made the said Charles then being in Inspruch, fly out of Germany.


OF ITALY.
ITALY is girded round with the Ionian,Maginus. Tyrrhen^an, and Adriatique Seas, except it be towards France and Germany, from which it is parted by the Alpes.
The name impropriated to all the Region, is Italy, of Italus a King of Sicily, which first taught the people agriculture; or fro^ (...), which in Greeke signifieth an Oxe, whereof here is as much plenty, as vse. The more particular names are 1 H^speria,

because it is situate vnder the Euening-star Hesperus. And 2 Latium, because Saturn driuen fro^ Crete by his son Iupiter, hic latebat abditus. 3 Ausonia. 4 Oen^tria, from its abundance of Wines.
Pliny beautifieth Italy with these attributes: Italia terrarum omnium alumna, ead^m and parens, numine de^m electa, quae coelum ipsum clarius fa^eret, sparsa congregaret Imperia, ritus mollire^; t^t populorum discordes l^nguas sermonis commercio, ad colloquia distraheret; and humanitati hominem daret. Italy (saith he) the nurse and parent of all Regions, was elected by the prouidence of the gods, to make (if it possible might be) the Heauens more famous; to gather the scattered Empires of the world into one Body; to temper the barbarous rites of the Nations; to vnite so many disagreeing languages of men, by the benefit of one co^mon tongue* and in a word to restore man to his humanity.
The length of this famous Region is 1020 miles; the bredth in some places 410 miles,Maginus. in others not aboue 126 miles; the whole compasse is 3448 miles. It lieth vnder the 5 and 8 Climats, in the Northerne temperat Zone; the longest day being 16 houres. The people in former times were wary of behauiour and expences; of great valour, as subduing the greatest part of the world; very desirous of glory, as Cicero saith, Semper appetentes gloriae praeter caeteras gentes sunt Romani.
Here liued the famous Captaines, Camillus the Sword, and 2 Fabius Maximus the buckler of Rome. 3 Scipio. 4 Pompey, 5 Caesar, etc. The famous Oratours Cicero, Hortensius, and Antonius, etc. The worthy Historians, Livius, Tacitus, and Salustius, etc. The memorable Poets, Virgill, Ovid, Catullus, Horatius, etc. In these latter daies Petrarch the Philosopher, Guicciardine the Historian, Ariosto and Tasso the Poets, etc.
Brerewood.The language of Italy was diuers, in Apulia they vsed the Mesapian tongue: In Calabria the Greeke: In Etruria the Thuscan; and in Latium the Latine, which yet so altered in a little time, that Polybius saith, that the Articles of peace made between the Romans and the Carthaginians, could not be vnderstood by the best Antiquaries of his time. That the Latine tongue was generally spoken in all the Prouinces of the Roman Empire, as some hold, I dare not think; being better perswaded

by M. Brerewoods learned discourse on this Theame: Out of whom I will only draw one of his main Arguments, viz: how it was by especiall grace granted to the Cuma^s, dwelling but 100 miles distant from Rome, publiquely to vse the Roman language. This hapned not 140 yeares before the Emperours, at what time the Romans were Lords of all Italy, Sardinia, C^rsi^a, and the greater part of Spaine; And of this proofe, Livy an Author aboue all exception, is the ground.
This Country is said to be first inhabited by Ianus Ann. M. 1925. His Progeny multiplied exceedingly, and peopled Italy with the Tribes of the Laurentini, Brutij, Samniti, Etrusci, Sabini, Tarentini, etc. The second that came to enioy the happinesse of this Countrey was Evander, and certaine other Arcadi^ns, who banished their natiue habitations, seated themselues about the place where Rome was after built. The next that setled themselues here, was Aeneas and his Troians; who flying from their ruined countrie, and enraged enimies, and seeking new habitations, were by tempest first cast on the shore of Africa. There they were (as Virgil hath it) entertained by Dido, then busie in the building of Carthage; who so much doted on the perfections of this new commer, that she yeelded her body and Citty to his disposall. But this being not the place where Aeneas posterity was to erect a fourth Monarchie, hee priuately stole thence nto Italy, wherevpon the discontented Lady slew her selfe. This relation h^th no affinity at all with the truth of Chronologie. For Carthage being built but 135 yeares (or as others will, 143 yeares) be^ore Rome; and there being no lesse then 426 ye^res, betweene the beginning of the reigne of Aeneas in Italy, and the beginning of the reigne of Romulus in Rome; it is not possible that euer Dido should see Aeneas, vnlesse in imagination or pictures. Hereunto consenteth Ausonius, who honouring the Statua of this abused Princesse, with an Epigram of 18 verses, among others giueth vs these 4.
Invida cur in me stimul^sti Musa Maronem,Fi^geret vt ^^strae da^na pudicitiae?Vos magis his^ ^icis (^ectores) red te de me:Quam qui furta d^um, concubitusque canunt.Why didst thou stirre vp Virgil enuious Muse.Falsely my name and honour to abuse?Of me let histories be heard; not thoseWhich Ioues adulteries and thefts expose.
Credible it is that Aeneas being driuen on the coast of Africke, was by some Prince there curteously entertained, as a man whose same had beene his harbinger: but why the story should fasten it on Dido, I see not. Perhaps the vnfortunate death of this Queene, who laid violent hands on her selfe, gaue occasion to the Poet to faine that it was for the loue of Aeneas; whereas it was indeed to avoid the lust and furie of Iarbas, a potent king in Africke, who violently desired to haue his pleasure on her. Whether Aeneas euer were in Africke or not; or who it was that welcomed him thither, it matters not: certaine it is, that in Italy he ariued in an happy houre. For he was no sooner landed then gently entertained by Latinus King of the Laurentini; who to make his loue more apparant, espowsed his only child Lavinia vnto him. Hence grew the warres between Turnus K. of the Rutili a former suiter, and him; which being extinguished by the death and vanquishment of the Rutilian, confirmed the Troians in a setled peace. For now growing with the Laurentini, by many intermarriages, into a more constant bond of friendship; they built the Towne called after the name of their Queene, Lavinia; making it their residence for their Princes, till Longa Alba was built by Alba Silvius, a succeeding King, and made the chiefe of the kingdome.

The Latine Kings.
A. M.


Pr^igij Sy^.


2787
1 Aeneas 3
2790
2 Ascanius 38
2828
3 Sylvius 29
2857
4 Aeneas Sylvius 32
2888
5 Latinus Sylvius 50
2938
6 Alb^ Sylvius 39.
2977
7 Capetus Sylvius 24.
3001
8 Capis Sylvius 28.
3029
9 Capetus Sylvius 13.
3042
10 Tiberinus Sylvius 8.
3050
11 Agrippa Sylvius 40.
3090
12 Alladius Sylvius 37.
3109
13 Aventinus Sylvius 11.
3146
14 Procas Sylvius 23.
3169
15 Amulius Sylvius 24. Hee chased his elder Brother Numitor from the Realme,Plutarch. and clapt his daughter Rhea into the Temple of Vesta; where shee being a mother to two boyes, was (according to the custome) buried quicke, and her ch^ldren cast out for a prey for the wild beasts. They were found by Faustulus the kings shepheard, nursed by his wife for her meretricious life named Lupa: and being at last wel grown; slew Amulius, and restored Numitor to his kingdome, whom also they slew not long after. Then Romulus laid the foundation of Rome, and tempered the morter with the bloud of his brother Rhemus, who disdainefully had leapt ouer the new walls. This Towne was peopled with the refuse of the Italian Rascality, insomuch as their neighbours refused to giue them their daughters in marriage; till at solemne Plaies and Pastimes the Romans rau^shed the Sabine women, which came thither to behold the sport. Diuers other nations or tribes rather of the Tuscanes suf^ered in this rape, together with the Sabines: as the Ceninenses, the Antemnates, and the Crustumini. Of these the Ceninenses were most eager of reuenge, and vnder the conduct of then King Acron, giue battaile to the Romans. Romulus seeing his people gaue ground* prayed vnto Iupiter for the victory; and vowed if he ouercame king Acron, to offer vp his armour vnto him. When Acron the^ was vanquished, Romulus cutting down a faire young Oke, hung on it all the armour of Acron: Then girding his gowne vnto him, and putting on a garland of Lawrell, he laid the Oke on his shoulder, and marched into the citty: his Army ^ollowing, and singing a royall song of victory. Hither must we refe^re the begin^ing of Triumphs: but Nihil est mumtum and p^rfectu^ eodem tempore. Taerquiniu^ Priscus long after Romulus, added herevnto the purple roabes; and the triumphant Chariot, drawne with foure horses. Of these Triumps are two sorts; the greater properly so called, and the lesser

vulgarly called the Ovation; which differed in many circu^stances. For 1 the Triumpher entreth in a royall Chariot, and is met by the Senatours in their ornaments: but the Ovator entreth on foot, and is met only by the Knights and Gentlemen of Rome. 2^, The Triumpher had a Lawrell Crowne, and entered with the noyse of Drummes and Trumpets: but the Ovator, a Garland of Firre, with Flutes and Hoboyes playing before him. 3^. The Triumpher was attired in a garment of state; the O^a^or in a plaine purple gowne only. 4ly, In a Triumph the Souldiers cryed out Io triumphe: in an Ovation they cryed onely O, O, O; the often doubling of which noyse made it bee called (as some thinke) Ovation. 5ly, and lastly, the Triumpher vsed in his sacrifice to offer a certaine number of Oxen: but the Ovator only offered a sheepe; whence the name is more properly to be deriued. Now Ovation was in three cases granted. 1 If the Generall had subdued his enimies with little or no bloudshed, so that there were not slaine 5000 men; or by perswasion more then battaile. 2ly, If the warres had been flight, cursory, or not lawfully managed. And 3ly, if it had beene against an ignoble enimie. Of this last we haue a faire instance in P. Rupilio, who being Victor in the Servile war (or the war wherein the bondslaues made head against the R^mans) was contented with the Ovation, Ne triumphi dignitatem (saith Florus) seruili inscriptione violare^. The greater Triumphs were indeed full of magnificence: the state whereof, who list to see, may finde it fully set downe by Plutarch, in the Tr^mph of Paulus Aemylius. Yet by this which wee haue said by way of Antithesis, not a little may be obserued. This greater triumph was notwithstanding, not alwaies giuen to such as deserued it; there being many waies to hinder, or forfeit it. 1 Sometimes it was denied a Conqueror by the strength of a contrary faction: so Pompey denied Metellus his Triumph for the conquest of Crete. 2l, Sometimes it was by the Conquerours omi^ted for feare of envy: so Marcellus in Plutarch, after his conquest of Sicilae, hauing twice before triumphed; denied it the third time: his reason was (...), Invidiam parit tertius triumphus. ^l, Sometimes the Souldiers hauing beene ill paid, or too much streightned;

would not permit their Generall to triumph: and this was P. Aemylius case, because hee deuided not among the men of war (according to his promise) the spoyles of Greece. 4ly, Sometimes because the Generall had borne no publique office in the Citty: so (in Livie) Lentulus returning Proconsull out of Spaine required a Triumph: to which the fathers answered, that he had indeed done things worthy that honour, but they had no president for it; Vt qui neque Consul, neque Dictator; neque Praetor res gessisset, triumphaxet. 5ly, Sometimes the Generalls themselues omitted it, for the furtherance of some of their other designes: So Caesar comming toward Rome in Triumph, the same time the Consulls were chosen; quitted his Triumph to sue for the Consulship: it being the custome that such as demanded the Triumph should abide without the Citty, and such as sued for the Consulship must of necessity be within. 6ly, It was denied whe^ the warre had beene vndertaken without the command of the Senate: So it hapned to Manlius, hauing to the great enlargement of the Empire; yet without commission surprized Gallatia; quia causam belli Senatus non approbauit. 7ly, If the warres had beene ciuill betweene the Romans themselues, there was no Triumph allowed to the Victor; because in all such victories the Commonwealth was depriued of some part of her selfe: So Pompey and Metellus hauing vanquished Sertorius in Spaine; Externum magis id bellum quam ciuile videri voluerunt vt triumpharent. 8ly, If the conquest had beene gotten not without great losse on the Romans side: For this was Valerius conquerour of the Gau^es denied this honour; Quia magis dolor ciuibus amissis, quam gandium fusis hostibus praevaluit (saith Macrobius) 9l^, and lastly, if the seruice had not beene performed in the Generalls owne Province: So when Livius and Nero being Consuls* ouercame Hasdrubal, Livins only triumphed because the warre had beene managed in his Prouince; whereas indeed Nero was the man that wonne the day. And these are all, or at least the chief causes of hindring or omitting this honor: which certainly was the most eminent that euer the free state was capable of. When the Commonwealth was changed into a Monarchie, this honour seemed too great for Subiects; and was first

of all neglected by M. Vipsanius Agrippa, the establisher of Augustus Empire: who hauing quenched certaine rebellions in Asia, and setled ^he Prouince, had a Triumph decreed for him; which he, to giue posterity example, de^ied. This example, being as it were a law to others, was the cause that this custome was laid aside: and no man vnder the degree of an Emperour triumphed; p^iu^te Captaines being from thence forth contented with the triumphall ornaments, (...), are the words of Dion. Yet I finde that almost 600 yeares after this, Be^isa^ius triumphed: but I answere, that this was done in Constantinople, not Rome; and 2ly, it lacked so much of a triumph, that it fell short of an Ovation: it being indeed nothing but an honorable presenting of himselfe, and his prisoners before the Emperour. And if after Agrippa, Bellisarius may be accounted to h^ue triumphed: certainly, himselfe excepted, there was none ^ther to whom this fauour was vouchsafed; neither after him any at all. The last Emperour whom wee finde in Histories to haue triumphed was Probus, after his victories ouer the Germans: and the Blemyi a people of Africke, about the yeare 284. But I haue beene too tedious in this discourse. I returne vnto Romulus, who hauing vanquished the Ceninenses, and made peace with the Sabines, reigned victoriously in his new Citty the space of 37 yeares.


The Kings of Rome,
A. M.

3213
1 Romulus the founder of Rome. 37.
3251
2 Numa Pompil^us, the author of the Romane ceremonies 43.
3294
3 Tullus Hostilius, who subdued Alba. 32.
3326
4 A^cus M^rtius, who built Ostia 24.
33^0
5 L Tarquinius Pr^scus, the adorner of the triu^phs 38
3388
6 Servius Tull who brought the people into c^nse 44
3432
7 L Tarquinius Superbus. Who for his insolent behaviour, and a rape committed on the chast Lucretia, wife to Collatinus, by his sonne Sextus,Pluta^ch in public. was together with all his kind^ed banished the Towne, A M ^457. The people for his sake euer after loathed the name of a King, and therefore the Citty was

gouerned by two Consulls, annually chosen out of the chiefe Citizens, called Patricij. These Consuls tooke their name a consulendo, ^om counselling of and seeing to the good of the people and Commonwealth,Floru^. Vt consulere se suis ciuibus debere meminisse^t; their name being a memo^^all of their charge. This magistracy of the Consuls h^ld not long, but that first the Decemviri, then Tri^unes of consular auth^^ity, and others dispossessed them of their gouerment; concerning which thus Tacitus. Vrbem Romam a principio reges* etc. The Citty of Rome was in the beginning gouerned by Kings: Liberty and the Consulship L. Brutus brought in The Dictators were chosen but for a time: the D^^^mviri passed not two yeares: neither had the Consularie authority of the Tribunes of the Souldiers any long continuance: Nor Cinna, nor Syllas dominion Pompey and Crass^s quickly yeelded to Caesars forces; Lepidus and Antony to Augustus: this Tacitus. Yet notwithstanding these often mutations, the Con^uls were generally the supreame Magistrates, in which office t^ere were alwaies two, and those but for a yeare, ne vel solitudine vel mo^a potestas corrum^eretur. And though some had the fortune to be Consulls two or three yeares together, yet every n^w yeare they were anew chosen, and so the^r offices reck^^ed as seuerall: neither doe wee finde any to haue beene elected for lesse then a^ yeare, vnlesse vpon the death, or deposition of a ^ormer, vntill the ciuill warres* But then cum belli ciuilis pr^mia f^stinari coeperu^t,Tacitus. when the seruices done in the ciuill warres ^equi^ed a qui^ker turne in requitall, the Consulshippe was giuen only for some part of the yeare, and ordinarily for two months: ^h first Consul* being named Ordinarij in whose names the writings made for the whole yeare were dated;Dion. the other Minores* or Ilonorarij, which on^ly serued to make vp a numbe^. For so ambitious were he Romans of this honor, that when Maximus died in t^e l^st ^ay of his Consu^ship, Caninius R^bi^u^ petitioned Caesar for that part of the day that re^ained: whence tha^ so memorated ^est of Tully, O vigilantem Consulem, qui toto ^onsulatu^ suitempore s^mnum oculis non vidit Also when ^aecin^ was by the S^nate degraded f^o^ this honour, the day in which he was to resigne it, one Ros^ius Regulus obtained

the office from Vitellius for the day remaining,Ta^itus. but as the Historian noteth, magno cum risu accipientis, tribuentisque. Now as the Romans did thus exceed the first number of Consulls, so sometimes fell they short of it. The first that was sole Consull was Pompey in the beginning of the ciuill warres, viz. Ao V.C. 703. The next,Calvisius. one Varianes Ao Cti 410. This authority from the first institution to the finall period of it, continued at least in name (for the Emperours, long before the end of it, assumed the prerogatiue) the space of 1084 yeares: howbeit not without many intermissions of the title and office, by the seuerall formes of gouerment aboue specified. The last Consull was one Basilius in the raigne of Iustinian, Anno 541. The first were two worthy men, namely Collatinus, husband to Lucretia; and Iuniu^ Brutus, who in the raigne of the Tarquines counterfeited a distracted humour, but being called to this dignity, by the execution of his sonne, for practising secretly with the Tarquins, kept the licentious people within the bounds of true obedience. The people free from feare of the Kings, for want of imployment at home, ouerburdened their neighbours abroad, whom after the space of 500 yeares they subdued: a matter truely worth consideration, that the Italians should hold out against the puissance of Rome 500 yeares, when as almost all the rest of the world was subdued in little more then 200. So great a matter was it (saith Florus) to contract the many bodies of Italy vnder one head.


Tantae molis erat Romanam condere gentem.
So great a matter was it found,
To raise Romes Empire from the ground.

After Italy was subdued, Pyrrhus of Epirus was beaten home by them; and next the ouerthrow of the Carthaginians cast many faire possessions into the lap of Rome: who now become the mistrisse of the world, grew likewise oppressed by her owne greatnesse; and therefore willing to be supported. This aduantage Caesar espying, like an officious Gentleman Vsher laid hold of her armes, and from her seruant became her master; first with the title of perpetuall Dictator, and next of absolute Emperour: and after he had ruled fiue yeares, was with 23 wounds murdered

by Brutus, Cassius, and their ^ellow conspiratours, in the Senate house. Yet was not Caesar the first man that euer taught the Romanes to obey, they had already learned that lesson, and he had good Schoolemasters which foregoing him, did instruct him in the arts of Empire and ambition. Concerning which deg^^es of the Romans falling into bondage, take along with you this short Epi^ome, as I finde it in Tacitus: Nam rebus modicis (...) as facile habebatur* etc. For whiles our dominions were straight, equality was easily maintained: but after wee had subdued the world, destroyed all Citties or Kings which stood in our light, or might worke our annoyance; whenas we had leasure to seeke after wealth void of perill; there arose hot contentions betweene the Nobility and Commons: sometimes factious Tribunes carried it away; sometimes the Consulls prevailed: and in the Citty and common Forum, some little skirmish^^, the beginnings of our ciuill warres, w^re attempted. Anon after C. Marius one of the meanest of the communalty, and L. Sylla the most cruell of all the nobility, by force of armes ouerthrowing the free state, induced an absolute gouerment. After these succeeded Cn. Pompeius, something secreter but nothing better, and nunquam postea nisi de principatu quaesitum, and then was there neuer any other question debated, but who should be so^eraigne Prince of the state. So farre Tacitus. Caesar being thus ^^aine, they recouered some hope and shew of liberty, till fi^st the confederacie, and secondly the falling out of Augustus. Anto^ius, and Lepidus, put all againe out of ioint. For these civill warres once ended; by the death of Antonie, and degrading of L^pidus, Augustus tooke all into his owne hands: cuncta discordijs civilibus fessa, nomine principis sub imperium accepit. The Emperours, notwithstanding this foundation laid by August^s, came not to the heighth of their authority, nor the people to the bottome of their slauery, till some hundred of yeares after: ^n which times the Emperours by degrees incroaching on the common liberty and priuiledges; and the people (homines ad servitutem parati, as Tiberius called them) desirous to gratifie and become gratious with the Prince; they lost in the end not only the body, but the carkasse and very shaddowe of the free

state or Commonwealth. The chiefe strength by which the ensuing Emperours subsisted, was the Praetorian guard, consisting of 10000 men,Dion. euery one hauing the double wages of a Legionary Souldier. This gua^d Augustus first tooke to himselfe, vnder pretence of his own safety; but intending only by so choice a band of followers to awe the Citty: and they knowing from whom their maintena^ce was to be deriued, would neuer ^ndu^e to heare of the free state. An euident example whereof we haue in story: for when after the death of Caligula, the Senate had ^o great hopes of recouering their liberty, that they gaue the watch word to the citty guard; and consulted about the set^^g of the Commonwealth in open counsell: the Praetorian Souldiers saluted Claudius Emperour, and compelled the Senatours to approue their election. Ouer this body of the guard were ordained two Praefect^ Praetorio, both which tooke place next the Emperour himselfe,Zosimus. vntill the time of Constantine: who first cassing the Praetorian order, and destroying their Campe, because they were commonly the authors of all the seditions and rebellions in the state; and afterwards constituting foure Prefects (in title but not authority) for the foure quarters of his Empire; he gaue the chiefe precedency to the Patricij, an honour of his owne invention. But I returne to the Emperours.

The Romane Emperours.
A. M. 3918
Freigius.1 Iulius Caesar 5*
3923
2 Octavianus Augustus 56.
A. Ch.

17
3 Tiberius Nero 23.
39
4 C. Caligula. 3
43
5 Tiberius Claudius Drusus 13.
57
6 Domitius Nero 13.
70
7 Sulpitius Galba.

8 Silvius Otto.

9 Ai Vitellius.
71
10 Fl. Vespasianus 9.
18
11 Titus Vespasi. 2.
83
12 Flav. Domitianus 15.
97
13 Nerva Cocc^ius 2.
99
14 Vipius Traianus 19.
118
15 Aelius Adrianus 20.
139
16 Antoninus Pius 24.
162
17 Marc. Antoninus Philos. 19.

18 L. Aurelius Commodus 19.
181
19 L. Antoninus Commodus 13.
194
20 Aelius Pertinax.

21 Didius Iulianus.
195
22 Septimius Severus 18.
213
23 Aur. Bassianus Caracalla 7.
220
24 Opilius Macrinus.
221
25 Varius Heliogabalus 4.
225
26 Alexander Severus 13.
238
27 Iul. Maximinus 3.
241
28 Gordianus 6.
247
29 Philippus Arabs 5.
252
30 Decius ^.
254
31 Gallus Hostilianus 2.

32 Aemylianus Maurus.
256
33 Licinius 15.
256
33 Valerianus. 15.
256
33 Gallienus. 15.
271
34 Fl. Claudius 1.
272
35 Quintilius d. 17.
273
36 Valerius Aurelianus. 6
279
37 Annius Tacitus.

38 Florianus.
280
39 Valerius Probus 6.
286
40 Carus 2.
288
41 Diocletianus 20.
308
42 Constantius Chlorus
310
43 Constantinus M. 31. This Emperour though very religious, as being the first Christian Emperour, did more preiudice the Empire then any of his predecessours, first in translating the Imperiall seat from Rome to Bizantium, by which transplantation the Empire lost much of its naturall vigour; as we see in Plants and Flowres, who being remoued

from the place of their first grow^h, loose much of that vertue which was formerly in them* On this reason Camill^^ would not suffer the R^mans to remoue their seat to Veij* then newly conquered, but to preuent their desires, set fire on the towne and so consumed it, Vt nunc V^^os fuisse (saith Florus) lalora Annalium fides. A second fault of this Constantine was the diuiding of the Empire betweene his children For though it was quickly againe reunited, yet by his example others learned the same lesson, renting the Empire in peeces, which occasioned the losse of the whole. The former Emperours vsed indeed to associate sometimes their sonnes or brothers with them; yet so, that they were ioyntly Lords of it, as of one entire regiment: but Consta^tine, if I remember aright, was the first which allotted to particular men, particular iurisdiction. The third fault of this Prince, was his translating the Legions and Colonies which lay on the north Marches, into the easterne country, as a Bulwark against the Persians: thereby opening that passage, by which not long after the barbarous nations entred. For though insteed of these Colonies, he planted Garrisons and Forts, yet th^se quickly sayled, and became in a manner vnserviceable. So that Zosimus (though in other of his reports concerning this Prince hee bewrayes much malice) truely calleth him the first subverter of that flourishing Monarchie. To these three causes may bee added a fourth, concerning the Emperours in general, namely their stupid negligence, and degenerate spirits. Italy notwithstanding continued a member of the Empire till the yeare 399, in which Theodosius the great diuided againe the Empire:Munster. to Arcadi^^ his elder sonne he gaue the Easterne; to Honorius the young^^ the Westerne parts of his Monarchy.


The Westerne Emperours.
399
1 Honorius 26.
425
2 Valentinianus 29
454
3 Maxim^anus 4.
458
4 S^verianus 4
462
5 Anthemius 5
467
6 Crestes 6.
473
7 Augustulus 1. The last the ever kept his dayly residence in Italy: a thing ominous, that Augustus should establish, and Augustulus ruinate that spacious Monarchy.

During the raignes of these Emperours and some few years after, Italy was seauen times almost brought to desolation, by the fire and sword of Barbarous nations.Hist. of Ital. 1 By Alaricus King of the G^thes, who tooke R^me, Naples, etc. 2 By Attila king of the Bunnes, who r^zed ^lorence, spoild Lombardie, and by the ^n^caty of Leo the first, was diuerted from Rome. 3ly, By Genscr^us king of the Vandals, who sacked Rome. 4ly, By Biorgus king of the Alam or Lithuani 5ly, By Odoacer king of the Heruli, who droue Augustulus out of Italy, and twice in 13 yeares laid th^ countrey desolate. 6ly, By Theodoricus king of the Goths, called by Zeno the Emperor to expell Odoacer. 7ly, By Gunde^^^^^ king of the Burgundians, who hauing ransacked all Lombardie, returned home, leauing the Gothes in possession of Italy: who after they had raigned 72 yeares in Italy, were at last subdued by Belisarius, and Narses, two of the brauest Captaines that euer serued the Romane Emperours. This Narses gouerned Italy for the Emperour 17 yeares,Pezelius in Sleidan. at the end of which time being basely vpbraided by Sophia the Constantinopolitan Empresse, and wise to Iustinian the Emperour: who envying his fortune, procured him to be recalled, and sent him word, shee would make the Eunuch (for such he was) come home and spin among her maides: he replied, that he would spin such a web, as n^ither she, nor the best of her minions should euer vnweaue. Therevpon he sent into Pannoia (now Hungarie) for King Albe^nus and his Lombards; who comming into Italy with their (...) and children* possessed themselues of all the Countrey, from the Alpes to the Appennine Hills, calling it by their owne name L^mbardie.

The Kings of Lombardie.
568
1 Alboinus 6.
574
2 Clephes 1.
586
3 Antharis 7.
59^
4 Agilu^^us 25.
6^8
5 Adoaldus 10
628
6 Ario^ldus 11.
639
7 Rotha^is 16.
655
8 Radoaldus 5.
660
9 Aribertus 9.Freigiu^.
669
10 Gundibertus 1
670
11 Grimoaldus 9.
679
12 Garibalius mens. 3
679
13 Partarithus 18.
698
14 Cunibertus 12.

15 Luithertus.

16 Rainbertus.
712
17 Aribertus 12.
723
18 Asprandus Mens 3
723
19 Lu^tprandus 21.
744
20 Ra^hisius 6.
750
21 As^ul^us 8.
756
22 Desider^^s 18.

Mach. hist. of Flor.Of all these kings of Lombardie, I will only relate some occurrences of the two first and the two last. Alb^inus before his comming into Italy, waged wa^re with C^^emu^dus a king of the Iopidi whom he ouerthrew, and of his ^kul he made a ^uaffing cup. Rosamund daughter to this king be tooke to wife, and one day being ouer-merry in Verona, compelled her to drinke out of her fathers skull. This abuse shee sto^ asking, prom^sed to one Helmichil^e her selfe to wise, and Lombardie for a dowry, if he would kill the King. He consented, and did it; but was so extreamely hated for it, that he was forced together with ^s Rosamund to fly to Rauenna the Court of Longi^us the ^xarch. Longinus partly desirous to enioy the loue of Rosamund^; partly to possesse that masse of money and iewells which shee brought with her; and partly by her faction to raise a beneficiall warre against the Lombards; perswaded her to kill Helmichilde, and take him, to which she agreed. Helmich^^d entering out of a Bath called for beere, and shee gaue him a strong poyson; halfe of which when he had dranke, mistrusting the matter, he made her drinke the rest, and so they both died together. C^^thes the 2d king extended the Longobardian kingdome, euen to the gates of Rome. He was so cruell, that after his death they would haue no more kings, but chuse 30 Dukes to gou^^^^ them. This diuision (though it en^ured not fully a dozen years) was the cause that the Lombards made not themselues Lo^^^ of all Ita^y. Th 21 King was Astu^phus, who wonne Rave^^, and the Exarchie thereof, A0 741. the last Ex^rch being (...) Eutic^us. Astu^phus long enioyed not his conquests; for Pepin king of France, being by Pope ^tepha^ the (...), sollicited to come into Italy, ouerthrewe him, and gaue Ravenna to the Church. The last king was D^sideriu^, who falling at ods with Adrian the first, and besie^ing him in Rome, was by Charles the great, successour to Pepin, bes^eged in (...), and himselfe with all his children taken prisoners, A0 774. Here ended the kingdome of the Lombards, hauing indured in Italy 232 yeares.

Lombardy was then made a Province of the French, and after of the Germanes Empire; many of whose Emperours vsed to bee crowned kings of Lombardie by the Bishops of Millaine, with an iron Crowne, which was kept at M^doccum, now called Mon^^ a small Village. This Charles confirmed his fathers former donation, to the Church; and added of his own accord, Marca Anconitana, and the Dukedome of Spoleto. For these and ot^er kindnesses, Charles was by Pope Leo the 4th on Christmas day made Emperour of the West, Ao 801. whose successours shall be catal^guized when we come to describe Germa^^^. Boterus* At this division of the Empire, Irene was Empresse of the Eas^; to whom and her successours Naples was allotted* it being then in the possession of the Greekes. To the Popes were given by this Emperour and his father, almost all the lands which they possesse at this day. The Venetians in that little they then had, remained sui^^ris. The rest of Italy containing all Lombarde, P^dmont, Frinly, Tuscany, and Trenigiana, belonged to the Empire; till the Imperiall reputation dec^ying, gaue the pettie Princes occasion of strengthning themselues; incited particular Citties to make themselues free commonwealths.

Of Italy as it now is.
The soyle as in former times is so fruitfull, that they haue abundance of all things, and want of none; transporting into other places Rice, Silkes, Velvets, Satins, T^ffaties, Grogrammes, Rash, Fustians, Gold, Wire, Armour, Allom, Glasses, etc. They haue their three Haruests in one yeare, which require as much labour of the husbandman, as it yeeldeth profit to the Lord: so that it is truely said, that the rich men of Italy, were the richest; and the poore, the poorest in the whole world.
The language is very courtly and fluent, the best whereof i^ about Florence and Siena: it retaineth the greatest portion of Latin, but not without the mixture of barbarous languages, so long in vse amongst them.
The chiefe Riuers generally of the whole Region are Padus,Maginus, or Poe, called also Eridanus, into which Phaeton was drenched when he came downe tumbling from heauen: this riuer riseth in the Alpes, and running through Lombardie, diuideth the countrey

in Cispadanam, and Transpidan^m, a diuision in these daies forgotten; and so gallopeth with a fail carecre int^ the Adriatique. 2 Rubi^on the ancient Northerne bound of Italie.

3 Cuique fuit roru^ promiss^ potentia Tibris.
And Tiber vnto which was giuen
Lordship of all things vnder heauen.

Sands relat.The people are for the most pa^^ graue, respectiue, and in^enious; excellent men (said a Spaniolized Italian) but for three things; 1 in their lusts they are vnnatural, 2 in their malice vnappeasable: 3, in their actions deceitfull. To which might bee added, they will blaspheame sooner then sweate, and murther a man rather then slander him. They are exceeding i^alous ouer their wiues, insomuch that they shut them vp from the common view, and perm^t them to discourse with few or none. The l^cke which a Gentleman of V^^^e vsed to keepe his wife true in his absence, is so common, it needeth no relation. Indeed this ^^nzie rageth among all Southerne people. The Tu^kes permit not their women to walke in the streets, but couered with a v^yl^. In Barbarie it is death for any man to see one of the Xer^^^^ Concubines; and for them too, if when they see a man, though but through a casement, they doe not suddenly skreeke out. The Spanish Embassadour Mendoza,B^din de rep found great fault with our promiscuous sitting of men and women in the Church, a^^^^ting it as immodest and lasciuious. To whom D' Dale, master of the Requests, replied, that indeed in Spaine, where the people euen at the Diuine Seruice, could not abstaine from vncleane thoughts, and vnchast gestures, that mi^gled kind of sitting was not allowable; but Englishmen were of another temper. ^ew Northerne people are troubled with this yellow Iaundise; who not only sit mixed in the Church, but euen in the open and common Bathes also. Two things which the Italian would hardly endure, who so infinitely are beso^^ed with this passion, that looke how many Italians there are, there are for the most part so many ^aylors. The women are generally witty in speech* modest in outward carriage, and bountifull where they bea^e affection: and it is prove^bially said, that they are Mag-pier at the docre, Saints in the Church, Goates in the Garden, Dinells in the

house, Angells in the streets, and Syrens in the windowes. All the people both men and women amount to 15 Millions.
The vsuall diuision is into six parts, 1 Lombardy. 2. Tuscany. 3 the land of the Church. 4 Naples. 5 Rieue^ere di Genon. 6 the land of Venice; of which there is passed this censure, according to the capitall Ci^ties. 1 Rome for Religion. 2 Naples for Nobility. 3 Mollaine for Beautie. 4 G^noa for statelinesse. 5 Florence for pollicie. 6 Venice for Riches. Howsoeuer we will divide it according to the present divers principalities which are,
Lither The greater, as
The Kingdome of Naples.The Papacie.The Common-wealth of Venice.The Dukedome of Florence.The Dukedome of M^llaine.Lither The lesser, as
The Dukedome of Mantua.The Dukedome of Vrbine.The Principality of Parma.The State of Genoa.The State of Luca.


THE KINGDOME OF NAPLES.
THE KINGDOME OF NAPLES is seperated from the Land of the Church by a line drawne from the mouth of the riuer Tronto,Orteli* to the head of Axosenus: On the other parts it is envi^oned with the Sea, the compasse of it being 1468 miles. This Kingdome is the fertil^st place in all Italy, abounding in Miner of diuers m^^^als; and the choicest wi^es called Vina Massier, and Fal^ru^: To Alexandria they s^nd Saffrons, to (...) S^^kes, to Venice oyle, to Rome Wines.
The Noblemen here, of all men vnder Heauen, liue in most carelesnesse, hauing like the Tyrant Polycrates, nothing to trouble them, but that they are troubled with nothing, bu^ the Pe^^^t ^^eth in as great a misery, as his Lord in jollity.
The principall riuers of this Kingdome of Naples are 1 Sil^^^^, 2 Basentus, 3 Posoa^a, 4. Trontus, 5 Sal^^elius, 6 V^^^nus, 7 Salinus, and 8 Gariglian. On the banks of this last riuer,Guice many battles haue bin fought between the French

and the Spaniards for the Kingdome of Naples: especially that famous battaile between the Marquesse of Saluzzes, Generall of the French, and Goasalvo Leader of the Spaniards; the losse of which victory by the French, was the absolute confirmation of the Realme of Naple^ to the Spaniards. More famous is this riuer for the death of Peter di Medices, who being banished his Country at the comming of king Charles into Italy; and hauing diuers times in vain attempted to be reimpatriate; followed the French army hither; and after the losse of the day, took shippe with others here, to fly to Caieta; but ouer-charging the vessell, she sunk and drowned them all. But most famous is it, in that Marius, that excellent, though vnfortunate captain, being by Syllas faction,Plutarch. driuen out of Rome, hid himself stark naked in the durt and weedes of this riuer; strange alteration. He had not lien here long, but Syllas souldiers found him, and carried him to the city of the Mintu nians, being fast by this riuer. The^e men to please Sylla, hired a Cimber to kill him, which the fellow attempting (such is the vertue of Maiesty euen in a miserable fortune) run out again crying, he could not kill C. Marius. This riuer was of old called Aquae Sinessuanae, or the Lake of Minturne.

The chief Prouinces are
1. TERRA DI LAVORO. aunciently Campania, and called Veneris and Bacchicer^amen, the chief Cities whereof are 1 Caieta, so called either of Caieta the nurse of Aeneas here buried; or from (...), vro, because the Troian Ladies being here arri^ed out of Africa, and fearing their husbands would again put out to sea, burnt their ships, and so forced them to settle in this cou^try. It is a Town commodiously seated on the sea side, and seemeth to be a place of great importance, insomuch that (as C^minaeus telleth vs) if King Charles the 8th, had but only fortified it,Adrianus. and the castle of Naples, the Realme had neuer bin lost* 2 Naples, the Metropolis of the Kingdome, a beautifull City, containing seuen miles in compasse. It was once called Parthenope, and falling to ruine, was new built, and called Neapolis. Among all other things here is an hospitall, the revenues whereof is 60000 Crownes; wherewith besides other good deeds they

nourish in diuers parts of the Kingdome 2000 poore Infants. In this City the disease called Morbus Gallicus, or Neapolitanus was first known in Christendome. This City is seated on the sea shore, and fortified with 4 strong Castles, viz: 1 Castle Capo^na, where the Kings palace was: 2 Saint Ermo; 3 Castle del Ovo, or the Castle of the Egge; and fourthly Castle Novo, or the new Castle.Floru^. 3 Capua, whose pleasures enervated the victorious army of Hannibal whence was the saying, Capua est Cann^ A^nibali. 4 Cuma, ^eere which is Sybillae antrum, by which Aeneas went down to H^ll to talk with his Father: and not far d^stant is the Lake called lacus Avernus; the stink of which killeth birds as they flye ouer it. 5 Baiae famous for the Bathes. 6 Nola, where Marcellus ouerthrew Hannibal, and his souldi^^^; letting the world know that Hannibal was not invincible. 7 Pa^colis a small town standing on a creek of the sea opposite to B^aile,Dion. from which it is distant 3 miles and a halfe. These towns are famous for the bridge built between them by C. Caligul^. It was composed of sund^y vessels, compacted together in that sort, that there was not only a fair and large passage, but di^ers ten^s and victualing houses on both sides. Caius in triumphall ha^it marcheth and remarcheth ouer the bridge, praiseth himself and his souldiers, as men to whose heroick enterprise^ neither Earth nor Sea was an obstacle. This he did, as himself a^^irmed, to keep in awe Neptun^; and to exceed the like acts of Xerx^s and Darius, memorized in old Histories: or as it was coniectured to terrifie the Romans and Brittaines, which (...) of such a notable exploit: or to fulfill the prophesie of (...), who had often foretold during the life of Tiberius, that it was as impossible for Canis to succeed ^n the Empire, as to ride o^ horseback from Baule to Putcolis. 8 Misenum, where Augustus keeping one A^mada, and an^ther at Raven^a, (...) the whole Roman Empire H^r^ is also in this Country the (...) Velu^^^s, that casteth out fl^mes of fire: the smoke of whi^^ ^led ^liny Iunior, coueting to search the cause of it The flame hereof br^ke ^orth cruelly also during the reigne of Titus, casting out not only such sto^e of smoke, that the ver^ Sun seemed to be in the Ecclipse: but also huge stones, and of ashes such

plenty, that Rome, Africke, Aegypt, and Syria, were euen couered; Hereulanum and P^mpeios, two Cities in Italy, were ouerwhelmed with them. There were heard dismall no ses all about the Prouince, and Giants of incredible bignes seen to stalke vp and down, about the top and edges of the mountain: which extraordinary accident, either was a cause or presage of the future pestilence, which raged in Rome and Italy long after.
4. ABRVZZO, where once the Samnita, Picentini, and others dwelt; the chief towns are Aquila, ne^re the Appen^ne. 2 Beneventum once called Maleventum. 3 Aquino where Thomas Aquinas, the great School-Diuine was borne. 4. Salmo, Oui^s birth-place, as himself testifieth in his De Tristsbus,
Sulmo mihi patria est gelidis uberrimus undis,Millia qui nonies distat ab urbe decem.Sulmo my birth-place full of riuers cleare,From Rome is distant ninety miles well neare.
In this country are the straights called Furcae Candinae, wherein when the Sam^ites and Picentini had so enclosed the Romans,Livy. that there was no possibility of escape: they sent to Herennius, a man for his age much reverenced, and for his wisdome much followed by them, to know what it were best to doe to the Romans. The old man sent word, they should all be sent home safe and vntouched. This answer not being well liked, they sent to him again: he returned answer, they should all be put to the sword. These different answers made them conceiue amis^e of the old mans brain, till explain^ng himself, he told the^ that either they must make the Romans their friends by a (...) and honourable deliuerance; or else take from them all power of doing hurt, by putting to sword so many of their Captaine^ and Souldiers; mid way was there none. To neither of these courses would the souldiers agree, but disarming and spoyling the Romans, sent them home. The Romans not made friends by so ^dious a be^efit, but hatching revenge for the disgrace, vnder the conduct of Papyrius, entred again the country: which, hauing opprobriously handled the natiues, they made subiect to the Senate and people of Rome: Leauing Princes a notable lesson for their proceedings against men of quality and ranke, either

not to strike at all, or els to strike home, and to the purpose. M^ch^avel in his history of Florence, taxeth for committing a great ^olo^cisme in state, R^naldo of the house of Alb^zi; in that hating Cosmo of the Family of the Medici, he only procured his b^n^shment; which Cosmo at his returne recompenced to the full: Whereon the historian in^erreth this notable Aphorisme, That great personages must not at all be touched; or if they be, must be made su^e from taking reuenge. Yet doe I not prohibit a Prince the vse of mercy, I know it is the richest Iewell that adorneth his Crowne; neither dare I take vpon me to limit the vse of so excellent a vertue: only let me obserue how many (...) of vsage are commonly afforded those men, whose liberty after their delinquencie, may endanger the safety of the Prince or State; I find then three principall, whereof the first is immediate execution, a course more to be allowed where it cannot, then commended where it may be spared. The second is either close imprisonment, or else consiament to the house and custody of some man in trust with the Prince; wherein great caution ought to be vsed: for we find in our own histories, how Morton Bishop of Elie, being committed to the Duke of Bucking^am his custody by Richard 3d, not only procured his own liberty; but wrought the Duke to the contrary faction. The last which is in all times the gentlest, and in some cases the surest, is not only an absolute pardon of life, or a grant of liberty, (for that alone were partly vnsa^e:) but an^ind^ering of the party delinquent by giuing him some place of honour, or committing to (...) fidelity some office of ^r^st. A pregnant instance we haue of this kind in the Emperour Otho, who not only pardoned Marius Cel^us the chief of Gaelba's ^action; but put him in place neerest about him, and made him one of his principall Leaders in the warre against Vitell^^; the reason was, ne hostis metum, (...), lest lying alo^se as a pardoned enemy, he might suspect that the bre^ch were but badly made vp. But now it is (...) my self from the streights of these Furc^ Candinae, and to ^^lace my self in the plaines of Calabria.
3. CALABRIA IMPERIOR,Adrianus. the inhabitation of the Bru^ij, whose chief Cities are ^ Peste, or Pessidonia, where Roses

grow thrice in a yeare. 2 Salernum, famous for the study of Physick, the Doctours whereof made the book Schola Salerus, dedicated to our Henry 8th. 3 Consensia the prime City of these parts. 4 Rhezo, or Regium, so called from (...), rumpo; because that here it is thought that Sicily was broken from Italy. 5 Locris, where liued the Lawmaker Zaleucus, who ordering adultery to be punished with the losse of both their eyes, was compelled to execute his law on his son the first offender. Therfore to shew the loue of a Father, and sincerity of a Iudge, he put out one of his sonnes eyes, and one of his own. He also prouided in his Lawes, that no woman should be attended with more then one maid in the street, but when she was drunk; that she should not goe out of the City in the night, but when she went to commit adultery: that she should not weare gold or embroydered apparel, but when she purposed to be a common strumpet: that men should not weare rings and tissues, but when they went a-whoring and the like: by which lawes both men and women were restrained from all extraordinary traines of attendants, and excesse of apparell; this last, asault in our times too common. This town was formerly also famous for the victory of Eunomus, an excellent Musitian; vpon Aristonus of Rhegium, an other of the same profession. For though Aristonus had made his prayers to Apollo, the god of Musick, to grant him the conquest; yet Eunomus plainly told him, that nature was against him; who had made all the Grasse-hoppers on his side of the water, mute. The day being come, one of the strings of Eunomus harpe in the midst of his playing, brake; when presently a Grassehopper leaped vpon his harpe, and supplyed the defect of his string, by which means the victory was adjudged to Eunomus. And indeed it is by diuers affirmed, that betweene Locris and Rhezo i^ the inner of Al^x, on the banks of which, towards Locris, the Grassehoppers doe sing merrily, on the other they are quite mute.
Strabo.4. CALABRIA SVPERIOR, or Magna Graecia, from diuers Colonies of Graecians, that there were planted. On the Northeast part of this Country is Golfo di Tarento, olim Sinus Tarentinus, on the Southeast, Golfo de Chilaci, olim Sinus Scillaticus.

The chief townes are 1 Tarentum, a town built by the Lacedaemonians, about which grew the warres between Pyrrbus and the Romans:Strabo. here the Philosopher Architas was borne, so famous for his flying Doue. 2 Crotona, the men whereof were so actiue, that at one Olympicke game, all seuen that ouercame were Cretonians: their glory much decayed in a battaile against the Locrians, where 120000 of the^ were ouercome by 15000 of the enemy. 3 Polycostrum. 4 Amycle, a town peopled with Pythagoreans. These men hauing bin often terrified with a vain rumour of their enemies approach; promulgated a law, forbidding all such reports: by which meanes their enemies comming vnawares vpon them, took the town. Hence grew the proverb, Amyclas silentium perdidit: and Lucilius commanded to be silent, made answer, Mihi necesse est loqui, scio enim Amyclas silentio peri^sse. 5 Sybaris, a city built by the Graecians, after the destruction of Troy, the people whereof were Lords of 25 cities, and could arme 30000 men. They were so effeminate and delicate, that they permitted no smith or copper-man to dwell in their town, lest the noyse of the workers should disturbe their rest. Fidlers and singers they had in request; which occasion the Cretonians their aduersaries embracing, entred the town, apparelled like Musitians, and mastred it. Before this accident, there was a prophesie giuen, that the town should neuer be taken, till men were more esteemed then gods. It happened that a seruant being beaten by his master, and for the gods sake obtaining no mercy, fled to the monument of his masters Auncestors, and was pardoned. Amyris the Philosopher hearing this, forsooke the town; most men holding him mad, in a time of no danger to leaue so delicious a seat; hence grew the proverb, Amyris insaint, applyed to such as vnder shew of madnes, or folly, prouide for their own safety. 6 St Severine.
5. TERRA DI OTRANTO, possessed heretofore by the Salentini and Iapyges: the chief towns are 1 Brundusium, glorying in one of the best hauens in the World. 2 Hydruntum, now called Otranto,Knolls. the taking of which town by Mahomet the Great, Anno 1481, put all Italy in such a feare, that Rome was quite forsaken; and not fully inhabited till the expulsion of the

Turkes the yeare following. 3 Gallipolis.
6. PVGLIA, containing Apulia Daunia, and Apulia P^ucetia: the cities of which are Manfredonia the seat of an Arch-bishop. 2 Canna famous for the great victory of Hannibal against the Consuis, Paulus Aemylius, Terentius Varro, and the Romanes; of whom were slain 42700.Plutarch. Had Hannibal pursued this victory, he had easily ouerthrown the Roman Common-wealth; so that it was truly said vnto him, by Maharball Captain of his horsemen, Vincere scis Annibal, victoria uti nescis. Here stands Venusia, whence Horase borne in this town is called Venusinus: as also 2 Arpinum where Tully was borne; here moreouer is the hill Gargalus, or mount St Angelo) 120 miles round. It is as well by Art as Nature, very defensible, so that it is commonly the last place in Naples, which is abandoned, as we may see, in the Greekes and Sarazens, who kept this hill many yeares after the Normans were Lords of the rest of the Country. The greatest riches of this Prouince is the tribute of cattell,Guiceiard. which also is one of the fairest revenues in Naples, as being worth (in Guicciardines time) 80000 duckats Of this tribute, because the French could haue no part, after the diuision made with Ferdinand, as being owners only of Lavoro and Abruzzo: they began to be discontented with the Spaniard; insomuch, that breaking into open warre, the French seeking to increase their shar^, quite lost it. The people of these two last Prouinces are troubled with a Tarantula, curable only with musick.
There is no nation vnder the Sua, which hath suffered so many mutations of slave,Hist. of Ita. as the Neopolitans: The Region being first vnder diuers people, was subjected to the Roman Consuls; In the diuision of the Empire betwixt Charles of the West, and Nicephorus of the East; this Country was assigned to Nicephorus and his successours; who were almost vtterly vanquished by the Sarazens, vnder the conduct of Sabba, and other successive generals; These were partly dispossest by the Emperor Otho 1, and his Almames; and they again expelled by the Greekes and Sarazens, who for a long time held bitter warres one against the other. During these warres it hapned, that one Dra^got a Gentleman of of Normandie, hauing in the presence of Duke

Robert (Father to William the Conquerour) slain one Repostell, a Gentleman of the like quality; to auoid the fury of the Duke, and the traines of Repostels friends, fled into this Country, attended by such of his followers, as either best loued him, or had bin medlers in the fray. The Duke of Beneuent, Vicegerent to the Easterne Emperour, took him and his small retinue into pay. Their entertainment being bruited in Normandie; and withall a report being raised, that the Greeke Vice-Roy willingly harkned after men of the like valour; caused diuers priuat Gentlemen to passe the Alpes, and there venture their liues to mend their fortunes. The happy successe of these last aadventurers, drew thither also Tancred Lord of Hauteville in Normandy; who with his 12 sonnes came into Apulia, Anno 1008. He and his successours not only droue thence the Sarazens,Munster. but also the Grecians, keeping possession to themselues with the title of the Dukes of Calabria, amongst whom, two were famous, viz: Robert Guiscard, third son to Tancred, the most famous captain of his time, and chief establisher of the Normane Kingdome in Italy; and Boemound his eldest son; who going with Godfrey of Bulloigne into the Holy Land, was for his merits installed King of Antioch. Roger, Nephew to this Boemound, was the first that intituled himself King of Naples and Sicily: a title which the Pope^ neither could endure, nor remedy.

The Kings of Naples of the Norman line.
1125
1 Roger 24
1149
2 William 21
1170
3 William II 26
1196
6 Tancred base son to King William the 2d, deposed by Pope Celestine the 3d; who gaue Constance a Nun of the age of 50 yeares almost, and daughter to the last William, to
1298
5 Henry the 6 of Germany in marriage, and for her dowry, Naples. He reigned 4 yeares.


The German line.
1202
6 Fredericke, son to Henry, crowned at the age of three yeares; he had to wife the daughter of Iohn di Brenn^, the titulary king of Hierusalem: of which, the kings of Naples haue euer since intitled themselues Kings; and in their rights (...) the Spanish.
1250
7 Conrade, poisoned by his base brother Manfroy, hauing raigned 4 yeares.
1254
8 Manfroy, against whom Vrban the fourth, called in Charles of Aniou and Provence, brother to Lewis the 10 of France. He had one only daughter named Constance.


The French line.
1261
Hist. of Fr.9 Ch^rles Earle of Provence, and Aniou, ouercame Manfroy, and was inthronized in the Throne of N^ples* (...) time Peter of Arragon, claimed the Kingdome of Naple^, in right of Constance his wife, daughter to Man^roy. To saue the effusion of blood, Charles challeng'd Peter to fight hand to hand in Burdeaux, before King Edward the first of England; but while Charles there expected Peter, he seized on Sicily, 1281. This Charles raigned 23 yeares.
1284
10 Charles II his son, formerly prisoner to Peter of Arragon in Sicily, was ransomed by the procuration of king Edward aboue-named, for 30000 markes. This King by Mary, daughter to Stephen King of Hungary, had 14 children; the most pertinent are Charles King of Hungary by right of his Mother; then Robert King of Napl^s, and Le^is of Durazzo. 26.
1310
11 Robert 32.
1342
12 Ioane, Neece to Robert, m^rried Andrew, s^cond son to Charles King of Hungary, whom she hanged ^t her window for insufficiency: her second husband wa^ Lewis of Tarentum, who ouer-straining himself to (...) appetite, died: Then shee married Iames of Tarracon, ^ gallant Gentleman, whom she beheaded for b^ing with another woman: and lastly Otho, D. of B^unswi^^^, who outliued her. This Queen was driuen one of her Kingdome by Lewis of Hungary and hanged at the same window where she hanged her first husband: she adopted Lewis D. of Aniou, hauing reigned 29 yeares.


The Hungarian line.
1371
13 Charles son to Lewis of Durazzo, by the help of Lewis King of Hungary, and Pope Vrban VI, was made King of Naples. He ouerthrew and killed Lewis of A^^^*

and after the death of Lewis of Hungary, he was made King of that Kingdome also, wherein he liued not long, being poisoned by the old Queene. 15.
1386
14 Ladislaus. This King on some grudge forced an entry into Rome, and was tr^umphantly receiued; for which the Pope called in Lewis 2d of Aniou, who gaue Ladislaus a great ouerthrow: insomuch that Ladislaus vsed to say, that if Lewis had followed his victory the first day, he had bin Lord of my Kingdome and Person: if the second day, of my Kingdome, but not of my Person: but the third day of n^ither. So at the end Lewis was compell'd to flye to Rome. 29
1415
15 Ioane, sister to Ladislaus, of the same lasciuious dishonesty of life, as the former Ioane: she first adopted Alfonso V King of Arragon; and after vpon some vnkindnes, reuoked that adoption, and confirmed the state to Lewis D. of Aniou, and after his death to his brother Rene or Rainold, who was dispossessed by the Arragon^ys. 19


The Arragonian Line.
1434
16 Alfonso King of Arragon; who left the Kingdome well settled, to his bastard Ferdinando. 24.
1458
17 Ferdinando,Guicciard. who took Otranto from the Turkes. 36.
1494
18 Alfonso II.
1494
19 Ferdinando expell'd by Charles the 8 of France, son to Lewis II of France, and heire to Rene, the last adopted son of Queen Ioane the second.
1494
20 Charles after the conquest, was crowned king of Naples, (at what time the French pox beginning in Naples, was first known in Europe.) But returning into France, and leauing the people much discontented, and the Realme meanly prouided for; gaue opportunity to Ferdinand to recouer his Kingdome: and he not long injoying the fruits of his victory, left it to his Vncle Frederick. So that in 3 yeares space here were in Naples, no fewer the^ 6 kings, viz: Fernando the first, Alphonso 2d, Fernando 2d, Charles of France, Fernando againe, and this Fredericke.
1497
21 Fredericke, who submitted himself to Lewis XII King of France, and yeelded vp his Kingdome to him. And indeed what els could the poore Prince doe, when he saw his own blood, and such as had taken his Realme into their protection, conspire against him. When Charles made his passage toward Naples, Ferdinand the Catholique sent Gonsalvo (who was afterward for his valour surnamed the great Captain) with some forces to resist the French victories. But when the French were expelled, Gonsalvo would not leaue the Country, because his master had not as yet sent for him. In the mean time it was agreed between Lewis of France, and this Ferdinand; that they should jointly set vpon the kingdome of Naples, and hauing wonne it, the French should possesse Alruzz^ and Lavoro; the Spaniard, Puglia and both Calabrias; that the first should be intituled king of Naples, the latter Duke of Apulia. This confederacie was kept secret till the French Forces were come to Rome, and Gonsalvo possessed (vnder pretence of defending it) all Calabria: So that no maruell was, if they made themselues masters of the Country. In this action the French king dealt very indiscre^tly, in bringing into Italy (where he was before the sole Moderator) an other king; to whom, as to his Rival, his enemies might haue recourse^ and the Spanish very vnnaturally, in betraying for the moietie of a kingdome, a Prince of his own blood, vnder pretence and promises of succours. These two Princes continued not long friendly neighbors; for the Spaniards disagreeing with the French, within two or three yeares droue them out of all; and haue to this day kept it; though this Lewis his successors Francis, and Henry, haue divers times, and with great effusion of blood, attempted it.


The Spanish line.
1503
22 Ferdinand the Catholique 13
1516
23 Charles the Emperour 43
1558
24 Phil^p the first of Nap: the 2d of Sp. 40
1598
25 Philip II of Nap. III of Sp. 22
1621
26 Philip now liuing.

The Armes of this kingdome are Azure, Semi of Flower de Lyces,Bara. Or, a File of a Labels, Gules.
The revenues of this kingdome are 2 Millions and a halfe of Crownes;Hist. of Ita. whereof 20000 are ^ue vnto the Popes for chiefe ^ents: and the rest is so imploy^d for maintaining G^rrisons and Navies, that the king of Spaine receiueth not a fourth part de claro.

There are reckoned in this kingdome

Archbishops 20


Princes 13


Marquesses 25


Bishops 127


Dukes 24

Ortelius.



Earles 90


Barons ^00.





2 The PAPACIE.
THE LAND OF THE CHVRCH extendeth North and South from the Adriatique to the Tuscan Seas;Maginus. the Eastern bounds being Axofenus and Trontus, by which it is separated from Naples. On the Northwest it is bounded with the Riuers Po and F^ore, by which it is diuided from the Venetian; and on the Southwest with Piss^o, by which it is parted from the Florentine. The men of this Country are questionlesse the best Souldiers of Italy, as retaining some sparke of their Auncestors valour. The soyle is as the rest of Italy.

The Prouinces hereof are
1. ROMANDIOLA, extending from the Rubicon East, to the Venetians on the West; from the Appenine South; to Padus, and the Adriatique on the North. The chief Cities are 1 Bononiae, the chief Vniuersity of Italy, and a retiring place of the Popes.Lewk^o^ The ciuill Law is much studied here; insomuch that fro^ hence proceeded the famous Civilians, Iohannes Andreas, Aza, Bartolus, and Socinus. I beleeue they haue built Castles in the aire, which ascribe the founding of this Vniversity to Theodosius the 2d. The charter of this Foundation dated Anno 423, is an idle and foolish thing; for there it is said, that at the institution, there were present Gualter Earle of Poicteirs Embassadour for the king of England, and Baldwin Earle of Flanders

for the king of France; when at that time neither those Earledomes or those kingdomes, were in re um natura. It is situat^on the riuer Aposa,Florus. and was by former writers called Folsina, now B^logne. Neere vnto this town was that meetin^ between A^gustus, A^tonie, and Lepid^s, whe^ein they agreed on the Trv^virate: diuiding the Empi^e and city of Rome among them three. This combination was confirm'd by the insuing Pr^scription, wherein that they might be reveng'd on Cr^ero L^pulus proscribed his brother; A^tonius his Vncle. 2 R^mano anciently called Arimmum, seated on the mouth of the ^^uer Rubicon. The suddain taking of this city by Caesar, so frighted Pompey and ^is faction, that th^y abandoned Rome, leauing it to the curtesie of Caesar, and with-drew into Epirus. The night before Caesar dre^med, that he carnally knew his mother; whereby the Soothsayers gathered, that he should be Lord of Rome, which was the common mother of them all, and so indeed it hapned. 3 Cervia, on the Adriatique Sea, where there is made so much salt, that the Popes part amounteth to 60000 Crownes. 4 ^errara, whose Territories stretch in length 160 miles, in bredth 50; and contain the worthy Cities of Modena and Rhegium. The chief City Ferrara,Hist. of Ita. so called from the Iron-mines about it, is seated on the bank of Po, which by reason of his bredth, depth, and swiftnes, is a sufficient rampier on that side; and on the other it is fortified with a strong wall, and a spacious moat. In the midst of the Town is a faire Green, into which there doe open on all sides about 19 streets; most of which are halfe a mile in length, and so euen, that the ends may easily be seene: the whole compasse is fiue miles. This town after the ruine of the Longobordan kingdome, belonged to the Germane Emperours, till the yeare 110^, in which the Countesse Mathilda or Maudo took it, together with Mantua and Par^ra, from the Emperour Henry the third; and dying without issue, gaue her whole estate both by conquest and inheritance, vnto the Church of Rome. The Roman Bishops not long after, gaue this town to Azo of the house of Este, in whose line it continued vntill the yeare 1589; when the last Duke dying without lawfull issue, the Dukedome returned to the Church; and added to the Popes

Dominions, 250000 Duckats of yearely revenue. 5 Ravenna, once beautified with one of the fairest hauens in the world, was for that cause made the Road of one of the two Navies which Aug^stus kept alwaies manned,Dion. to command the whole Empire of Rome; the other riding at Misenum in Campania. This of Ra^onna being in the vpper sea, awed and defended, Dalmatia, Gree^ce, Cr^te, Cyprus, Asia, etc. the ^ther of Misenum in the lower sea, protected and kept vnder, France, Spaine, Africke, Aegypt, Syria, etc. This city hath bin honoured also with the seat of the ^mperour Honorius, and his successours; next of the Gothish kings; then of the Exarchs; and last of its Patriarchs; chosen for this purpose, because of the plentifull territory now couered with water;Machiav. and the conveniencie of the Hauen at this day choked. When the Emperours kept at Constantinople, Italy was made a prey to all barbarous people; to represse whose fury, the Emperour Iustinian sent a Vice-regent into Italy, whom he called his Exarch; who leauing Rome, kept his residence at Ravenna, for its site nigh vnto Constantinople, the residence of the Emperours. Vnder this Exarch were comprehended these ten Cities, Ravenna, Bolognia, Regium, Modena, Parma, Placentia, Sarcina, Classe, Furli, Fo^limpoli. This was properly called the Exarchate of Ravenna; as the count^ie which hauing no subordinate Magistrat, immedi^t^ly obeyed the Exarch of Ravenna. In other townes of importance, there were by the Exarchs, gouern^r^ appointed, who^ they honored with the title of Dukes. Rome it self, so far was it then from obeying the Popes had one of these ^^lled Dukes, sen^ hither yearely from Ravenna: and his gouernment was the Roman Dukedome. This diuision of Italy into so many members, most of which were too big for the head to gouerne, was ^he cause that the Longobards with m^re f^cility, subdued the greater part of Italy; into which, a little before the erection of this magistracie, they were entred.

The Exarchs of Ravenna.
570
1 Longinus 21
591
2 Smaragdus 4
595
3 Rom. Pat^icius
596
4 Callinicus 13
609
5 Smaragaus 3
612
6 Ioh. Lamigius 4.Freigiu^.
616
7 Eleuthe^ius 5
621
8 Isaa. Patricius 24
645
9 Theod. Call^opa 10
657
10 Olympius 3
657
11 Theod Calliopa 30
687
12 Ioh Platina 15
702
13 Theophilacius 25
727
14 Paulus 1
729
15 Eutychus 12* In the dayes of this Exarch, Ravenna was taken from the Empire by Astulphus, king of the Lombards: from whom it was regained by Charles the Great, and giuen to the Bishops of Rome, together with A^conitana, and ^poleto; as a requitall for the kingdome of France, giuen to the King Pepi^ his Father, by the consent and authority of the Popes. The donation of this Exarchate to the Popes, partly to blot out the memory of the Exarchs; and partly to make the people obedient to the Prelates, changed the name of the count^y from Flaminia (by which it was formerly known) to Romandiola, and now to Romagna.

2. MARCHA ANCONITANA, formerly the dwelling of the Piceni,Adrianus. is bounded with Romagna, the Appennine, Naples, and the Adriatique. The chief towns are Ancona, seated on the hill Cimmerius, which shooteth into the Sea like a Prom^ntory; this town glorieth in giuing name to the whole Prouince, and in her Hauen built by Traian the Emperour.Florus. 2 Ascoli the faire, of old called Asculum, conquer'd by the Romans, vnder the co^duct of Sempronius, Ao V. C. 685. Nigh vnto this city was fought the second battaile between C. Fabricius, and the Romans on the one side, and Pyrrhus with his Epyrots on the other: wherin the victory fell to the king, hauing slain 6000 of his enemies. Yet with such apparencie of valor and vertue in the Romans, that he could not but break into this exclamation, O quam facile esset orbe^ vincere, aut mihi Romanis militibus, aut merege Romanis. This town also was the seat of the warre called bell^^s sociale, raised by the people of Italy against the Romans; Popedius being both author of the rebellion, and Captain. They sorely shaked the state of Rome; but at last they were vanquished, and this town by Strabo Pompeius forced and spoiled. 3 Firmo the strong. 4 Macera^a the Gouernours place of Residence. 5 Adria w^ich gaue the denomination to the adjoyning Sea, and the Emperor Adrian. 6 Narma. 7 Humona* which two last townes, together with Ancona,Hist. of Ita. were giuen to Pope Zacharie by Luisprandus

king of the Lombards, about the yeare 751: the succeeding Popes, after the giuing of this inch, tooke the whole ^ll. 8 Recanati (olim Aelia Recina.) 9 Loretto famous for our Lady, and her miracles: of which in our description of Palestine, you shall meet with a proper Legend.
3. DVCATO SPOLETANO, of old called Vmbria, because being situate vnder the Appennines, it was Regio Vmbrosa. The chiefe citties are Spoleto, naming the whole Province. 2 Ovietto seated on so high a rocke,Adrianus. that it is a terrour to looke downe to the Vallies: here is a Church of a wonderous lightnesse, whose windowes are made with Alablaster in steed of glasse. 3 Perugia, formerly called Perusia. In this towne Augustus beseiged L. Antonius the brother, and Fulvia the wi^e of Antony the Triumvir; who when they had in vaine attempted to seduce Rome from the faction of Augustus; returned to this Citty which also at last yeelded to the more fortunate Emperour. This towne did a long time belong to the Baillons,Guicciard. who held it as Vicars of the Church. To these Baillons was the familie of the Oddies much opposite, insomuch that hauing got together a pretty army of male-contents; they so suddenly one night entered the Citty, that the Baillons beganne to fly. The Oddies were now come to the Palace gates, into which nothing hindered them from entring but a chaine drawn crosse the gate. One of the Souldiers had a hatchet purposely to take away the barre, but wanting room to we^ld his arme, he cryed giue back, giue backe. These words heard, but not vnderstood by the hin-most, put them to their heeles; and the formost thinking that they ^led not for nothing, runne away too: and so the citty was saued. 4 Asis, where St Francis was borne. In this Countrey is Lago di Perugia of thirtie miles circuit, which was anciently called Thrasymere;Plutarch. where A^nibal ^lew Flaminius and 15000 of his Romanes. This ^ight continued three houres with such eagernesse, that the Sould^ers felt not the grieuous earthquake happening at the same time. Here also is Lacus Vademonius, where Do^abella ouerthrew such of the G^uls, as had escaped the sword of Camillus: Ne quis exta^et in ea gento, qui accensam a se Roman^ gloriar^tur (saith Floru^)
The chiefe Rivers of the former Provinces are, 1 Tuderus. 2 Chiaggius. 3 Paglia. 4 Aposa. 5 Bidens. 6 Roneus. 7 Esima. 8 Potentia.
4. St PETERS PATRIMONY, containing all Latium (or Campagna di Roma) and part of Hetruria: was giuen vnto the Church by the braue Virago Mathilda, Ano 1101, Pascal II, sitting in the Chaire of Rome: it is bounded with Pisseo hard by Siena, the Appenine, Naples, and the Tyrrhenean Seas. Here are the Mountaines called Gallicanum, in which Annib^l that Father of warlike stratagems, frighted that politike and wary Captaine Fab. Maximus,Plutarch. with 2000 Oxen carrying fire on their hornes, and so passed ouer the mountaines. Here are the Riuers Tiber and Al^^a, nigh vnto which last, Br^nnus and his Gauls (being drawne into Italy by the sweet tast of the Italian wines) slaughtered the Romans. The Roman Army consisted of 40000 Souldiers, most of them being raw, and vnexperienced. The Gaules were not more in number but were naturally of a fierce and hardy courage, and withall so bigboned, that it seemeth they were borne to be the terrour of mankinde, and the ruine of Citties. Hauing wonne the day, the Barbarians march towards Rome, forsaken of its chiefest strength, the Capitoll onely being manned by Manlius: which also they had mastred, if the Geese had not beene more vigilant then the Watch. When they had failed of this enterprize, they beganne a treaty with the fathers of the Towne: agreeing with them for ^000 pound weight of Gold, to forsake the Citty. But before the deliuery of this mo^y, they were assaulted and vanquished by Camillus, who for this is called Romes second founder. The ouerthrow at Al^^a, and the vanquishment of the Fabij, hapned in one day, which was therefore by the old Romans put among the vnfortunate dayes; they never on that day at empting any businesse of importance. The like custome, whether on superstition, or feare of ill lucke, is vsed by many Christians; and especially on Childerm^s day: wherein Phi^i^ de Commes telleth vs, that Lewis the 11th vsed not to debate any matter, but accounted it a signe of some great misfortune towards him, if any man comuned with him of his affaires: and would be marvelously displeased with those that were neere

about him, if they troubled him in any matter whatsoeuer.
The chiefe Citties are and were Alba, the seat of the Silvian Kings, ruined by Tullus Hostilius. In this warre was Rome as it were laid to stake against Alba, and the whole action committed by the Romans to the Hora^ij, and by the Albans to the Curiatij, three brethren of each side. In this treble duell, two of the Horatij were slaine, but the third counterfeiting flight, seuered hi^ enimies, and seuerally slew them; so making Alba and the Latines subiect to Rome. 2 Ostia built by Ancus Martius, at the m^uth of Tiber, whose Hauen hath beene long damped vp, to stop the passage of enimies ships to Rome. The Bishoppe of this towne vseth to consecrate the Popes. 3 Antrum, whether the Emperours did vse to retire for recreation. The Roman Co^sull Maenius hauing wonne this Citty,Plutarch. and broken their force at sea, brought with him to Rome the Beaks of their ships, with which he decked and beautified the pulpit for Orations, which haue generally since, beene called Rostra. 4 Tibur. 5 Preneste, taken by Quinctius Cincinnatus the Dictator. Nothing so much endamaged this Citty, as its naturall and artificiall fortifications; for when the Romans in the times of sedition abandoned the towne, they made this place their refuge. Among others, Marius the younger made it the seat of his warre against Sylla; but perceauing the vnprosperous succeding of his affaires, here kill^d himselfe: and Sylla entring as conquerour, put 12000 of the Cittizens to the sword.Florus. 6 Ardea taken by Superbus; a town to which the miserable Romans fled when the Gaules had wonne Rome. 7 Gabij, taken also by Superbus, and his sonne Sextus: who counterfeiting a loathing of his fathers cruelty* fled to Gabij, and was made Captaine of the towne, which he betrayed to the Romans. 8 Veij, a Citty of great wealth and compasse. It was many times assaulted by the Romans in generall: once by the Fabij as particular aduenturers, all which being 306 in number were slayne in one day.
Veientibus aruisTercentum Fabij ter cecidere duo.On the Veiean plaineThree hundred and six Fabij were slaine.

There was by hap a little child of this familie left at home, who did againe restore the house, and was the Ancestor of Fab. Maximus, the preseruer of Italy against Annibal. This citty at last, after a tenne yeares siege was taken by Furius Camillus, and not long after leuelled with the earth, because the Roman people so delighted in the situation of the place, that they were resolued to haue forsooke Rome, and dwelt there. 9 Tivolis where there is a fountaine, which by artificiall workes driuen with water, representeth the notes of diuers birds. 10 Rome, once the Mistresse of the vniverse, famous for her triumphs and antiquities; is seated on Tiber now well growne by the receit of 42 riuers, and is distant from the Sea fifteene miles. This citty built by Romulus, was in circuit about two miles, and contained 30000 inhabitants: which in the flourishing of that common-wealth, increased to 463000,Ortelius. and the compasse of the Towne to fiftie miles, there being on the walls aboue 740 Turrets. When I said there were 463000 inhabitants, I mean not also seruants, women and children; but men able to beare armes, free denizens, and such as were inrolled into cense. To these if we adde their children, wiues, and seruants, we cannot probably coniecture them to haue beene fewer then 3 or 4 millions: and so Lipsius in his tract de magnitudine Romana, is of opinion. The extent of the Roman Empire was answerable to the multitude of inhabitants,Brerewood. the revenue correspondent to the extent. It was in length about 2000 miles; namely from the Irish Ocean West, to the riuer Euphrates on the East: in bredth it reached from the Danubius Northward, to mount Atlas on the South, about 2000 miles. And though the Romans had extended their Dominions sometimes farther East then North; yet could they neuer quietly settle themselues in these conquests. Nature, it seemeth, had appointed them these bounds, not so much to limit their empire, as to defend it; for the enimies found these riuers, by reason of the depth of the channell, and violent current of the streame as a couple of impregnable fortresses, purposely erected to hinder them from harasing the Roman Country. The revenewes Lipsius in the former tract esteemeth to be about 150 millions of Crownes* and that they were no lesse, may bee made more then

probable by these reasons. 1 It is affirmed by diuers, and among others by Boterus that the yearely revenewes of the king of China amount vnto 120 millions of Crownes; and if this be true (as few question it) we cannot in proportion guesse the whole Empire of the Romans to yeeld lesse then 150 millions: especially considering what arts masters the Romans were in levying and raysing their taxes, and customary tributes. 2ly, The Legionary Souldiers which were dispersed ouer the Provinces, receaued in ordinary pay (besides provision of corne, apparell, and officers wages) fiue millions, and 516062l and 10s of our money; which amounteth vnto 16 millions of Crownes, or thereabout. In the Citty it selfe there were kept in continuall pay, 7000 Souldiers of the watch, 4 or 6000 for the defence of the Citty, and 10000 for the guard of the Emperours persons. The two first had the same wages; the last, the double wages of a Legionary Souldier. Adde hereto the expences of the pallace, and other meanes of disbursalls, and I thinke nothing of the sum can be abated. 3ly, we read that C. Caligula spent in one yeare two millions and 700000 of Sestertiums: how Nero most lavishly gaue away two millions and 100000 of Sestertiums: and how Vitollius in a few months was 900000 of Sestertiums in arrerages. All huge and infinite summes. 4ly, When Vespasian came to the Empire, the Exchequer was so impouerished, that he protested in open Senate, that hee wanted to settle the Common-wealth 40 millions of Sest^rtiums, which protestation, (saith Sueton) seemed probable, quia and male partis optime vsu^ est. Now vnlesse the ordinary revenewes came to as much, or more then we haue spoken, by what meanes could this extraordinary summe be raised. 5ly, Wee may guesse at the generall revenew, by the monies issuing out of particular Provinces; and it is certaine that Aegypt afforded to the Ptolomies 12000 Talents yearely, neither had the Romans lesse, they being more perfect in inhancing then abating their intradoe. France was by Caesar cessed at the yearely tribute of 20 millions of Crownes: And I thinke the rest of the Provinces were rated accordingly. 6ly, and lastly, the infinite summes of money giuen by the Emperours in way of largesse, are proofes sufficient for the greatnesse

of the income. I will instance in Augustus only, and in him, omitting his donatiues at the v^ctory of A^luim, and the rest, I will specifie his Legacy at his dea^^. he bequeathed by his Testament to the common sort, and the rest of the people, 3l 8^ a man. To euery Souldier of the Praetorian bands 7 16^ and 3d. And to euery Legionary Souldier of the Roman Cittizens, 46^ 10 l ob. Which amounteth to a mighty masse of money: And let this suffice for the Roman revenew; now we returne to Rome it selfe.
In this Towne was the Capitoll saued from the fury of the Gaules, by the cackling of Geese. Tacitus calleth this house S^aem Iovis optimi maximi, auspicato a maioril us pignus m^^^ri cond^tam It was twice burnt,Dion. once in the ciuill warres of Syl^a and Marius; and againe in the warres of Vespasian and Vudlius. In the third building of it, Vespasian carried the first basket of earth; after him the nobility did the like, to make the people more forward in the seruice; and perhaps the custome of laying the first stone in a building, or driuing the first nayle in a timber-worke, by him whose edifice it is; hath from hence, if not beginning, yet growth. Here was the Temple of Ianus, open in the time of warres, and shut in the time of peace* which during all their Monarchie hapned but thrice: namely during the raigne of Augustus, after the Puni^ke warre; and in the time of Numa Here was the br^dge called Pons Sub^icius on which Horatius Cocles resisted the whole army of king Porsena, Tarqum, and the Tuscans; till the Cittizens behind had broken downe the bridge, receaued him swimming to the banke with ioyfull acclamations, and saued their Citty from (...). Here liued the famous warriers; here flourished (...) ma^iall discipl^ne, so men o^ized by ancient Histo(...) finally here were layd vp the spoyles and Tro(...)
Hist. of Ital.Rome, as now it standeth lower on the (...) Campus Martius, where it was built after the (...) the Gothes and Va^dals, is in compasse 11 miles, (...) is not a little wast ground. The inhabitants a (...) two parts whereof are Clergie men and Curt(...) being seldome vnder 40000, of whom the Pop(...)

yearely tribute of 30000 Duckats; not (saith Mr. Harding) to tolerate them in their sinne, but to punish them for it. The most worthy places are the Church of St Peter, which were it once fini^hed, would bee the rarest building in the world: then the C^stle of S. Angelo, impregnable vnlesse by famine: next the Popes Palla^e called Belvidere: and lastly, the Library of the (...) Vatican, properly called the Palatine. but more commonly th^ Vatican Library; from which double name, to note vnto y^u so much by the way; the Liber Palatin: and Liber Vatican: cited so often by Criti^ks,Lewknor. in their Variae lectiones, are one and the s^me. This Library was founded by Sixtus the 4th, who not only stored it with the choicest books he could picke out of Europ^, but also ^ed also a large revenew for the perpetuall augmentation of it. When the Duke of Burbon sacked Rome, Ano 1527 this Library was much defaced and ransacked; but by the succeeding Popes, it ha^h beene againe recouered to its former (...) and beauty. Rome is now an Vniversitie, which was founded by Vrban the 4th, at whose request Th. Aqu^nas prof^ssed here. Pope Ni^hola^ the 5th was a speciall ben^factour to the s^me; and after him (...) the 10th, who reviued the Greekes learning and language, which were in these parts almost forgotten.
The description of the whore of Babylon sitting on the beast with 7 heads can be vnderstood of ^o place but this, being built ^17 ^^lls, ^^^^ly, 1 Palatinus. 2 Capitolinus 3 Viminalis. 4 A(...). 5 Esquili^u^ 6 Ci^^us. 7 Qu^rinalis. Gouerned by 7 Kings, viz: 1 Romulus. ^ Numa 3 A^cu Martius. 4 Tullus (...) Servius Tullus. 7 Tarquin Sup^^^ And (...) Rulers. 1 Kings. 2 Consuls. 3 Decemv^ri. 4 Tribu^es. 5 (...)rs. 6 Emperours. 7 Popes. This (...), was neuer taken but by the Gaules: but (...) it c^me Po(...), it (...) beene made a prey to a^l ba^b^^ous nations; and never was besieged by any that tooke (...).
The Pope (...) of the foundation of their Church, and auth(...), who ^ being there is very disputable; (...),
An Petrus fuerit Romae sub Iudice lis est,Simonem Romae nemo fuisse negat.That Peter was at Rome is questioned euer,That Simon was at Rome was doubted neuer.
The maine argument the aduersaries haue out of the Scriptures is taken out of the first of Peter, the fift Chap. and 13 ver. where the Apostle saith, The Chu^ch that is at Babylon saluteth you, By this word Babylon they say, is meant Rome; and the Rhemists in the annotations on their translation of the Testament, much blame the ingenuity of our men, in affirming Babylon to signify Rome in the Apocalips, but not here. Since they so honestly and freely grant the one, I see not any inconuenience that would follow if we granted the other. And so let Peter bee at Rome, and Rome be Babylon, the Popes the whores therof. That Peter was the Prince of the Apostles, or that his suffering there could co^ferre on the Roman Bishops any supremacy ouer the Church: would (I suppose) be hardly proued, if wee granted that Peter had bin there, as most histories testifie. But that Rome by their own confession, should be Babylon, maketh much for our side; notwithstanding their idle distinction of th^ Church in Babylon, and the whore of Babylon; which they say, is the heathen Emperours of Rome, then liuing. But this interpretation cannot stand: for St Iohn spoke by way of prophesie, what in future times should be, not in way of declaration what already was: and againe, Antichrist must be in the Church, not out of it. F^^ St Paul telleth vs, (...); that he as God, shall sit in the Temple of God, 2 Thess. 2.4. But whosoeuer was the first Bishop, certain it is, they were subiect to much persecution, and little worldly joy, till the time of Silvester the 31 B^shop, who hauing converted Constantine, left case to his successours: On which Constantine, is fathered a donation of Rome, and her territories to the Romane Church, which certainly is forged. But Phocas hauing kill'd the Emperour Mauretius his wif^ and children, Anno 604: to assure himselfe of Italy, ready to revolt from so barbarous a tyrant, made Boniface the third, vniuersall Bishop, and head of the Church. Before this time, the Bishops of Constantinople, and Ravenna, did often dispute

with the Bishops of Rome for superiority; the seat of Religion commonly following the seat of the Empire. And the Bishops of Constantinople prevailed so farre, that with the permission of Mauritius the Emperour, hee tooke vpon him the title of Vniuersall Patriarch. Gregory the great (of whom it is said that he was the worst Bishop of all that went before him, and the best of all that came after him) was at that time Bishop of Rome. He sharply inveighed as well against the Emperour, as the Patriarch of Constantinople for this title; and plainely maintained that whosoeuer called himselfe Vniuersall Bishop, was the forerunner of Antichrist. As for himselfe, it is probable that he tooke the title of servus servorum Dei, more in opposition to him of Constantinople, then with an intent to be so. To this our aduersaries answere, that Gregory did not absolutely condemne this title; but only blamed Iohn the Constantinopolitan Patriarch, for assuming to himselfe the attribute which properly belonged to the See of Rome. But this cannot be; for then we should either in the old Bulls of the former Popes, find me^tion of this title: or selfe Greg. would haue assum'd it to himselfe that the world might take notice whereto of right it was due. This Boniface whom that cruell and butcherly tyrant Phocas made head of the Church, was the 64 Bishop, and first Pope of Rome, the Latine word Papa, comming from the old Greeke word (...), which signifieth a Father.

The Bishops of Rome vnder persecution.
70
1 Linus 12.
82
2 Anacletus 12.
94
3 Clemens 9.
103
4 Euaristus 8.
111
5 Alexander 10.
121
6 Sixtus 8.
129
7 Telesphorus 11.
140
8 Higinus 4.
144
9 Pius 15.
159
10 Anicetus 11.
170
11 Soter 8.
178
12 Eleutherius 13.
191
13 Victor 12.
203
14 Zepherinus 18.
221
15 Calistus 4.
226
16 Vrbanus 8.
233
17 Pontianus 6.
239
18 Antherus 1.
240
19 Fabianus 12.
252
20 Cornelius 2.
254
21 Lucius mens 8.
255
22 Stephanus 2.
257
23 Sixtus II. 11.
268
24 Dionysius 9.
277
25 Felix. 5

26 Eutychanus.
283
27 Caius 15.
298
28 Marcellinus 9.
307
29 Ma^cellus 1.
308
30 Miltiades 6.


The Bishops of Rome after the end of persecutions.
314
31 Sylvester 20*
334
32 Marcus. II
335
33 Iulius 16.
352
34 Lib^rius 17.
369
35 Damasus 18.
387
36 V^sinus seu S^ricius 14.
401
37 Anastasius 3.
404
38 Innocentius 15.
420
39 Zosimus 1.
422
40 Beni^acius 3.
426
41 C^l^st^nus 9.
436
42 Sixtus III. 8.
444
43 Leo 21.
465
44 Hilarius 6.
471
45 Simplicius 15.
486
46 Felix II, 9.
495
47 Gelasius 4.
500
48 Anastasius 2.
502
49 Symmachus 15
516
50 Ho^misda 9.
525
51 Ioannes.
527
52 Felix III. 4
531
53 Bonifacius II. ^.
533
54 Ioannes II. 2.
535
55 Agapetus 1.
536
56 Iaberius II.
537
57 Vigilius 18.
555
58 ^^lagi^^ 9.
564
59 Ioannes III. 13.
577
60 Benedi^^us 4.
581
61 Pelagius II. ^^.
591
62 Gr^goriu^ mag. 14
605
63 Sabinianus 1 The l^st Romane Bishop without the title of Pope.


The Popes of Rome.
607
1 Bonifacius III. 1.
608
2 Bonifacius IV. ^.
615
3 Deus dedit 3.
618
4 Bonifacius V. 5.
623
5 Honorius 13.
636
6 Severinus 2.
638
7 (...) IV 2.
640
8 Theodorus 5.
646
9 Martin 6.
654
10 Eugenius 2.
657
11 Vitali^nus 15.
672
12 Adeodatus 5.
677
13 Donnus 5.
682
14 Agatho ^.
686
15 Leo II mens. ^^.
687
16 Benedictus 11.

17 Iohn V.

18 Conon.
688
19 Sergius 1^.
701
20 Iohn VI. ^.
704
21 Iohn VII. ^.

22 Zosimus.
707
23 Constanti^us 7.
714
24 Steph^^us II. ^^^s

Gregor^us II. 17.
731
25 Gregorius III. 10.
742
26 Zacharias 10.
7^2
27 Stephanus II. 5.
757
28 Paulus I. 10.
767
29 C^^st^^^^us 1.
7^8
30 Stephanus III 4.
772
31 H^dria^^s I. 23.
7^6
32 Leo III. 20.
816
^3 Stephanus IV.
817
34 Paschalis ^.
8^4
35 Fuge^ius II. 3.

36 Valentinus.
827
37 ^r^gorius IV. 16.
8^3
38 Sergius II 3.
84^
39 Leo IV. 8.
854
40 Ioannes VIII. Angius foemina, 2.
856
41 ^e^eaictus III. 3.
857
42 Nicolaus 10.
867
43 Hadrianus 5.
873
44 Ioannes VIII. 10.
883
45 Mariinus II.
8^5
46 H^d^ianus III
886
47 Stephanus V. 6
892
48 ^ormosus 6.
898
49 Bonifacuis VI.

50 Stephanus VI.

51 Romanus.

52 The^dorus.
9^0
53 Ioannes IX. 2.
902
54 Benedictus IV. 3.
905
55 Leo V.
906
56 Ch^istophorus 1.
907
57 Sergius III 7.
914
58 Anastasius III. 2.
916
59 Lando.
917
60 Ioannes X. 13.
930
61 Ioannes XI.

62 Leo VI.
931
63 Stephanus VII. 2.
933
64 Ioannes XII. 5
938
65 Leo VII 3.
941
66 Stephanus VIII. 3.
944
67 Martinus III. 3.
947
68 Agapetus 7.
9^4
69 Ioannes XIII. 8

70 Benedictus VI.

71 Leo VIII.
965
72 Ioan^es XIII. 8.

73 Benedi^^us VII

74 Donnus II.

75 Boni^acius VII.
976
76 Benedictus VIII. 8
984
77 Ioannes XIIII

78 Ioannes XV.
985
79 Ioannes XVI. 10.

80 Gregorius V.

81 Ioannes XVII

82 Silvester II.
998
83 Gilb. Necromant. 4

84 Iohn XVIII.
1002
85 Iohn XIX. 4.
1007
86 Sergius IV. 3.
1010
87 Benedict VIII. 11
1022
8^ Iohn XX. 11.
1033
89 Benedict IX. 13
1045
90 Silvester III

91 Bened^ct X.

92 Gregory VI.

93 Clemens II.

94 Damasus II.
1049
95 Leo IX. 6.
1054
96 Victor II. 2.
1057
97 Stephan IX.
1058
98 Benedict. X.
1059
99 Nicholas II. 3.
1074
100 Gregor. VII. 12.
1062
101 Alexander, II.

102 Victor III.
1088
103 Vrbanus II 12
1100
104 Paschalis II. 18.
1118
105 Gelasius II.
1119
106 Callistus II. 6.
1125
107 Honorius II. 5
1130
108 Innocent. II. 13.

109 Celestinus II

110 Lucius II.
1145
111 Eugenius III. 8.
1153
112 Anastasius IV.
1155
113 Hadrian. IV. 4.
1160
114 Alexan. III. 22.
1182
115 Lucius III. 4
1186
116 Vrbanus III. 2
1188
117 Clemens III. 3
1191
118 Celestinus III. 6
1199
119 Innocent III. 17
1216
120 Honor. III. 10.
1227
121 Gregor. IX. 14
1241
122 Celestinus IV
1243
123 Innocent IV. 11
1256
124 Alexand. IV. 6.
1262
125 Vrbanus IV. 3.
1266
126 Clemens IV. 3
1272
127 Gregorius X 4
1276
128 Innocent. 5.

129 Hadrianus V.

130 Ioannes XXI
1278
131 Nicolaus III. 3.
1282
132 Martinus IV. 4
1286
133 Honorius IV
1288
134 Nicolaus IV. 4.
1294
135 Celestinus V.
1295
136 Bonif. VIII. 8
1304
137 Benedict. XI.
1306
138 Clemens V. 8.
1317
139 Ioan. XXII. 18.
1335
140 Benedict. XII. 7
1342
141 Clemens 6.12.
1354
142 Innocent. VI. 10
1364
143 Vrbanus V. 8,
1372
144 Gregor. XI. 7.
1380
145 Vrbanus VI. 11
1391
146 Bonifao. IX. 14.
1405
147 Innocent. VII, 2
1407
148 Gregor. XII. 2.

149 Alexander. V.
1411
150 Ioan. XXIII. 5,
1419
151 Martinus V. 13
1431
152 Eugenius IV. 16
1447
153 Nicola^s V. 8.
1455
154 Callistus III. 3.
1459
155 Pius II. ^lim Aeneas Sylviu^ 6.
1465
156 Paulus II. 7.
1472
157 Sixtus IV. 12.
1485
158 Innocen. VIII. ^
1493
159 Alexan. VI. 10
1503
160 Pius III.
1504
161 Iulius II. 10.
1513
162 Leo X. antea Ioannes Medices. 9.
1522
163 Adrianus VI. 2
1524
164 Clemens VII. 10
1535
165 Paulus III. 15
1550
166 Iulius III. 5.
1555
167 Ma^cillus II Corvinus.
1556
168 Paulus IV
1560
169 Pius IV 6.
1567
170 Pius V. 6.
1572
171 Greg. XIII. 13.
1585
172 Sixtus V. 5
1590
173 Vibanus VII decem dies.

174 Gregorius XIV. 9 mens. 10 dies.
1591
175 Innocentius IX. mens. 1, dies. 22.
1592
176 Clem. VIII. 13.
1605
177 Leo XI.
1605
178 Paul. V. 16.
1621
179 Gregory XV. 2*
1623
180 Vrban III. now liuing. To These 180 Popes, adde the 63 Bishops; and they make the full number of 243.

It were a taske too great for Hercules, to shew all the acts and pious decrees of all these ghostly fathers: We will therfore only make mention of some principall passages, for the better vnderstanding of their history and policies.

1. Paschalis the first, caused the Priests of some Parishes in Rome, by reason of their neerenesse to his person, their presence at his election, and to honour their authority with a more venerable title, to be called Cardinals. They are now mates for Kings, and numbred about 70.
2. Eugenius the second took on him the authority of creating Earles, Dukes, and knights; as the Exarchs of Ravenna had formerly vsed to doe.
3. Sergius the second was the first that changed his name; for thinking his own name Bocca di Porco, or Swines-mouth, not consonant to his dignity; he caused himself to be called Sergius: which president his successours following, doe also vary their names. So that if one be a coward, he is called Leo; if a Tyrant, Clemens; if an Atheist, Pius or Innocons; if a Rustick, Vrbanus; and so of the rest.
4. Nicholas the second, took from the Roman Clergie, the election of the Popes, allotting it to the Con^laue ol Cardinals.
5. Nicholas the third, was the first Pope that practised to enrich his kindred, and his successours haue studied nothing more then to aduance their Nephewes, (for by that name the Popes vse to call their bastards:) whence came that worthy saying of Alexander the third; The lawes forbid vs to get children, and the Diuell hath giuen vs Nephewes in their steed.
6. Iohn the eight, is by most writers confessed to be a woman,

and is vsually called Pope Ioane. To auoid the like disgrace, the Porphyrie chaire was ordained; Vbi ab ultimo Diacono, etc. so that both in a literall and mysticall sense, this woman may be called, The whore of Babylon.
Fox Mart.7. Innocent the third held a councell in Rome; in which it was enacted, that the Pope should haue the correction of all Christian Princes, and that no Emperour should be acknowledged, till he had sworne obedience to him: He invented Transul stantiation; and ordeined that there should be a Pix to couer the Bread, and a Bell to be rung before it. He also brought Aur^cular Confession into the Church.
8. Sixtus the fourth builded in Rome, Stewes of both sexes, he brought in Beades; and made our Ladies Psalter.
9. Sergius the third instituted the bearing about of Candles, for the purification of the blessed Virgin Mary.
10. Nicholas the first prohibited the Clergie marriage, saying; that it was more honest to haue to doe with many women priuatly, than openly to take one wife. Insomuch that a Priest of Placentia being accused to haue wife and children, was depriued of his Benefice; but proouing the said woman to be the wife of another man, and but his Concubine, he was again restored.
11. Celestine 2d was the inventor of that mad cursing, by Bell, Booke, and Candle.
12. Bonifac^ the eight, by a generall Bull, exempted the Clergie from all taxes and subsidies to temporall Princes. Wherevpon our Edward the first, put the Clerg^e out of the protection of him and his Lawes. By which course, the Popes Bull left roaring in England. He was the author of the Decretals.
13. Pope Clement the sixt liued in an vnhaypy time; for in his Papacie the Emperour gaue freely all Lands belonging to the Church,Machiav. to such as former^y had vsurped them, and that they should hold them by authority Imperiall. Thus the Malatesti became Lords of Rimino, the Ordelaffi of Furli; the Varani of Camerine, the Bentivoles of Bologne, the Manfre^i of Fuenza, etc. Which estates were neuer recouered to the Church, till the dayes of Alexander the sixt, and Iulio the second.
14. Sergius the fourth, was the first that on Christmasse night,

with diuers ceremonies,Sleid. Cont. consecrated swords, roses, or the like; which afterward are sent as a token of loue and honour to such Princes as best them like. Leo 10th sent a consecrated rose to Fredericke Duke of Saxonie, desiring him to banish Luther. The like did Clement 7th to our Henry 8th, for writing against Luther. So Paul the third sent an hallowed sword to Iames the fift of Scotland, when he began the warre with our Henry 8th. The like did Iulius the second to our Henry 7th, in his warres against his Rebels.
15. Boniface the eight, instituted the Roman Iubile, and decreed that it should be solemnized euery hundred yeare; but by Clement the sixt, it was brought to fifty.
16. Alexander the sixt,Guicciard. setting aside all modesty, was the first that vnmasked his Nephewes, acknowledging them to be his sonnes. He recouered to the Papacy, Imola, Furlie, and many other townes, by the valour of his son Caesar Borgia, a true chip of the old block; whom notwithstanding all his villanies, Machiauell proposeth in his Tract de Principe, as the only example for a Prince to imitate.
17. Clement the fift,Du Pless. taught (as indeed it is true) that one drop of our Sauiours blood had bin enough to haue saued all mankind; but (this he added), seeing that all that precious blood was spilt, the ouer-plus was giuen as a treasure to the Church; to be disposed according to the discretion of S. Peter, and his successours. Hereunto they joyned the merits of the Virgin Mary, and all the Saints; so that this treasure can neuer be drawn dry: and hereon he founded the vertue of Pardons and Indulgences.
18. Leo the tenth, was indeed a great fauourer of learning, but so little sauoured he of Religion, that he was often heard to say, Quantas nobis divitias comparavit ista fabula Christi: a speech so blasphemous, that Porphyrie, or Iulian the Apostata's could neuer match it. In his time began the Reformation according to the Word of God taught by Luther.

These matters are most pertinent: but to rip vp the life of euery particular, would rather grieue then delight me, and get amazement in the hearer, not beliefe. I will therefore end with

the Painter, who being blamed by a Cardinal, for colouring the visages of Peter and Paul too red, tartly replied; that he painted them so, as blushing at the liues of those men, who stiled themselues their successours.
We before touched at Constantines donation, avouching it to be forged; and well might we so doe, considering how fearefull the Popes are, in hauing their title disputed, insomuch that many leaues are razed out of Guicciardine by the Inquisition, where this donation was called in question. In the place, the hist^^rian not only denieth the fained donation of Constantine, but affirmes that diuers learned men reported Silvester and him to haue liued in diuers ages. Then he sheweth how obscure and base the authority of the Popes was, during the time that the barbarous Nations made havock of Italy: 2ly, that in the institution of the Exarchate, the Popes had nothing to doe with the temporall sword; but liued as subiects to the Emperours, 3ly, that they were not very much obeyed in matters spirituall, by reason of the corruption of their manners. 4ly, that the ouerthrow of the Exarchate, the Emperours now neglecting Italy, the Romans began to be gouerned by the aduice and power of the Popes. 5ly, that Pepin of France, and his son Charles; hauing ouerthrowne the kingdome of the Lombards, gaue vnto the Popes, the Exarchate, Vrbine, Ancona, Spoleto; and many other townes and territories about Rome. 6ly, that the Popes in all their Bulls or Charters, expressed the date in these formall words; Such a one our Lord the Emperor raigning. 7l^, that long after the translation of the Empire from France to Germany, the Popes began to make open protestation, that the Pontificall dignity was rather to giue Lawes to the Emperours, then receiue any from them. 8ly, that being thus raised to an earthly power, they forgot the saluation of soules, sanctity of life, and the commandements of God, propagation of Religion, and charity towards men. To raise armes, to make warre against Christians, to invent new deuices for getting of money, to prophane sacred things for their own ends, and to enrich their kindred and children; was their only studie. And this is the substance of Guicciardine in that place, an author aboue all exception; he was a

man whom the Popes imployed in many businesses of rare importance, so that no hate to them, but loue to the truth made him write thus much. As for the city of Rome, so vnlikely is it to haue bin giuen by Constantine, that neither Pepin, nor Charles his son could be induced to part with it. Lewis surnamed Pius is said to be the first donour thereof, and a copie of this donation is found in the third booke of Volaterran, subscribed by the Emperour, his three sonnes, ten Bishops, eight Abbots, fifteene Earles, and the Popes Library-keeper. Yet Lampadius in his Comment on Sleidan affirmeth, that it was by many learned and judicions men maintained, that all this was foisted into the text by Anastasius the Popes Library-keeper, who is cited as a witnes of the donatio^. Let vs hear what the recorder of Florence saith in this case. Rome (saith he) was alwaies subiect to the Lords of Italy, till Theodorick king of the Gothes remooued his seat to Rauenna, for hereby the Romans were enforced to submit themselues to the Bishops, Ao 460 or there about. And againe talking of the estate of the Popedome in the yeare 931. The Popes (saith he) had in Rome more or lesse authority according to the fauour they found with the Emperours, or others then most mighty. But the leauing of Italy by the German Emperours, seated the Pope in a more absolute soueraignty ouer the Citty.
Hauing thus a little glanced at the meanes by which the present demaines of the Church of Rome, were first gotten and increased: Let vs consider by what policies this Papall Monarchy hath beene vpheld in respect and magnificence. They may be diuided into three heads. 1 Those by which they haue insinuated and screwed themselues into the affections and affaires of the most potent Princes. 2 Those by which already they haue and by which hereafter they will be a^le to secure their own estate. And 3d, those by which they keepe the people both in blindnesse, and due obedience.
1. Concerning the first:Sands relig. First, the donation of seuerall kingdomes to them that haue no right or title, but from the Pope, and in force of his donation; cannot but oblige them to him, without whom they could lay no title to what they possesse.

2ly Next the readines of their Ministers to kill such as resist the^, cannot but deterre Princes from injuring them, and constraine them to seek their friendship: especially since by a w^it of Excommunication they can arme the subiects against the Soueraigne; and without levying a Souldier, either vtterly destroy him, or bring him to good conformity. 3ly Then followes their allowance of marriages prohibited by God and Nature, the issue of which, cannot but vphold the Popes infinite authority; without whom, their birth is vnnaturall, and their persons not capable of the estates which by his allowance they hold; wherein they strengthen themselues more, by vnlawfull matches of others, then euer Prince could by lawfull marriage of his owne. 4ly They commeth in their dispensing with the Oathes of Princes, by which such Princes both preserue their credit, in not being perjur'd, as they think, since allowed by the Church: and also get somewhat for which they cannot be vnthankfull to the Papacie. 5ly Then succeedeth in order the choosing of the yonger sons of potent families into their Cardinalships: by which meanes, the whole linage are ready to support him, as the chief staffe of their brother or Cosens preferment. 6ly As by these courses hee holds in with all Princes of his religion in generall; so hath he fastned o^ the King of Spaine in particular, by making him and his successours the executioners of his excommunications. By this office Ferdinando the Catholique surprized Navarre; and Philip the 2d had no small hopes to haue done the like on England and France.
2. Concerning the second: so it is, that first their state hath the firmest foundation of any; as being laid in the conscience of men, by perswading them of their infallible power: and the Ecclesiasticall and temporall jurisdiction ouer Heauen, Hell, Earth and their Purgatory. 2ly Next commeth the innumerable preferments for men of all sorts and humors, (as hauing well high in their disposing, all the Benefices and Bishopricks of Italy, halfe in Spaine, diuers in France and Germany:) which keep the Clergie in a perpetuall bond of allegeance; especially inioying diverse priuiledges which they of the Temporalty are not capable of. 3ly Then consider the multitude of Friers, all whose

hopes depend on his safety: they are known to be more then a Million, of which halfe at least would grow fit to be imployed in any warlike seruice; all which they doe maintaine at other mens cost, themselues not disbursing a penny. 4ly Their Revenues they increase by their Pardons and Indulgences; amongst others I read of a Pardon giuen by Pope Boniface 8th, of whom it is said, he entred like a Fox, liu'd like a Lyon, and died like a dog* it was a Pardon for 82000 yeares to all them, which would say such a prayer of St Augustine, and that for euery day ^^ties quoties. 5ly The next help of their Coffers is their dealing with Peniten^s, whom in the agony of their soules they perswade, that no help will be easily had, vnlesse by a donation of part of their estates to the Church. 6ly The last string to this Bow, is the invention of spirituall fraternities, which are appurtenances or annexaties to the orders of Friers; and may in number perhaps equall them. Into these the lay-people of all sorts, men and women, married and single, desire to be inrolled; as hereby injoying the spirituall prerogatiues of Indulgences and speedy dispatch out of Purgatory.
3. Concerning the thi^d; 1, they deterre the people from reading the Scripture; alledging vnto them the perils they may incurre by misinterpretatio^: 2ly they breed an antipathy between the Papists and the Protestants; insomuch that a Papist may not say Amen vnto a Protestants Deo gratias. 3ly they debarre them all sound of the religion, in prohibiting the bookes of the reformed Writers; and hiding their own treatises, in which the tenent of the Protestants is recited only to be co^futed: insomuch that in all Italy you shal seldome meet with Bellarmines works, or any of the like nature to be sold. 4ly They haue vnder pain of excommunication, prohibited the Italians from trauell and traffick with hereticall countries* or such places where those contagious sounds and sights (as they tearme them) might make the^ returne infected. 5ly The seuerity, or tyranny rather, of the Inquisi^ion, of which we haue elswhere spoken, crusheth not only the beginnings, but the smallest suspitions of being this way addicted. And 6ly the people thus restrained from trauell, are taught to belieue, that the Protestants are blasphemers of God

and all his Saints: that in England Churches are turned to stables, the people is growne barbarous, and eat young children: that Geneva is a professed sanctuary of roguerie, and the like. We haue yet two later examples of their dealing in this kind: 1 the grosse slander of the Apostasie (or as they call it, the revnion) vnto their Church, of the right reverend Father in God, D^ King, late Lord Bishop of London; a Prelate of too known a faith and zeale, to giue occasion for such a calumnie. The second is a book by them lately published, and comm^nly sold in Italy, and France; containing a relation of Gods Iudgments, shown on a sort of Protestant-Hereticks, by the fall of an house in Blacke-Friers in London, in which they were assembled to heare a Geneva Lecture; by which dealing, the simple people are made to belieue that to be a judgment on vs, which the authors of that pamphlet well know, to be a calamity (I will ^ot say a judgment) that be fell their owne.
Had these Pontificall Prelates bin chosen young, or of the same family, so that the successour had not through envie, or a new humour, crossed the designes of his predecessour: it cannot be but that this Monarchie had bin greater and better established, then the old Romane in her greatest glory. But this course is distastefull to the ambition of the C^rdinals, who by the deaths (naturall or violent it matters not) of the Pope, aspi^e by all meanes, both of loue and money, to that dignity. Now the elections of the Popes are made in this place and manner: for I suppose it will not be impertinent to speak a little hereof. In the Popes Palace in the hill Vatican, are among other buildings, 5 halls, 2 chappels, and a gallerie 70 foot long. The gallery is appointed for conference; the one chappell for the masse, and for the election; the other with the Halls are for the Cardinals lodgings. Euery Hall hath two rowes of chambers, which are purposely for the time made of green or violet cloath. To each Cardinall is allowed foure seruants to lye in his chamber. They that are once within, are compelled, vnlesse they be sicke, still to continue there: and such as are once out, are no more permitted to goe in; lest by that meanes the Cardinals should maintain intelligence with any forraine Princes. To this Conclaue

(for by this name the place of the election is called) is but one doore, to which belongeth foure locks, and as many keyes. One key is in the keeping of the Cardinals; one of the City-Bishops; one of the Roman nobility; and one of the Master of the ceremonies. There is in this doore a litle wicket or hatch, which is opened only at dinners and suppers; and whereof the Master of the ceremonies keepeth the key. At this hole the Cardinals seruants receiue their Meate; euery dish being first diligently searched, lest any letters should be conveyed in them. As for the Lodgings, they haue neither holes nor windowes to giue light, so that there they make day of wax-candles: And lest the Pope should be made by force, both the City and Conclaue are strongly guarded. When the Cardinals are going to election, the priuiledges of the Cardinals are recited; which euery one sweareth to obserue, in case he be chosen Pope. Then the Master of the ceremonies ringing a Bell, calleth them all to Masse; which ended, there is brought to euery Cardinall, a chaire, and therein a scroll of all the Cardinals names. Before the altar is set a table, couered with a purple cloath, whereupon is set a chalice, a siluer bell; and about it six stooles, on which sit two Bishops, two Priests, and two Deacons. Euery Cardinall writeth is voyc^ in a peece o^ paper, goeth to the Altar, prayeth God to guide him in the election, putteth his voyce into the chalice, and departeth to his seat. The first Bishop taketh out all the papers, and deliuereth them to the first Deacon, who vnfolding each of them, readeth (without mentioning the name of the Electour) the name of the elected: and euery Cardinall in his particular scroll, noteth how many voices euery one hath. The accompt being made, the first Priest hauing the like scroll, p^onounceth who hath most voyces: which done, the Priest ringeth the siluer bell, at which call, the Master of the ceremonies bringeth in a panne of coales, and burneth all the litle papers wherein the names of the elected were written. He that hath the most voyces, so that his voyces exceed the proportion of two parts of three, is acknowledged Pope, and adored by the rest of the Cardinals; but if they exceed not that number, they must begin all anew. If in the space of 30 dayes the election be not

fully ended* then must the Cardinals be kept from fire, light and victuals, till they are fully agreed The ^^^ket which we before mentioned, is called the gold (...), at which stand an infinite number of people; on (...) Pope, hauing opened th^t gate, bestoweth ^i, ^a^he^ly (...) to (...) all their sinne* Then strike^h he cont^nua^ly on the maine door^ with a golden m^llet; which wh^lest he is doing, workem^n without bre^ke it open The ch^ppes, (...), dust, and d^rt which falleth from the gate while it is opening, are gathered and preserued as choisest Reliques^ and the golden mallet is vsually g^uen to that Cardinall, who is most in grace with the new Pope. This is the plaine and surple manner of choosing the Spiritual Head of Christendome, (for I should wrong him if I should omit this title:) but there is now adai^^ much corruption and preposterousnesse vsed, as buying of voyce^, setting vp some for st^les, and tearing of scrutinies, euery Cardinall desiring to haue a Pope of his owne, and his Princes faction. It is written of an old Sicilian Cardinal, who after long absence, came to the election of a ^ope; where expecting th^t incessant prayers, is in time of old should haue pointed out (by Diuine inspiration) Christs Vicar; and finding nought but c^nvasing, promising, and threatning for voyces, Ad hu^^ modum (saith he) fiunt Romani Pon^i^ices? and so retired to his home, and neuer saw Rome againe.
Boterus.The ordinary temporall revenewes of the Papac^e are b^tter then two Millions of Cr^wnes; the extraordinary and sph^^^all is wonderfull. ^ius Quintus, who ruled sixe yeare^ on^y* get from the Spanish Clergie 14 m^llions. Sixt^^ the 5th (...) t^e Iesuite^ ^t one clap 20000 crownes of yearely rev^nue because they were too rich f^r men that vowed p^uerty; and ^a^ing sate but fiue yeares, had offered vp 5 mi^lion^* foure of which hi^ successour ^regory t^e 14 spent in (...) then a yeare. Out of France they reape no lesse then a million of Crownes yearely. Out of England, when it was the Pope. (...) ^^^haustus, they extracted no lesse th^n 60000 m^^kes, which of our present money is ^^0000 po^nds, being at that time more then the Kings certain revenue: and this was in the time of Henry

the 3d, before their rapine was come to the height. Let other Countries be rated accordingly. Next adde the moneyes receiued from the particular pardons, for dispensings with vnlawful marriages; the profits arising from pilgrimage^; from great mens death and funerals; from the Indulgences granted vnto Abbeyes and Convents, in all which the Popes haue a share; and it would pussle a right good Arithmetician to state his int^ado* Here t^ke the saying of Sixtus the 4, that a Pope could neuer want money while he held a pen in his hand. Yet is their treasury seldome full; for 1 the state they keepe, because of their height of honour aboue all Princes; 2^^ the large allowance they g^u^ vnto their Lega^es, Nuncio's, and other Ministers; and 3^ th^^r greedy desire to enrich their sonnes or kinsmen with the Churches Lands or money (with which humour only Pope Sixtus the 5 was neuer touched) keepe their coffers exceeding low.
The Papall Vestiments are of great value, especially the Triple Crow^e; for when Clement the 5 transferred his seat to Av^gnion, we read how with a fa^l from his horse, he l^st a Carbuncle (with which his Crown was thick set) worth 6000 Duckats at the least.
Hauing in former places mentioned such order of Knighthood, as these Countries gaue beginning to: I will now set down the orders of the Popish spirituall Knights, or Friers, which his holy Benediction hath erected, and fat allowance doth maintaine; and for the better proceeding, we will beginne with the originall of a monasticall life; and then wee will make speciall mention of the Romish Votaries.


The beginning and increase of a Monasticall life.
Vnder the persecution of Decius, one Paulus borne at Thebes in Ae^ypt*Polyd. Virg. an^ Groost* retired to a priuat caue vnder the foot of a rocke, Anno 260. Here he liued one hundred yeares, and was s^ene of no man, but one Anthony, who was present at his death. This Anthony was the first that followed the example of Paulus: he was of a noble house* and sold all h^s estate* that he might mo^e priuatly enioy himself: he is called the Fath^r of the Monkes: he

liued 105 yeares, and died Anno 345.
After this foundation, the Monasticall building increased so fast, that it seemed necessary to prescribe them orders: Hereupo^ St. Basil gathered them together, liuing formerly dispersed, and was the first that built Monasteries; he is said to haue ordained the three vowes, 1 of Pouerty, 2 of obedience to their rules; and 3 of perpetuall chastity: he instructed them in good Arts, and true Religion, and the seruice of God, with Watchings, Prayers, and Hymnes.
The next that prescribed orders was St Austin, borne Anno he being thirty yeares old, obtained a garden without the walls of Hippo, where he begun this order, assuming onely twelue into his company. The first Monastery of them was erected by William Duke of Guyen at Paris; and Anno 1200, they began to flourish in Italy by the fauour of Iohn Duke of Mantua.
The third was Benedict, borne at Nursia in Vmbria, Anno 482, he gathered the Monkes of Italy together, and gaue them a rule in writing; he liued till he had seen twelue Monasteries filled with his Disciples: Their habit was a loose gown of black, reaching down to their feet: their vnder garment was white woollen, their legges booted, their Crownes shaued; their heads hooded. Of this order haue bin 52 Popes, 200 Cardinals, 1600 Archbishops, 4000 Bishops, and 50000 Saints, which haue bin approued by the Church.
The fourth was St Francis, borne at Asis, he fell from M^rchandise to Religion, going barefoot, and behauing himself very penitently; hereupon great store of disciples following him, he gaue them a rule wherein they are bound to professe pouerty and beggery; he caused them to be called Minors, to shew their humility; but now they are called Franciscans. This order was confirmed 1212.
Now concerning these orders of Friers, certaine it is, that at their first institution they were a people much reueren^ed for their holy life, as men that for Christs sake abandoned all the pompes and vanities of the world. And questionlesse they then were a people altogether mortified; and who by their very aspects

would gaine vpon the affection of the hardest hearts;Sleidan com. insomuch that not only meane men, but great personages also did desire to be buried in a Friers weed: as Francis the 2d, Marquesse of Mantua; Albertus Pius an other Prince of Italy; and in later times the great Scholler Christopher Longolius. But as Florus saith of the ciuill warres between Pompey and Caesar, Causa huius bell* eadem quae omnium, nimia felicitas: so may I say of these cloystred Friers, the greatnes of their wealth, which many on a superstitious deuotion bequeathed to their houses, brought them first into a neglect of their former religiou^ and demure carriage: 2ly into a rechlesnesse of their credit and actions: and lastly by consequence into contempt: so that there was not a people vnder heauen that was more infamous in themselues, or more grossely abused by others. Hence the vulgar saying of the people, When a Frier receiveth the razor, the diuell entreth into him: and Friers weare crosses on th^ir brests, because th^y haue none in their hearts, with the like. Nay Sr Thomas Moore, who in the Popes cause lost his head, sticketh not to call them in his Vtopia, Errones maximi; and that they were to bee comprehended vnder the statutes, made against vagabonds and sturdy beggers. Now to shew both the passions of respect and contempt of these Friers: There goeth a tale how the Lady Moore, S^ Thomas his wife, finding a Friers girdle, shewed it with great joy to her husband, saying; behold Sir Thomas, a step toward Heauen: to which, he with a disdainfull laugh made answere, that he feared that step would not bring her a step higher. As for this retirednesse and solitarinesse of life, so it is, that many Kings, chiefly of our Kingdome, and especially vnder the Saxon H^ptarchie, haue left their thrones to enioy it. And Barelay, whose excellent endowments, shall neuer with me defend him from the staine of Apostasie, vnder the person of Anaroestus, hath (...) his Argenis, defended this kind of a Prince his withdrawing himself from the world. Yet against examples only, to oppose authority and practise; the Philosophers haue defined a man to be (...). a creature meerely made for mutuall converse: the Poets say, that
Nascitur indigne per quem non nascitur alter:

and the Iewes which liue aboundantly in Rome and Italy, euen abhorre this vnsociable life; preferring a ciuill life farre before a solitary; as being to nature more agreeable; to man more profitable; and by consequence, to God more acceptable. So hauing spoken thus much of Friers in generall, I descend now to particulars.

The particular orders of Friers.
Polyd. Virg. and Grimst.1. Monkes of Saint Hierome, begun by a worthy Father of the Church, so called. Their roabe is a white Cassock, vnder a Tawny Cloake; there are many of them in Spaine; their chiefe house is Saint Bartholomew of Lupiena; they follow the rule of Saint Austin.
4. Of Comald, begun in Italy, 1012, by Romoald of Ravenna. Their first Monastery was built nigh vnto Arezzo in the Dutchy of Florence, by one Comald, hence the name: they continue in their old strictnesse; their Roabe is white; they follow the rule of Saint Benedict.
3. Of Val d'Ombre, begun by Iohn Gualbert a Florentine, 1040, who betaking himselfe to the study of Religion, retired to a place in the Appennine called Val Ombreux: his followers weare a smoakie habite, and follow the rule of Saint Bennet.
4. The Carthusians, begunne by Bruno a German Doctour of Diuinity, and sixe others, at the town Carthusia: his followers haue at this day 93 Monasteries. They eat no flesh; liue by couples; neuer meet but on Sundayes; labour with their hands, Watch, Pray, etc. their Roabe is white, with a short Cape.
5. Of Cisteaux, instituted by Robert, Abbot of Molesme, who with 21 of his religiousest Monks, retired to Cisteaux in Purgundie; where Bernard a great Lord, became of their Order: who built and repaired 160 Abbies. Their Roabe is a white Cassock, girt with a girdle of wooll; the rest black: they eat no flesh; and follow Saint Bennet.
6. Carmelites, so called from Mount Carmel in Syria, were insti^uted by Almene Bishop of Antioch, Anno 1122. They follow Saint Basil, and were reformed by Eresba, a Spanish woman, she made them certain constitutions, confirmed by Pope Pius 4th, Anno 1565.
7. Dominicke, Preaching, or Black-Friers, instituted by Saint Dominicke a Spaniard; he put himselfe in orders with 16 of his disciples 1206* then sent he his associats to preach the Gospel euen to the farthest parts of the world, which both they did, and thei^ successours since haue done, in India and America. This order was confirmed by Pope Innocent.
8. Celestines, instituted by one Peter a Samnite, borne 1215 He alwayes wore a chaine of iron next his flesh, and ouer that a shirt of haire. Pope Gregory the eleuenth confirmed this rule: they follow Saint Bennet, and took name from the said Peter, who for his sanctity was chosen Pope, and called Cel^stine 5th.
9. The Minimes ordained 1450, by one Francis a N^apolitan: he prosest austerity from his youth vp, his followers keep alwayes a true Lenten fast, vnlesse in case of sicknesse: their roabe is dark Tawny, a hood of the same, hanging to their girdles.
10. Capouchins, so called of their Cowle or Capouch, ordeined by Mathew Basci of Ancona. Frier Lewis his companion obtained of the Pope, the habit and rule of S. Francis, 1526: in the space of 42 yeares, they increased to 2240 associats, had 222 Monasteries, and were diuided into fifteen Prouinces.
11. Begging Friers follow the rule of Saint Austin, they liue idlely vp and down, and are fed by the peoples almes, thinking that herein they doe imitate our blessed Sauiour, and his Apostles* they are bound to carry no money about them, nor more victuals then will serue the present, but they may haue a boy to doe both for them, without any scruple.
12. Crossed Friers, vulgarly called Crouched Friers, were ordeined by Cyriacus a Hierosolymitan Bishop, who shewed vnto Helena the place where the Crosse was hid: hence this order: which being almost decayed, Pope Innocent the third repaired. Their roabe was of watchet colour, and in their hands they carried the figure of the Crosse.
13. Iesuites, founded by Ignatius Loyola, borne in Navarre, who being in his youth addicted to the warres, was lamed in one of his legges, after which maime he betooke himselfe to the study of Religion, he framed his order consisting often: Pope Paul the third did confirme it 1540, confining the number

within sixty, which he after inla^ged ad rifinitum. They are now the greatest Politicians, soundest schollers, and chiefest vpholders of the Romish See; so that the onely way to re-establish the Romish Religion in any land, is to plant a Colledge of Iesuits in it. To the three vowes of pouerty, obedience, and chastity, common to all other orders,Iesuites Catechisme. Ignatius at the institution of this, added the vow of Mission; whereby his followers are bound to obey their Generall, or the Pope, without demaunding any reason, in all dangerous and hazardous attempts whatsoeuer; whether it be in vndertaking some tedious voyage for the propagation of the Romish Religion; or the massacring of any Prince, whose life is an hinderance to their proceedings. It is reported, that a Iesuite being in the midst of his Masse, which they call the sacrifice of the altar, was sent for by Ignatius, to whom, leauing off his Masse, he went immediatly: Ignatius hauing no businesse wherein to employ him, told him, that he only sent for him to try his obedience; and withal prophanely added, that Obedience was better taen sacrifice: and this is called, the blind obedience of the Iesuites. To leaue them then as they are, the greatest disturbers of the quiet of Europe; I haue heard a worthy Gentleman, now with God, say; that till the Ie^uites were taken from the Church of Rome, and the pee^ish Puritan Preachers out of the Churches of Great Brittaine, hee thought there would neuer be any peace in Christendome.
14. Anaehorets or Anchorets, so called, because they vse to liue (...), retired from company. They are kept in a close place, where they must dig their graues with their nailes; badly clad, and worse dieted: not to be pittied, because their restraint of liberty is voluntary; yet to be sorrowed for, in that after such an earthly Purgatory, they shall find insteed of an Euge bone serve, a Quis haec quae^ivit de manibus vestris?

I should much wrong the Friers, if I should depriue them of the company of their Nunnes: and therefore somewhat must be said of them also.Hospinian. They are called in Latin Moniales, from the Greek word (...), because of their solitary life: and amongst vs, Ni^ines, from the Egyptian word Nonna: (for Egypt in former times, was not meanly pestered with them) which signifieth

also lonelinesse; a word in some of the barbarous Latines very frequent. Scholastica the sister of Saint Benedict, was the first that collected them into companies, and prescribed them orders. They are shaued as Monkes are, and vow perpetual virginity, which how well they performe, let Clemanges be judge; who telleth vs, that puellam velare idem est ac publice cam ad scort^ndum exponere: And one Robinson, which for a time liued in the English Nunnery at Lisbon, writeth; that hee by chance found a hole in the wall of a Nunnery Garden, couered with plaister, in which were many bones of young children, whom their vnnaturall dammes had murdered, and throwne in there. Of these Nunnes I will instance only in two orders, viz: that of Saint Clare as being the strictest, and that of Saint Brigit, as inioying most liberty.
St Clara was a Knights daughter of Asis, where Saint Francis was borne, with whom she was contemporarie; and with whose austere life she was so affected, that she forsooke her fathers house, and followed him. Hauing learned her lirrie of that Frier-monger, she composed an order of Religious Virgins, and had it confirmed by Pope Honorius 3d, Anno 1225. Her followers professe pouerty, goe barefoot, feed meanly, and are indeed too much straightned.
Saint Brigit was Queene of Swethland, and comming to Rome on devotion, obtained of Pope Vrban the 5th, that Friers and Nunnes might in some places liue together, Anno 1372. For she being a widow and a woman, knew best without question, what was good for both sexes; but little needed this cohabitation, for they had formerly bin conioyned in carnall affections, though parted by walls; neither were the Visitations so ^ruitlesse, but that the Nunnes did ^ructifie by them. These Friers and Nunnes, though they liue vnder the same roofe, are prohibited to come one vnto the other: the Foundresse so ordering it, that the Nunnes should lye vppermost, and the Fr^ers vndermost; though herein her pleasure be sometimes inverted. The Confessour also is denied accesse into their chambers; but shriueth them through an iron grate, by which his lodging is parted from my Lady Abbesses. And here lieth the mysterie of iniquity.

Robinson, whom I aboue named, telleth vs, that at the time of his seruice in the English Nannery at Lisbone, he was shewed a trick, by which this vncharitable Grate, that seemed to keep the Friers from the company of their sweet votaries; might be, and was vpon such occasion, vsually remooued; and free accesse opened into one anothers beds. This he writeth of them, and for my part I dare beleeue it of all the rest of this order.
And now I returne to my Friers, who besides the maintenance which by their Founders is allotted vnto them; are kept in continuall possibility of attaining greater honours, if they continue dutifull to that See. For 1 there is not one of them, which hopeth not to be the Prior of his Covent; 2 Provinciall of his order, in that Country where he liueth; 3 the Generall of his order; 4 the Generals are most likely to be Cardinals; 5 your Cardinals are in the ^ighest possibility to be Popes; So firme and sweet a companion of man is hope, that it being the last thing which leaueth him, maketh all toyles supportable, all difficulties conquerable.

The Papacie containeth


Maginus.

Archibishops 3.


Bishops 54.





THE COMMON-WEALTH OF VENICE.
Hist. of Ita.THE COMMON-WEALTH OF VENICE containeth La Marca Trevigiana, Friuli, Histria, part of Dalmatia; the Islands Candie, Corfu, Cephalene Ithaca, Zant, Leucadia, Cythera, and others of lesse note.
The length of the Venetian Territories, is aboue 1000 miles; but the bredth is not answerable to the length.
The Venetians heretofore were worthy souldiers by sea and land, maintaining warres with the Greeke ^mperours, their neighbours, in Italy, and the Turkes in the Holy land. They are now more desirous to keep, then inlarge their Dominions; and that by money and presents, rather then by true valour, and the dint of the sword: which course succeedeth so prosperously with them, that it is obserued by Machiavel, that whatsoeuer

they loose by the battle, they recouer by treatie.
They were (as it is recorded) a people of the Lesser Asia, called Heneti,Hist. of Ven. and in that ten yeares siege of Troy, gaue what aid they could to their distressed confederates. But Troy being taken, and their King Pterilimene slain, they chose rather to vndergee a voluntary exile, then the insolent behauiour of a new Conquerour. Vpon this resolution they follow Antenor, and sayling as the wind and seas fauoured, arriued with prosperous gale into Italy; whose happines herein, another wandring Troian envied in this manner:
Antenor potuit, medijs illapsus Achivi^,Illyricos penetrare sinus, atque intima tutu^Regna Liburnorum.Antenor rushing through the warlike Greekes,Safely arriued through the Illyrian creekes,Within Liburnia.Hist. of Ven.
In this part of Italy they first seated themselues, and there continued till the report of the Huns designe against Italy, draue many to avoid the storme before it fell: and so comming into the Marishes and Islands, where Venice now standeth; fortified themselues as well as hast could permit them, and there began a a little Common wealth vnder Tribunes. But multitude of gouernours being for the most part accompanied with confusion, they chose them a Duke, Anno 709. Vnder these Dukes, they haue gotten that great Dominion, which they now inioy. The Dukes authority is but small, as being in all things subiect to the Senate, and three officers called the Capi; without whose consent he may not goe out of the town, and by whom he is prescribed an order in his apparell: So that he may be counted litle better then an honourable slaue. His revenue is as little as his authority, he being allowed out of the common treasurie, but 40000 Duckats in a yeare. The people of this City are either Gentlemen, or Artificers and Commons. The first are the progenie of those who first beganne to settle here; the latter such whom after-occasions induced to make here their dwelling. The Gentlemen they haue in such respect, that to make a man a Gentleman of the city, is the greatest honour they can bestow

vpon the best deseruer. Henry the 3d of France taking this city in his way out of Poland, thought himself graced with this attribute: which they are very dainty and sparing of; it being the glory which they vouchsafe to impart to such Commanders of their own, and Ammbass^dours of other Princes, as haue well deserued it To compare it to a thing ordinary amongst vs, it is like the custome in our Vniuersities, of creating him a Master of Arts, who either is a wel-doer, or a Messenger of some speciall businesse, or glad tidings vnto vs. Now, a^ Otho in Tacitus said to the Praetorian souldiers, Princeps e Senatu oritur, Sena^us e vobis: so out of these Gentlemen are chosen the Senat^rs, out of them the Duke. His election is in this manner. In the vacancie of the place,Contarenus. all the Gentry aboue 30 yeares of age are assembled. So many as meet, cast their names into a Pot, and in another are just so many bals, of which, 30 only are guilt. The^ a child draweth for each, till the 30 guilt ones be drawne; for which 30 the child draweth againe the second time out of an other Pot, that hath only 9 guilt balls. The nine so drawne, nominate forty; out of which forty are 12 again selected by the same kinde of lot. These twelue denominate 25; out of which 25, are n^ne again by lot set a-part. These nine nominate 45. who are by lot again reduced vnto eleuen. These eleuen choose forty one of the best and chiefest of the Senators. These forty one, alter an o^th seuerally, to chuse whom they judge worthiest; write in a scrol euery one whom he best liketh. The scrolls are mingled together, and then drawne: the fitnesse of the persons thus drawne, is discussed: and he that hath most voyces aboue 25, is the man whom they pronounce to be elected; and adjudge with due solemnities to be created their Duke. By the like kind of lottene doe they choose Gentlemen into the Senate-house, and make publike officers. Insomuch that many suppose the Venetian Repub^ique, to be a very modell of Platoes old plat-^orme.
Hist. of Ven.This city was begun the 25 day of March about noone, A^ 421: It is built vpon 72 Islands, distant from the maine Land fiue miles, defended against the fury of the Sea, by a banke, extending 60 miles in length; through which in s^uen places there is passage broken for boats, but no way for vessels of bigge^

burden, sauing at Malamuc^o, and the castles of Lio, strongly fortified, so that it is impossible to be taken, but by an enemy, whose army can stretch 150 m^les in compasse.
The Citty is in compasse eight miles, and hath for conveniency of passage 4000 Bridges, and very neere 12000 boats. The buildings are faire, and adorned with glasse windowes, an ornament not common in Italy.Hist. of Ital, Here are supposed to bee 200 houses, fit to lodge any king whomsoeuer; most of which doe stand on the Grand Canale. They haue an Arsenall, in which are kept 200 Gallies, nigh to which are houses stored with Mast^, Sayles, and other tacklings: so that they can speedily set out a Navie. In their Magazin of warre, they haue armour sufficient for 100000 Souldiers; amongst which are 1000 coats of plate garnished with gold, and couered with veluet, so that they are fit for any Prince in Christendome. From so base and abiect a beginning, is this Citty growne to be the chiefe Bulwarke of Europe. Shee is also accounted Lady of the Adriatique Sea, to which she is euery Ascension day espowsed, by casting a Ring into it. This priuiledge was granted by Pope Alexander the third, who persecuted by Frederick Barbarossa, fled to Venice, S^bastian C^ani then being Duke; who for his sake ^ncountered Otho the Emperours sonne,Hist. of Ven* vanquished him, restored the Pope, and for a reward was honoured with this espowsall. The Patron of the Citty is St Marke, whose body they report to haue bin brought from Alexandria, and is here buried in the fairest Church of the Citty, called St Markes, which is said to bee the goodliest and richest Church in the world. For it is built throughout with Mosaique worke, of which works they vaunt them^elues to be the authors. Now Mosaique or Marqueterie (Musaea Musaica or Musica the Latines call it) is a most curious worke wrought of stones of diuers colours and divers mettles, into the shape of knots, flowres, and other devices, with that excellency of cunning; that they seeme all to be one stone, and rather the worke of nature then art. As for the ^urniture of this Church, ^t ^arre exceedeth the building, for sumptuousnesse and beauty.
The chiefe policy whereby this Common-wealth hath so

long subsisted in an Aristocracie, is 1, the exempting their cittizens from the warres, and hi^ing others in their places: by whose death the Common-wealth sustaineth the lesse losse. 2ly The entertaining of some forraine Prince for their Generall, whom after the warres ended they presently discard; by which course they avoid faction and seruitude, which were like to happen, if they should imploy in that seruice any of their own people; who by his vertue and courage might perchance make himselfe their Prince. The Lawes also of this Citty, permit not the younger sonnes of the Nobility or Gentrie to marry;Hist. of It. least the number increasing, should diminish the dignity; howsoeuer they permit them vnlawfull pleasures, and for their sakes allow publike Stewes.
Europe is the head of the world, Italy the face of Europe, and Venice the eye of Italy: it is the fairest, strongest, and most actiue part of that powerfull body: so that it seemeth, that in the subversion of the last Monarchie, the Romane Genius made a Pythagoricall transmigration into Venice; whose peace hath procured the plenty, and whose warres the peace of all Christendome. It is animated with all the vertues of old Rome, but if I coniecture aright, knit with a more constant temper; so that the present Rome, is but the carkasse of the old, of which she retaineth nothing but her ruines; and the cause of them, her sins.

Thus much of the Citty; the chiefe Provinces are,
1. MARCA TREVIGIANA is bounded on the South, with the riuer Po,Hist. of Ven on the West with the Dutchie of Millaine, on the East with Friuli and the Gulfe of Venice, and on the North with Tirolis. The chiefe citty is Treuiso, whence the countrey is named. It hath beene taken by the Venetians, and lost againe diuers times; but was finally conquered Ano 1390, or thereabout, Antonio Vermero being Duke of Venice. 2 Padua, formerly called Patauium, was built by Antenor, whose Tombe is still here to be shewne. The Vniversity was established Ano 1220, famous for Physitians, who haue here a garden of Simples, and for the birth of Livie, Zabarell, and Maginus. It was much renowned in former times for the humanity of the men, and chastity in the women: which was so eminent and famous,

that As chaft as one of Padua, grew into a prouerbe. Hereunto alludeth Martial, speaking of his owne lasciuious writings:
Tu quoque nequitias nostri lususque libelli,Vda puella leges, sis Patauina licet.Young maids my wanton li^es will long to see,And read them or'e, though Patauines they be.
This Cit^y after much vicissitude of fortune, fell to the power of the Venetians, with all her territories, being in compasse 180 miles,Ortelius. Anno 1406, Michael Steno being then Duke. 3 Vicenza wonne about the same time with Padua. 4 Brescia, the second Citty for bignesse and beauty in all Lombardy: it is also the seat of an Archbishop, who is an Earle, a Marquesse, and a Duke. Her territories are in length 100, in breadth 50 miles, which the Cittizens together with their freedome bought of Otho the Germane Emperour: and lost to the Venetians, Francis Foscara being Duke Ao 1434 5 Verona, quasi Vere vna, or Brenona, because as some will it was built by Brennus; is seated on the Athesis, and is the first citty of the second ranke of Cities in Italy. It boasteth of an Amphitheatre, able to containe 80000 people; and the birth of Catullus: the Territories are 65 miles in length, and 40 in breadth; within which is the mountaine Baldus where Physitians vse to gather medicinall hearbs. 7 Briscello, or Brixellum famous for the death of Otho the Roman Emperour,Tacitus who here slew himselfe. For hauing receaued newes that his Armie was by Valens and Cacina, Captains to Vitellius, vnfortunatly vanquished; chose rather to make a way himselfe, then that his Countrey should for his sake be forced againe to renew the warre. When he was dead and laid vpon the funerall pile, many of the Souldiers slew themselues; not vpon feare of punishment, nor as being guilty of any crime: but for the great loue they bare to him, and to follow his honorable example. So we may truely say of this Otho, as he said of himselfe, Alij diutius imperium tenuerunt, nemo tam fo^titer reliquit. 8 Bergomo, the people whereof speake the worst language of any in Italy. 9 Este, whence came the familie D'Este, late Dukes of Ferrara, 10 Crema, a strong sort against the Milla^oys. In this town was borne Iohn Cremensis,Mat. Paris. whom Ao 1125 Pope Honorius the 2d

sent Legate into England, to disswade our Clergie from marriage. A Convocation was called presently after his arrivall; in which the Legate hauing made an accurate speech in praise of single life, and how fit it was that Ministers should liue separat from the cares of the world; was the night following taken in adulterie.
The principall riuers are Athesis. 2 Addua. 3 Ollius. And Brenta, famous for her adioyning Pallaces.
2. FRIVLI, formerly called Forum Iulij, is environed with Histria, the Alpes, Trevigiana, and the Adriatique; the length of it is 50 miles, and the breadth as much. The chiefe citties are 1 Aquilegia, once 12 miles in circuit: it is seated on Natisco, was razed by Attila and his Hunnes, and is now ill inhabited by reason of the neighbourhood of Venice.Capitol. This towne endured that famous siege against Maximinus for the weale of the Commonwealth of Rome, and her Emperours Maximus and Balbinus. In whose cause the Cittizens persisted so resolutely faithfull, that they bereaued the women (willing for the common good to loose so invaluable an ornament) of their haire, to make bow-strings. Neither did this pious and hearty constancie to the State want its wished effect; for they beheld the Tyrant headlesse vnder their walls, and saw the Metropolis of the world preserued by their loyaltie. After the death of the olde Tyrant, the Souldiers and people lay hands also vpon his children, and put them to the sword: Of which cruelty being asked the reason, they replied, that! pessimi canis ne catulus esset relinqu^n^us. 2 Tergestum or Tr^ist, close to the Sea. 3 Gorritia. 4 Palma, a towne built by the Venetians 1583, and is best fortified of any in Italy. 5 Cividad d' Austria built by Iulius Caesar, and called Iulium; whence the Province was named Forum Iulij: it hauing before beene called Iapidia, of Iapis an Aetolian, that planted here.
The chiefe Riuers are 1 Risanus. 2 Lizonsus. 3 Natisco.
Hist. of It.At the beginning of the Venetian Common-wealth, Friuli was one of the 4 Dukedomes founded by the Lombards (the other three being Turino, Spoleti, Benevento) Luitprandus one of the Dukes envying the Venetians increase of dominion, did

make warre against them, which ended in the losse of his countrey; euer since subiect to the Venetians.
3 Histria,Boterus. is enuironed with the Sea, Friuli, and Carniola. The compasse of it is 200 miles, the ayre so vnwholsome, that the Venetians were compell'd to hire people to dwell there. The chiefe Townes are 1 Cape d' Istria, or Iustinopolis, by Pliny called Aegide.Sleid. Com. Of this towne Vergerius was Bishop; a man who^ many Popes imployed in Germanie against Luther. In which negotiation he behaued himselfe so fully to the content of those that imployed him, that Paul the 3d intended Anno 1541, to haue made him Cardinall, had not some who envied him this honour, accused him of Lutheranisme. Hee to purge himselfe beganne to write a booke entituled Against the Apostata's of Germany: in the pursuit whereof pondering Luthers reasons, he became of his opinion; which once knowne, he was driuen from Iustinople. He submitted himselfe and his cause to the Fathers at Trent but could not get a hearing. Thence hee went to the D. of Mantua, from him to the State of Venice; but no where finding protection, he retired into Rhetia, and there preached the Gospell, till Christopher Duke of Wirtenberg, Ao 1548 placed him in his Vniver^^tie of Tubing, and there allowed him a sufficiency of maintenance.Volaterr. It was built by Iustinus sonne to Iustinian the Emperour, as a fortresse against the incursions of the barbarous people. 2 Pola built by the Colchians at their first comming hither; the name in their language importing as much as banishment. It abutteth on Sinu^ Fanaticus, or Golf^ Queuero. 3 Parenzo. 4 Portulae. 5 Rubinum. and 6 ^^on^ona.
The principall Riuers are Phormio (now called Risanus) parting Histria fro^ Friuli. 2 Quietus formerly Naupactus. 3 Arsia.
It is recorded that the Histrians were a people of Colchis, who being sent by K^ng Aetas to pursue Iason and the Argonauts, were driuen (...) this Gulfe: where either for feare of the Kings anger, or not d^r^ng to venture their weake vessell, to so long a voyage; they staid in this Countrey. Thus liu'd in freedo^e till t^e growth of the Roman Empire; after whose decay, they regained their liberty till by Pryracie molesting the Venetians,Hist. of Ven. they lost many of their Townes to Duke Peitro Candiano

Anno 938: and the whole countrey was made tributary by the valour of Duke Henry Gondolo, about the yeare 1200. The other parts of this Empire, being no part of Italy, shall be handled in due place.
Selden.The chiefe orders of Knighthood in this Republike are,
1 Of S^ Marke, began in the yeare 1330, and renued Ao 1562. The Knights are to bee of the noble sort: the word, Pax tibi Marce.2 Of the Glorious Virgin, instituted by Bartholmew of Vicenza 1232. Their charge is to defend widdowes, and Orphans; and to procure the peace of Italy. It was approued by Pope Viban the 4th Anno 1262. The Armes are a purple Crosse, betweene certaine Starres; a white roabe ouer a ruslet cloake.
Hist. of I^.The reuenewes of this Common-wealth are 4 Millions of Duckats, which they raise with such taxes, that Christians generally liue better vnder the Turke, then vnder the Venetian.
Bara.The Armes are Gules, two Keyes in Saltier, Or, stringed Azure.

Here are in this State,

Patriarchs 2.


Bishops 34.





THE DVKEDOME OF FLORENCE.
THE DVKEDOME OF FLORENCE containeth the greater part of Tuscany; being parted from Genoa by the Magra, and the strong Towne Sarezana, belonging to the Genocys on the West; from Romagna and Ancona, by the Appennine on the North; by the Pisseo on the East; and the Tirrhene Sea on the South.Freigius. It was called Thuscanie, from (...) sacrificing, and Tirrhenia from Tirrhenus, sonne to Atis king of Lydia, who planted here a Colonie. The first King was Tarquon Prisons, in the yeare of the world 2550; the last was Turenus Ceso; after whose death the Romans tooke it, Anno M. 3682.
The chiefe Citty is Florence, seated nigh to the confluence of Arnus and Chianus. It so aboundeth with goodly buildings, both for diuine and ciuill vses, and hath so many straight and clean stre^ts;Boterus. that Charles the Archduke was wont to say, it was a Citty to be scene on holy daies onely. It is in compasse 6 miles;

was built by L. Sylla that bloudy Dictator; and was made a Colonie by Augustus, Antony, and Lepidus the Triumviri; and called Florentia a situ slo^e^ti. It was razed by the Lombards, and reedified by Charles the great; to whose successors it long time continued faithfull: but at last by the example of other Citties, it began to shift for it selfe, and finally bought her absolute liberty of Rodolphus for 6000 Crownes.
The Medices whose posterity are now Dukes hereof, were in the free state reckoned among the popular NobilityMach. hist. of Flor.; which were such of the Nobles, as to make themselues capable of the Citty Magistracies, had in a manner degraded themselues, becomming part of the Communalty. About the yeare ^410, Iohn de Medices stoutly maintaining the peoples, liberty against the Nobility; was by the Commons exceedingly honored and enriched: so that he had not only a great partie, but almost a Soveraignty in the Citty. To him succeeded Cosmo his sonne, a man worthy amongst the worthiest: he died in the year 1464: during which time hee had much reformed the gouernment of the State, and enlarged the territories thereof with the conquest of Borgo San Sepulchro, Casentino, etc. To Cosmo succeeded Peter de Medices, whose whole time was spent against such factions, as at home were raised against him. He dying Ao 1472, lest his whole power and estate, with a greater measure of his fathers vertues, to his two sonnes Lorenzo and Iulian After his death, the people inclined much to one of the fam^lie of the Sodermi, a man of very plausible behauiour. But hee knowing that new houses, as they are easily honoured, so are they quickly abandoned; conferr'd all the dependencies cast vpon him, vpon these two young men of the Medices, as being descended from a family which had long gouerned the Citty. Against these two, the Pazzi a potent house in Fl^rence, conspired, and at Masse they slew Iulian; but Lorenzo escaped; the blowes which were stroke at him being receaued by one of his seruants, whom two daies before hee had deliuered out of prison. For this fact the Pazzi were hang^d at the Pall^ce windowe, together with the Archbishop of P^sa, who had beene of the conspiracy. To revenge the death of this Bishop, Pope Paul

the 2d excommunicated the Florentines; and Ferdinand King of Naples warred vpon them. Lorenzo to diuert this mischiefe went in person to Naples; where he grew so much into the good liking of the king, that there was a perpetuall league made betweene them. After his death Ao 1492, his sonne Peter hauing very improvidently deliuered Pisa and Ligorne,Gui^^iard. with other peeces, to the French King; was together with his whole family banished. Iohn di Medices being Pope by the name of Lee the 10^ restored againe his family; who not long after his death, were againe exil'd. This disgrace Iulio di Medices sonne to the aboue named Iulian, and Pope of Rome by the name of Clement the 7th, not enduring; procured Charles the fift to besiege it; which request was granted; and the Citty after two yeares resistance, yeelded. The Emperour gaue it to Alexander Medices (grand-child to Peter by his sonne Laurence) Ao 1571. And he to restraine the insolencies of the people, built a strong cittadell in the towne.P. Iovius This Alexander was a man addicted to all kinde of vncleanenesse, insomuch as he was slayne by Laurence his cosen, who insteed of calling, after the fact committed, the people to take armes for their liberty; fearefully fled out of the Citty, and posted toward Venice. Before the people had notice of this accident, the freinds of the Medices consulting together, made choice of Cosmo di Medices, then about 18 yeares old, for their Prince. This Cosmo being an excellent statesman, and a braue leader, so swaied the affaires of Italy: that Philip the 2d of Spaine, to be assured of his freindship, gaue him the Signe^ry of Su^^a, out of which he had lately driuen the French. Pius the 4th Anno 1560 would haue crowned this Cosmo king of Tuscanie. But Philip of Spaine thwarted that intent, as loath to haue in Italy any more kings then himselfe. After in the yeare 1570 Pius the fift crowned the said Cosmo in the Court of Rome, with the title of Great Duke of Tuscanie, for him and his heires for euer. In the new Dukes Coro^et he caused to be engrauen these words. Pius quintus pont: maxiob eximiam dilectionem and rel gionis catholicae zelum, praecipuumque iustitiae studium, donavit. Thus forward were these Popes to honour this familie. One of Duke Cosmo's successours since intreated a succeeding Pope that he might bee

created King of Tuscanie: but the Romish Caliph not liking so Lordly a title, answered that he was content He should be a king in Tuscany, but not king of Tuscany: a Scholler-like distinction, but not well taken. The Citty hath diuers times beene ruinated by the factions of the Bondelmonti and Vborti. 2 The Anudei and Donati. 3 The Guelsi and Gibellini. Here were borne three Monsters, viz: 1 Alexander de Medices, that dispoyled Florence of her liberty, the fairest Citty of Italy 2 Katherine de Medices, that ruined France, the fairest kingdome of Europe. 3 Nicholas Machiavell, Recorder of this Towne, whose politickes haue poysoned Europe, the fairest part of the whole world.
The second Citty is Pisa, built by the Pisae, a people of Elis in Greece;Stephanus who following old Nestor from Troy, were by the violence of wind and sea, driue^ into the mouth of Arnus, where they built this towne, calling it after their owne n^me. After the fall of the Roman Monarchy, it grew so strong; that at one time the Cittizens waged warre with the Venetians and Genoys. They were Masters of the Baleares, Corsica, and Sardinia: but finally being discomfited by the Genowaies, neere to the Iland Gigli^; they submitted themselues to Charles the 4th. Not long after it was taken by Iohn Galeas, the first of the Vicounts which was Duke of Millaine. Ao 1404. Gabriel Maria Vicount, sold them to the Flo^entines, from whose command they by violence delivered themselues. The Florentines besieged them, and brought them to that extremity of hunger, that they were almost all staru'd: yet such was the humanity of their besiegers, that whe^ they entred the Towne; insteed of weapons every man carried victuals* to beget as it were new life in that rebellious people. This victory the Florentines got by the valour and conduct of Sr Iohn Hawkwood, whom the Italians call Giovanni di Aguto; who being first a Tayler in Essex, afterward serued Edward the th^rd in his French warres, where he was knighted: and when vpon the peace concluded after the battle of Poycters, he wanted imployment; he entred with his regiment into Italy, and put himselfe into the pay of the Florentines then in warre with this Citty; who for his valour haue honored him with a faire tomb and monument. When Charles the 8th went into Italy, the Pisans

againe revolted; and were no^ without much labour reas-subiected.
The third Citty is Sienna, bu^lt by Brennus, who did there put his old sickly men to so^ourne, and called it Sena. Here was borne Ae^^as Sylvius, called afterward Pope Pius the second; and Francis Piccol^mmey, after Pope ^ius the third: Her Territories contained Orbitello, ^ienza, Soana, and 26 other walled Townes: To this Commo^wealth also belonged the hauen of Telamon, and the Lordship of Plombino. To it also appertained the Peninsula called Mont^ Argentorato, enriched with mines of siluer, and abundance of marble. This last is in the possession of the Duke of Florenco, but T^lamon and Plombino are still kept by the Spaniard, the better to keepe the great Duke at his devotion. This Commonweale bought its liberty of the Emperour Rodolphus: Afterwards it ^ell into the hands of the Spaniards, then of the French; and was sold to the Florentine by the Spa^iards, Anno 1558, in consideration of the monie already receaued, and the assistance in future expected, from Cosmo di Medices. This Cosmo depriuing the people of all armour as well for defence as ^ffence, altered the gouerment, bereaued them of the common liberty; and was the first Prince, that after the constitution of the free Commonwealth, euer had absolute dominion in the Citty: The Spaniards and French never ruling here as Lords; but called in according to the factions then bearing most sway, to driue out one another.
Hist. of It.The fourth Citty is Pistoya, where first begunne the quarrel of the Neri and Beanchi, as also that tedious and bloudy faction of the Guelfi and G^ibellini: these latter so called of two Dutchmen Brothers, whereof Guelf thought the Pope, and Ghibell the Emperour to be more worthy, in which quarrell they slew each other, dispersing their cause throughout all Italy. These Ghibellines were so hateful to the Popes, that on an Ash-wednesday, when according to the Romish institution, the Pope being to cast Ashes on the heads of the Cardinals, was to say, Memento o homo quod cinis es, and in cinerem converteris: seeing a Ghibelline amon^st the rest, transported with rage, he said vnto him, Memente ^ homo quod Ghibellinus es, and cum Ghibellinis morieris.
The other Citties of the better sort are 1 Massa, famous for her Quarries of white marble. 2 Volaterra where Rodolphus Volaterra was borne. 3 Arezzo bought of Lewis of Aniou, the Popes Vicegerent in Tuscany, for 40000 Florens. 4 Cortona, seated vnder the Appenine, and sold by Ladislaus of Naples. 5 Carara. 6 Borgo San Sepulchro added to the Signeurie of Florence by the valour of Cosmo di Medices,Mach. hist. of Flor. the first of that name. 7 Liuorne, a famous hauen towne, seated at the mouth of the river Arnus. It once belonged to the Genoyse, till Thomazo Fregosa for 120000 Duckats sold it to the Florentines. It is by the care of the great Duke so well manned and fortified, that this town together with Luca, Zara in Dalmatia, and Canea in Crete, are accounted foure of the strongest Citties in Christendome; Citties I say, not Castles; the Castles of Millaine, and Stockholme in Swethland, being reputed the strongest holds in the world.
The length of this Dukes dominion is 260 miles, the bredth in some place as much; in which compasse liue a people pleasant vnconstant, sociable, of an accurate wit, and pure language. Not only the Subiects, but the Duke himselfe, is wholy devoted to Merchandize; whereas in England and France, hee looseth the priuiledge of a Noble man, who doth buy or s^ll in way of trading. The Duke vseth here also to buy vp almost all the Corne in the Country at his owne price; and sell it againe as deere as he list; forbidding any Corne to be sold, till his be all vented.
The principall order of Knighthood in this Dukedome,Selden* is of St Stephan, instituted by Cosmo di Medices 1561, because on St Stephans day, being the 6 of August, hee wonne the battaile of Mariana. Pius the 4th confirmed it. Their Roabe is Chaml^t a Crosse Gules on their left side: they are to be nobly borne, of the Romish Church, and haue liberty to mar^y. This order was proposed against the Turk^ the supreame master of it, being the Duke of Florence. Other orders are commonly simple, this is mixt, as being partly religious, partly honourarie.
What the Revenewes were in the free state, I cannot easily determine. That they were very great is manifest, in that hauing in those fiue yeares during, which they warred against the

Duke of Millaine spent 3 millions and a halfe of Florens; their treasury was so farre from wanting, that the next yeare they beseiged and indangered the state of Luca. Now, since the altering of the State to a Dutchie, and the addition of the territory and towne of Siena, the yearely revennue is about a Million and a halfe of Duckats.
Paradine.The Armes are Or, fiue Torteaux Gules, 2, 2, and 1. and one in chiefe Azure; charged with three Flower de Lyces of the first*

This Dukedome hath


Maginns.

Archbishops 5.


Bish^ps 25.




THE DVKEDOME OF MILLAINE.
The DVKEDOME OF MILLAINE hath on the East Mantua and Parma, on the South Liguria, on the North Trevigiana, on the West Peidmont. It standeth wholy in Lombardy, which for its wondrous fertility, was stiled the Garden of Italy. Lombardy was knowne to the Ancients by the name of Gallia Cisalpina: Gallia, as being inhabited of the Gaules; Cisalpina, because it lay on this side the Alp^s. It was also called Gallia Comata because of the long haire of their heads: and afterward Longobardia from the long haire of the peoples beards. It was by the riuer Po divided into Cispadanam and Transpadanam, and comprehended the Dukedomes of Mantua and Parma; the Provinces of Romandiola, Trevigiana, and Peidmont; together with this Dutchie, which then by a peculiar name was called Insubria.
The chiefe rivers are, 1 Padus. 2 Ad^a. 3 Ollius. 4 Ticinu^* and 5 Lacus Larius, vulgarly called, Lago di Como, 50 miles in length.
The chiefe citties are 1 Pavia or Papia on the flood Ticinus, made an Vniversity 1361, by Charles the 4th: vnited to M^llaine by Iohn Galeazo the first Duke: and famous for the battle in which Francis the first, was taken prisoner by Charles the fift 1525. 2 Lodi. 3 Alexandria, now a Towne of great strength, formerly a poore small Village named Roboretum.Munster. The new name and greatnesse must be ascribed to the often ouerthrowes

of Millaine by Frederick Barbarossa; the people whereof at the seuerall destruction of their Citty, retired to this Towne; calling it for Pope Alexander the thirds sake, whose part they then tooke against the Emperour,Tacitus. by this new name. 4 Cremona, built in the first yeare of the second Punicke warre, and burnt to the ground by Vespasians Souldiers, after the defeat of Vitellius forces: which defeat was giuen vnder the walls of this Towne. When Antonius, Vespasians Generall first after his victory entred into it: hee went to a Bath to wash away the sweat and bloud from his body; where finding the water some what too cold, he said by chance, that it should anon bee made hotter. Which words the Souldiers applying to their greedy desires set ^ire on the Towne, and spent foure daies in the sacking of it. By the encouragement of Vespasian it was againe reedified; and i^ now famous for her high Tower; from which grew the byword, Vna turris in Cremona, vnus Petrus in Roma, vnus Portus in Ancona. 5 Como, seated on a Lake so named, in wh^ch both the Plinies were borne. 6 Millain a faire Towne, and the biggest of all Lombardy; hauing a Castle so strongly fortified, with natural and artificiall ramparts,Hist. of It. that it is deemed impregnable. It is a Citty very populous containing 200000 persons; and of great trade, here being private shops equalling the publike storehouses of other places: whence the people are so rich, that the wife of every Mechanicke will flaunt it in her silkes and Taffataes. This Citty is said to haue beene built by the Gaules 359 yeares before Christ; it is 7 miles in circuit, and honoured with an V^iversity,Munster. wherein flourished Hermolaus Barbarus, Cali^s Rhodiginus, and Cardanus. Here (say some) St Barnabie taught Divinity, and here S. Ambrose was Bishop.
This Towne continued Imperiall after the ouerthrow of the Lombards, till the time of Fredericke Barbarossa, 1161, from whose obedience, in behalfe of Pope Alexander the third, it revolted The Emperour divers times destroyed the Citty, the people hereof still ministring fresh occasions. Beatrix the Emperours wife, comming to see the Towne, was by the irreuerent people, first imprisoned; and then most barbarously handled. For they placed her on a Mule with her face towards the tayle,

which she was compelled to vse insteed of a bridle; and when they had thus shewne her to all the towne, they brought her to a gate, and kickt her out. To revenge this wrong the Emperour besieged and forced the Towne; and adiudged all the people to dye, saue such as would vndergoe this ransome. Betweene the buttocks of a skittish Mule, a bunch of Figges was fastned; and such as would liue, must with their hands bound behind, runne after the Mule, till with their teeth they had snatched out one or more of the Figges. This condition, besides the hazard of many a sound kicke, was by most accepted and performed. Since which time, the Italians when they intend to scoffe or disgrace one, vse to put their thumbe betweene two of their fingers and say Ecco, la fico: which is counted a disgrace answerable to our English custome, of making hornes to that man whom wee suspect to bee a Cuckold. After this, this Citty againe rebelled; and was by the same Emperour leuel'd with the ground, the wals pulled down, and all the platforme of the Citty ploughed vp and sowne with salt; that being the Embleme of a towne neuer in possibility to be reedified. This notwithstanding Millaine was againe rebuilt, and the Pope by the Millanoys and Venetians helpe, had the better of the Emperour; to whom the Pope inioyned a seruice in the Holy land. At this time, seeing the Emperour troubled with warres, the people began a Commonwealth, which continued about 56 yeares; when the Visconti, a potent fam^ly,Hist. of It. vsurped the Dominion. The first which tooke on him this authority was Otho, who being also Lord of Angerena, surnamed himselfe Visconti, quasi bis Comes. The first of this family which obtained the title of Duke, was Iohn called Galeazo, because at his birth the Cocks crew more then was ordinary: who for his dignity paid to the Emperour Wenceslaus 100000 Crownes. This Iohn so increased his dominions, that he was Lord of 29 Citties and their territories, and died going to Florence, that he might bee crowned king of Tuscany. He left one daughter married to Lewis Duke of Orleans; and two sonnes: Iohn Maria the elder, was slaine by the people; and Philip Maria succeeded in Millain. He dying, left one illegitimate daughter called Blanch, married to Francisco Sforza a braue

Souldier; and in his will named Alphonso of Arragon his heire* but in vaine, for Sforza was possessed of the Citty. In his line it continued, till the comming of Lewis the twelfth into Italy; who was King of France, sonne to Charles Duke of Orleans, sonne to Lewis a^oresaid, and Valentina daughter to Iohn the first Duke. His Competitours were the King of Arragon, alleaging the testament of Duke Philip, the Sforzaes in possession and the Emperour Maximili^n, who pretended an escheat for want of heires male. Against these in severall Lewis prevailed, as also did Francis the first his next successour: but when the right of Spaine and the Empire met together in Charles the fift, then was King Francis taken prisoner, and for his release, was glad to release all title to Naples and Millain. A release long before endeauored by some French Politicians, because the keeping of this Dutchie, or its title, had brought such dammage to that Crowne: and as much opposed by Chancellour Prat; because it both kept the French in a continuall and certaine discipline of warre, and serued as a purgation of idle and superfluous people. Notwithstanding this release, king Francis renued the warre againe; during which the poore Millancys endured all the wretchednesse imaginable in a country so banded for, and tost from Potentate to Potentate. Antonio di Lena, the French gouernour in Millain, to provide for the pay of his Souldiers, had drawne into his hands all the victuall of the Citty, which he sold at his own price; which many poore people hauing no meanes to giue died in the streets. Yet this sufficed not. His Souldiers he quartered in the Citty; every of which, vsed as often as they wanted money, to chaine their hosts and then ransome them. Such as vpon this vsage fled the Citty, had their goods confiscate: the Nobles went but poorely arrayed; the principall places of the Citty were ouergrowne with Nettles and Brambles. In this miserable estate it continued, till Charles hauing totally driuen thence the French, restored it to Francis Sforzi brother to the l^st Duke Maximilian; and sonne to that Lodowicke* who most improuidently for his owne priuate ends, had first taught the French the way into Italy. After the death of this Francis, being the last of the Sforzaes, the Emperour entred as Lord of Millaine,

which his successours yet keepe: I meane his successours in Spaine, not the Empire.
Hist. of It.Of 29 Citties vnder Millain, there now remaine but 9; yet is this the prime Dukedome of Christendome, containing 300 miles in circuit, and affording the reuenew of 800000 Duckats vnto the King of Spaine.
The Armes are A, a Serpent B, crowned O, in his gorge an infant G: This coat was the ensigne of a Saracen, whom Otho the first of the Visconti, overcame in the Holy land.

In this Dukedome are.


Maginus

Archbishop 1


Bishops 6.




THE DVKEDOME OF MANTVA.
The DVKEDOME OF MANTVA hath on the East Romagna, on the West Millaine, on the North Trevigiana, on the South Parma and Placentia. To this belongeth the ^ukedome of Montferrat, seated in the Southeast part of Peidmont, whose chiefe Citties are 1 Alba, once called Alba Pompei^, where Pertinax the Roman Emperour was borne; who being of base and obscure ancestors, betooke himselfe to the warres, in Brittaine and other places: In which hauing gotten great reputation, hee was by Letus and Electus, the deliuerers of Rome from the Tyranny of Commodus; called to the Empire. But being ouer zealous to redresse the corruption then reuiuing in the State, hee was by the Praetorian Souldiers, loathing now their Princes for their vertues, more then formerly they did for their vices; barbarously murdered; and the Imperiall dignity sold to Iulianus, for 25 Sestertiuns a man. 2 Cas^la St Vas, vulgarly called St Vas, new built by Fredericke the first Duke of Mantua; who married the daughter and heire of Gulielmus Pal^^logus Marquesse of Montserrat Ao 1539. 3 Nicaea or Niza: and 4 Isola.
The chief cities of this Dukedome of Mantua, are 1 Mirabella, 2 Lucera, 3 Cap^iana, 4 Modena, once a Town belonging to Ferrara, and by Clement the 8th giuen with her spacious ^erritories, vnto Caesar d'Este, naturall sonne vnto Hercules d'Este, last Duke of Ferrara. It is now by marriage allied to Mantua. This town was of old called Mutina, and is famous for the first

battail between Antonie and Augustus: this latter being by the Lords and people of Rome,Dion. made head of the League against Antony the common enemy. Augustus was then aged but 18 yeares, and therefore he refer^ed the execution of the warre to Hirtius, and Pansa, then Consuls. The fortune of the day was so equally shared, that Antonie lost the field, and the Consuls their liue^* Leauing Augustus a headlesse army, into whose fauour when he had wrought himself, he presently poasted to Rome, and made himself Consul. 5 Reggio, for the possession of which, there haue bin so many discontents, and open warre between the old Dukes of Ferrara, and the Popes of Rome. 6 Cuneto, 7 Mantua, a very strong Town, environed on three sides with a water,Hist. of Ita. being a quarter of a mile broad; on the fourth with a wall. It is seated on a riuer, which comming from Lago di G^rda, runneth into the Po. In this City was held that Councell, wherein it was decreed, that the choosing of the Popes should belong only to the Conclaue of Cardinals: A prerogatiue which formerly belonging to the Emperours, was first giuen away by Constantine the 4th, Anno 621: but re-taken by Charles the Great, and now confirmed to the Cardinals, 1063. In this town Virgil was borne, Mantua Virgilio gaudet.
This* City was taken from the Emperours Vice-gerents, by that braue Virago, Matilda; who dying without issue, gaue this Town, and all other her possessions, to the Roman Prelates: whose Legats ruled this Town, till the Poledroni, a great family, took on them the gouernment, 1220: from these it was taken by the family of Gonzaga, Anno 1308. These Lords mightily augmented their Dominions, which caused the Emperour Sigismund to create Lord Iohn Francisco, Marquesse of Mantua. From a Marquisate, it became a Dukedome, in the time of M^rquesse Fr^dericke, created Duke by Charles the 5, Anno 1^^4, the present Duke is Francis Gonzaga. As for the Country of Montferrat;Bergomensis it is so called a monte ferrato, some mountaine here stored with iron; or else a monte seraci, from the fertility ^f the mountaines here being. It is environed with the Apponine hills, Millaine and the riuer Tanarus; which riuer springing out of these hils about Barceis, a town of the Marqussate of

Saluzzes; looses it selfe in the Po, somwhat beneath the Pauie. In this round are some townes belonging to Millaine, as Aste, Alexandria, etc. This country was made a Marquisate by Oth^ the 2d, 985; and giuen to his son in law Alaramus: and since the joyning of it vnto Mantua, it was erected into a Dukedome by Maximilian the 2d, Anno 1575, William the 3d being then Duke of Mantua.
The chief order of Knighthood in this Dukedome, is of The blood of our Lord Iesus Christ, instituted Anno 1608. The Author of this order was Duke Vincent Gonzaga,Seld^n. when the marriage was solemnized between his son Francis, now Duke, and the Lady Margaret, daughter to the Duke of Savoy. It consisteth of twenty Knights, whereof the Mantuan Dukes are Soueraignes; and was allowed by Pope Paul the 5th. The Collar hath threades of gold layed on fire, and inter-wouen with these words, Domine probasti. To the Collar are pendant two Angels, supporting three droppes of blood, and circumscribed with, Nihil isto triste recepto. It tooke this name, because in Saint Andrewes Church in Mantua, are kept as a most precious relique, certain droppes of our Sauiours blood; (thou canst not O Reader but belieue it) with a piece of the spunge.
The Territories of this Duke, are in circuit nigh vnto those of Florence, but his revenues f^ll short, which amount to about 500000 Duckats only: but might be greater, if either the D. would be burdensome to his subiects, as Florence is; or if hee were not on all sides landlocked from nauigation and traffique.
Bara.The Armes are quarterly; first, Argent, a Crosse patee Gules, between foure Eagles Sable, membred of the second; vnder an Escho^cheon in Fesse, charged quarterly with G, a Lyon O, and O, three ba^^es S, for the Dutchy of Mantua: And secondly Gules,Maginus. a chief Arg. for the Marquisat of Montferrat. This Dukedome hath,
Archbishops 1.Bishops 8.


THE DVKEDOME OF VRBIN.
THE DVKEDOME OF VRBIN, lieth in the midst of the Papall Territories, hauing on the North the Adri^tiq^e, on the South the Appennine, on the West Romagna, on the East

Marca Anconitana. The length of it is 60, the bredth 35 miles: the revenues are 100000 Crownes,Grimston. whereof, 2240 are due to the Popes for chief rents.
Here are 200 Castles,Hist. of I^. and 7 Townes. The chief of the seuen Towns are 1 Vrbine, seated on the bottome of the Appennine, and bu^lt in the fashion of a Miter; it was called Vrbinas, quia Vrbes binas continere videbatur. In this City Polydor Virgil was borne, who writ an English History, though not altogether so true as I could wish, especially in those passages, which concerne the regality and credit of the Popes of Rome, the Collectour of whose Peter-pence in England,P. Virg. he then was. These Peter pence (if it be not out of my roade to note it in this place) were first granted to the Roman Popes by Offa king of the Mercians, about the yeare 730; confirmed by Ethelwolphe the second Saxon Monarch; and finally wisely with-held from the^ by Henry 8t^, at such time as he began to know his own strength and supremacie. The 2d town is Belfort^, seated in the midland. 3 Pisauro a good hauen. 4 Cabo. 5 Fano, sea-townes also. The principall of the 200 Castles are the Rocke of Saint Leo,Guicciard, and Marivol, which were the last that held good for Duke Guido Baldo, against Caesar Borgia, Duke of Valentinoys; and the first that came again vnder his obedience. For which cause when he fled the second time from the said C^sar; he dismantled all his other castles, as being more likely to confirme the invaders victory, then resist it: these two being wel fortified, he left to keep as much as in them lay, possession of his Countrie.
In the warres between Lewis of Bavaria the Emperour,Hist. of I^. and Pope Clement the first; Gelasso di Montefeltro was the Emperours Vicegerent in Vrbine, 1345. His posterity continued in that office, till the yeare 1444; when Lord Fredericke for his surpassing valour, was by Eugenius the fourth, made Duke of Vrbine; cond^tionally, in token of allegiance he should pay to the Popes yearely, 2240 Crownes. This Fredericke was by ou^ Henry the sixt, made Knight of the Garter; to requite which honour, the English to this day inioy many immunities in his Dominions. Guido Vbaldo this Dukes son, lost this Dutchy to Caesar Borgia. He, after the death of his father, left it to the Pope

Iuli^ the second: who gaue it, Anno 1504, to Francisco Maria, Nephew and adopted sonne vnto the late Duke Guido Vbaldo. The present Duke is also named Francisco Maria. Here are only 3 Bishops.


THE PRINCIPATE OF PARMA AND PLACENTIA.
This PRINCIPATE hath on the North Mantuae, on the South the Appeni^e,Maginus. on the West Millaine, on the East the country of Modenae. The revenues are 50000 crownes, the commodities common to the rest of Italy; here are also the excellent Cheeses, called Parmesans. The City of Parma is seated on a litle riuer called ^irnia; Placentia is seated on the Po. They haue both partaken of diuersity of fortune,Hist. of It. being sometime vnder the Venetians, sometime vnder the Millanois, and finally vnder the Romane ^relates. Paul the third gaue them to his son Peitre Alvigi Farn^sis, 1546; adding in recompence to the Church, the Signiory of Caemerine, which he had taken from Guido Maria; D. of Vrbin.Sleidan com. This Peitro Aluigi, or Lewis Farnesis, was a man of a most villanous behauiour; and amongst other crimes committed an vnspeakable violence, on the person of Cosmus Charius, Bishop of Fanum, and then poysoned him; for which detestable action, he receiued no other chastisement of his Father Christs Vicar, then Haec vitia me non co^monstra^ore didicit. At last behauing himselfe so insolently, he was slain by Count Iohn Aguzzolo; and Placentia was yeelded to Fernand Gonzaga, the Spanish Viceroy in Millaine; Parma being fortified by the Pope,Hist. of Fr. was giuen to his Nephew Octavian Farnesis. Yet could not this donation so assure the Estate, but that Octavian had quite lost it; if Henry 2d of F^ance had not taken him into his protection. For the Emperour Charles fully determined, (notwithstanding that Octavian had married his base daughter) to haue made hims^l^ Lord of the towne: and the French King was loath to see so great a strength added to the Emperours possession in Italy. When the warre had now last^d foure yeares, Philip the second, which succeeded Charles, considering how necessary it was for his affaires in Italy, to haue this Octavian

his friend: restored vnto him again this Plaisance, or Placentia, and so with-drew him from the French faction, Anno 1557. Yet because he would be sure to keep this house in a perpetuall dependance on Spaine, he restored it not absolutely, but only for foure generations. He made also Alexander Farnesis Commander of the Netherlands, therein giuing that family some small satisfaction, for stepping between them in the Kingdome of Portugall. To this Principate belongeth Mirandula, with her Territories, where that learned Scholler Picus Mirandula was borne.

The Principate hath

Archbishop 1.

Maginus.



Bish^ps 3.




THE STATE OF GENOA.
THE STATE OF GENOA was once very great, containing Liguria, or Riuiera di Genoa; Capha with the adjacent Country in Taurica Chersonesus; Pera in Thrace, part of Tuscany; Sardinia, Corsica, Lesbos, and many other Ilands, dispersed in the Greeke Seas. They haue now nothing left but Liguria, and Corsica; Sardinia was taken from them by the Arragonians; Capha, and the Ilands by the Turkes; their land in Tuscany by the great Duke;Hist. of Ven. and their strength at Sea broken by the Venetians. These last they had once in so great an exigent, that the Senate of Venice once sent vnto Peter Doria, Captaine of the Gen^an Navy, a blanke Charter, to prescribe them what conditions he would, and they would gladly accept them. Doria. proud of his advantage, would haue the City of Venice to vse as he best pleased: whereupon the Venetians growne desperat, assaulted the secure Genoys, and took 100 of their Boats and Gallies; after which losse, the men of Genoa still had the worse, and were at last compelled to submit themselues to the protection of the Kings of Naples, then to the French, then to the Dukes of Millaine, and now to the Spanish, as being Lords of Millaine, and most able to help them. While they were vnder the tuition of Millaine, their good Master Lodowicke Sforza, exacted a great masse of mony of them. His Negotiator (as the tale goeth) was invited by a Genoys to dinner, and walking in

the Garden, he shewed the Ambassadour the hearbe Basel. He gently stroking it, smelt thence a sweet sauour; but straining it hardly, as vnsauory a smell; whereon the Genoys in^erred, Sir, if our Lord Duke Lodowicke will gently stroke the hand of his puissance ouer this City, it will be pleasing to him by obedience: but i^ he seek to oppresse it, it may chance to proue vnsavory by rebellion.
Hauing acquainted you thus farre with the ancient State of this Common-wealth: I will next describe vnto you Liguria, which is all now left on the maine land.
Liguria hath on the East the riuer Varus, rising abo^t the edge of Provence; on the West the riuer Magra, by which it is parted from Tuscany; on the North the Appenine; on the South the Ligurian or Tyrrhenian Seas: it is in length 80 miles, not so much in bredth.
Florus.The ancient Inhabitants were the Deceates, Oxilij, En^uriades, and the Ingauni. They were vanquished by the Romans, after the end of the first Punick warres; yet not with much labour and paines; by reason of the woods, marishes, and mountaines, within and behind which, they retired and saued themselues. And indeed it was a matter of more difficulty to find, then conquer them, Aliquanto maior erat labor (saith Florus) invenire, quam vincere. They had diuerse times molested the Romans, till at last Postumius so disweaponed them, that he scarce le^t them instruments to plough the Earth. What the men were, may be known by their exploits aboue named; but now they are rather addicted to merchandice, then warre; but most of all to vsury, a vice which the Christians learned of the Iewes, and are now thought to equal, if not exceed their teachers. It was the sa^ing of a merry fellow, that in Christendome there wee neither schollers inough, Gentlemen inough, nor Iewes inough: and when answer was made, that of all these there was rather too great a plenty, then any scarcity; he repl^ed, that if th^re were schollers inough, so many would not be double or ^eth^e beneficed; if Gentlemen inough, so many Peasant; would not be ranked among the Gentrie; and if Iewes inough, so many Christians would not professe vsury.Hist. of Ita. The women are very faire and

comely, wearing for the most part their haire in tresses, which they c^st ouer their backs; they weare no vpper garments but of cloath, as being only allowed by the Lawes, but their vndergarments of the purest stuffe. The women here are priuiledged aboue all Italy, hauing free leaue to talke with whom they wil, and be courted by any that will, both priuatly and publikely.
The chief Townes are 1 Ceva, 2 Finali 3 Noli. 4 Sarazena, a strong fortresse against the great Duke. 5 Savona, taken Anno 1250.Guicciard. Famous is this Towne for that notable interview here made, between Ferdinand of Spaine, and Lewis the 12th of France, Anno 1507; who hauing bin deadly enemies by reason of the Realme of Naples, taken from Lewis by Ferdinand, at this town, most strangely relied on one anothers faith. Lewis first bording Fernando's Galley, and Fernando for diuers dayes together feasting with Lewis in this Town, which to him then belonged. These interviewes seldome haue hapned among Princes that haue bin at enmity; and when they doe, they proue oft very dangerous. Nay, that notable Statesman Comines, vtterly disliketh all interview between Princes confederate, and intirely louing each other, as many times producing effects contrary to their intents: which he proueth by the example of Lewis the 11th, and He^ry of Castile, who meeting purposely, Ao 1463. took such a dislike at each others person, and behauiour, that they neuer after loued one another. The like examples he bringeth of interviewes, between Frederick the Emperour, and Charles Duke of Burgundie, and our Edward the fourth with the same Charles; together with diuerse others very pregnant. His reasons I omit,Hist. of Ita. and make haste to 7 Genoa, a town built by Ianus, who first dwelt in Italy; afterward burnt by Mago the Carthaginian, and reedified by Charles the Great; vnder whose successours it continued till the Berengarij made it free, Anno 899. Not long after in the Holy land warres, they sent seuen seuerall Armies* and grew so powerfull, that in 3 dayes they sent to Sea 58 Gallies, and 8 Pamphili (being Boats of 140, or 160 Oares on a side) and on another occasion suddenly armed 165 Gallies at once. By this strength they got the better hand diuers times of the Ve^etians, they wonne diuers Ilands; and beat the Pisani

out of Sardinia, Corsica, and the Baleares, compelling them to pay 135000 Crownes for their peace. During this prosperity, they were ruled by a common Councell, without any superiour power: but the people in the yeare 1339, in a seditious tumult, chose one Simon Bocanegra for their Duke; the name of which office is still remaining, but not the authority; the Carkasse, but not the Body: The Duke being at this time new chosen euery yeare, and hauing his authority limited by 8 Gouernours, and 8 Protectours. Now fortune moueth retrograde, and the people fell to priuat factions, first between the Dorij and Spinoli, against the Frischi and Grima^di, 1174. Secondly, the Negri and Mollani, against the Salvatici and Embriaci, 1289. Thirdly the Spinoli and Dorij* 1306. Fourthly, the Nobility and Commons 1339. Those factions and often ouerthrowe; giuen by the Venetians, together with the surprisall of their townes and Ilands by the Turke, so distracted them, that they were glad to submit to the Prince aboue-named. The King of Spaine is now their Protectour, and that not for nought, he being indebted to them a Million and a halfe of gold; which is the remainder of many Millions, cut off by the Popes authority, that so the Kings might be indebted to that See: for most of his Lands were formerly engaged to the Mony-masters of this City. The same course of non-payment, the King took with the rest of his creditors in Florence, A^sburg, and the rest: Insomuch, that it was commonly said in Italy, that the King of Spaine had made more ill faces vpon the Exchange in one day, then Michael Angelo the famous Painter had euer made good in his life.
Hist. of Ita.The Town is in compasse 8 miles, the buildings for the height of two stories, are made of Marble, and curiously wrought, but the lawes forbid Marble to be vsed any higher. There is a very faire and capacious hauen, and wery well fortified, where Shippes may be secure from tempest and other violence: So that the Spaniards say, that were the Catholique K. absolute Lord of Marseiles in Provenoe, and Genoa in Italy, hee might command the whole world. Thus you see this great City which commanded the Ocean, the Lady of so many Ilands, and a great Moderator of the affaires of Italy, saine to put her

selfe into the protection of a forreine Prince; yet is she not so low, but that her publiquo revenue may amount to 430000 Crownes yearely.

The State hathMaginus.

Archbishps 1


Bishops 5.




THE STATE OF LVCA.
THE STATE OF LVCA is situate in Tuscanie,Boterus. it comprehendeth the Territories and Town of Luca, built by Lucumo king of Italy, on the riuer Serch^us; the Town is in compasse 3 miles, the Territories 80 miles; out of which the State can raise 3000 horse,Florus. and 15000 foot. In this town was the meeting of three great Captaines, Pompey, Caesar, and Crassus; so pernicious to the Roman Republicke. For Pompey desirous to retain potencie, Crassus to increase his possessions, and Caesar to get honours, here joyned their forces together. Pompeys powerablenesse, was vpheld by Caesars armies, and Cressus wealth: Caesars armies were assigned him by reason of Pompeyes authority, and Crassus money; Crassus estate was protected by Pompeyes greatnesse, and secured by ^aesars military reputation. This done, they made a division of the Roman Prouinces betwixt them: To Caesar was allotted all Gallia; to Pompey, Spaine; to Crassus, Syria. This confederacie was the cause of the ouerthrow of the Republicke; for Crassus being once sl^ine, Caesar and Pompey wanting a third man to keepe the scale euen, fell presently at oddes, and thence to ciuil warres, whose end made Caesar Lord of Rome. On this meeting, and the succeeding breach was grou^ded that so celebrated speech of Cicero, Vtinam Pompeius cum Caesare s^cietatem aut nunquam co^sset, aut nunquam dirim^sset.
The men of Luca were vnder the Empire, ti^l Rodo^phas sold them their liberty for 10000 Crownes, which was disbursed for them by a Cardinall. Their chief officer or Gonfaloniere, is changeable euery second month; he is assisted by a choice number of Citizens, alterable euery sixth month; during which time they liue all in one Palace together.
The people of this State haue bin tossed from the Genoys, to the Venetian, and from them to the Millainoys and Florentine.

They now inioy a perfect quiet vnder the win^s of Spaine, and of late are growne very rich, so that the publick revenues may be about 80000 Crownes; this long peace hath so blessed the people. Here are only two Bishops.

There are 16 Vniversities in Italy.
Lewknor.1 Rome. Pap.
2 Ferrara. Pap.
3 Perugia. Pap.
4 Macerata Pap.
5 Turme. Peid.
6 Naples. Nap.
7 S^lernum Nap.
8 Venice Ven.
9 Padua Ven.
10 Verona Ven.
11 Florence. Flor.
12 ^^sa. Flor.
13 Siena. Flor.
14 Millain^. Mil.
15 Pauie Mil.
16 Mantua. Mil.

Thus much of Italy.



OF BELGIA.
ON the Northwest of Italy, lieth Germany, which is diuided into the higher, and the lower; this latter is called BELGIA, and Gallia Belgica:Maginus. It is bounded on the East with the Ems, and part of Germany; on the West with the German Sea; on the North with East-Freizeland; and on the South with the Some, Champaigne, and Lorraine.
The names pertaining to the whole Region, are Belgia, from Belgus, once a King of this Country; and also the Low-Countries, and the Netherlands, from their low situation. The more peculiar is Flanders, which though but one of the Prouinces, hath yet for its fame, giuen denomination vnto Belgia; all whose inhabitants were once called Flemmings.
Old Belgia, or Gallia Belgicae, was of more large extent by farre, than it now is, as containing the Dukedomes of Lorrei^e, Cleue, and Iuliers; the Bishopricks of Collen, Mentz, and Triers, with all that part of France beyond the riuer Seine. The Belg^ were or^ginally Germans, who driuing out the Gaules, here planted themselues. They were by Caesar accounted to be the valiantest of the French Nation, and that for three causes. First, they were the farthest from Provence, where the Roman ciuility, and more affable course of life was embraced. 2ly, They dwelt on a Sea, not then frequented by Merchants; and so wanted those allurements to effeminacie, which are in Countries of

traffique. And 3ly they bord^red on the Germans, a wa^like nation, with whom they were continually in armes. This people seeing the prosperous successe of Caesars victories in Gaule, joyned together in a common league; and minist^ed an army of 269000 fighting men against him. But seeing they could not draw him out of his sortresse, they retired againe; but in such disorder, that three Legions (for no more was Caesars army) put them to an infinite slaughter. After this, Caesar fighting against them seuerally, ouercame them all.
Belgia, or the Netherlands, is in compasse 1000 miles, situate in the North temperat zone, vnder the 8^h and 11th Climats, the longest day being 17 houres.Guicciard. The Aire in these latter dayes, is growne much more wholesome then formerly it hath beene, partly by the wonderfull increase of the Inhabitants; and partly by the industry of the people; who by drawing the marishes, and converting the standing waters, or channels, into running streames, haue purged the Aire of many grosse vapours, thence vsually arising.
The Country is very populous, containing well nigh 3 millions of soules; the men being for the most part well proportioned, much giuen to our English Bee^e, vnmindfull both of good turnes, and injuries: they did invent Clocks, Printing, and the Compasse. They restored Musick, and found out diuers musicall instruments. To them also belong the invention of Chariots; the laying of colours with oyle; the working of pictures in glasse: and the making of Worsted, Sayes, Tapestrie, etc. The women generally are of a good complexion, wel proportioned, especially in the leg and foot; honourers of vertue, actiue, and familiar, Both within doores, and without, they gouerne all; which considering the naturall desire of women to beare rule, maketh them too imperious and burdensome.
They vse the German or Dutch tongue, with a little difference in Dialect; and in some places adjoyning to France, they haue a little smattering of that language.
The Country lieth exceeding low vpon the Seas, insomuch, that it is much subiect to inundations. In the time of Henry the 2d, Flanders was so ouerflowne, that many thousands of people,

whose dwellings the Sea had deuoured, came into England to beg new seates; and were by that King first placed in Yorkeshire, and then remoued to Pembrookeshire.Guicciard. Since that, it hath in Zealand swallowed eight of the Ilands, and in them 300 towns and villages; many of whose Churches and strong buildings, are at a dead low water to be seen; and as Ouid hath it, of Helice and Buris, cities of Achaia*

Invenies sub aquis; and adhuc ostendere nautae
Inclinata s^lent cum moenibus oppida versir.
The water hides them, and the shipmen shew
The ruin'd walls, and steeples as they row.

The Commodities with which they most abound, are Li^nens, Scarlet, Worsted, Saies, Silkes, Veluets, and the like s^^ffes; Armour, Cables, Ropes, Butter, Cheese.
Famous Captaines here haue not bin many, the people till these our dayes, liuing in perpetuall peace; the chiefe of such as haue beene, were William Earle of Holland, chosen also Emperour of Germany; Baldwin Earle of Flanders, Emperour of Greece, and in these latter dayes the Princes of the house of Nassaw.
Schollers it hath bred many, as Iustus Lipsius, Erasmus, that great restorer of Learning in these parts; G^mma Frisias, R^dolphus Agricola, I^nus Douza, Putean, Levi^us Lemnius, Ortelius, Mercator, etc.
Cam^en.The Christian Religion was planted in seueral Prouinces, by seuerall men; in Holland, Zealand, and Freizland, by Willbr^d an Englishman, the first Bishop of Vtrecht. They are at this present, diuided in opinion; the States allow free exercise only of the Reformed; the Archduke only of the Romish Religio^; which hath beene the cause of all the warres in these Countreyes.
Sr W. Ral.The Revenew, before the Spaniard made warre vpon them, was three Millions of Crownes: and indeed this town was the correlatiue of the Indies; the losse of which, hath cost the King of Spaine aboue 100 Millions of Gold, and 400000 men.
Hist. of Netherl.The chief Riuers are 1 Rhene, into which the old Belgi did vse to cast the children, which they suspected to be illegitimate: for were they borne of a lawfull bed, they floated on the waters;

if of an vnlawfull, they sanke immediatly. Whereunto Claudian alluding, saith, Nascentes explorat gurgite Rhenus. But that great searcher of Antiquities, V^rstegan, is of opinion, that they hereby inured onely their Children to hardnes, and made ^^yall of their strength, adultery being rarely found among them: and so these kindes of experiments needlesse. 2 Mosa, which doth compasse halfe the Countrey. 3 Ems, diuiding the two Freizlands. 4 Scaldis, which arising in Picardie, and running through Artoys, and between Haynault, and Brabant, meeteth with the se^ a little aboue Antwerpe: and 5 Lie, or Ley, which runneth quite through Flanders.
The shore of this Country hath bin much out-worne by the Sea,L. Guicciar. especially that of the Ilands of Zeal^nd, and such as lie scattred about Holland, where they are defended with banks and ramparts painfully made, and chargeably maintained. These banks are about ten ells in height, and 25 in bredth at the bottome: they are made of the hardest clay that may be gotten; in the inside stuffed with wood and stone; on the outside couered with matts, strong and thick made.
The former inhabitants were diuers, as shall be shewed in their diuers Prouinces, they are at this present diuided into 17 Prouinces.
Viz: into
4 Dukedomes
1 Limburg.2 Luxenburg.3 Gelderland.4 Brabant.1 Marquisate: viz. of the holy Emp^re.7 Earledomes
1 Flanders.2 Artoys.3 Hainault.4 Namurce.5 Zutphen.6 Holland.7 Zealand.5 Baronies
1 West-Freizland.2 Vtrecht.3 Overyss^ll,4 Machlyn.5 Groyning.

1. LIMBOVRG.
The Dutchie of LIMBOVRG, and the Bishopricke of LEIGE, or LVYCKE, are environed with Brabant, and Namurce, West: with Brabant and Gulicke, North: with Gulicke and Collen, East: and with Luxenbourg, South. The Westerne part belongeth to the Bishop, which comprehendeth 24 walled

townes, and 1800 Villages, with Parish Churches. The Bishop is a Prince of the Empire, D. of Bouillon, Marquesse of Franchimont, Earle of Hasbani; and hath vnder him 52 Baronies of note. He is chosen by the Chapter of S. Lambert, which is the chiefe Church in Leige, or Luyck, the chiefe towne seated on the Meuse. The buildings of this town are very faire, especially the Monasteries and Abbeyes; for which cause it is called the Paradise of Priests. This town next to Gaunt, hath bin accompted the most seditious Town of Europe, and was twice taken, and once destroyed by Charles of Burgundie, 1468. It is an Vniuersity, in which were students at one time, nine kings sonnes; 24 Dukes sonnes, ^9 Earles sonnes, besides Barons and Gentlmen. 2 Tongres a town now of no great bignesse; yet once so large, that Atti^a king of the Hunnes, destroyed in it 100 Churches. 3 Dinand, hard vpon Namur, destroyde by Charles of Burgundie. 4 Huy. 5 Bi^sen. 6 Truden. This Bishoprick was erected by Pope Constantine, Anno 710.
The Easterne part is properly called the Dutchie of Limbourg: It containeth 5 Townes, viz: Limbourg on the riuer Weser. 2 Walkembourg, conquered by Iohn D. of Brabant. 3 Dalem strengthened with a castell. 4 Rode le Buck; 5 Carpen, seated between Gulick and Collen, and 123 Villages. It is said of this Country, that the bread is better then bread, the fire hotter then fire, and the Iron harder then Iron.
The Ancients were the Eburones.
This Prouince of an Earledome, was made a Dukedome by the Emperour Fred. Barbarossa; 1172: and being destitute of heires males, was seized on by the Brabantine, 1293.
The Armes are Argent, a Lyon Barrie, of 10 peeces, O, and G.


Earn.2. LVXENBOVRG.
LVXENBOVRG is bounded with Lembourg on the North; Lorraine on the South; the Bishoprick of Triers on the East; and the Meuse on the West. It is in circuit 240 miles, in which are contained 1169 Villages,L. Guicci^r. and 23 walled Townes: the chief being Luxenbourg on the riuer Alsnuius, or Elze: It took name, either quasi Leucorum burgum, from the Leuci being the first inhabitants: or quasi Lucis burgum, because the

Sunne was here adored. It is nor yet recouered of the lasting warres between the French and Spaniards, brought vnto her. 2 Bostonack^ a faire town, and commonly called the Paris of Ardenne For this Prou^nce is diuided into two parts, viz; Ardenne being on the West, and Fannene on the East quarters. 3 Thio^ vitae, taken and spoiled by the French, 1558, 4 Mommedi, and 5 Danvillers, ransacked by the French, 1552. 6 Neufe ch^^^l. 8 Rocke de Marche: and 9 Arluna, whose name quasi Ara lu^ae, importeth the Moone to haue bin here worshipped. The Ancients were the Leuci and Lingones; the language towards Lo^reine, French: in other parts Dutch.
Here is the Forrest Ardenna, once 500 miles compasse, now scarce 90 miles round, of which so many fabulous stories are reported. In this Forrest, or about the edges thereof, are the famous hot Baths, frequented from all the places of Europe, and called the Spa, not so pleasant as wholsome, not so wholesome as famous: Yet are they good for sundry d^seases, as the Tertian Ague, and Dropsie, the Stone, the exulceration of the lungs, the Sci^tique, etc. They are of most vertue in Iuly, because they are then hottest; and to such as taste them, they rellish much of iron; from some iron mines, it seemeth, through which the waters runne.
In the skirts of this Countrey, towards France, standeth the Dutchy of Bovillon; the Prince whereof is of the French Nobility and a great assistant to the Protestants: his chief Towns are Sedan and Bouillon. Of these, Bouillon is in the ha^ds of the Bishop of Leige; to who^ Godfrey of Bouillon, at his journey into the Holy land, sold it. It hath since that time, bin sometimes in the possessio^s of the Bishops, somtimes of the Dukes. Sedan the Dukes seat, is a fine town, and honoured with a seat of Learning, which is a Schola illustris; to which diuerse resort to study, but cannot take any degrees: so that I thinke this and the like places of study, are not much vnlike the two famous collegiat Schooles of Winchester, and Eaton with vs; the greatest difference being, that in these last named, learning is more restrained to particularities, then in the other. Tilenus, before his fall from the true Church, was Professour of Diuinity here: and here Berchat

the Scholiast on Stephanus Catechisme, taught Greeke.
Luxenbourg was formerly an Earledome, two of whose Earles were famous,Munster. viz: Henry the 7th, who was poysoned by a Frier, in the Chalice; and Iohn, who was by the States chosen King of Bohemia. His successours joyntly ruled in both Provinces, the space of 130 yeares: during which time, Luxenbourg was made a Dutchy, by the Emperour Wenceslaus. This mans brother Sigismund, sold it to Antony Duke of Brabant, in respect of a marriage betweene the said Antony, and Elizabeth daughter to Iohn D. of Gorlits, younger brother to this Sigismund. After the death of Duke Antony and his wife, this Dukedome sell to Philip the Good; the Dukes elder brother, and heire.
Barae,The Armes B, six Barrulets A, supporting a Lyon G, crowned and armed O.


3. GELDERLAND.
GELDERLAND (so called from Geldabum, once the metropolis) hath on the East Cleue, on the West Brabant, on the North Freizland, on the South Limbourg. It containeth 300 Villages,L. Guicciar. and 24 Townes, the chiefe being Noviomagum, or Nanmegon, once a free Citty; and subdued by the Geldroys, 1248 It is seated on that branch of the Rhene, which is called the Whaell; and was by Charles the great made one of the seats of the Empire in these parts; the other two being Aken, and Thinovill. The homage which it owes to the Empire, whereof it was a free towne; is only a gloue of peper, which once in the yeare they must send to Aken. 2 Ruermond, so called of the river Ruer, and Monde, which signifieth a mouth. 3 Arhnem, which was wont to be the residence of the Gu^lderland Dukes. 4. Harderwicke, which together with the two former, was walled by Otho the third Earle. 5 Doesbourg. 6 Buren an Earledome; one of the Earles whereof was the Count Egmond, who being opposite to the Prince of Oranges counsell, about resisting the Duke of Alva's entrance; was the first which by the said Duke was betrayed, and beheaded. Philip of Nassaw, the elder brother of Prince Maurice, was during his life Earle of Bur^n, in right of his mother; who was heire vnto Maximilian de Egmond

Earle hereof.
This Country is sit for feeding Beasts: which grow so great and fat; that Anno 1570, there was a Gelderland Bull killed at Antwerpe, which weighed 3200 pounds.
The Ancients were the Menapij and the Sicambri.
The Countrey was gouerned by Lords, till the yeare 1079; Munster. in which, Lord Otho was made Earle: and Anno 1339, Earle Remald, was by the Emperour Lodovicus Bavarus made Duke. It was sold by Duke Arnald, to Charles Duke of Burgundy for 92000 Florens, and an annuall pension, 1472. Notwithstanding this compact, Adolph that wicked Prince, his sonne succeeded, and him his sonne Charles: after whose death, Charles the 5th possessed himselfe of Gueldres, and Zutphen, Anno 1543.
The Armes are B, a Lyon O, crowned G.


4. BRABANT.
BRABANT (quasi Brachland, id est, a barren soyle) hath on the East,Guicciard. North, and South, the Meuse; on the West the Schald. It is in length 75, in breadth 60 miles; comprehending 700 Villages, and 26 Townes: the chiefe being Lovaine, where is an Vniversity, erected by Duke Iohn the 4th, Anno 1426: here is also a Seminary of English Iesuits. It is in compasse within the walls, foure miles; and 6 without: within which compasse are many goodly Gardens, Valleyes, Mountaines, Meddowes, etc. This is the mother towne of Brabant, and the first which receaveth and giueth oath to their new Lord. In this Vniversitie are about 20 Colleges. 2 Bruxels, the Dukes seat, a towne of the same bignesse with Lovaine; but for all commodities of pleasure, and profit; as also for the vniformenes and elegancy of the building, farre beyond it. 3 Bergen ap Some, famous for the notable resistance it made to Spinola 1622. 4 Boldue. 5 Tilmont. 6 Mastricht, a Bishops See, till the remoouall to Leige; here are two Churches of Canons, in one of which the Duke of Brabant is alwaies a Canon. It is subiect partly to the Duke of Brabant, and partly to the Bishop of Leige, in whose country it standeth. The children are subiect to that Prince alwaies, to whom their mother was subiect, without relation to the fathers subiection* and when a stranger commeth to dwell there, he may liue vnder

which of them he list. 7 Breda, the seat of the Princes of Orange till the last wars. It was taken from the Spaniard by a few venterous Gentlemen, who hiding themselues in a boat couered with Turfe, were conveyed into the Castle, which they ma^^^^d: and the next day made the Prince of Orange Lord of it againe. The people here of are none of the wisest, especially when they incline towards age; hence that saying of Erasmus, Brabanti qu^ magis senescunt, eo magis stultescunt.


5. THE MARQVISATE.
Ortelius.THE MARQVISATE of the holy Empire, is contained in Brabant. The chiefe Towne is Antwerpe, being of an orbicular forme, and in circuit 7 miles. It was before the civill warres a Towne of infinite trading; the things bought and sold here, amounting to more in one month; then that of Venice in 2 yeares. But now the Hollanders haue so blocked vp the Hauen, that the trafficke is remoued hence to Amsterdam. In th^s Antwerp there are 8 principall Channels cut out of the Schelde, on which the Towne is seated;Guicciard. the biggest of them being able to receaue 100 great ships. The causes of the great increase of this towne were three: 1 Two Marts holden here euery yeare, either of them during 6 weekes; in which space no man can either in his person, or his goods, be arrested. 2ly, The King of Portugall hauing in the yeare 1503, diuerted the course of traffique from Alexandria and Venice, to Lisbon: kept here his Factor, and sent hither his spice; for which cause, Anno 1516, many Merchants left Bruges, and dwelt here. 3ly, In the warres betweene the French, and Charles the fift, many Gentlemen and others forsooke the Villages, and built here; so that Antwerpe is since that time bigger then it was, by aboue 3000 houses.
These two Provinces were vnited to Lorreine till the dates of Otho the 3d:Munster. who gaue the Dukedome of Brabant to one Conrade, 985, The Marquisate was by the same Otho erected, for the dowre of his aunt Gerberge, mother to Lotharius King of France. How they became vnited, I haue not yet learned. In the yeare 1385, died Iohn D. of Brabant, leauing his estate to his eldest daughter Iane; who dying without issue, gaue this Dutchie to Antony, who was second son of Philip Duke of Burgundie

and to Margaret; danghter vnto Margaret her younger sister. After this Antony, succeeded his two sonnes Iohn and Philip; who quickly dying left their estate to Philip the Good, Duke of Burgundie.
The Armes of Brabant are Sable a Lyon Or.Bara.


6. FLANDERS.
FLANDERS, so called a Flando, because it lyeth open to the w^ndes, is divided into Imperialem, Gallicam, and Teutonicam. This last is seuered from the other two,L. Guicciar. by the riuer Ley, or Lis. The chiefe townes are Gaunt or Gandavum, whose wall is 7 miles in compasse; within which is much wast ground. The ^i^ers Schald and Ley runne through it, and make in it 26 Ilands, ioyned together with 98 Bridges: and had not her often seditious, ruinated her beauties, she might haue been Queene of Europe. In this Towne was borne Iohn Duke of Lancaster, vsually called Iohn of Gaunt. 2 Burgis, or Brugg, once a famous Mart Towne; but now not a litle decayed, by reason that the seat of traffique was remoued hence to Antwerpe. It was walled by Earle, Baldwin, Ao 890: it is distant 3 leagues from the Sea; and is seated on a faire and deepe Channell, made by art; and filled with the waters of all the adioyning fountaines and riuerets. These artificiall Channels are in these Countries very frequent, to the great inriching of the whole state. 3 Ypres, a towne seated very str^n^ly, and almost impregnable, It standeth on a small river so named. 4 Winnocks Berge,, so called of Winno^ an Englishman, of holy and pure life. 5 Graueling on the sea side, which since the taking of Callais by the French, hath beene made the strongest sort of the Low Countries. 6 Oudenard, the birthplace of Margaret Dutches of Parma, the gouernesse here for King Ph^l^^* and mother to that excellent Souldier, Alexander Farnesis. The some principall ports of Flanders* are 1 Dunkerke, the people of which in the late warres, so in^ested the Seas. 2 Scluse (...) the mo^th of the Channell of Bruges. It hath a very fai^^h ^en able to containe 500 good ships; and is now subiect to the States: with whose wellfare it cannot stand, to suffer the King of ^paine, to inioy any safe and large harbour in those Seas. ^ Newport, neer vnto which was fought a field battail between

Archduke Albertus,Hist. of the N^therl. and the States. The victory, next vnder God, was gotten by the prudent conduct of the Veres, and valour of the English. 4 Ostend, which held against the Archduke a siege of three yeares, and as many months.
Emperiall Flanders, so called, becuase it was long vnder the obedience of the Emperours;Guicciard. is seuered from Brabant, by the riuer Dender, from the Gallicke Flanders, by the riuer Schelde, about Oudenarde. The chiefe Townes are, 1 Alost, on the Dender. 2 Dendermond, at the mouth of the said river. 3 Hulst. 4 Axele. and 5 Rupelmond, the birthplace of Mercator, that excellent Cosmographer.
Gall^cke Flanders, so called, because it is properly belonging to France, whose language is still here vsed; is seuered from the Teutonicke Flanders, by the riuer Leye; and from the Emperiall, by the Schelde, about Oudenard. The chiefe Townes are Lisle, or Ryssell, the third towne of traffique in all the Netherlands. 2 Doway an Vniversity. 3 Orchies. 4 Armentiers. 5 St Amand. and 6 Turnay, or Dornicke, on the Schaldis; taken by our Henry the 8, 1513: to whom the Cittizens paid 100000 Duckats for their ransome. It was restored to the French for 600000 Crownes; and from him againe taken by Charles the fift.
There are in all Flanders 35 Townes, and 1178 Villages. The country is in length 96 miles, in breadth much lesse; it is bounded with Brabant on the East; Picardy on the West; the Sea on the North; Artoys on the South.
Munster.The ancient inhabitants were the Morini and Rutheni. The first Earle was Baldwin, promoted to that dignity by Charles the Bald, Anno 863. It is accounted the prime Earledome, as Millaine is the prime Dukedome of Europe. The Earle among other prerogatiues, writeth himselfe Comes Dei gratia; others only Dei Clementia. The same of this Countrey hath beene so great, that it hath beene vsed for all Belgia; It was vnited to the house of Burgundie, by the marriage of Duke Philip the hardy, to Margaret daughter to Lewis de Malaine,Paradine. Earle of Flanders Anno 1383. The Armes are Or, a Lyon Sable, langued and armed Gules.



7. ARTOYS.
ARTOYS hath on the East, Hainalt; on the West, Picardy; on the North,Guicciard. Flanders; on the South, Champaigne. The ancients were the Attrebati It containeth 754 Villages, and 12 townes; the chief^ being Attreb^tium, or Arras, whence come our cloathes of Arras. 2 Ayre. 3 Pernes. 4 St Omer, a good hauen. 5 Lilliers. and 6 Le cluse. The chiefe of the frontire townes, betweene this and Picardie, are 1 Hedinfert, a very defensible towne, built by Charles the Emperour out of the ruines of old Hed^^,Comines. which towne he had razed, Anno 1553, when he tooke it from the French. 2 Rentie. On the West part of Artoys is St Paul, whereof Lewis of Luxenbourg was Earle in the daies of Lewis the 11th: with whom, as also with Charles of Burgundie, and Edward of England, he plaied such crosse tricks; that hauing seuerally deluded them all, and kept them as well in continuall stri^e with each other, as an vnseasonable suspicion of his vntowardly plots; he was at last by D. Charles taken, and beheaded.
The first Earle of Artoys,Paradine. was Robert sonne to Lewis the 8h of France, Anno 1234. It was vnited to the house of Burgundy, by marriage of Duke Philip, and Bonne daughter to Philip of Artoys, 1424.
The Armes are Azure, Semi di flower de ly^^s Or, a file with three Labells Gules, charged with as many Castles of the second.


8. HAINALT.
HAINALT, so called from the riuer Hania,Maginus. hath on the East, Limbourg; on the West, Flanders; on the North Braban^; on the South Champaigne: It was formerly called Saltus Carbonatius, and the lower Picardie.Grimston. The length of it is 60 miles, and 48 the breadth; in which space are 950 Villages, and 24 townes: The chiefe being 1 Mons, strong, ancient, and rich. 2 Valenciennes so seated on the Scheld, that it cannot bee besieged, but with three Armies at once. 3 Cond^. 4 That old towne Bavays, at a pillar whereof beginne all the waies leading into France, made of paued stone by Brunhault the French Queene; who together with Fredegond, and Katherine de Medices, may bee called the three Furies of France. 5 Landrecy, on the riuer Sambre, famous for the great resistance it made to Charles the fift, Ano.

15^^. 6 Mariembourg, built by Mary Queene of Hurgarie, Go^ernesse h^^e for her brother Charles, 1542. 7 Engien. ^ Re^^x. 9 Avennes on the borders toward Champaigne; about w^ich are d^gged excellent white stones for building, and little i (...) to marble. On the South part of Hainault is the town and territory of Cambray. This towne was by the Emperours made free and Imperiall: but by the French who pretended title to it, diuers times possessed. In the time of Lewis the 11th, it submitted it selfe voluntarily to Maximilian, afterwards Emperour: whose Nephew Charles, hath fortified it with a strong cittadell: pretending their safety, but indeed to keepe it from revolt^ng. The people notwithstanding retaine their ancient ^^^edome, and priuiledges.
Hainalt was vnited to Flanders, Anno 1110; by marriage of Earle Baldwin, and Margaret Countesse of Flanders: and d^sioyned by Iohn called Avenion, who tooke it from his brothers Gu^do and William. This Iohn married Atheilda, daughter and heire to Floris, the 4th of Holland, Anno 1300: From which co^iunction issued Iohn Earle of Holland and Hainalt.
Bara.The Armes are quarterly Flanders, and Holland.


9. NAMVRCE
L. Guice.NAMVRCE hath on the East Limbourg; on the West, Hainalt; on the North Brabant; on the South, Luxenbourg. This Countrey hath great store of Coales, contrary to the common nature of Coales, in that they are kindled with water, and quenched with Oyle. It containeth about 180 Villages, and foure Townes: viz: 1 Namurce, seated where Sicambris payeth his Tribute to Meuse. 2 Charlemont. 3 Valencourt. 4 Bovires. The men of this countrey are good Souldiers and very affectionate to their Prince. The countrey very fruitfull of all sorts of graine; enriched with mines of I sper, and all sorts of marble: But in iron so ^bundant, that Vulcans forge may seeme to be restored againe to the world, and seated in this Prouince. All these commodities make the people as laborious, as wealthy. The principall Villages are Floren, and Deue.
Munster.This Fa^ledome was vnited to the house of Burgundie, Ano 1429, in which Earle Iohn sold it to Philip the Good.
The Armes are Or,Bara, a Lyon Sable, debrused with a bend Gules.


10. ZVTPHEN.
ZVTPHEN is a Towne in Gelderland, which long hath beene an Earledome:Hist. of Ne. It is seated on the riuer Yssell, and is a towne of very great strength; in the siege of which was slaine that honour of Chivalrie, and mirrour of learning, gallant St Philip Sidney, of whom our Brittish Epigrammatist thus versifieth.

D^gna legi scribis* facis and dignissima scribi:
Scripta probant doctum te tua; facta, probum.
Thou writ'st things worthy reading, and dost doe
Things that are even most worthy writing too:
Thy workes thy learning praise,
Thy deeds thy goodnesse raise.

This Towne was recouered from the Spaniard, Anno 1590, The Armes are Azure a Lyon Gules.


11 HOLLAND.
HOLLAND,Ortelius. quasi Hot-land, id est, a woody Country, hath on the East* Vt echt^on the West, and North, the Sea, on the South the Meuse. It is in cir^uit 180 miles, no part of which is distant fr^m the Sea, th^^e houres iourney. It comprehendeth 400 Vill^ges, and 23 Townes: the chiefe being 1 Dordrect or Do^t where An^ 1618, was held a nationall Synode against the Arminians. ^ Har^em, where printing was invented, and Tullies book^ de O^^i^ijs, was the first that ever was printed. 3 Le^den, or Lugdu^^^ Ba^avorum, an Vniversity, founded Anno 1564. The Towne co^sisteth of 41 Ilands, to which they pas^e partly by bo^ts* pa^^ly by bridges; whereof there are 145, and of them 1^4 build^d with stone. Here is in this towne a Castle said to ha^e b^ene buil^ed by Hengist the Saxon, at his returne out of E^gland. 4 De^it, the birthplace of that monstrous Heretique Daui^ George who c^lled himselfe King, and Christ immortall. (...) with hi^ w^^e and children Anno 1544. to Basil; there he set vp his doctrine: the points whereof were, that the Law and the (...) were vnprofitable for the attaining of heauen; but his do^^^ine able to saue such as receaued it. 2ly, That hee was the true Christ and Messias. 3ly, That he had beene till that

present, kept in a place vnknown to all the Saints. And 4ly, that he vvas not to restore the house of Israel by death or tribulation, but by the loue and grace of the spirit. He died in the yeare 1556; and three yeares after, his doctrine was by them of Basil condemned; his goods confiscate, and his bones taken vp and burned. He bound his Disciples to three things, first to conceal his name: 2ly, not to reveale of what condition he had beene: and 3ly, not to discouer the articles of his doctrine to any man in Basil. 5 Alkmer, famous for the defeat which the D. of Alva, receaued before it. For he in the beginning of the Low country troubles, hauing with the losse of 20000 of his owne men, forced Ha^lem; laid his siege round about this town. Had he le^t any way for his Souldiers to haue fled thence, the towne had bin abandoned; but hauing environed them round, he put them to such a resolution, or desperation, choose you whether; that manfully they resisted 3 of his assaults; and in the end made him depart, with great losse, as well of his Souldiers, as his reputation. 7 Roterodam, where Erasmus was borne. 8 Horne. 9 Ench^sen. 10 Amsterdam, a very faire hauen Towne, out of which I haue s^ene, saith Gainsford, at one tide, 1000 ships of all sorts vse to goe out and in: so truely saith one,
Quod Tagus, atque Haemus veh^t, and Pactolus; in vnumVer^ hunc congestum dixeris esse locum.What Tagus, Haemus, and Pactolus, beare:You would coniecture to be heap'd vp here.
The present inhabitants are generally giuen to S^afa^ing lines: So that it is thought that in Holland, Zeland and Friezland, are 2500 good ships fit for burden, and warre. The women are all laborious in making stuffes; nay you can scarce finde a boy of 4 yeares of age, which cannot earne his own meat. The greatest commodity is Butter and Cheese: of which, besides that which they vse themselues; they make 100000l yearely of that which they sell to their neighbours. By these meanes they are growne so potent a^d rich, that as Flanders hereto^ore; so now Holland is taken generally for all the Provinces, I meane the Vnited.
One miraculous accident I cannot ouerpass^ in silence namely how Margaret sister to Earle Floris the fourth, being of the

age of 42 yeares brought forth at one birth 365 children; halfe of them being Males, halfe Females, and the odde one an Her^^^ (...). They were Christned in two Basons at the church (...), by Guido suffragan to the Bishop of Vtr^cht; who (...) de M^les Ioha^ the Females Elizabeths; both all which (...) after died, and with them their mother. The Basons (...) in the foresaid Church.
(...) of the Holland Villages is the Hage, or Graven (...) the generall Councell resideth. It containeth in it (...). The inhabitants will not wall it, as desiring (...) the principall Village in Europe, the^ (...). The other Villages of note are 1 Egmond. 2 Bre^^^ (...), which giue name to three excellent and (...). Neere vnto this last Village was the fort called (...), built by C. Caligula, in memory of his famous (...) on this shore. For intending a voyage into Britanie, to (...) that nation; he borded his Galley, embattail'd his souldiers, (...) the Trumpets to sound, gaue them the signall, and (...) them to gather cockles. This Tow^^ was at (...) R^man^ Emp^te ouerwhelm'd by the sea; the ru^^^ (...) ^t a dead h^w water, are yet to be seene.
Th^ old inhabitants were the Batavi.Bara. The Armes O a Ly^^^.


12. ZELAND.
(...), quasi Sea and Land, consisteth of 7 Islands, the (...) 1^,Ortelius. which the Sea hath swallowed; and in them (...) Townes. The seauen are, 1 Walcheren, whose (...) M^dlsbourg, built, as they say, by Prince Ze(...) whom this Province was named) in honour of his (...), and called Metell^ Burgum. 2 Flushing (...) good p^rt* and inum^^ble str^ngta: this Towne (...) to the English, her first Gouernour being wor^^^ (...) also was the first towne which the (...) tooke from the Spaniard; the agents being Vo^^^ (...), and M^di Berland the Bayly thereof. A poore (...) it was, peopled for the most part with Fishers: but (...) the key of the Netherlands, without whose licence, no

ship can passe to or from Antwerp. Had Duke Alva at the beginning of his gouernment, bestowed that care in fortifying this towne, which he did in strengthning Antwerp; he had in all probability, hindred the generall revolt of these cou^tries. Nigh to this Towne is the fort Ramkins, once cautionary to the English, together with the Brill, the chiefe towne in the Ile of Voo^ne which is situate ouer against the South of Holland; and commandeth all that passage downe to Gertrudenberg, in Brabant. These townes were taken from the Spaniard, Ao 1572; assigned to Queen Elizabeth Ao 1585; and surrendred by King Iames to the States, 1616. 3 Vere, or Canfer^, whence our English Veres tooke their denomination: no maruell then is it, if so willingly they venture their liues for the defence of this Countrey, she being in a manner their Grandmother The second is South Beuerland, whose chiefe towne is Tergows^. The third is Schoven, whose Metropolis is Sirexee; the next being Breuers Haven. The fourth is T^len, whose chiefe towne is Tertolen. The other three are North Beverland, Duveland, and Wolfersdike. In all this Countrey are eight Citties, 102 Villages. The soyle is farre more fruitfull then any of Brabant; but they haue neither wood, nor fresh water.
The Armes are Or, a Lyon Gules, ^ising out of a Sea wauie, Argent and Azure.


13 WEST-FREIZLAND.
Ortelius.WEST-FREIZLAND, hath on the East, Groyning; on the South, Overyssell; on the other sides the Sea. It containeth 345 Villages, and 11 Townes: the chief being Lewarden, where the common councell for the Province is kept. 2 Harlingem a Sea Towne. 3 Zwichen. 4 Doceum, where Gemma Frisius was borne*L. Gui^ciar. and 5 Franeker, a new Vniuersitie. Neere vnto this Province is the Ile Schelinke, the shoares whereof are plentifully stored with Dog-fish, who are taken in this manner. The men of the Iland attire themselues in beasts skinnes, and then fall a dancing and leaping; with which sport the fish being delighted, make out of the water toward them. When they haue left the water, there are nets pitched betweene it and them; which done, the men put off their disguizes, and the frighted Fishes hasting

toward the sea, are caught in the toyles.
This Country had once its proprietary Kings, the last of which was Roboald, vanquished by Charlemaigne, and the countrey was made a member of the French Empire. Roboald during his captiuitie, was persuaded to be baptized, but being ready to be sprinkled with the holy water, he demanded where were his friends, and kinsfolkes; answere was made that they were in h^^ because no Christians; neither then will I, quoth hee, for I loue to be among my friends.
The first Earle of Holland,Hist. of Net Zeland, and West-Freizland, was Thierrie of Aquitaine, preferred to that dignity by Charles the bald, An^ 863. It was vnited to the house of Burgundy, in the person of D. Philip the good, sonne vnto Margaret, daughter to Albertu^ of Bavaria, Earle of Holland: which Philip succeeded Countesse Iaqueline, who died without issue, being daughter and heire to William, the brother of the forenamed Margaret, Anno 1433.
The Armes of this Freizland are Azure,Bara. semi of billets Argent, two Lions Or.


14 VTRECHT. 15 OVERYSSELL.
VTRECHT and her Diocesse was once part of Holland*Gul^ciard. but now a distinct Prouince. It is bounded on the East with Gelderland; on the North, South, and West, with Holland. It containeth 70 Villages, and 5 Townes, viz: 1 Rhenen. 2 Wick te Duerstede, on the South West side of the Prouince. 3 Amesfort iust opposite to it, on the North. 4 Montscort on the Southwest; and 5 Vtrecht iust in the midst. It was first called Antonins, of one of the Antonines of Rome; afterward by Dagobert of France, Traiectum, because of the common ferrie there. It is so seated, that a man may goe from hence in one day, to any one of 50 walled Townes equally from this distant: or to any of 26 Townes to dinner, and returne againe to bed. To her spirituall Iurisdiction belongeth the country beyond Yssell, now called OVERYSSELL or Transisulana. It is bounded on the North with Freizland and Groyning; on the South with Gelderland; on the East with Westphalia; on the West, with the Sea: containing 101 Villages, and 11 Townes; the chiefe of which are

1 Swall 2 Campene. 3 Deuentor, taken by Robert Dudley Earle of Leicester for the States, and villanously reyeelded to the Spaniard by S^ William Stanley: b^ regained not long after, 15^0. 4 (...) 5 (...) Old (...) Hard^mb^rge. 8 (...).
These two Provinces were (...) the (...) the Bishop of Vtrecht.Munster. The first was (...) of Bavaria; who being ^xpell'd by the Citizens (...) and the Duke of (...): resigned his iurisdiction to (...) fift, who entred into it as the first temporall Lo^^, 1, 2 (...) and for the better administration of iustice, diuided (...) Lordsh^ps.


16 MACHLYN.
Ortelius.MACHLYN is a Towne in Brabant, which (...)nish invasion, was honoured with the Parliament, (...) States. It was much defaced by firing of 800 (...) powder, Anno 1546: and by yeelding to the Spania^d, (...) It containeth besides this Towne, nine Villages; (...) followed the fortune of Brabant,L. Guicciar. though it inioy not the p^^^^^ledges: for which cause many women at the time of (...) birth, goe to be deliuered in Brabant, that their (...) capeable of the immunities of that countrie. This is a (...) strong Towre, and so daintily seated amidst the waters of the riuer Dele, that it may on all sides be drowned. Here (...)stery wherein are sometimes 1600 Nunnes, who m^y (...) pleasure leaue the Cloyster, and ma^ry.


17 GROYNING.
GROYNING is a Towne of Well-Fr^ezland, contain^ng vnder her command 145 Villages, the chiefe being (...), and Ke^kerke.Aurie^us. The towne is so called from a gree^e in (...) standeth. It belonged formerly to the Dukes of (...) whom it was wrested by the Earle of East-Freizland (...) able to defend his vniust detention, sold it to Cha^les (...) Gue^dres 1514: and in the yeare following it (...) Charles the fift, ^o whom George Duke of Saxonie (...) all his interest. This Towne and her ter^^tory (which (...) the Ommelands) was oue^-awed by the Duke of Par^^, 15^0, and was recouered by the States in lesse then two mo^^^ 1594.

The territories of this Prouince are bounded on the East,Guicciard. with East-Freizland; on the West, with West-Freizland; on the south with Overyssell; on the North, with the Sea.
By the severall meanes before recited, these seuerall Prouinces came vnder the command of one Prince; who would haue made is a kingdome, had not the diuersity of lawes and prerogatiues, hindred his intention.Hist. of the Netherl. Howsoeuer they continued faithfull subiects; and Charles the Emperour at his death, commanded his sonne Philip to vse that people well: telling him that they had beene the chiefe supporters of his estate and glory; and withall that if he vsed them otherwise then gently, they would be the ruine and destruction of him, and his fortunes; wherein the euent shewed that he was but too true a Prophet. After the establishment of Philip in the gouernment, they to gaine his favour, gaue him 40 millions of Florens: but hee vnseasonably transported with a superstitious zeale, forgot both that, and his fathers Legacie; intangling himselfe and them in a tedious and bloudy war: from which he was compelled to desist with losse of men, mony, and credit. So that now the countrey is diuided betweene the States, and the Archduchesse.
The States haue vnder their Aristocraticall gouernment, the Dutchie of Gueldre^. 2 the Earledomes of Holland. 3 Zeland, and 4 Z^tphen. 5 The Lordships of Freizland. 6 Vt^echt. 7 Overyssell. and 8 Groyning. This is the lesser part by farre, and more poore in respect of the soyle: but more populous, and by the industrie of the people, ^arre more rich. They keepe about 30000 Souldiers in continuall Garrison; whose pay together with their Officers and Captaines wages, amounteth to 500000l yearely, or thereabout, which is raised by taxes from all commodities, victuals, and the like. The LL the States are chosen for euery Prouince one: the common counsell of euery particular Province is collected out of the Townes and principall Villages. The Councell of the particular Prouinces, resideth in the principall Townes of such Prouinces: but the Councell of the Generall States resideth continually at the Hage in Holland: in which Councell Maurice Prince of Orange, and the Embassadour, or Leiger for England, haue their places, and voices, a^

members of it; and that as free and binding as the general estates themselues.
Here liue, but not with open exercise of religion, almost as many Iewes, Anabaptists, Papists, So^inians, and the like, as Protestants; if not more. For since all s^rts spent their bloud, lost their friends, and consumed their estate against the common enimie in warre; good reason they should enioy the blessings of peace. Notwithstanding they are not called to gouernment, or any publike charge; such offices being alwaies conferred on the reformed. The Captaine Generall of all their forces, is Maurice of Nassaw, Prince of Orange, a valiant and expert leader.
The profits which the Arch-Duke reapeth from his part of the country, are not great: his Souldiers pay is great, and hee is loath by taxes and other the like burdens, to exasperat the people, incite them to another rebellion, or startle their resolutions to some farther designes against his quiet.
For the better historifying the breach of these Countries, from the kings of Spaine, I will ascend to the beginning of the house of Burgund^e. That the Dutchie, and Countie of Burgundie, formerly diuided, were vnited by the marriage of Ioane the Countesse, with Duke Eudes 1331; as also how they were given by King Charles the fift to his brother Philip the hardy, A^ 1369: we haue before related. This Philip tooke to wi^e Margaret, daughter to Iohn d^ Malaine, Earle of Flanders; and in her right succeeded in that Earledome, Anno 1383. Vnder his successours, especially Philip the good (vnder whom most of the Belgicke Provinces became vnited) the subiects of Be^gia and Burgundie so abounded in wealth; that Comines, who then liued, saith, that these Signeuries seemed like the Land of promise: the people being in their apparell, excessiuely gorgeous; in their banquets ouer sumptuous; in their manners, dissolute: vices vsually accompanying this kinde of felicity. Charles the warlike made an end of this happinesse, by warring on king Lewis the 11th; for though he kept the warre from his owne home, yet after his death at the battle of Nancie; the French king bereft his successour the Lady Mary of the Dutchy of Burgundie, and many Townes and Lordships in Picardie; besides the greatest part

of the Dutchy of Artoys. This Mary, married Maxim^lian Arch-Duke of Austria, with whom hauing liued about 5 years she brake her thigh with a fall from her horse; and in a woma^ly modesty, chose rather to dye, then to permit any Chirurgian to dresse her there where she was hurt. In her ended the house of Burgundie; the rights of these Prouinces being translated into the house of Austria, and from thence to Spaine: which hapned by the marriage of Philip, sonne to Mary, with Ioan, daughter and heire to Ferdinand, and Isabell, who then possessed all the continent of Spaine, Portugall excepted. During the g^uernment of this Philip, Charles his sonne, and Philip his grandchild; these Countries, especially Luxenbourg, Hainal^, and Artoys, were ransacked and harrowed by the French: with whom these Princes were continually in war. But when a Truce was made betweene Spaine, and France; then beganne King Philip to cast his thoughts on the subiection of this people to his wil and pleasure. For they were so fortified and insconced, as it were, with priuiledges, which their former Princes had granted, and the latter were sworne to obserue; that hee found himselfe to want much of that free and vncontrolable power,L. Guic^. which his violent spirit seemed euery where to desire. Some of these immunities we^e, that the Prince could place no stranger amongst them, either in offices of warre or iustice. 2ly, The Prince could giue nothing to the Clergy: nor 3ly, leavie no Subsidies without the States of the Country. But the maine prerogatiue was, that if the Prince by violence or wrong, did infringe any of the said Charters and Franchises; the people after their declaratio^ there of made,Sr R. Wi^. may goe to election of a new Prince. This not a little grieued the Spaniards, that such base and vnworthy people (for so they esteemed them) should in such liberty possesse so braue and rich a Country; their King bearing no title of maiestie, or absolute command ouer them. Besides the reformation of Religion, which then began to growe to some strength, moued the King to reduce the^ by Spanish Rhetoricke (that is by the Sword and the Cannon) to the Romish Church. To these ends hee sent the Duke of Alua, an old and expert Captaine, as hauing 60 yeares beene a Souldier, with a puissant army, to bee his Vice-Roy

among them. He gaue him also a commission of that large extent, that he might place and displace whom he would, and execute all such as he found opposite to his designes. At that time the two chiefe men were the Prince of Orange, and Count Egmont; the first was more potent with the people, the latter with the Souldiers. Had these two joyned together, they might easily haue preuented D. Alba's entrance; but Egmont was so soothed vp with letters from Spaine, that he beleeued not the intelligence which the Prince had, concerning the Dukes Commission. The Earle exhorted the Prince to submit himselfe to the pleasure of the King, and so to preuent the ruine of his house: the Prince desired the Earle to maintaine the liberty of his country; as for himself, he had rather bee a Prince without an hous^, then a Count without an head. Being thus resolued, the Prince retires to his friends of Nassaw, in high Germanie; the Earle stayeth to congratulate the entrance of the new Gouernour: Who had no sooner setled himselfe, but he intrapped the Counts of Horne, and Egmont, and beheaded them. Anno 1567. Being thus rid of these two, with diuers others of good quality; who liuing would much haue hindred his proceedings; he quartered his Spaniards in the Townes and Prov^nces, spoyled the people not of their priuiledges onely, but their liberty; among the reformed hee brought in the bloudy Inquisition; and indeed so tyrannically did he behaue himselfe, that the people were forced to a defensiue warre, as well for their liues as substances. This was a warre of State, not Religion; the most part of the Hollanders being Papists, at the time of their taking Armes. During these troubles, the Prince of Orenge was not idle; but he in one place, and Count Lodowicke his brother, in another; kept D. Alva imployed: though diuers times not with such fortunate successe, as the cause deserued. In the yeare 1572, Flushing was surprized by Voorst, and Berland, as we haue before said. So also was the Brill in Voorne, an Iland of Holland, by the Count de la March: And not long after, all Holland, except Amsterdam, followed the fortune and side of the Prince, together with all of the Townes of Zealand, Middlebourg excepted. Anno 1573 D'Alba being recalled, Don Lewis de Requis^ns

was appointed Gouernour, during whose rule, many of the Belgians abandoned their Country, some flying into Germany, others into France,Hist. of Ne^ most into England. After his death, and before the arriuall of Don Iohn, the Prince and his party recouered strength and courage again, till the comming of the Duke of Parma, who brought them into worse case then euer. Yet Anno 1581. they declare by their writings directed to all people, that Philip of ^paine was fallen from the gouernment; and take a new oath of the people, which bound them neuer to returne to the Spanish obedience. This done, they elect Francis Duke of Aniou, heire apparant to the French king, and then in no small hopes of marrying our Queene, to be their Lord. But he intending rather to settle a tyrann^e in himself, then to driue it from the Spaniard, attempted Antwerpe, put his men into the town, but was by the valour of the Burgers shamefully repulst. Shame of this ignoble enterprise, especially griefe for its ill successe* took him out of the world. The State of these countries was then thus by his Hieroglyphick, expressed. A cow represen^ed ^he body of Belgia, there stood the King of Spaine spurring her; the Queen of England ^eeding her, the Prince of Orenge m^lking her; And Duke Francis plucking her back by the taile, but she soul'd his fingers. During his vnfortunate gouernment, Parma preuailed in all places, especially after the death of William Prince of Orenge; treacherously slaine with a Pistoll, Ao 1584. Now were the poore Hollanders truely miserable, hauing none to lead them, none to protect them; but such as were likely to regard their own good, more then theirs. England was then only sanctuary they had now left, to her they sue, offering the Queene thereof, the soueraignty of their Prouinces; who had if not a true, yet a plausible title to them; As being lineallly descended from Edward the th^rd, and Philip his wi^e, who was sis^^r, (and (as some say heire) to Wllliam Earle of Hainalt, Holland* etc. If Margar^t, from whom the right of Spaine is de^iued, were Daughter to Earle William, then was our Queene to succeed after Philip, who was rejected: if that Margaret were (as many w^ite) his yonger sister, then was our Queen the vndoubted heire, her Predecessour Philippa, being

Earle Williams eldest sister. Our Heroick Queene not disputing the right of the title, nor intending to her selfe any thing, saue the honor of relieuing her distressed neighbours; like a true Defen^resse of the Faith, took them into her protection. Vnder wh^ch, the Belgian affaires succeeded so prosperously (I will not now stand on particulars) that before they would hearken to any treaty of peace, they forced the King of Spaine to confesse, that they were a people so free, that he had no right to the place, which they were possessed of. This peace was concluded, Anno 1609: Since which time, they haue kept garrisons well disciplined, and as well payed. So that these Countries haue (in these late dayes) bin the Campus Martius, or Schoole of defence for all Ch^istendome; to which the youth of all Nations repaire, to see the manner of fortifications, and learne the Art of warre. The people hereof haue for 40 yeares held the sta^^e against a most puissant Monarch, and haue with so great advantage capitulated, that it is obserued, where all other Nations grow poore with warre, these only grow rich. Whereupon it is remarkeable to consider into what follies and extremities Princes runne, by vsing their people to the warres. The Kings of France place most of their hopes in their Cavalrie; because in policy they would not that the vulgar should bee exercised in armes. Lycurgus gaue a law to the Lacedemonians, that they should neuer fight often with one enemy: the breaking whereof made the Thebans a small Common-wealth, to be their equals in power. The Turkes wonne this vast Empire they now possesse, by making many, and speedy warres: but now that policy being worne out of fashion; we see that (to omit Persia) the little and distracted kingdome of Hungary, hath for euen almost 200 yeares, resist^d them. So was it between the Dukes of Austria, and the Switzers; and so it is betwixt the Spaniard, and Low-countrymen;Arch. Ab. who being formerly accounted a dull and heauy people, altogether vnfit for the warres: by their continuall combating with the Spaniard, are become ingenious, full of action, and great managers of causes appertaining to fights, either by sea or land. We may hereby also perceiue what advantages a small State gaineth, by fortifying places and passages:

there being nothing which sooner hindreth a great Prince, then to beleaguer a well fortified towne: for that herein he consumeth his time, and commonly looseth his men, credit, and mony: as the Romanes before Numantia; the great Turke in Malta; and Charles of Burgundy before Nancie. For where warre is drawn out of the field vnto the wals, the Mattock and Spade being more necessary then the Sword and Speare: there the valour of the assailants is little auaileable, because it wanteth its proper obiect.

Since the vniting of most of these Provinces, these haue bin the Lords of Belgia.Hist. of Net.
1383
1 Philip the hardy, Duke of Burg. E. of Flanders.

2 Iohn the proud, D. of Burg. E. of Flanders.

3 Philip II the Good, Duke of Burg. Brab. Lux. Limb. Marquesse of the Empire; E. of Fland. Art. Nam, Hain. Holl. Zel, Lord of Freiz, and Machlyn.
1467
4 Charles the warlike.
1476
5 Mary, daughter to Charles.
1476
5 Maximilian Archd. of Austria.
1481
6 Philip II. Archd. of Austria, D. of Burg.
1481
6 Ioane Queene of Castile.
1506
7 Charles II. Emperour, K. of Spaine, Archd. of Austria, D. of Burg. Brab. Guel. Lux Limb. Marq. of the Empire: Earle of Fland. Artoys, Nam. Holl. Hain. Zel. Lord of Freiz. Vtr. Over. Groyn. Machlyn.
1559
8 Philip IV. of Sp. II, reiected by the States.
1599
5 Clara Isabella Eugeniae, daughter to Philip.
1599
5 Albertus Archd. of Austria.

The principall order of Knighthood in these Countries, hath bin, and is of the Golden Pleece,Guicciard. instituted by Duke Philip the Good, Anno 1430: in analogie to Gedeons Fleece, as some will; or Iasons Fleece, as others thinke; and it may be in token of the loue he bare to the English Wooll, from which he receiued so great profits. They weare a collar of gold, interlaced with (...) iron, seeming to strike fire out of a flint; the word Ex ferro flammam; at the end hung the Fleece, or Toison d' Or. This company was raised by the same Philip from 25, (for at first institution

they were no more) to 3^; Charles the fift raised them to 51; and now there may be as many as the King of Spaine will invest with it.

Here are 6 Vniuersities.
Lovaine Brab.
Doway. Fland.
Leige. Limb.
Leiden. Holl.
Harderwicke. Geld.
Groyning. 1614.


Before the reformation and Spanish invasion, here were reckoned

Archbishops 3


Dukes 4


Earles 7


Bishops 15


Marquesse 1


Lords 5


Thus much of Belgia.



OF GERMANIE.
Maginus.GERMANIE is bounded on the West with France and Be^gia; on the North with Denmarke and her seas; on the East wit^ Prussia, Poland, and Hungary: on the South with the Alpes. It was so called (as some think) by the Roman^, who passing ouer Rhene to satisfie his eye in seeing forrain countries, or to enrich himselfe with the spoyle of an vnfriendly Nation, seeing the people so like vnto the Gaules in speech, man^ers, and complexion, called them the Germane to the French. Others doe deriue it from ^er, which signifieth all; and man: whence also came the name of Almayne, as well as that of Germane. By this Etymologie they would imply, that the Almaines or Germanes are a very warlike Nation; as a people that haue in the^, nihil nisi virile, nothing weak or womanish, nor indeed any thing not worthy a man. B^t it is by others as probablie conjectured, that they are called Almanes or Germanes, because they consist of so many seuerall nations, comming out of the North and North-East hither, that they seeme to be an hotchpot or mixture of all kindes of men, kn^aded into one name and country: and this is the conceit of Asinius Qu^dratus.
The compasse of this spacious countrey, is 2600 English miles: the figure is almost an exact square, each side being in

length 650 miles. It is situate in the Northerne temperat Zone, vn^^r the 7^^ and 11th Climates, the longest day being 17 (...), and a halfe.
I^ is supposed to contain 10 millio^s of people: the men of the po^^e^ sor^, laborious, painfu^l, and of sincere behauiour: the Nobles either profound schollers,Boter. relat. or resolute souldiers, louers of true honour, though Tacitus thought otherwise, saying; the (...) liberty, the Belgians for honours, the Germanes (...) little addicted to Venus, and very much to (...) the proverb, Germanorum vivere, est biber^* (...) sicles:
Germani possunt cunctos tolerare labores,O utinam possent tam bene ferre sitim.G^rmanes themselues vnto all workes inure,Oh would they thirst could halfe so well endure.
(...) of a strong constitution, and much inclining to (...) whereupon Pope Iulio the second, styling the Spani(...) of the aire, because of their ambition; the Venetians (...), fishes of the Sea: c^l^ed the Germans, beasts of (...). And when Augustus established the Monarchie of (...) was advised by Agri^pa, to choose a guard of Germ^^^^, ^he reason was, because in those great bodies, there was (...) hidden, and lesse subtilty; and that they were a people that (...) more pleasure to be commanded, then to command. In mat^ers of war^e thi^ people haue bin euer in a mea(...) yet not so much by the valour, or conduct of their ((...) or they haue had but few such) as by their owne (...). They withstood the Romanes 210 yeares; afflicting and (...) them more in that space; then either the Carcha(...) Spaniards, French, or Parthians: and euen at the last (^aith (...)) t^u^mpha^imagis sunt, quam vi^li. In our times (...), and ^ans^^^ghts of G^rmanie, are of indifferent (...) their onely, or at least their greatest fault b^ing a (...) custome they h^^e, euen in the midst of a battail, if their (...) truly p^^ed to cry gu^lt, gu^lt, cast downe their (...) suffer* themselues to bee cut in pieces by the (...).
The women are of a good complexion, though by reason of their intemperance in eating and drinking, they are somewhat corpulent: women (as they say) of good carriage, good bea^ers, and good breeders.
The diet of Germany, Italy, and that of France, is thus censured: the Germans haue much meat,View of Fr. but sluttishly dressed; the French litle, but cleanly handled; the Italians neither one nor the other.
The titles of the Fathers descend to all the children, euery son of a Duke, being a Duke; and euery daughter a Dutchesse: a thing which the Italians hold so ridiculous, that they put it in the fore-front of this facetious Satyre. The Dukes and Earles of Germany, the Dons of Spaine, the Monsieurs of France, the Bishops of Italy, the Nobility of Hungary, the Lairdes of Scotland, the Knights of Naples, and the younger brethren of England, make a poore company. For by this common assuming of the Fathers honour, and parting his lands among all the brethren; the Nobility is beyond reason multiplied,Morison. and no lesse impouerisht: there being not long since, 17 Princes of Anhalt, and 27 Counts of Mansfield; to most of which, their Armes haue bin the best part of their riches, and nihil nisi arma and manus, and in his omnia, as Tacitus once said of the Brittaines.
Their language being the Dutch, hath lesse commixture with the Latine, then any which is vsed in the Westerne parts, and is very harsh, by reason of its many consonants.
Tacitus accounted this country rude and barren, as then co^taining nothing but vnpeopled Forrests, vprofitable Heaths, and vnhealthfull pooles: but were he now aliue, he would bee forced to sing a Palinodia, confessing it to be both pleasing, healthfull and profitable; abounding with Mines of Siluer, and inferiour mettals; plentifull in Corne and Wines, which they transport into other Countries; together with fresh fish, Linnens, Quicksiluer, Allum, Armours, and other iron-workes, The Arable lands are in the East parts so spacious, that the husbandman going forward with his plough in the morning, turneth not back again till it be mid-day. So making his whole dayes worke, but two ploughed furrowes; one in his going

forward, the other in his returne, as Verstegan relateth.
In former times this Country yeelded neither good Captain, nor good Scholler; the later both, but especially the Scholler, as Albertus Magnus the Physician, and great Philosopher; who made the Statua of a man, which by the operation of inward artificiall engins, could speak very articulately, and was the worke of 30 yeares: Appian the Cosmographer, Gesner the Philosopher, Munster, Luther, Vrsinus, Zuinglius, Scultetus, and Iunius, with many other Diuines, besides Keckerman, Alstedius, Timpler,Munster. Goclenius, etc. To those let me adde Bertholdus Swart, if not for his learning, yet for one of his inventions; being that fatall instrument, called the Gunne. This Swarte was a Franciscan, and studious in Alohymie. For the finding out of experiments in this Art, he was one euening tempering brimstone, dried earth, and certain other ingredients, in a mortar, which he couered with a stone. The night growing on, he took a tinderbox to light him a candle; where striking fire, a spark by chance flew into the mortar, and catching hold of the brimstone, and salt-peter, with great violence blew vp the stone. The cunning Alchymist guessing which of his ingredients it was that produced this effect, made h^m an iron pipe, crammed it with sulphure, and stones; and putting fire to it, saw with what great fury and noyse it discharged it selfe. This Invention he communicated to the Venetians,Guicciard. Anno 1330, or thereabouts; who hauing bin often vanquished by the Genewaies, and driuen almost to a necessity of yeelding to them: by the help of these Gunnes, (Bombards they were then called) gaue vnto their enemies a notable discomfiture. And this was the first battaile that euer those warlike pieces had a part in: which not long after, put to silence all the engins and dev^ces, where with the Ancients were wont to make their bat^erie. The next that made vse of this Instrument, were the inhabitants of the Balticke sea:Camd. Re^. and not long after them, the English, at the siege of Calice, Anno 1347; about which time they began also to be vsed in Spaine. The French, it seemeth, learned the vse of them from the English; and the first benefit receiued by them, was the death of that famous Leader, Thomas Montacute, Earle of Salisbury, who at the siege of Orleance,

was slain with a great shot, Anno 1425. The Turbes are beholding for them to the warres they had with the Venet^an^; beholding I say,Turk. hist. for notwithstandi^g the harmes receiued by them at first; yet afterward growing expert in managing of the^, they gaue vnto Vffin Cassares, and Hismael, two of the most mighty Emperours of Persia, two memorable ouerthrowes, by the help of their great Ordinance only. The Portugals were in this Art, the Tutors to the Persians: for as Solyman the (...) Emperour objected against them, they not only aided (...) the Sophie with certain h^rcabagiers; but also sent him workmen to shew him the vse and making of Artillerie. These great pieces at the first invention were rude, vnweldie, and charged with stone bullets only: but by degree, they come to that perfection, both for the wall a^d the hard, that they (...) Whether now Archerie or Gunning be to be protected, I stand not here to determine: onely this I am sure of, that victories haue been of late purchased with lesse expence of life and blo^d, then euer in former times they were. But of this theame m^^e hereafter.
The Religion here is diuers, Iewes being intermingled with Christians, these diuided into Pap^sts and Pr^testants. These latter also are diuided into Lutherans and Calvi^ists, who though in all things opposite to the Romish Church, are yet in some few, contrary one to the other: the Lutheran maintaining consubstantiation in the blessed Eucharist, with omnipresen^e: and eternall predestination, to be out of a fore-scene faith and good workes, and not absolute. Which tenents not (...) to the word of the most High, are impugned b^ the (...) and that with more vehemencie, and lesse mod^st^e, (...) and writing, then is profitable to either: making (...)ther worse then better, by bitter calumniati^ns (...) to be the two chiefe, if not only poi^^s, they (...).
Boterus reckoneth the Revenues of the (...)lions, which indeed were true, taking Anst(...)hemia for parts of it: but since these are not (...) Imperiall Throne, but that they may be vtterly di(...), reason they should be admitted into the reckoning. (...)tiles

are parts of the Empire, but acknowledge no subiection* as Denmarke, Switzerland, and the Seuenteene Provinces; Some again acknowledge a kind of subiection, but come not to the Diets, as some Italian Potentates, the Dukes of Lorreine and Savoy; and some both confesse the Emperours soueraigntie, and come to all Councels, namely the Germaine Princes; who all pay certain monies, which they count a contribution, but no tribute. The cities of this country are of 3 sorts, Hansetownes, which enjoy large pr^uiledges and immunities,Morison* and are in number 72: such are Lubecke, Hambourg, Madenbourg: Each of which is able to put to sea 150 good Ships. The second sort are they which are holden by inheritance of some Princes. The third sort are the Free or Imperiall cities: Free for their great prerogatiues of coyning moneys, and ruling by their owne lawes; Imperiall, as knowing no Lord or protectour, but the Emperour; to whom they pay two third parts of such contributions, as are assessed in the assemblies, and about 1500 Florens yearely, for themselues and their territories. This revenue as it is certainely knowne not to be very great, so cannot wee certainly know how great or litle. These cities enioying so many priuiledges, and hauing so full a command ouer the neighbouring country, and the villages thereof, are exceeding rich and potent. I will instance only in Norimberg, by which wee may guesse at the rest: and in Norimberg also I can but ayme at the whole wealth, by a particular losse, which was thus. Ao 1554. when Maeurice Duke of Saxony,Sleid. Com. and his associats, had driuen the Emperour Charles out of Germany, Albert Marquesse of Brandenbourg, whose sword was in a manner his law, and his revenue, besieged this City: He burnt 100 of the villages belonging to it, 70 manors and sermes appertaining to the citizens: 3000 acres of wood: and after all this spoyle, compoundeth with them for 200000 crownes, and sixe pieces of Ordinance. As for the Religion in these free and Imperiall townes professed, it is in a manner totally the reformed; there being 3 onely, which adhere wholly to the Church of Rome, which are Gmond, Vberlinque, or Whirlingen, and Dinkelspuhel; three smal townes in the lower Suevia, and in some few of the rest, both

religions are permitted. In briefe these are called free Citties (as Guicciardine the Historian defineth them) which acknowledging by a certain determinate tribute, the authority of the Empire, doe notwithstanding in all other things, gouern themselues after their own lawes: not seeking to amplifie their territories, but to defend their liberties. They are in number 60, as Francsort, Norimberg, with the rest: which together with the Princes in time of warres, are to aide the Emperour with 3842 horse, and 16300 foot; but how small a triste is that, in respect of so huge a Country.
The principall riuers are 1 Danubius, which rising out of Nigrasylva, and receiuing amongst others, 60 navigable riuers, disgorgeth his full stomack out of his 7 mouthes, into the Euxine seas, after it hath streamed along for the space of 1500 miles.
Cedere Danubius se tibi Nile negat.O seuen-mouth'd Nile I plainly see,Danow will scarce giue way to thee.
2 Rhene, which arising in Helvetia, and running through Germanie and Belgia, after a course of 800 miles, saluteth the Germane Ocean; into which also runneth 3 the Albis, after a journy of more then 400 miles; rising about the lowest skirts of Bohemia, and passing by Madenberg, Brunswicke, and Denmarke. 4 Odera which hath his fountaine in the hithermost con^in^s of Silesia; and after it hath runne a s^lent course through Brandenbourg, and Pomerania, of some 300 miles in length; openeth his wide mouth in the Balticke sea. 5 Maenus. 6 Visurgis, or Weser.
About 130 yeares after the vniuersall deluge, and not long after the confusion of tongues at Babell,Munster. (if wee may beleeue what we find recorded) one Teuto the son of Gomer, came into Germany; of whom the people of his posterity were called Teutones: by which name, many of them were known to the Romanes, though not without a miscellaneous admixture of others; as the Cha^ti, Cherusci, Suevi, and the like. Caesar opened the way for the Romanes to this country, the conquest wherof was brought to best perfection by him, who for his happy victories, was meritoriously named Germanicus. It continued

Romane vntill the dayes of Phocas; when France, Spaine, and Germanie, at a clap shaked off all allegiance to the Empire; so detestable is a tyrannicall vsurper, that euen barbarous and ignoble spirits abhorre his gouernment. Germanie being now slipt from its former bondage, was distracted into many petty royalties; all or most of which, were extinguished by the greater light of the French Monarchie, vnder Pepin and Charles, Kings of France: the latter being for his many seruices to the Church, made Emperour of the West, containing vnder its command, part of Spaine, and Italy, all France, and Germanie, which last hath bin the seat of most of his successours. So that now the prophecie of the Druides, concerning the remouing of the Empire into these parts, seemeth to haue bin fulfilled, though Tacitus in his time accounted it a vaine and idle prediction. For when Civilis raised a rebellion in Germany against Vespasian, then newly made Emperour; possessionem rerum humanarum Transalpinis gentibus portendi, superstitione vana Druidae canebant. And by this erecting of the Westerne Empire, we see the prophecie to haue bin good; though it was not so soone fulfilled, as was expected.
The Emperours of Germany.8011 Carolus M. 148152 Ludov. Pius 268413 Lotharius 158564 Ludovious II 198775 Carolus Calvus 26 Ludov. III. Balbus7 Carol. III. CrassusFreigius.8918 Arnolphus 129039 Ludovicus IV. 1091310 Conradus I. 7. This Prince was the last of the blood of Charles the great: for the Francones and the Saxones, seeing Charles the simple King of France, wholly possessed with the Normans; took that advantage, and chose an Emperour of their owne blood: a worthy Prince questionlesse they made choyce of,Muster. subduing to the Empire the Sclavonians, the Hungarians, Dalmatians, Bohemians, Lorreine, and Brandenburg: for his delight is fowling he was called92011 Henricus Auceps 1893812 Otho I. 3697413 Otho II. 1098414 Otho III 19. After the death of this Emperour, all right of succession disclaimed, the Emperours became electiue; whereby the Princes haue growne potent: But the Empire weake, voices being obtained, not according to the worthines of vertue, but by gifts, to the prejudice of the Imperiall Majesty. This decree of election was confirmed by Pope Gregory the fi^t, and the power giuen to the Count Palatine of Rhene, Archsewer; the Duke of Saxony, Lord Marshall; and the Marquesse of Brandenburg, chiefe Chamberlaine of the Temporalties; amongst the spiritualty, to the Archbishop of Mentz, Chancellour of the Empire; to the Archbishop of Collen, Chancellour of Italy to the Archbishop of Triers, Chancellour of France: and if equality of voices hapned, the Duke of Bohemia, (but now King) had the binding voice, who by office is chiefe cup-bearer. These Offices on dayes of especiall solemnitie, are performed after this manner.Gelden Bul. Before the gate of the Emperour standeth an heape of oates so high, that it reacheth to the brest of the horse, whereon the D. of Saxony rideth: who beareth in his hand a siluer wand, and a siluer measure, both which together, weigh 200 markes of siluer. Then sitting on his horse, he filleth that measure with oates, and sticking his siluer staffe^in the remainder, he goeth together with the Emperour into the Pallace; hauing first giuen his measure of oates to any of his seruants which standeth next vnto him. When the Emperour is entred the Palace, and is sate down at his Table, the 3 spirituall Electours standing orderly together, say grace. Then the Marquesse of Brandenbourg comming on horsebacke with a siluer bason (weighing 12 markes of siluer) full of water, in his hand, and a fine clean towell on his arme, lighteth downe, and giueth the Emperour water to wash his hands. After him the Palatine of the Rhene commeth on horseback, with 4 siluer platters in his hands, full of meat; who lighting from his horse, carrieth, and setteth them down on the table; euery platter weighing three markes. Last of all, the King of Bohemia, riding on a horse, with a napkin on his arme, and a couered cup in his hand, weighing 12 markes, entreth the great Hall; where lighting downe, hee giueth the cup to the Emperour to drinke.
The election is vsually holden at Francfort on Maenus,Sleid. Com. whither the Electours or their deputies come vpon the day appointed by the Bishop of Mentz, whose office it is to assemble the Princes. In their passage vnto Francfort, they are guarded by euery Prince, through whose territories they passe. Their attendants must not exceed the number of 200 horsemen whereof 50 only must be armed. When they are all met, they goe to St Bartholmewes Church; where after Masse said, the spirituall Electours laying their hands on their brests, and the temporall on their booke, shall sweare to choose a fit temporall head for the people of Christendome. If in the space of 30 dayes they haue not agreed, then must they eate nothing but bread and water, nor by any meanes goe out of the city, till the greater part haue agreed on a man, who shall forth with be acknowledged King of the Romanes.
The inauguration is holden first at Aken in Gulick, where the new elected Emperour receiueth the siluer Crown for Germany: secondly at Millaine, where he receiueth his iron Crown for Lombardy. Thirdly at Rome, where he receiueth the golden Crowne for the Empire. These constitutions were made by Charles the 4th, and called the Golden Bull, or Aurea Bulla, Anno 1356. The first chosen Emperour was
100215 Henricus II. Claudus and Sanctus 22102516 Conradus II. Salicus 15104017 Henricus III. Niger 17105718 Henricus IV. senior 50. In the dayes of this Prince, the Romane Prelates began to vsurpe authority ouer Kings and Emperours. Leo the ninth hauing receiued the Papacie of the Emperours hands, repented himselfe, put off his purp^e, went to Rome as a priuat man, and was againe elected by the Clergie. This was done by the perswasion of Hildebrand a Monke, who being afterwards Pope Gregory the seuenth, excommunicated this Henry; being the first Prince that euer was exco^municated: from this time, till the yeare 1254, was there continuall warres, and thunders, between the Popes, and the nine following Emperours.110719 Henricus V. iunior 20112620 Lothar, Saxo 13113821 Conradus III. 1511532^ Frideric. I. Barb. 38119023 Henricus VI. 8119824 Philip.25 Otho IV121226 Frederick II. 38125027 Conradus IV. 4125428 Richard Earle of Cornwall, and brother to King Henry the 3 of England* was chosen and crowned King of the Romanes; and after he had supported a ruinous Empire 6 yeares, he returned into England, where he died. In the times of these last Emperours, the politicke Bishops of Rome, had in a manner forced the Emperours out of Italy; so that Rodolfus the next Emperour, sold all his right in Italy to diuers Princes. The craft of the Popes extended yet farther, euen into Germany; where by granting royall prerogatiues to the tributary Princes, they much weakned the state of the Empire: It was vtterly ruined by Venceslaus, who sold Lombardie to the Visconti of Millaine; and gaue to the Princes many possessions of the Empire, for their fauours in his election; which they then willingly receiued, and since powerfully defended; few of them not being able to wage war^e with the Emperours themselues.Sleid. Com. Charles the fift, was questionlesse the most puissant Emperour from Charles the Great, as being King of Spaine, Lord of all Belgia, King of Naples, Duke of Millaine, and Austria; yet his inability to match with some of those ruffling Princes, was not the least cause of his resignation to his brother Ferdinand. But to proceed: After a 12 yeares interegnum, was chosen127330 Rodol. Habspur. 191292Synops. hist.31 Adulph. Nassov. 6129831 Albert. Austr. 10130832 Henr. VII. Lucel. 6131433 Ludovi^us Bavar.134634 Carolus IV. 32137835 Vencestaus 2236 Iodocus Barbatus.140037 Rupert. Palatin. 10141138 Sigis. R. Hung. 28143139 Alb^rt. II. Aust. 1144040 Fred. III. Aust. 54149441 Maximil. I. 25151942 Carolus V. 39155843 Ferdinandus 7156544 Maximilianus II157645 Rodolphus II. 35161046 Matthias.161947 Ferdinand. II. Being the ninth of the house of Austria, without intermission. The cause of which is to be attributed to Charles the fift, who procured in his life-time, that his

brother might be chosen Rex Romanorum, as his successour. Now Rex Romanorum is defined to be one, who is already so farre estated in the Empire, that on the death, deposition, or resignation of the present Emperour, he is immediatly to succeed. This definition may passe, though there be no necessity of the Rex Roma^orum into the Empire. For Charles the fifth, though he made his brother King of the Romaens,Sleid. Com. had no small hopes to haue left his sonne Philip his successour iu the Empire: for feare of which, it was by many thought, that his brother lent D. Mau^ice a helping hand, to driue him out of Germanie. The reason why Charles did institute this Rex Romanorum, was questionlesse a desire to perpetuate the soueraignty in his owne house; but his pretences were 1, because he hauing the command of many Nations, could not alwayes be present in Germany. 2ly the troubled State of Christendome, by reason of Luthers preaching, especially there; 3ly the violent power of the Turkes, who now began to be nigh neighbours vnto them; 4ly the late rurall warres, raised by the Boores, and scarce yet thoroughly extinct; and 5ly an imminent disobedience in euery part of the Empire, seemed to require a powerfull coadjutor. The wise Duke of Saxonie, through all these faire pretences, truely saw the maine plot; which was to make Germany (as Galba in his excellent oration to Piso, said of the Romane Empire) unius quasi familiae haereditatem: and therefore he first flatly denied to yeeld to any such institution. Then he motioned that there might be an acte made, to prohibite the continuance of the Imperiall autority, longer in one family, then for 3 successions: But preuailing in neither, he left the Electours: by whom Ferdinand was chosen, and not long after crowned at Aken or Aquisgrane in Cleueland, the 16 of Ianuary, Anno 1531. This policie hath bin euer since continued by his successours, to which the Germanes are more willing; because the Austrian Princes are natiues of the Country, and able to backe out the Empire, in its compleat countenance of Maiestie.
The Armes of the Empire,Bara. are Sol, an Eagle displayed with two heads Saturne, armed and crowned Mars. The two heads signifie the East and West Empire: whereof the one is quite

plucked off, and the other stript of all its feathers; the Imperiall dignity being growne litle more, then titularie.
The chiefe Pro^inces of Germanie are 1 East-Friezland, 2 Westphalia 3 Cleu^land. 4 Alsatia. 5 Franconia. 6 Helvetia. 7 Suevia. 8 Bavaria. 9 Austria. 10 Bohemia. 11 Brandenburg. 12 Saxonie. 13 Pomerania and Mecklenburg. 14 Brunswick and Luneb^urg. 15 Hassia; some of which, Aubanus thus censureth. They of Suevia are whoores; they of Franconia, rauishers and beggers; they of Bohemia, heretickes: they of Bavaria, theeues; they of Helvetia bawdes; they of Saxonie, fudlers: they of Frisia and Westphalia, swearers: and they of the Rhene are gluttons.

1 EAST-FREIZLAND.
EAST-FRIEZLAND is bounded on the West with the Ems, on the East with the Woser, on the South with Westphalia, on the North with the Sea. The old inhabitants were the Cauchi: the chiefe Townes are 1 Emden, so called of the Ems, on which it is seated. This Towne hath of late expelled their Earle, and gouerne as a petty Common-wealth, making Religion but a maske to disguise vnnaturall rebellions. 2 Amm^r Dun. 3 Oldenbourg, which hath an Earle of its owne; a family sufficiently famous, in that the Kings of Denmarke are descended from it, euer since Christian, Earle of this place, was chosen King of that country, Anno 1448. 4 Anselinge, etc.
The first Earle of East-Freizland was Ezardus, Anno 1466; his predecessours being onely Captaines of the Country:Reusner. the present Count is Gustanus, who Anno 1592, was driuen out of Emden, because he fauoured the Lutherans, rather then the Calvinists.


2 WESTPHALIA.
WESTPHALIA was the habitation of the old Saxons, vntill by Charles the Great, they were brought into narrower compasse: and though now also this name is not of so large extent as it hath bin, yet we will take it as it was at the biggest, when it was bounded on the East with Brunswicke, on the West with Belgia, on the North with the Sea, on the South with Hassia. The soyle aboundeth with all fruits, and is wonderfully stored with Acornes; which feed Swine of an exceeding pleasant

taste and nourishment, so that a Westphal^an Gammon of Bacon, is the chiefe dish at a Banquet. The Northerne part of this Country is called Bremen, from the chiefe City Breme, the Bishop whereof is Lord of this Tract. The next parts belong to the Dukes of Saxony, the chie^e Cities of which are 1 Clappenburg. 2 Exenberg. 3 Als^orpe etc. The other part belongeth to the Bishoprick of Collen, Munster, and Triers.
The Bishopricke of Collen containeth a great part of Westphalen, and was once belonging to Lorreine, till the da^es of Otho 2d: Who giuing Lorreine to Charles of France, extracted great possessions from it; which he gaue to the Bishop of Collen. The former inhabitants were the Vbij,Munster. who were converted to Christianity, by Maternus the Disciple of St Peter, Anno 70. Their chie^e Citty was Vbiopolis, afterward called Agrippina, in honour of Agrippina, Nero's mother: and lastly Collen, of the French, who there planted a colonie. Nigh vnto this citty did Caesar with incredible expedition make a bridge ouer the Rhene, which more terrified the barbarous enemy, then the reports of his valour; so powerfull is laborious industry, that it ouercommeth all disasters, and maketh the most vnpassable waters, yeeld to Heroicke resolutions. The Archbishop of this citty is the second spirituall Electour of the Emperour, and Chancelour of Italy. In this towne (as it is supposed) are nigh 100 priuate Schooles. In this Towne also are said to lye the bodies of the three wise men, which came from the East to worshippe our Sauiour, vulgarly called the three Kings of Collen. The whole story is at large written in tables, which are fastned vnto the Tombes. The pith whereof is this. The first of them called Melchior, an old man with a long beard, offered gold as vnto a King. The second called Gaspar, a beardlesse young man, offred Frankincense as vnto God* The third called Balthasar, a blackmoore with a spreading beard, offred Mirrh, as vnto a man ready for his Sepulchre. Th^t they were of Arabia, the table saith is probable; first, because they came from the East, and so is Aribia in respect of Hierusalem. 2ly, because it is said in the 72 Psalme, The Kings of Ar^bia shall bring guifts. As for their bodies, they are the^e said to haue beene translated by Helena, the

mother of Constantine; vnto Constan^inople: from thence by Eustor^ius, Bishop of Millaine, vnto Millaine; and finally brought hither by Rainoldus Bishop hereof Ano 1164. This is the substance of the history, which for my part I reckon among the Apocrypha. The other Townes vnder the dominion of this Bishop are 1 Ernace, or Andernach, (Marcellinus calleth it Antennacum) one of the 10 Garrison; erected on the banke of Rhene by Caesar. 2 Lints, seated on the Rhene, as also is 3 B^nna, where the Bishop hath a Pallace, which is esteemed to bee one of the fairest houses of Germany. And 4 Mondenand. The Bishopp of Collen, writeth himselfe Duke of Westphalia, and Angiuaria, which last is a but a part of the first.
The chiefe Townes vnder the Bishop of Munster are, 1 Warendorp. 2 Herwerden. and 3 Munster,Sleid, Com. seated on the riuer of Ems, and so called of a Monastery built there by Charles the great. In this Towne about the yeare 1533, a lawlesse crew of Anabaptists assembled, chose themselues a King, whom they called the King of Sion; and the Citty they named new Hierusalem: but by the industry of the Bishop, this tumult was appeased, their King and his chiefe complices deseruedly punished. To epitomize the story would quite spoile it, and therefore I referre the reader to the 10th book of Sleidans Commentaries, who excellently, and at large describeth, the beginning, progresse, and end of this fanaticall kingdome.
Munster.The chiefe Townes belonging to the Bishop of Triers are 1 Bopport, seated on the Moselle, and so called quasi bon port, a safe harbour. It was once miserably wasted by Richard Earle of Cornwall, and King of the Romans; because the Bishop of Triers had opposed his election. 2 Engers, pawned together with Bopport, to the Bishops of this Diocesse, by the Emperour Henry the 7th. 3 Coblents, anciently called Confluentia, because it is built at the con^luence of the Rhene, and the Moselle. and 4 Treveris, or Triers, a Citty seated in an ayre so clowdy, and subiect to raine; that it is by some merrily called Cloaca planetarum^. This is the chiefe seat of the Chancellour of France, and third spirituall Electour: it is built on the Moselle, and is so ancient, that it is recorded to haue beene built 150 yeares before Rome. To

this Bishop also belongeth the faire and sumptuous Castle of Hermenstemie.


3 CLEVELAND.
This Dutchy containeth, 1 Cleue. 2 Gulicke. 3 Berge. The Dutchie of CLEVE ioyneth to Gelderland. The chiefe Citties are 1 Cleue. 2 Calker. 3 Wesell. 4 Emericke. Here dwelt the Cherusci, who slew three Legions and their Captaine Qui^tilius Varus. This discomfiture,Suetonius, partly by the losse of so many of his Souldiers; partly by the ignominy thence receaued; and withall that griefe had beene of long a Non-resident with him: so distracted Augustus, that he was seene to teare his beard, and knock his head against the posts, crying, redde mihi Legiones Quintili Vare* In this ouerthrowe the Barbarians seized on two of the Roman Eagles, the third being cast into the Fennes by the standard-bearer; which inforceth Cuspinianus and that not improbably, to guesse, that the Armes of Germany should be two Eagles conjoyned, and not one with two heads.
Cleue was made an Earledome Anno 911:Munster and for want of heires diuolued into the Empire Ao 1350, in the time of Charles the fourth: who not long after gaue it to Adolfe Bishop of Collen; it may be for his fauour in raising his sonne Wenceslaus to the Empire: His son also named Adolfe, was by Sigismond the Emperour made Duke of Cleue Anno 1417. This Dukedome is now vnited vnto the Marquisate of Brandenburg, by marriage of the sister of Iohn the last Duke, vnto Albert a Marquesse of Brand^nburg. But the Marquesse inioyeth not the least part of it. For the other pretendants herevnto, to make their side good, besought aid of the Spaniards; whereby the Marquesse was inforced to cal in the States of the Lowcountries, by which meanes the Spaniard possessed himselfe of Cleue; and the States of Berge and Gulicke: leauing the true owner small ioy in these his new possessions.
The Armes are Gules,Bara. a Carbuncle Or, on an Eschotcheon in ^esse, Argent.
2 The Dutchie of GVLICK, or Iuliacum, was anciently inhabited by the Menapij and Eburones. The chiefe Citties are, 3 Aquisgranum or Aken, where the Emperour after his election

is inucsted with the siluer Crowne of Germanie.Tacitus. This towne was formerly that wintring campe of the Romans called Vetera, which was taken by Civilis in the beginning of his rebellion against Vespasian: during which warres it is often mentioned by the writers of those times. They were built and strengthned by Augustus, the better to keep vnder the Germans: quippe illis bybernis obsideri premique, G^rmanias Augustus crediderat. At this day this Towne and ^r^ers are reputed famous for holy relicks; here being among others ^he bearing cloath wherein our Sauiour was wrapt when he was in his swadling clouts: which the Emperour solemnly worshippeth at his inauguration Concerning the ambition which the Papists haue to bee thought possessours of these reliques; See, I beseech you, how pittifully they haue mangled the head of St Iohn Baptist. They of Amiens brag that they haue his face, and so doe they of St Iohn D Angelie. The rest of his head is at Malta, yet is the h^nder part of his skull at Namours, and his braine at Nouum R^stourense. Another part of it is at Maurienn^, another peece at Paris; his law at Wesell, his ^are at S. Flowres, his forehead and haire at S. Salvadores in Venice; another peece of his head is at Noyon, and another at Luca; yet is his whole head intire and vnmaimed in St Sylvesters Church at Rome: and so no doubt is this bearing-cloth at more places then one. 2 Gulicke, lost lately by the States of the vnited Provinces. 3 Dulken. 4 Newis, called by Tacitus, Nov^sium.
The country of Gulick^ o^ Iul^ers, of an Earledome, was by the Emperour Lewis made a Ma^quisate,Munster. Anno 1329: and about the yeare 1359, Marquesse William for his good seruice was made Duke of Gulicke by Charles the fourth. In the yeare 1496 it was vnited to Cleue by a marriage betweene Mary Dutches of Gulicke, and Iohn Duke of Cleue.
The Armes are O, a Lion B, armed G.
3 The Dutchie of BERGE or Monte, was once the dwelling of the ^u^teri;Munster. the compasse of it is 130 miles. The chief towns are 1 Dusseld^rpe. 2 Hattingen. 3 Arusberg. It was made a Dukedome by Henricus called Auceps, first Emperour of the Saxon line Anno 924: the first Duke was Eb^rhard. It was vnited

to Gulicke, by a marriage of the daughter of Berg, to Gerard, grandch^ld to William first D. of Gulicke, about the yeare 1400: Thus we see these three Dukedomes vnited together in themselue; first Berg to Guli^ke, Anno 1400; then both these vnto Cleue, Anno 1496. And now altogether ioyned vnto the house of Brandenbourg,Fr. hist* Anno 1572. This Albert which married Maria Leonora. the eldest daughter of Duke William, sister of Duke Iohn, and heire of these Dutchies; had by her 3 daughters: whereof the eldest named Anne, was married vnto Sigismond Electour of Brade^bourg, and in her right Duke or Lord of these Countries. The rest which pretend right herevnto, are Philip the Palatine of Newburge, who marrying with the second sister of the Lady Anne, claimeth a part in the inheritance, after the manner of G^rmany. 2ly Leopold, Lantgraue of Alsatia, brother to the Emperour Ferdinand; who pleadeth an investiture granted vnto him by the Emperour Rodolphus; these Countries being imperiall fees (feathers of the Eagle, as he calleth them) and so escheated for want of heires males. 3ly Iohannes Georgius, Duke of Saxony; who claimeth from a compact made 1526, between Iohn the first Lord of these vnited countries, and Iohn Fredericke, Duke of Saxonie; which was, that D. Iohn Fredericke, marrying with Sybill, the eldest daughter of Cleue: should when euer the heires males failed, succed in those estates: a contract which the succeeding Dukes cut off by the imperiall authority.


4. ALSATIA.
ELSAS or ALSATIA hath on the West Lorreine, on the South Helvetia, on the East the Rhene, and on the North tho Palatina^e. It receiued the Christian Faith by the preaching of the aforesaid Maternus: The chief Townes are Strasburg, formerly called Argentina, because in it the Roman Exchequer receiued the tribute of conquered Nations. Here is a Clocke of most admirable workmanship,Maginus. and a Tower 578 paces high; of this Town saith a Poet,
Vrbs praeclara si^u, ripis contermina Rheni,Adrianus.Maxima cui celsae me^i^ntur maenia turris.Strasburg on Rhenes inamell'd bankes doth lie,Whose lofty towre threatneth the spangled skie.
2 Psaltburg. 3 Weisenberg, one of the ten Townes which Caesar like a politique Conquerour,Munster. built vpon the Westerne banke of the Rhene, to defend the Roman Empire against the fury of the Germans, and other barbarous Nations. The other nine were 1 Strasburg. 2 Selts. 3 Altrip in Latine Altaripa, because it is built on an high banke of the riuer. 4 Saberne, or Elsas Saveren, whereas the Bishop of Strasburg keepeth his residence, being al Townes of this Prouince. 5 Bing. 6 Wormes. 7 Boppart. 8 Confluence, and 9 Andernach. All these Townes, or at that time rather garrisons, were vnder the command of the captain or Duke of Mentz, to whom the defence of the frontiers was committed. As long as these places were well garrison'd, the Empire continued impregnable on this side: But when Constantine to make resistance against the Persians, transplanted these forces into the East; the barbarous people entring at this gap, quickly defaced and ruin'd the Empire. On the South end of Alsatia stand Colmar, Hagenaw, and Schleistat, or Selestadium, three faire and ancient townes belonging to the Empire.
This Country neuer had any peculiar Prince, but alwayes acknowledged the Emperour for their Lord: in the falling of whom, part was seized on by the Duke of Wittenberg, part was alienated to the house of Austria, the rest remaining imperiall.


5. FRANCONIA.
FRANKELAND is bounded on the East with Boheme and Saxonie, on the West with Elsas, on the North with Hassia, on the South with Suevia, Bavaria, and Helvetia. The old inhabitants were the Francones. They receiued the Christian faith by the preaching of Boniface (or Winifrede) an Englishman, Anno 730. It is at this day diuided twixt the Palatine of Rhene, the Duke of Wittenberg, the Marquesse of Auspach and Baden, the Bishops of Mentz, Bamberg, Westberg, and the Emperour. It once belonged totally to the Bishops of Westberg, vnto whom it was giuen by Charles the Great, Anno 772. Afterwards Otho the Great invested Conrade,Munster. the husband of his daughter, with the Dukedome of Franconie. This Conrade afterward Emperour, left it to his sonne Henry 3d, whose successour and son

Henry married Agnes his yongest child, to Fredericke Barbarossa: and their issue being extinct by the death of Conrade the fourth, Anno 1254; this Country was diuided betweene the Princes and Prelats aboue-named.
1 The PALATINATE of RHENE containeth in length from Coub to Gomersheime, north and South, 72 miles: and in bredth, from Sweibracken to Lauden, East and West, 96 miles. In this compasse are some townes of the Empire, and not a few Lordships belonging to the Bishops of Wormes and Spires two imperiall cities in this Country, and both seated on the Rhine. Spires was formerly called Nemetes, and is sufficiently famous for the imperiall Chamber here continually kept, and that the name of Protestants was first here giuen vnto the Princes and followers of the reformed Religion, 1529. Wormes was of old called Vangionium Speculum. In this towne did Luther make his first appearance before the Emperour Cha^les; from which when some of his friends disswaded him, he made answere, that he would goe, were there as many diu^ls to confront him, as the houses had tiles. In these two townes, Religion is indifferently allowed. The rest of the Country followeth the Doctrine of Calvin, as most agreeable to the Scripture. It is the most pleasing and delicious part of all Germany, stored with al fruits and mettals; abounding with those coole wines, and growing on the banks of Rhene, which are by vs called Rhenish wines; adorned with many gallant towns, if we consider either strength or brauery; and finally, watred with the famous riuers of Rhene, and Neccar. On the banks of this latter, standeth Mospoch,Munster a pretty neat towne. 2 Heidelberge, the chiefe city belonging to this Prince. It was once part of the Bishopricke of Wormes, from which it was taken by the Palatines. It is now famous for being the seat of the Palsgraues; for the sepulchre of Rodolphus Agricola; and for an Vniversity founded by the Emperour and Palatine Rupertus Anno 1406. On the banks of the Rhene stand 1 Baccharach, so called quasi Bacchiara, for the excellent wines. 2 Coub on the other side of the water; nere vnto which is the old and faire castle called Psalts, from whence the name Psalts-graue or Palsgraue seemeth to haue bin deriued.

3 Oppenheim, a strong town, which together with Keisers Lauterne, and Ingetheim, were giuen to the Palatine by Wenceslaus: and after settled on them by Rupertus the Emperour and Palatine, for 100000 Florens, Anno 1402 4 Cruitznacke, called anciently Stauronesus. 5 Frankendale, lately a Monastery only, but being peopled by such of the Netherlands,M^reat. which to auoyde the fury of D' Alva, fled hither; is now a town of principall strength. 6 Germersheim, and 7 Manheim, a well fortified town, seated on the confluence of Rhene and Nescar. On the Easterne part of the country standeth 1 Winheime a smal town. 2 Lauden or Ladeburge, on the little riuer Tuberus, bought by Rupertus aforesaid, of the Earles of Hohenloe, 1398. On the west side are the townes of 1 Newstate. 2 Keisers Lauterne, or Caesarea Lutra. 3 Sweibrucken, the title of the younger house of the Palsgra^es, whom the Latine Writers call Principes Gemini pontis, or Bipontani; the French, Princes of Deuxponts, or Biponts. The particular names of al the other cities and chief towns, I purposely omit; telling you only this, that here are in this country 14 other walled Towns, and 22 Palaces belonging to the Palatines: most of which they haue added to their Dominions, within litle more then 400 yeares. Such excellent managers of their own estate, haue bin those worthy Princes of the Rhene; so potent haue they bin in ordering the affaires of the Empire, both in warre and peac^; and so exceedingly haue they ingraffed themselues into the most noble Families of Germany, that I may well say with Irenicus, Nen est aelia Germaniae familia cui plus debeat nobilitas. The ancient inhabitants of this tract were the Nemetes and Vangiones.
The Palatinate and Bavaria were once a kingdome, continuing from Aldigerius, Anno 456, vnto Tassilo, Anno 739: who was subdued by Charles the Great.Munster. In his posterity they continued till the yeare 575, in which Otho the first took them by force:: giuing both Bavaria and the Palatinate, to his brother Henry. His issue inioyed them till the yeare 1043, in which the Emperour Henry the third, took them from Conrade the true heire to the great discontent of the Princes of the Empire. At last they were again restored to Otho of Wittlebacke, heire to

the fore named Conrade, by Fre^ericke Barbarossa, Ao 1103* Since which time, vnto this present, the male line neuer failed. The chief augmentation of this principate, came by the vertue of Fredericke the Palatine, and the vice of Wenceslaus the Emperour. The latter gaue vnto the Palatines for their voices in his election, three strong townes of the Empire; viz: Keisars Lanterne, Ingelheime, and Openheim: and the former took in a battle, Anno 1452, the Duke of Wittenberg the Marquesse of Raden, the Bishop of Spires, and the Archbishop of Metz, and ransomed them on what conditions he pleased. More particularly the Earle of Wirtenberge (for it was not yet erected into a Dukedome) paied for his ransome 100000 Florens, the Bishop of Metz redeemed himself for 450000 Florens. The Bishop of Sp^res gaue for his liberty, the towns of Rotenberg and Wersaw; and the Marquesse of Baden yeelded vp in lieu of his freedome, (...) County of Spanheim, of which, Cruitznack is a part; the towns of Besiken and Binheim; the right which he pretended to Eppingen, a town ouer-against Gemersheim; and his royalties between this Gemersheim, and Selts, a town of Alsatia, in fishing and hunting. From Otho of Witlebach, restored (as before is said) by Fredericke Barbarossa, there haue bin in a continued succession 26 Princes Electours, which haue ruled in these parts 440 yeares, with great credit and applause. The present Electour is Fredericke the 5th, who in the yeare 1613, espoused Elizabeth, daughter of IAMES K. of Great Brittaine, and Neice to Christian the fift, King of Denmarke: which alliance, together with his manifold vertues, and religious life, preferred him to the Kingdome of Bohemia, Anno 1619.
The Palsgraue hath many prerogatiues aboue the Electours of either sort: He taketh place of the Duke of Saxo^ie, and Marquesse of Brandenburg, because Henry the first Palatine, was descended of Charles the Great:Golden Bul. for which cause he is also in the vacancie of the Empire, Gouernour of the Westerne parts of Germany, in wh^ch office he hath power to alienate or giue offices, to take fealtie and homage of the subiects; and which is most, to sit in the imperiall Courts; and giue judgement of the Emperour himself. And look whatsoeuer shall in the vacancie

of the Empire, be by the Palatines enacted, that the new Emperours are bound by oath to confirme.
This Country is called the lower Palatinate, to distinguish it from the Palatinate of Northgo^a (of which we shall speak when we come into Bavaria) which belongeth also to these Princes, and is vulgarly calles, the vpper Palatinate.
Grimston.The revenues of this Prince, are 60000 pounds of yearely rents: lesse it cannot be; the very siluer Mines about one Town only, yeelding euery yeare 60000 Crownes; and the passage of one bridge ouer the Rhene, aboue 20000 Crownes more: besides his Coronet lands, and other duties.
Bara.His Armes are Diamond, a Lion Top^ce, armed and crowned Rubie. I say nothing of the deplored estate of this Country, holding it more fit for my prayers, then for my penne.
2. WIRTENBERG is about the bignesse of Yorkeshire; the ancient inhabitants were the Tectosages, and Virthungi, from which last, the name of the whole Country is deriued; it hauing bin formerly called Virthunberg. The chief towns are 1 Tubing an Vniuersity. 2 Stutgard the D. seat. 3 Marbach. 4 Caustat: and three Townes of the Empire, Esling, Wiler, and Rutling, all on the riuer Neccar.
Munster.This Country was made an Earledome in the yeare 1300; in which state it continued, till Earle Eberhard was by the Emperour Maximilian, made D. of Wittenberg in the yeare 1495: in which time, his successours haue added some dominions in Elsas and Suevia; so that his revenues may equall them of the Palatine. His Armes are Or, three attires of a stagge, borne palie barrie; Sable.
3. ANSPACH, or Onalsbach is a town of Franconia, distant 5 Dutch, or 25 English miles from Nurenberge. The Marquesse hereof is master of no small part of Franconie: but his estate (as the other Germane Princes are) is mixt and confused, with his neighbours. His chief towns then are 1 Anspach, or Onolsbach, 2 Hailbrun, seated on the edge of Wirtenberge; it was walled Ao 1085; and in it were publique schooles erected by Marquesse George Fredericke, Anno 1582. 3 Pleinfelt not farre from Nurenberge. To this Prince also belongeth a great part of Voiteland,Irenicus.

where he possessed the townes of Culmbach; and 2 Hoffe (formerly called Curia Pegniana) with diuers others.
These Marquesses are of the puissant family of Brandenburg,Reusner. the first which inioyed this title, being M. Fredericke, grandfather to M. Albert, who in the dayes of Charles the 5th, so harassed this country. George the first Marquesse Brandenburg of Iagendorfe, was son vnto this Fredericke: so also was Albert the first Duke of Prussia. The present Marq. Anspach, is Ioachimus Ernestus, youngest brother to the last Electour Sigismund; and was by the Princes of the Vnion, made Generall of their Forces, for the defence of the Palatinate 1620; a charge in which he bare himself, either cowardly, or not faithfully.
4. BADEN was made a Marquisate by Frederick Barbarossa. It lieth between the riuers Rhene and Neccar,Munster. and is a fine pleasing and fruitfull place. The first Marquesse was Hermannus, who took to wife Iudith, Countesse of Hochberg in Suevia; by which marriage, many fair possessions accrewed to him in those parts. His successours also had many fair Estates and Lordships in the Palatinate, which the Palatines of the Rhene by litle and litle, haue brought vnder their Dominion. His chief townes are 1 Turlach, or Durlach. 2. Pfortshaimie; and 3 Baden, a proper neat town, seated on the Rhene. Here the D. keepes in the winter, but at sommer he retireth to his fair castle of Milberg. Famous is this town for its hot bathes, being no lesse then 300 in number; from hence the town seemeth to haue tooke denomination, in respect of which, our Bathes in Somersetshire, wer^ called of old, Caire Baden. They are profitable for many diseases, and exulcerate sores.
5. MENTZ is a Town, seated where the riuer Moenus, is emptied into the Rhene, called in Latine Moguntia: the Bishop whereof is the chief Electour of Germanie; and in all places sitteth at the Emperours right hand: as his spirituall* so his temporal lands are great,Munster. but not comparable to his of Collen. Two of the Moguntine Bishops I cannot omit, the one as infamous for his life, as the other was for his doctrine. The first was Hatto or Hanno, who in a yeare of scarcity, gathered all the poore people in the Country into an olde barne, pretending a generall

almes: but being there, he burnt them all, saying, they were the rats and mice which deuoured the corne: after this inhumane act, he was so haunted with rats and mice, that to auoide them, he built him a palace in the midst of the Rhene, whither also the rats and mice followed and deuoured him. The second was Boniface, who was the first that taught, that though the Pope neglected all Christianity, yet ought no man to rebuke him for it. It seemeth that this Boniface was a sound in Philosophy, as Religion; for hapning to see a Tractate written by Virgilius Bishop of Salizburge; of the Antipodes; and supposing that vnder that strange name some damnable doctrine was conteined; made complaint first to the D. of Boh^mia, and next to Pope Zachary, Anno 745; By whom the poore Bishop (vnfortunate only in being learned in such a time of ignorance) was co^demned of heresie. The Archbishoprick was translated from Wormes hither, by King Pepi^, father to Charles the Great. The chief townes here to belonging, are 1 Lansteine, 2 Bing, seated on the Rhene: nigh vnto this towne is the palace built by the aboue-named Hatto in the midst of the water; and is called to this day, the Mouseturne.
5 BAMBERG is a reasonable faire Citty, and belongeth to a Bishop of its owne; who possesseth no small part of Franconie. It is seated on Moenus, not farre from We^rstberg. The reuenew of this Bishop cannot but be great:Sleid. Com. for in the wars of Germanie 1530; we finde how the Bishop hereof gaue vnto Marquesse Albert of Brandenbourg, for a cessation from armes, 20 Lordships; besides the tutelage of his wards and Clients, his chiefe Towne next vnto Bamberg, is Schestlits. and 3 Fochiam where it is said that Pontius Pilate was borne.
6 WEIRSTBERG, is a Bishoprick, whose Bishop still intituleth himselfe Duke of Franconie;Munster. which was by the guist of Charles the Great in the possession of his predecessours* til Otho the Great gaue it to his sonne in law, Conradus Salicus. The citty was once called Herb polis. During the late mentioned wars in Germanie, this Bishop also felt the fury of Marquesse Alberts armies;Sleid. Com. so that he was faine to co^pound with him, for 220000 Crownes ready money, and to discharge all his debts, which amounted

vnto 350000 Crownes more: by which composition we may partly guesse at the riches of his treasurie, and partly at the greatnesse of his intrado. The second Towne of note, belonging to this Bishopricke, is Schwinfurt, seated on Moenus. 3 Arnsteme.
7 The EMPEROVRS PART containeth the free or Imperiall Citties before mentioned,Morison. in the Palatinate, and Wittinberg besides many other: the chiefe whereof are 1 Norenberge, whereof the Marquesses of Brandenberg were once Burgraues; which office was sold at length to the citty by Frederick the 3d Anno 1414, or thereabouts. His sonne Albert desired to recover the old office againe, and besieged the Citty; hauing on his part no lesse then 17 Princes on his side, and yet could not force it.Sleid. Co^* At this Towne was held that assembly of the Catholique Princes of Germanie; in which a league was made against the confederacy of Smalcalde, Anno 1538. Into this league entred Charles the Emperour, Fernando king of the Romanes; the Bishops of Mentz, and Salisburg; William and Lewis Dukes of Bavaria, Henry Duke of Brunswicke, and George Duke of Saxony. Keckerman reporteth that at the comming of Maximilian, the Emperour toward this Towne; a wooden Eagle made by an Artizan here dwelling, flew a quarter of a mile out of the town to meet the Emperour: and being come to the place where hee was, turned backe againe of her owne accord, and accompanied him home to his lodging. Sit sides penes autorem. This towne is situate in the very navell or center of Germanie; and giueth for Armes; Azure, an Harpie displai'd, crined, crowned, and armed Or. And 2 Frankefort on the riuer Moenus, famous for the election of the Emperours; and for the two great book-marts here holden in mid-lent, and mid-September. It tooke this name either from Francus the sonne of Marcomir, thought to bee the founder of it; or a Francorum vado, as being the vsuall foord or passage of the Franks.


5 HELVETIA.
HELVETIA or Zwitzerland, is bounded on the East with Tirolis; on the West, with France; on the North, with Lorreine and Elsas; on the South, with Italy. It containeth the 13 Cantons,

of 1 Zurich, 2 Berne, 3 Lucerne, 4 Vraniae, 5 Glari^, 6 Zugh,Guillim. 7 Baset, 8 Friburg, 9 Vnderwalt, 10 Soloure, 11 Schaffhausen, 12 Apensol, and 13 Swits; from which last, the whole Country is called Switzerland. This is reputed to be the highest country in all Europe, as sending forth sowre riuers, which run through all the quarters of the same: viz: Danubius thro^gh Germanie, Hungary, and Dacia East; 2 Rhene, through France and Belgia, North; Rhodanus through France, West; and Pee, through Italy, South.
The chiefe Townes are Zurich, or Tigurum, nigh vnto which Zwinglius was slaine, it being the custome of the place, for the Ministers to goe in the front of their Armies.Sleid. C^m. And againe he being a man of a bold courage, thought that if hee should stay at home, men would haue deemed him to haue fainted in time of warre, which had incouraged others in time of peace. Hee was aged at the time of his death 44 yeares, and was by the victorious enimy burned; his heart remaining in the midst of the fire, after the rest of his body was consumed, whole and vntouched: (as was also the heart of Bishop Cranmer at his martyrdome in England) 2 Sengall, or Ciuitas Sancti Galli, which rather is a Town confederate with the Switzers, then any way subiect vnto them. The Anabaptists who beganne in the yeare 1527 were in this Towne very riefe; insomuch that one of them in the presence of his father and mother, cut of his brothers head; and said (according to the humor of that sect, who boast much of dreames, visio^s, and enthusiasms) that God co^manded him to do it. 3 Basel so called, either of a Basiliske, slain at the building of the City; or of the German word Pasel, signifying a path; or of (...), signifying kingly. It was built Anno 382, and is famous for an Vniversity founded by Pius the 2d, Anno 1459. It was made a Canton Anno 1501; and is honoured with the Sepulchres of Oecolampadius, Erasmus, Pontanus, Glarcanus, and Hottoman the famous Civilian. In this Citty, Anno 1431, was held that notable Councell, wherein though the papall authority was then at the height; it was decreed, that a generall Councell was aboue the Pope. What was then enacted, was immediatly put in practise; the Councell deposing Pope Eugenius the 4th, and

placing in his roome Amadeus, Duke of Savoy, who was afterward called Felix the 4th. 4 Constance, seated on the lake Boden^ee, ouer against Lindaw,Sleid Com. is within the confines of Switzerland; bu^ belongeth to the house of Austria. For this Citty being Ao 1548, out-lawed by Charles the 5th, for not receauing the Interim and not being able to withstand such forces as he had prepared against them, put themselues into the protection of the Archdukes of Austria. But herein they fell out of the fryingpanne into the fire: for Ferdinand King of the Romanes then Archduke, being possessed of the Towne; ceazed on the common treasurie, and all the writings belonging to the Towne; he commanded that no Cittizen should weare a sword, and that within eight dayes all the Ministers of the Gospell should depart the Citty. Famous is this Towne for the Councell here holden, Anno 1414, so renowned as well for the multitude of people there assembled, as the importance of the matters there handled. The people of note there assembled, were Sigismund the Emperour, 4 Patriarchs, 29 Cardinals, 346 Archbishops and Bishops, 564 Abbots and Doctours, 16000 secular Princes and Noblemen, 450 common Harlots, 600 Barbers, and 320 Minstrells and lesters. The businesse there handled was first the pacifying of a schisme in the Church, there being at that time three Antipopes, viz: Gregory the 12th, resident at Rome; Iohn the 23 resident at Bononia, and Bennet the 13th resident in Spaine; all which were by the Councell deposed, and Martin the fift made sole Pope. The other maine businesse was the proceedings against Hierome of Prage, and Iohn Husse, both who (notwithstanding they had the Emperours safe conduct) were vniustly condemned of heresie,Sleid. Com. degraded, and then burned. Now the maner of degrading of Priests is this. The party to bee degraded is attired in his Priestly vestments, and holdeth in the one hand a Chalice filled with wine mixed with water, and in the other a guilt patent with a wafer (or singing cake.) Then kneeling down, the Bishops deputy first taketh from him all these things commanding him to say no more Masses for the quicke and the dead. 2ly, scraping with a peece of glasse his fingers ends, he inioyneth him neuer to hallow any thing: And 3ly, stripping him

of his Priestly vestments, he is cloathed in a lay habit, and delivered into the power of the secular magistrate. 5 Berne where, Anno 1528, Images were plucked out of the Churches in a popular tumult; this being the first towne that after the reformation, was purged of those excellent instruments of idolatry. 6 Baden, called for distinction sake the Vpper Baden, is seated in the middle of the Countrey; and is for that cause the place of meeting for the Councell of estate of all the confederates. It taketh name from the Batches here being, two of which only are publike, the rest in priuate houses: conscious, as it is thought, to much lasciuiousnesse. For whereas it is said of Adrian, that Lavacra pro sexibus separauit; here men and women promiscuously wash together, and which is worst in priuate: whereas Munster telleth vs, Cernunt viri vxores tractari, cernunt cum alienis loqui, and quidem solam cum solo; and yet are not any disturbed with iealousie. These Bathes are much frequented, yet not so much for health as pleasure. Their chiefest vertue is the quickning power they haue vpon barren women. But as the Friers vse to send men whose wiues are fruitlesse, in pilgrimage to S. Ioyce the patronesse of fruitfulnesse, and in the meane time to lye with their wiues: so it may be with good reason thought that in a place of such liberty as this is* the lusty and young gallants that haunt this place, produce greater operation on barren women, then the waters of the Bath. 7 Lucerne, seated on the banks of a great lake, and so called from Lucerna a Lanthorne, which was placed on the top of an high tower, for the benefit of Saylers.
Zwitzerland in Caesars time was so populous, that the Countrey not being able to sustaine the people, they set fire on their Townes and houses, and went all with a generall resolution to seeke new dwellings. The men, women, and children amounted to the number of 3680000: which notwithstanding were by Caesar compelled to returne into their pristine habitation. During the Empire of the French, they were accounted French;Munster. and Germane, when the Empire was devolved vnto Germanie. But being at last ouer-burdened with the tyranny of their Gouernours; and seeing the Empire by the

Popes Fulminations, distracted into diuers factions; they contracted an offensiue and defensiue league: into which first entred the Vranians, Swits, and Vndervaldens, Ao 1316; neither were they all vnited into one consederation till the yeare 1513. At their first beginning to free themselues from bondage, Fredericke Duke of Austria, sent his sonne Leopold to war vpon them; but they protesting that they neuer acknowledged the Dukes of Austria for their Lords, but only such of this family as were Emperours; encountred and ouerthrew him, more by the convenience of the narrow passages, through which his army was to passe,Cominaus. then their own valour. The first time that euer they got any reputation by their valour, was in the warres which Charles Duke of Burgundy made against them; when they discomfited in three set battailes: a warre begun on very small occasions, and lesse hopes: the country being so barren, and the people so poore, that their Embassadour to the Duke protested, that if all his countrimen were taken, they would not be able to pay a ransome, to the value of the spurres and bridle bits in his campe. Certainly at that time they were so poore, that they knew not what riches was; for hauing wonne the first battaile at Granson, (the other two were those of Morat and Nancie) one of the goodliest pauilions in the world, was by them torne into peeces, and turned into breeches and sidecoats: diuerse siluer plates and dishes they sold for two souse apeece, supposing them to be powter; and a great Diamond of the Dukes, which was the goodliest Iewell in Christendome, was sold to a Priest for a guilder; and by him again to some of the Lords of the country for three franks. After their valour shewed in those battailes, Lewis 11th took them into pension, giuing them yearely 40000 Crownes, viz: 20000 to the cities, and 20000 to particular persons. These pensions, when by their assistance Lewis 12th had conquered Millaine, they desired to haue enlarged, which when he denied, they with-drew themselues from the amity of the French, and entred into the seruice of Pope Iulio 2d;Guicciard. who therefore stiled them the Defenders of the Church, Anno 1510. Francis, successour to this Lewis, considering what damage his Realme had sustained by the revolt

of these auxiliaries to his enemies, renewed the confederation with them, on condition that he should restore the ancient pension of 40000 Crownes: secondly, that he should pay vnto them at certaine termes, 600000 Crownes: thirdly, that hee should entertain 4000 of them in his pay continually: fourthly that for the restoring of such places as they had taken from the Dutchy of Millaine, he should giue vnto the^ 300000 crowns: fiftly, that he should giue them three months pay before-hand: sixtly and lastly, that Maximilian Sforce, whom they had estated in Millaine, and were now going to dispossesse; might by the King be created Duke of Nemours, endowed with 12000 frankes of yearely revenue, and married to a Lady of the blood royall. On these conditions, as honourable to them, as burdensome to the King, was the league renued Anno 1522: since which time, they haue obtained, that 600 of their Countrie are to be of the French Kings guard; 500 of which, waite without at the gates of the Court, the other hundred in the great hall.
As for the Religion of this people, they are diuided into Papists and Protestants; fiue Cantons being wholly Papists; viz: Swits,Grimston. Vrania, Vnderwald, Lucerne, and Zugh; Glaris and Apenzol mixt; and the rest entirely Protestants. This diuision began Anno 1519, or thereabouts; when Zuinglius minister at Zurich, or Tigu^um, sec^nded the beginning of Luther, which innovation the rest of this people not liking, moued warre with them of Zurich, and the rest of the reformation; in which Zuinglius was slaine, and the Tigurines discomfited. But in the yeare 1531, an absolute peace was concluded between them, so that notwithstanding this diuersity of Religion, they liue now in a happy vnity, gouerning after a Democraticall for me. The country is in length 240, and in bredth 180 miles; and is thought to containe three millions of people. In this Country arise the heads of Poe, Danow, Rhene, and Rhone, the fountaines of those two last, being not aboue three houres riding distant. The people are very warlike, and since by reason of their situation, they haue no vent of men by trafficke, they vse to imploy themselues on the seruice of any who will hire them.
Boterus.On the Southwest of Zwitzerland, lieth Valesia or Wallis. It

is seated totally among the Alpis,Munster. consisting indifferently of dangerous, rockie, and impassible hills; and rich, pleasing, and delicious valleyes; d^fficult to be entred, and that to but a few places. It is in length from East to West, fiue dayes journey, but in bredth nothing answerable. The names of all their chiefe Townes, you shall anon heare; I commend chiefly vnto your obseruation 1 Sedunum, Sittin, or Sion, the only walled town of this countrie: of it selfe of no great beauty or worth, but in respect of the other townes about it, neat and gallant. Built it is on a hill of great height, and an ascent as hazardous; impossible to be mounted by force, and vnlikely to be taken by assault; the steepinesse of the rocke keeping it without the reach of gunneshot. 2 Martinacht, formerly called Octodurum, famous only for its antiquity; and 3 Agaunum, or S. Maurice, the key of the whole country; but chiefly in the winter-time. For then the yce doth so shut vp the passages, that the only entrance is at this place, here being a bridge built ouer the Rhene for that purpose, which is strongly built, and well manned, to auoide surprisall. This town is the seat of the Gouernour of the lower Val^sia; for it is diuided into the vpper and lower; in the vpper are seuen Cantons, namely 1 Sedune. 2 Leuck. 3 Brig. 4 Nies. 5 Rauren. 6 Sider 7. Gombes. In the lower Valesia are six commonalties. 1 Gundis. 2 Ardon. 3 Sallien. 4 Martinacht. 5 Intremont. 6 S. Maur^ce: all which are called by the name of the chief townes. They were giuen by Charles the Great vnto Theodul, Bishop of Sedune, Anno 805, vnder whose successours they continue, but without much shew of subiection: The Bishop is chosen by the Canons of the Church of Sedune, and certain Burgesses of the 7 vpper Cantons. They speak partly the Dutch, partly the French tongues. They combined themselues with the fiue Cantons of Zw^tzerland, for the better maintenance of the Romish Religion, not aboue 52 yeares since.


6. SVEVIA.
SVEVIA is divided into the vpper and lower.Mnnster* The vpper is bounded on the East with Tirolis, on the West with Helvetia, on the North with lower Suevia, on the South with Millaine. The Country is halfe in Germany, halfe in Italy: so that they vse

both languages. This Region was of old called Rhaetia, from one Rhaetus, who flying out of Tuscanie from the fury of the Gaules, planted here a new set of people, about 187 yeares before the comming of CHRIST: whose Gospell they d^d receiue about the yeare 448. They are now called Grisons. The whole Region is diuided into three confederations. 1 Lega Cadi Deo, whose chiefe City is Chur or Coyra, on which, as being the Metropolis of the Grisons, I will the longer insist. It was built Anno 357, seated about halfe an houres journey from the Rhene: for forme it is triangular, the houses indifferent hansome in themselues, but not vniforme one with the other. In one corner of it, on a hill somewhat higher then the rest of the towne, standeth the close, within which is the Cathedrall Church; a stately piece of building, rather in the account of the natiues, then strangers; the Bishops palace, and the Canons houses, all well built, and sufficiently adorned. This Town, together with all the rest of the Country in 2 manner, was taken by the Spaniard, Anno 1622. This Liga Cadi Dio comprehendeth 21 corporations, and sendeth to the generall Senates 23 Commissioners. The 2 is Lega Grisa, whence all the people are called Grisons: It sendeth to the Senates 28 Deputies, and comprehendeth 19 Commonalties; the chiefe of which is Musocco. The 3d is Lega Dritture, containing 10 Corporations, the chief Townes of which are Bormio and Sondrio; and sendeth to the Senatehouse 14 Commissioners. The gouernment of this Country was giuen Anno 744, by Charles the great, to `the Bishop of Coyra, who being molested by his neighbours of Tirolis, entered confederation with the Switzers, 1471. They haue free vse of Religion, both they of the Romish, as they of the Reformed Church.
Lower SVEVIA, or the country now called the Dukedome SCHWABEN; is limited on the East with Bavaria, on the West with Danubius, on the North with Francoma, and on the South with Tirolis and the Grisons. The chiefe Townes are 1 Vlme, so called for the company of Elmes which inviron it. 2 Lind^we, seated ouer against Constance, in the lake called Bod^azee: it bought her freedome of the Emperour Fredericke

Barbarossa 1166. 3 Auspurg, called for distinction sake, Augusta Vindelicorum, it standeth on the riuer Leith. In this towne Anno 1530.Sleid. Com. The Protestant Princes exhibited vnto the Emperour, a confession of their Faith; which is still called Confessio Augustana. Here also did the Emperour compile the Interim, which comprehended a forme of doctrine, which he would haue by all obserued, till the next generall Councell: It was a miscellanie of Religion, containing some things in fauour of the Papists, and some of the Protestants: yet neither party was pleased with it. 4 Norlingen. 5 Wherlingon, townes of the Empire. 6 Ravensperge, an other imperiall towne. 7 Dinckelspuhel, and 8 Gmund (both seated on the North of Danubius) of the same tenure also Here is also the Countie of Hasperge, being the ancient patrimony of the house of Austria, out of which came Rodolphus Haspurgensis, who sold Italy, and vnited Austria to his small Countie.
The former inhabitants were the Rhaeti, and the Vindelici; these latter, if I coniecture not amisse, deriuing their name from the riuer Lycus, which bounded the East side of their country. They were both bitter enemies to the Romans, on whom they executed all manner of crueltie, that a barbarous rage could invent. To represse these insolencies, Augustus sent against them his sonne-in-law Drusus, being the father of Germanicus, who subdued them: but not without great resistance: the women throwing their young children at the Romans, insteed of darts. The valiantest of the people were transplanted into other soiles, the weaker remai^ed at home: who soon yeelded the country to the Sueui, then wearie of the Romans neighbourhood.
In the time of Caesar, these Suevi were the most potent nation of Germ^nie; and brought against him into the field 430000 fighting men; whereof 80000 were slaine, and many of them drowned. They vsed to stay at home, and goe abroad by turnes: they which staid at home, tilled the lands; they which went abroad, brought with them the spoyle of their neighbours. After they had slipped their necks out of the Roman Collar, they erected a kingdome; which was ruinated by King Pepin, and made a Prouince of the French Monarchie: from which againe it reuolted,

and was made an absolute Dukedome in the daies of Charle^ the Grosse. This Dukedome yeelded 6 Emperours, the last of which was Conradus, whose son Corradine being the 21 Duke of this family, was slaine in the wars of Naples. After his death, the issue of the former Dukes fayling, Rodolphus Haspergensis seized on the greatest part of this Countrey, for Austria and the Empire: the rest was shared, though not equally, betweene the Dukes of Bavaria, and Wittenberg.
The Armes of Sueuia or Schwaben are Argent, 3 Leopards Sable.


7 BAVARIA.
Munster.BAVARIA hath on the East Austria, and Stiria; on the West the Leike; on the North Bohemia, and part of Franconia; on the South Tir^lis and Carinthia. The Christian faith was first preached in this Countrey, by Rupertus Bishop of Wormes Ao 612: the religion now is corrupted with the abuses of Popery, which they will by no meanes be induced to ^orsake. The chief towns are 1 Munchen vpon the riuer Aser, the Dukes seat. 2 Ingol^^^^ on Danabius, an Vniuersity. 3 Ratisbona, or Regensperg seated on the Donaw;Sleid. Com. famous for the enterview here made betweene the Emperour Charles the fift, and Maurice Duke of Saxonie: where it was agreed that Maurice abandoning his Vnkle, and cleauing to the Emperor, should be invested in the Dukedome and Electourship of Saxonie. 4 Passawe, where haue bin so many meetings of the German Princes; that especially, wherein all warres being ended between the Protestant Princes, and the Emperour Charles, peace and liberty of conscience, was restored to the whole Country. 5 Salisburge, by Ptolomie called Poedicum, and of late Iuvan^a: it is seated on the riuer Saltz^ch, of which it taketh name. Here lieth buried the famous Quacksaluer Paracelsus. This City is honoured with a Bishopticke, whose revenues are the greatest in Germanie.Hist. of the Coun. of Tr. In the time of Luthers Reformation, Matheo Langi a Cardinall, was Bishop hereof, who ingeniously confessed, that the Masse was not void of its faults; that the Courts of Rome were corrupted; and that a generall reformation of the liues of Priests and Friers was necessary: but that a poore rascall Monke, (for so he thought Luther)

should begin all, that he deemed intollerable, and not to be endured. 6 Frising, situate on the swelling of (...) hill, not farre from the riuer Mosacus:Munster. it was called in former times Fraxinu^, and was erected into a Bishops See, Anno 710. 7 Eystet, called in Latine Aishstadium, supposed to be built out of the ruines of Aureatum, a town destroyed by the Hunnes. Finally the whole number of cities in Bavaria are 34,Ortelius. besides 46 great Townes: the soile about which is sufficiently fruitfull in all things, sauing wines.
Bavaria followed the fortune of the Palatinate of Rhene, till the yeare 1294;Munster. in which Lewis the Palatine, and D. of Bavaria dying* gaue to Rodolphus his eldest son, the Palatinate; to Lewis or Lodowicke his yonger (who was afterwards Emperour) Bavaria. This again ought to haue bin vnited to the Palatinate by the marriage of Rupert the Palatine, with Elizabeth heire of George D. of Bavaria: But Maximilian the Emperour, gaue the Dukedome to Albert of Bavaria; son to Albert, son to Iohn, which was brother to Fredericke, the father of D. George, Anno 1504. From Albert, descended Maximilian, that now liueth; who is the only temporall Prince of any note, which follow^th the doctrine of the Romish Church; for which his house is so pestered with Friers and Iesuits, that notwithstanding the greatnes of his revenue, he is very poore; as spending his whole state on these Popish flesh-^lies, by building for them Colledges and Churches.
His Armes are Lozenges of 21 peeces in Bend, Arg. and Azure.
The Northerne part of Bavaria, on the farther side of Danubius, is called by some the Palatinate of Northgoia; by others the Palatinate of Bavaria; but generally Over Psalts, or the vpper Palatinate. It is bounded East and North with Bohemia; West with that part of Franconie, which belongeth to the citty of Nurenberge; and South with Danubius. It belongeth totally to the Palatines of the Rhene, and so hath done euer since the yeare 1339: when Lodovicus the Emperour, and and first Duke of Baniere, after the diuision aboue-mentioned made between him and Rodolphus the Palatine; gaue it for euer

to the Palatines; who it seemeth were not content with the former partage. The chief towns are Amberg (the birth-place of the present Electour Fredericke) whose siluer mines yeeld vnto the Princes coffers, 60000 crowns yearely. 2 Newburg, which is vsually the Apennage of some of the younger Palatines. 3 Awerbach. 4 Sultzbach. 5 Weiden, and 6 Castell, where the Palatines of the Rhene, when they soiourne in this country, vse to keep court. On the North riuer of this Country, where it jetteth toward Voitland, is the hill Feichtelberg, out of which arise 4 riuers, running foure seuerall wayes: viz: Eger East, 2ly Moenus West; 3ly Sala North; 4ly Nabus South: so that it may very probably be thought, that this is the highest hill in al Germany. On the Southwest corner are two litle riuers, viz: Almul, which runneth into Danubius, and Red^itz which runneth into Moenus, and so into the Rhene. Between these two riuer heads, which are but litle distant; Charles the Great, Anno 793, intended to haue digged a channel; so to haue made a passage out of the Rhene, into Danow or Danubius. He imployed in this work many thousand men; but partly by excesse of rain, and partly by I know not what strange affrightments, they desisted. Some parts of the begun ditch are yet to be seen, nigh vnto Weisenberg, which standeth between both riuers. This Palatinate is in length from Weisenberg, to the hill Fe^chielberg, 68 miles: and in bredth from Hambu^ge, vnto the edge of ^ohemia, 80 miles.


8 AVSTRIA.
The Archdukedome of AVSTRIA, comprehendeth the Prouinces of Austria, Styria, Carinthia, Tirolis, and Cara^ola; besides the parcels of Suevia, and Elsas.
Ortelius.Austria is parted on the East from Hungarie, by the Leitae; on the West (...) Bav^ire, by the Ems; on the North from Moravia by the Tems; on the South from Styria, by the Muer. It is called by the Germanes, Ostenrich, signifying the Easterne bound of the Empire.Munster. The Christian Faith was first preached here by Saint Seuerine, Anno 464: at this time they are divided in opinions; the greater sort, especially the Nobility, addicted to the reformation. The soile of this Country is very rich,

abounding with all necessaries; and hauing great store of wines, with which they supply the defects of Bavaria, and other neighbouring Regions. The chief Town, are Wien or Vienna, famous for a repulse giuen to the Turkes, Ao 1526, of whom 200000 vnder the conduct of Solyman the Magnificent, besieged the city: but by the valour of Fredericke the II Electour Pal^tine, and other Princes, they were forced to retire, with the losse of 80000 Souldiers. This City was made an Vniversity by the Emperour Fredericke the 2d. It is seated on the Danubius, and is doubtlesse one of the brauest and beautifullest Townes in Germanie: adorned with many magnificent Temples, and stately Monasteries; but aboue all, with a most sumptuous and princely Palace, wherein the Archdukes keep their residence, built by Ottocarus King of Bohemia, during the little time that he was Duke here. This town was anciently called Fabiana, but being ruined by the Hunnes, and again by the natiues reedified, obtained this new name. 2 Emps so called of the riuer Ems, on whose banks it is seated. 3 S. Leopold. 4 Neustat. 5 Hainburg. 6 Crems.
Austria was formerly called Pannonia superior; and afterward being subiected to the French Monarchie, was called Ostenrich or Austrich. It was wrested from the Empire, during the raigne of Arnulphus, by the Hunnes; from whom it was recouered by Otho the first, with the aid of many Nobles, amo^gst whom the Country was distributed; which Families being extinct, Otho the II gaue the Prouince to a yong Gentleman called Lupoldus, with the title of Marquesse, Anno 980. This Marquisate was by Fredericke Barbarossa raised to a Dukedome, 1158, Henry being the first Duke, whose brother Leopold, took Richard the first of England, prisoner, in his returne from Palestine: for whose ransome he had so much money, that with it he bought Carniola, the Counties of Neobourgh, and Luitz; and walled Vienna. His son Fredericus Leopoldus was for his manifold deserts, made King of Austria, by the Emperour Frederick the second, Anno 1225. Eleuen yeares he continued in this dignity; at the end of which, he was spoyled of his royal ornaments by the same Emperour, for patronage of villainous actions in his kingdome, and scorning to appeare to his answere at the

summons of the Emperour. Finally, he died in the yeare 1246, leauing two daughters. His sister named Margaret was ^^r^ed vnto Ottocar, son to Primist^^^ King of Bohemia: his eldest daughter Gertru^e, to the Marquesse o^ Baden: and Ag^es the second, ma^ied vnto Henry D. of (...)* Ottocar pretending the right of his wife, tooke on him the Dukedome of Austria, which he kept after the death of his wife, till the yeare 127^ (...) which he was vanquished and slain by Rodolphus the Emperor* Rodolphus gaue it to Albert his son; whose wi^e Elizabeth was daughter to Membard Earle of T^r^lis, son of D. Henry of C^rinthia and of Agres daughter of Fredericke Leopold; Margaret the s^ster; and Gert^ude the daughter of this Fredericke dying issuelesse. By this marriage, Albert had the Dukedome, of Austria, Stiria, and Carinthia; with the Earledome of T^rcl^s and Carniola: This Dukedome was by Fredericke the third, Emperour and D. of Austria, raised to the dignity of an Archdukedome, as it still continueth.

The Dukes and ^ Archdukes of Austria.
1278
1 Albertus 30
1308
2 Albertus II. 51
1359
3 Leopold 27
1386
4 Albert* III 9
1395
5 Albert IV 9
1439
6 Fredericke 54
1493
7 Maxim^^^^ 26
1519
8 Charles 39. ^^m whom are descerded the Kings of Spaine now ruling, and b^^ng the first branch of the Austrian tree; whose boughs h^ue euershadowed the better part of Europe.
1558
9 Ferdinand ^
1565
10 Alaximilian II
1576
11 Rod^lphus 35
1611
12 Mat^hias 8
16^9
13 Ferdinand II, the first of the house of Gratz, which is the fourth branch of this tree, now beginning to rule the Empire. There were also two other stocks of the Imperall house of Austria, namely the Dukes of ^uspunc^ being the third* and the Archdukes of Austria being the second branch^ of which last, Albert the Duke of Burgundie was chief. All which Princely Families, as well for entertaining a perpetuall vnity among themselues, as thereby to be able to mol^st their enemies; haue made so many crosse or inter-marriages, that they ^aue remained still as brethren of the same parent, and as armes of the

same tree. In our time two of these Austrian Families are extinct* and the whole patrimonie of this Fam^ly in Germany, se^^^ed in the house of Gratz. For Maximilian the Emperour, (...) to the Emperour Ferdinand, Duke of Austria, of the (...) in all 9 sonnes, all which died childlesse; and (...), viz: Rodolphus and Matthias, were Emperours o^ (...), and Kings of Hungary, and Bohemia: and two (...) for the Kings of Spaine in the Netherlands, (...) and Albertus. The house of Inspruch is (...);Morison. for when Ferdinand of Inspruch disgraced his high (...), by ma^rying with Philippina, a Burgers daughter of Aus^^^^ the co^ditioned with those of his kin^ed, that Tirol should (...) end vnto the children borne of that bed. So after his (...), Tirol (...) into the house of Gratz; and Charles his eldest (...) being made Marquesse of Burgh; and his youngest sonne Andrew, Cardinall of Brixia.

2. ST^RIA or STIERMARKE is bounded with the Rab on the East. Carinthia on the West, with Dravus on the South, and the Muer and Austria on the North: The length of this countrey is 110 miles, the bredth 60 or thereabouts. The chiefe cities are Marchpurg, and Gratz, whence the fourth branch of Austria is called Du Gr^tz, and haue the Gouernment of this Country.Everewo^^. This town was once full of Protestants, who could by no meanes be expell'd, or hindred from free exercise of Religion, till the yeare 1598; in which the late Queene of Spaine, Marg. Sister to the Archduke Ferdinand du Gratz, was by the Citizens solemnly entertain'd; with whom entered so many Souldiers* that the City was taken, and 14 Ministers of the Gospell presently banished. This Marquisate of Stiria was vnited to Austria, by a marriage betwixt the daughter and heire of Ottocar the Marquesse,Morison. and Leopold Duke of Austrian at which wedding, this Stiria by Fredericke Barb^rossa, was made a Dukedome. It was called in former times Val^ria.
3. CARINTHIA is 75 miles in length, and 55 in bredth; it (...) with Stiria on the East, Tirol on the West, Ba^are on the (...), the Alpes on the South. The chief Townes are 1 Vi^^ach, 2 Spittall, 3 G^rah, 4 Freisach, and 5 S. Viti. Santo. Vitus, or

St Veit, the Metropolis of the whole Country. The ceremonies with which the Archdukes of Austria are acknowledged Dukes of Carinthiae,Munster. are very strange and obserueable. For in the meadowes adjoyning to the town of S. Veit, a certain country man to whom that office by inheritance belongeth, sitteth on a marble stone there being; holding in his right hand a cow with a black calfe; and in his left hand a mare as lean as a rake. Then commeth the new Duke, attired in a plain rusti^k habite, his Courtiers attending him in their richest apparell: at whose approach, the Country man aboue-mentioned, demaundeth; what he is that so maiestically commeth th^t^erward; the people answere, that it is the future Duk^. He againe asketh, whether he be a iust Iudge, and one that will maintaine the libertie of the Countrey, and sinceritie of the Religion; the people answere, he will. Then he asketh, by what right he wil displace him fro^ his mar^le seat; to whom the Steward of the new Dukes house replieth, he shall give thee 60 pence in siluer, the cattell now standing by thee, the cloathes which he hath at this time on, and thy house shall euer be free from taxe and tribute. The fellow vpon this taketh the Duke by the hand, and bidding him be a good Prince, giueth him a gentle cuffe on the eare; seateth him on the marble stone, and taking away the cattell, departeth. This done, the new Duke goeth to S. Vites Church, and hauing done his devotions, putteth of his rustick weedes, and dresseth himself in cloathes befitting a Prince; for such after these ceremonies he is acknowledged.
4. CARNIOLA being 150 miles long, and 45 broad, is environed with Sclavonia East, Italy West, Carinthia North, and Istria South. The chiefe Townes are 1 Newmarckt, 2 Es^^ng, 3 Marsperg, 4 Pegonocke, and 5 Saxenfelt, all vpon the Savus; which arising in this Country, runneth through the very middle of it.
Ortelius.5. TIROLIS is 72 miles broad, and as many long: It is bounded East with Carinthia, West with the Grisons, North with Schwaben, South with Marca Trevigiana. The soile of this Country is very good, and full of siluer Mines, which yeeld vnto the Archdukes 20000 Crownes yearely. The chief ^owns

are Oenipons, or Inspurch (seated on the Inn or Oe^^s) which gaue denomination to the third branch of Austria, as being so called, descended from Ferdinand the second, sonne of Ferdinand the Emperour; whereas the house of Grats proceed fro^ Charles being the 3d. In this towne was Charles the fi^t, when he heard how Mauritius, whom he had made Electour of Saxonie, was comming against him with his owne men; which so terrified him, that he fled immediatly into Italy, and resigned his Empire to his brother Ferdinand. 2 Landecke 3 Tirol. 4 B^lzan. 5 Trent on the riuer Adesis, in which the Councell was held by Pope Paul the third. It began in the yeare 1545, against the doctrines of Luther and Calvin. This Councell continued, sometimes assembled, sometimes dissolued, for the space of 18 yeares; and before the first meeting here, had at diuerse other places bin intimated and dashed; furthered by some, and hindred by others for 22 yeares together. The effects of this Councell I cannot better describe, then in the words of the history hereof, which are these: This Councell desired and procured by godly men, to re-vnite the Church, which began to be diuided; hath so established the schisme, and made the parties so obstinate, that the dis^ords are irreconcileable: and being managed by Princes for reformation of Ecclesiasticall Discipline, hath caused the greatest deformation that euer was since Christianitie did beginne: and hoped for by the Bishops to regaine the Episcopall authority, for the most part vsurped by the Pope; ^ath made them loose it altogether, bringing them into greater seruitude; on the contrary scared and avoided by the See of Rome, ^as a potent meanes to moderate the exorbitant power thereof, mounted from small beginnings, by diuerse degrees, to an vnlimited excesse; it hath so established and confirmed the same ouer that part which remaineth subiect vnto it, that it neuer was so great no^ so soundly rooted. So farre the words of the History.
These Prouinces belong all to the house of Austria: the revenue of which Princes, would certainly be farre greater; if the neighbourhood of the Turke did not put them to continuall expences, and losse of men and Money: howsoeuer, I think they may yeeld them yearely, two millions of Crownes, and vpwards.
The Armes of this Archduke are Gules; a fesse Argent; which Armes were assumed by Marquesse Leopold at the siege of Acon, because his whole armour being couered ouer with blood, his belt only remained white: whereas his former Armes were Azu^e, six Larkes Or; which Armes are supposed to haue bin assumed by the first Marquesses of Austria, because they possessed those six petit Prouinces, in which the tenth Legion called Ala^da, had in ancient times their station.


9 BOHEMIA.
Bara.The Kingdome of BOHEMIA containeth Bohemia, the Dukedome of Silesia, the Marquisates of Lusatia, and Morauia.
Bohemia is environed with the Hercynian Forrest, which the Romans could not in long time penetrate. It hath on the East Silesia, and Moravia; on the West Franconia; on the North Misuia and Lusatia,Ortelius. on the South Bavaria.
Ortelius.The whole kingdome containeth in circuit 550 miles, in which compasse are comprehended 780 Cities, walled townes, and Castles, and 32000 Villages; all which are inhabited by a people giuen to drink and gluttony, and also to valour and loue of honour; this last quality belonging to the Nobles and better sort of people; the former to the Commons: but in more moderate fashion then the other Germans. All of them, rich and poore, noble and base, vse the Sclavonian language.
Mountaig.The chief Bohemian Captain that euer I read of, was Zisca, who in 11 battailes fought in defence of the Hussites, against the Pope and his confoderats; preuailed and went away victorious; insomuch that at his death he willed the Bohemians to flea him, and make a Drumme of his skinne; perswading himself if they so did, they could neuer be ouercome: wherein hee concei^ed so of himselfe, as Scipio Africanus, and Vortimer king of the Brittaines did of their selues: For the one hauing almost ruined the Commonwealth of Carthage, commanded his body to be buried so, that his tombe might looke toward Africke; and the other hauing expulsed the Saxons out of Brittanie, desired to be interred in the hauen towne of Stonar (in Tanet) the vsuall landing-place of that people; thinking thereby to affright the Carthaginians from Italy, and the Saxons from Brittaine.

The Christian Religion was first preached in this country by one Bosinous, Anno 900 or thereabouts; since which time they haue continued in it, though not without the admixture of one notable vanity. For one Picardus comming out of the Low-Countries, drew a great sort of men and women vnto him,Munster. pretending to bring them to the same state of perfection, that Adam was in before his fall; from whence they were called Picards and Adamites. They had no respect vnto marriage; yet could they not accompany any woman, vntil the man comming to Adam, said vnto him; Father Adam, I am enflamed towards this woman: and Adam made answere, increase and multiply. They liued in an Island which they called Parad^se, and went starke naked: but they continued not long: for Zisca hearing of them, entred their fooles Paradise, and put them all to the sword, Ao 1416. Before this time also the workes of Wickliffe were brought into Bohemia, by a certain scholler who had beene a student in the Vniuersity of Oxford, which happening into the hands of Iohn Husse, and Hierome of Prague, two men whereof the Country may worthily boast; wrought in their hearts a desire to reforme the Church: a businesse which they prosecuted so earnestly, that being summoned to the councell of Constance, they were there condemned for hereticks, and burned, Anno 1414. yet had their doctrine such deep root in the Bohemians, that it could neuer by warre or persecution be plucked vp; but to this day continueth, though abundantly perfected by the writings of Luther, Calvin, and other painful labourers in Gods Haruest.
The soyle is exceeding fruitfull, and enriched with mines of all sorts,Camden. except of gold. Tinne they haue here in good plenty, the mines whereof were first found out by a Cornishman, banished out of England, Anno 1240: which discouery of Tinne in these parts, was, as saith my Author, in magnam iacturam Richardi Comitis Cornubiae, (he meaneth that Richard which was afterward King of the Romans;) and no maruaile, for in those times there was no Tinne in all Europe, but in England. Wood they haue here good store, and in some of their Forrests a beast called Lo^^, which hath hanging vnder it's neck a bladder full

of scalding water; with which when she is hunted, she so tortureth the dogges, that she easily escapeth them.
The principall riuers are 1 Albis, which here^ hath his fountaine, as also hath 2 Egar, 3 Mulda, and 4 Wattz; these three last al exonerating themselues into the first; which runneth through the midst of the Country.
The kingdome is not anothers, diuided into Counties and Prouinces; but into the territories and possessions of seuerall Lords.L^wknor. The chiefe citties of the whole are 1 Prage, the Metropolis, seated in the middle of the country, on the riuer Mulda or Multaw. It consisteth of foure seuerall Townes, euery of which hath its peculiar Magistrates, lawes, and customes. The principal is called the old town, adorned with many goodly edifices, a spacious market place, and a stately Senate house. The second is called the new Towne separated from the old by a ditch of great depth and widenesse. The third called the little towne, is diuided from the old towne by the riuer Mulda, and ioyned to it by a beautifull bridge, consisting of 24 arches; and in this towne is the hill Rachine, on the sides whereof are many fayre and stately houses belonging to the nobility; and on the toppe thereof a magnificent pallace, wherein the Bohemian kings, and the latter Emperours, kept their residence. The fourth Towne is that of the Iewes, who haue here fiue Synagogues, and liue according to their owne particular lawes and liberties. Neere vnto this Towne was fought that memorable battaile betweene the Duke of Bavaria and Count Bucquoy, Leistenants for the Emperour Ferdinand, with 50000 men on the one side; and Fredericke newly elected king of Bohemia, with the Prince of Anhalt, the Count of Thurne, and 30000 men on the other side. It was fought on the eight of Nouember stylo nouo being Sunday; wherein (such was the vnsearchable will of God) the victory fell vnto the Imperialls, the yong Princes of Anhal^, Tourne and Saxon Weimar, with diuers others being taken prisoners; the Bohemian ordinance al surprised; Prage forced to yeeld vnto the enimy; and King Fredericke with his Queene compelled to fly into Silesia: a most lamentable and vnfortunate losse, not so this people only, but to the whole cause of religion. The 2d

Citty of note is Egra, situate on the riuer Eger, on the very borders o^ this kingdome; where it confineth with Franconia, and Vo^tland. It was once Imperiall, but in the yeare 1315, it was sold by the Emperour L^dovicus Bavarus, vnto Iohn King of Bohemia, for 400000 marks of siluer. 3 Budwi^s, a strong town towards Austria. 4 Melmucke on the riuer Albis. 5 Weldawe. And 6 Pilsen, the last town of this Prouince, which yeelded vnto the prevailing Imperialls; and then also betrayed vnto Count T^lly, for a summe of money by some of the Captaines of Count Mansfield, who was then absent, and had so long defended it.
The first inhabitants of this Country that we haue notice of were the Bemi, whom Pomponius Mela placeth in this tract, and calleth Gens magna. To these in processe of time were added the Boij;Munster. who being a people of Gallia Cisalpina, fled ouer the Alpes to avoid the bondage of the Romans, and seated themselues in Bavaria, by them called Boiaria. Then entred they this region, and mixing themselues with the Bemi, were ioyntly with them called Boibems, afterward Bothemi, and now Bohemi. They continued a free nation til the comming in of the Croatians, and Sclavonians, vnder the conduct of Zechius Ao 550, who with his brother Leches being banished Croatia for a murther: Leches seated himselfe in Polonia, and Zechius in this cou^trey, the people whereof in their own language, call themselues Czechians. After the death of this Zechius, the state was of long time in a confused Anarchy, euen vntill the yeare 670: at what time not respecting the progeny of Zechius, the founder of their Commonwealth; they fastned on Crocus a man of good respect amongst them,B^rtholdus. and elected him their Duke, Crocus vir iustus and magna apud Bohemos opinionis, princeps electus est, saith Bertholdus. Crocus being dead, the Bohemians elected Libussa, the yongest of his three daughters: of whose female gouernment being soone weary, they elected Primistaus for their Duke, and made him husband to Libussa. The rest of the Dukes being 18 in nu^ber, I willingly paste ouer, and come to Vratista^s, whom for his manifold deserts. Henry the 4th Emperour of Germany, created the first king of Bohemia Anno 1086,


Berthold. and Dubrav.The Kings and Dukes of Bohemia.
1086
1 Vratislaus the brother of Spitigneus the last Duke of Bohemia, was by Henry the 4th at Mentz created king.

2 Conrade brother to Vratislaus, notwithstanding that his brother had three sonnes, was elected Duke of Bohemia.

3 Brecislaus sonne to Vratislaus, the two sons of Conrade being reiected, is by the Bohemians chosen.
1100
4 Borivorius, the 4th sonne of Brecislaus, is chosen by the Bohemians, his elder brothers then all liuing.
1109
5 Sutopulcus cosen german to Borivorius, by the consent and fauour of the people deposed Borivorius, and caused himselfe to be elected in his place.

6 Vladislaus II, brother to Borivorius, preferred by the people to the throne before Otho the brother, and Henry the sonne of Sutopul^us the last Prince.

7 Sobeslaus brother to Vladislaus, promoted to the State before the sonne of Vladislaus.
1159
8 Vladislaus III, sonne to Vladislaus the 2d (the foure sonnes of Sobeslaus omitted) is chosen and crowned the 2d King, by Fredericke the Emperour; but deposed by the States: because he was not by them formally elected, according to their priuiledges and customes.

9 Vldaricus, the 3d sonne of Sobeslaus, his elder bretheren yet liuing; was by the people elected in the roome of Vladislaus, and his sonne Fredericke; whom the Emperour Fredericke had by force established in the throne.

10 Sobeslaus II, 2d sonne to Sobeslaus, was by Fredericke aboue named expell'd; and he al^o by the Bohemians.

11 Conrade grandchild to Otho the brother of Su^opulcus, elected by the Bohemians in place of Fredericke: betweene which two Princes there was continuall warre.

12 Wenceslaus vnkle vnto Conrade, and sonne of Otho aforesaid, was preferred before many neerer the succession. Him Primislaus expelled, but fearing his returne quitted Prage.

13 Henry Bishop of Prage, a stranger to the bloud,

was by a generall consent elected Duke.

14 Vladislaus IV, brother to Primislaus, the sonne of Wenceslaus, being put by; succeeded Henry: and soone after resigned.
1199
15 Primislaus elected by the Bohemians, and by the Emperour Philip crowned the third king of Bohemia at Mentz, was brother to Vladislaus the 4th.
1248
16 Ottacarus, notwithstanding that Wenceslaus his elder brother, had beene crowned in his Fathers life time; was acknowledged King. He was slaine in battle by Rod^lphus the Emperour.
1278
17 Wenceslaus II, sonne to Ottacarus.
1284
18 Wenceslaus III, sonne to Wenceslaus, the last of the Bohemian Princes of the male line.
1304
19 Rodolfus, sonne to the Emperour Albertus, is by the potencie of his Father, and the Election of the States, seated in the throne; being otherwise a stranger to the bloud royall of Bohemia.
1305
20 Henry Duke of Carinthia, husband to Anne, the 2d daughter of Wenceslaus the 2d, is chosen by the Bohemians: but being weary of his gouerment, they elect Iohn of Luxenbourg. Finally, Henry was murdered by one of his Nephewes.
1311
21 Iohn of Luxenbourg, sonne to Henry the seauenth Emperour, and husband to Elizabeth youngest daughter to Wenceslaus the 2d, is elected: the Lady Anne yet liuing.
1346
22 Charles sonne to Iohn, and Emperour of that name the 4th; the author of the Golden Bull.
1362
22 Wenceslaus IV, Emperour also, in whose time the troubles of the Hussites, and the valour of Zisca was famous.
1418
23 Sigismund, brother to Wenceslaus, maketh himselfe king by force; and at his death commendeth Albertus D. of Austria, the husband of his daughter Elizabeth, vnto the Lords.
1437
24 Albertus Duke of Austria, elected vpon the commendations of King Sigismund, by the Bohemian Lords.
1440
25 Ladislaus, sonne to A^bert, who being the brother of two sisters, commended yet one George Pogiebrachius vnto the States, as fittest to succeed him.
1458
26 Georgius Pogi^brachius, neither by affinity or co^sanguinity of the bloud: And he though he had three sons; yet for the benefit of his Country, aduised the Nobles after his death, to elect the King of Poland.
1471
27 Ladislaus II, King of Poland, and sonne to Elizabeth, the younger daughter of Albert Duke of Austria; the issue of Anne the elder sister still liuing; elected King of Bohemia.
1516
28 Ludovicus, sonne to Ladislaus, crowned and elected by the meanes of his father then liuing.
1526
29 Ferdinand, Archduke of Austria, brother to Charles the fift, and husband to Anne sister to Lodovicus; by his letters reuersall acknowledgeth that hee was chosen King of Bohemia, not of any right, but of meere free will, according to the liberties of that Kingdome.
1562
30 Maximilian, eldest sonne of Ferdinand, was in his Fathers life time, and at his suit, elected king Ao 1549.
1575
31 Rodolfus Emperour of Germany, and second sonne to Ferdinand of Austria; elected King.
1612
32 Mathias brother to Rodolfus, was at the ioynt suit of them both, nominated and appointed King of Bohemia, by the generall consent of the States; during his brothers life time, An^ viz: 1608, which denomination they both protest in their letters reuersall, should not bee to the preiudice of the liberties and ancient customes of that Kingdome.
1618
32 Ferdinand II, Duke of Grats, was by Mathias adopted for his sonne, and declared by vertue thereof successour to the Crowne of Bohemia, but neuer formally and legally elected: for which cause amongst others hee was by the States reiected; in like case as Vladislaus the third had formerly beene.
1619
33 Frederick Electour Palatine, the strongest German Prince of the Calvinists, and most potent by his great alliances,

was elected King of Bohemia: and crowned at Pragu^, together with his wife on the 5th day of Nouember. This Prince is descended from the Lady Sophia, sister to Ladislaus the 2d, King of Poland and Bohemia: and hath to wife Elizabeth, daughter to Iames King of Great Brittaine, and Anne of Danemarke, descended from the Lady Anne, daughter of Albertus of Austria, and elder sister to Elizabeth wife to Ladislaus the 2d aboue named.

It is recorded that in the quarrells betweene Fredericke the second and Pope Innoc^nt the fourth, the Emperour sent the Pope these verses.
Roma diu titubans, varijs erroribus actaCorruet, and mundi desinet esse caput.Fata volunt, stell^que docent, aviumque volatus,Quod Fredericus ego malleus orbis ero.Rome tost with diuers errours downe must fall*And cease to be the mistresse of this Ball.For loe the fates decree, Starres, Birds, foretell;That I a Fredericke shall the wh^le world quell.
That which that Fredericke then spoke in a hopeful desire of revenge, and a vehemency of anger, had (I hope) some prophetical relation to the sacred person of this Fredericke: and that it may fall out accordingly, I beseech the God of battles, and Lord of hosts, so to protect and comfort him in this time of his trouble, that he may yet liue to tread vpon the necke of the Romish Adder, and outsta^e the Antichristian Basiliske, till his enimies are made his footstoole.
The reuenewes of this kingdome may amount to 3 millions of Crownes yearely, considering that the following Countries are vnders its subiection.
The Armes are Mars,Bara. a Lion with a forked tayle, Luna crowned Sol.
2 SILESIA is bounded with Bohemia,Ortelius. on the West; Brandenburg, on the North; Polonia, on the South; Hungarie and Moravia, on the East. It is in length 240, in breath 80 miles, and diuided equally by the riuer Od^ra, who here hath its originall.
Xiphilinus.The former inhabitants of this Prouince, and Lusatia were the Quadi, against whom, when M Antoninus the Emperour made warre: he had vnawares run himselfe into such a straight, that his army was environed with mountaines one way, and enimies the other. To this (as calamities g^e seldome alone) was added the extraordinary heat and drouth then being. To the Emperour thus put to his plunges, came the Captaine of his guard; telling him th^^ he had in his Army a legion of Christians (M^li^ens he calleth them) which by prayer to their own God could obtaine any thing. The Emperour sendeth for them, desiring them to make supplications for the Army; which they did^ and God Almighty that neuer turneth a deafe eare to the prayers of his seruants, when they are either for his glory, the Churches, or their own good; scattered and vanquished the Quadi with thundershot and artillery from heauen; and refreshed the faint and dying Romans, with many a gentle and pleasing show^e. This miracle purchased to that Legion, the sirname of (...), i. e. the thunderer; and induced the Emperour to honour m^n ^f that holy profession, and to make an end of the 4th persecution. Ao Ch. 174.
The chiefe Townes are Pres^aw, or Vratislauia, built by Vratislaus a Duke of this Prouince, and made a Bishops See An^ 970, or thereabouts. In the yeare 1341, it was totally (...) with a happy misfortune; for it was againe reedified with fire stone, so that it is now one of the prettiest Citties of Germ^^^. 2 Iagendorfe, or Iegerndorf, the patrimony of Iohannes Georgus o^ the family of Brandenb^rg, who is called Marq^es^e Iagendorse, of whom more anon.Reusner. The lands and estates (...)sion were giuen by Ladislaus king of Boh^mia, vnto Geor^e ^^^named Piu^, of the family of Brande^burg, for the (...) good seruices he had done him: but his posterity being (...) they are ^allen vnto the present owner (...) towne of all Bohemia, which was conquered by (...) Emperour, from King Fredericke. 4 (...)derberg all on Od^ra. Here are two Duked (...) Sue^^z; the latter whereof is sub^ect to the (...)me^ hath Duke, who is also at the command (...)

Bohem^a. This Country once belonged to Poland, and was given by Henry the fourth, to the new King of Bohemia, Vratisl^^^, 1087.
3 LV^ATIA, is bounded on the East and North with Brandenburg, on the West with Saxonie; on the South with Silesia. This Country though but little, is able to arme 20000 foot, as good as any in Germany. The chiefe Citties are Gorlitz, and Tra(...) on the riuer Nisse; ^prembe^g and Gottbusse on the riuer Spre which was heretofore called Suevus, and is thought to haue given name to the Suevi: this riuer runneth through the whole Country^^ Bautsen (Budissiuum the Latines call it) the first Towne attempted, and taken by the Duke of Saxonie, when he tooke vpon him to execute the Emperours decree against Frederick^ the Palatine, then newly chosen King of Bohemia. This Country is called in Dutch La^s^i^s, and is commonly diuided into the higher and the lower. It was giuen also to the new Bohemia King Vratislaus by Henry the 4th, Anno 1087.
4 MORAVIA is bounded on the North, and East with Si^^^ia on the West with Brandenburg; on the South with Au(...) ^^d Hunga^y.Maginus. It is the most ^ertile part of Corne in G^rmany, and hath no small store of Myrrh and Frankincense, which contrary to common custome groweth not on trees, but immediatly out of the earth: and which addeth to the miracle, the Fran(...) groweth in the shape and similitude of those (...) men and women labour most to conceale. Dubra^i^^ th^ writer of the Bohemian history is the reporter, and Gra(...) ^h^ name of th^t only place where it thus groweth.
(...) Townes are 1 Brinne, the seat of the Marquesse. (...) Vniuersity, seated on the Morava of when Ri(...) 3 Terebi z. ^ I^su etc.Munster. The fo^mer in(...) o^ this Country were the Marcom^nni* and it is now (...) It was once a kingdome, the last king of it be(...) w^o rebelled a^^ainst Arnulph the Emperour (...) had vnder him Boh^mia, Poloni^, Silesia* and Lu(...) (...) which after his death chose themsel^es seuerall gouer(...) till Hen^y the ^t^ gaue vnto his ^ew (...), the Provinces or Silesia and Lusatia; whose fortune

Morauia followed, when Sigismund the Emperour gaue it to Albertus King of Bohemia, and Duke of Austria, Ano 1417. It still retaineth a Marquesse, who is tributary to the Bohemian.


10 BRANDENBOVRG.
Ortelius.The Marquisate of BRANDENBOVRG is limited on the East with Poland, on the West with Saxony, on the North with Pomerania, on the South with Lusatia: it is in compasse 520 miles, in which are contained 50 Citties, and 64 walled towns, the chiefe of which are 1 Brandenbourg, built by Brando a Prince of the Franconians, Anno 140. 2 Francofurt (for distinction sake named) ad Oderam, which was made an Vniuersity by Ioachim the Marquesse 1506. It is situate in a soyle so plentifully stored with Corne and Wines, that it is not easie to affirme whether Ceres or Bacchus be most enamoured of it.Magi^us. Here is also at this Towne a famous Empory, but not comparable to that of the other Francfort on the Moenus. 3 Berlin, the ordinary residence of the Marquesse. It is situate on the riuer Spre, a riuer which arising in Lusatia, emptieth it selfe into the Albis; 4 Hauelbourg, seated on the little riuer Havell, the seat of a Bishop, who acknowledgeth the Archbishop of Maydenbourg for his Metropolitan. This Marquisate is diuided into the new and the old; the river Odera watering the last; the Albis the first.
Brandenbourg was taken from the Frankes and Vandalls, by the Emperour Henry the first,Munster. Ann. 920: at which time also the Gospell was first here preached. This Henry gaue the Country of Brandenbourg with the title of Marquesse, to one Earle Albert: whose issue being extinct, Lodovic: Bavarus gaue this Marquisate to his sonne Ladowicke, Ann. 1314. His grandchild Otho, sold it vnto Procopius Marquesse of Moravia, Ao 1373: whose issue failing, it was giuen to Fredericke the Burgraue of Neurenberge, Anno 1417, by the Emperour Sigismund. The posterity of this Fredericke to this day inioy it, possessing also part of Prussia; and the three Dukedomes of Cleus, Iuliers, and Berge, or Montz, the Signiories of Prignits, and Crossen, the confines of Silesia, and this Marquisate; together with the cou^tie of Rapin, and the Marquisates of Iegendorfe, and Ansspach: so that they exceed the Dukes of Saxonis in greatnesse of territory

and multitude of subiects; but fall short of them in the largenesse of their revenew. This augmentation of their Dominions is of no great standing; Prussia was estated on M. Albert, Anno 1525, and by a marriage betweene Anne the Neice and heire of this Albert, and Sigismund the late Electour, is newly added to the Electorall family.Reus^er. Cleueland came vnto them by the marriage last mentioned; Iagendorfe was giuen as a requitall of the seruices of M. George: and Auspach they wrested from the female heires of Wolframius the last Lord thereof: insomuch that now this is the powerfuist family in all Germany.
The reuenues of this Electour could not be lesse then 20000l by the yeare, if hee were permitted to enioy his three Dutchies of Cleue, Gulicke, and Berge in any peaceable manner. This house of Brandenbourg hath among other good Souldiers, yeelded 3 of especial note, viz: Albert the last master of the Dutch knights and first Duke of Prussia. 2 Albertus, called the Alcibiades of Germany, who in the time of Charles the fift (by whom he was proscribed) so molested the Popish Princes of Franconia, as in some particulars I haue already shewed: a man both in his actions, spirit, and valour, not much vnlike the present Count Mansfield. And 3ly, Iohannes Georgius of Iagendorfe, brother to the last Electour, who hauing faire possessions in Silesia, and furthering the election of his Cosen the Palatine of Rhene, to the Crowne of Bohemia: is dispossessed of his estates, and proscribed by the now preuailing Emperour; whom hee ceaseth not most couragiously with all his force and pollicy continually to disturbe.
The Armes are Argian Eagle Gules membred and becked Or.Bara. The people are of the reformed Church and follow the doctrine of Luther.


11 POMERANIA and MECLENBVRG.
POMERANIA is bounded on the East with the riuer Vistula, on the West with Meclenbourg;Ortelius. on the North with the Balticke Ocean; on the South with Brandenbourg. The chief towns are S^e^in,Munster. the Princes seat; once a poore fisher Towne, now the Metropolis of the Country, as rising by the fall of Wimeta, a famous Mart-towne in these parts. 2 Wolgast. 3 Wallin, or Iubinum,

a Towne which once florished in traffique, and gaue place vnto Constantinople only: the Russians, Daues, Saxons, Vandals, etc. hauing here their particular streets. Anno 1170, it was sacked by Waldemarus, King of Danemarke, since which time it never recouered its former glory, most of her traffique being remoued to Lubecke. 4 Gripswald made an Vniversity 1456. 5 Neutrepton a Sea Towne. To this Province belong three Ilands, viz: Rugia, Wisedomia, and Volmia.
Pomeren, so called by the Sclavonians, for that it lyeth along vpon the Sea, was long time in the power of the Vandals; who being expelled; one Barvimus took vpon him the Principate, Ao 935* about one hundred yeares after which Prince, Wartisl^us with all his people receaued the Christian faith, Anno 1130. In their issue the Corone^ still remaines, though now divided: for Anno 1540, it was diuided betweene Barvimus and Philip two brothers; the former hauing the higher part next Prussia, the latter the lower part next vnto Mecklenbourg.
MECKLENBOVRG, or Megalopolis, is on the West part of Pomeren. It was the seat of the Heruli, and is a peculiar principality, the chiefe of her Townes being 1 Malchaw. 2 Sterneberg. 3 Wismar, so called from Wisimarus a King of the Vandals, the father of Rhadaguse, who together with Alarick the Gothe, sacked Rome. 4 Rostocke, made an Vniuersity Anno 1415, at the intreaty of Albert and Henry, Princes of this Province. The first Professours came hither from Erdfort in Saxonie.
This Province tooke the name of Mecklenbourg, or Megalopolis, from a great Towne of this name here being, when the Vandals and Heruli first setled here; but now destroyed. Their first King is said to be one Anterius, the sonne of an Amazonian Lady, a man which learned his first warrefare vnder Alexander the great. The last of these Princes which tooke vpon him the name of King, was Pribislaus, who died, Anno 1179: his full title being, Pribislaus Dei gratia Herulorum, Wagriorum, Cire^paenoram, Polamborum, Obotritarum, Kissmorum, Vandalorumque Rex; These being the ancient names of those particular Tribes of the Barbarians, which were by one generall name called Heruli.
On the West of this Prouince, by the riuer Traue, is the faire Hanstown of Lubecke; which of old was a Dukedome, but made subiect by Fredericke the first: after whose death they chose another Duke, who within 5 yeares, together with the towne was taken by the Danes; and from them deliuered by Fredericke the 2d, and by him infranchized. Not much aboue tenne miles from Lubecke, is Hamborough, in which Towne are 777 Brewers, one Lawyer, one Phisician, and 40 Bakers. The reason why there is such an huge disproportion betweene the number of Brewers, and that of Lawyers and Physicians; is, because a cuppe of nimis is their best vomiting potion; and their differences are sooner decided ouer a Canne, then by course of law. Not far hence but on the other side of the riuer is Stoade, where the English men haue a house to sell abroad their cloathes and other commodities.


12 SAXONIE.
SAXONIE is bounded on the East with Lusatia and Brandenbourg; on the West with Hassia; on the North with Brunswicke; on the South with Franconie and Bohemia. It containeth the countries of Thuringia, Misnia* Voitland, and Saxonie.
1 TVRINGIA is environed with Hassia, Franconie, Misnia, and Saxony. The chiefe Citty is Erdford, one of the fairest and biggest of Germany. 2 Iene, an Vniversity of Phisicians. 3 Smalcald, famous for the league here made, Anno 1530, between all the Princes and Citties, which maintained the doctrine of Christ, taught by Luther.Sleid. Com. There entred first into this league the Duke of Saxon and his sonne, Ernest and Francis Dukes of Luneburg; Philip the Lantgraue; George Marquesse of Brandenbourg; the Citties of Serasbourg, Nurenberg, Heilbrune, Ruteling, Vlmes, Lindaw, Constance, Mening, and Campedune. Afterward, Anno 1535, there entred into it, Bermine and Philip, Princes of Pomeren; Vlricke Duke of Wirtenberg; Robert Prince of Bipont; William Earle of Nassaw; George and Ioachim Earles of Anhalt; the Citties of Francford, Hamborough, Auspurge, Hannolder; and not long after the Palsgraue, and the King of Danemarke. By this famous confederacy, Lu^her not onely kept his head on his shoulders; but the Gospell by him reformed grew to that

strength, that no force or pollicy could ever root it vp. 4 Kale, or Hale, where Philip the Lantgraue was treacherously taken prisoner, as you shall heare anon. 5 Weimar, a Towne which together with the Castle of Gothe, were assigned for the estate and maintenance of that religious, though vnfortunate, Prince, Io^n Fredericke ^uke of Sax^nie, after his discomfiture and imprisonment by Charles the fift.
The whole country is in length but 120 miles, nor any more in breadth: yet it containes 2000 villages, and 12 Earledomes.
This Country was once a Lantgrauesdome, but the male issue failing, it came vnto the Lords of M^snia, Anno 1211.
2 MISNIA is environed with Bohemia, Voitland, Thuring, and Saxonie:Boterus. it is watred with the riuers Sala, Plissena, El^ter, and Mulda. The chiefe townes are Dresden, seated on Albis, hauing continually on her walls and Bulwarkes 150 Peeces of ordinance; a stable of the Dukes in which are 128 horses of seruice; and a Magazin, out of which 300000 Horse and Foot may bee armed at a dayes warning. The next is Lipsique, as famous a Vniuersity for Philosophers, as Iene is for Phisicians. It seemeth the Schollers and Cittizens will not suffer their beere to perish; of which here is so much drunke and exported, that the very custome of it due vnto the duke, amounts to 20000 pounds yearly; yet is this towne of no more then two Churches. 3 Rochlus. 4 Mulberg, where Iohn the Electour was discomfited.
Misnia was at first but a Lordship vnder Turingia, and was made a Marquisate, a little after it obtained the Dominion of Turingia:Munste^. in which state it continued, till the Emperour Sigismund gaue the Dukedome of Saxonie to Marquesse Fred^rick^, in the yeare 1413; whose posterity till this day enioy all the Dukedome.
3 VOYTLAND is a little country South of Misnia, whose chiefe Citties are Olnits. 2 Werda. 3 Cronah. 4 Culmbach, and 5 Hoffe. This Country seemeth to haue taken its name from the Iuites or Vites, who together with the Saxons and Angles conquered Brittaine: and to be called Voitland, quasi Vitel^nd* the Country of the Vites. It belongeth not totally to the Duke, of Saxonie, for the Marquesses of Auspach in Franconie, possesse the greatest part of it.
4 SAXONY is on the North of Turinge and Misnia; her chiefe Towne is Parthenopolis now Meydenberg, or Magdeberg, which belonged to the Empire; but now is vnder the patronage of the Dukes of Saxonie. For when this Town refusing to receaue the Interim, was outlawd by the Emperour, and giuen to him that could first take it; it was attempted by the Duke of Megelberg; but he was in a Camisado taken prisoner, his Army routed, his Nobles made captiue, and 260 horses brought into the Citty. Next it was besieged by Duke Maurice, who on honourable tearmes was after a long siege receaued into it; Ao 1550, when it had stood on its owne guard the space of 3 yeares. This long opposition of one Towne, taught the Germane Princes what constancie could doe; it held vp the coales of rebellion in Germanie; and indeed proued to be the fire which burned the Emperours trophies. For here Duke Maurice comming acquainted with Baron Hedecke, hatched that confederacie, by which not long after this great Emperour was driuen out of Germany. 2 Worlits seated on the Albis. 3 Heldericke. 4 Wittenberg, the seat of the electours of Saxonie, and an Vniuersity of Diuines, founded by Duke Fredericke, Anno 1508. It was called Wittenberg, as some coniecture, from Witti^indus, once Lord of Saxonie, when the extent thereof was greatest. Famous is this town for the Sepulchres of Luther and Melancthon; but chiefely for that here were the walls of Popery broken downe, and the Gospell of Christ reduced to perfection. The whole story in briefe is this.
Luther was borne at Isleben in Sax. and studied first at Magdeburg; but at the establishing of the Vniuersity of Witte^berg, he was chosen to prosesse there. It hapned in the yeare 1516, that Pope Leo hauing need of money, sent about his Iubiles and Pardons: against the abuses of which, Luther inueighed both priuatly and publikely, by word and writing. This spark grew at last to so great a coale, that it fired the Papall Monarchy; for the Germane Princes cleaued to the doctrine of Luther, and protested they would defend it to the death: hence were they first called Protestants. Yet was not this reformation so easily established. Christ had foretold that fathers should be against their

sonnes, and brothers against brothers for his sake; neither doe we euer finde in any story, that the true religion was induced or religion corrupted about to be amended, without warre and bloudshed. Charles the Emperour whetted on by the Romane Bishops, had long borne a grudge against the reformation; but especially against the confederacy of Smalc^ld. After long heart burnings on either side, they brake out at last into open warre, which at first succeeded luckily with the Princes. But there being an equality of command, betweene Iohn Fredericke the Electour, and Philip the Lantgraue; one sometimes not approuing, otherwhiles thwarting the others proiects: the ende prooued not answerable. Besides the politique Emperour alwaies eschewed all occasion of battaile; and by this delaye wearied out this Armie of the Princes; which without performing any notable exploit, disbanded it selfe: Euery man hastning home to defend his owne. The Duke of Saxonie had most cause to hast^n homeward; for in his absence, his cousin Maurice forgetting the education he had vnder him, and how formerly the Duke had conquered for him, and estated him in the Prouince of Misnia; combined himself with the Emperour, and invaded his Vncles Country. But the Duke Electour, not only recouered his own, but subdued all the Estates in which he had formerly placed his vngratefull and ambitious kinsman. The Emperour all this while was not idle, but waited advantage to encounter the Duke, which at last he found righ vnto Mulberg, where the Duke was hearing a Sermon. The Emperour giueth the alarum: the Duke startled from his religious exercise, seeketh to order his men: but in vaine. For they supposing the Emperour to be neerer with all his Forces, then indeed he was; add the wings of feare, to the feet of cowardice, and flie away; yet did the Duke with a few resolute Gentlemen as well as they could, make head against the enemie; till most of them were slaine, and the Duke himself taken prisoner. The morrow after this ouerthrow, he was condemned to loose his head, but pardoned he was at last, on condition he should ransomlesse set free Marquesse Albertus, renounce his dignity of the Electourship; resigne vp al his

inheritances, with the like harsh Articles. It was also vrged that he should alter his religio^; but that he so constantly denied that it was om^tted. For his after-maintenance, there were rendred back vnto him, the townes of Weymar and Gothe; from the former of which, his posterity are now called, Dukes of Weymar. After this victory, the Emperour fraudulently intrapped the Lantgraue; then marched he against the cities, in all which he prevailed, restored the Masse, and draue them to hard composit^on for their liberties. It was thought that in this warre, the Emperour got 1600000 Crownes, and 500 p^eces of Ordinance. The imprisonment of the Lantgraue, contrary to the Emperors promise, was the chief thing which ouerthrew his good fortune For Duke Maurice hauing pawned his word, and giuen vnto the Lantgraues children his bond, for the safe returne of their Father, found himself much wronged and grieued. Therfore consulting with Baron Hedeck, he entreth league with the French King, associateth himself with Marquesse Albert, suddenly surpriseth Auspurg, and by the terrour which his haste brought with it, forced the Emperour to flye from Inspruch, and the Fathers to break vp the Councell of Trent. The Emperour now brought low, easily hearkned to an honourable composition, which not long after was concluded; the Cities recouering their priuiledges; free passage being giuen to the Gospell; and all things being reduced to the same state they were in before the warres; the restoring of Iohn Fredericke to his Dukedome and Electourship, only excepted. So did this Duke Maurice both ouerthrow the liberty of his country, and restore it; so was the preaching of the Gospell by his meanes depressed, by the same again reviued, and established stronger then euer. Thus we see
--Vel nemo, vel qui mihi vulnera fecit,Solus Achillaeo tollere more potest.Ovid.None but the man which did his Country wound,Achilles-like could heale and make it sound.
I am no Prophet, yet by comparing causes present, with examples past, what should hinder me from guessing, that as Iohannes Georgius the D. now being, is descended from his Maurice,

and hath to the prejudice of the Gospels free passage, and his Countries liberty* sided with the Emperour Ferdinand in these present warres: but that on a like insight of the easuing inconveniences, he may with his ^ight hand build vp, what his left hath plu^ked downe.
The Doctrine of Luther thus s^ttled in Germany, and being agreeable to the word of God, was quickly propagated ouer all Christendome: the reasons of which, next vnto the Al^^ghty power of the most High,Sands r^l. may be prin^^pally sixe. 1 The d^ligence and assiduity of preaching in C^tty and Village. 2 The publishing of bookes of piety and Christian Religion. 3 The translations of the Scriptures into the vulgar language; whereby the simple might discerne good from bad, the m^ddy doctrine of Rome, from the cleare Water of Life. 4 The education of youth, especially in Catechismes, which contained the whole body of Christian Religion; which once well planted in their mindes, was it radicable. 5 The continuall offers o^d sputations to the adverse party in a publike aud^ence; which be^ng denied, gaue assurance of the truth, and soundnes of the one: as of the falshood and weaknes of the other. 6 Their compiling of Martyrologies and Histories of the Church; which cannot but worke an admirable confirmation of fai^h and constancie in the hearers and readers: There is one only policy wan^ing, namely the calling of a generall Synode, to compose the differences of the reformed Church, about the Sacraments and Predestination; which would certainly strengthen their own cause; and weaken the enemies; whose chief hopes are, that the present disagreements will arme party against party, to their own destruction. But God grant that their hopes may be frustrated, and we will say with the Poet,
--Hae manus Troiam origent?Parvas habet spes Troia, si tales habet.Senoc. Trag.Shall these small jarres restore the ruin'd Pope?Small hope he hath, if this be all his hope.
Saxonie was once farre greater then now it is, containing all between Albis and the Rhene ^ast and West; and from Danubius, to the Germane and Balticke Ocean, North and South. The

Saxons were a people of Asia. called the Saecae or Sassones, who first seated themselues in the Cimbrick Chersonesse;Camden. afterward they came more Southward into Germany. A valiant Nation questionless^ they were; they conquered England, and were the l^st of the German^s which yeelded to the French Monarch, Charles the Great; by whose mea^s also they recei^ed the faith of Christ Anno 785. The Prince of the Saxons then was Wittikindus, from whom are descended the present Kings of France since Hugh Capet,Munster. the ancient Princes of Aniou and Maine, the present Kings of England, the ancient Dukes of Burgundie, and present Dukes of Saxonie. Anno 1106, Magnus Duke of Saxonie, dying without heires males, the Dukedome was giuen vnto Henry surnamed Guelse, Duke of Bavaria, who claimed it in right of his wife Gertrude. His son Henry, called the Lion, succeeded in both Dukedomes. But he being by Fredericke Barbarossa, for his many insolencies, depriued of this dignity: it was conferr'd on Bernard Earle of Anhalt, whose grandmother was He^like the Mother of Magnus aboue-named. Ao 1423. The male line of this B^rnard failing, Saxonie was by Sigismund the Emperour, giuen vnto Fred^ricke, Marquesse of Misnia. In his line it stil continueth, though not without a manifest breach, which hapned when Iohn Fredericke being depriued, D. Maurice was invested into the Electorship. And because these translations of States are not ordinary, I will briefly relate the ceremonies thereat vsed.
There were at Wittenb^rg scaffolds erected, on which sate the Emperour,Sleid, Com. and the Princes Electours in their Robes. On the backside of the Stage were placed the Trumpetters; right against it standeth D. Maurice, with two bands of horsemen The first in a ^ull carreir ranne their horses vp to the pauillion: Out of the second issued Henry Duke of Brunswicke, Wolfang Prince of B^pont; and Albert D. of Bavier. These when they had in like manne^ coursed their horses about, alighted, ascended to the Throne, and humbly required the Emperour, that for the common go^d, he would advance D. Maurice to the Electourship. He c^^sulting with the Electours, made answere to the Duke of Mentz, that he was content, so D. Maurice would in person

come and desire it. Then came forth D. Maurice with the whole troup; before him were bor^e ten ensignes, bea^ing the Armes of as many Regions wherein he desi^ed to be invested. When he came before the throne, ^e kneeled down on his knees, and humbly desired the Emperor to bestow o^ him the ^l^ctorship of Saxonie, and all the lands of Iohn ^rederick late Electour. His petition was granted. Then the B^shop of Menz ^^ad vnto him the Oath by which the ^lectours are bound vnto the Empire: which Oath when D. Maurice had taken, the Empe^our deliuered vnto him a sword, which was a signe of his perfect investiture. Duke Maurice now the Electour of Saxonie arose, gaue the Emperour thanks, promised his fidelity, ma^e obeysance, and took his place among the Electours. This solemnity was on the 24 day of Febr. Anno 1548.
The revenue of this Dukedome in the dayes of Chris^i^nus, Augu^tus, and Mauritius, was not les^e then 400000 pounds yearely; but now by the ill ordered custome of Germanie, they are distracted amongst diuers pettie Princes and Lords.
Within the bounds of Saxonie are two small Principates, namely of Anha^t and Mansfield; the P^inces of the former being Cal^inists, of the latter Catholiques; both which are Homagers to the Duke of ^axonie. Both these houses haue beene long famous for the excellent spirits which they haue bred vp for the warres, as if military valour were annex^d and hereditary to thei^ Families. The principall of them at this time is Christian Prince of Anhalt, who so fai^h^ully stood out, as long as there was any hope of doing good, for Fred^rick^ the El^ctour ^alatine, a^d King of B^hem^a, whose Lie^tenant ^e was. And on the o^her side Earnestus Earle of Mansfie^d, so renowned for the warres which he hath maintained in all Germanie, with great fortune and courage.Camden. They which delineate the pedegree of the Earles of this Family, deriue them (to note vnto you so much by the way) from one of the Knights of King Arthurs round Table, borne at Mansfield in Nottinghamsh^re, who setling himselfe in Germany, gaue name to this house.
Selden.The Armes of Saxonie are Bar^^wise of 6 pieces Sable, and Or, a Bend slowred Verte. This Bend was added to the coat,

being before only Barry S, and O: by Fredericke Barbarossa, when he invested Bernard of Anhalt in the Dukedome. For this Bernard desiring some difference added to his Armes, ^o distinguish h^m from the former Dukes, the Emperor took a ch^plet of Rue, which he then wore on his head, and threw it (...) his buckler or escotcheon of Armes; which was thereon presently painted.


13 BRVNSWICK and LVNEBOVRG.
The Dukedomes of BRVNSWICK and LVNEB^VRG are bounded on the East with Brande^bourg, on the West wit^ Wastphalen, on the North with Denmar^e, on the South wit^ Saxonie and Hassia The riuer Amasa or Ems runn^th throu^h the country: whose chief cities are first Brunswicke, built by ^he Brunnus, son ^o Ludolphus D. of Saxonie, and Vn^^e to He^r^ the first Emperour, called the Fowler. Nigh vnto this Towne is the mountaine Hamelen, vnto which the Pied Piper led the children of Halberstade, where they all sunke, and were neuer m^^e seene: but of this Story more annon when we come to T^a^^^lvania. 2 Wo f^ha^ten, where the Duke doth keep his Court; for though Brunswicke giueth him his title, yet wil it not ye^ld h^m any obedience, but reputeth her selfe among the Hans^townes: for which cause there haue b^n great warres between the Dukes and the Ci^izens. 3 Halbersta^e a Bishops See, the pres^nt Bishop (or rather the administrator of the Bishopricke) being Christian Duke of ^ru^swicke, that noble young souldier, who hath vowed his life and fortunes to the seruice of ^lizabe^h Q. of Bohemi^. 4 Luneb^urg so called of the Moone (...) the old i^^^^itants did worship. 5 Cella the seat of the Duke of Lunebourg.
T^e Lords of these Prouinces d^riue their pedegree from one Welfus, son to Isenb^rdus Earle of Altorse in Sue^ia. This Isenbardus had to wife one Ierm^nirudis* who grieuously accused one of her neighbour women of adulteries, and had her punished, because she had not long be^o^e bin deli^ered of sixe children at a birth. It fortuned that she her self, her husband being abroad in the fields, was deliuered at one birth of twelue children, all males. She s^aring the like infamous punishme^^,

which by her instigation had bin inflicted on the former woman; commanded the nurse to kill eleuen of them. The Nu^se going to execute the will of her mistrisse, was met by her Lord, then returning homeward. He demaunded what she carried in her lap, she answered, puppies: he desired to see them, she denied him. The Lord on this growing angry, opened her apron, and there sound eleuen of his own sonnes, pretty sweet babes, and of most promising countenances. The Earle examined the matter, found out the truth; inioyned the old trot to be secret, and put the children to a miller to nurse. Six yeares being passed ouer in silence, the Earle making a solemne feast, invited most of his wiues and his own friends. The yong boyes he attireth all in the same fashion, and presenteth them to their mother: she misdoubting the truth, confesseth her fault, is by the Earle pardoned, and acknowledgeth her children From Welfus the eldest of these brethren, descended Earle Henry, son and heire to the Lady Luitgardis Queene of the Franks and Bavarians. His posterity held Bavaria 109 yeares. Afterward they came to be Dukes of Saxony, vnder whose command and Empire, Brunswick and Lunebourg once were;Munster. till Duke Henry called the Lyon, was proscribed by the Emperour Fredericke Barbarossa, and disinherited both from Brunswicke and Saxonie. At last his grand-child Otho got by his submission, the Dukedome of Brunswicke, together with the title of Lunebourg, by the grant of Fredericke the second. This Otho died 1252: whose posterity injoyed these Dukedomes joyntlie, till the yeare 1430; in which the Country was diuided between William the Victorious, who had the title of Brunswicke: and his Vncle Bernard who had the title of Lunebourg. In their posterity both these Dukedomes still remain, though Brunswicke be the greater.
Bara.The Armes of Brunswicke are Gules, two Lyons Or, armed Azure. As for the A^mes of Lunebourg, they are quarterly 1. G, two Lyons O, armed B. 2ly A Semie of hearts G, a Lyon B, armed and crowned O. 3ly B, a Lyon A, armed G: and 4ly G, a Lyon O, armed B; a bordure componie O and B.


14. HASSIA.
The Lantgrauedome of HASSIA is environed on the East

with Saxonie, on the South with Franconie, on the West and North with Westphalen. It took its name from the Hassi, who with the Chatti inhabited the Country.Camd. R^. The Christian Faith was first here preached by Boniface or Winifride an Englishman, Ao 730, or thereabouts: of which Winifride I finde this pretty Apothegme, that in old time there were golden Prelates, and wood^n chalices; but in his time, wooden Prelates, and golden ch^l^ces. Not much vnlike this there is another of newer inventi^n, viz: that Christians had once blind Churches, and lightsome hearts; but now they haue lightsome Churches, and blind hearts.
The chief townes are 1 Dormestad, the seat and inheritance of the youngest House of the La^tgraues. This Lodowicke was by Count Mansfield taken prisoner, Anno 1622, and his whole town and Country exposed to the spoyle and rapine of his souldiers: because (besides other ill offices) he was the chief perswader of the Princes of the vnion, to disband their forces prouided for the defence of the Palatinate; and reconcile themselues to the Emperour.Morison. 2 Marpurg an Vniuersity, and the seat of the second house of the Lantgraues, descending from Ph^lip, who was Lantgraue hereof in the time of Charles the 5th, whom he so valiantly withstood. 3 Geysen a town belonging to the Lantgraues of Marpurge. 4. Dries. 5 Frankenbourge; 6 Cassels, three townes belonging to the elder house of the Lantgraues, whereof Cassell is the chief, as being the seat of their residence. This city is situate in a fruitfull Country, and is well fortified with strong earthen walls, and deep ditches: yet are the houses of no great beau^y; being composed for the most part, of wood, thatch, and clay. Vnto this Prouince belongeth the County of Waldecke, whose chief Cities are 1 Wa^decke; and Corbach: the Earles hereof are subiect to the Lantgraue; the first of them being Otho,Re^sner. Ao 1300 or thereabouts.
Within this Country also is the country of Vetera^ia, commonly called the Conf^deration of Wederawe; containing among others, the Counties of Nassaw, and Hanawe, and the free City of Frieburge. This Frieburge is (as we said) an imperiall City, situate in the midst of most pleasant and delicious corne-fields.

Hanaw, or Hannouia, is distant from Francfort ad Moenum ten miles, and is a County of it selfe; the chief town next vnto it, being Windecke; the first Earle hereof was in the yeare 1392, or thereabouts, and by name Otho. As for the Countie of Nassaw, it hath in it many Pri^^^ towns, as 1 Dillingbourg the principall. 2 Nassaw. 3 Catzenelbagen an Earledome of it selfe: to which both the Princes of Orenge, and Lantgraues of Hassen lay title; and in whose name some footsteps of the Chatti are apparantly couched; and 4 Herborn, in which that great Scholle^ Piscator professed Diuinity; and that huge method-monger Alstedius, now teacheth the Arts. This house of Nass^w is very ancient and famous,R^usuer. the first Earle being one Otho, Ao 1079: out of whose loynes haue streamed Adolphus Nassovius the Emperour, Ao 1292, the ancient Dukes of Geldria and the present Princes of Orange, who are Lords also of manie townes and Seigneuries in Belgia. All these Princes, as also the Lantgraue follow the doctrine of Calvin.
Hassia was once an Earledome vnder Thuringia, Anno 1042, Lodowicke was Earle of Hassen, whose successours were afterward preferred to the dignity of Lantgraues; the most puissant of which was Philip, a man who much swayed the affaires of Germany.Sl^id. Com. Anno 1520. he discomfited King Fernando, and restored Vlricke to the Dukedome of Wirtenberge. Anno 1530, he vnited all the Protestant Princes and cities of Germany, in a co^mo^ league at Smalcald, for the defence of the reformed religion, Ano 1545, he vndertook the cause of Gos^aria against the D. of Brunswicke, whom in a set battaile he took prisoner, together with his sonne, and possessed his Country. Anno 1548, he vnited all the Princes and Cities of Germany, in an offensiue and a defensiue league against Charles the fift. But that warre succeded not prosperously; fo^ (...) and the Duke of Saxonie his perpetuall confederate, being taken prisoners; he submitted himself to the Emperour at Kale or Hale in Misnia, his sonnes in Law D. Maurice, the Marquesse of Brandenbourg; and Wolfang Prince of Deuxponts, hauing giuen their bonds for his returne. The conditions of his pardon were 1, that he should dismantle all his townes, except Cassell: 2. that he should yeeld vp vnto

the Emperour, all his munition: 3 that he should pay vnto the Emperour 150000 Crownes. The same night he was by the D. of Alva invited to supper: his sonnes in law of Saxonie and Brandenbourg accompanying him. After supper he was contrary to the Lawes o^ hospitality, and the Emperours exact promise, detained prisoner:R. Ascham. The fallacie stood thus. In the Emperours compact with the three Princes, the words were, that the Lantgraue should be kept, Nicht in emig gesengknes, that is, not in any prison; which the Emperors Secretary by a smal dash of his penne, turned into Nicht in ewig gefengk^es, that is, not in euerlasting prison. Well, in prison he staide 5 yeares, which being expired, he was again set at large by Duke Maurice, the ouerthrower and restorer of the German liberty.
The Armes of the Lantgraue are Azure,Paradin. a Lyon barri^ of 8 pieces, Arg. and Gules; armed and crowned Or.
There are diuers other inferiour Princes of Germany, which yet are absolute and free: insomuch that in one dayes riding, a Traueller may meet with diuers lands,Morison. and diuers coynes twice or thrice: euery free Prince and free City (whose Lawes the Emperours are sworne to keep inviolable) hauing power to make what Lawes, and coyne what money he will. And hence in the censure of kingdomes; the King of Spaine is said to be Rex hominum^, because of his subjects reasonable obedience: the king of France, Rex Asmorum, because of their infinite taxes and impositions: the King of England, Rex Diabolorum, because of his subjects often insurrections against, and depositions of their Princes: But the Emperour of Germanie is called Rex R^gum, because there is such a number of Reguli, or free Princes which liue vnder his command; or rather at their own command; for they doe euen what they list.

There are 20 Vniuersities in Germany.
1 Collen West.
2 Triers West.
3 Basil Swit.
4 Deling Swit.
5 Tubingen Bav.
6 Ingolstade Bav.
7 Mentz Fr.
8 Wirtenberg. Fr.
9 Heidelberg. Fr.
10 Iene Sax.
11 Lipsique. Sax.
12 Wittenberg Sax.
13 V^enna Au^t.
14 Friburg. Au^t.
15 Francfort. Bran.
16 Rostocke Pom
17 Gr^pswald Pom
18 Marpurg. Has.
19 Olmutz. Mor.
20 Prage. Boh.



There are in Germany

Emperour 1.


Dukes 34


Archbishops 7


Lantgraues 4


Vicounts.


King 1


Marquesses 6


Bishops 47


Earles


Barons.


Thus much of Germany.



OF DENMARKE.
DENMARKE containeth the Cimbricke Chersonesse, part of Scandia, and the Ilands of the Balticke Sea.
Ortelius.The CHERSONESSE hath on the Southwest the Albis, on the Southeast the riuer Trare, on the South a little piece of Germany. In all other parts, the sea. It was first inhabited by the Cimbri, thence called the Cimbrian Chersonesse. Of the Cimbri we shall speake more anon;Stephanus. as for Chersonesus it is so called (...), a terra and insula. It being the same with Peninsula in Latine. Now of these Chersonesi, fiue were most famous, 1 Peloponnesus in Greece; 2ly Thracica Chersonesus in Thrace: 3ly Taurica Chersonesus in Scythia or Tartary; 4ly Aurea Ch^rsonesus in India; of all which in their due places; and 5ly this Cimbrica Chersonesus where we now are. This Cimbrian Chersonesse is then in length 120 miles, in bredth 80: and containeth 28 Cities, 4 Bishops Sees, and 20 royall castles or palaces; as well for the Country, as the priuate retirements of the King. The chief Prouinces are Holst or Holsatia, whose chief Cities are Nyemunster and Bramsted:Maginus. this Prouince is the title of the second sonne of Denmarke. II Dietmars, whose chief Cities are Meldorp, whose citizens are so rich, that they couer their houses with copper: and 2 Marue. III Slesia, or Sleswicke, whose chief towns are Goterpe, and 2 Londen an hauen Town vpon Eider. IV. Iuitland whence came the Iuites, who together with the Saxons, and Angles, conquered England. The chiefe tow^s are 1 Rincopen, 2 Nicopen* 3 Holn, and 4 Arhausen.
The ILANDS of the BALTICKE are 35. The chief are Senland or Selandunia, in length 64, in bredth 52 miles. It containeth

7 strong castles belonging to the King, and about 13 Cities, the chief of which are 1 Haffen, or Hafnia, the kings seat, and the only Vniuersity in Denmarke; it is called by the Germans, Copenhagen: that is, m^rcatorum portus, the marchants H^uen. 2 Helfinura, or Elseneur, standing on the Sea side. At this towne the Marriners which haue passed, or are to passe the Sound, vse to pay their customes. 3 Rosc^^lt, the Sepulchre of the Danish Princes; Between this Hand and the firme land of Scundivania, is the passage called the Sound, toward Muscovie: which did yeeld vnto the King very great profit yearly; but now it is not a little fallen, since the Eng^ish found out the Northerne passage vnto Russia. This Sound is in bredth 3 miles and somwh^t more; and is commanded by the castle of Hilsembourg on Scandia side, and that of Cronburge in this Iland: which castles are the best forti^ied and furnished of any in this Country. II ^ionia or Fuinen containing 8 cities; the principal whereof are 1 Ottonium or Osel. 2 Swienbourgh or Suiborch. III Bornholmia, situate on the Balticke sea, not farre from Gothland; the chief city is Borneholme. It was redeemed by Fredericke the 2d, from the state of Lubecke; to which it had for 50 yeares together bin pawned. IV Fimera, in which Ticho Brahe built an artificiall Tower; in which are many rare Mathematicall Instruments. The chief town is Petersborne.
SCANDIVANIA or SCANDIA, is environed with the Seas, saue where it is joyned to Muscovie. It lieth part on this side* part beyond the Articke circle; so that the longest day in the more Northerne part is about three Months. It containeth the Kingdomes of Norwey, Swethland, and part of Denmarke. That part of Scandivania which belongeth vnto Denmarke, is situate in the South of this great Peninsula; and is diuided into 3 Prouinces, viz: 1 Hallandia, 2 Sconia or Scania; and 3 Blescida.
Ha^india hath on the North Swethland, on the South Scandia, on the East the wild woods that part it from Gothland. The Country is fruitfuller then Blescida, and barrenner then Scania. The chief town is Halanesoe.
Scania or Seonia hath on the South Hallandia; on all other

parts the sea. It is in length 72 miles, and 48 in bredth; and is the pleasantest Country in all Denmarke, most aboundant in fruits, most rich in merchandise, and on the sea sides so stored with herr^ngs; that sometimes ships are scarce able with winde and oare to break through them, and row off the harbour. The chief towns are 1 Londis, a great hauen town. 2 Elbogen. 3 Falskerbode. Here is also the castle of Elsimbourg aboue-mentioned.
Bl^scida or Blicker hath on the North Swethland, on the Fast and South the Balticke sea; on the North a little Si^us or sea gullet, by which it is parted from Scanta. It is a mountainous and barren country. The chief towns are Ma^nogia, the birth place of Casp. Bertholinus; and 2 Colmar, a strong fortresse against the Sw^thlander.
The people of this Country are good Souldiers both by sea and land;Ious. Boter: but fitter for the sea then the field: the Magistrate is wise rather by experience, then by study; the old man couetous; the yong man thrifty; and the Marchant ambitious. The women are of the same conditions as the women of ^elgia. They receiued the Christian Religion by the preaching of Ansu^rius,Munster. and follow the reformation of Luther.
The soyle is naturally more fit for pasture, then for tillage; feeding such a multitude of Oxen, that 50000 are said to bee sent hence yearely into Germany. Their other commodities, are Fish, Tallow, Furniture for shipping, Armours, Oxe-hides, Buck skinnes, Wamscot, Firrewood, Filberds, and the like.
The first inhabitants hereof were the Cimbri, a people descended from Gomer, the first son of Iaphet. They are said to haue first dwelt on the banks of Palus Moeotis,Plutarch. where they were called Cimmerij, and gaue name to Bospherus Cimmerius there being. These C^mmerij being ouer-layed by the Scythians, remoued their seates more Northward into a Country bounded according to Plutarch by the great Ocean on the one side; and the Forrest of Heroynia on the other; being the Country where we now are. They were a people of extraordinary big stature, h^uing blew or red eyes, and liued most vpon theft; so that for their sakes, (...), the Germans called all theeues, Cimbres. It hapned that the Ocean ouerflowing

a great part of their Country compelled them to seeke new seates; whereupon in great multitudes abandoning their dwellings, they petitioned the Romans, then lording it ouer a great part of the world, for some place to settle in. This request being denied, they proceeded in an other manner, winning with their swords, what their tongues could not obtain. Manilius, Sillanus, and Cepio, all Roman Consuls, perished by them; so that now (saith Florus) actum esset de imperio Romano, nisi illi seculo Marius contigisset; for he, as we haue elsewhere told you, vtterly ouerthrew them. The next inhabiters hereof were the Saxons, of whom we haue already spoken; and as for the Danes they were a people inhabiting the Ilands of Sinus Codanus, who about the yeare 500,Camden. left their old dwellings, and came vnto the Cimb^icke Chersonesse; not long before forsaken by the Saxons, at the conquest of England. They liued a great while in a confused state, which at last was brought to some conformity by Gotricus their King,Munster. Anno 797: They were much giuen to Sea-robberies, and taking dislike against Osbert King of Northumberland, who had rauished a Lady, sister to the Danish King; they came with grea^ strength into England: where for 255 yeares they tyrannized ouer the afflicted people. Of late they haue had no warres but with the Swethlanders, to whose kingdome they pretend a title from their Q. Margaret; who vanquished Albertus the King of Swethland, and gouerned it: as also did many of her successours, as shall be shewed in the Catalogue of the Swethland Kings. I will now reckon vp such Kings of the Danes, as haue bin since Charles the Great, the former of which were in number 44, hauing no certainty or apparance of continuance.

The Kings of Denmarke.
797
1 Gotrieus.

2 Henningus.

3 Canutus

4 Ivarus

5 Agnerus

6 Frotho

7 Haraldus

8 Gormo
926
9 Harald IIFregei Syn.

10 Canutus II

11 Canutus III

12 Sueno
1067
13 Haraldus III. 2
1069
14 Canutus IIII 10
1079
15 Olaus 10
1009
16 Ericus 13
1102
17 Haraldus V 52
1104
18 Nicolaus 30
1135
19 Ericus V
1140
20 Ericus VI
1150
21 Sueno
1161
22 Valdemarus 24
1185
23 Canutus 18
1203
24 Valdemarus II. 40
1243
25 Eri^us VII. 9
1251
26 Abel
1252
27 Christophorus 7
1260
28 Ericus VIII. 27
1287
29 Ericus IX. 35
1322
30 Christopher. II 12
1334
31 Val^emarus III 42
1376
32 Margareta 35
1411
33 Ericus D. Pomerani^^^ Margar. ado^^at. 28
1439
34 Ch^istoph. D. Bau.
1448
35 Ch^istiernus Comes Alde^b^^^g. 34
1482
36 Ioannes 32
1514
37 Christiernus II 9
1523
38 Fridericus I
1535
39 Christiernus III 2^
1559
40 Fridericus II 29
1588
41 C^ristianus IV

42 Christianus. Now liuing, King of Denmarke and Norway.

Boterus.The revenues of this Crown cannot be great; there being no commodity in his kingdome but fish, to allure Mariners: they which are also, are vncertain, considering the Sound sometimes yeeldeth more then others.
Bara.The Armes are Or, 3 Lyons passant Vert, crowned of the first.


OF NORWAY.
Maginus.NORWEY is bounded on the North with Lappia, on the East with the Dofrine mountaines, by which it is parted from Swethland; on the other parts with the Seas. It containeth in length 1300 miles, in bredth not halfe so much. This country is exceedingly troubled with certain little beasts,Munster. which they call Lemmers. They are about the bignes of a field mouse, and are by the inhabitants said to drop out of the clouds in tempestuous weather. They deuoure like the Locusts euery green thing on the earth, and at a certain time die all in heapes (as it were) together: and with their stench so poison the aire, that the poore people are long after troubled with the Iaundies, and with a giddinesse in the head. But these beasts come not often.
It is called Norwey for the Northerne situation: the people are much giuen to hospitality, plain-dealers, etc abhorring theft

They were once famous warriers, they conquered Neustria in France, since called Normandy, vnder the conduct of Rollo; England vnder the leading of D. William; Italy and Sicily vnder the banners of Tancred: Ireland and the Orcades vnder the ensignes of Turgesius: and the kingdome of Antioch vnder the leading of Boemund.
The soyle is so barren, that the people liue on dried fish inst^ed of bread; but the better (that is the richer sort) buy corne of such merchants as come to traffick with the^. Their chief co^modities are stockfish, butter, rich furres, traine oyle, pitch, and tackling for ships; as masts, cables, deale-boards, and the like; which the inhabitants exchange for corne, wine, fruits, and beere.
Townes here are exceeding thinne, and in them the houses very miserable and poore; for the most part patched vp of durt and hurdles, not much vnlike our ordinary village-houses in Lincolneshire, The chief of these towns are 1 Nidrosia, the See of an Archbishop, who is the Metropolitan of Norwey, Island, and Groinland. 2 Bergen, one of the foure ancient mart-townes of Europe; the other three being London in England, Novigrod in Muscovie, and Bruges in Flanders. But of these, three are decayed, viz: this Bergen, which hath yeelded to Wardhuis; Novigrod which by reason of the change of navigation through the Balticke, into the Northerne passage, hath giuen way to S. Nicholas: and Bruges which was depriued of her traffick by Antwerpe, from whence it is remoued to Amsterdam: For the Hollanders by blocking vp the hauen; but especially by keeping Bergen aep Zome, haue such a command ouer the riuer; that no vessell can passe or repasse without their licence. 3 Asloya, a Bishops See, and the place in which Iustice is administred for all the kingdome: and 4 Staffanger.
On the North and West of Norwey lieth Finmarchia,Mercat. a great and populous Prouince; the people whereof are for the most part idolaters. It took the name of Finmarch, as being the bou^ds or marches of the F^nni, of which people we shall tell you more in Swethland; it is subiect together with Norwey vnto the king of Denmarke. The chief townes are 1 Saman, 2 Hielso, both sea-townes:

and 3 Wardhuis seated in the very Northerne end of all the Country; a towne very profitable and seruiceable to the King, in that it a weth the Lappians, who border on this Prouince: and because ships must of necessity touch at it in their passage to Muscouie. It is so called, for that it standeth in a little Iland called Warde.
Munster.To omit the Catalogue of such Kings as are vncertaine, we will begin with king Subidagerus, who was king of all the three kingdomes, and at his death diuided them again amongst his three sonnes.

The Kings of Norwey.
1 Subidagerus
2 Haddingus
3 Hotharius
4 Collerus
5 F^ogerus
6 Gota^us
7 Rotherus
8 Helga
9 Hasmunlu^
10 Reginaldus
11 Gumaraus
12 Osmundus
13 Olaus
14 Osmundus II. not long after whose time Anno. sc. 800, the Normans began their irruptions.
15 Aquinus
16 Heraldus
17 Olaus II
18 Sueno K. of Dan.
19 Olaus III.
20 Sueno II
21 Canuius
22 Magnus
23 Haraldus II
24 Magnus II
23 Magnue III
26 Ingo
27 Aquinus of Norw.
27 Marg. of Den. by this marriage, the two kingdomes of Denmarke and Norwey were vnited, and neuer since disioyned; the Danes keeping the natiues so poore, that they are not able to resist them; besides the strong Garrisons kept on all parts of the Country, keep it in an absolute awe. The Christian Faith was first preached here by the meanes of Pope Adrian the fourth. They followed the reformed Church after the opinions of Luther; and speake the Dutch language; which is also common to their Lords of Denmarke, and neighbours of Sweden.

The Armes of this Kingdome are Gules, a Lion rampant Or,

crowned and armed of the first, in his pawes a Dansk hatchet Arg.
The chief order of Knighthood is of the Elephant,Grimston. instituted by Fredericke the second king of Denmarke; their badge is a coller powdred with Elephants towred, circling the kings armes and hauing at the end the picture of the Virgin Mary,
There are reckoned in Denmarke and NorweyArchbishops 3DukesEarlesBishops 15MarquessesViscunts.
One Vniuersity, namely Copenhagen.
Thus much of Denmarke and Norwey.


OF SWETHLAND.
SWETHLAND is bounded on the East with Muscouie, on the West with the Dofrine hils, on the North with the Frozen Seas, on the South with the Balticke seas. These Balticke Seas are they which beginning at the narrow passage, called the Sound, interlace the countries of Denmarke, Swethlaud, Germany, and Poland, and extend euen to Livonia and Lituania. These Seas are by some called Mare Su^vicum; by Pomponius Mela, Sinus Codanus; by Strabo, Sinus Venedicus: but generally Mare Balticum, because the great Peninsula of Scandia was called Baltia. The reasons why this sea being so large, doth not ebb and flow, are 1 the narrownesse of the streight by which the Ocean is let unto it; and secondly the Northerne situation of it, whereby the celestial influences produce therein the lesser operation.
This country alone, without the adiacent Prouinces of Lappia, Scricfinia, and Barm^a, is little lesse then Italy and France ioyned together: and with the additions of the said nations, is bigger by a circuit of 9^0 miles.
The people participate much in nature with the Norweians, as hospitable and valiant as they: for from hence came the Gothes, Suev^, Longobards, and other barbarous Nations, which by their often inundations ouer all Europe, gaue occasion to the olde

adage, Omne malum ab Aquilono.
They were converted to the Christian Faith long since, and now follow the doctrine of Luther, vsing the Dutch language, though not without an apparant and notable difference, in pronunciation and Orthographie.
The soyle is so fertill, that to see a bigger is a difficult matter; and the aire so healthfull, that it is ordinary to see men of 130, or 140 yeares of age. The country aboundeth with Mines of Lead, Copper, and Siluer, which are transported into other Nations, together with hides of Bucks, Goates, and Oxen, Tallow, Tarre, Barley, Malt, costly Furres, and the like.

The chief Prouinces are,
1 LAPPIA the most Northerne part of all Scandia, is diuided into the Easterne,Munster containing Biarmia and Corelia, which belo^geth vnto the Knez or Duke of Russia: and the Easterne comprehending Lappia, properly so called, and Scricfinnia, which are vnder the king of Sweden. Lappland is situate between Scricfinnia, North; Sweden, South; the Dofrine hills, West; and S^nus Boddi^us, East. The people deriue their name from their blockish behauiour, the word Lappon signifying as much as inepius or insulsus in Latine. Scri^finnia lieth between I^apland and the frozen Ocean. They deriue their name from the Finni, a great people of Scandia, and Scricken a Dutch word, signifying leaping, sliding, or bounding, for such is their gate: and moreouer in that for their more speedy sliding ouer the ice, of which this Countrey in the winter is full; they vsed wooden-soaled shooes, with sharp bottomes, now in vse among the Germans, and by them called Scrickeshoenon, or sliding-shooes. The ancient writers call this people Scrictofinni. These together with the Laplanders, vse to giue worship and diuine honour all the day following to that liuing creature what ere it be, which they see at their first going out of their doores in a morning: and are so poore, that they pay vnto the King of Sweden for tribute, rich skinnes, and furres; as being without the vse of money, and benefit of houses. They are of an indifferent good stature, and passing well skilled in Archerie.
Maginus.2 BODIA hath on the North Scricfinnia; on the South Finland;

on the East Sinns Finnicus, and part of Muscouie; on the West a large and capacious bay or sea-gulet, which from hence is called Sinus Bodicns, The chief townes are 1 Virtis. 2 Vista. 3 Helsinga, honoured with the title of a Dukedome.
3 FINLAND hath on the North Bodia, on the South the Balticke Sea, or Mare Suevicum; on the East Sinus Finnicus, and on the West Sinus Bodicus. It is by Munster thought to be called Finland, quasi fine land, quod pulchrior and amoenior sit Suecia, because it is a more fine and pleasing country then Sweden it selfe. But indeed it is so called from the Finni or Fenni, a potent Nation who haue here dwelt, whose character thus framed by Tacitus, Finnis m^ra feritas, faeda paupertas: non arma, non equi, non penates; victuiherbae, vestitui pelles, cubile humus; sola in sagi^tis spes, etc. agreeth euery way with our present Finlander, especially those of Scricfinnia, and Finmarchia, who are not so well reclaimed to ciuility, as the other. This Finland is very populous as comprehending 1433 parishes, many of which containe 1000 Families. The chiefe townes are 1 Abo, a Bishops seat. 2 Narne, a place of great strength. Not farre from these, are townes within the limits of Muscouie, namely Viburge and Rivallia;Boterus. the keeping of which Fortresses, stand the King in 10^000 Dollars yearely. They are Forts excellently well seated, defending his own, and offending his enemies territories: of which nature was Calice in France when the English possessed it.
4 SWECIA or SWEDEN (...) so called, hath on the East Sinus Bodicus, on the West the Dosrine hills: on the North Lappia, and on the South Gothland. The country is very fruitfull and delicious,Maginus, vnlesse in some places where the cragginesse of the hills maketh it more barren, and lesse pleasing. The chief cities are 1 Vpsale, a famous Bishoprick, from whence all this tract is tearmed Archiepiscopatus Vpsalinsis, 2 Nicopia* a Sea-town of good strength. 3 Coperdol, famous for its abundance of brasse.
5 GOTHLAND is the best and richest Prouince of the North, and took name from the Gothes, whose Country it once was, and not quasi Good land, for its goodnesse, and fertility. It is

diuided into the Iland and the Continent; The Iland of Gothia is seated in the Balticke seas, being in length 18 miles, and 5 in bredth: it standeth very convenient for the Danes to invade Sweden; which is the reason it hath bin so often in eithers possession; and is now vnder the Swethlander. The chief towne is Wisbich. The Co^tinent of Gothia is in the hithermost part of Scand^a, next vnto the kingdome of Denmarke. It hath in it the great Lake Weret, which receiuing 24 tiuers, disburdeneth it selfe at one mouth, and that with such a noise and fury, that they call it, the Diuels head. The chief Cities are Stockholme, seated after the manner of Venice; a town in which Christiern King of Denmarke, committed vnspeakable cruelties, filling the channels with blood,Munster. and the streets with dead bodies. 2 Lodusia a town of great traffique* 3 Waldbourge, a well fortified peece; and 4 Colmar, famous for its impregnable castle.
The first people of this Gothia were the Vandals, who first went into Poland, and afterward into Italy, Spaine, and Africke: and the Gothes, who being a people of Scythia, called Ge^es, and Gepides, seated themselues in Misia. Afterwards for feare of the Romans, they returned into Scandivania, and inhabited this part, since called Gothio; but not lik^ng the coldnes of the Climat, they returned again towards their former habitation of Misia, where Decius the Emperour warred against them, to the death of himself and his son, Anno 253. Not long after they were subdued by the Hu^nes, whereupon many of the Gothes not willing to endure the imperious command of that barbarou^ pe^ple, obtained of Valeus and Valentinianus the Constantinop ^tan Emperours, a ^eat towards the mouth of Danubius, Valens exacting of them in liew of his kindnes, vnsupportable tributes, was by them vanquished; nor were they w^ll appeased till the time of Theodosius,Zosimus. Anno ^83: who made a firme peace with them. In his time there was a dissention between Rha^ag^se and Alaric for the kingdome; which when Alaric had gotten, Rhadaguse with 200000 men went into Italy, who were ^here starued and slaughtered in the Appenine hils. To reuenge this Massacre, his riuall Alaric went into Italy, in the time of H^norius the son of Theodosius, where he conquered Rome, Campania

an^ Naples. After him succeeded Athaulfus, who married Placida, sister to Honorius; by whom he was perswaded to leaue Italy, and go into Spaine: which was possessed by his successors, the space of 300 yeares. Some of these Gothes sent Colonies into the more Southerne parts of France, where they possessed Languedocke and Provence: and at last forgot the name of Gothes, and became French. About 77 yeares after the conquest of Spaine they were againe sent for into Italy, by Zeno the Emperour, Anno 493: to repell the fury of King Odoacer, and his Heruli; who being expulst, Theodoricke Captaine of the Gothes, made himselfe King of Italy. The reason why the Gothes were rather wished for in Italy, the^ the Heruli; was, for that the Goths wer^, and had of long time bin Christians; for we read that Theodosius Bishop of the Goths, was present at the Ni^ene Councell. They were generally infected with the heresie of Arius,Socrat. whereto they addicted themselues to feed the humour of Valens, co-partner with Valentiniauus in the Empire. For there was not long before among the Gothes a civill warre; Athanaricus, and Phritigernes being the leaders of the factions. Phritigernes being ouerthrowne fled to Valens, and of him receaued such succours, that encountering againe his enimy, he wonne the day; and to gratifie the Emperour (who mainely was addicted to Arrianisme) he commanded his subiects to embrace that doctrine. Vliphas, Bishop of the Gothes, at the same time inuented the Gothicke letters, and translated the holy Scriptures into that language: Which labor the good old man might wel haue spared, (...) then the seruice of the Church (as the Papists say) was only celebrated in the Greeke and Latine tongues. This king Theodoricke, whom Zeno call'd into Italy, was King of the Ostrogothi, or Easterne Gothes: who were the ofspring of those that remained in their country,Pezel. in Sl^id. after the expeditio^ of Alari^ into Italy, and the West. Attila the Hunne subdued them to his Empire, vnder which during his life they continued: but after dis death, his sonnes falling at oddes, were by Wilaner one of the Got^sh bloudroyall, ouerthrowne, and the Gothes sea^ed in Pannonia. To Willamer succeeded his brother Thendomir, who was the father of this Theodericke, Theodericke was in his youth, kept as

his fathers pledge in Constantinople, where he was instructed in all the Grecian and Roman learning: And when Zeno resolued to send him into Italie against Odoacer, he made him a Patrician of the Empire. This honour of the Patriciatus was deuised by Constantine, that great innouator in the Roman Empire: and they who were dignified with it, were by the constitutions of the Emperour, to take precedency of the Praef^ct^ Praetorio. And so much did Charlemaigne prize this attribute, that he assumed it as an additament to his stile of Emperour. Theodoricke having vanquished and slaine Odoacer, strengthned himselfe divers waies in the Country; first by alliances and then by fortresses. He tooke to wife Adelheida, daughter to Clodovem K. of the Frank^. His sister Hammelfrede hee gaue in marriage to Thrasimunde king of the Vandals in Africa, His niece Amelberge he married to Hermanfridus king of the Turingians; and his daughter Amalusunta to Eutharicus, a Prince among the Gothes in Spaine. Being thus backt with all the barbarous, nations his neighbours; he built townes and forts along the Alps and the Adriatique Sea, to impeach the passage of barba^ous people into Itaelie. His Souldier^ and Captaines he dispersed in sundry townes and villages; partly that they might keep vnder the wauering ^alians; partly to mingle his people with the me^ of Italie, in language, fashions, and marriages; and partly that he might more easily in warre command them, and in peace correct them. Italy which was before a throughfare to the barbarous nations, and quite disordered by the often inundations of such people, he reduced ^o so fortunate a gouernment; that before his death the footstepps of their miseries were troden out, and a generall felicity diffused it selfe through all the Country. Such Citties as were formerly defa^ed he repaired, strengthned, and beautified. In his warres he was victorious, in his peace, iust, wise, and affable. Finally, he was, as Velleius sai^h of M^robodunus, natione magis quam ratione barbarus; and of all the Barbarous Princes that euer inuaded the Romane Provinces; hee went the most in iudiciously to worke in establishing his new co^quests; and euen in our daies he may well stand as a patterne to such men as vndertake the like actions.
The Gotish Kings in Italie.Procopius.4451 Theodoricus the first King, 33.5272 Amabasunta, a woman of most perfect vertue, tooke vpon her the Empire of gouernment of the Gothes, as partner with her sonne Atalaric. She droue the Burgundians and Almain^s out of Liguria; and was skilfull in the languages of all nations that had any commerce with the Rom^n Empire: insomuch that pro miraculo fuerit ipsam aud^re loquentem. She raigned 8 yeares.5343 Theodatus, who being in warres with the Romans, and willing before hand to knowe his successe; was willed by a Iew to shut vp a number of Swine, and to giue some of them Roman names, the others Gothish. Not long after, the King and the Iew going to the sties, found the Gothish Hogges all slaine, and the Romans halfe vnbrisselled: whereon the Iew foretold that the Gothes should be discomfited, and the Romans loose much of their strength: and so it hapned. This kinde of diuination is called (...), and hath been prohibited by a generall Councell. 3.5374 Viti^es 65405 Idobaldus 1541Araricus 1.5427 Totilas 11.5538 Teias, who being overcome by Narses, submitted himselfe to the Roman Empire; after which time, they grewe with the Italians (as also with the French and Spaniards) into one nation. Their history is thus briefly set downe by Sylvester in his Du B^^tas.
The warl^ke Gothe which whilome issued forthFrom ^he cola frozen Ilands of the North,In^^mpt by V^sta^a, but the ayre almostBeing there as cold as in the Balticke coast:He wi^h v^ctorious armes Sclavonia gaines,The ^^ansily^n^^n, and Valachian plaines.Thence flyeth to Thracia, and then leauing Greekes,G^eedy of spoyle, foure times he brauely seekesTo plucke fro^ Rome, then Mars his minion;The plumes which she from all the world had wonne,Guided by Rhadaguise, and Alaricke,Bold Vindimarus and Theodoricke.Thence flyeth to France, from whence expulst, his legionsRest ever since vpon the Spanish Regions.
And let this suffice for the originall, Empire, and decay of the Gothes. Now somewhat concerning the Swethlanders themselues, the beginning of which natiue natio^, I find very obscure, not mentioned by Munster or Crantzius, whi^h two (the l^st especially) purposely haue written of them. Three der^^ations and three only I finde probable, the one taught me by Casp^r Peucerus, the other by my owne reading and obseruation. Peucerus then deriueth them from the Suevi, who inhabited the Northerne part of Germanie, and from whom the Balticke Sea is indeed by many approued writers tearmed Mare Suevicum: which people he coniectureth to haue beene driuen by the ^aci, and Gothes into this Country, and by changing only one letter, to be called Sueci. But this is not altogether in my conceit so likely; for in fatali illa gentium emigratione, when almost all nations shifted their seats; these Sueui retired partly into Swaben, and the rest into Spaine, as we haue there said: of any expedition of theirs into this Country negry quidem, wee read not a word. Mine owne opinion (if it be lawfull for me to insert mine owne) is twofold: First, I referre their originall to the Suiones mentioned by Tacitus, and by him reputed to be strong in men, armour, and shipping. That these Suiones were inhabiters of Scandia, appeareth by two circumstances of the same author; viz: I that the people were not permitted to weare weapons, quia subitos hostium incursus prohibet Oce^nus; because the Ocean was vnto them a sufficient rampire: which cannot be affirmed of the German nations. 2ly, Because the Sea beyond this natio^ was reputed to be the vtmost bound of the whole world, trans Suiones mare aliud quo cingi claudique terrarum orbem fides, which we knowe still to hold good in Sweden. And 3ly, by a passage in the old Annales of Lewis the 2d Emper^ur, where it is said, that the Danes (relicta patria apud Sueones exulabant) were banished into the Country of the Sueones, which doubtlesse was this Sweden. Now (for applications sake) most certain it is, that Sueones is the true and ancient name of this people; and

by the names of Sueones or Sueci are they called both in Munster and Crantzius abouenamed. My second derivation is from the Suethans and Suethidi, mentioned by Iornandes, and by him placed in the Ile of Scanzia; for such, by old writers, was this great Peninsula esteemed to be. Now that these are the Suecians or Swethlanders, appeareth first by the propinquitie of the names. 2ly, In that he maketh the Finlanders or Finni and Finnauhae to be their neere neighbours: and 3ly, in that by the same author they are affirmed to haue furnished the Romanes with rich Furres, and the skinnes of wild beasts; with which commodities this countrey is abundantly stored. To which of these opinions to adhere, I am not yet resolute: what now, if I should say that these Sueones and Suethans, were but one people, and to haue had these diuers names according to the diuerse ages of Authors? If I did, it were but my guesse; and sometimes better men coniecture as improbably.
There haue beene diverse Kings of Swethland, which their owne histories cannot number aright: we will therefore beginne with I^^manicus, the contemporarie of Charlemaigne, of whose successours there is more certainty and continuation.

The Kings of Sweden.

1 Iermanicus

2 Frotho.

3 Herotus

4 Sorlus.

5 Bi^rnus.

6 Wichsertus.

7 Ericus.

8 Ostenus.

9 Sturbioru^s.

10 Ericus II.

11 Olaus.

12 Edmun^us.

13 Stink^lis.

14 Halstenus.

15 Animander.

16 Aquinus.Munster.

17 Magnus.
1150
18 Sher^o 10.
1160
19 Carolus 8.
1168
20 Canutus 54.
1222
21 Ericus III. 27.
1249
22 Bingerius 2
1251
23 Waldemarus 26.
1277
24 Magnus II. 13.
1290
25 Bingerius II. 23.
1313
26 Magnus III. 13
1326
27 Magnus IV.

28 Magnus V.
1363
29 Alberius Duke of Mecklenbourg, who was vanquished by Q. Margaret of Danemarke, and Norwaie, the Semiramis of Germany, 24.
1387
30 Margaret Q of Sweth Norw. and Denmarke.
1411
31 Ericus IV, Duke of Pomeren, adopted by Queene Margaret. 28.
1439
3^ Christopher Duke of Bavare: after his death the Swethlanders weary of the Danish yoke, which they had borne eue^ since the time of Ma^garet Queene of Danemarke; reuo^te* and chose one Carolus Canutus, Ao 1448
1448
33 Carolus Canutus one of the meanest of the Nobil^ty was chosen King. He hauing incurred the displeasure of his Nobles, and fearing a change of for^un^; gathered together all the mony and treasure hee could; sledde vnto Dantzicke, and there ended his d^ies. In the meane time the Swedens appointed among them one whom they called their Marshall; vnder whose seuerall conducts they vanquished Christierne, and Iohn his sonne Kings of Denmarke. Of these Marshalls there were three in number, Steno, Suanto, and Steno Stur: of which the two first died naturally, and the last by Christiern the 2d slaine in battaile; Sweden was by the treachery of Gustanus Archbishop of Vpsall, betrayed and yeelded to the Dane, Anno 1519.
1519
^4 Christierne King of D^nemarke and Norwey, vsed his victory so cruelly here, and his subiects so insolently at home: that here he was outed by Gustanus Ericus, and driuen from Danemarke by his Vnkle Frederick Ao 1523
1523
35 Gustanus Eric^s, the restorer of his Countries liberty. 38.
1561
36 Ericus sonne to ^ustanus, 8.
1569
37 Iohn, brother to Ericus, 25.
1593
38 Sigismund during the lif^ of Iohn his father, was chosen King of Poland Anno 1586; and hath since his fathers death beene disp^ssessed of his kingdome of Sweden by Cha^les his V^k^e; or adhering to the Church of Rome, af^er he had raigned 1^ yeares.

39 Charl^s King of Swed^n, 1^.
1617
40 Gus^a^us Ad^^p^us, sonne to ^harles now liuing.

The revenewes o^ this kingdome cannot but be great, the King hauing some meanes to augment his Treasure. 1 The

tenths of Ecclesiasticall liuings. 2 Mines. 3 Tributes. 4 Customes. In the yeare 1578, all charges of Court and armie deducted, the King coffered vp 700000 German Dollars.
The men of warre are more obedient to their Prince then any Northerne Souldiers whatsoeuer, because the King giueth vnto every souldier victuals, and that according to their obedience and desert: 2 If a Souldier be taken by the enimy the King doth vsually redeeme him: 3 If a Souldiers horse bee slaine vnder him, the King most graciously giueth him another. By this meanes the Kings are very potent in warres, and though they were once much inferiour to the Danes, yet are they now equal to him; and as much superiour to the Muscovite. They are supposed to haue 8000 great brasse pe^ces for the warres: and that in the Castle of the towne of Stockholme only there are 400 of proofe sufficient.

The Armes of this kingdome are Azure,Bara. 3 Crownes Or, There are in Swethland.

Archbishop 1


Dukes 13


Earles.


Bishops 7.


Marquesses.


Vicounts.


One Vniversity viz: Vpsall.
Thus much of Swethland.



OF MVSCOVIE.
MVSCOVIA is bounded on the East with Tartary, on the West with Livonia,Maginus. Lituania, and part of Sweden; on the North with the Frozen Ocean; on the South with Mare Caspium the Turkes, and Palus Maeotis. This Country standeth partly in Europe, partly in Asia. It taketh its name from Musco, the chiefe Citty; and is also called Russia alba, to distinguish it from Russia nigra, a province of Poland. The reason whereof, saith one, speaking of the Muscovite, is, quod incolae omnium regionum ipsius imperio subiectarum, vestibus albis and pileis plerunque vtantur, because the inhabitants weare white caps? And why not? Sithence the inhabitants of Margiana and Sogdian^ in Asia, are called Iesel^^sse; onely because they weare greene

turbants, the name importing as much.
It is in length from East to West 3300 miles, and in bredth 3065 miles: it is situate between the 8th and the 20th Climats, the longest day in the Southerne parts, being but 16 houres long and a halfe, in the Northerne parts almost 22 houres long, and a hal^e.
The people are persidious, swift of foot, strong of body, and vnnaturall, ^he father insulting on the sonne, and he againe ouer his father and mother. So malitious one towards another, that you shall haue a man hide some of his owne goods in his house whom h^ hateth; and then accuse him for the stealth of them. They are exceedingly giuen to drinke, insomuch that all heady and intoxicating drinkes are by statute prohibited: and two or three daies only in a whole yeare, allowed them to be drunk in. They are for the most part of a square proportion, broad, short, and thicke; grey eyed, broad-bearded, and generally are furnished with prominent panches. The Commons liue in miserable subiection to the Nobles; and they againe in as great slauery to the Duke or Emperour: to whom no man dareth immediatly exhibit a petition, or make known his grieuances: nay the meaner Lords are squeamish in this kind, and but on great submission will not commend vnto the Duke a poore mans cause. They are altogether vnlearned; euen the Priests are meanely indoctrinated; it being cautionated by the great Duke that there be no Schooles, lest there should be any Schollers but himsel^e: so that the people vse to breake the Sabboth, holding it fit only to be kept by Gentlemen: and to say in a difficult question, God and our great Duke knowe all this: and in other talke, All we enioy health and life; all from our great Duke. The women are private fearefull to offend, but once lasciuious, intollerably wanton. It is the fashion of these women to loue that husband best which beateth them most; and to thinke themselues neither loved nor regarded, vnlesse they be twice or thrice aday welfauoredly swadled. The author of the Treasurie of times, telleth a story of a German Shoomaker, who trauelling into this Country, and here marrying a widdow, vsed her with all kindnes that a woman could (as he thought) desire; yet did not she seem contented.

At last learning where the fault was, and that his not beating her, was the cause of her pensiuenesse; he took such a vaine in cudgelling her sides, that in the end the hangman was fain to breake his necke for his labour.
They vse the Sclauonian language, and receaued the Christian saith Anno 987: in which they follow the Church of Greece, and differ from the Romish and reformed Churches: 1 Denying the holy Ghost to proceed from the Father, and the Sonne. 2ly, Denying Purgatory, but praying for the dead. 3ly, Beleeuing that holy men inioy not the presence of God, before the resurrection. 4ly, Communicating in both kindes; but vsing leauened bread, and mingling warme water with wine: which both together they distribute with a spoone. 5ly, Receauing Children of seauen yeares old to the Sacrament, because then they begin to sin^e. 6ly, For bidding extreame vnction, confirmation, and fourth marriages. 7ly, Admitting none to orders but such as are married; and prohibiting marriage to them who are actually in orders. 8ly, Reiecting carued Images, but admitting the painted 9ly, Obseruing foure Lents in the yeare. 10ly, Reputing it vnlawfull to fast on Saturdaies. This diversity betweene the Romanists and this people in points of religion; hath bred such a difference betweene them in loue, and made the one so hard co^ceited of the other: that if a Muscouite be knowne or suspected to haue conversed with any of the Church of Rome, he is accou^ted to be a polluted person: and must bee solemnly purged and purified before he shall be receaued or admitted to partake of the blessed Communion.
In matters of warre the people are indifferently able,Maginus. as being almost in continuall broyles with their neighbours; and haue a custome that when they goe to the warres, euery Souldier giueth vnto the Emperour a peece of money; which after the end of the warres, he againe receaueth of him: by which meanes the number of the slaine is exactly knowne. At their funeralls they vse to put a penny in the mouth of the deceased, a paire of shoes on his feet, and a letter in his hand directed (such is their superstition) to St Nicholas, whom they deeme to bee the porter of heauen: an opinion doubtlesse very preiudiciall to the Popes,

and St Peters prerogatiues.
This Country is not so populous as spacious, the Easterne parts are vexed with the Tartars, who like Aesops dogge will neither dwel there themselues, nor suffer the Muscovite to plant Colonies there: the Westerne parts are almost as much molested by the Sweden and Polonian Kings: the Southern by the Turks and Precopenfes: and the Northerne by the coldnesse of the aire; which is of such vehemency; that water throwne vp into the ayre, will turne to ice before it fall to the ground. The better to resist this extremity of this cold, not onely the cloathes of this people, but their very houses are lined with thicke furres. Every Gentleman or man of note hath in his dwelling house a Stoue, or hot-house; in which they keepe, as it were, to thaw themselues. Such as trauell on the way, vse often to rub their nose and eares with snowe or ice, to settle and recall the motiue spirits into these parts; which otherwise they would bee in a danger to loose: the ignorance of which preventing chirurgery, was not the least cause that in the yeare 1598, of 70000 Tu^kes, which made an intode into Muscovie, 40000 were frozen to death. This excesse of cold in the ayre, gaue occasion to Castilian in his Aulicus, wittily and not incongruously to faine, that if two men being somewhat distant talke together in the winter, their words will be so frozen that they cannot bee heard; but if the parties in the spring returne to the same place, their words will melt in the same order that they were frozen and spoken, and bee plainely vnderstood. Such is their Winter, neither is their Summer lesse miraculous. For the huge seas of Ice, which in a manner couered the whole surface of the Countrey, are at the first approach of the Sunne suddainly dissolued, the waters quickly dryed vp, and the earth dressed in her holyday apparell, such a mature growth of fruits, such flourishing of hearbs, such chirping of birds, as if ^ere were a perpetuall spring.
The chiefe commodities which they send abroad, are rich Furres; others of lesse note are Flaxe, Hemp, Whales grease, hony, Wax, Canvasses, Nuts, and the like.
The revenues of this Empire cannot but be great, the Great Duke being Lord both of the liues and goods of his Subiects:

Mahomet a Turkish Bashaw was wont to say, that his master and the Muscovite were the most absolute Princes in the world. His revenewes in mony (his houshold charge being defrayed) amount to 3 Millions of Rubbles. He is apparelled like a King and a Bishop; wearing with his royall vestiment a Miter and a Crosier staffe. When he sitteth in his state, all the plate of his house is set before him; with a great number of the grauest and seemliest men of all Musco, and the adioyning Citties richly apparelled out of the wardrope:Archb. Ab. which to Forreiners, not knowing this cunning fraud, appeare so many Princes and Noble men; and is no small cause of admiration and wonder at his magnificence.
The Country may bee (as rightly it is) called the Mother of Rivers; the chiefe of which are Don or Tanais, which was by the ancient Geographers, thought to bee the onely bound twixt Europe and Asia: it disburdeneth it selfe into Palus Maeotis, 2 Duina, which entreth into the Scythian Seas, at the Abbie of St Nicholas; where the English since the discouery of the Northerne passage, vse to land; and disperse themselues into all the parts of this vast Empire. And truly there is no nation so kindly entertained amongst the Russians both Prince and people, as the English; who haue many immunities not granted to other nations. The cause I cannot but attribute to the neuer-dying fame of our late Queene, admired and loued of the Barbarians; and also to the conformable behauiour of the English in generall; which is so accepted, that when Wasiliwich or Basiliades nayl'd the hat of an other forraine Embassadour to his head for his peremptorinesse: hee at the same time, vsed our S^ Thomas Smith with all curtesie immaginable. Another time when the Iesuite Possevinus,Archb. Ab. began to exhort him to accept the Romish faith; vpon the information of our Embassadour, that the Pope was a prowd prelate, and would make Kings kisse his feet: hee grew into such a rage, that Possevinus thought he would haue beaten out his braines. This friendship betweene these nations, hath beene since maintained by mutuall Embassaies on both parties. The third riuer of note, is Boristenes, called also Neiper, (as Duina is Oby) which augmenteth the waters of Pontus Euxinus.Maginus*

4 Duina minor, now called O^ega, which openeth its mouth to rece^ue the waters of the Bal^^cke Sea. 5 Vo^ga, which with no lesse then 70 mouthes, vomits his soule into the Mare Caspium and^.
The chiefe Provinces are 1 NOVIGORDIA, in which is the famous Towne No^o^rod on the coast of the Bal^^cke Seas* one of the foure ancient M^^t Townes of Europ:S.W. Ral. now decayed since the dis^ouery of the new passage vnto S Nicholas, by O^y or Duina. This Novogrod is seated on the less^^ Duina. Nigh vnto this Towne was fought the battle betweene the Sarmatians, or Scythians of Europe, and their slaues. For when the Asiaticke Scythes went to plant themselues in Media, with the Provinces adjoyning; these Sarmatians inhabiting Poland, went with the^, to see them setled. Their long stay caused their wiues willing to make vse of any pretence to comfort themselues at bedde and board with their slaues; to whom they bore a lusty bro^d of youths. These now well growne, and hearing the vnwelcome tidings of the Sarmatians* returne out of Asia, ioyne together: the slaues to retaine the freedome and Lordship they had got: the wiues for feare of their husbands fury: the young men for defence of their fathers and mothers. With ioynt forces they goe to meet them before their entry into the country; neither are t^e masters slowe, hoping to take them vnprovided. At this Towne they haue the first sight of each other. The masters ^earning to defile their swords on their slaues, assault them with Horse-whips, and got the victory. In memory of this battaile, the N^vogrodians haue euer since stamped their money with the figure of a Horse-man shaking a whip in his hand. And it is the custome ouer all Museovie, that a maid in time of wooing, sends to that suiter whom she chooseth for her husband, such a whip, curiously by her selfe wrought, in token of her subiectio^.
Maginus.2 PLESCOVIA, whose chiefe towne is Pl^scowe: this being the only walled Towned in Russia. This country is in length 330 miles, about 130 in breadth; and was conquered by Basilius 1509.
3 VALADOMIRE, is distant from Muscovie about 70 miles. The soyle is so fruitfull, that one bushell of corne ordinarily

returneth 20, and sometimes 25 bushells. The chiefe town so named was once the Metropolis of Russia.
4 RHEZAN, so plentifull of corne, that Birds and Horses can neither fly nor runne through it, by reason of its thicknesse; the chiefe citty is Rhezen. This is the ser^ilest country in all Musco^ie and most rich; abounding with Graine, Hony, Fish, and Fowle, sans number: and is so well replenished with able men, that the great Duke can from hence levie 25000 Horse, and 40000 Foot. Here is the head of the famous riuer Tanais.
5 SEVERIA, a great Province, lieth fast vpon Palus Maeotis. The chiefe Townes are 1 Staradub, and 2 Pativola. The people are very valiant.
6 SMOLENSKO,Adrianus. whose chiefe citty is Smolensko.
7 RESCOVIE, whose chiefe citty is Toropyerz.
8 ROSTOWIA, whose Metropolis is Coloprigod.
9 CORELIA, where Laudiskron is the chiefe Towne.
10 PERMIA, where there is such abundance of stagges, that the people eat them (as the people of Norw^y doe fish) insteed of bread: the prime Citty is Sicwiarksey.
11 CONDORA being beyond the Articke. In this country they haue for halfe a yeare together, perpetuall day; and for the other halfe, as long a night.
12 PETZORA, the most Northeast parts of Muscovie. In this country the hills which the ancients called Riphe^,Maginus. and Hyperbore^ montes doe end. They are thought to bee perpetually covered with snowe, and are here of that height, that a cert^ine man hauing for 17 daies together travelled vp them; returned backe againe, as despairing euer to come to the top. The people here haue for some months continuall day. They are a simple nation, and receaued the Russian faith and Empire together, Ao 1518.
13 The kingdome of CASAN and CITRAHAM.
14 MUSCOVIA, so named of Musco the prime Citty, to which Daniel the 4th Lord, translated his regall seat from Volodmire. It was once 9 miles in circuit,Boter. but was fired by the Tartar Anno 1571, where there were burnt 80000 men: and it is now become but 5 miles round, and is adorned with 16 Churches;

whereof halfe and more, are made with wood and durt, as most of the houses are. The Pallace of the Duke is seated in the very middle of the Citty,Maginus. fortefied with 17 Turrets and three great Bulwarkes; and guarded continually with 25000 Souldiers. This Province is the greatest and most populous of all this Empire; for it extendeth from East to West no lesse then 2000 miles; and out of this, the great Duke can suddenly levy 70000 footmen, and 3000 horse. The other lesser Provinces as Biela, Tuver, Mosaiskie, Wolochda, I^gra, and Bieleiezioro (in which last, the Duke hath a strong fortresse which is vsually his treasure house, and to which in time of need he vsually flyeth; besides many others, I purposely omit..
This country was called formerly Scythia Europaa, and was neuer totally knowne either by the Grecians or Romans. Anno 1240,Boterus. the Tartars first made it tributary, who were afterward shrewdly weakned, by the valour of Iohn the first Great Duke: to whom they afterward yeelded the Countrey, conditionally that once euery yeare within the Castle of Mosco, the Great D. standing on foot, should feed the horse of the Crim Tartar, with Oates out of his owne cap. This homage was by Basilius changed to a tribute of Furres; which being also denied, gaue occasions of the warre between the Tartar and the Muscovite: which the Tartars make either by saddai^e incursions; or by armes royall, at which time there come seldome fewer then 200000 fighting men into the field.
Io. Aubrie.The Chorographical describer of Muscouia, maketh mention of the Princes of it, euer since the dayes of Augustus; but without any great shew of truth, no computation of time, or relation of atchieuements. I commend the Authours modesty, in not stuffing vp his treatise with actions meerly fabulous, of which could neither be ground nor possibility : yet can I not acquit him for putting down so many names to so little purpose. We will therfore omit them, and begin our Catalogue with George; who both bare the brunt of the Tartars inuasion, and after the retreat of their greatest forces, began again to taste the sweetnes of soueraignty: yet not so free, but that he and nine of his successours were tributaries to the Tartar; none of the^ performing

any thing worthy the rehearsing.

The Lords of Muscouie.
1 George
2 Iaceslaus
3 Alexander
4 Daniel
5 Iohn
6 Iohn II
7 Basilius
8 Demetrius
9 Georgius II
10 Basilius II


The Great Dukes

1 Iohn the first Great Duke, shook off the Tartarian bondage.

2 Basilius Casaen wonne the Prouinces of Severia, Roscouia, and Smolensko.

3 Iohn Basilius conquered Livonia, and Lituania; both w^ich his successour
1548
4 Iohannes Basiliades, or Wasiliwicke, lost in his age; though in his youth he had subdued the No^hacensian Tartars to his Empire; and vanquished Selim, Emperour of the Turkes, Anno 1569. With this King the English first began to confederat, he reigned 35 yeares.
1583
5 Thi^dorus Ioannides 5
1588
6 ^oris Theodorus

7 Demetrius an vsurper.
1615
8 Michael Fedrovitius now gouerning this vast Empire, and liuing in a firmer and more constant continuation of peace with Tartar, Turke, Polonian, and Swethlander; then euer any of his p^edecessours did in times past.

The formality with which the Emperours of Russia are invested or settled in the Throne, are not many, nor stately; such as they be, I h^re afford you out of the history of the life of Iohannes Basiliades, written in Latine by Paulus Oderbornius. On the 2d of Iune, A^o 1583. Theod^rus Iohannides went towards the Temple of S. Michael, being the principall Church in all Musco: the streets all couered with flowres, the doores of the citizens crowned with garlands, the Aire ecchoing with the noise of Flutes and Trumpets, and the people so crowding to behold their Prince, that had not the Guard with naked swords forced a passage through them, it had bin impossible for him

to haue gone on. Being now come to the Church doore, the Lords of the Country (Cneses they there call them) went out to meet him; and the Archbishop of Musco clad in his pontificalibus, when he was come into the Church, embraced him. The pauement of the Church was hidden with Tapest^ie, and the wals adorned with costly hangings. The great Duke sate down in his Throne, being attired in a garment of silk, buttoned down with golden butto^s: on his head he ware a purple cap, sp^ngled with rich jewels; and on his fingers abundance of rings. Bei^g thus seated, the Archbishop prayed vnto God to blesse him, his peop^e, and his gouernment, which was seconded by the ioyful shoutes of his subiects; amongst whom no small store of siluer money was slung about by the Treasurer, and so they returned to the Palace.
Bara.The Armes are Sable, a portall open of two leaues, and as many degrees Or.

There are ^n this Empire

Kingd. 2.


Archbishops 2.


Dukes 15.


Princes 16.


Bishops 18.


Earles.


Thus much of Muscovie.


OF POLAND.
Maginus.POLAND is limited on the East with N^iper or B^risthenes, which parteth it from Muscouie; on the West with Vi^^ula, which parteth it from Germanie; on the North with the Balticke sea, and Sinus Finnicu^; on the South with Hungary.
The most ancient name of it was Sarmatia, and the people Sauroma^ae: it is now called Poland, from Pole, which in the Sclavonian tongue sign fieth plaine, because the Count^y is so little swolne with hills. It is in compasse 2600 miles, and is situate in the more Northerne part of the temperate Zone, being vnder the 8th and 12th Climats, and the longest day being 18 houres.
The Country is plain and woodie, and the Aire so cold, that they haue neither wine nor grapes; insteed of which they v^e

that kind of drink called Ale, which was heretofore counted the vsuall b^nerage of England only, and this Poland. Barley they haue and pulse in such abundance, that no small quantity of these graine, is from hence transferred into other Regions: neither in number of Cattle doe they giue way to Denmarke, or Hungary.
The people are very industrious, and st^dious of all languages, e^pecially the Latine; to which they are so deuoted, that you shall hardly find a meane man,Boterus. which is not able in some measure to expresse himself in that tongue. They are according to thei^ abilities rather prodigall, then truly liberall; and are generally good Souldiers; the Gentlemen free, the Peazants in miserable sub^ection to their Lords: amongst which Lords there is such an equality, that no mans estate exceedeth 25000 Duckat, yearely. Proud they are, and impatient, delicious in diet, and costly in attire; which last qualities are common also to the women; who are for the most part indifferently faire, and rather witty, then well spoken.
They vse the Sclavonian language, and receiued the Christian Fa^th, Anno 963. They are of all Religions; some following the Romish, others the reformed Church; and of these some embrace the doctrine of Luther, others of Calvin; some the Bohemian, s^me the August^ne, and some the Helvetian confessions. Here are Ies^i^s and Arrians, Anabaptists, Anti-trinitarians, and all Sects wha^soeuer* tollerated; whence it is said, if a man hath lost his Religion, let him to Poland, and he shall be s^^e to find it, or els belieue it is vanisht: a saying now applied to Amste^d^m in Holland. It is a custome here, that when in their Churches the G^sp^l is reading, the Nobility and Gentry of this Country, draw out their swords, signifying that they are ready to defend the same, if any dare opp^gne it. The same reason doubtlesse ga^e beginning to our custome of standing vp at the Cr^ed; wherby we expresse how prepared and resolute we are to maintain it: though now of late some more nice then wise* holding it to be a relique of Popery, doe vndiscreetly refuse it.
The chief merchandizes that goe from hence to other Prouinces,

are Amber, Barley, Wax, Hony, Hemp, Pitch, Tarre, etc.
The King is elected by the generall States, who for the most part choose a warriour;Bot^rus. to whom, being crowned, the Nobility are as familiar as he were their brother, and account his decrees to last but three dayes: They haue no written lawes: custome and temporary Statutes, being the rule of their gouernment, and obedience.
The revenues of the kingdome are about 600000 crownes, most of which are put vp in his Treasury: For the Kingdome is diuided into 4 parts, euery part of it keeping the King and his Court, in allowance and all expences a quarter of a yeare: and contributing money to the marriages of his daughters.
The chief riuers are Vistula, which hath its fountaine in the Carpathian mountaines, which part Hungary from Poland; his mouth is in the Balticke sea* and is navigable 400 miles. 2 Neister, which parteth it from Moldavia. 3 Neiper. 4 Ruben. 5 Beg. 6. Limbecke 7 Mimmel.

The chief Prouinces are
1 LIVONIA, bounded on the East with Muscovie; on the West with the Balticke sea;Munster on the North with Finland; and on the South with Lituania. It is in length 500, in bredth 160 miles, and is a country exceeding mountainous and fennie; yet withall so abundantly fruitfull, that no small store of prouision is sent hence into other countries. The people receiued the Christian Faith partly by the preaching of one Meinardus, Ao 1200: and partly by the compelling of the Knights, called the Enfifers, or of the Portglaiue, who seconded the good beginnings of that reuerend man. The chiefe townes are 1 Riga an Archbishops See. 2 Derpt, a town of great commerce. 3 Rivallia a strong fort in the hands of the Swe^hlander. So also is 4 Narne, an exceeding strong sortresse, built by a Polonian Architect, who for a reward had his eies put out, to disable him from making the like.Adrianus. The chief Prouinces of it are 1 Curland. 2 Senugal. 3 Estland. 4 Virland. 5 Harland. 6 Geroenland. This country was once subiect vnto the order of Dutch Knights, who being molested by the Muscouite, in their reformation of Religion, submitted themselues to Sigismund the king of Poland,

Ao 1558: vnto whose successour King Stephen, the Musco^ite surrendred his title, Anno 1582: reseruing only to himself some Townes on the Easterne side. The rest is vnder the Pollacque, except some few Townes on the North, subiect to Sweden.
2 LITVANIA is South to Livonia, North to Podo^ia, East to Poland,Boterus. and West vnto Muscouie. The people receiued the Christian Faith, Anno 1386; when as Iagello, afterward called Vladislaus, married Hedingis Q. of Poland; which marriage this Prouince was vnited to Polonia. The chief Cities are Vilna an Vniversity.Maginus. 2 Vilkomire: and 3 Brestia. The Aire here is very sharp. the soile as barren and vnfruitfull; searce so full of men as beasts, whose skinnes are their chiefest commodities. They vse here to be diuorced and remarried as often as they list. For a man to vse the bed or body of an harlot, is counted a most opprobrious crime: but for a woman to haue her stallions, is so frequent and vnblameable, that the husbands call them Connubij adiutores, or their fellow-labourers, and prize them far aboue all the rest of their acquaintance.
3 VOLINIA is environed with Lituania, Podolia, and Russia; the people are strong and warlike. It hath as chief townes in it Kiovia, and Circassia, on the banks of the riuer Neiper, and is a small woodie Prouince.
4 SAMOGITIA (whose inhabitants are most Idolaters, and build their houses with straw) hath for its chief town Camia.Munster. It is a Northerne Region, hauing Livonia on the North, and the Balticke sea on the West: a Country full of wood, which is the chief co^modity of it, there being found in the midst of their trees very excellent hony, scarce hauing with it any co^mixture of wax. Both these last Prouinces, haue followed the fortunes of Lituania.
4 PODOLIA is limited with Lituania North,Maginus. Neister South, Russia East, and Poland West; here the ground is so fertile, that of one sowing, they haue 3 Haruests; The chief cities are Camienza, seated on high rocks, and deemed invincible. 2 Orkzacow, and 3 Winiecza.
5 RVSSIA NIGRA hath on the East Podolia, on the West Poland, as also on the North; and on the South Hungary.

The chief townes are Leopolis or Lemburg, built by Leo a Muscouite. 2 Grodecke. 3 Luckzo. These two Prouinces were incorporated to Poland by King Ladislaus, about the yeare 1440; by giuing them the freedome and prerogatiues of natiue Polomans. It hath the attribute of Nigra, to distinguish it from Muscouia, which is Russia Alba; and was formerly called Ruthenia and Roxolania. It is also called Russia Meridionalis, and is a very fruitfull Country, well stoared with faire horses, and numerous heards of cattell.
6 MAZOVIA is environed with Russia, Prussia, Lituania, and Poland. It was so called from one Massaus D. hereof, and hath for its chief city Marzow, where the best Methegl^n is made. It was ioyned to Polonia; by Casmure the I. Anno 1045.
Ortelius.7 SPRVCE, PRVSSIA, or BORVSSIA, is situated on the North of Mazovia; hauing on the North the Baltick seas; on the East Lituania, on the West Vistula. This country yeeldeth abundance of Amber, which is the iuyce of a stone, which groweth like a corall,L. Guice. in a mountain of the North sea, cleane couered with water, and shunned by mariners 3 leagues off for feare of wrack. In the moneths especially of September and December, this liquor is by violence of the sea, rent from the rock, and cast into the hauens of this and the neighbour Countries. Besides the beautie hereof, and the quality it hath of burning like pitch, and attracting strawes and iron like the Adamant; it is good for stopping the blood, falling sicknesse, dropsies, and many other diseases.
The chief cities are Dan^scum, where Kecke man was Professour, a famous Emporie: in which (to omit other things) are daily sold 1000 measures of wheat. It is sited in Pomerania, but subiect vnto the P^lonian. 2 Mons Regius, called by the Germans, Koningsberg, by vs Regimount or Mount royall; it is seated at the influxe of Pegel into the sea; and is a famous Vniuersity in these parts, it being founded by Duke Albert, 1525. 3 Heilsperge.Munster. 4 Maneburge, the seat of the masters of the Dutch Knights, it being translated from Ptolemais or Acon in Syria, vnto Venice, from thence to Marpurg; and so hither by Sitridus the 12th great Master, Anno 1340, or thereabouts. 5 Aegenberge,

and 6 Culne.
This Country was long time vnder the Dutch Knights, who being called by the Muscouite against the Prussi^ns, here planted themselues, Ao 1239, the then Master being Herman Salza. They continued long in warres with the Prussians themselues, whom they found to be tough meat, and neither easily chewed, nor quickly disgested. Hauing made an end with the^, they were assaulted by the Polanders, vnto whose King Casimire, they were compelied to become tributary, Ao 1450, Lodovicus being the present, and from Henry Walpat the 18th Master. Yet was not Lodovicus easily vanquished, he hauiug formerly driuen the King out of the field, routed his whole Army, slaine 3000 of his men, and taken 136 of his Nobility. Neither was he now ouercome but by the rebellion of his own people. Finally, peace was made between the Prussians and Poles, conditionally that the King of Poland should haue Dantzicke, and the Westerne parts; and that Albert the Marquesse of Brandenbourg, and then Master of the order, should possesse Regimount with the title of Duke; and should doe homage for it to the Polonian, taking in all assemblies his place at the kings right hand. Thi^ Dutchie of Regimount containeth 54 castles,Boterus. and 86 towns; the revenues being yearely 120000 Duckats. The Armes of this Duke are A, an Eagle V, membred and crowned O, langued G.
8 PODLASSIA hath on the East Lituania, and on the west Maz^uia.Maginus. The chief townes are 1 Tycockzin, a fort well furnished with munition, as being the place wherein the Kings treasure is reserued. 2 Biesko 3 Knyssia, where the Kings of Poland haue a fine retiring house, as being well furnished with parkes and fishponds, abundantly stored with game. This Country was vnited vnto the ^olish Diademe by Sigismund Augustus, Anno 1569.
9 The Dukedomes of OSWITZ and ZATOR,Bara. so called of their chief Townes, are in Silesia: The first was conquered by Cassimire the fourth, Ortelius. Anno 1554: the last by Sigismund, 1547.
10 POLAND hath on the East Lituania, on the West Germany, on the North Mazonia, on the South Podolia. The Metropolis

is Cracovia, built by Crocus a Duke of Bohemia; seated on the banke of Vistula. 2 Lublin. 3 Guisna, whose Archbishop in the absence of the King, or during the Inter-regnum, holdeth the supreame authority, summoneth the diets, etc. 4 Siradia. 5 Sendonure. 6 Minsko. 7 Posna. 8 Dobrinia. 9 Vladislavia.
Munster.The first people of these parts were the Sarmatians, after the^ the Vandals; afterwards the Sclavonians, vnder the conduct of Lechius, first D. hereof, Anno 550: who flying from his natiue soyle, together with Zechius his brother; saw his brother setled in Bohemia, and then peopled this country, which for the plainnesse he named Poland. His successors inioyed the title of Dukes only, till the Emperour Otho the third, created the Duke Bosleslaus, King of Poland, Anno 1000.

The king and Dukes of Poland.
800

Pyastus Dux Poloniae.

963
1 Miesco seu Miezlaus primus Christianus Rex 37
1000
2 Boleslaus 25
1025
3 Miezlaus II 9 Interregnum an. 6
1041
4 Casimirus 18
1059
5 Boleslaus Audax 20
1082
6 Vladislaus Hermannus in whose time the name of Duke was vsed again. Dukes
1103
7 Boleslaus Czryuousti 36
1140
8 Vladislaus 6
1146
9 Boleslaus Crispus 28
1174
10 Miezlaus 21
1174
11 Casimirus II 21
1195
12 Lesko albus 33
1243
13 Boleslaus Pudieus 3^
1280
14 Lesko Niger 10
1290
15 Boleslaus.

16 Henricus Probus.

17 Vladislaus.

18 Premislaus, who assumed againe the title of king, Anno 1^00.
1300
19 Venceslaus Boh^miae R. 6
1306
20 Vladislaus 27
1333
21 Casimirus M. 38
1371
22 Ludovicus R. Vngariae 12
1383
23 Heduigis.
1386
24 Iagello Dux Lituania, post Vladislaus dictus 49
1435
25 Vladislaus iunior 10
1447
26 Casimirus D. Lituania 46
1493
27 Ioannes Albertus 9
1502
28 Alexander M Dux Lit. 5
1507
29 Sigismundus 41
1548
30 Sigismundus Augustus.
1574
31 Henricus.
1576
32 Stephenus 10
1587
33 Sigismund Suevus III. king of Sweden by succession, and of Poland by election.



The chiefe orders of knighthood are,
Munster.The Marian or Dutch knights, instituted vnder the walls of

Acon, Ao 1190; Their first master being Henry Walpot. They took their first name from S. Maries Church at Acon, when their order was allowed; and their second when they had conquered Prussia. Their Ensigne was a black Crosse. The 34 Master of the order was Albert, Marquesse of Brandenbourg, who revolting from Sigismund King of Poland, to whose Predecessour Casimire, the Knights had submitted themselues, drew on the Country a long and miserable warre 1511. Hauing for 14 yeares valiantly maintained the liberty of the Country, and the credit of the order; and in vaine for 4 yeares together importuned the assistance of the Emperour and Princes of Germanie: he casteth the order, and is by King Sigismund made D. of Prussia, for him and his heires for euer, Ao 1525, after this manner. Albert attired in a complete habite of a master of the order, presented himself humbly on his knees before King Sigismund, sitting in his Throne. The King raising him from the ground, causeth him to put off those Roabes, and attire himself in a Dukall habite; which done, he gaue him the Dukedome of Prussia, to hold in see of him and his successours Kings of Poland. The co^pany of Knights wonderfully storme at this action, and retiring into Germany, chose one Walter Croneberg for their titulary master. About 1549 they began to waxe weary of their places; and no new knights being desirous of that profitlesse order, it vanished in short time into nothing.
2 Of the sword-bearers or Portglaiue in Livonia, and Lituania; it was confirmed by Innocent the third; was allied to the Marians, and separated, Anno 1541. The last Master was Vnivus, in whose time the Lutherans reformation here receiued, extinguished this order of knighthood.
The Armes are puarterly 1 Gules,Guilliam. an Eag^e Arg. crowned and armed Or, for the kingdome of Poland, 2ly G, a Chevalier armed Cap a pea, aduancing his sword A, mounted on a barbed courser of the second, for the Dukedome of Lituania.

There are in Poland

Archbishops 2


Dukes ^


Vicounts


Bishops 16


Earles 12


Baron^




Vni^ers^ties 4.
Crac^w. Pol.
Velna Lituan.
Dantiske Pom.
Reg^mont Pruss.

Thus much of Poland.



OF HVNGARIE.
Maginus.HVNGARIA is bounded on the East with Transiluania, and Walach^a: on the West with Austria; on the North with Poland, on the South with Sclavon^a.
It was formerly called Pannonia inferior; Pannonia from the Pannones,Nicetas. and inferior to distinguish it from Austria, which was Pannonia superior. It is now called H^ngaria, quasi Hungauaria, from the Hunni and Avares, who here dwelt. Of the Hunni we shall anon make further mention. The Avares were a people of Scythia, which inhabited about Palus Maeotis, they began first to stir^e in the reigne of Iustinus the 2d, and gaue the Emperours forces a great ouerthrow about the mouth of Danubius. Tiberius somwhat quieted them; but he being dea^, they were again in heart, and with great courage warred against Mauritius his successour. Their King was called Caganus (we may English it Cham) it not being a proper name to one, but a common attribute to all their leaders. This Caganus was the first that euer vanquished the Scythians: he made warres against the Turkes, which people was at this time first made known to the inhabitants of Europe: he also with the help of his associats the Hunni, invaded and possessed Pannonia, hauing vanquished the Gothes and Gepidi, who here dwelt. Against this Caganus, Mauritius the Emperour waged warre, more with an intent to reuenge himself on his own souldiers, which had formerly offended him, then with hope of preuailing against the enemie. Comentiolus according to the Emperours directions, betrayeth his Armie, 12000 of them were slaine, and the rest taken. Caganus a heroick and mercifull Conqueror, offers to ransome them for 8s 6d apiece, (for somuch was that nummus, or (...), which he demaunded for them.) When the Emperour asmuch louing his gold, as hating his souldiers, had denied that condition; he offered them all for one nummus, and a^ter for halfe a one:

but being also herein vnsatisfied, he put them all to the sword. For this cause the rest of the souldiers not long after made Phocas, one of the Centurions, Emperour; and he mo^^ barbarously stewed the Emperour in his own broath, putting him, his wife, friends, and children to the sword.
It is situate in the Northerne temperate Zone,Maginus. vnder the 7th and 9th Climats, the longest day being 16 houres and a halfe.
The people are strong of body, but of rude behauiour, respecting neither the liberall Arts, nor mechanick Trades. The greatest aspersion is the name of a Coward, which cannot be wiped off without the killing of a Turke; after which they are priuiledged to weare a Feather. Their females are vncapable of their fathers possessions; yet they giue them no portion, but a new coat at their wedding; before which time neither man nor woman vse to lye in beds. They vse the Scythian language, and were baptized not long before the yeare 1000: the number of Protestants at this time, are farre greater then of the Papists.
The soyle is wonderfull fruitfull, yeelding corne there thrice in a yeare; the grasse in some places (as in the Ile of Comara) exceeding the height of a man: which doth feed such a number of cattle, that it is thought this Country alone to be able to feede all Europe with flesh. They yearely send into Germany and Sclavonia 80000 Oxen:Ortelius. they haue Deere, Partridge, Pheasant, in such abundance, that any man that will may kill them; which in other places is vtterly prohibited,Sleid Com. these Fowle being reserved as game for Gentlemen. At that great insurrection of the Boores in Germany, before the end of which 50000 of them were slain; their chiefe demands were, that they might choose their own ministers; 2ly that they might pay no tithes but of corne; 3ly that they might be free from the power of magistrats* 4ly that woods, timber, and fuell might be common; 5l^ and especially, that they might hunt and hawke in all times and places. The other commodities which are transported, are Gold, Siluer, Fish, Copper, Wine, etc.
The worthiest Scholler that euer this kingdome produced, was S. Hicrome, a worthy Father of the Church, borne in Stridon.
Knolls hist.The most worthy souldier was Iohannes Huniades, who so valiantly resisted the incursions of the Turkes: of whom he slew 50000 at the battle at Maxon: and 2ly Matthias Corvinus, of whom thus saith Adrianus out of a Poet,
--Patriae decus, vnica stirpisGloria, Pannonicae caedis fort^ssimus ultor.His Countries pride, the glory of his race,Reuenger of the Hungarians late disgrace.
To requi^e this ouerthrow of Maxon, the Turkes not long after in the battle of Varne, slew the King Ladisl^us, and 30000 of his Souldiers: a battle against which, faithful Huniades mu^h opposed. For the Hungarians hauing made truce with the Turkes, the Popes Legate vpon a seeming advantage, ob^ol^ed the Christians of their oathes; who falling on the Turkes, so daunted them, that Amurath lifting vp his eyes to Heauen, praied vnto Christ to look vpon the perfidious dealing of his C^ristians, who had for their own advantage, dishonoured his name and their profession; after which prayer, the Christians began to giue back, and lost the day. Matthias Corvinus, afterwards K. of Hungary, was sonne to this Huniades; a sonne worthy of such a father, as being the chiefe prop of his country against the Turkes: which after his death, fell into the hands of Solyman.
The principall riuers are 1 Danubius, which is here called Ister, which name continueth to his very Estuarium. 2 Savus, which rising in Carniola. 3 Dravus, which rising in Carinthia; and 4 Tibuscus which rising in the Carpathian mountaines,Camden. pay their tribute to Danubius: of this last riuer the Hungarians vse to say, that two parts are water, and the third fish.
This kingdome now standeth diuided between the Turke and the Hungarian;Knolles. the former hauing Buda, seated on Danubius, being the Metropolis of the Country, and Court of the King; it was taken by Solyman, Anno 1536. 2 Gyula a strong towne on the confines of Transilvania, betrayed by Nicholas Keretsken gouernour hereof, in the last yeare of the said Solyman, in hope of great reward from this Emperour. But Selmius successour to Solyman, caused him to be put into a barrell stuck full of nailes, with the points inward, and so to be rolled vp and down

till he miserably died: there being written on the barrell this Inscription, Here receiue the reward of thy avarice and treason: Gyula thou soldest for gold;Sleid. Com. Knolles. if thou be not faithfull to Maximilian thy Lord* neither wilt thou be to me. 3 Pest, iust ouer-against Buda. 4 Alba Regalis, called by the Germans Weisenberge, taken by the Turkes, Ao 1543. 5 Quinque Ecclesia, taken the same yeare also. 6 Iaurinum or Rab. In the Emperours part the chiefe townes are Presburg, seated hard vpon the edge of Austria. It is called Passonium in Latine, and is the Metropolis of Hungarie, since the taking of Buda by the Turkes. Before the walls hereof died Count Dampier, one of the now Emperours Captaines in his Hungarian and Bohemian warres. 2 Strigonium or Gran, taken Anno 1543 by the Turkes, and lost again 1595; at which time amongst others,Camden. our Sr Thomas Arundell bare himself brauely, forcing the water-towre, and with his owne hands taking away the Turkish banner: for which heroick act, the Emperour Rodolphus did by Charter giue him the title of a Count of the Empire: and our Soueraigne made him Lord Arundell of Wardour: 3 Agraria. 4 Comara in an Isle so called. 5 Toctax. 6 Canista. 7 Alkeinbourg. 8 Neuheusell, which Anno 1621, was fatall to that great Commander Bucquoy; who at the siege hereof, lost his life: For going priuatly to view the best accesse for a generall assault, he fell into an ambush of Hungarians; who suddenly setting on him, discomfited his small retinue, slew his horse vnder him, and at last himselfe, hauing in that skirmish receiued 16 wounds. There were slain also amongst other Nobles, Terquatus a Prince of Italy, Marquesse Gonzaga, and Count Verdugo. I had almost omitted Zigeth^a Town on the Dravus,Kno^^es. taken Anno 1566, by Solyman the magnificent, who there ended his dayes: and Keresture, where Anno 1596, Mahomet the third gaue the Christians so great an ouerthrow; that if he had pursued his victory, he had finished the conquest of Hungarie: which hath withstood the Turkish puissance, for the space of 160 yeares.
This Country was first inhabited by the Pannones,Munster. displaced by the Gothes; who going to Italy, left this kingdome to the Hunnes, and then to the Lombards. These being a people of

Scandia, were first called Winnili; afterwards ob longas barbas, Longobardi: But concerning this last name, take along with you this old wiues tale, recited, but not approued by Paulus Diaconus. The Vandales warring vpon the Winnili, went vnto Goddan (he should rather haue said Woden) to sue for the victory: which the Winnili hearing, wrought by countermine, and sent Gambata, the mother of their King A^on, on the like businesse to Frea, Goddans wife. So it was, that Goddan had promised the Vandals, that they should be victorious, whom he saw first in the morning; whereupon Frea willing to please Gamba^^, and not louing, as it seemeth, the sight of men; gaue order, that all the women of the Winnili parting their haire, bringing one halfe ouer one cheeke, the other ouer the other, and tying both vnder their chin, should appeare betimes before the window the next morning. This they did, and she showing them to her Husband, he demaunded of her, Qui sunt isti Longobardi? Hence the name. They were compelled by scarcity of victuall, to seek new habitations:Munster. and first they seazed on the Iland Ragia, and the adjacent Continent; next vpon Poland; then vpon this Pannonia; and at last vnder the leading of Alboinus, went into Italy, where after 200 yeares, their Kingdome was ouerthrown by Charlemaine. Of the Longobardian Kings ensuing, I will particularly make mention onely of Lamissus, and of him this Story. Agilmond the second King of the Lombards, one morning went a hunting. As he was riding by a fish-pond, he spied seuen children sprawling for life, which one (as faith Paulus Diaconus) or (it may be) many harlots had bin deliuered of, and most barbarous^y thrown into the water. The King amazed at this spectacle, put his borespeare or hunting pole among them. One of the children hand-fasted the speare, and the King softly drawing back his hand, wafted the child to the shore. This boy he named Lamissus, from Lama, which in their language signified a fish-pond. He was in the Kings Court carefully brought vp, where there appeared in him such tokens of vertue and courage, that after the death of Agilmond, he was by the Lombards chosen to succeed him.


The Longobardian Kings.
383
1 Aion 10
393
2 Agilmond 33
426
3 Lamissus 3
429
4 Labe vel Lethe 40
469
5 Heldehoc 4
473
6 Gedohoc 12
485
7 Daphon vel Cla^^o 5
490
8 Thamus 10Freigius.
500
9 Vacon 1^
518
10 Val^harius 7
525
11 Adoinus 18
543
12 Alboinus, who by the sollicitation of Narses, went into Italy, and erected there the Longobardian Kingdome; which 200 yeares after, was demolished by the puissance of Charles the Great. The History of this people is Epitomized by Silvester, in his Du Bartas, thus:
The Lombard strong who was in Scowland nurst,On Rugeland, and Liuonia seazed first.Then hauing well reveng'd on the BulgarianThe death of Agilmont; the bold BarbarianSurprises Poland; thence anon he pressesIn Danows streames to rense his amber tresses:When he straight after had surrenderedThe double-named Isters flowrie bed,To scarre-sac'd Hunnes: he hunteth furiouslyThe rest of Gaules, from wealthie Insubrie.There raignes 200 yeares, triumphing so,That royall Tesin might compare with Po,Which after fell in French mens hands againe,Wonne by the sword of worthy Charlemaine.

At the departure of the Lombards into Italy, the Hunnes again settled themselues in this Country, which they had before bin compelled by the Lombards to abandon. These Hunnes were a people of Asia,Pezelius in Sleidan. dwelling about the Hircanian sea, and made their first irruption into Europe, Anno 373. Balamirus being their Captaine of King,Munster. Their first expedition was against the Ostrogothes, inhabiting the shores of Pontus Euxinus, and Moeotis; whom without great difficulty they vanquished: and pursuing their victories, broke into this Country, then called Pannonia. Macrinus the Roman Lieftenant here encountred them in two set battailes; in the first he was victorious, but not without great losse, there being slain on both sides, aboue

300000 men; in the second he was slaine, and his army routed, the Hunnes buying this victory with the losse of 40000 souldiers, Anno 401. These Hunnes after this battaile, quietly setled themselues in this Prouince, and some 38 yeares after their first entrance into it, chose for their King one Attila, a wise and valiant man; of whose warres, and how he should be called ^l^sgollum Dei, I haue in sundry places told you. The Armes o^ this renowned and victorious Captaine, are (by Bara) said to be Gules, a Falcon displayed Or, membred and armed Argent. After the death of Attila, who reigned 44 yeares, the glory of the Hunnes began to decline, and was then in the Ecclipse, when the Lombards vnder the King Adoinus, forsook their habitation which they had settled in the North parts of Germanie, and subdued this Country, Anno 530. The Lombards stayed not here long, but they were by Narses sollicited to come into Italy, which invitation they willingly accepted; and re-yeelded ap Pannonia to the Hunnes, conditionally, that if their journey succeeded not prosperously, they might be receiued and permitted to liue amongst them. The Hunnes hearing how happily the designes of the Lombards thriued in Italy, expected not their returne; but sent for the Avares, and others their confederates and allies, to inioy together with them the riches and goodnes of this Region, which about this time, and at their comming in, begun to be called Hungavaria. Long after they were expelled by Charles the Great, but returned again to the number of one million, in the dayes of the Emperour Arnulphus, about the yeare 900, and recouered their forsaken habitations. Here haue they since continued, but not without a miserable affliction by the Tartars; 500000 of whom, tyrannized here for the space of 3 yeares, committing incredible spoyles and massacres, Anno 1248.

The Kings of Hungary.
1000
Freigi^s.1 Stephen 39
1039
2 Peter 3
1042
3 Alba.
1043
4 Peter II, 4
1047
5 Andrew 1^
1059
6 Bela 3
1062
7 Solomon 13
1075
8 Geisa 3
1078
9 Ladislaus 18
1096
10 Calomannus 10
1114
11 Stephen II, 18
1132
12 Bela II, 9
1142
13 Geisa II, 20
1162
14 Stephen III, 10
1172
15 Bela III, 18
1191
16 Emericus 8
1201
17 Andrew II, 35
12^6
18 Bela IV, 35
1271
19 Stephen IV. 2
1273
20 Ladislaus II, 17
1290
21 Andrew III, 12
1302
22 Venceslaus 3
1305
23 Otho D. of Bav. 4.
1310
24 Charles sonne to Charl. of Nap* 32
1343
25 Lodovicus 40
1383
26 Maria 2
1385
27 Charles II king of Napl. 2
1387
28 Sigismund of Bran denb. 51
1438
29 Alber^us 2
1440
30 Ladislaus III slain at Varne 18
1451
31 Matth. Copuin. 33
1491
32 Vladislaus 26
1517
33 Lewis II, 10. after whose death,Turk. hist. slaine together with 19000 of his subiects; Iohn, Vaivod of Transilvania, was chosen King of Hungarie: but Ferdinand Arch-Duke of Austria, and brother vnto Charles the fift; challenged the kingdome in right of Anne his wife, daughter and sister to Vladislaus, and King Lewis, kings of Hungarie and Bohemia. On this pretence he invaded the kingdome, and droue out Iohn his competitour: who to recouer his right, and revenge his wrong, called Sol^man the magnificent into the Country, who tooke so fast sooting, that his successours could neuer since be remoued.
1527
34 Ferdinand 35 Imp.
1562
35 Maximilian 11. Imp.
1572
36 Rodolphus 36.
1608
37 Mathias II, 12. After whose death the Hungarians weary of the German gouernment, accepted Bethlem Gabor, Vaivod, or Prince of Transilvania, for their Prince o^ Protectour, Anno 1620. So that by the revolt of Bohemia and Hungary on the one side; with the ill affections of his Subiects in Austria on the other; besides the warres on all sides thundred against him: the Emperour is much impouerished and dismaid; howsoeuer fortune of late hath smiled on him.

The revenewes of this kingdome are about 2 Millions of Gilders, the presidiarie Souldier being payd with contribution money.
Grimston.The Armes are Barrwise of 8 peeces Gules and Argent.
The chiefe order of knighthood here is the Dragon, instituted by Sigismund King of Hungary, and Emperour: after he had by the Councells of Constance, and Basil, contriued the death of Iohn Hus, and H^erom of Prage; and by the sharpnes of his sword cast downe (as hee thought) the Dragon of Heresie and Schisme.

There are in Hungary,

Archbishops 2.


Dukes.


Earles.


Bishops 13.


Marquesses.


Barons 20.




OF DACIA.
DACIA, is bounded on the East with the Euxine Seas; on the West with Hungarie; on the North with the Carpathian mountaines; on the South with Haemus, by which it is divided from Greece.
StephanusIt tooke its name from the Daci, who first here inhabited; and afterward passing into the Cimbrick Chersonesse were call'd Dani. This people was by Strabo the Geographer called Davi: from which the Athenians in their Comoedies, called the Servants and Sycophants by the name of Davus, because the Daui were so servile and officious.
They were long free from the command of the Romans, and had their proprietary kings, of whom the last was Decebalus, a man both ready in advice and quicke in execution.Dio^. Against him Domitian made warre by Iulianus his leiftenant, who gaue Decebalus a great ouerthrowe, and had then vtterly vanquished him, if his wit had not better befriended him then his sword. For fearing least the Romans making vse of their victory, ^would enter and take possession of his Country; he pitched in the way a great number of stakes in battle ray, putting on them the old Corslets of his Souldiers. These stakes looking like so many men of armes, frighted the enimy from approaching the Countrey. Traian^ was the next which made warre against him, and brought him to that exigent; that hauing with much losse endured

some few skirmishes, he yeeldeth himselfe, and is acknowledged a friend to the Senate and people of Rome. But being one of a high spirit, and borne in a free ayre, he once againe fell off from the Romans, but to his owne destruction: for seeing by the valour of Traia^e, his kingdome conquered, and his pallace taken; he fell on his owne sword, and left Dacia a Prouince of the Romane Emperours.
The people are generally stubborne, and vntractable: they speake the Sclauonian language, and read like the Iewes from th^ right hand to the left. They are of the Christian faith, and follow the Greeke Church.
The Country is sufficiently fruitfull, enriched with Mines, and abound^ng with Horses, whose manes hang downe to the very ground.
It was first possessed by the Moesi, a people of Asia, whence it was by Danubius diuided into Misia superior, and Misia inferior; these gaue place to the Daci, Dani, or Davi; since whose time it is divided into 1 Transilvania. 2 Moldavia. 3 Walachia. 4 Servia. 5 Rascia. 6 Bulgaria. 7 Bosnia.
This Country is situate in the Northerne temperate Zone, betweene the 7th and 10th Climates, the longest day being 17 houres.
The chiefe riuers are 1 Danubius. 2 Alluta. 3 Salvata. 4 Cockle. 5 Morus. and 6 Tinas.

1 TRANSILVANIA.Quade.
TRANSILVANIA, so called because it is penetrable no way but through woods; and Sep^em Castrae, or in Dutch Zenburgen, or Zenbrooke, because of seuen Castles placed to defend the Frontiers: is limited on the North with the Carpathian hills, on the South with Walachia, on the West with Hungarie, on the East with Moldavia.
The chiefe Townes are 1 Alba Iulia, or Weisenberg. 2 Claudiopolis, called now Clausenberge. 3 Bristitia. 4 Centum colles. 5 Fogaros. 6 Stephanopoli, etc.
On the North end of Transilvania, lieth the Province Zaculeia, whose people liue after the manner of the Helvetians: their chiefe and only Townes being 1 Kisdie. 2 Orby. and 3 Shepsdy.

They haue long maintained an offensiue and defensiue league with the Transilvanians against Turkes and Germans. They are free from all manner of taxes and subsidies, excepting onely the Coronation day of the new king of Hungarie, for then every housekeeper is to giue the King a Bull.
That the people of this Countrey are the progenie of the Saxons, is evident by the Saxon language yet retained. 2ly, We finde that Charles the Great, like a politique conquerour, placed many of that nation here: weakning so their strength at home,Versteg^n. and fortifying the bounds of his Empire. And 3l^, by a story recited by Verstegan, which we touched in our description of Brunswicke; the whole narration is this. Halberstade was beyond credit troubled with Rattes, which a Musician, whom they called the Pied Piper, vndertaketh for a great masse of mony to destroy; they agree: herevpon he tuneth his Pipes, and all the Rats in the Towne dancing after them, are drowned in the next riuer. This done, he asketh his pay, but is denied; wherevpon he striketh vp a new fit of mirth: all the children male and female of the Towne follow him into the hill Hame^en, which presently closed againe. The Parents misse their Children, and could never heare newes of them; now of late some haue found them in this Country, where I also leaue them; only telling you this, that this marueilous accident is said to happen the 22^^ of Iuly, Anno D. 1376. Since which time the people of Halberstade, permit not any Drumme, Pipe, or other instrument to bee sounded in that street: and established a decree, that in all writings of contract or bargaine, after the date of our Saviours nativity, the date also of this their childrens transm^gratio^ should be added.
This Transilvania was long subiect vnto Hungarie, and had for its governour a Vaivod,Knolls. which was the second person in the kingdome. This Vaivodate was by King Vladislaus giuen vnto Iohn Huniades, that terrour of his enimies, and supporter of his Country: and after his death to Iohn Zepusius. This Iohn was chosen King of Hungary, but being expelled by Ferdinand, he called Solyman into the kingdome, by whom he was restored and became the Turkes Tributary: after whose death Solyman

seazing on the kingdome of Hungary, gaue vnto Stephen, his sonne, the Vaivodate of Transilvania, Anno 1541. Vnto this Stephe^ succeeded another Stephen, called Bathori, by the guift of the T^rkish Emperours: who being called to the kingdome of Poland, left this country to his brother Christopher, Ao 1575 To him succeeded his sonne Sigismund, who shook off the Turkish yoake; and although he gaue them many ouerthrowes and slew some of their Bashawes: yet not being able to defend himselfe against so potent an adversary, hee resigned his principate to the Emperour Rod^lphus, Anno 1601. The Germane Souldiers behauing themselues tyrannically ouer the people, were by Iustine Botscay, newly chosen Prince, driuen out of the Count^y: to whom succeeded Gabriel Batour, Ao 1609; since whose death, so welcome to his neighbours and subiects; the Sultan A^h^n^t, committed this Country vnto Bethlem G^bour, that great enim^e of the Austrian family.


2 MOLDAVIA.
MOLDAVIA is seated on the North end of Transilvania,Turk. hist, and Zaculeia, and extendeth to the Euxine Sea. The chiefe Citties are Occazonia, or Zucchania, once the Vaivods seat. 2 Fuechiana. and 3 Fal^z^nge. It was first made Tributary to the Turkes by Mahomet the great, and vtterly subiected, Ao 1594, by Selimus the 2d. Not long after it revolted from the Turkes, and made combination with the Transilvanian, Anno 1576. Walachia also entred into this confederacy, against which they haue since with great alterations prosecuted: the Countries being sometimes vnder the protection of the Emperours of Germanie; some^imes of the Turke; sometimes of the Polander. To this Moldavia belongeth the little Country of Bessarabia,Maginus. lying betweene mount Hoemus South, and Lituania North. It is seated very commodiously on the Blacke Seas, and is so called from the Bessi, the ancient inhabitants of this place, and the progenitours of the ^ofnians. It was made a Turkish Province 1485. The chiefe Townes are 1 Kilim* and 2 Chermen or Moncastrum the seat of a Turkish Sanziacke. It is built on the riuer Tira^, not farre from its influxe into the Sea.



3 WALACHIA.
WALACHIA, called more properly Flaccia, from Flaccus a Roman, who here planted an Italian or Roman Colonie: is seated betweene Transilvan^a, and Danubius. The people speake the Latin tongue, but so that it is much corrupted, and can hardly be vnderstood. The chiefe Citties are Sabinium. 2 Prailaba* and 3 Tergovista,Mereasor. the Vaivods se^t. The Countrey is abundant in all things necessary for the life and vse of man, as mines of gold siluer, and iron; Salt-pits, Wine, Cattle, and especially Horses, of which here is a number, no lesse great then good. It yeeldeth also a pure and refined kinde of Brimstone, of which they make excellent Candles. Ouer the riuer Danubius, which diuideth this Countrey from Bulgaria, did the Emperour Traian build his so memorized bridge, in his warre against the Dacians: of whi^h 34 pillars yet are to be seene to the great admiration of the beholders. This Country was conquered by M^homet the Great,Turk. hist. by reason of two brothers, Waldus and Dracula, who contended for the principality. The Vaiv^ds paid to the Turks 60000 Duckats, which when Amurath the 3d required to haue doubled; Michael the Vaivod revolted, and ioyn'd with the Vaivod of Moldavia and Prince of Transilvania, Anno 1594.
Guillim.The Armes are Gules three Banners disveloped Or.


4 SERVIA.
SERVIA lieth betwixt Bosnia and Rascia. The ancient possessours hereof were the Triballi, who only had the happines to vanquish Philip King of the Macedonians.Iustine. For Philip hauing or pretending a quarrell against Ma^aeas King of the Sarma^ians; entred his Country, ouerthrew him in a set battle, carried with him great booties; and among other things 20000 Mares for breed. These Mares he tooke in the battaile, it being the custome of the Scythians, and Sarmatians, to vse Mares onely in their warres; because their not stopping in the midst of a race to pisse, could be no impediment to them in their flight. In his returne homeward, these Triballi deny him passage through their Country, vn^esse they might pertake of the spoyles. This being denied, they fall from words to blowes, and next to a pitched field. In this fight Philip was wounded with an Arrow, which

passing through his thigh, nayled him to his Saddle, and the Horse being gauled with the wound, fell downe to the ground. The Macedonians seeing his fall, and supposing that hee was slaine, fled out of the field; leauing all the Sarmatian spoyles to the Traballi; whose receauers they seeme only to haue beene.
The chiefe Citties are Stonibourg the seat of the Despot. 2 Samandria. 3 Taurinum,Adrianus. now called Bellgrade, a towne which being once the bulwarke of Christendome, valiantly resisted the puissance of Amurath the 6 and Mahomet the great, but was at the last taken by Solymau, Anno 1520. It standeth on the Danubius, where it receaueth the riuer Savus.


5 RASCIA.
RASCIA lieth betweene Servia and Bulgaria: the chief citty is Boden famous for her annuall fayres.
These two Provinces were once subiect to their seueral Despots,Turk. hist. vnder whose command they long inioyed tranquillity, til Anno 1438: when as George Despot of Servia and Rascia became tributary to Amurath the second. After the death of this George; who was a Christian by profession, but a Turke by affection (as all the actions of his life did liuely demonstrate) his sonne Lazarus succeeded: who being dead, Mahomet the great vnited these Provinces to his Empire, Anno 1454.


6 BVLGARIA.
BVLGARIA hath on the East the Euxine Sea,Adrianus. on the West Rascia; on the North Danubius; on the South, Thrace. The chiefe Citties are 1 Sophia the seat of the Beglerbeg of Greece, vnder whom are 21 Sansiakes. 2 Nicopolis. This Countrey was conquered by the Scythians of Bulgar (a Towne situate on the riuer Volga,Pezelius. whence they are called Bulgari and Volgari) who making their irruptions in the daies of the Emperour Constantine Pogonatus, became bitter enimies to the Christians till the yeare 868: in which their King Trebellius by the perswasion of his sister (who being a captiue had receaued the Chr^stian faith) together with all his people was baptized.Selden, The Kings hereof had their Crowne of gold, their tiar or cap of silke, and their red shooes for their regall; which were also imperiall ornaments. To these Kings also, and to these only did the Greeke Emperours

allow the title of (...), as being meerely imperiall. Other Kings they called (...), from the Latine word Reges. Insomuch that when Basilius Macedo had receaued letters from Pope Adrian the 2d, wherein Lewis the 2d the Westerne Emperour was called Basilens: he razed out that Imperiall attribute, and dispatched an Embassie to Lewis, wherein hee challenged it as his owne peculiar Epethete. That reverend father Theophilact was chiefe Bishop of this nation. This kingdome was made a Turkish Province, by Baiazet the first, Anno 1396.


7 BOSNIA.
BOSNIA, so called of the Bossi or Bessi, a people of Bulgaria; bounded on the East with Servia, on the West with Croatia, on the North with the riuer Savus, on the South with Illyricum. The chiefe Citties are Cazachium the residence,Turk. hist. and Laiza, or Iaziga, the Sepulture of the Bosnian Kings. This Country was erected into a Kingdome Anno 1420; not long after which, K. Stephen was taken and flaine aliue, by the barbarous command of Mahomet the Great; at which time this kingdome was converted to a Province of the Mahumetan Empire, Anno 1464.
Thus much of Dacia.



OF SCLAVONIA.
SCLAVONIA, hath on the East the riuer Drinus, and a line drawne from thence to the sea, on the West part of Italy, on the North Hungary, and on the South the Adriatique Sea.
It is in length 480 miles, and 120 in breadth; it is situated vnder the sixt and seuenth Climates, the longest day being 15 houres and a halfe.
The people are couragious, prowd, and stubborne, and vse their own Sclavonian tongue, which extendeth through al Sclavonia. 2 Histria.Brerewood. 3 Bohemia. 4 Polonia. 5 Moravia. 6 Muscovie. 7 Dacia. 8 Epirus. 9 part of Hungary. 10 Georgia. 11 Mengrelia. and 12 is vsed by all Captaines and Souldiers of the Emperours of Turkey.
They are of the Christian faith, and follow the Greeke Church.
This Country is more fit for grazing then for haruesting; for

the Sheepe and other Cattle bring forth young twice in a yeare, and are shorne foure times.
The Sclavi whence this Region tooke denomination,Quade. were a people of Scythia, who in the time of Iustinian the Emperour, planted themselues in Thrace: and after during the raigne of Phocas, came and setled themselues in Illyricum, since by their conquest of it, called Sclavonia. These Sclavi were first broken by the Venetians, who seeing them to be of strong bodies and able constitutions, imployed them in all the offices of drudgery belonging to their fields, and houses: from whence both wee and other nations, haue borrowed that ignomintous word, Slaue; whereby we vse to call ignoble fellowes, and the more base sort of people: and this is the obseruation of Sr W. Raleigh, in his most excellent History. Sclavonia is now diuided into Illyricum, Dalmatia, and Croatia. The principall riuers of the whole are, 1 Drinus, by which it is parted from Servia. 2 Savus. 3 Dravus. 4 Edavius. 5 Titius. 6 Naron.
1 ILLIRIS was once the name of the whole Prouince, but it is now accommodated to one part: which being commonly called Windismarch, is bounded on the East with Danubius; on the West with Carniola; on the North with Dravus, and on the South with Savus. The chiefe Citties are 1 Zatha on Danubius 2 Zakaocz 3 Windishgretz on Dravus. and 4 Sagouna nigh vnto Savus.Florus. The people hereof were made subiect vnto the Romans, Ao V C. 525. they themselues giuing the occasion. For not content to make inrodes into, and to lay wast the Romane territories, they slew the Embassadours desiring restitution, and vsed much opprobrious language vnto the Citty: Tenta their Queene, not only not forbidding, but commanding it. On this ground Fulvius Cen^umalus is sent against them with an army, who subduing the Province; sacrificed the chiefe of the nobility to the Ghosts of his murdered countrymen. This countrey is now a member of the kingdome of Hungary.
2 DALMATIA hath on the East Drinus; on the West Croatia; on the North Savus;Grimst. ^o and on the South the Adriatick sea. The chiefe Citties are Rag^si, formerly called Epidaurus, situate on the Adriatique sea; a Citty of great traffique and riches. It is

tributary to the Turkes to w^om i^ payeth yearely 12000 Duckats. 2 Sebeni^um or S^^^m s^^n^ing on the Sea shoare. 3 Zara or L^^era on the same sho(...) For the possession of this Towne,Ortelius. there haue been^ g^^at w^^res betw^xt the Hurgarians and the Venetians; to whom it s^^meth to be of such importance; that b^ing on^e taken by the Hurg^ria^s, it was redeemed for 100000 Crownes. In this T^wne is the Church of S Iohn di Malvatia, w^ich was b^ilt by a company of Sayler^; who being in a tempest made a vo^, that if they escaped they would consecrate a Temple to S. Iohn di Malvat^a, whose m^rter should be tempered with Malms^y, and accord^ngly paid their vowes. Farre les^e did another master of a shipp intend to performe his promise though he spoke bigger; who in a like extremity of danger; promised our Lady to offer at her Altar, a Candle as great as the maine mast of his ship. For when one of his mates iogging him, told him he had promised an impossibility; tush foole (replied the master) wee must speake her faire in time of need: but if euer I come ashore, I will make her be content with a Candle of eight to the pownd. And in a like fit of devotion was he, who on the same occasion plainely told God, that he was no common begger, hee neuer troubled him with prayers befo^e: and if he would heare him that time, he would neuer trouble him againe. But I proceed. 4 Spalato a sea towne standing East of Sebenico, the Bishop whereof Mare^s Antonius de D^^minis seeming to loath the Romish superstition, came for ^efuge into England, Anno 1616, and hauing here both by preaching and writing laboured to ouerthrowe the Church of Rome; vpon I knowe not what proiects he declared himselfe to be a counterfeit, Anno 1622, and returned againe to Rome. So that we may say of him as Socrates in his Ecclesiasticall history; saith of Ecebolius, who vnder Constantius, was a Christian; vnder Iulian a Pagan; and a Christian againe vnder Iovinian: (...); so warering and vnconstant a ^urn-coat was Ec^holius, from his b^ginnings to his end. The 5 town of note is Scodra or Scutari, which ^esisted the Turkish puiss^^ce a whole yeare:Turk. hist. and many dayes was battered with 70 p^^c^s of Ordnance, of wondrous bignesse,

especially that called the Princes peece, which carried a stone or bullet of 1200 pownd waig^t. Not far^e hence is 6 Lissa famous for the Sepulchre of Scanderbog. These 2 Townes were gained by Mahomet the 2d, Anno 1478.
The ancient inhabitants of this Country were the Dalmati, whose Metropolis was Dalminium on the ^iuer Drinus. This Citty was sacked by Marcius a Roman Consull, Ao V C 689; and Dalmatia fi^st was s^st made subiect to that Empire. Afterward also this Citty was againe ruined by one Nasica: but the people as they were by the Romans often subdued, so they as often revolted. Their last rebellion was raised at the instigation of one Batto, a man very potent with the people; who hauing ten yeares together maintained the liberty of his Country, at last broken and wearied by the forces of G^rmanicus, and Tiberius, he submitted himselfe vnto the two Captaines: who asking the reason of his revolt, were answered, because the Romans sent no Sheepheards to keepe, but Wolues to devoure their flocke, Dalmatia thus finally conquered, continued a Roman Prouince, till the time of Phocas; during whose tyrannicall Empire, the S^lam subdued this Countrey: who after they had Lorded it ^e^e ^or the space of almost 200 yeares, were made vassalls to the Hungarians; who setled themselues in Pannonia, during the raigne of Arnulphus in the West, and Leo Philosophus in the East. These new Lords were much giuen to Piracy and robbing, and amongst others,Hist. of It. rauished a company of gorgeous Venetian Damsells: to revenge which wrong, Dalma^ia was made tribu^ary to the Venetians; to whom, besides their mony and Townes the Dalmatians were to giue 100 barrells of wine, and 3000 Coniskinnes to the Duke for a present. It is now diuided between^ the Venec^ans who keepe the greatest part, and the Tu^ke. 2 CROATIA or Corvatia, was called by the ancients Li^urnia and Valeria: it hath on the East and South Dalmatia, on the North Savus; on the West Istria and Carniola. The chiefe Townes are Gradiska situate on Savus. 2 Bruman. 3 Nouigrod situate on the Savus also, hard vpon Germanie. and 4 Sisseghk, famous for the resis^ance which the Tu^kes found there, Anno 1592. For the Turk^s hoping if they could conquere this little

Country, to haue an open passage into Germany; entred it with a great army, surprised the Castle of Ostrow^tz seated on the river Wana; tooke by seige the strong Towne of Wihits, a principall Towne also of this Country, and seated on the same riuer: which done they matched vp to Sisseghk or Sissaken, where after a long seige, they were raised by a power of Germans, that came to succour the Towne, who slewe about 8000 of the Turkes; most of the ^est being drowned in the riuer Savus, as they ^ledd from the sword of the conqueror. The 6* and last Town of note in this country is Petrowya, situate at the foot of the mountains, which are betweene the riuers Savus and Dravus; and diuide Hungarie from Sc^avonia. The Croatians are generally, though corruptly called Corbats. Their Countrey hath the title of a Dukedome, and is subiect partly to the Austrians, and partly to the Venetians, who set first footing in it, Anno 1007.
Guilliam.The S^l^vonian Armes are Arg. a Cardinalls hat, the strings pendant and platted in true loues knot, meeting in the base Gules.

There are in Sclavonia.

Archbishops 3


Bishops 20


Thus much of Sclavonia.


OF GREECE.
Maginus.GREECE, the Mother of Arts and Sciences, is bounded on the East with the Aegean sea, the Hellespont, Propontis, and Thracius Bosphorus: on the West where it beholdeth her daughter and supplanter, Italy; with the Adriatique sea: on the North with the mountaine Hamus, of which Stratonicus vsed to say, that for eight months it was very cold, and for the other foure, winter: and on the South with the Ionian Sea.
It was called Greece from Graecus the sonne of Cecrops, fi^st founder of Athens; and at the first was only attributed for the Country about Attica: but after the Macedonian Empire had swallowed all the petty Commonwealths, this name was communicated to the whole Countrey; whose people by a Synecdoche are diuersly called, by some Achiui, by some Mirmidones, sometimes Pelasgi, Danai, Argini, etc.
This Countrey is situate in the Northerne temperate Zone, vnder the fift and sixt Climats, the longest day being 15 houres.
The people were once braue men of warre, sound Schollers, addicted to the loue of vertue,Sands. and ciuill of behauiour. A nation once so excellent, that their precepts and examples doe still remaine, as approued rules and Tutors to instruct and direct the man, that indeauoreth to be vertuo^s: famous for gouernment; affectours of freedome, euery way noble. For which vertues in themselues, and want of them in others, all their neighbour and remote nations, were by them scornefully called Barbarians: a name now most fit for the Grecians themselues, being an vnco^stant people, destitute of all learning, and the meanes to obtaine it, Vniversities: vncivill, riotous, and so lazie, that for the most part they endeavour their profit no farther then their belly compells them. When they meet at feasts or bankets, they drinke small draughts at the beginning; which by degrees they increase, till they come to the height of intemperancy: at which point when they are arriued, they keepe no rule or order; whereas before, to drinke out of ones turne is accounted a point of incivility. Hence, as I beleeue, sprung our by-word, As merry as a Greeke, and the Latine word Graecari.
The women are for the most part brown complexioned, exceedingly welfauoured, and excessiuely amorous. Painting they vse very much, to keep the^selues in grace with their husbands: for when they once grow wrinkled, they are put to al the drudgeries of the house.
The Christian faith was receaued here immediately after the passion of the Lambe slaine, from the beginning of the world: but especially established by Timoth^e, to whom S. Paule writ two Epistles. The Fathers whom in this Church they most adhere vnto, and reuerence, are Chrysostome, Basil, and the two Gregories, the one surnamed Nissene, and the other Nazianzen. The Church gouernment is by the 4 Patriarchs; of Alexandria, who presideth ouer Aegypt and Arabia:Brerewo^d* of Hierusalem, who gouerneth the Greekes of Palestine: of Antioch, whose iurisdiction containeth Syria, Armenia, and Cilicia: and of Constantinople, to whose charge are committed all the other Provinces of the

Greeke Church, as all Greece and Muscovie: Sclavonia, Dacia, and part of Poland; all the Ilands of the Adria ique and Aegean Seas, together with Crete, Cyp^us, and Rho^es; almost all Natolia, and the Sea shores of Pontus Euxinus, and Palus Maeotis. Their Liturgie is ordinarily ^hat of S. Chrysostome; but on festivall daies that of S. Basil: which being both written in the learned or ancient Greeke, doth not much more edifie the vulgar people then the Latine Service doth the illiterate Papists. The particular tenets by which the Gre^ke Church doth differ from the Roman and Reformed are already specified in our description of Muscovie: betweene which two of Greece and Muscouy the most materiall points are the manner of distributing the Sacrament; and the exacting of marriage at the Ordination of Priests.
The language they spake was the Greeke, of which were fiue Dialects, 1 Atticke. 2 Doricke. 3 Aeolicke. 4 Ionicke. and 5 The Common Dialect, or phrase of speech. A language excellent for Philosophy and the liberall arts, but more excellent for so great a part of the meanes of our saluation deliuered therein: for the lofty sound, significant expressions of the mind, genuine suauity and happy composition of diuers words in one, so excellent aboue others; that euen in the flourishing of the Roman Commonwealth, it ouertopped the Latine; insomuch that most of the histories of Rome were writ in this tongue, as Polybius, Dion Cassius, Appian, and the like. It also was once of wonderfull extent, in Greece, Natolia, Italy, Province, and almost all the Ilands of the Mediterranean. But now partly through mutilation of some words, and compaction of others; partly by the confusion of the true sound of vowells, dipthongs, and consonants; and the translating of the Accents; to which may be added the commixtion of the language of forraine nations: the language is not only fallen from its elegancy, but also fro^ its largenesse of extent; as being confin'd within Greece, and there not only much corrupted, but almost quite devoured by the Sclavonian, and Turkish tongues.
The soyle questionlesse is very fruitfull, and would yeeld great profit to the husbandman, if they would take paines in the tilling:

but they knowing nothing certainly to be their owne, but all things subiect to the Grand Signeur and his Souldiers, omit agriculture, and may perchance thinke of that of the Poet,
Impius haec tam culta noualia miles habebi^?Barbarus has segetes? en queis consuevimu arua.Shall misbeleeuing Turkes these acros spoyle,Which I manur'd with so much cost and toyle?Shall they enioy my care? See neighbours see,For whom these goodly cornfields tilled be.
The more naturall and certa^ne commodities which they transport into other parts, are Wines; which in memory of the water which our Saviour turned into wine, and on that day whereon they think this miracle was wrought; they vse to baptize: for which cause the Iewes will drinke none of them. They send also into other parts of the world, Oyle, Copper, Vittriall, some Gold and Siluer, Veluets, Damasks, Turquesse Grograms, etc.
This Country hath formerly been famous for the Captaines Miltiades, Epaminondas, Aristides, Pyrrhus, and (to omit infinite others) Alexander the subverter of the Persian Monarchy: For the divine Philosophers, Plato, Socrates, A^istotle, and Theophraslus; for the most exquisite Poets, Hesiodus, Homerus, Sophocles, and Aristophanes. For the faithfull Historiographers, Xenophon the condisciple of Plato, Thucydides, Plu^arch, and Herodotus: The eloquent Oratours Aeschines, Demosthenes, and Isocrates. And lastly, the authors and establishers of all humane learning whatsoeuer, only the Mathematiques excepted.
The chiefe riuers are C^phisus, which arising in the Frontires of Epirus, disburdeneth it selfe into the Aegean Sea. 2 Erigon. and 3 Alaicmon; which beginning their course in the more northerne parts of Macedon, end it in Thirmaicus sinus. 4 Strim^n in Migdonia. 5 Athicus and Nisus in Thrace. 6 S^ymphalus, where Hercules killed the Stymphalian birds; and 7 Ladon in Arcadia. 8 Inachus whose daughter Io turned into a Heifer, was worshipped by the Egyptians vnder the name of Isis. And 9 Pineus, whose daughter was Daphne, turned into a bay-tree; in Macedon: as also
Populifer. 10 Sperchius, and irrequietus, 11 Enipeus;12 Apidanusque senex; lenisque 13 Amphrisus; and 14 Aeas.Poplar-clad Sperchius, swift Enipeus, oldApidane, smooth Amphrisus, Aeas cold.
Thus much of the whole Country in grosse; the chiefe and ordinary division is, into 1 Pel. ponnesus. 2 Achaia. 3 Epirus. 4 Albania. 5 Macedonia. 6 Migdonia. 7 Thracia.

1 PELOPONNESVS.
Maginus.PELOPONNESVS is a peninsula rounded with the Sea, except where it is tied to the maine land of Greece, by an Istmus of 5 miles in breadth; which the Grecians and Venetians fortified with a strong wall, and 5 Castles. This was called Hexamilium, and was ouerthrowne by Amurath the second, who harassed and spoyled all the Countrey. It was afterwards in the yeare 1453, vpon a rumour of a new warre, built vp againe by the Venetians (who then had the greatest part of this Country) in 15 daies: there being for that time 30000 men imploied in the worke. This wall extended from one sea vnto the other; which had it beene as warily guarded, as it was hastily built; or as it was well fortified, had it beene so well manned: might easily haue resisted the Turks, vntill more meanes had bin thought on to defend it.
Dio^.This Istmus was begunne to haue beene digged through by Nero, who to hearten on his souldiers, loath to attempt so fruitlesse an enterprise; took a spade in hand, and busily beganne the worke. Yet at last the Souldiers, being frighted with the blood which abundantly broke forth; with the groanes and roarings which they continually heard* and with the Hobgoblins and Furies, which were alwaies in their sight: perswaded the Emperor, now halfe out of the humour, to leaue this, and inioyne them some more profitable seruice. King Dem^tr^us, C. Caligula, and I. Caesar, with like successe attempted the same action.
This Peninsula is in compasse 600 miles, and was called at the first Aegialia, from Aegtalus the first King, A.M. 1574: 2 Apia from Apis the fourth King. 3 Siciona, from the ninth King Sicion; which name was afterward attributed to a little Prouince by Corinth: then Peloponnesus from Pelops, and (...)

insula, and now Morea, a Maurorum incursionibus, as Mercator thinketh.
This Country is diuided into these six Prouinces, 1 Elis. 2 Messenia. 3 Arcadia. 4 Laconia. 5 Argolis, and Achaia propria.
1 The Country of ELIS hath on the East Aready, on the West the Ionian Sea,Stephanus. on the North Achaia propria, on the South Messe^ia. The chief cities are Elis, which giues name to the whole Prouince. Nigh vnto this city runneth the riuer Alpheus, of which you shall heare more in Sicilia; and in this City reigned the King A^geus, the cleansing of whose Stable is accompted one of the wonders, or twelue labours performed by Hercules. This Elis was of old called Olympia, famous for the Statue of Iupiter Olympicus, one of the worlds 7 wonders, being in height 60 cubits; composed by that excellent workman Phidias, of gold, and ivory. In honor of this Iupiter were the Olympicke games instituted by Hercules on the hill Olympus in Thessalie. The 2 d City is Pisa, whose people following Nestor to the warres of Troy, in their returne were by tempest driuen to the coasts of Italy; where they built the City Pisa.
2 MESSENIA hath on the East Arcady,Adrianus. on the North Elis, on the South and West the Sea. It takes its name from the Metropolis Mesene on Sinus Messeniacus, now called Golfo di Coron. In this City Menelaus was king, whose wife the faire Helena, was the cause of the destruction of Troy. 2 Pilon, where Nestor was King, now called Navarino. 3 Methone or Medon. This people had once great sway in this Peninsula, for whose sole Empire they were long corriuall with the Spartans: who at last getting the vpper hand of them, oppressed them with miserable slauery.Pezelius in Sleidan. In the confines of this Country stood a Temple of Diana, common alike to the Messenians, Spartans, and Dores. It hapned that some Spartan Virgins were by the Messenians here rauished; which abuse, the Spartans pretended to be the ground of their warre; the true reason indeed being, their couetousnes of the sole Empire. This warre broke out 3 times. The first continued 20 yeares, in which space the Lacedaemonians fearing their absence would hinder the supply of yong children

in the city; sent a company of their ablest yong men home, to accompany their wiues. Their off-spring were called Parthenij, who comming to full growth, abandoned Sparta, s^yled into Italy, and there built Tarentum. The second being of 23 yeares continuance, was raised and maintained by Aristomenes, one of the blood-royall. This warre prospered, till Aristocrates King of Arcadia, one of the confederates, revolted, to side with Lacedaemon. Then began they to decline, and Aristomenes was thrice taken prisoner, still miraculously escaping. His last imprisonment was in a dungeon, where by chance espying a Fox deuouring a dead body, he caught hold of her taile: The Fox running a way, guided Aristomenes after; till the straitnesse of the hole by which she went out, made him leaue his holt, and fall to scraping with his nailes; which exercise he neuer left, till he had the hole passable, and so escaped; and hauing a while vpheld his falling Country, died in Rhodes. The third warre was like drops after a tempest. In this the Messenians were forced to abandon their Country; which they could neuer again recouer, till Epaminondas hauing vanquished the Lacedaemonians at Leuctra, restored them to their ancient possessions.
3 ARCADIA hath on the East Laconia, on the West Elis and Messene, on the North Achaia propria, and on the South the Sea. This Country took its name from Arcas, the son of Iupiter and Calisto; but was forme^ly called Pelasgia: the people whereof thought themselues more ancient then the Moone.
Ovid. de Fast.Or^a prius Luna, de se fi creditur ipsi,A magno tellus Arcade nomen habet.The land which of great Arcas took its name*Was ere the Moone, if we will credit Fame.
The chiefe Cities are 1 Psophis. 2 Mantinea, nigh vnto which the Theban Army,Pezel. in Sleidan. consisting of 30000 foot, and 3000 horse; routed the Army of the Spartans and Athenians, consisting of 25000 foot, and 2000 horse. In this battaile Epaminondas that famous Leader, receiued his deaths wound, and not long after died. At his last gaspe one of his friends said; Alas thou diest Epaminondas, and leauest behind thee no children: Nay, replyed he, two daughters will I leaue behind me, the victory at Leuctra,

and this other at Mantinea. 3. Megalopolis, the birth-place of Polybius, that excellent Historian. 4 Phialia towards the sea. Here was the lake Stymphalus,Maginus. and the riuer Styx, whose water for the poysonous taste, was called the water of hell. The Poets faine, that Gods vsed to sweare by this riuer, as may be euerywhere obserued: and what God soeuer swore by Styx falsly, he was banished from Heauen, and prohibited Nectar for a 1000 y^ares. It is a Country whose fitnes for pastorage and grazing, hath made it the subiect of many worthy and witty discourses, especially that of Sr Philip Sidney; of whom I cannot but make honourable mention: a book which besides its excellent language, rare contriuances, and delectable stories; hath in it all the straines of Poesie, comprehendeth the vniuersall Art of speaking, and to them which can discerne, and will obserue, affordeth notable rules for demeanour, both priuat and publike.
4 LACONIA hath on the East and South the Sea, on the North Argolis, on the West Arcadia. The chief Cities are Lacedaemon, once a famous Common-wealth,Plutarch. whose lawes were compiled by Lycurgus; who going a iourney, bound the people by oath, to obserue all his Lawes till he returned: and being gone from thence, commanded, that when he was dead and buried, his ashes should be cast into the Sea, By this meanes, his Lawes were kept in Sparta almost 700 yeares, during which time the Commonwealth flourished in all prosperity. Whosoeuer is desirous to know the particular lawes, customes, and ordinances, by which this Common-wealth did subsist; may in the life of Lycu^gus set down by Plutarch, find them all specified. Their course of liuing was so strict and seuere, that many went to warres, hoping by death to rid themselues from life, so austere and vnpleasing.Laertius. D^ogenes returning from Sparta to At^ens, said, that he returned from men to women, (...): To another demand^ng in what part of Greece he saw the most complete men; he replied, that he saw saw men no-where, but boyes at Lacedaemon. This Commonwealth was so equally mixt, that the soueraignty of one was nothing preiudiciall to the liberty of all. Their kings being of the race of Hercules, had a royaltie not vnlimited, the Nobles

prerogat^ues not infringed; the people, freedome vnquestioned. The Ephori or Tribunes of the people, whose authority was in some respect aboue the Kings, made it seeme a Democracie: The Senate whose decrees were vncontrollable, resembled an Aristocracie: The Kings who like the soule did animate and actuate the rest, shewed that there was somewhat also of a Monarchie. A rare mixture of gouernment. The discipline of this citty, both in warre and peace, made it feared by the neighbours as well as honoured.Plutarch. The people were accounted the chiefe of all the Grecians, and directed the rest as subordinate to them. At last the Athenians hauing conquered many large Prouinces in Asia, began somewhat to Ecclipse their glory; which they not enduring, warred against Athens; and after many losses on their parts susteined, took the city, and dismantled it. Immediatly followed the warre betwixt them, and the Boeotians; the Athenians couertly, and the Persians openly assisting the enemy. Here their prosperity began to leaue them; for beside many small defeates, Epaminondas the Theban so discomfited them, at the ouerthrowes of Leuctra and Mantinea; that Sparta it selfe was in danger of vtter ruine. Not long after hapned the Holy-warre, wherein they also made a party: but this warre being ended by King Philip, they scarce breathed more freedome, then he gaue aire to. But when Alexanders Captaines fought for the Empire of their master, all these flourishing Republickes were either totally swallowed into, or much defaced by the Kingdome of Macedon. The Lacedaemonians held the chiefe strength of a towne to consist in the valour of the people; and therefore would neuer suffer Sparta to be walled, till the times immediatly following the death of Alexander the Great: yet could not these Fortifications defend them from Antigonus Doson King of Macedon; who hauing vanquished Cleomenes King of Sparta, entred the towne, and was the first man that euer was receiued into it as Conquerour; so much different were the present Spartans from the valour and courage of their ancestors. Here liu'd the famous Captaines Euribiades, the Admirall of the Navy against Xerxes, Lisander: and Agesilaeus. The second City of note is Leuctra on the sea side. 3 Thalana, nigh

vnto which is the Lake Lerna, where Hercules slew the monster Hydra, and the mount Tenarus, from whence the same champion drew the three-headed Dog Cerberus, as the Poets called him; and 4 Selassia, where Antigonus vanquished Cleomenes.
5 ARGOLIS, so called from the chiefe Citty Argos, is bounded on the East and North with the Sea, on the West with Achaiae propria, on the South with Laconia. The chiefe Cities are Argos, built by Argus the fourth king of this Country. The first king was Inachu^, A.M. 2109. The last Achrisius, whose daughter Danae, being shut vp in a Towre of brasse, was yet rauished by Iupiter to whom she bare Perseus. This Perseus hauing by mishap slaine Achrisius, translated the Kingdome of Argos, to Micene the second City of note. From this Perseus descended Atreus and Thiestes; from Atreus, Agamemnon; who was Captain of the Greekish Army before Troy, in which were 69 Kings, wasted ouer with a Navy of 1224 ships. The third Town is Nemaea,S^ W.R. where Hercules slew the Lyons. In honour of this memorable exploit, were instituted the Nemaean games, which continued famous in Greece for many ages. The exercises were running with swift horses, whorlebats, running on foot, quotting, wrestling, darting, shoo^ing. Some referre the beginning of these games to the honour of one Opheltus a Lacedaemonian: and others fetch it higher, from the warres of Thebes: but this I take to be the more probable opinion. 4 Epidaurus, famous for the Temple of Aesculap^us: and 5 Nauplia, where Naulu^ the Father of Palamedes was k^ng.
6 ACHAIA PROPRIA, hath on the South Elis, Arcadia, and Argolis: and on all other parts, the s^a. The chief Cities are 1 Corinth, eated at the foot of the Acro-Corinthian hills, hard by the Fount^ine Pirene* called by Perseus, fons Caballinus, because it was by the Poets fained to haue bin made by the horse Pegasus, dashing his hoofe agai^st the rock. This town was fenced with a castle, which stand^ng on the Acro-Corinthian hills, was called Acro-Corinthus. It was for strength impregnable, and for command very power^ull; as able to cut off all passage by land, from one halfe of Greece to the other: and mastering the Ionian and Aegaean seas: vpon both which, Corinth had such commodious

hauens, the sea on both sides washing the walls, that Horace calleth it, Corinthus bimaris. It was built by Corinthus the sonne of Pelops, from whom it tooke name; and by reason of her commodious situation, so exceedingly thriued and flourished, that in the heat of their pride the Cori^thians abused certain Romane Ambassadours, sent vnto them. But irasci populo Romano nemo sapienter potest, as Livy saith, and this the Corinthians found to be true: for Lucius Mummius took the town, and burnt it to the very ground. It was afterwards re-edified, and is now a place of small note, called by the Turkes Crato Here liu'd the famous whore Lais, which exacted 10000 Drachma's for a nights lodging, which made Demosthenes cry, non emam ^anti penitere, and occasioned the old verse,
Non cuivis homini contingit adire Corinthum.T'is not for euery mans auaile,Vnto Corinth for to ^aile.
Here also Theseus instituted the Istmian games, in the honour of N^ptune, as Hercules had the Olympian in honour of Iupiter. 2 Patras. 3 Sycion, now Vasilico. 4 Dimeae.
These Commonwealths flourished in Peloponnesus, till the ciuill warres betwee^ Sparta, Thebes, and Athens; which so weakened all sides, that they were soon made a prey to Philip of Macedon. After they we^e subiect to the Roman, then to the Constantinopolitan Emperours; and when the Latines subdued Constantinople,Turk. hist. most of this Country fell into the armes of Venice: whose people fortified i^ in many pl^ces, especially towards the Sea: finally, it w^s conquered by the Turkes, 1460.


2 ACHAIA.
ACHAIA, called once H^llas, from Helles, son to Deu^alion, is bounded on the East with the Aegaean Sea, on the West with Epirus, on the North wi^h Thessaly, on the South with Peloponnes^^, and the Seas thereof. It is diuid^d into 1 Attica 2 Megaris 3 B^^v^a: 4 Phoci^. 5 Aetol^a. 6 Dori^. 7 Locris.
Strabo.1 A^TICA hath on the West Megaris; on the other part^ the Sea. The soyle is v^ry barren and cr^ggi^; yet the art^ficiall endea^our of the people, wo^derfully enriched them; s^ that the yea^ely revenues of the Common-wealth were ^200 Talent^.

The mony current in this Country was commonly stamped w^th an Oxe; whence came the by-word against bribing and corrupt Lawyers, Bos in lingua. Not much vnlike to this was the Proverb, ^ising from the mony of Aegina, being stamped w^th a snaile; which was, virtutem and sapientiam vincunt testudines.
The chief city Athens (now Selines) was built by Cecrops the first King hereof, and called Cecrop^^, Ao Mundi ^409. It was ^fter repaired by Th^seus, and furnished with good Lawes by Solon. It took name from Minerva (whom the Grecians call Athenae) in whose honour there were long time solemne playes, called Panathena^a. This City hath bin ^amous for many things, three especially, first for the ^nviolable faith of the Citizens in thei^ leagues, and vnfained affection to their friends; so that Fides Attica grew into Adage. Second^y, for the famous Schollers which here taught and flourished: And indeed so happy a nurserie was it of good wits, and so fitly seated for study, that the very natiues being in other Countries, could sensibly perceiue some want of that naturall vigour, which vsually was resident in their spirits. Ita ut corpora istius gentis separata sint in ali^s reg^ones;Velleius. ingenia vero solis Atheniensium muris clausa es^e ex^st^^nes. It was a famous Vniuersity, from whose great e^^erne, the conduit-pipes of Learning were dispersed ouer all Europe. Yet at the first the sweet straines of Apollo's harpe, did not out-sound the lowd braying of Mars his Trumpet: this City yeelding more valiant Captaines, then any in the world, Rom^ excepted, which was the third thing which raised the reputation of the City.Plutarch. Alcibiad^s, Aristides, Themist^cl^s, Pericle^, with diuers others, were the men that vpheld and enlarged the Athenian Republicke: yet were the people so vngrateful to them, or they so vn^o^tun^te in th^ end, that they ^ll died ei^her (...) banishm^nt or violently at home. Th^mistocles the cha^pion of ^reec^, died an exile in Pe^sia. ^hoc^on was slain by the (...) laid violent hands on himselfe; Pericl^s (...) endangered; and Theseus the founder of the Ci(...) from hi^ royalty, and spitefully imprisoned. Aristi(...), and others, banished ten yeares by the Ostracisme.

This forme of punishment, so called, because the nam^ of the party banished was writ in an Oyster shell, was only vsed toward such, who either began to grow too popular, or potent among the men of seruice Which deuice allowable in a Democracie, where the ouer-much powerablenes of one, might hazard the liberty of all, was exercised on spight oftner, then desert. A Country-fellow meeting by chance Aristides, desired him to write Aristides in his shell; and being asked, whether the man whose banishment he desired, had euer wronged him, replyed, No, he was only sorry to heare folkes call him a good man. We find the like vnfortunate end to most of the Romans, so redoubted in warre: Coriolanus was exiled; Camillus confined to Ardea; Scipio murdred, with diuers others, onely because their vertue had lifted them aboue the pitch of ordinary men. Ventidius was disgraced by Antonie: Agricola poisoned with the priuity of Domitian: Corbulo murdred by the command of Nero: all able men yet liuing in an age, wherein it was not law^ull to be valiant. In later times it so hapned to Gonsalvo the Great Captaine, who hauing conquered the kingdome of Naples, droue the French beyond the mountaines, and brought all the Italian Potentates to stand at the Spaniards deuotion; was by his master called home, where he died obscurely, and was buried without solemnity, without teares. Worse fared the Guise and Byron in France; worse Essex, and Dudley of Northumberland with vs; neither will I omit William Duke of Suffolke, who hauing serued 34 yeares in our French warres, and for 17 yeares together, neuer returning home, was at his returne, basely made away. It were almost impiety to be silent of Ioab, the brauest souldier, and politickest Leader, that euer fought the Lords battailes; yet he died at the hornes of the Altar. Whether it be that such men are borne vnder an vnhappy Planet; or that Courtiers, and such as haue b^st opportunity to endeere men of warre with their Soueraignes, know not how to commend and extoll their deserts, in a subiect beyond the reach of their bra^ne, or courage of their heart; or that faction and opposition at home; or Enuie that common foe to Vertue, be the hinderance, I cannot determine. Yet it may be that Princes naturally distrust

men of employment, and are loath to adde honours to a working wit, and an attempting spirit: and it may be the fault of Souldiers themselues, by an vnseasonable praise of their own worths, aboue the ability of renumeration in that state. This was the cause of Silius death vnder Tiberius, concerning which, the Historian giueth vs this excellent sentence: Beneficia eo usque lata sunt, dum videntur exsolui posse: ubi multum anteven^re, pro gratia odium redditur.
The last King hereof was Codrus,Patercul. who in the warres against the Peloponnesians, hauing intelligence by an oracle, that his enemies should haue the victory, if they did not kill the Athenian King; attired himselfe like a beggar, and forced the Peloponnesians to kill him: and they vnderstanding how vnfortunately they had slaine him, whom they had most desire to haue saued, raised their camp and departed. For this fact, the Athenians so honoured his memorie, that they thought no man worthy to succeed him as King; and therefore committed the managing of the state to Gouernours for terme of life, whom they called Archontes,Freigi^ the first Archon being Medon the son of C^drus. This gouernment began A.M. 2897, and continued 316 yeares, at which time the Archontes were appointed to gouerne ten yeares only, and then to giue vp their charge: Seuenty yeares lasted this gouernment vnder seuen Archentes, which time expired A.M. 3284, began the Democracie of Athens; during which, Draco and Solon the Law-giuers flourished. Toward the ^^ter end of Solons life, Pisistratus altered the free state, and made himselfe Lord or Tyrant of the City: but he once dead, the people regained their freedome, driuing thence Hippias the son of Pisistratus, who hereupon fled for succour to Darius K. of Persia, by this meanes bringing the Persians first into Greece. What successe the Persians had in Greece, the Histories of these times abundantly informe vs. Darius being vanquished by Miltiades at Marathron; and Xerxes by Themistocles at Salamis: yet did not Athens scape so cleare, but that it was taken by Xerxes,Plutarch. though indeed first abandoned, and voluntarily dismanteled by the Athenians. When the Persians were retired homewards, the people of Athens reedified their towne, and strongly

fortified it with high and defensible walls; which done, they put their Fleet to sea, and spoyled the coasts of Persia in all quarters; enriching their city with the spoiles, and enlarging their power and dominion, by the addition of many Ilands and sea-townes. Hereby they grew vnto that wealth and potencie, that they were suspected by their weaker neighbours,Thucydides. and envied by their stronger, the Lacedaemonians especially: who fearing to loose their ancient prioritie ouer Greece; but pretending the surprifall of Potidea a City of Thrace from the Corinthians, and some ha^d measure by them shewed vpon the Megarenses, made warre vpon them. In the beginning of this warre the Athenians not only resisted the whole powers of all Greece confederate against them; but so exceedingly prospered, that the Spartans sued for peace, and could not get it. But the scales of Fortune turned; for after they had held out 28 yeares, they were co^pelled to pluck down the walles of their town, and submit themselues to the order of the Lacedaemonians, now by the puissance of Lysander victorious. Then was this Virgin-Town prostituted to the lust of 30 Tyrants, whom not long after, Thrasibulus a braue souldier, and one that loued the liberty of his Country, expelled. This warre was called Bellum Peleponnesiacum. Not long after, the Persians seeing how the State of Sparta, for want of the opposition of Athens, began to worke vpon their Empire; furnished Conon a worthy Gentleman of Athens, with a Navy so wel furnished, that therewith he vanquished the Lacedaemonian Fleete; and put the Athenians by this victory in so good heart, that they once more reedified their walls. Immediatly after followed the warre against Thebes,Plutarch. called Bellum sacrum, which in the end was composed by Philip of Macedon, by bringing as well the Thebans whom he came to succour, as the Athenians, Spartans, and Phocians, whom he came to oppose, all vnder his owne dominion: from which slauery, Greece neuer recouered, till as well Macedon, as she, became follow-seruants to Rome.
The next townes of note in Attica, were 1 Marathron, where Miltiades discomfited the numerous Army of Darius, consisting of 100000 foot, a^d 10000 horse, the emulation of which noble victory, startled such braue resolues in the brest of

Themistocles. 3 Piraea the hauen-town to Athens, built and impregnably fortified by the advice of Themistocles, and afterward the better to keep vnder the Athenians, demolished by Scylla, in his warres against Mythridates. 4 Panormus.
2 MEGARIS hath on the East Attica, on the West Sinus Corinthiacus, on the North Boeotia, and on the South the Isimus. The chiefe city is Megara, now Megra, where Euclide taught Geometrie. Ovid maketh mention of one Nisus King of this Country, not so happy that his head was circled with a Coronet, as that thereon grew a purple haire; to which was annexed the preseruation both of his life and Kingdome. This Iewell his daughter Scylla deliuered to King Minos, her Fathers enemy: who ioyfully receiuing the present, commanded her to be cast into the Sea; where she was (as some write) turned to the gulfe so named. I leaue the moralizing of the Fable, to such as prosesse Mythologie; obseruing only by the way, the antiquity of that politique practise, to loue the Treason, and hate the Traitours. This Country after shaking off the Cretans, became sui iuris; and amounted to that height of prosperity, that they contended with the Athenians for the Iland of Salamis, and so crushed them in one fatall ouerthrow, that a Law was enacted in Athens, that whosoeuer mentioned the recouery of Salamis, should loose his life: so that Solon was compelled to fain himselfe mad, the safelier to motion the matter, which had a prosperous end. This fortune of the Megarenses lasted not long in so eminent a degree; yet they continued a free people, till the comming of the Macedonians. The second town of note in Megaris is Eleusis, vvhere Ceres had a Temple, vvhich is hence called Ceres Eleusina.
3 BOEOTIA hath on the East Attica, on the West Phocis, on the North the riuer Cephisus, on the South Megaris and the Sea. It took its name from B^s, vvhich signifieth an Oxe: for vvhen Cadmus vveary vvith seeking his sister Eur^pa, vvhom Iupiter had stolne from Phoenicia, came to Delphos; hee vvas vvarned by the Oracle, to follovv the first young Oxe he savv, and vvhere he rested, to build a City; the Country for this cause vvas called Boeotia.Plutarch. It vvas a custome in this Country to burne

before the doore of the house in which a new-married wife was to dwell, the axle-tree of the coach in which she came thither: Giuing her by this ceremony to vnderstand, that she must restraine her selfe from gadding abroad; and that being now ioyned to an husband, she must frame her selfe to liue and tarry with him, without any hope of departure.
The chiefe citty is Thebes, built on the brook Cephisus, by Cadmus the Phoenician. Famous it is for the warres here made of old between Eteocles and Polinices, sonnes to that vnfortunate Prince Oedipus, and his mother and wife Iocasta. The History of this warre is the most ancient piece of story which we finde of all Greece; the former times and writings containing nothing but Fables, little sauouring of humanity, and lesse of truth: As of well changed into Monsters, the adulteries of the gods, and the like. In this town l^ued Pelopidas, and Epaminondas, who so crushed the Lacedaemonians at the battles of Leuctres and Mantinea;Plutarch. that they could neuer after re-obtaine their former puissance. This Common-wealth long flourished, and at last being ouerburdened in the Phocian warre, was glad to submit it selfe to the mercy of the Macedonians, vnder the leading of King Philip: who by this meanes first got footing in Greece, into which afterward he thrust his whole body. Vpon the death of Philip, Thebes revolted from the Macedons; but Alexander his successor quickly recouered it; and to dishearten the Greeks in the like attempts, he razed the city, selling all the inhabitants of age and strength: only Pindarus house he commanded to be left standing, in honour of that learned Poet. At the sack of this town, one of the Macedon souldiers entred the house of a principall woman, named Timoclea, rauished her, and rifled her coffers: but still demaunding more treasure, she shewed him a deep Well, saying that there all her mony was hidden. The credulous villain stooping down to behold his prey, she tumbled into the Well, and ouer-whelmed with stones; for which noble act, the generous Captain highly commended, and dismissed her vnhurt. The City was re-edified by Cassander, and is now called Scibes. 2 Daulis, which was vnder the subiection of Tereus King of Thrace, who hauing rauished Philomela, daughter to Pandion, King of the

Athenians, was by his wife Progne, sister to Philomela, murdered, after he had eaten his son Itys in a Pye. 3 Platea, in which Mardonius the Generall of the Persians, was ouercome by the Grecians.Pezel. in Sleidan. There were slain in this battail, Mardonius himselfe, and 260000 Persians; but on the side of the Grecians, 31 Lacedaemonians, 52 Athenians, 16 Arcadians; and of the Megarenses about 600. The Lieftenant-Generall was Pausanias, who afterward plotting to make himself the Tyrant of all Greece, and being discouered, fled into the Temple of Pallas. In this place it was almost a sacriledge to meddle with him; and therefore they resolued to close vp the doore, his mother voluntarily laying the first stone. Before this battle, the Athenians had an Oracle, that they should be conquerours, if they fought in their own territories; whereupon the Plateans, within whose iurisdiction the battle was fought, gaue that part of their Country to the City of Athens: In requitall of which worthy donation, Alexander the great re-edified and inlarged their city. 4 Leuctra, where the Thebans vnder the conduct of Epaminoudas, vanquished the Lacedamonians, slew their King Cleombrotus; and not only preserued their own liberty, but brought their enemies to that fall of courage and reputation, that they could hardly euer rise again. 5 Asc ra, the birth-place of Hesiod, a man (according to Paterculus) elegantis ingenij, and carminum dulcedine memorabilis: though the proud Critick Scaliger, intending to deifie Virgil, most iniudiciously and absurdly preferreth the worse Verse in the Georgickes of the one, before the whole workes of the other. 6 Cheronea or Coronea, the birth-place of Plutarch.Plutarch. Neere vnto this City was fought that memorable battail between L. Sylla, and the Romans, against Archelaus Lieutenant to Mithridates King of Ponius, who led an Army of 120800 Souldiers: of which great number only 10000 escaped with life; Sylla loosing of his own men 14 only. 7 Orchomenon, nigh vnto which the same Sylla vanquished Dorilaus, an other of the Kings captaine^, hauing an Army of 80000 men, whereof 20000 lost their liues. After these two victories Sylla made peace with Mithridates, because Marius and Cinna domineering in Rome, had trodden his faction vnderfoot: herein preferring his owne

quarrells, before the ruine of the common enemy; which had he followed these victories, ne^^^er could haue raised an other warre, as he did afterward*
In this Country are t^e streights of Thermopylae, which in the warre that Xerxes made against Gre^ce, were defended by 300 Spartans, and their King Leonidas: Who hauing valiantly resisted that Army, which in their passage out of Persia, had d^ankedly whole riuers, and s^^m of them 20000, died all in the place. Xerxes, lest the greatnes of his losse should terrifie his men, who had not yet seene that vnproportionable discomfiture; buried in seuerall pits, all saue one thousand; as if no more had bin wanting then they.
Strabo.4 PHOCIS is bounded on the East with Boeotia, on the West with Locris and Doris, on the North with the riuer Cephisus, and on the South with the Sinus Corinthi^cus. In this Country is Helicon the mount consecrated to the Muses; as also another hill of this Country, called Cithaeron, and both striuing with Parnassus in height and bignes. This Pernassus is of wonderfull height, whose two tops euen kisse the clouds:
Ovid. Met.Mons hic cervicibus p^tit arduus astra duobusNomine Pernassus: supera^que cacumine montes.Through the thick Clouds the mount Pernas^us hight,With his two tops doth kisse the Starres so bright.
In the generall deluge of Greece, in which almost all men perished in the waters, Deucalion and Pyrrha, saued themselues on this h^ll; not farre from which stood the Temple of Themis.
The chiefe Townes are Cyrra, 2 Crissa; 3 and Antycira on the Sea; the last of which is famous for the Elleborum that grew there, a Herbe very medicinall for the Phren^ie, whence came the proverb. naviget Antyciram 4 Elladia. 5 Pytho or Pythia, a town seated not only in the midst of Greece, but of the whole World also. For Iupiter desirous once to know the ex^ct middle of the Earth, let the two Eagles, one from the ^ast, the other from the West. These Eagles meeting in this place, shewed plainly that here was the nauell or mid part of the Earth. This town by reason of its convenient situation, was the Sessions town of all Greece, it being the meeting-place of the Amphictyones.

These Amphictyones were men selected out of the 12 pri^^ cities of Greece: they had povver to decide all contro^ersies and enact Lavves for the common good. They vvere instituted either by Acrisius (as Strabo) or (as Halicarnas^an thinks) by Amphi^^yon the son of Helen,Stephanus. from vvhom they seeme to haue deriued their name. Their meetings vvere at the beginnings of the Spring and Autumne: The Commissioners o^ the Cities vvere in seuerall called Pylagorae. Some instances concerning their authority vvere not amisse. In the time of Cimon, the Scyrians hauing by Piracie vvronged the Thessalonians, vvere fined by this Councel. Aftervvard the Lacedaemonians for surprizing Cadmea, and the Phocians,Pezel. in Sleidan. for ploughing vp the land of Cyrrha belonging to Delphos, vvere by them amerced: and because they continued obstinate, and payed not their mu^ct, their dominions vvere adiudged to be confiscate to the Temple of Apollo. But they resisting this decree, spoyled the Temple it selfe; for which warre being proclaimed, and the rebels (for so they were now held) by the assistance of Philip of Macedon subdued: the Councel was again assembled. Here it was decreed that the Phocians should raze their walls: that they should pay the yearely tribute of sixty talents: that they should no more keep horse and armour, till they had satisfied the Treasury of the temple: and that they should no more haue any voyces in that consistory. It was also then enacted, that King Philip and all his sucessours should haue the two suffrages of the ^hocians in that Parliament, and be (as it were) Princes of the Senate. To this generall Counsell in the Iewish Commonwealth, the Sanhed^in, or Aristocraticall gouernment of the 70 Elders, had most resemblance. At this time the Diots of the Empire, the States of the Low-co^ntries, and the assemblies of the Swi^ze^s and Grisons, come ^ighest to this patterne. 6 Delphos, where was the Temple of Apollo; in which, with that of Iupiter Hannon in Cyrene, were the most famous Oracles of the Heathens, deliuered, darke riddles of the Diuell, couched in a forme so cunningly contriued, that the truth was then farthest off, when it was thought to haue bin found. Craesus consulting with the Oracle, was giuen this answere,
Craesus Halyn penetrans m^gnam perve^tet opum vin^^*When Craesus ouer H^ly^ row^th*A mighty nation he ouerthroweth.
Which he interpreting according to his own hopes; crossed the riuer, was vanquished by Cy^us King of Persia and his wh^^e country ru^^ed. In the like kind of deceitfu^l manner were the rest of the Oracles in those dayes giuen; the diuell being sure, that howsoeuer the euent was* he would hardly be convinced of lying. So we find King Pyrrhus before h^s warre with the Romans, to haue consulted with the Oracle, and to haue receiued this answere.
Aio te Aeacide Romanos vincere posse;
Which doubtfull prediction he construing ^eposse vincere Romanos, according to his own hopes, found afterwards that the Diuell meant Romanos posse vincere te, that the Romans should ouercome him; for so indeed it hapned. By an other kind of the same fallacie, which the Logicians call Amph^bolia, did the same enemy of mankind ouerthrow an other Prince, who demaunding of the Oracle what successe he should haue in his warres had this answere giuen him, Ibis redibis nunquam per bella peribis; which he thus commaing* Ibis, redibis, nunquam per etc. ventured on the warre, and was slaine; whereupon his followers again canvasing the Oracle, found that it was Ibis, redibis nunquam, per etc. The like iuggling he also vsed in those supernaturall dreames, which Philosophers call (...), (or sent from the diuell:) for Caesar dreaming that he committed Incest with his mother, made himselfe Lord of Rome, which was his Country and mother; and Hippias the son to P^isistratus the Tyrant of Athens, hauing vpon the same proiects the same dreame, was killed, and buried in the bowels of his mother the Earth; so that had Caesar miscarried in his action, and Hippias thriued: yet still had the diuell bin reputed his craftesmaster, and the father of truths. But as the Ecclesiasticall history telleth vs, that Iulian the Apostata consulting with the diuell, was told that he could receiue no answere, because that the body of Babilas the martyr, was entombed nigh his Temple; so much rather could the diuels deceiue the World, as formerly

they had done, after Christ the Trueth it selfe was manif^sted in the flesh, and tormented these vnclean spirits, though as they alle^dged before their time. For Augustus in whose time our S^uiour was borne, consulting with the Oracle about his successour* receiued this not-s^tisfying answere:
(...),(...);(...)--An Hebrew ch^ld, whom the blest gods adore,Hath bid me leaue these shrines and pack to hell,So that o^ Oracles I can no more:In silence leaue our Altar, and farewell.
Whereupon Augustus comming home, in the Capitoll erected an Altar, and theron in Capital letters caused this Inscription to be ingra^en, HAEC EST ARA PRIMOGENITI DEI. Now as the diuels had by Christs birth lost much of their wonted vertue, so after his passion they lost it almost altogether: concerning which, Plutarch in a tract of his Moralls called (...), why Oracles cease ^o giue answeres, telleth vs a notable story, which was this. Some company going out of Greece into Italy, were about the Echinades becalmed, when on the sudden there was heard a voyce loudly calling on one Thamus an Egyptian, then in the Ship. At the two first calls he made no answere, but to the third he replyed, Here I am: and the voyce again spake vnto him, bidding him when he came to Palodes* to make it knowne that the great god Pan was dead. When they came vnto the Palodes, which are certain shelue^ and rocks in the Ionian sea, Thamus standing on the poope of the Ship, did as the voyce directed him, whereupon there was heard a mighty noyse of many together, who all seemed to groane and lament, with terrible and hideous skreiking. T^berius hearing of this miracle, caused the learned of his Empire to search out who that Pan should be, who returned answere, that he was the son of Mercurie by Penelope; but such as more narrowly obserued circumstances, found it to happen iust at the time when the Lord of Life suffered death on the Crosse, who was the true Pan and Sheepheard of our Soules; and

that vpon this divulging of his passion, the diuels who vsed to deliuer Oracles, with great grief and lamentations forsook the office, which had bin so profitable to them in seducing the blind people. I dare not affirme that all Oracles then failed, but certainly they then began to decay: for Iuvenal in his time affirmed, that Delphis oracula c^ssant.Plutarch. This temple of Apollo being spoyled by the Phocians, caused the warre between them and the Thebans, called the Holy warre, in which the Thebans being likely to haue the worst, sent for Philip of Macedon, who made an end of the warre by subduing them both. The spoyle which the Ph^cians got out of the Temple, was 60 Tunnes of Gold, which was to them Aurum Tholosanum: so vnpardonable a crime is sacriledge, that the fault of some few, patronized by their confederats, bringeth an vncurable punishment on whole Nations.
5 LOCRIS is bounded on the West with Aetolia; on the North with Doris, on other parts with the Sea. The chief cities are 1 Naup^ctum, now called Lepanto, which once belonged to the Venetians, but now to the Turkes. This Town the Athenians gaue vnto the poore M^ssenians, when after their third warre,Pezel. in Sleid. the Lacedaemonians vnwilling to haue them troublesome neighbours, and they scorning to be quiet slaues, compe^led them to seek new habitations. 2 Emathia.
Maginus.6 AETOLIA hath on the East Locris, on the West Epirus, on the North Doris, on the South the Gul^e o^ Lepanto. Here is the Forrest Calidon, where Meleager, and the flowre of the Greeke Nobility, slew the wild Boare. Here is the riuer Evenus, ouer which the Centau^e N^ssus hauing carried De^ane^ra, w^^e to Hercules* and intending to haue rauished her, was slaine by an arrow, which Hercules on the other side of the riuer shot at him. Here also is the riuer Achel^us, of whom the Poets fable many things,Ovid. as that being ^iuall with Hercules (iure it must needes be before he was turned into a riuer;) in the lo^e of Detaneira, he encount^ed him in the shape of a Bull; and that when Hercules had plucked off one of hi^ hornes, the Nymphs made of it their so much celebrated Cornuc^pia. The ^eople of this Country were the most turbulent and vnruly people of all

Greece, neuer at peace with their neighbours, and seldome with themselues. The Macedonians could neuer tame them, by reason of the cragginesse of the Country: yet they brought them to such termes, that they were compelled to let the Romans into Greece, who quickly made an end of all. The chiefe townes are 1 Chalcis, 2 Olenus, 3 Pleurona, 4 Thermum, the parliament City of all Aetolia.
7 DORIS hath on the East Boeotia, on the West Epirus, on the South the Sea; and on the North the hill Oeta, on which Hercules being tortured by a poisoned shirt, sent him by his innocent wise Deianeira, burned himselfe. The chiefe citties are 1 Amphissa. The people of this Citty refusing to yeeld to the sentence of the Amphictyones, against their confederats the Phoc^ans, were the cause of Philips returne into Greece: who grievously infested the territorie of the Boeotians.Plutarch. Against these proceedings the Athenians opposed themselues; not so much in any hope of prevailing, as being whetted on by the eloquence of D^mosthenes; whose biting Orations against Philip called the Philipp^cks, haue giuen name to all the invectiues of this kinde; so that Tullie called the Orations he composed against Antonie his Philippica. At Coronea the armies meet where the Athenians are vanquished; and Philip is made Captaine of all Greece. 2 Libra and 3 C^^^um.
The whole Country of Achaia was subdued by Amurath the second.


3 EPIRVS.
EPIRVS hath on the East Achaia; on the North Macedon; on the other parts the Seas. In this Country Olimpias, Alexander the greats mother was borne; and also Pyrrhus, who first of any forrainer made triall (to his owne losse) of the Roman puis^a^ce: and afterwards in A^gos leaguer, was slaine with a tile by an old woman. Here is the mount Pind^^s sacred to Apollo and the ^^Mu^es; and the Acrocera^nian hills, so called because they ^^e subiect to thunderclaps. Here are also the riuers Acher^n (...) Coc^^^^ f^r their colour and tast called the rivers of hell.
The Easterne pa^t of this Province is called Acarnania: the Westerne is Chao^ia: both very populous, vntill Paulus Aemilius

ouerthrew 70 of their Citties. The chiefe of the remainder are 1 Antogonia. 2 Cassiope. 3 Torona on the riuer Thiamis in the Westerne part: and in the other 1 Nicopolis,Dion. built by Augustus in the place where his land souldiers were incamped, before the battaile of Act^um: either in memory of his victorie there; or else of a man and his Asse whom he there met. For the night be^ore the fight, he met a poore man on an Asse, of whom he demanding his name was answered Eu^iches, that is fortunate; and asking the name of his Asse, was told Nicon, that is Conquerour: which happy omens made the Souldiers couragious and hopefull of victory; and Augustus in memoriam sacti, erected there a couple of brasen Images; one of the Asse, the other of his master. 2 Ambracia, now Larta, on the vpper end of the Bay of Ambracia, or the Gulfe of Larta. 2 Leucas. 3 Anactorium. and 4 Actium, nigh vnto which in the Sea of Lepanto, Augustus and Antony fought for the Empire of the world. The Navie of the latter co^sisted of 500 Gallies; the former had 250 Gallies, adorned with the Trophies of victory. Here also was fought that memorable Sea-fight, Anno. 1571, betweene the Turkes,Hist. of Ven. who had a Navie of 270; and the Venetians hauing 145 Gallies; on which the Lord of hosts bestowed victory. In this day there died of the Turkes 29000 men, and of the confederats 7656, or thereabouts. There were freed 1200 captiue Christians, taken Prisoners 3900 Turkes; nigh 140 Gallies, and about 4000 peeces of Ordnance: so that this place seemeth to be marked for a stage of great designes, and that this latter navall batta^le, was but the second part of the first.
This Country was once called Molossia from the Molossi, whom Pyr^hus sonne to Achilles brought vnder the yoake of servitude. From him descended that Pyrrhus, who made warre with the Romans, Anno mundi 3683. V.C. 471. After his death this kingdome was shrewdly shaken by the Macedonians, and shortly after subdued by Paulus Aemilius, who as wee now said destroyed 70 Citties hereof in one day. For desirous to satisfie his Souldiers after his victory in Macedon hee sent vnto the Ep^rots for ten of the principall men of every Citty. These he commanded to deliuer vp all the Gold and Siluer which they

had; and to that end, as he gaue out, he sent certaine companies of Souldiers along with them; vnto whom hee gaue secret instructions, that on a day by him appointed, they should fall to sacke euery one the Towne, whereinto they were sent. A barbarous and bloudy decree, 70 Citties confederate with the Roma^s ruined in one day, and no fewer then 150000 Epirots made and sold for slaues. This Country of Epirus was rent from the Constantinopolitane Empire by Amurath the second, and his son Mahomet.


4 ALBANIA.
ALBANIA is bounded on the East with Macedonia, on the West with the Adriatique, on the North with Sclavonia; on the South with Epirus. Here are the riuers Celidnus. 1 Laus. and 3 Baniasus. The chiefe Citties are 1 Albanopolis. 2 Sfetigrade, which held good for Scanderbeg against the Turke;Knolls the Souldiers neither fainting in their oppositions, nor corrupted by money. There was in the Towne one only Well, into which a treacherous Christian cast a dead dog; at the sight of which being the next day drawne vp, the Souldiers gaue vp the Towne: being so vnseasonably superstitious; that no perswasion, nor the example of the Captaine, or the Burgo-masters, could make them drinke those (as they thought them) defiled waters. 3. Durazzo, a towne of great strength. It was first called Epidamnum and afterward Dyrachium. Vnder the walls of this Towne, was the first bickering betweene the Souldiers of Caesar and Pompey; not only to the present losse; but also the vtter discomfiture of Caesar, as he himselfe co^fessed; if the enimies captain had known how to haue ouercome. I must not omit the valour of Sceva at this siege, who alone so long resisted. Pompeys army: he had 220 darts sticking in his shield; and lost one of his eyes: (...) C^sar came to his rescue.
Parque novum fortuna videt concurrere, bellumAtque virum--densamque ferens in pectore silvam.Fortune beholds an vnaccustom'd sight,An army and a man together fight,Whose brest a wood of Arrowes couered quite.
Croya, vnder whose walls Amurath the 2d gaue vp a wretched

soule to the Diuell.
This Country for the most part followed the fortune of Macedon,Turk. hist. and Epirus; together with which, it was taken by Amurath: from whom it was recouered by that worthy captaine George Castrio^, nick-named Scanderbeg, i. e. Great Alexander. He was a most warie and politick souldier, giuing a great checke to the Turkish victories, of which people it is recorded, that hee slew in severall battailes, 3000 with his owne hands: and hauing held the cards against two most fortunate gamesters, Amurath and Mahomet: he set vp his rest a winner. After his death and buriall, his body was digged vp by the Turkes; and happy man was he that could get the smallest peece of his bones, to preserue as an inestimable Iewell: supposing that as long as he carried it about him, he should be alwaies invincible.


5 MACEDONIA.
MACEDONIA is bounded on the East with Migd^nia, on the West with Albania;Maginus. on the North vvith Misia superior, on the South with Epirus and Achaia. It was called Hamonia, fro^ mount Hoemus: Aemathia, from a king of it called Aemathus: and Macedonia, from the King Macedo. Here is the fount P^mple, sacred to the Pierian Goddesses. The chief citties are 1 Scydra. 2 Andaristus. 3 Aedessa all midland townes. 4 Eribae^ on Albania side now called Pr^ssae. 5 Pidna seated on the influx of the riuer Alaicmon into the bay called Sinus Thermaicus. In this Towne Cassander besieged, and by besiege tooke Olimpias the mother, Roxane the wife, and Hercules the heire apparant of great Alexander: all which he barbarously put to death. This cruelty he committed partly to revenge himselfe on Alexander, who had once strooke his head and the wall together; and partly to cry quits with Olimpias, vvho had lately murdered K. Aridaeus, and Euridice his Queene,Maginus. with whom Cassander is thought to haue beene ouer familiar. 6 Pella standing on the same shore, the birth place of the great Alexander, hence called Pellaeus Iuvenis. And 7 Syderocaspae, called of old Chrysiles, famous for her mines of gold and siluer: which are so rich, that the Turke receaueth hence monthly sometimes 18000, sometimes 30000 crownes de claro.
The Southerne part of Macedon is Thessalis, a fruitfull and pleasant Country. Here is the hill Olympus, on which Hercules instituted the Olympicke games in honour of Iupiter A.M. 2757 the exercises being meerely bodily, as running with Chariots, running on foot, wrastling, fighting with the whorlebats, and the like. The reward giuen to the Victor were onely Garlands of Pal^^e; yet did the Greekes no lesse esteeme that small signe of conquest and honour, then the Romans did their most magnificent triumphes. The Iudges in these games were the Eleans, because in their Citty was the Temple and statua of Iupiter, surnamed Olympicus. After the death of Hercules these Games were discontinued for 430 yeares, at which time one Iphitus, warned so to doe by the Oracle of Apollo, renewed them; causing them to be solemnly exercised euery fift yeare: from which custome Olympias is sometimes taken for the space of ^ yeares; as qu^^^^^ annorum Olympiades,Camden. for 20 yeares. Varro reckneth the times before the stood to be obscure; those before the Olympiads, and after the stood to be fabulous; but those that followed these Olympiads to be historicall, and these Olympiades were of long time euen from the restauration of them by Iphitus vntill the reigne of the Emperour Theodosius; the Grecian Epoche: from whence they reckoned their time. 2ly the hill Othris, where dwelt the Lapithae ouer whom Pirithous was K. 3ly The hills Pel^on and Ossa, about which the Centaures dwel^; who m^nding to rauish Hippodame, the Bride of Pirithous, on the wedding day: were slaine by Hercules and the Lapithae. 4ly Here betweene the hills Olympus and Ossa, was situate the delectable vallie called Tompe* extending in length fiue, in breadth 6 miles: so beautified with natures gifts, that it was supposed to be the Garden of the Muses. And 5ly, here liued the Mirmidones, over whom at the siege of Tr^y, Achilles was Captaine. They were a sparing and labotious kinde of people; and were therefore ^ain^d by the Poets to haue beene Emmets, and transformed into men at the request of Aeacus, when he wanted Souldiers.

--mores quos anto gerebantOvid.
Nunc quoque habent parcum genus est patiensque laborum;
Quaesitique tenax; and qu^d quaesita reserue^.
The customes they of Emmets still retaine;
A sparing folke and vnto labour set;
Strangely addicted to all kinde of gaine;
And wary keepers of what ere they get.

The chiefe Townes of Th^ssalie are 1 Tricca, whose Bishop Heliodorus, made that ingenious Poem of Theagenes, and Cariclia; which is intituled The Aethiopique History; and chose rather to loose his Bishopricke, then suffer his book, which a Provinciall Synode had iudged to the fire, to be burned. A Poem not so lasciuious as many guesse. Chast and honest loue is the subiect of this work; not such as old or moderne Poets, in their Comoedies mention. Here is no incestuous mixture of father and daughter; no pandarismes of old midwiues, no vnseemly action specified, where heat of blood and opportunity meet: nor in deed any one passage vnworthy the chastest eare. 2 Lamia where the Athenians after the death of Alexander, hoping to recouer their freedome, besieged Antipater. This war was called Bellum Lamiacum, and was the last honourable action, vndertaken by that great and renowned Citty. 3 Demetrias seated on Sinus Pelasgicus. 4 Larissa, situate South of Demetrias on the same bay, where Achilles was borne. 4 Pharsalis, nigh vnto which was that bloody battaile betweene Caesar and Pompey, for the Lordship of the vvorld. Caesar herein vvas conquerour. The victory vvas more famous then bloody,Plutarch. six thousand men only among 300000, being slaine. Before the field vvas fought, the Pompeians vvere in such a miserable security, that some of them contended for the Priesthood, which vvas Caesars office: others disposed of the Consulships and offices in Rome* Pompey himselfe being so retchlesse, that hee neuer considered into what place he were best retire, if he lost the day; or by what meanes he might prouide for his safety, and raise new forces. As if the warre had beene made against some ignoble enimy, and not against Caesar; who had taken 1000 Townes; conquered 300 nations; tooke prisoners one million of men, and slaine as many. In the same fields but somewhat nigher to the City of Philippi, was the like memorable conflict betweene Augustus and Antoni^ on the one side; and Brutus and Cassius on the other: these

latter being by fortune rather then valour ouerthrowne. For either thinking the other vanquished, slew himselfe: these two being the last that euer openly stood for the common liberty; or as Cordus in Tacitus calleth them, Vltimi Romanorum, The last of all the Romans. And 5 Pherae where Alexander the tyrant raigned; against whom that notable Captaine Pelopidas fighting, was slaine. He was in the end murdered by his wiues brothers: all Thessalie by his death recouering liberty.
Though Macedonia was neuer very famous, till the daies of King Philip and his sonne Alexander; yet it shall not bee amisse to recite all the Kings, beginning at Caranaus son to Macedo, the Nephew of Deucalion.

The Kings of Macedo.
3155
1 Caranaus 28
3182
2 Coenus 12.
3195
3 Tirmas 38
32^3
4 Perdiccas 51
3284
5 Argaens 38
3322
6 Philippus 38
3360
7 Europus 26
3386
8 Alcetas 29
3415
9 Amintas 50.
3565
10 Alexander 43
3508
11 Perdiccas 28.
3536
12 Arcbelaus 24
3560
13 Orestes 3.Freigius.
3563
14 Archelaus 4.
3567
15 Pausanias 1.
3568
16 Amyntas 6.
3574
17 Argeus 1.
3575
18 Amyntas 19.
3594
19 Alexander. 1.
3595
20 Alorites 4
3599
21 Perdiccas 6
3605
22 Philip 24
3629
23 Alexander the Great.

Of these 23 Kings, onely six are famous: viz: Caranaus the first King. He was originally of Argos; and by an oracle commanded to lead a Colonie into this Country; and to follow the first flocke of Cattell he saw before him. Being here arriued in a tempestuous stormy day, he espied a heard of Goates flying the fury of the weather. These Goates he persued vnto Aedessa, into which by reason of the darknesse of the ayre he entred vndiscouered; wonne the towne, and in short space became Lord of all the country. 2ly P^rdiccas the fourth king, who at Aega built a buriall place for all his successours; assuring the people that as long as their kings were there buried, his race should never fayle, and so it hapned. For the kingdome of Macedon after

the death of Alexander the great, who was buried at Babylon, was translated to the sonnes of Antipater. 3 Europus, who in his infancy was carried in a cradle against the Illir^ans his enimies, and returned victorious. This the Macedons did, either because they thought they could not be beaten, their King being present; or perswaded themselues, that there was none so void of honour, and compassion as to abandon an infant, no way able to saue himselfe from destruction, but by the valour and fidelity of his seruants. 4 Alexander the son of Amy^tas, famous for a noble exploit on the ^ersian Ambassadours; who being sent from Megabizus, requested a view of the Macedon^an ^adies. No sooner were they entred; but petulantius eas P^^sis contrectantibus, etc. they were called back by this Alexander; sending in their steeds, young springals maidenly attired: who vpon the like indignities offered, slew these effeminate Asians. After this he behaued himselfe so discreetly, that the Persian Monarch gaue him all Greece, between Hoemus and Olympus. 5 Philip father vnto Alexander, who subdued Peloponnesus, Achaia and Thrace, and was chosen Captain Generall of the Greeks against the Persians. No sooner had he begun this warre, but he was arrested by death, with a writ of habeas corpus. 6 Alexander the sonne of Philip, who recouered the greater part of Greece, which at his fathers death, flattered themselues with hope of liberty. He subdued Darius of Persia, Toxiles and Porus, kings of India: founded the Grecian Monarchie: and in the height of his victories, was poysoned by Cassander at Babylon* After his death, his new-got Empire was much controverted; he himselfe hauing bequeathed it to him whom the souldiers reputed most worthie: and they according to their seuerall affections, thought their seuerall Leaders best to deserue it. At last the title of King was by generall consent cast on Ari^aeus, a bastard of Philips: to whom Perdiccas was appointed protector: (for Aridae^s was a little crazed in his braine) and made Generall of all the Army. As for the Prouinces, they were assigned to the gouernment of the chiefe Captaines, as Aegypt and Cyrene to Ptol^mie; Syria to Laomedon; Cilicia to Philotas; Media to Pytho; Cappadocia to Eumenes; Pamphilia, Lycia, and Phrygia

maior, to Antigonus; Caria to Cassander; Lydia to Menander; P^ntus and Phrygia minor to Leonatus; Assyria to Seleucus; Persis to Peucestes; Thrace to Lysimachus; and Macedonia to Antipater: the other parts of the Persian Empire being left in their hands, vnto whom Alexander in his life-time had entrusted them. This diuision continued long; for Perdiccas being on^e sla^ne by Ptolomie and Eumenes, made away by Antigonus; these two became quickly master of the rest; Ptolomie adding Syria to Aegypt, and Antigonus bringing vnder his command not only all Asia Minor, but Assyria Media, and the rest of the Easterne parts of the Empire also. Antipater in the mean time succeeding Perdiccas in the Proctourship, died* which advantage Olympias (whom Antipater, extreamely hating her, had banished into Epirus) taking, entred Macedonia, put to death Aridaeus and his wife Euridice, and proclaimed Hercules the sonne of Alexander, king; but was not long after, together with her nephew and daughter, barbarously slaine by Cassander. The royall blood thus extinct, Antigonus took on himselfe the title of King: the like did Seleucus, who had now recouered all the Persian Prouinces beyond Euphrates: the like did Ptolomie in Egypt, and Cassander in Macedon.

The second race of the Macedon Kings.
3648
1 Cassander, son vnto Antipater, supposed to haue bin the poisoner of Alexander, rooted out the blood royall of Macedon; his reigne full of troubles and difficulties. 19
3667
2 Alexander and Antipater, sonnes to Cassander; but not well agreeing, called vnto their aide Lysimachus, and Demetrius, by whom they were both in short time murdered. 4.
3671
3 Demetrius sonne to Antigonus the powerfull King of Asia, after he had in one battle against Seleucus, lost both his Father and all his Asian Dominions: settled himselfe in Macedon: but being there outed w^th Pyrrhus, he fled to Seleucus* and with him died. 6.
3677
4 Pyrrhus King of Epirus, was by the souldiers voluntarily forsaking Demetrius, made King of Macedon: but after 7 moneths, the souldiers revolted to Lysimachus, as

being a Macedonian borne.
3678
5 Lysimachus Gouernour of Thrace, being thus made King of Macedon, was in the end vanquished and slaine by Seleucus. 7
3685
6 Ceraunus son to Ptolomie of Egypt, hauing traiterously slain his friend and patron Seleucus, seazed on Macedon; but lost it, together with his life vnto the Gaules, who after they had left Italy, plagued these countries. 2
3687
7 Antigonus Gonatas, son to Demetrius, was for his valour shewne in expulsing the Gaules, made King of Macedon: and though for a while he gaue way to Pyrrhus, then returning out of Italy, yet after Pyrrhus death, he againe recouered it. 36
3723
8 Demetrius, son to Antigonus, recouered the Kingdome of Macedon: which Alexander one of the sonnes of Pyrrhus, had taken from his father. 10.
3733
9 Antigonus Doson, left by Demetrius as Protectour to his yong son Philip, took vpo^ him the kingdome. He diuers times vanquished and crushed the Greekes, then beginning to cast off the Macedonian yoake.
3745
10 Philippus sonne to Demetrius.
3787
11 Perseus the sonne of Philip. These two were the subverters of the Kingdome of Macedon; for they not onely molested the Aetolians and other Grecians, whom the Romans had taken into their patronage; but sided with the Carthaginians against them: which they not able to endure, sent Paulus Aemilius with an Army to Macedon, to bring King Perseus to some conformity. The euent was answerable to the Roman fortune. Greece is made a Prouince of their Empire, and Perseus with a deiected countenance followeth the triumphant chariot of Aemilius, after he had reigned 11 yeares. From the Constantinopolitans, Macedon was wrested by Baiaz^t the first.



6 MIGDONIA.
Maginus.MIGDONIA hath on the East and South the Aegaean Sea* on the North Thrace; on the West Macedon, of which by many, this Country is reckoned a part. Here is the hill Athos, which is 75 miles in circuit, three dayes iourney in height, and

casteth a shadow as farre as Lemnos, which is 40 miles distant. The chief cities are 1 Stagira (now Nicalidi) where the famous Philosopher Arist. was borne: a man so worthy, that Philip reioyced he had a sonne borne in his time. 2 Apollonia. 3 Pallene, sacred to the Muses. 4 Neapolis on the borders of Thrace. 5 Antigonia: and 6 Thessalonica, now called Salonichi, seated on the Sea; to the people of which City, S. Paul writ two of his Epistles. It is a populous city, replenished with Christians, Turkes, and Iewes; the last of which swarme here in such abundance, that in this towne and Constantinople only, are reckoned 160000 Iewes. Yet notwithstanding their multitude, they are not here only, but in all places where they abide, not only contemned, but hated;Biddulph. and at euery Easter in danger of death. For if they stirre out of doores between Maunday Thursday at noone, and Easter Eue at night, the Christians among whom they dwell, will stone them; because at that time they crucified our Sauiour, derided, and buffetted him. This Prouince hath alwayes followed the fortune of Macedon.


7 THRACE.
THRACE hath on the East Pontus Euxinus, Propontis, and Hellespont; on the West Macedon, on the North the hill Haemus, on the South the Aegaean Sea. The people are very bold and valiant, and called by some (...), because euery man was a law to himselfe. So that it was truely said by Herodotus, that if they had either bin all of one mind, or vnder one king, they had bin invincible. The Country of it selfe is neither of a rich soyle, or pleasant aire: the corne and other seeds, by reason of the coldnes of the Climate, leasurely ripening^ the Vines yeelding more shade, then iuyce; the trees more leaues then fruit. The men were more couragious, then comely, wearing cloathes according to their conditions, ragged and vnseemly. The married women were in loue to their husbands so constant, that they willingly sacrificed themselues at their funerals. The Virgins were bestowed not by their own parents, but the common Fathers of the cities. Such as brought neither beauty nor vertue for their dowre, were put off according to their money, most times sold, as other cattle, in the markets. Of the soules immortality

they had all such a rude certainty, and of lifes miseries so knowne experience, that saith mine Author, Lugentur puerperia, natique deflentur; funera contra festa sunt, and veluti sacra cantu lus^que celebrantur. Such were the old Thracians. Here liued the Tyrant Polymnestor, who villanously murdred Polydorus a yonger son of Priamus; for which fact Hecuba the yong Princes mother scratched him to death. Here liued the Tyrant Tereus, of whom before in Phocis: and Diomedes, who vsing to feed his horses with mans flesh, was slain by Hercules, and cast vnto his horses. And here raigned King Cotis, whom I mention not as a Tyrant, but propose as a patterne of rare temper, both in mastering and preuenting passion. For when a neighbor Prince had sent him a present, of accurately wrought, and purely mettall'd Glasses; he (hauing dispatched the messenger with all the due complements of Maiesty and gratitude) broke them all to pieces; lest if by mishap, any of his seruants doing the like, might stirre him to an intemperate choller.
This Country fell into the hands of Philip of Macedon, by a strife between two brothers for the kingdome, who after many acts of hostility, at last appealed to this Philip; and he making his best advantage out of their disagreement, seazed on it to his own vse.
The chiefe Townes are Sestos on the Hellespont, iust ouer against Abydos of Asia; places famous for the loue of Hero and Leandor.Maginus. 2 Abdera the birth-place of Democritus, who spent his life in laughing. 3 Po^idea, of old a colonie of the Athenians, from whom it revolted, and submitted to Corinth. But the people of Athens not enduring this affront, beleagured it, and after a two yeares siege by composition, took it; hauing spent in its recouery two thousand talents.Plutarch. 4 Cardia seated in the Thracian Chersonese, which being a Peninsula, a butting iust ouer against Troas in Asia side, is now called St Georges arme. This Cardia is seated on the Westerne side of it, opposite to the Ile of Lemnos; and was the birth-place of Eumenes, who being a poore Ca^riers son, attained to such ability in the art of warre: that after the death of Alexander the Great, vnder whom he serued, he seazed on the prouinces of Cappadocia and Paphlagonia: and

siding (though a stranger to Macedon) with Olympias and the blood royall, against the Greeke Captaines; vanquished and slew Craterus, and diuerse times draue Antigonus (afterward Lord of Asia) out of the field: but being by his own souldiers betraied, he was by them deliuered to Antigonus, and by him slain. 5 Lys^^achia on the sea shore,Knoll. ^. built by Lysimachus, who after Alexanders death, layed hand on this Country. 6 Callipolis, situate on the Northerne promontorie of the Chersonesse, the first town that euer the Turkes had in Europe, it being surprised by Solyman, son to Orchanes, Anno 1358. 7 Traianopolis, founded by Traian 8 Adrianople built by Adrian the Emperour, and added to the Empire of the Turkes by Baiazet 1362. It was from the first taking of it, the seat of the Turkish Kings, vntill Mahomet the Great by the disunion of Christendome, forced Constantinople, and transferred the seat to that city. 9 Pera, of old Galata, a Town of the Genowaies: It was taken by Mahomet the Great, Anno 1453: in which yeare he brought such a reckoning before Constantinople, that she not able to discharge her score, forfaited her liberty. 10 Constantinople is seated in a commodious place for an Empire, ouer-looking Europe and Asia; and commanding the Euxine Sea, Propontis, and Hellespont. It is in compasse 18 miles, in which compasse are comprehended 700000 liuing soules: yet certainly it would be more populous, if the plague like a Tertian ague, did not so rage amongst them euery third yeare. It was built by Pausanias a Lacedaemonian Captaine, 663 yeares before Christs appearing in the flesh; and was by him called Bizantium: It was of wonderfull strength at the beginning of the Roman Empire. The wals were of a iust height, euery stone being cemented together with brasse couplets, that the whole wall seemed to be but one entire stone: neither wanted there turrets, bulwarkes, and other fortifications* This City sided with Niger against Severus, and held out a siege of three yeares, against almost all the forces of the world. During this time they endured such want of sustenance, that men meeting in the streetes, would (as it were) with ioint consent, draw and fight, the victor still eating the vanquished: For want of artillery to discharge on the assailants, they flung

at them whole Statua's made of brasse; and the like curious Imagery. Houses they plucked down to get timber for shipping; the hair of their women they cut off, to inch out their tacklings: and hauing thus patched vp a Navy of 500 saile, they lost it all in one tempest. When they had yeelded, the Conqueror hauing put to the sword the chief of the Nobles, and giuen the rest as a spoyle to the souldiers, dismantled the Town, and left it almost in rubbish: yet there appeared such signes of beauty and strength in the very ruines, V^ mireris an eorum quip^imi extruxerunt, vel horum qui deinceps sunt demoliti, vires sint praestantiores. Afterwards it was reedified by Constantine the Great, who made it the seat of his Empire, and thus named it, Anno 315. He adorned also this City with magnificent buildings, with curious statues, and the like ornaments: which he hither transported from Rome: which City he spoyled of more ancient and costly monuments, then any twenty of his predecessours had brought thither. At this day the chief buildings are the Turkes Seraglio, and the Temple of Saint Sophia, which as they differ not much in place and situation,Sands. so as little in magnificence and state. The Temple of St Sophia, was, if not built, yet reedified by the Emperour Iustinian. It is built of an ovall forme, surrounded with pillars of admirable workmanship, adorned with spacious and beautifull galleries, roofed all ouer with Mosaique worke, and vaulted vnderneath very strongly for the fabrick, and pleasing for the eye. The doores are very curiously wrought, and plated; one of which by the superstitious people is thought to haue bin made of the planks of Noahs Arke: and yet this Temple is litle more then the Chancell of the ancient Church, which contained in length 260 foot, and 180 in height; and to our Saint Pauls in London, may seeme for the bignes to haue bin but a chappell of ease. It is now a Turkish Mosquo, and ioyneth close to the Seraglio, which is diuided from the rest of the City by a lofty wall 3 miles in circuit. It was first built by the Emperour Iustinus, and hath bin by the Ottomans much enlarged; the buildings yeelding to those of France, and Italy, for contriuement: but farre surpassing them for cost and curiousnesse. It conteineth 3 Courts one within the other, very pleasing both for exercise and recreation.


The Constantinopolitan Emperours.
310
1 Constantinus. M. 31
341
2 Constans 14
355
3 Constantius

4 Iulianus Apostata.

5 Iovinianus.
368
6 Valentinian 12
368
6 Valens 12
380
7 Gratianus 3
380
7 Valentin II 3
383
8 Theodosius, he diuided the Empire twixt Honorius, and
399
9 Arcadius his sons.
412
10 Theod^sius II 42
454
11 Martianus 7
461
12 Leo 17
478
13 Zeno 17
494
14 Anastasius, in whose time Constantinople suffered great harme by the Scythians: till Proclus a famous Mathematician, like another Archimedes, with artificiall Glasses did fire 3000 of their Gallies.
521
15 Iustinus 7
528
16 Iustinianus 38
566
17 Fl. Val. Iustinus 12
577
18 Tib. Constantinus 7
584
19 Mauritius 20
604
20 Phocas, who made the Bishops of Rome Popes, and heads of the Church.
611
21 Heraclius 30
641
22 Constantinus 1
642
23 Constans 27
670
24 Constant. Pogon. 17
687
25 Iustinianus II 10
697
26 Leontius 3
700
27 Absimarus 7
713
28 Philippus Bard 2
715
29 Anastasius II 2
717
30 Theodosius 1
718
31 Leo Isauricus. In his time Caliph Zulciman besieged Constantinople, the space of 3 yeares: and when by cold and famine, 300000 of them were slaine, they desisted. At this siege was that fire invented, which we for the violence of it, call wild fire, and the Latines, because the Greeks were the Authors of it, Graecus ignis: by which the Saracen ships were not a little molested.
741
32 Constantinus Copronymus 35
777
33 Leo IV. 5
782
34 Irene, in whose time the Empire was diuided into the East and the West. For the Popes knowing their greatnes to grow out of the ruines of the temporall power, committed the Empire of the West vnto the French Princes; whereby the Greeke Emperours became much weakned; and the French being the Popes creatures, were in tract of

time at their devotion. When Fredericke Barbarossa was by Pope Alexander 3d pronounced non-Emperour Emanuel of Constantinople sued for a re-vnion of the Empires: but the crafty Pope returned this answere, Non licere illi ea coniu^gere, quae maiores eius de industria disi^nxerunt; Let no man presume to ioyne, what the god of Rome, the Pope, hath put asunder.
803
35 Nicephorus 9
812
36 Mich. Curoplates 2
814
37 Leo Armenus 8
821
38 Mich. Ba^bus 9
830
39 Theophilus 15
845
40 Michael III 24
869
41 Basilius Macedo 17
886
42 Leo Phil^sophus 17
904
43 Alexander 2
906
44 Constantinus 39
945
45 Romanus 16
961
46 Niceph. Phocas 10
971
47 Ioan. Zimisces 6
977
48 Basil^us Porphyr.
1027
49 Constantinus 3
1030
50 Romanus Arg. 5
1035
51 Michael Paph. 7
1042
52 Michael Calaph.

53 Zoe.

54 Constant. Mon. 12

55 Theodora.

56 Mich Stratioticus.
1059
57 Isacius Comnen. 4
1063
58 Co^st. Ducas 7
1071
59 Roman. Diog 4
1075
60 Mich. Parapinat. 6
1081
61 Niceph. Botoniates
1084
62 Alexius Comn. 33
1117
63 Calo Iohannes 25
1141
64 Manuel Comn. 38
1180
65 Alexius Comn. 3
1183
66 Andronicus Com. 2
118^
67 Isacius Angelus 16

68 Alexius Ang.

69 Alexius Iunior, the sonne of Isaacus Angelus; who being vniustly thrust out of his Empire by his Vncle Alexius,Turk. hist. fled to Philip the Westerne Emperour his father-in-law; who so preuailed with Pope Innocent 3d, that the Army prepared for the Holy land, was sent into Greece to restore young Alexius. Vpon approach of this Army, Alexius the vsurper fled; Alexius the true Prince is seated in the Throne; and not long after is slain by Alexius Ducas. To revenge this villany* the La^^nes assault and winne Constantinople; they create Baldwin Earle of Flanders Emperour; and allot to the Genoys, Pera; to the Venetians many Townes in Morea, with many Ilands in the Sea; and to other associats, other portions*
1200
70 Baldwin 2
1202
71 Henry 13
1215
72 Peter 5
1220
73 Robert 7
1227
74 Baldwin II. 33. during whose life, the Grecians recouered their Empire, by the valour and fortune of Michael Paleologus; when it had bin in possession of the Latines 60 yeares
1260
75 Michael Paleologus 35
1295
76 Andronicus Paleologus 2^
1325
77 Andronicus Iunior 29
1354
78 Iohn Palcologus 31
1387
79 Emanuel Paleologus 34
1421
80 Iohn Paleologus 23
1444
81 Constantinus Paleologus, in whose time the famous City and Empire of Constantinople was taken by Mahomet the Great 1453. Concerning this Empire wee may obserue some fatall contrarieties in one and the same name: as first Philip the father of Alexander, laid the first foundation of the Macedonian Monarchie; and Philip the father of Perse^s r^ined it. Secondly, Baldwin was the first, and Baldwin the last Emperour of the Latines, in Constantinople. Thirdly, this town was built by a Constantine, the son of a Helena, a Gregory being Patriarch; and was lost by a Constantine, the sonne of a Helena, a Gregory being also Patriarch. And fourthly, the Turkes haue a prophecie, that as it was wonne by a Mahomet, so it shal be lost by a Mahomet. So Augustus was the first established Emperour of Rome, and Augustulus the last: Darius the sonne of Histaspes the restorer, and Darius the sonne of A^samis the ouerthrower o^ the Persian Monarchie. A like note I shall anon tell you of Hierusalem, in the mean time I will present you with a fatall obseruation on this letter H, as I find it thus versed in Albions England.
Not superstitiously I speake, but H this letter still,Hath bin obserued ominous to Englands good or ill.First Hercules, Hesion^, and Hele^ were the causeOf warre to Troy; Aeneas seed becomming so outlawes.Humbar the Hunn with forrein armes did first the Brutes invade.Helen to Romes imperiall Throne, the British Crowne conveide.Hengist and Horsus first did plant the Saxons in this Ile,Hungar and Hubba first brought Danes that swayed here long while.At Harold had the Saxon end; at Hardie Cnute, the Dane;Henries the first and second did restore the English raigne.Fourth Henrie first for Lancaster did Englands Crowne obtaine.Seauenth Henrie, jarring Lancaster and Yorke, vnites in peace,Henry the eight did happily Romes irreligion cease.
A strange and ominous letter; euery mutation in our state being as it were vshered in by it.

What were the revenues of this Empire since the diuision of it into the East and West, I could neuer yet learne. That they were exceeding great, may appeare by three circumstances. 1 Zonaras reporteth that the Emperour Basilius had in his treasury 200000 talents of gold, besides infinite heapes of siluer and other moneyes. 2ly Lipsius relateth how Beniamin a Iew, in his discourse of Europe, saith that the customes due to the Emperor, out of the victuals and merchandise sold at Constantinople onely, did amount to 20000 Crownes daily. 3ly we find that at the sacke of Constantinople, there was found an invaluable masse of gold, siluer plate, and Iewels, besides that which was hid in the earth. For so the couetous Citizens chose rather to imploy their wealth, then afford any part of it to the Emperour, who with teares in his eyes, went from doore to doore to beg or borrow money, wherewith he might wage more souldiers for the defence of the Town.
The Armes of the Empire are Mars, a crosse Sol, betweene foure Greek Beta's of the second; the foure Beta's signifying, (as Bodin saith) (...).
Expectation may perchance wait here, for a historicall relation of the nature of the Turkes; their customes, forces, policies, originall, and proceedings: the discourse whereof we will de^erre till we come to Turcomania, a Prouince of Armenia, fro^ whence this populous Nation first made their inundations; like to some vnresistable torrent, into Persia, and the other parts of the World, now subiect vnto their imperious fury. And though the Peninsula, called Tauri^a Chersonesus, or Tartaria Precopensis*

be within the bounds of Europe: yet we wil deferre the description of it, till we come to speak in generall of the Tartars; and will now speedily saile about the Grecian Seas, and discouer their Ilands.
Thus much of Greece.



THE GRECIAN ILES.
HAuing discoursed of the Continent, and its particular kingdomes; we will say somewhat also of the Sea, and its particular Iles: which lye dispersed either in the Grecian, 2 Cretan, 3 Ionian, 4 Adriatique, 5 Mediterranean, 6 Brittish, or 7 Northerne Seas; and first of such as are about the coasts of Greece.
The first Sea which offreth it self vnto vs, is Palus Maeotis, so called of the Maeotae, who formerly inhabited about the banks of it. It is nourisht by the riuer Phasis, Tanais, and infinit others, and aboundeth with a kind of fish, which the ancients called Maeotides. The present name of this Sea, is Mar di la Tana, and hath in it no Iland of note. Hence the Sea going Southward, is brought into a narrow streight, called Bosphorus Cimmerius, from the Cimmerij who here dwelt: of no great bredth, in that oxen haue swomme ouer it, and in length about 27 miles. This streight openeth into Pontus Euxinus.
Pontus Euxinus is in compasse 2700 miles,Boterus. and was first called (...), from the inhospitablenesse of the neighbouring people, which being brought to some conformity, caused the sea to be called (...). It is now called Mare Maggiore for its greatnes: and the Blacke Sea, because of the darke mists thence arising. Others not improbably affirme, that it is called the Blacke sea, from the dangerous and black shipwrackes here happening: For it is a very dangerous shore, full of rocks and sands: and for this cause there is on the top of an high towre, a lantherne, in which there is a great panne full of pitch, rozen, tallow, and the like, in dark nights continually burning, to giue warning to marriners, how neere they approach the shore. This Sea being the biggest of all these parts, gaue occasion to them which knew no bigger, to call all Sea a by the name of Pontus, as

Ovid, Omnia pontus erant; deerant quoque littora ponto: and in another place of the same Poet, --Nil nisi pontus and aer; a better reason doubtlesse of the name, then that of the Etymologists, Pontus quia ponte caret. Of this sea the chiefe Iles are 1 Thinnius, and Erithinnus, little famous.
Strabo.The Sea bending Southward, is coarctated into narrow bounds, not being fully a mile broad; and called Thracius Bosphorus: Thracius for its site nigh Thrace; and Bosphorus for that Oxen haue swomme ouer it. It hath no Iland worth naming.
This straight hauing continued 20 miles in length, openeth it selfe into the Propontis 330 miles in compasse, now called Mare di Marmora, from the Iland Marmora: which formerly called Proconesus, hath for its abundance of Marble, purchased this new name.
The Sea hauing gathered hir waters into a lesser Channell, is called Hellespont; from Helle, daughter to Athamas King of Thebes, who was here drowned. Ouer thi^ straight, Xerxes did make a bridge of boats to passe into Greece; which when a suddain tempest had shrewdly battered, he caused the Sea to be beaten with 300 stripes, and cast a paire of fetters into it, to make it know to whom it was subiect.Herodotus. Xerxes in this expedition wafted ouer an Army consisting of two millions and 164610 fighting men, in no lesse then 2208 bottomes of all so^ts. When all the Persians soothed the King in the vnconquerablenesse of his forces, Artabanus told him, that he feared no enemies but the Sea and the Earth; the one yeelding no safe harbour for such a Navie; the other not yeelding sufficient sustenance for so multitudinous an Armie. His returne ouer this Hellespont was as deiected, as his passage magnificent; his fleet was broken by the valour of the Greekes, and the fury of the sea; so that for his more speedy flight, he was compelled to make vse of a poore fisher boat. Neither yet was his passage secure: the boat being ouer-burdened, had sunke all, if the Persians by casting away themselues, had not saued the life of their King: The losse of which noble spirits so vexed him, that hauing giuen the Steeresm^n a golden Coronet for preseruing his own life, he commanded him to execution, as a coauthor of the death of his seruants.

It is now called the castles, or the sea of the two castles; which two castles stand one on Europe, the other on Asia side; in the same places where once stood Sestos and Abydos. These castles are exceeding well built, and abundantly furnished with munition. They search and examine all shippes that passe that way: they receiue the Grand Signieurs customes; and are in effect the principall strength of Constantinople. At these castles all shippes must stay three dayes; to the end, that if any slaue be runne away from his master, or theeues haue stollen any thing, they may be in that space pursued and apprehended. In this Hellespont is the Iland Tenedos, on Asia side. It is in compasse ten miles, and was so called from one Tenes, who abhorring the lasciuious intreaties of his mother, was by her command cast into the Sea, fast locked in a Chest; and here most miraculously deliuered, as Strabo writeth:
Insula diues opum, Priami dum regna manebant.An Iland rich, full of delight,When Priams kingdome stood vpright.
Hellespont after a fourty miles course, expatiateth its waters in the Aegaean Sea; so called either from Aegaeus the father of Theseus, who misdoubting his sonnes safe returne from the Minotaure of Crete, here drowned himselfe: or 2ly from Aege once a principall City in the prime Iland Euboea; or 3ly because that the Ilands lie scattered vp and down like the leapes of a wanton Goate, in Greek called (...).
The chiefe Ilands are 1 Samothracia. 2 Lemnos. 3 Lesbos. 4 Chris. 5 Euboen 6 Scyros. 7 Salamis. 8 the Sporades, and 9 the Cyclades.

1 SAMOTHRACIA.
SAMOTHRACIA is a small Iland,Strabo. and little famous: only proud in this, that Pythagoras that diuine Philosopher, and Samo one of the Sybils, were here borne. Here also was Iuno by the Poets fained to haue bin borne, because Iuno allegorically signifieth the Aire, which is here most cleare and pure. The chief town is Samia, beautified with a goodly harbour, but now by the pyrats often infesting these seas, almost left desolate.



2 LEMNOS.
LEMNOS containeth in circuit 100 miles. The chief citty was Hephestia, where Vulcan was adored, who being but a homely brat, was by Iuno cast down hither, and so no maruaile if he haue got a halting. Here is digged the soueraigne minerall against infections, called Terra Lemnia, and Sigillata. The former name proceedeth from the Iland: the latter is in force, because the earth made into little pellets, is sealed with a Turkish Character or signet, and so dispersed ouer Christendome. It was once called also Diospolis from the two chief cities herein, of which the first was Hephestia aboue-named, now altogether decayed: the 2d Lemnos or Myrina, yet continuing, though with no great lustre. The Country is plaine, is compared with the adjacent Ilands, the Westerne parts dry and barren, the East more fat and fruitfull. It containeth in all 75 Villages, inhabited by the Greekes all except three, which are fortified by the Turkes; who being Lords of the whole Iland, call it by a new name, Stalimene.


3 LESBOS.
Strabo.LESBOS on the Asian side, containeth in compasse 168 miles: the South and West parts being but mountainous and barren, the rest leuell and fruitfull. The chiefe cities are Erissus. 2 Methimna, and 3 Mitilene. The former is of little estimation, the two latter took name from the two daughters of Macarios; the elder of which Mitilene was married to Lesbos (the son of Lapithus) of whom the whole Iland took denomination. This town in the Peloponnesian warre,Pezel. in Sleidan. wherein all the States of Greece banded against Athens, revolted from the party of that City, and was by Paches an Athenian Captain, so straitly besieged, that the people submitted to his mercy. Paches sent to the Councell of Athens, to know in what sort he should deal with the vanquisht M^tilenians; who commanded him to put them all to the sword. But on the morrow after, repenting this cruell sentence, they sent a countermand. These later messengers made no stay, but eating with one hand, and towing with the other, they came to Mitilene iust as Paches was reading the former decree. So neere were these miserable people to a fatall and finall

destruction. In the general mutation of soueraignties, this Iland followed the fortune of the Roman and Greeke Emperours;Sands. till Ca^o Iohannes in the yeare 1355, gaue it to Catalusius a Nobleman of Genoa, in dowrie with his sister. His posterity inioyed it* till M^homet the Great seazed on it, Anno 1462. In this Iland were borne Sappho an heroick woman, whose invention was the Sapphick verse, and is therefore called the tenth Muse: 2 Pittacus one of the wise men of Greece; 3 Theophrastus that notable Physitian and Philosopher; 4 Arion, who was so expert on his Harpe, that being cast into the sea, playing on that instrument, a Dolphin took him on his back, and carried him to the shore. And, Alcaeus the successour of Orpheus in the excellencie of Lyricall poesie.


4 CHIOS.
CHIOS 125 miles in circuit, took denomination, as some say,Biddulph. of a certain Nymph called Chious; as others coniecture fro^ (...), nix. At this day this Iland onely beareth that sweet gum, which Apothecaries call mastick, which in the month of Iuly and August, the people force out of the trees, by making with their sharp instruments, deep incisions into the barkes of them; out of which the iuyce dropping, is afterward hardned like to a gumme, and in September following gathered. Others think this Iland to be so named from Chio the chiefe City: the people of which were once Lords of the Sea, maintaining a Navie of 80 shippes. It tooke the name of Chios, in that it was built after the fashion or likenesse of the Greeke letter (...), euen as that part of Egypt, which lieth between the two extreme channels of Nilus, is called Delta; because it resembleth that letter reversed. This town is one of the 7 which contended for Homers birth, whose sepulcher the Chians say, is yet to be seene in an old castle on the hill H^lias. It is now called Sio. In this Iland there are infinite store of partridges, which are of a red colour; They are kept tame, and fed in flocks like geese, in the streetes and greens warths of the villages: some little boy or girle driuing them to field, and with a whistle calling the^ home again. The most excelle^t wines of all Greece are made in this Country, called Vina Chia. The people of this Country were successiuely subiect to the Roman and Greeke Princes, till Andronicus Paleologus gaue them and

their Ile to the Iustinians, a family of Genoa; from whence it was taken by Solyman the Magnificen, on Easter day, 1566.


5 EVBOEA.
EVBOEA is situate on Europe side, ouer against Ch^os. It hath bin knowne by the diuers names of Abantis, Macris, Euboea, now Negropont,Strabo. and is in compasse 365 miles. It is in fertility parallell to Achaia; from which it was once rent by an Earthquake; so that between the Iland and Continent is onely a little Euripus; which ebbeth and floweth seuen times in one day: the reason of which when Aristotle could not finde, it is said that he threw himself into the Sea, with these words: Quia ego non capio te, tu capias me. In this Iland is the Promontory Capareus, where Nauplius the father of Palamedes, placed his false fires, to the destruction of so ma^y Greekes. For vnderstanding how his son Palamedes, whom he deemed to haue beene slain by the hand of Paris, was treacherously circumvented by the policy of Vlysses and Diomedes; he conceiued such a displeasure against the whole hoast of the Grecians, that he intended their generall destructio^. To this end he caused fires to be made on the tops of the most dangerous and vnaccessible rocks in this whole Iland; which the Greekes taking (according to the custome of the time) to haue bin the markes of some safe hauen, made thitherward, and were there miserably cast away, there perishing 200 shippes, and many thousand men. But when Nauplius vnderstood how Diomedes and Vlysses, whose ruine he principally intended, were escaped; he drowned him for very vexation, in this very same place. Palamedes this Na^plius son, is said to haue invented foure of the Greeke letters, viz: (...), to haue first instituted sentinels in an Armie, and to haue bin the inventor of watch-words. The chief cities of Euboea are 1 Chalcis, situate iust against the Continent, to which it was once ioyned by a bridge. This town when it was in the hands of the Kings of Macedon, t^gether with Demetrias in Thessalie, and the castle of Acro-Corinthus, nigh vnto Corinth, were called the setters of Greece; insomuch that when the Roman Senate commanded Philip the father of Perseus to set the Grecians at liberty; the Grecians made answere, that in vaine was their liberty

restored the^, vnlesse these 3 towns were first dismantled. This Chalcis was taken from the Venetians by the Turkes, and toge^her with it the whole Iland, Anno 1451. The second own is Euboea, or Negroponte, 3 Caristia. The principall riuers are Cireus, and Nileus; if a sheepe drink of the former, his wooll turneth white; if of the latter, coale black, as Strabo relateth.


6 SCYROS.
SCYROS is famous for the birth of Neoptolimus, or Pyrrhus; and in that it was the lurking-place of Achilles: For his m^ther being by an Oracle forewarned, that he should be slain in the Troian warre, sent him, now well growne, to Lycomedes King of this Iland; where in womans attire he was brought vp amon^st the Kings daughters, and deemed a maiden, till by the getting of Pyrrhus on Deidamia the Kings daughter, it was prooued to be otherwise; and he by Vlysses was compelled to accompany the other Grecians to the warre.


7 SALAMIS.
SALAMIS is night vnto Megaris, famous for the ouerthrow of the populous Navy of Xerxes,Plutarch. by the Athenians and their confederats. What was the nu^ber of the soldiers and gallies of the Persian side, hath already bin declared. The Grecian fleete consisted of 270 vessels, whereof 127 were rigged and set foorth at the charge of the Athenians only; the rest by the associates. Yet was the admiralty committed to Euribiades ^ Lacedaemonian; the Athenians preferring the maine care of the common safety, before an vnseasonable contention for priority. The Spartans seeing the inequality of forces, intended not to haue hazarded the battail; but with full saile to haue retired to Peloponnesus, into which Country the Persians had made incursions: respecting more the welfare of their own Country yet defensible, then the desperate estate of Attica. This designe was by Themistocles (as carefull for the state of Athens, as they for Sparta) signified to Xerxes: who getting betweene them and home, compelled them to a necessity of fighting: But to his own ruine. For in the conflict, more then 200 of his ships were sunk, and most of the rest taken; the confederats hauing lost of their Navy forty only. Between the Athenians and Megarenses,



were many contentions for this Iland.


8 SPORADES.
The SPORADES so called from (...) Spargo, because they are so scattered and dispersed about the Sea, are in n^mber 12. The princ^pall are 1 Melos a Con^to^, 3 A^^^e, and of these, Melos is of most note,M^ginus, which is now called Mi^o, and took its first name for its abundance of honey. It is in forme round, and containeth 80 miles in circuite. The soyle is fruitfull sufficiently of graine and oyles, deficient only in wine. Here is good store of marble, curiously spotted, and no small store of milstones. Here is also great quantity of pitch and brimstone, and some sulphury or hot springs, good for many diseases.


9 The CYCLADES.
Strabo.The CYCLADES, so called because they lie in a circle round about Delos, are in number 53. They are also called the Ilands of the Arches, because they are in the sea called Archipelago. They stand so close together, that in a cleare day a man may see 20 of them at a time: for which cause it is with good reason accou^ted to be a dangerous place for sailers in a storme. The chiefe of these Cyclades, are 1 Delos quasi (...), signifying apparant; because when all the earth had abiured the receipt of Latona, at the request of Iuno: this Iland then vnder water, was by Iupiter erected aloft, and fixt to receiue her; and in it was she deliuered of Apollo and D^ana.Ovid.
--Erratica DelosErrantem accepit, tunc cum le vis insula nabat:Illic incumbens sub Paelladis arbore palma,Edidit invita, Geminos, Latona, noverca.Vnsettled Delos floating on the waueA little Iland, entertainment gaueTo wandring Laton; spight of Iuno's head,Vnder Minerua's palme-tree brought to bed.
Notable also is this Iland for the temple of Apollo, and a custome neither permitting men to die, or children to be borne in it: but sending sicke men, and great bellied women to Rhena, a small Iland, and not much distant.
Stephanus.2 Samos, where the Tyrant Polystates liu'd, so fortunate, as

he neuer had any mischance. That he therefore might haue some misfortune, he cast a ring which he much esteemed, into the sea; which after he had found in the belly of a fish brought to his table, he was by Orontes a Persian brought to a miserable death: Leauing vs an example, that fortune certaine in nothing but incertainties; like a Bee with a sharpe sting, hath alwayes some misery following a long concarination of felicities.
3 Coos (now Lange) where Hippocrates was borne, who reviued Physick, then almost lost. Here was Aesculapius worshipped, hauing his Temples and Altars,Strabo. as vnto whom this Iland was dedicated. In this Temple stood the picture of Venus naked, as if new rising out of the Sea; made by Apelles, who was borne in this Iland; and who at the drawing thereof assembled all the beautifull women of this Country, comprehending in that one peece all their particular perfections. The chiefe town Coos is inhabited by Turkes onely, the villages by Grecians.
4 Patmos,Sands. where S. Iohn the Diuine did write his Reuelation, being confined hither by Domitian. His hand the Greeke Priests affirme to be reserued in the principall Monasterie hereof; and that the nailes thereof being cut, doe grow againe. The Iland is very harborous, by which meanes onely, the people liue; for the country is of it selfe so barren, that it affoordes nothing almost fit for sustenance.
5 Giaros a little Iland, into which the Romans vsed to banish delinquents: hence that of Iuvenal,
Aude aliquid brevibus Gyaris, vel carcere dignum,Si vis esse aliquid; probitas landatur and alget.If thou intendst to thriue, doe what deseruesShort Gyaros or Giues: prais'd vertue sterues.
These Ilands lye part in Asia, part in Europe, all in the Iear^an Sea; so called from Icarus, who flying from Creet, and not following his father Dedalus directly, was here drowned.
Dum petit infirmis nimium sublimia pennisOv. de trist.Icarus, Icarijs nomina fecit aquis.Whilst Icarus weake wings too high did soare,He fell, and christned the Icarian shoare.
The other Ilands dispersed about the Greekish Seas, and yeelding

nothing worthy of relation, I purposely omit: only this I obserue, that most of the 69 Kings which went with Agamemnon to the siege of Troy, were kings only of these small Ilands; and so I passe to the Ilands in the Cretan seas, the chief of which is Creta. Thus much of the Grecian Ilands.



CRETA.
CRETA is situate in the mouth of the Aegaean Sea, it is in compasse 590 miles, in length 270, in bredth 50 miles.
Ortelius.The soyle is very fruitfull, especially of wines, which we call Muscadels: of which they transport yearely 12000 butts, together with Sugar Candie, Gummes, Hony, Sugar, Oliues, Dates, Apples, Orenges, Lemmons, Raisins, Mellons, Citrons, Pomgranats; yet, as other countries of the like hot nature, it is not a li^le deficient in corne, the most or greatest part of which is yearely brought hither from Peloponnesus.
The Iland is very populous, insomuch that it is thought that vpon any sudden occasion, the Signeurie of Venice can raise in it 60000 men able to beare armes. The people haue formerly bin good sea-faring men; a vertue commaculated with many vices, which they yet retaine; as envy, malice, and lying; to which last they were so addicted, that an horrible lye was termed Cretense mendacium. This fault was aymed at by Epimenides, whose words are cited by Saint Paul to Titus, Chap. 1. Vers. 2.
(...)The Cretans are liers, euill beasts, slow bellies.
To which let me adde this prouerbe, (...); that is, there are three nations whose names beginne with K, worse then other, viz: Cretans, Cappadocians, Cilicians.
The Cretans speake promiscuously the Greeke and Latine tongues, and follow the Greeke and Latine Churches.
The chiefe riuers are Melipotomos, 2 Epici^inus, 3 Scasinus, 4 Catarachus. None of them deep or commodious for shipping; yet for her many harbours, and convenient situation, nigh both to Europe, Africa, and Asia: the great Philosopher termed her The Lady of the Sea. For it is distant from the lesser Asia 100 miles, as many from Peloponnesus; and 150 from Africa; so that it seemeth to be seated in the middle of the Mediterranean,

and that according to Virgil,
Creta Iovis magni medio iacet insula ponto.Ioues birth-place Crete, a (...) l^nd,I'th middle of of the sea doth stand.
By this conveniencie of situation, they became (as we haue said) excelle^t seafaring men; insomuch, that when the people of those times vsed to taxe an vnlikely report, they would say, Cretensis neseit pelagus; it is as improbable, as for a Cretan to be no sailer.
Here are three marueilous things in this Iland. First, it breedeth no venemous wormes, or hurtfull creature. 2 If a woman bite a man any thing hard he will neuer recouer.Quade. 3 They haue an ^earbe called Allimos, which if one chaw in his mouth, he shall feele no hunger that day.
The chiefe Cities of old were Gnossus, where Minos kept his Court. 2 Cydonia. 3. Cortyna, nigh vnto which was the Labyrinth made by Dedalus,Ortelius. to include the Minotaure: which was afterward killed by Theseus, and 4 Aphra. All these haue now resigned priority to Candie the Metropolis, much inhabited by the Venetians. 2 Cunea. 3 Rhetimo, and 4 Sittia.
This Country was once called Hecatompolis, for that it had in it an hundred Cities; after the Creta, quasi Cureta, from the Curetes. Here raigned Saturne father to Iupiter, which was borne here,Strabe. and nursed in the hill Dicte, whence he is sometimes called Dictaeus: here also liued Minos and Radamantus, whose lawes were after in itated in the prime Cities of Greece; and who for their equity on earth, are fained by the Poets to be (with Aeacus) the Iudges in hell. Here liued Strabo the Cosmographer, and the lewdly-lustful^ Pasiphae, who doted on a white Bull, who they say begat on her the Minotaure; Dadalus hauing framed for her an artificial cowe into which she conveied her selfe, and by that meanes obtained her desire. The fable is thus expounded, that Pasiphae was in loue with Taurus, one of Mino^ Secretaries, whose company by the pandarisme of Dadalus she enioying, was deliuered of two sons, one called ^inos, the other Taurus. And wheras it is said, that the Minotaure was slain by Theseus, like enough that the annual tribute of 7 childre^ which the Arthenians paied to Minos, was laid vp in some prison,

Minos, and Taurus being the keepers or Iaylors. As for the action of Pasiphae, I thinke it not altogether impossible to be true; considering how Domitian to verifie the old relation, exhibited the like beastly spectacle in his amphitheatre at Rome. For saith Martial,

Iunctam Pasiphaen Dictaeo, credite, Tauro
Vidim^s; accepit fabula prisca fidem.
Nec se miretur (Caesar) longava vetustas,
Quicquid fama canit, donat arena tibi
The fable's prou'd a truth, our eyes did see
The Cretan Bull sport with Pasiphae:
Triumph not then antiquity; that thing
Our Cirques haue shew'd, which fame did only sing.

This Country was subiected to the Romans by Marcellus, (surnamed for this action) Creticus: and being afterward part of the Greeke Empire, was called Candie, either from the chiefe city, or the white rockes: It was giuen by Baldwin Earle of Flanders, the first Latine Emperour of Constantinople, to Boniface of Montferrat; who sold it Anno 1194, to the Venetians: who notwithstanding all real rebellio^s of the natiues, and threatned invasions of the Turkes, still enioy it. For for the defence of it from a forraine power, they haue furnished the Iland with 78 or 80 Galleyes for the defence of the shores: and haue exceedingly fortified the hauen of Suda, with two strong castles; this hauen being capable of more then 1000 vessels, and therefore meritoriously reputed the doore and entrie into the country. It is reported that the King of Spaine, Philip 2d, did offer vnto the Venetians for this hauen, money more then inough; but it could not be accepted. For though the Spaniard seemed only to intend the retreit and reliefe of his own Navie, when he should vndertake any expedition against the Turke; yet the wise Venetians saw, that by this hauen he might at all times awe, and when he listed, surprise the whole Country. Against the attempts of the natiues, they haue garrison'd Canea with 7 companies of souldiers: Candie with 2000 souldiours, and the lessers cities proportionably; ouer which there is set so streight a guard, that a naturall Cretian is not permitted to enter weaponed into any of them.
The Ilands in this Sea of lesse note, are Claudi. 2 Dio. 3 Aegilia, of which nothing is famous.

Creta containeth

Archbishops 2


Bishops 8


Thus much of the Cretan Ilands.


THE IONIAN ILES.
THe IONIAN sea is so called either from one Ionius,Stephanus. whom Hercules hauing in a fury killed, did here drowne (as Didimus) or from Io^a a region in the extremity of Calabria (as Solinus) or from Io daughter to Inachus (as Lycophron.) The principall Ilands of it are, 1 Cythera. 2 the Strophades. 3 Zacynthias. 4 the Echinades. 5 Cephalenia. 6 Corcyra. 7 Ithaca. 8 Leucadia.

1 CYTHERA.
CITHERA, now called Cerigo, is in compasse 60 miles; and about some 5 miles distant from Cape Malo in Peloponesus.Strabe. It was formerly called Porphyris, from the abundance of marble, whereof the mountaines yeeld good plenty. Defended it is by the rocks in themselues inaccessible, which on all sides environ i^: hauens it hath many, but those small, and difficult to enter. It hath a towne also of the same name with the Iland, in which was the Temple dedicated to Venus, out of which Helena the wife of Menelaus, was willingly rauished by Paris. From the honour done by these Ilanders to Venus, she is called Cytheraea; as in Virgil:

Parce metus Cytheraea, manent immota tuoruns
Fata ^ibi.
D^iue feare fayre Cytherea from thy mind,
Thou thy sonnes fate immoueable shalt find.



2 THE STROPHADES.
The STROPHADES, are two Ilands called now Strivall, lying against Mess^nia;Sands. famous for nothing but the Harpies, which rauenous birds were driuen away by Zethus and Calanus, at the request of Phineus K. of Arcadia. Concerning these Harpies, Alphonso king of Naples vsed to say, that they had left the Strophades and dwelt at Rome. They are inhabited only by

some few Greeke Friers, and in one of them there is a Spring of fresh water, which hath his fountaine in Peloponesus, and passing vnder the Sea ariseth here. The Greeke Priests are called Calo^res qu^si (...),Biddulph* bonus Sacerdos. They are about 30 in nu^ber; they weare long haire, neuer eat flesh, and (but at some seasons of the yeare) seldome fish: ^eeding vsually of hearbs, oliues, oyle, and the like. They never goe out of the Ilands, neither doe they on any occasion permit women to come amongst them. They all labour for their sustenance, some in tillage, some vineyards, some in fishing, so that among very many of them three or foure only can read.


3 ZACINTHVS.
ZACINTHVS or Z^nt is 60 miles in compasse; and distant from Peloponesus 20 miles:Ortelius. it was so called of Zacinthus sonne to Dordanus. The Countrey is wonderfully stoared with oyle, wines, currans, of which last they make yearely 150000 Z^cchines for their owne coffer^: and 18000 Dollars, which they pay for custome to the Signe^ry of Venice.Biddulph. They were a very poore people when the Engl^sh vsed to traffique there first; but now they grow rich and prowd. At our Merchants first frequenting the country, they much maruelled to what end they bought so many currants, and demanded whether they vsed to dye cloathes, or fat hogges with them, for so they themselues did: but now they haue learned a more profitable vse of them. This Iland is much troubled with earthquakes commonly once a weeke; in regard whereof they build their houses very low: and when they perceaue them commi^g, the Priests vse to ring the bells to stir^e the people to prayers.Sands. They haue a custome here at weddings to invite many young men whom they call Cempeeres, of which euery one giueth to the bride a ring; which done, it is an abuse as de^estable a incest, to accompany her in any carnall kinde: wherefore t^ey choose such for Compe^res, as haue formerly beene suspected of too much familiarity. The chiefe Citty is called also Zant not very large, the streets vneven and rugged, and the buildings by reason of the often earthquakes very low. On the East side of it, on a round steep mountaine standeth a well ga^ri^ond and munitioned castle, which

commandeth not the Citty and the harbour only, but a great part of the sea also. Vpon the wall there continually standeth a watchman to descry what shipping approacheth and hangeth out as many flagges as he discouereth vessells. Over the Praetorian hall dore of this Citty these verses are inscribed.

Hiclocus, 1 odit, 2 amat, 3 punit, 4 consorvat, 5 honorat:
1 Nequiti^m, 2 pacem, 3 crimina, 4 iura, 5 probos.
This place doth, 1 hate, 2 loue, 3 punish, 4 keepe, 5 requite:
1 Voluptuous riot, 2 peace, 3 crimes, 4 lawes, 5 th'vpright.



4 THE ECHINADES.
The ECHINADES are certain little Ilands, or rather great rocks now called Curzolari; famous for nothing but the battle of Lepanto, fought nigh the^. They stand iust against the mouth of the riuer A^helous.

Turbidus obiectas Achelous Echinadas exit.
Fierce Achelous with the Sea is mixt
Where the Echinades great rocks are fixt.

These Ilands are in number fiue, and are by the Poets fained to haue been so many N^iades or sea Nimphes, whom Achelous the riuer-God vpon some displeasure, metamorphosed into these rockie Ilands. But the truth is they were caused by the dur^ and mud, which by this riuer carried a little into the sea, there setled together. Alluding to which Ovid bringeth in the riuer Achelous thus speaking.

--fluctus nost^rque marisque
Continu^m deduxit humum, pariterque revell^t
In totidem, medij^ (quod cernis) Echinadas, vndis.
The fury of the ^ea waues and mine owne
Continuall heapes of earth and mud drew downe:
Which parted by the inter-running seas,
Made (as thou seest) those fiue Echinades.



5 CEPHALENIA.
CEPHALENIA lyeth ouer against Acarnania, and is in compasse 166 miles. It contained 200 townes, the chiefe being the hauens of A^gastuli, 2 Gu^scardo, and 3 Nollo: the chiefe co^modities are wheat, hony, currants, powder for the dying of Scarlet, oyle, wo^ll, Turkies, etc. This Iland was first called

Melena, then Teleboas, whose king Pterelaus was by Amphitrion a Theban Captaine killed in battaile, and the Iland made subiect to Thebes:Strabo. during the stay of Amphitrion two things hapned in Greece, 1 Iupiter got his wife Alomena with child of Hercules. 2ly, Cephalus a noble man of Athens being in hunting, killed his wife Procris with an arrow, insteed of his prey, whervpon he fled to Amphitrion newly victorious ouer the Teloboans; who pitteing his case, made him gouernour of this Iland, called since Cephalenia, after his name.


6 CORCYRA.
CORCYRA (now Corfu, formerly Phaeacia) so called from a virgin of that name, whom Neptune here deflowred; is distant 12 miles from Epirus. It stretcheth East and West in forme of a bow, and in length is 54 miles, 24 in breadth; and is seated co^;veniently for the Venetians, as being the center of their Lordship by sea. The chiefe Citty is Corfu, which the Turks by their repulses haue found impregnable. For it is situate at the foot of a mountaine, on the topp of which are built two vnaccessible fortresses, as being strongly fenced with a naturall rocke. The one of these is called The old fortresse; the other The new; both iustly esteemed the chiefe bulwarkes of Venice, whose trade and pote^cy would soone fayle, were these forts in any others hands. For this cause the two Captaines are sworne before the Senate of Venice, neuer to haue mutuall conuerse or intelligence one with the other, either in word or writing: least by the corruption of one Captaine, the other might perhaps be wrought from his allegeance. Neither is their command there for more then two yeares, their commission then terminating, and new successours being sent them. 2 Pagropoli. 3 Castello St Angelo. It is very fruitfull in Wax; Honny, Wine, Oyle, etc. Here raigned Alcinous whose gardens are so memorised by the Poets.
Ovid. Met.Quid bifera Alcinoi referam pomaria? vosqueQui nunquam vacui prodistis in aethera rami?Why should I name Alcinous fertile ground?And trees which neuer without fruit were found?
This Alcinous was he who so courteously receaued Vlysses after his shipwracke.



7 ITHACA.
ITHACA now called Valde Campare, lyeth on the Northe^st of Capha^ema;Sandi. being in compasse 50 miles; famous for the bath of Vlysses, the sonne of Laertes:
Effugimus scopulos Ithacae, Laertia regna:Et terram altricom s^ui execramur VlissisFrom the Ithacan rocks, Laertes land we fled,And curs'd the soyle which dire Vlisses bred.
This Iland was also called Dullichium (or else there was an Iland of this name nigh vnto Ithaca, whereof Vlisses was also King) from whence Vlisses is oftentimes named Dullichius heros among the Poets; and Dullichius vertex in Ovid is put for Vlisses head.

Sed neque Dullichius sub Achillis casside vertex
Ponde a tanta feret.
Achilles helme's a waight too great I knowe
Fow weake Vlisses pate to vndergoe.



8 LEVCADIA.
LEVCADIA (now S. Maure) was so called of the white rockes betweene it and Cephalenia. On these rocks stood a temple of Apollo,Strabo. from whence by leaping into the sea, such as vnfortunatly loued were cured of that fury. The chiefe citty is St Maure, inhabited by Iewes for the most part, to whom Baiazel the 2d gaue it, after their expulsion from Spaine. This country was once ioyned to the continent.
Leucada continuam vetere^ habuere coloni,Ovid. Met.Nunc freta circumeunt.Leucas in former times ioyn'd to the land,Environ'd round with waters now doth stand.
These Ilands followed the Roman and Greeke Empires, and was by Baldwin the first Latine Emperour of Constantinople, allotted to the Vo^ctians; who haue euer since defended them; only this Leucadia being lost to the Turkes.

Thus much of the Ionian Iles.





THE ADRIATIQVE ILES.
THe ADRIATIQVE Sea extending 700 miles in length, and 140 in bredth; was so called of Adria, once a famous sea Town on the mouth of ^ridanus or Poe. It was accounted a sea wonderfull vnsafe and tempestuous, as appeared by the Improbo vacundior Adria, in Horace, by the Minax Adri^^cum, in Catullas, and the ventosi tumor Adria, in Seneca's Thi^stes. When the Empresse Helena found the Crosse on which our Sauiour died; she made of one of the three nailes by which his Body was fastned, a reines for her sonne Constantines horse: of the second, the rest of his helmet; the third she cast into this sea; since which time (as Platina in the life of Pope Silu^ster reporteth out of S Ambrose) it hath bin very calme and quiet. The Venetians are the Lords of this Sea, to whom as the Duke is espoused euery Ascention day; so it is baptized by the Bishop of Zant, euery Epiphany day. The Ilands of this Sea are neither many, great, nor famous; the most pleasant are 1 the Absirtides, so called by the men of Cholcis, whom king A^^as had sent to pursue the Argonauts, in memory of Absirtus their kings sonne, whom Medea his sister had torne in pieces, before she tooke ship to fly away with Iason. 2 Cherso fruitfull in cattell. 3 Weggia, abounding in wood, wines, and pul^e; it is 30 miles in compasse. 4 Grissa or Pago glorying in her salt-pits, and being second for bignes in all this sea, as containing in compasse 100 miles. 5 Lesina the biggest absolutely of all the Adriati^ue in compasse 150 miles, an exceeding fertile place for the quantity. The chiefe town Lesina is vnwalled, and of no great beauty or bignes; but defended by a strong fortresse which command^th both the harbour, and the vessels in it. 6 Curzola, called anciently Corcyra Nigra, is sufficiently fruitfull, the most populous of all the rest, and 90 miles round. This Iland Anno 1571, a little after the taking of Cyprus, and before the battaile of Lepanto, was invaded by Vluz Ali,Knolles. with a Navy of 60 Galleyes; for scare of whom, Co^tar^nus the Venetian Gouernour, abandoned Curzola the chiefe towne hereof, together with all the townesmen and souldiours. The silly women thus forsaken, and preferring death before dishonour, defended the walls, and with stone, fire, and such weapons as they had, beat off the enemie,

till a violent tempest sorced the Turkish Generall to remoue his galleyes to a place of more safety. 7 Zara. 8 Brazzia, and 9 Lissa, three small Iles, all which the Turkes spoyled, and carried thence 1000 Christian captiues, in their retreit from Curzola. 10 Arbe the onely hauenlesse Iland in the whole Sea, which defect is recompensed with its naturall pleasantnesse: which so entised certaine dissolute rouers of Austria, that they seazed on it; and had (...) like to pluck a heauy warre between the Archduke and the Venetians; if the King of Spaine had not made a pacification. The other Ilands I willingly omit, and will haste to the Mediterranean.
Thus much of the Adriatique Iles.


THE MEDITERRANEAN ILES.
THe MEDITERRANEAN Sea, so called for that it hath its course in the middle of the earth; is called in some places Mare Tyrrhenum, in others Ligusticum, in some Siculum, in others Sardoum, etc: and euen as the Camelion applyeth it selfe to the colours of the nighest adiacent body; so this Sea taketh its denomination from the neerest adiacent shore. These Seas are called also by sundry moderne Writers in our neighbour (...)* the Leuant seas, or the seas of Leuant: because in respect of France, Spain* Germany, Brittaine, etc: they are toward the ^ast; Leuant in the French language signifying the sunne-rising. The chiefest Ilands are the greater or lesser: the greater are 1 ^icil^e. 2 ^alta 3 Corsica. 4 Sardinia. 5 the Baleares. The less^ shall be spoken of in their due time.

1 SICILIA.
SICILIE environed round with the sea, hath in compasse 7^^ m^les; and was supposed to haue bin ioyned to Italy, and d^uided by the fury of the waues. The narrow seas betweene this and Italy, being not aboue a mile and a halfe broad, are by Florus called,Sands. fabulosis infa^ne mo^stris fretum, from Scylla and Charibilis, of whom so many fabulous things are reported by (...), Chari^dis is a gulfe or whirle-pit on Sicily side, which violently attracting all vessels that come too nigh it, deuoureth

them, and casteth vp their wrecks at the shore of Tauronia, not farre from Cat^na. Opposite to this in Italy standeth the dangerous rocko Scylla,Strabo. it the foot of which, many little rockes shoot out, on which the waters strongly beating, make that noyse which the Poets faine to be the barking of dogges. The passage between these two being to vnskilfull marriners exceeding periltous, gaue beginning to the prouerbe,
Incidit in Scyllam cupiens vitare Charibdim,Who seekes Charibdis for to shunne,Doth oftentimes on Scylla runne.
It is situate vnder the 4 Climate, the longest day being 13 houres and a halfe. The first name was Trinacria, for that being triangular, it butteth into the Sea with 3 Promontories, (...) 1 Pelorus (or Cape del Poro) North: 2 Pachinus (or C. Pas^^^^) West: 3 Lilibaeum (or C. Boij, or C. Coro) South. This Lilibaeum looked toward Carthage, and was distant from the shore of Africke 180 miles. Strabo relateth, that a man of a very sharp and strong sight (some Linceus I warrant you) getting vp into a watch-towre that stood on this Cape, descried a fleete setting sayle out of the hauen of Carthage, and told the Lilibitanians their bignes and number. That this is true, I dare not say; for besides the vnlikelyhood of kenning at so great a d^stance, we are taught by Philosophy, that the sea being of an orbicula^ forme, swelleth it selfe into the fashion of a round to^^re or h^ll, t^ll it put bound to the eye-sight. From these three corners, this country was (as we haue said) called Trinacris or Trinacria, according to that of Ovid,
Terra tribus scopulis vastum procurrit in aeq^or,Trinacris a positu nomen adepta lo^^^.An Iland with three corners braues the maine,And thence the name Trinacria doth gaine.
The first inhabitants that we find to haue dwelt in this counttry, are the huge Grants so often mentioned in the Odysses of the diuine poet Homer, called Lestrigones and Cyclopes; of which last rank was the so much (...) Poliphemus, that with such humanity entertained Vlyss^s and his companions. These were afterwards rooted out by the Sicani a people of Spaine, who called

it Sicania. As for the name of Sicilia, some deriue it from Sicileus a supposed king of Spaine, who is fabled to haue conquered this country: but the truth is, it came from the Siculi, who being by Evander and his Arcadians, driuen out of Latium, came into this Iland: to which, hauing mastred the Sicani, they left their name. In succeeding ages there came hither diuers Colonies of the Greekes, who planting themselues only in the coast-parts of the country; altered not the name, by which at their comming they found it called.
The people are ingenious,Orteliu^. eloquent and pleasant, but withall wondrous inconstant, and very talkatiue, whence rose the prouerbe, Gerrae Siculae. They follow the Religion of the Romish Church, and vse the Italian language, but very much impaired and fallen from his true elegancy; as hauing commixture of the Greeke, Saracen, Norman, Spanish, and French tongues. The totall number of them is about one million and 300000 soules.
The soile is incredibly fruitful in Wine, Oyle, Hony, Saffron, Sugar, Salt, in Minerals of Gold, Siluer, and Allom, hauing the gemmes of Acate, and Emralds; with such abundance of all sorts of graine, that it was of old called the Granarie of the Roman Empire; and now furnisheth Italy, Malta, with the adjacent Ilands, Spaine, and Barbary, with part of her superfluities. In this Country is the hill Hybla, so famous for bees and honey, and the hill Aetna, now called Montgiball, which continually sendeth forth continuall flames of fire, to the astonishment of a^l beholders. Into this fiery Fornace the Philosopher Empedocles cast himselfe, that he might be reputed a God.
--Deus immortalis haberiDum cupit Empedocles, ardentem fervidus AetnamInsiluit--Empedocles to be a God desires,And casts him selfe into th'Aetnean fires.
The reason of these fires is the abundance of sulphure and brimstone, contained in the bosome of this hill; which is blowne by the winde, driuing in at the chappes of the earth, as by a paire of bellowes: through which chinkes also, there is continually more fuell added to the fire, the very water administring an operatiue

vertue to the combust^ble matter; as we see that water cast on coales in the Smiths forge, doth make them burne more ardently. The reason of this slaine is thus set down by Ovid.

Ista b^tumineae rapiunt incendi^ vires,
Luteaque exiguis a^d^scunt sulphura flammis:
Atque ubi terra cibos alimentaque de^ ita flammae
Non dabit, absumptis, per longum viribus aev^m;
Nat^raeque suum nutrimen deerit edaci:
Non seret Aetna famem, desertaque d^seret ignes.
A rozen mould these fiery flames begin,
And ^l^yie brimstone aides the fire within.
Yet when the slymie soyle consumed, shall
Yeeld no more food to feed the fire withall:
And Nature shall restraine her nourishment,
The flame shall cease, hating all famishment.

Vnder this hill some Poets faine the Giant Enceladus to haue bin buried; whose hot breath fireth the mountaine, lying on his face: Others suppose it to be the shoppe of Vulcan, and the Cyclops: the grosse Papists hold therein to be Purgatory.
The chiefe riuers are 1 Sanso. 2 Taretta. 3 Acatius, famous for its precious stones, and 4 Arethusa, memorized by the Poets, into which the Grecian riuer Alpheus, hauing received 140 lesser streames, and making his way vnder so great a part of the Sea, is thought to arise here: as Strabo and Seneca affirme, and sufficiently proue by the seuerall instances of a wooden dish or cup lost in the riuer Alpheus, and found rising vp in this riuer; and by the leaues of certaine trees growing on the bankes of that Greeke riuer, and swimming on this in great abundance, there being none of these trees in all Sicily. Dicitur Alpb^m, (saith Mela) se non consociare pelago, sed subter maria, torrasque depressus, huc agere alveum, atque, hic se rursus extollere.
Sands.This Iland is famous for the worthy Schollers she once produced, viz: Aeschilus, the first Tragedian of fame, who being bald through age, once w^lked in the fields, where by chance an Eagle taking his bald pate for a white rock, let a shell fish f^ll on it, of that bignesse, that it beat out his braines. 2 Diodorus Siculus that famous historian, 3 Empedocles the first inventer of

Rhetoricke, and his fellow Gorgias. 4 Euclide, the tex^u^ry Geometrician, who taught in Megaris. 5 Archimed^s a m^st wor^^y Mathematician,Plutarch. he was the first author of the Sphere, at which instruments he made one of that art and bignesse, that one standing within, might easily perceiue the seuerall motions of euery celestiall Orbe. He made also diuers mi^itary engines, which in the siege of Syracusa, sorely vexed the Romans, and was at last slain in his study by a common souldier, at the sack of the Town; to the great griefe of the Roman Generall Marcellus. 6 Epicharmus. 7 Theocritus,
Pliny reckoned in this Iland 72 Cities; the chiefe of which were Syracusa, containing in circuit 22 miles, the Metropolis of the whole Iland, and a most strong and flourishing Commonwealth. It was built by Archias of Corinth, who being for an vnnaturall rape committed on a yong Gentleman, banished his Country, together with his friend and companion Miscellus; consulted with the Oracle of Delphos. The Oracle demanded whether they affected rather wealth, or health; to which when Miscellus replyed health, and Archias wealth, the Oracle directed the former to Crotona in Italy; and the latter hither. It contained in it 4 Townes as it were, viz: Ile, Acradin, Neapolis, and Tyche, together with the Fort Hexapyle, commanding all the rest. It was the custome of this Towne, when any of the Nobility began to grow too potent among them, to write his name in an Oliue leafe, which being put into his hand, without any further ceremony, banished him for fiue yeares. This kind of banishment was called the Petal^sme from (...) a lease. 2 Erix, where Venus was worshipped, and called Ericina: 3 Catina, so vexed by Dionysius tyrant of Sicily, 4 Emma, whence Pluto is said to haue stolne Proserpina.Florui. In this town hued Syrus En^us, who stirred vp the slaues of the Roman state, to rebell against their Lords: for hauing broke open the common prisons, and receiued all such as repaired to him, he patched vp an Army of 40000 souldiers, and was after much harme done, vanquished by Rupilius. This warre the Historians call, Bellum servile. The whole Iland is now diuided into 3 parts: 1 Mazara west, whose chiefe cities are 1 Moureal, famous for the Church and

Archbishops See: 2 Gorgenti once Agrigentum, where the tyrant Phalaris liued, who tortured Perillus in the brazen Bull, which he made for the destruction and torture of others: wherupon aptly Ovid.
--nec enim lex iustior ulla,Quam necis artifices arte perire sua.Most iust it is a man should be tormented,With that which first his cruell wit invented.
3 Palermo, formerly called Panormus, a colonie of the Phenicians, and now the chiefe citie of Sicily, and the seat of the Spanish Viceroy: situate it is on the West cape of the Iland, ouer-against Sardinia, beautified with large streets, delicate buildings, strong walls, and magnificent Temples. II Vallis de Noto toward the Southeast, in which the chiefe cities are 1 Syracuse on the Sea side, 2 Emma in the midland, of which already: and Leontium on the Sea also, North of Syracusa; with which town it had alwayes warre, either for liberty or priority. And III Mona toward the Northeast, in which the chiefe townes are 1 Nicosia, in the midland: 2 Milaso on the North promontorie: and 3 Messina, iust opposite to Rhezo in Italy, a town whose hauen and entrances are so strongly sconced and bulwarked, that the people let their gates (in derision of the Turkes) stand continually open. It is also an Archbishops See.
After this Iland was once known to the Greekes, there came from all parts of Greece, colonies to inhabite it, as from Athens, Sparta, Corinth, Mesene, Megaris, and the rest: who winning vpon the Natiues, planted themselues in the Country. Here in tract of time was managed a great part of the Peloponnesian warre, the Athenians siding with the Leontines; and the Spartans with the Syracusians: in which the whole power of Athens was broken by sea and land; and their two Captaines, Nicias and Demosthenes, murdred in prison. Famous also was this country of old,Iustine. for the Tyrants Dionysis, the elder and the younger; for Hieron, and Hieronymus, in whose time broke out the first Punique warre, the Sicilians calling in the Romans to expell thence the Carthaginians, which then possessed a great part of the Iland. These Tyrants, especially the last Dionysii, were so

odious, that there were continual execrations powred on them, onely one old woman prayed for the life of the latter: who being asked the cause, made answer, that she knew his Grandfather to haue bin bad; and after by prayers they had obtained his death, his sonne succeeded farre worse then the father: and after their curses had also prevailed on him, came the present Tyrant, worse then either; for whose life she was resolued to pray, l^st after his decease, the Diuell himselfe should come amongst them. After the Tyrants had bin rooted out, and this Iland was conquered by Marcellus; it alwayes followed the fortune of Naples; and together with it (when Manfroy the bastard had forcibly made himself King of these countries) was offered to Richard Earle of Cornewall,Camden. brother to our Henry the 3d, a man of that riches, that he was able to spend for ten yeares, an hundred markes a-day, which according to those times, was no small summe. The conditions by the Pope proposed, were so impossible for the Earle to performe, that his Agent told the Pope, he might as well say to his Master, I giue the Moone, climbe vp, catch it, and take it. The Earle thus refusing it, it was offered to the King his brother, for his second son Edmund, who was invested by the gift of a ring, and in his name the Pope coined money, with the inscription of Aimundus Rex Siciliae. But the King being ouer-burdened by his Barons warres, the Pope hauing sucked no small store of treasure from him; it was in the yeare 1261, giuen vnto Charles Earle of Provence and Aniou, brother to Lewis 10th. Vnder him those Countries jointly continued subject, till the yeare 1281, in which time his competitor Peter of Arragon, promising him to fight a single combat before our king Edward the first, at Burdeaux, fail'd of his word, and in the mean time so contriued it,Hist. of Fr. that at the sound of a bell tolling to prayers, all the Frenchmen in Sicily were cruelly massacred; which exploit masketh now vnder the name of Vespe^i Siculi: Since which time this Iland hath belonged to the house of Arragon.
The revenues of this kingdome are as some say but 800000 only;Bar^. but as others say, a million of Duckats. The Armes are Arragon, two ^lanches argent, charged with as many Eagles

Sable, becked Gules. For Nobility this Iland compareth with Naples, as containing in it
Archbishops 3Princes 7Marquesses 13Vicount 1B^shops 9Du^es 4Earles 14Barons 48


2 MALTA.
Sands.ABout 60 miles distant from Sicil^a is the Iland MALTA, in compasse 60 miles; seated vpon a rock, ouer which the Earth spreadeth in height not aboue three foot; so that it must needes be barren; which defect is supplied by the Sicilian aboundance: yet haue they no small store of Pomgranats, cytrons, orenges, melons, and other excellent fruits. Here is also great aboundance of cotton-wool (Gossypium the Latinists call it) which they sow as we doe corne. The stalke is no bigger then that of wheat, but stronger and tougher, the head round bearded, and hard as a stone, which when it is ripe, breaketh, and is deliuered of a white soft bumbast, mixed with seedes; which they separate with an instrument, selling the wooll, and reseruing their seed for the next haruest. This Iland is in the Scriptures called Molita, and is said to be the place where S. Paul shooke the Viper off his hand. Famous also is it for the Councel held here against Pelagius, by Pope Innocent the first, at which S. Austine was present, and 214 Bishops. The men are of the Africane complexion and language, following the Romish Church; the women faire, but hating company, and going couered. The whole nu^ber of inhabitants are 20000; possessing 60 Villages, and 4 Citties. Namely 1 Valetta, built after the defeat of the Turkes, Anno 1565, and called after the name of Valetta the great Master, who so c^uragiously withstood their fury. 2 The T^wn and Castle of S. Hermes, which the Turkes tooke, though they did not lon^ enioy it. 3 Malta or Melita, so called of the abundance of hony nigh vnto it. 4 La Issula: as also the Forts of S M^chael, and S. Angelo.
This Iland was by the Spaniards taken from the Moores,

and by Charles the fift giuen to the Knights of the Rhoaes, newly expelled thence by Solyman the Magn^ficent, Ao 1^22. These knights are in number 1000; of whom 500 are alwayes (...) resident in the Iland; the other 500 are dispersed through Christendome, at their seuerall Seminaries in France, Spaine, Italy, and Germany: and at any summons are to make their person^ll appearance. These Seminaries (Alberges they call them) are in number seuen, viz: one of France in generall, one of Av^rne, one of Provence, one of Castile, one of Arragon* one of Italy; and one o^ Germanie; ouer euery one of which they haue a Grand Prior, who in the country where he liueth, is of great reputation: An eigth Seminary they had in England, till the suppression of it by Henry the 8th: yet haue they some one or other, to whom they giue the title of Grand Prior of England. Concerning the originall and riches of these Knights, we shall speak when we come into Palestine; now a word or two only of their places, and the election of their great Master. None are admitted into the order, but such as can bring a testimony of their Gentry for six descents; and when the ceremonies of their admission (which are many) are performed* they sweare to defend the Church of Rome, to obey their superiours, to liue vpon the revenues of their order only, and withall to liue chastly. Of these there be 16 of great authority (Counsellers of state we may call them) called, the Great Crosses, out of whom the officers of the order, as the Marshall, the Admirall, the Chancellor, etc: are chosen; and who, together with their Master, punish such as are co^vict of any crime, first by degrading him, 2ly by strangling him, and 3ly by throwing him into the sea. Now when the Great Master is dead, they suffer no vessell to goe out of this Iland, till another be elected, lest the Pope should intrude on their Election, which is performed in this manner. The seuerall Seminaries nominate two knights, and two are also nominated for the English: these 16 from amongst themselues choose 8: these 8 choose a Knight, a Priest, and a Frier servant; and they three, out of the 16 Great Crosses, elect the great Master. The great Master being thus chosen, is stiled though but a Frier, The most illustrious, and most reuerend Prince, the Lord Frier N N:

Great Master of the Hospitall of S. Iohn of Hierusalem, Prince of Malta, Gaules, and Goza: these two last being Ilands lying nigh vnto Malta, the former in compasse 30 miles. Farre different, I assure you,Camden. is this title from that of the first Masters of this order, who called themselues only, Seruants to the poore seruitours of the Hospitall of Hierusalem: or that of the Master of the Templers, who was only entituled, The humble Minister of ^he poore Knights of the Temple.


3 CORSICA.
CORSICA is situate just against (...) in the Ligurian Sea,Maginus. it comprehendeth in length 120 miles; 70 in bredth, and 325 in circuit. It is vnder the fift Clime, the longest day being almost 15 houres. This Iland was first named Cyrnus, 2l^ Teracina, now Corsica, from a woman so named, who following her Cow hither, first discouered it.
It is diuided in Cismontanam, and Vitramontanam. The chiefe riuers of both being G^lo and Travignano.
This Country yeeldeth excellent dogges for game, good Horses, fierce Mastifes, and a beast called Musoli, not found in Europe, excepting this Iland, and Sardinia. They are horned like Rammes, and skinned like Stags; which skin is of such an incredible hardnes, that the beast being cast headlong against a rock, receiues no hurt, but nimbly flies from his enemie to his denne.
The soyle is by reason of the mountains (which euery-where are too thick and barren in it) lesse fruitfull,Mercator. producing corne in lesse plenty; but the best wines, and such as the old Romans well rellished, in good measure. It produceth also oyle, sigges, raisin, and honey; the first three in a mediocrity of goodnes, the last somwhat bitter, and by many deemed vnwholesome. It aboundeth also with allom, box-trees, iron-mines; and the tree called Taxus, whose poisonous berries, though in tast pleasing; are much fed on by the bees, and therfore thought to be the cause of the bitternes of the hony. In some few places also where the riuers haue their currents, especially towards Liguria, it recompenseth by its fertiliy in bearing all manner of graine, the ba^rennesse of the mountaines.
Pliny reckoned in it 34 Cities, or castles rather, the chiefe

whereof at this day are 1 Bastia, seated on the Northeast part of the Country vpon a commodious hauen, where the Genoensian Gouernour hath his residence, and a strong garrison. 2 Nebbium, called by Ptolomy, Chersunum. 3 Mariana, now Morian; 4 Alleria, now Gallera, both Roman Colonies; the last being situate on the Westerne shore of the Iland, iust against Bastia: and 5 Pila. The principall hauens hereof are S. Florence in the Northerne part, in the midst between Morian and Nebbio; and S. Boniface (called by Ptolomy, Portus Syracusanus) iust opposite to it in the South corner: both of good safety, and capable of the greatest vessels.
This Iland, as also its neighbours of Sicilia, and Sardinia, haue bin the tennis-balls of fortune, this being first subiect to the Tyrians; Secondly to the Carthaginians; Thirdly to the Romans; Fourthly to the Saracens. From these the Genowaies conquered it, from them it was taken by the Pisans: but recouered again by the Genowaies, who still enioy it.
The people are churlish, stubborne, poore, vnlearned, and vse a corrupt Italian. They are said to be the progeny of the 52 daughters of king Thespias, who being gotten with childe by Hercules in one night; were by their father put to the mercy of the Sea; which wrought them to this Iland; which they and their posterity peopled, till the comming of the Tyrians.

Here are in this Ile

Archbishop 1


Bishops 7




SARDINIA.
SARDINIA is South from Corsica,Ortelius. from which it is but 7 miles distant. It is in length 180 miles, 90 in bredth, 560 in circuit: it is situate vnder the 4 Climate, the longest day being 14 houres.
It is fertile in respect of Corsica, barren if compared to Sicily; abundant in Corne, deficient in Oyle; well stored with all sorts of cattaile,Hist. of Sp. as plainly appeareth by that plenty of cheese and hides, which are hence sent into Italy, and other places. The horses hereof are hot, headstrong, and hard to be broken, but they

will last long: the bullocks here do naturally amble, so that on them the country peazants vse to ride as familiarly, as they doe in Spaine on mules and asses. Here also is the beast Musoli, which we lately described; of whose skinne carried to Corduba, and there dressed, is ma^e our true Cordovan leather. Finally, here is an hearbe, which if one eat, he shall die with laughter; whence came the prouerb, Risus Sardonicus. The truth of this report, I will not oppugne, though it be by others more probably coniectured, that the hearbe being of a poysonous nature, causeth men to dye with such a convulsion or contraction of their sinewes, that they seeme to grinne or laugh.
The people are small of stature, laborious, giuen to hunting, prone vnto rebellions,Ortelius. wherefore the Spaniard permitteth neither Smith nor Cutler to liue there: yet indifferent peaceable among themselues, and in some measure curteous to strangers. In matters of Religion they are little curious, going to Masse on Sundayes, and Saints dayes; which once done, they fall to dancing in the midst of the Church, singing in the mean time, songs too immodest for an Ale-house. Nay it is thought that their Cleargy it selfe is the most ^ude, ignorant, and illiterate of any people in Christendome. The language they speak, is a corrupt Catalonian: their diet on meats common and grosse^ their apparell in the townes (especially that of the women) gorgeous: that in the villages, base.
It is diuided into two parts, viz: Cape Lugudori towards Corsica, and Cape Cegliari towards ^fricke. Of these, when this Iland was ioyntly vn^er the ^isans and Genowaies; the first, being the least, and withall so mountainous and barren, belonged to Genoa: the last being the larger, and besides, leuell and fruitfull, appertained to Pisa: the inequality of which diuision, caused often discontents and warres between them. The principall cities are Calvaris, built by the Pisans, and situate iust opposite to Africke; inioying a goodly hauen, and much frequented by Merchants, adorned with a beautifull Temple, stately turrets, the seat of the Vice-Roy; and an Ar^hiepiscopal Sec. 2 B^ssa on the West side, an Archbishops residence also. 3 S. P^eparata on Corsica side, and 4 Aqu^lastro on the East side. Here are in diuer^

places of this Iland, the remainders of sundry towres and forts, which the people call Norackes, from Nora, one of the sonnes of Gerion, who (as they thinke) came into this Country, and built the first man^^on in it.
This Iland was first called Ico, then Ichnusa, next Sandaliotes, from the resemblance^t had to the soale of a mans foot: and lastly Sardinia from Sardus, son (as they say) to Hercules. It was first vnder the Iol^tenses: Secondly, from them taken by the Carthaginians: Thirdly, by the Romans: Fourthly, by the Saracens, Anno 807. From these last it was recouered by the Genoys and Pisans: and because they could not agree about their bounds, Boniface the eight putting his finger in another mans pye, gaue it in see to Iames King of Arragon, and his successors; who driuing thence the Genowaies, made themselues absolute Lords of it, Anno 1324. The Spanish Viceroy hath (as we now said) his residence in Caliari, who must of necessity be a Spaniard, vnder whom are two Deputy-gouernours Spaniards also, one for Cape Caliari, the other for Cape Lugudori; the other inferiour officers may be of the Natiues. As for the City Caliaris it selfe, it is exempt from the legall iurisdiction euen of the Vice-Ro^; and is gouerned by a Councell of its own Citizens.
The Armes of this Iland are Or, a crosse Gules, between foure Saracens heads Sable curled Argent.Bara.

Here are in this Iland

Archbishops 3


Bishops 15




THE BALEARES.
THese Ilands were formerly called Insulae Gymnasiae, from (...), nudus, because they vse to goe naked; and BALEARES from (...), ^acio, because they were such excellent slin(...) exercise in a manner innatiue to them, the fithers giuing (...) after a convenient age no victuals, but what they could h^t down from some high beame with a sling. They ^^e diuided into Ma^or^a and Minorca, or the greater and the l^ss^^.
Manorca is about 60 miles distant from Spaine, and is 300

miles in circuit. The chief Cities are 1 Maiorca an Vniuersity. 2 Palma, where Raymundus Lullius was borne, as much esteemed with them, as Aristotle amongst vs.
Minorca is distant fram Ma^orca 9 miles, and is 150 miles in circuit: the people were heretofore valiant, now esseminate, the soile barren in some places, but generally fruitful. The chief Townes are 1 Minorca, and 2 Iaua. Both these Ilands did once wonderfully abound in Conies, wherwith they were so pestred, that they not only spoyled corne and grasse,Munster. but vndermined houses, and threw down walls; so that the Ilanders armed themselues, and fought with them; but when such force prevailed not, they sent to the Romans for aide, and there were taught the vse of Ferrets.
Quade.Nigh vnto these ^al^ares are two small Ilands. The 1 E^^isa is distant from the coast of Spaine 50 miles. and is 100 miles in circuit; the chief City is Tuica; the chief commodity is salt. Ten miles hence is 2 Olhi^sa, 70 miles round, called by the Latines, Frumentariae, They were both called Pithuisae, for their store of Pine trees. The men, and women also, of these two Ilands, and of Panconia, or Pantalarea, an Ilet adioyning, are very good Swimmers. Biddulph in the relation of his trauels, reporteth, how being about these Ilands becalmed, there came a woman swimming from one of them, with a basket of fruit to sell.
These 4 Ilands were added to the Rom^ns dominion by the valour of Metellus, the brother of him who conquered Crete. The people hereof were giuen to Pyracie, and seeing the Roman Navie coasting there-about, supposing them to haue bin only Merchants, assailed them: and at first gaue the repulse; but the Romans getting between them and the shore, soon forced them to an vnwilling submission. They were all wonne from the Romans by the Sarac^ns;Hist. of Sp. and from them regained by Raimund Arnauld, Earle of Catelogne, and the Genoys, Anno 1102: and being by the Genoys red^liuered to the Moores, were recouered by Iames the first of Arragon 1028. He gaue them to his second son, whose posterity continued kings of those Ilands, till the yeare 1343: in which Pedro the fourth of Arragon, did dispossesse king Iames, and vnited them to his Crowne.




THE MEDITERRANEAN ILES. THE LESSER ILANDS.
THE LESSER ILANDS dispersed about in this sea, are the Vulcanian or Aeolian Ilands, the people of which being wel skilled in diuining from which coast the wind would blow, gaue the Poets occasion, to make Aeolus, God of the wind. They lye all on the coast of Sicily, and are in number 11: the chief are 1 Lipara 10 miles round, from whence the rest are now called, the Lipa^ean Iles. 2 Vulcania (of old Hiera) where Vulcan was worshipped.Florus. Neere vnto these Ilands was fought the first nauall battail between the Romans and the Carthaginians, as well for the dominio^ of Sicily, as for the absolute supremacy in matter of command. The Roman^ before this time neuer vsed the Seas, as being totally imployed in the conquest of Italy: insomuch that when they had built their gallies, they exercised their men in rowing, by placing them with oares in their hands, on two seats neere the water. This notwithstanding, hauing made them grappling-hookes, they so fastned the aduerse fleet vnto them, that the whole fight seeming a land battail fought on the Seas, the victory fell vnto the Romans. II The Iles of Naples are 18 in number. The chiefe are Ischia, 18 miles round, begirt with rocks and mountaines full of Hares and Conies: the chief Town is Ischia,Ortelius. whither Ferdinand of Naples fled, being thrust out of his kingdome by Charles the eight. In this Iland neare Cape S. Angelo, is a fountaine of that heat, that it will in short time boyle any flesh or fish put into it. The second Ile of note is Capr^ae, where the Emperours of Rom^ vsed to retire for their recreation, and which Tiberius kept Court in, when he had withdrawne himselfe from Rome, the better to exercise his abominable lusts. The third Ile of note is Aenaria. III The Ligurian Ilands, the chief of which are Elba or Ilua, whose Metropolis is Cosmop^lis, built by Cosmodi Medices, D. of Florence; Here is abundance of Iron of that nature, that it will by no meanes melt in the Iland, but must be caried to some other place. The second is Gallinaria, so called from the abundance of wild Hens. And the third is Giglio, where the Genoys ouerthrew the whole power of the Pisa^^.
At the Westerne end of this sea, is the straight called of old

F^etum ^^ereu^^um, b^^ause Hercules here made a passage through the (...) let the ^^ce^n into the Mediterranean. On the North side (...) ^his str^ight was mount Calpe; on the South mount (...) on w^i^h ^ercu^e^ placed his (so memorized) pillars, with the inscript on of Nil vltra, in that there was the most westerne bou^d of the world. But Charles the fift after the discovery of Am^^ica, comming that way; caused Plus vltra to be engrauen either on the old pillars, or else one new erected in their places This straight is now named the straight of G^^raltar,Hist. of Sp. from Gibal Tariff, one of the principall leaders of the Moores into Spaine. Somewhat without the mouth of this straight is the Iland Gades or Cales, peopled by the Tyrians 56^ yeares before the birth of Christ. Here was a Temple consecrated to the honour of that great trauellour Hercules, in which all sea-faring men when they came hither vsed to pay their vowes and offer sacrifice, as hauing arriued at the vtmost part of the world. It was once called Tartessa, and is in length 13 miles, and hath of late beene the Magazin of the ^paniards warlike munition. It was taken in one day by the English vnder the conduct of Charles Earle of Nottingham, Robert Earle of Essex, and Sir Walter Rawleigh. In this day they burned the Indian fleet, consisting of 40 ships, whose lading was worth eight millions of Crownes; they ouercame the Spanish Fleet, composed of 57 men of warre: they tooke the St Andrew and the St Michael two great Galleons with their luggage: they spoyled and carried away more martiall furniture then could bee supplied in many yeares: they surprised the Towne, and in it beside priuate m^n and their goods, they slew and tooke prisoners 4000 foot, and 600 horse,Canid. Rem. Anno 1596. The fortunacy of this enterprise gaue occasion to one of the wits the^ liuing to frame this excellent Anagram on the name of that Earle of Essex, viz: Deureux, Vere Dux: w^ich he afterward cast into this distich.

Vere dux Deureux, and verior Hercule: Gades
Nam s^mel (...): vicit and ille si^^^l.
Alcides yeelds to Deuereux: he did see
Thy beauties (Cales) but Deuereux conquered thee.
Thus much of the Medite^ranean Iles.




THE ILES OF THE OCEAN.
ANd now we are come into the OCEAN, that ingens and infinitum pelagus, as Mela calleth it: in comparison of which the Seas before mentioned are but as Ponds or Gullets: a sea in former times knowne more by fame then triall, and rather wondred at on the shoare side, then any more remote place of it. The Romans ventured not on it with their vessels (vnlesse in the passage from France to Brittaine) and much famed is Alexander for his hazardous voyage on this vnruly Sea, hee having sayled in all but 400 furlongs from the shoare, The name and pedegree take here both from the Poets and Etymologists. The Poets make Oceanus to be the sonne of Coelum and Vesta, or of heauen and earth. They tearmed him the father of all things as Oc^anumque patrem rerum in Virgil, because moisture was necessarily required to the constitution of all bodies, and vsually painted him with a bulls head on his shoulders (whence Euripides calleth him (...) Oceanus Tauriceps) from the bellowing and fury of the winds, which from it come to the shoare, and to which it is subiect. As for the children attributed vnto him, they are doubtlesse nothing but the clouds and vapors thence arising. The name of (...); Oceanus some deriue from (...) celer, because of its swiftnesse; some from (...) findo, diuido; because it cleaueth and interlaceth the earth: and others make it (...) quasi (...), a celeriter fluendo, which agreeth in meaning with the first. Particular names it hath divers according to the name of the shoare, by which it passeth as Cantabricus, Gallicus, Britannicus, etc. The chiefe Iles of it are 1 those of Zeland, which wee haue already described. 2ly those in the Brittish: and 3ly those in the northern Seas.


THE BRITTISH ILANDS.
The BRITTISH ILANDS are either the
Greater
Brittaine which is divided into
England.Wales.Scotland.IrelandLesser are the
1 Orchades.2 Hebrides.3 Sorlinges. and4 Sporades.


BRITTAINE.
TO speake much of BRITTAINE, I hold in a manner superfluous, it being our home, and wee therefore no strangers to it. Yet as Mela saith of Italy, De Italia magis quia ordo exigit, quam quia monstrari eget, pauca dicentur; no^a sunt omnia: The like I say of Brittaine; it is so obuious to our sight that we need not the spectacles of letters: yet some things shall be said rather for methods sake, then necessity. To omit therefore the diuerfe Etimons of BRITTAINE, produced according to the phantasies of seuerall men, and omitting Bru^^^ whose comming into and denominating this Iland, is rather a fabulous report, then a well grounded historicall truth: I will take the Etymologie of M. Camden, as most probable, who fetching it from the Brittish language; deriueth it from Brit, signifying painting, and Tayne, signifying a nation: which agreeth not only with the Brittish tongue, but with the records of the most sincere and trusty Historiographers; all with one consent, affirming, that the Brittaines vsed to paint themselues, to make them shew more terrible to the enimy. For that there was no such Brutus, is euident, 1 by the newnesse of his birth; Geofrie of Monmouth, who liued in the dayes of Henry the 2d, being his first father. 2ly By the silence of the Roman histories, in which it had beene an vnpardonable negligence, to haue omitted an accident so remarkable, as the killing of a father by his sonne, and the erecting of a new Troian Empire in Brittaine. 3ly By the arguments which Caesar vseth to proue them to bee deriued from the Gaules; as speech, lawes, customes, disposition, structure, and the like. 4ly by the testimony of all the Roman writers, who affirme the Brittaines to haue beene distracted into many petty royalties, and not to be vnder the command of any one Prince: Summa belli administrandi communi consensu permissa est Cassivella^no, saith Caesar: Dum singuli pugnaban, vincebantur omnes, saith Tacitus and so the rest: and 5ly by the ignorance among all old writers of their first originall, Qui mortales initio coluerint parum comportum est, as the same Tacitus.
This Queene of Ilands is in compasse 1836 miles; being absolutely the greatest in the whole world, except Iaua. This most spatious countrey extending 800 miles in length, is vnder the 9th and 13th Climates of the Northerne temperate Zone; Insomuch that at the sommer solstice, in the Northerne parts of Scotland, there is no night at all; but only an obscure twilight.
It is divided into England, Wales, and Scotland.

ENGLAND.
ENGLAND is bounded on the East with the German, on the West with the Irish,Camden. on the South with the Brittish Oceans, on the North with the riuer Tweed, and a line drawne from it to the Solwa^ westward. In former times the Northerne limit was a wall built crosse the Iland from Carlile in Cumberland, to the riuer Tine. This same wall was built by Severus the Emperour for a fortresse against the Picts: at every miles end was a Castle, betweene every Castle many watch-towres; and through the walls of every Towne and Castle, was conveighed a pipe of brasle; which from one Garrison to another conveied the least noise without interruption: so that the newes of an approaching enimy was quickly divulged ouer the borders, and resistance made accordingly. In after times insteed of this wall, the strong Townes of Berwicke and Carlile were the chiefe barres by which we kept the back-dore sh^t: and as for other forts, we had scarce any in all the frontire parts of the kingdome. Within the heart of the land there were indeed too many, which being in the hands of subiects, was no small incouragement to their often rebellions, and no little incombrance in quenching them to the Kings: vntill toward the end of the reigne of K. Stephen, 1100 of them were laid leuell with the ground, and the few which remained were dismantled and made vnseruiceable. This care was taken to disable the Lords and Commons at home: but for keeping the Sea-coasts from forraine enimies, little or no care was taken. The dangerous rockes and steepe cliffes were accounted a strength sufficient. Only the Castle of Douer, and a few of the like peeces were well fortified and furnished, as well for the safety

of the land, as the command of the sea. Afterwards in the yeare 1539 Henry the eight hauing shaken off the Romish tyranny, and seeing how the Emperour Charles was offended for the divorce of his aunt, the Queene Katharine; how the French King had married his sonne to the Popes Neece, and his daughter to the King of Scotland: thought it best to prouide for himselfe and his people. For this cause he built in all places whe^e the shoare was plaine and open, Castles, platformes, and block^^^ses: which in this time of long peace are much neglected, and in part ruined. His daughter Eliz^beth of happy memory, prouided yet better for her kingdome. For she not only new so ^^^ed Portesmouth, and placed in it a strong Garrison; but walled our Iland round, with a most stately, royall, and invincible navie; with which she alwaies commanded the Seas, and vanquished the mightiest Monarch of Europe; whereas her predecessours in their sea-battailes for the most part, hired their Men of warre, from the Hantsmen, and Genowaies. Yet did neither of these erect any Castles in the inward parts of the realme, herein imitating nature, who fortifieth the head and feet only, not the middle of beasts: or some Captaine of a fort, who plants all his ordinances on the walls, bulwarkes, and out-workes; leauing the rest as by these sufficiently guarded.
The whole Iland was once called Albion, not from the Giant Albion, but ab albis rupibus, the white rocks towards France. Afterwards it was called Brittaine, which name continued till the time of Egbert the first Saxon Monarch, who called the Southerne part of the Iland, England: from the Angles, who with the Iu^^ and Saxons, conquered it. It is in length 320 miles; enioying a soyle equally participating of ground fit for tillage and pasture: yet to pasture more then tillage are our people addicted, as a course of life not requiring so many helpers, which must be all sed and paid; and yet yeelding more certaine profit. Hence in former times husbandry began to be neglected Villages depopulated, and hindes, for want of entertainment, to turne way-beaters: whereof St Thomas Moore in his Vtopia complaineth saying, that our flocks of sheepe had devoured not only men, but whole houses and Townes. Oves (saith hee) quae

tam mites esse, tamque exiguo solent ali; nunc tam edaces and indomitae esse coeperunt, vt homines devore^t ipsos; agros, domos, oppida vastent, ac d^populentur. To prevent this mischiefe there was a statute made in the 4th yeare of Henry the seuenth, against the converting of errable land into pasture ground: by which course husbandry was againe reuiued, and the soyle made so abounding in corne, that a deare yeare is seldome heard of. Our Vines are nipped with the cold, and seldome come to maturity, and are more vsed for the pleasantnesse of the shaddowe, then for the hopes of wines. Most of her other plenties, and ornaments, are expressed in this verse.
Anglia, Mons, Pons, Fons, Ecclesia, Faemina, Lana.England is stor'd with Mountaines, Bridges, Wool,With Churches, Riuers, Women beautifull.
To omit the ^ills, here and there lifting vp their heads aboue the pleasant Valleys: the Bridges are in number 857: the chiefe of which are the bridge of Rochester ouer Medway; the bridge of Bristoll ouer Auon; and the bridge of London ouer Thames. This latter standing vpon 19 Arches, of wonderfull strength and largenesse; supporteth continuall ranges of building, seeming rather a street then a bridge: and is not to be parallel'd with any Bridge of Europe.
The Riuers of this Countrey are in number 325. The chiefe is Thamisis, compounded of the two riuers Thame and Isis; whereof the former rising somewhat beyond Tame in Buckinghamshiere, and the latter beyond Cirencester in Glocestershiere, meet together about Dorcester in Oxfordshiere; the issue of which happy coniunction is the Thamisis or Thames. Hence it flyeth through Berks, Buck: Middlesex, Surrey, Kent, and Essex; and so weddeth himselfe with the Kentish Medway, in the very iawes of the Ocean. This glorious river seeleth the violence of the Sea more then any riuer in Europe, ebbing and flowing twice a day more then 60 miles: along whose banks are so many faire Townes and princely pallaces, that a German Poet thus truely spoke.

Tot campos, sylvas, tot regia tecta, tot hortos
Artifici excultos dextra, tot videmus arcei;
Vt nunc Ausonio Thamisis cum Tibride certet.
We saw so many woods, and princely Bowres,
Sweet Fields, braue Pallaces, and stately Towres,
So many Gardens drest with curious care,
That Thames with royall Tiber may compare.

The second Riuer of note is Sabrina or Severne. It hath its beginning in Plinlimmon hil in Mount gommeryshire, and his end about 7 miles from Bristoll: washing in the mean space the wals of Shrewsbury, Worcester, and Glocester. 3 Trent, so called for that 30 kinds of fishes are found in it, or that it receaueth 30 lesser riuerets: who hauing his fountaine in Staffordshire, and gliding through the Counties of Nottingham, Lincolne, Leicester, and Yorke; augmenteth the turbulent current of Humber, the most violent streame of the whole Ile. This Humber, is not, to say truth, a distinct riuer, hauing a spring head of his owne; but rather is the mouth or aestuarium of diuers riuers here consluent and meeting together, namely Dun, Arc, Warf^, Youre, Darwent and especially Ouse and Trent. And as the Daenowe hauing receaued into its channell the riuers Dravus, Savus, Tibiscus, and diuers others, changeth his name into Ister: so also the Trent receauing and meeting the waters abouenamed, changeth his name into this of Humber; Abios the old Geographers call it. 4 Medway a Kent^sh riuer, famous for harboring the royall navy. 5 Tweed the Northeast bound of England, on whose Northerne banke is seated the strong and impregnable Towne of Barwicke* 6 Tine, famous for Newcastle and her inexhaustible Coale-pits. These and the rest of principall note are thus comprehended in one of Mr Draytons Sonnets.

Our flouds Queen Thames; for ships and swans is crowned,
And stately Severne for her shore is praised;
The Cristall Trent for foords and fish renowned;
And Avons fame to Albions cliffes is raised;
Carlegion Chester vants her holy Dee;
Yorke many wonders of her Owse can tell;
The Peake her Doue whose bankes so fertile be;
And Kent will say her Medway doth excell;
Cotswall commends her Isis to the Tame;
Our Northerne borders boast of Tweeds faire s^ood
Our Westerne parts extoll their Willies fame
And the old Lea bragges of the Danish blood.

The Churches before the generall suppression of Abbies, and spoyling the Church ornaments, were most exquisite. The chief remaining are 1 the Church of S. Paul, founded by Ethelbert K. of Kent, in the place where once was a Temple consecrated to Diana: the Steeple of this Church was 534 foot high, and was twice fired by lightning. 2 S. Peters, or the Church of Westminster, the Chappell whereof is the most accurate building in Europe. 3 The Cathedrall Church of Lincolne. 4 For a priuate parish Church, that of Ratcliffe in Bristoll. 5 For a privat Chappel that of Kings College in Cambridge; 6 For the curious workmanship of the glasse, that of Christ church in Canterbury: For the exquisite beauty of the fronts, those of Wells and Peterborough 8 For a pleasant lightsome Church, the Abbey Church at Bath. 9 For an ancient and reuerent fabricke, the Minster of Yorke: and 10 to comprehend the rest in one, our Lady Church in Salisbury of which, this is true,
Mira canam, soles quot continet annus, in vnaTam numerosa,Camden. ferunt, aede fenestra micat.Marmoreasque tenet fusas tot ab a^te columna,Comprensas horas quot vagus annus habet:Tot gaudet portis, quot mensibus annus abundat:Res mira, at v^ra res celebrata fide.How many dayes in one whole yeare there be,So many windowes in one Church we see;So many marble pillers there appeare,As there are houres throughout the flitting yeare;So many Gates as moones one yeare doth view:Strange tale to tell, yet not so strange as true.
Our Women questionlesse are the most choice workes of nature, adorned with all beautious perfection, without the addition of adulterat sophistications.Morison. In an absolute woman, say the Italians, are required the parts of a Dutch woman, from the girdle downeward; the parts of a French woman, from the girdle to the shoulders; ouer which must be placed an English face. As

their beauty, so also their prerogatiues are the greatest of any nation; neither so servilely submisse as the French, nor so iealously guarded as the Italian; but keeping so true a decorum: that England, as it is tearmed the purgatory of Servants, and the hell of Horses; so it is acknowledged the Paradise of Women. And it is a common by-word among the Italians, that if there were a bridge built ouer the narrow seas, all the women of Europe would runne into England. For here they haue the vpper hand in the streets; the vpper place at the table; the thirds of their husbands estates; and their equall shares in all lands, yea euen such as are holden in knights service; priuiledges wherewith other women are not acquainted.
The Wooll of England is of exceeding finenesse, especially that of Cotswold in Glocestershire; that of Lemster in Herefordshiere; and of the Ile of Wight: Of this wooll are made excellent broad cloaths, dispersed all ouer the world, especially high Germany, Muscovie, Turkie, and Persia; to the great benefit of the Realme: as well in returne of so much mony which is made of them; as in setting to worke so many poore people, who from it receaue sustenance. Before the time of King Edward the third, Engl^shmen either had not the art, or neglected the vse of making cloaths: in which times our wooll was transported vnwrought. And as his successours haue laid impositions on euery cloath sold out of the realme; so his predecessours had, as their occasions required, some certaine customes granted on euery sack of wooll. In the beginning of this Edwards warres with France, the citties and townes of Flanders, being then euen to admiration rich, combined with him and ayded him in his wars there. And he for his part by the composition then made was to giue them 14000 pounds ready mony; to aide them by Sea and land if need required; and to make Bruges, then a great mart towne of Christendome, the St^ple for his woolls. Here the staple continued 15 yeares, at which time the Flemmings hauing broke off from the K^ng^ and he hauing by experience seen what the benefit of these Staples were; remoued them from Bruges into England. And for the ease as well of his subiects in bringing their wools vnto the ports, as of such forraine marchants as

came to buy, he placed his Staples at Excester, Bristoll, Winchester, Westminster, Chichester, Canterbury, Norwich, Lincoln, York and Newcastle, for England: at Ca^rmardin for Wales: and at Dublin, Waterford, Corke, and Tredah, for Ireland. Hee further enacted that no English, Irish, or Wel^hmen should transport this stapled commodity; no not by licences (if any such should bee granted) on paine of confiscation, and imprisonment during the Kings pleasure. Lastly he allured ouer hither diuerse Flemmings which taught our men the making of cloathes (who are now growne the best cloathworkers in the world:) and to encourage men in this art, it was by a statute made the 27th of Edward the 3d, enacted to be felonie, to carry any wools vnwrought. When England had for some short time inioyed the benefit of these Staples, the King remoued them to Calice, which hee had conquered and desired to make wealthie. From hence they were at severall times and occasions translated, now to one, now to another towne in Belgia: and still happy was that towne in what Country soeuer, where the English kept a house for this traffick* the confluence of al people thither to buy, infinitly enriching it. Antwerp in Brabant long enioyed the English Merchants, till vpon some discontents betweene K. Henry the 7th, and Maximilian Archduke,Martyn. and Lord of Belgia; they remoued: but at their returne againe were receaved by the Antwerpians, with solemne processions, princely triumphs, sumptuous feastings, rare banquetings, and expressions of much loue, but more ioy. And the giuing of some Cotswold sheepe by K. Edward the 4th to Henry of Castile, and Iohn of Arragon, Anno 1465: is counted one of the greatest preiudices that euer hapned to this kingdome. The English house is now at Stoade, being by reason of the warres in these parts, remooued from Antwerpe.
The wooll transported bringeth into the kingdome no lesse then 1500000l, and the Lead halfe that summe; so that Lewis Guicciardine reporteth, that before the warres of the Low Cou^tries, the Flemmings and the English bartered wares yearely, for 12 millions of Crownes.
The Author of the former verse might haue added our Parks Mines, and Beere. Of the former there are more in England

then in all E^rope besides; but sp^ciatim wee haue Chases 30* Forrests 55; and 745 Parkes, replenished with aboundance of game.
The Mines are either of Coale, or T^nne, Lead, and such mettle: the former chiefly inrich Newcastle in Northumberland; the latter especially Cornwall, where they digg T^nne not much infe^iour to siluer for finenesse.
Wines, as is said, we haue none, but Beere abundantly, which without controuersie is a most wholsome and nourishing beuerage: which being transported into France, Belgia, and Germany, by the working of the Sea, is so purged; that it is amongst them in high estimation, celebrated by the name of La bonne Beere d' Anglet^rre. And as for the old drink of England, Ale, which commeth from the Danish word Oela; it is questionlesse in it selfe (and without that commixture which some are accused to vse with it) a very wholsome drinke: howeuer it pleased a Poet in the time of Henry the third, thus to descant on it.
Nescio ^uod monstrum Stygiae conforme paludi,Ceruisiam plerique vocant: nil spissius illaCum bibitur, nil clarius est dum mingitur; vndeConstat, qu^d mulias faeces in ventre relinquit.Of this strange drink so like the Stygian lake,Men call it Ale, I knowe not what to make:Folke drinke it thicke, and vent it passing thinne:Much dregges therefore must needs remaine within.
Neither will I quite omit our Bells, of which we haue so many rings, and so tunable, which being well guided make excellent melody; that I haue heard Forrainers call our Country the Ranging Iland.
It was a tradition of old writers that England bred no Wolues neither would they liue here; which report is not consentaneous to truth: here being once store of them, till Edgar K. of England impo^ed on Idwallo Prince of Wales, the yearely tribute of 300 Wolues: by which meanes they were quite rooted out.
The Ayre of this Country is very temperate, neither so hot as France and Spaine in the Summer, because of its northernly situation; nor so cold in the Winter, because the ayre of this

kingdome being grosse, cannot so soone penetrat, as the thinne ayre of France and Spaine. And also it is here more hotte then there, because the windes participating of the Seas ouer which they passe vnto vs, doe carry with them a temperat warmth.
But if warmth were all the benefit we receiued from the seas, it might indeed be said, that we were come from Gods blessing, into the warme Sunne: but it is not so. For there are no seas in Europe tha^ yeeld more plenty of fish then ours. Our oysters were famous in the times of the old Romans; and our herrings are now very beneficial vnto the Netherlanders: to whom the Engl^shmen reseruing to themselues a kind of royalty; (for the Dutch by custome demand liberty to fish of Scarbourgh castle in Yorkeshire) haue yeelded vp the commodities. By which those States are exc^edingly inriched, and our Nation much impouerished, and condemned for lazinesse and sloth: Besides, the losse of imployment for many men, who vsing this trade, might be as it were, a Seminary of good and able marriners, as well for the warres, as for further navigations; cannot but be very preiudiciall to the strength and flourishing of our Commonwealth and Empire.
The Nobility of this Country is not of so much vnlimited power, as they are (to the preiudice of the Commonwealth) in other Countries: the names of Earles, Lords, and Marquesses, being meerely titular; whereas in other places they haue some absolute, some mixt gouernment; so that vpon any litle distast, they will stand on their own guard, and slight the power of their Soueraigne. The Commonalty enioy a multitude of prerogatiues aboue all other Nations, being most free from taxes, and burdenous impositions. They haue twice in a yeare (a laudable custome, no where else to be seen) iustice administred euen at their own doores; by the Itinerary Iudges of the kingdome: an order ^irst instituted by Henry the second; who was also the first instituter of our high Court of Parliament, which being an Amovin, he learned in France. They liue together with Gentlemen in Villages and Townes, which maketh them sauour of ciu^lity and good manners, and liue in farre gre^ter reputation then the Yeomen of Italy, Spaine, France, or Germany, being able to

entertaine a stranger honestly, diet him plentifully, and lodge him neatly.
The Cleargy was once of infinite riches, as appeareth by that Bill preferred to K. Henry the fift of the temporall revenue, of the Church: which were able to maintaine 15 Earles, 1500 Knights, 6000 men of Armes; more then 1000 Almes-houses, and the King also might clearely put vp 20000 pounds. As they now are not so rich, so are they farre more learned, and of more sincere and goodly carriage, where^n they giue place to no Cleargy in the world; and for learning I dare say, cannot be any where parallell'd: neither are they so destitute of the externall gifts of fortune, but that they are the richest of the Mi^isters o^ the Reformed Churches. For besides 5439 Parochiall Benefices, being no impropriations; and besides the Vicarages, euery of which exceed the competencie beyond seas: here are in England 26 Deanries,Camden. 60 Archdeaconries, and 544 dignities and Prebends; all of which are places of a faire revenue. And as for the main^^nance of Priests, Monkes, and Friers before the reformation^ there were reckoned 90 Colledges, besides tho^e in the Vniuersities; 110 hospitals, 2374 Chanteries and free Chappels: and 645 Abbeyes and Monasteries: more then halfe of which, had aboue the yearly income of 200 pounds in old rents. So studious were our Ancestours both in those times of blindnes, and those of a clearer sight, to encourage men to learning, and then to reward it.
The diet of England is for the most part flesh. In London only there are no fewer then 67500 beefes, and 675000 sheepe slain and vttered in a yeare, besides calues, lambes, hogs-flesh, and poulterers ware. To proue this, suppose there be in London 60 butchers, free of the city; whereof euery one, one with another, killeth an oxe aday; for so they are, and so at least they do. Then reckon (as the London butchers affirme) that the forreiners of the suburbes and villages, sell ^oure for their one. Lastly, count for euery oxe 10 sheep (for this is also certainly known) to be killed and sold, and you haue both the numbers aboue-mentioned. The Earle of Gondamor, late the Spanish Le^ger here, hauing in some seuerall market dayes seem the seueral shambles

of this great city; said to them who had made the discouery with him, that there was more flesh eaten in a moneth in that town, then in all Spaine in a yeare. Now had I his skill, who by the length of Hercules foot, found out the proportion of his whole body: I might by this prouision of flesh: consumed in the head, ^uesse at the quantity of that which is spent in the body of the Realme. But this I leaue to proportionists.
The Souldiery of England is either for the land or for the (...). Our victories by land are most apparant, ouer the Irish, (...) Turkes, and especially French; whose kingdome hath bin ^ore shaken by the English many times, especially twice, by King Edward the third,Hist. of Fr. and Henry the fift: this latter making so absolute a Conquest, that Charles the seuenth (like a poore Roy ^^ ^v^lot) confined himselfe to Bourges; where hauing casheerd his retinue, he was found in a little chamber at supper, with a ^apkin laid before him, a rump of mutton, and two chickens. And so redoubted, euen after our expulsion from France, (our (...) dissentions rather causing that expulsion, then the French v^lour) was the English name in that Country: that in the (...) between King Charles the 8th, and the Duke of Brittaine, the Duke to strike a terrour in his enemies, apparailed 1500 of (...) own subiects, in the Armes and Crosse of England. But as (...), when he had on the Lyons skinne, was for all that but an Asse, and no Lyon: So these Britons by the weake resistance they made against their enemies, shewed that they were indeed Bri^on^, and no Englishmen. Spaine also tasted the valour of our ^and-souldiers, when Iohn of Gaunt pursuing his title to Spaine; (...) seat home with 8 waggons, laden with gold, and an annual p^nsion of 10000 markes: as also when the Blacke Prince re^^^^lished King Pe^er in his throne^. And then also did they acknowledge, though they felt not the puissance of the English, when Fernando the Catholique surprised the kingdome of Navarre. For there were then in Fontarabia in Biscay, 6000 English ^oo^, who lay there to ioyne with this Ferdinando, in an expedition against France: Concerning which, Gu^isia^dine giueth this Item, that the Kingdome of Navarre was yeelded rather for the feare and reputation of the English forces that were at hand; then

by any puissance of the King of Arragon. Since those times the Spaniards much esteemed vs, as appeareth by this speech of theirs to our Souldiers at the siege of Amiens. You are tall souldiers, and therefore when you come downe to the trenches, wee d^uble our guards, and lo^ke for blowes: but as for those base and cowardly French,View of Fr. when they come, we make account we haue nothing to doe, but play, or sleepe on our Ramparts. The like the Netherlanders can testifie, only this is the grie^e of it: The English are like Pirrhus king of Epirns, fortunate to conquer kingdomes, but vnfortunate to keep them.
Our sea-forces may most euidently be perceiued in the battaile of Scluse, wherein King Edward the third with 200 ships, ouercame the French fleet consisting of 400 sayle; of which he sunke 200, and slew 30000 Souldiers: Secondly, at the battle in 88, where a few of the Q. shippes vanquished the Invincible Armado of the King of Spaine, consisting of 134 great Galleons and ships of extraordinary big^es. Sr Francis Drake with 4 ships, took from the Spaniards, one million, and 189200 Duckats in one voyage, Anno 1587; and again with 25 shippes, he awed the Ocean, sacked S. Iago, S. Dominico, and Cartagena, carrying away with him, besides treasure, 240 pieces of ordinance. I omit the circumnavigation of the whole world thrice by this Drake, and Cauendish; the voyage to Cales: as also how one of the Q. ships, named the Reuenge, in which Sr Rich. Gr^nvill was Captaine, with 180 souldiers (whereof 90 were sick on the ballast) maintain'd a Sea-fight for 24 houres, against aboue 50 of the Spanish Galleons; and though at last after her powder was spent to the last battail, she yeelded on honourable tearmes, yet was she neuer brough^ into Spaine; but had killed more then 1000 Souldiours; and sunke 4 of their greatest vessels. I omit also the discouery of the Northerne passages by Hugh Willoughby, Dauis, and Frobisher; concluding with that of Keckerman, Hoc certum est, omnibus hodie gentibus naviga^di industria and peritia superiores esse Anglos, and post Anglos, Holland^s: though now I know not by what neglect and disco^tinuance of these honourable employments, the Hollanders begin to bereaue vs of our ancient glories, and account themselues Lords of the Seas.
The English are commonly of a comely feature, gracious countenance, for the most part gray-eyed, pleasant, beautifull, bountifull,Pol. Virg. courteous, and much resembling the Italians in habit, and pronunciation. In matters of warre (as we haue already proued) they are both able to endure, and resolute to vndertake the hardest enterprises: in peace quiet, and not quarrelsome; in aduice or counsell, sound and speedy. Finally, they are actiue, hearty, and chearfull. And yet I know a Gentleman (whose name for his own credit sake I forbeare) who vpon the strength of two yeares trauell in France, grew so vnenglished, and so affected or besotted rather on the French Nation; that he hath not spared diuers times at an open table to say, that the English in respect of the French, were a heauy, dull, and flegmaticke people; of no dispatch, no mettle, no conceit, no audacity, and I know not what not. A vanity, in a man that is reputed so generally learned and accomplished, meriting rather my pitty, then my anger. Perhaps in vilifying his own Nation, he had consulted with Iulius Scaliger, who in the 16 Chapter of his third book de re poe^^^^, giveth of the two most noble Nations, English and Scottish, thi^ base and vnmanly character. Gothi belluae, Scoti non minus: Angli, perfidi, inflati, feri, contemptores, stolidi, amentes, inertes, inhospi^ales, immanes. His bolt, you see, is soon shot, and so you may happily guesse what the Archer was, a man indeed of an able learning; but of his own worth so conceited, that if his too much learning made him not mad; yet it made him by much too perempto^y and arrogant. To reuenge a Nationall disgrace on a personal, is an ignoble victory; besides, Socrates resolution in the like kind in my opinion, was very iudicious, (...); if an Asse kicke vs, we must not put him in the court. To confute his censure in euery point, would be to him too great an honour, and to me too great a labour; it being a taske which of it selfe would require a volume. The best is, many shoulders make the burden light; and other Nations are as deeply ingaged in this quarrell against that proud man, as ours: for so maliciously hath he there taxed all other people, that that Chapter might more properly haue bin placed among his Hypercritickes.
How the English, Netherlanders, and Germans, which of all Nations are thought most giuen to their bellies; doe agree and differ in this property, the same Scal^ger hath shewed vs in this Epigram:
Tres sunt convivae, Germanus, Flander, and Anglus:Dic quis edat melius, quis meliusve bibat.Non comedis Germane, bibis: tu non bibis Angle,Sed comedis: comedis Flandre, ^ibisque bene.Dutch, Flemming, English, are your only guests,Which of these three doth drink or eat the best?Th'English loue most to eate, the Dutch to swill,Only the Flemming eates and drinkes his fill.
Thus was it not long since with our Nation; but now I feare that the English haue, though not changed with the Flemmings, yet borrowed a little more then needes of their quality.
That the English language is a decompound of Dutch, French, and Latine, I hold rather to adde, then to detract from its praises: since out of euery language she hath c^lled the best and most significant words, and participateth equally of their perfections, their imperfections reiected; as being neither so boistious as the Germane, nor effeminate as the French; yet as significant as the Latine, and farre more happy in the coniunction or vnion of many words together.
The Christian Religion was first planted here, say some, by S. Peter and Paul; others suppose by Ioseph of Arimathea, whose body they absolutely affirme to be buried in Glassenbury in Somers^tshire. Howsoeuer, certain it is, that Lucius King of Brittaine, who was the first christned king of Europe, sent Anno 180 or thereabout, to Eleutherius Bishop of Rome, for some Ministers, if not to plant yet to confirme the Gospell. Yet it is not a fabulous vanity, to say that Austin first preached the Gospell here; for this is not to be vnderstood absolutely, that he first preached it; but that he first preached it to the Saxons, who hauing driuen the Brittaines into Wales, followed their Paga^ish superstition.Camd. Rem. It happened then that Gregory the Great, seeing some English boyes to be sold in the market at Rome, asked what they were: and answer was made, that they were called

Aueli; well may they so be called, said he, for they seeme Angeli: againe he asked of what Prouince they were, and it being answered, of Deira; Ergo, said he, de ira Dei sunt liberandi: and lastly vnderstanding that their King was named Alle; how fitly quoth he, may he sing Alleluiah vnto the most High: and on this occasion, Gregory sent Austin to convert the English Saxons, Anno 600.
After the Popes traditions had long annihilated the worth of the Scriptures, it pleased God to stirre vp Luther and the rest, to endeauour a reformation; which in other Countries receiued tumultuously, was here entertained with mature deliberation; the English bearing respect neither to Luther, Zwinglius, not Calvin, as to the square of their faith; but abolishing such things as were dissonant to Gods word, retained such ceremonies, as without offence the liberty of the Church might establish. Wherein certainly they dealt more advisedly then their neighbours, who in meere detestation of the Romish Church, abrogated such things altogether, which their abuse had defiled, though neuer so decent; and allowed in the Primitiue Church. And no doubt, had the reformed part continued an allowed correspondency in some circumstances, with the Romish Church, a^ the Church of England doth now, it had bin farre greater. I haue heard it reported, that when Peter du Moulin that great light of the Church of France, heard how indiscreetly some of our English Cleargy had silenced themselues, because they would not weare the cap and surplisse; he replyed, that would the King of France giue him a generall licence to preach in Paris, though it were in a fooles coat, he would most willingly accept the condition; adding withall, that he would neuer for any ceremony, depriue the Church of those gifts, wherewith God had blessed him. A resolution worthy him that spake it.
Our Church-gouernment is as that of the Primitiue Church by Archbish^ps and Bishops, which though inveighed against by the zealously superstitious Browni^ts; yet it is most absolute a^d perfect: and wonder it is how Calvins Presbyterie made only to content the Citizens of Geneva, without any blemish

found in the order of Bishops, was so headily receiued, and is as importunately desired.
The most valorous Souldiers of this Nation, were Brennus, who conducted the Gaules into Rome: 2 Cassibilane, who twice repulsed the Roman Legions from the Brittish shoare, and had not treason vndermined his proceedings, he had the third time and euer after done the like. 3 Constantine the Great, founder of the Constantinopolitan Empire. 4 Arthur, chiefe of the 9 Worthies. 5 William the Conquerour. 6 Richard the first. 7 Edward the third. 8 Henry the fift. 9 Edward the black Prince. 10 Iohn of Bedford. Our most famous Sea-Captaines haue bin Hawkins, Willowby, Burroughs, Ienkinson, Drake, Candish, Frobisher, and Davies.
Rationale Diuinorum.The most worthy Schollers were, Bede, for his learning surnamed Venerabilis: which attribute he purchased, when being blind, his boy guided him to preach among a company of stones, amongst which when he made an excellent sermon, concluding it with Gloria Pat. he was by them answered, Amen, Amen venerabilis Beda. Others assigne this reason: At his death an vnlearned Monke making him an Epitaph, blundred thus farre on a verse, Hac sunt in fossa Bedae ossa: but because the verse was yet imperfect, he went to bed, leauing a space between the two last words, which he found in the morning supplied in a strange Character, with Vener^bilis; and so he made his verse, and Beda got his name. The second Scholler of note was Ioannes de Sacro-Bosco,Camden. borne in Yorkeshire, the Author of the booke of the Spheare. 3 Alexander de Hales, Tutor to Thomas Aquinas. 4 Iohn Duns Scotus. 5 O^kham. 6 Baconthorp. 7 Winifrid, who converted the Saxons, Hassians, Franesnians, and Thuringians* 8 Willibrod, who converted the Frizons and Hollanders. 9 Walden, who converted the Lunanians, 10 Pope Adrian who converted the Normans. 11 Iohn Wickliffe who so valiantly withstood the Popish doctrine. 12 Iohn Iew^l Bishop of Salisbury. 13 Reinolds. 14 Humfrey, etc. The chiefe in matter of Poesie haue bin 1 Gower. 2 Cha^cer, of whom Sir Philip Sidney vsed to say, that he maruailed how that man in those mistie times could see so clearely, and how we in these

cleare times goe so stumblingly after him. 3 Edm Spencer. 4 Drayton. 5 Daniel, and the Martiall of England, Sir Iohn Harrington.
England is patible of a threefold division. 1 into 6 circuits, destinated to the Itinerary Iudges. Secondly, into 22 Episcopall Dioceses: Thirdly, into 40 Shires. The Realme was first diuided into circuits by King Henry the second, who appointed, that twice in the yeare, two of the most graue and learned Iudges of the Land, should in each circuit administer Iustice in the chiefe or head townes of euery country. Of these Iudges, one sitteth on matters criminall, concerning the life and death of melefactours; the other in actions personall, concerning title of land, debts, or the like, between party and party. The first circuit (for we will begin at the West) comprehendeth the Counties of Wiltes, Somerset, Devon, Cornewall, Dorset, and Southampton: the second containeth the Counties of Oxford, Berkes, Gloucester, Monmouth, Hereford, Worcester, Salop, and Stafford. The third hath in it the Counties of Surrey, Sussex, Kent, Essex, and Hartford. The fourth consisteth of the Shires of Buckingham, Bedford, Huntingdon, Cambridge, Norfolke, and Suffolke. The fifth of the Shires of Northampton, Rutland, Lincolne, Nottingham, Derbie, Leicester, and Warwicke. And the sixt and last, of the Shires of Yorke, Durham, Northumberland, Cumberland, Westmorland, and Lancaster. So that in these six circuits are numbred 38 Shires. The two remaining, are Middlesex, and Cheshire; wh^reof the first is exempted, because of its vicinity to London: and the second, as being a Countie Palatine, and hauing peculiar Iudges, and Counsellers to it selfe.
Our Church-gouernment is as we haue said, by Archbishops, and Bishops, which are in number 22; and so many are the Episcopall Dioceses. Archbishops we haue two, one of Yorke, vnder whom are Bishops of Chester, Durham, and Carlile; the other of Canterburie, who is Primate and Metropolitan of all England, vnder whom are the 17 other Bishops of England, and the 4 of Wales. This Archbishop of Canterburie vsed to take place in all Councels at the Popes right foot: which took beginning at the Councell of Lateran, when Vrban the second

called Anselme the Archbishop from among the other Prelats then assembled, and placed him at his right foot, saying; Includamus hunc in orbe nostro, tanquam altorius orbis Papam, Ao 1099. They also were accounted Legatinati; which honourable title was first giuen to Archbishop Theobald by Pope Innocent the second, and so perpetuated to his successours. Both these Archbishops, together with all the Bishops of Wales and England, haue their place and suffrage in the high Court of Parliament, as Barons of the Realme; and that in a double respect: first in relation had to their offices; next to their Baronries which they hold of the King. Yet doe they not inioy all the prerogatiue of temporall Barons; for they must not be tryed by their Peeres, but must be left to a Iury of 12 ordinary men: neither can they in examination, make a protestation on their honour, but must be put to their oathes. As for the Ecclesiasticall Courts, besides such as appertaine to the Archbishop himselfe, besides such as the Chancellour of euery Bishop holdeth in his Diocese; besides Courts holden in priuat Parishes, which are called Peculiars, and besides the Visitations, which are the assemblies of all the ministers in a Diocese, before their Bishop or his ordinary, there is the Synode or Convocation, which is as it were a Parliament of the Cleargy. In this Synode there assemble for the reforming of the Church, whether it be for point of faith or discipline; and for the granting of tenths and fifteenths vnto the King; all the right reuerend Fathers the Archbishops and Bishops; the Deanes of Cathedrall Churches. and a certain number of ministers chosen out of euery Diocese; these last being as it were the Knights and Burgesses of the house.
The Shires were first made by King Alfred, both for the easier and speedier administration of iustice:Lambe^ts B. of dueties. and because the naturall inhabitants of the Land, after the example, and vnder colour of the Danes, committed sundry outrages and robberies Ouer euery one of these Shires and Counties, he appointed a Sheriffe; and diuers Iustices, to see into the behauiour of priuate men* and to punish such as were deliquent: and in times of warre either already begun, or intended, he instituted a Prefect or Liestenant; to whom he gaue autority to see to their musters, their prouision

of armes; and if occasion serued, to punish such as rebelled or mutinied. This wise King ordeined also, that his subiects should be diuided into tens or tithings, euery of which seuerally should giue bond for the good abearing of each other; and he who was of that dissolute behauiour, that he could not be admitted to these tithings, was forthwith convayed to the house of correction. By this course men were not carefull only of their own actions, but had an eye to all the nine, for whom he stood bound; as the nine had ouer him; insomuch that a poore girle might trauell safely with a bagge of gold in her hand, and none durst meddle with her. The ancientest of these ten men were called (...), the Tythingmen. Ten of the ^ighest or neighbouring tythings, made that lesser diuision which we call hundreds; which name cannot be deriued from the like number of villages, for none of our hundreds are so large; and one of them in Berkshire there is, which containeth fiue hamlets only. We haue then a diuision of the Realme first into 40 Shires; of the Shires into diuers hundreds; and of the hundreds into ten tythi^gs. As for the gouernment; the chiefe officer is still the Sheriffe, whose office is to assist the Itinerary Iudges in executing Iustice; to gather in the the Kings amerciaments, etc. Next to him are certaine of the Gentrie, which we call Iustices of the peace, dispersed in all parts of the County, for the better ordering and punishing of peccant people. The Courts herein kept, are either the Countie Court kept euery three weekes, wherein the Sheriffe or his Deputy preside^h; or the Assises holden twice a yeare by the Itinerary Iudges. In euery hundred there is chosen one officer out of the Yeomanrie, whom we call the Constable of the hundred; who receiuing warrants from the Sheriffe or Iustices, dispatcheth them to the Constables of euery Town and Village within his hundred: and here also is a Court kept euery three weekes, wherein the steward of the hundred or his depu^y presideth; and wherein we hold pleas only for actions vnder the value of 4s vnlesse in some particular hundreds, where by especiall charter, the value of the actions is not limited, as th^t of Slaughter in Glocestershire. There are kept also in euery Village twice a yeare, Courts which inquire into actions between the King

and the subiect, which we call Courts leete; and also other courts wherein are handled actions between the lord and his tenants, which we call Courts Baron; and are summoned at the pleasure of the lord. Thus we see that Comines had good cause to write, that of all Signeuries in the world that euer he knew, the Realme of England was the Countrie where the Commonwealth was best gouerned. I returne againe to the Shires, of which some take their names from the ancient inhabitants, as Essex and Sussex from the East and South Saxons: some from the chiefe town, as Oxfordshire, and Gloucestersh^re: some from the situation, as Northumberland and Devonshire, this later taking name from the Brittish word Devinon, signifying low valleyes, whereof it much consisteth: and some from the figure, as Corn^wall, from the resemblance it hath to a horne; and Kent or Cantium, because it is a corner of the Isle, the word importing as much; as we may see by the word Canton still in vse among Heralds. Of those shires the biggest is Yorkeshire, out of which it is thought that 70000 footmen might be leuied, and in them all are comprehended 145 Castles, or rather the ruines of Castles, of which few are of any strength, and such as are, are in the Kings custody: it being nothing profitable to the State, to permit any man to fortifie himselfe in a well-contriued Castle. Here are also 9725 Parishes, besides Chappels, equal in bignes to many Parishes. Of these Parishes there are 585 Market Townes, being no Cities; the chiefe of which are Shrewesbury, Northampton, Southampton, Leicester, etc.
The Cities are in number 22, the chiefe of which are 1 London, pleasantly seated on the Thames, which diuideth it into two parts: ancient is this City, and long flourished before the Roman conquest, by whom it was called Augusta. Her circuit may containe 8 miles, in which space are 121 Parish Churches; the Palace of the King, the houses of the Nobility; Colledges for the study of the Lawes, (I meane not the Ciuill Law, which is Ius gentium, but (as we call it) the Common Lawes, appropriate only to this kingdome, of greater antiquity and indifferency then the Ciuill. It is wondrous populous, containing well nigh 400000 people, which number is much augmented in the

Tearme time. I compare London with Paris thus; London is the richer, the more populous, and more ancient: Paris the greater, more vniforme, and better fortified. 2 Yorke on the riuer Vre, is the second city of England according to the Verse,
Londinum caput est and regni urbs prima Britanni,Eboracum a prim^ iure secunda venit.In Brittaine London is the fairest Towne,The second place Yorke claimeth as its owne.
^^mous is this City for the death and buriall of the Emperour Seu^rus, and for the Law Court, instituted and placed here by K, Henry the eight, for the ease of his Northerne subiects, like the ordinary French Parliaments. 3 Bristoll, an especiall fine Town, and conveniently seated for ^raffiqu^. 4 Norwich in Norfolke. Exeter in Devonshire, etc. none of which are comparable to the Cities of Italy, or France; because the Gentlemen there liue continually in the Cities, ours in the Villages.
We haue but two Vniuersities, which may equall six, nay ten of the Vniversities of other Countries, (so that Paris, with some few others, be not in the number) most of them being no better then our Colledges of Eaton and Winchester, or the Collegiate Churches of Glocester, Worcester, etc. And scarce any of them is endowed with so much revenues, as two or three of our Colledges. The fairer and more ancient is Oxford, which of long time together with Paris, Salamanca, and Bononia, hath bin by Popes Edicts, honoured with the title of General^ studium. The other is Cambridge, which giuing the vpper hand to her sister, shall take place of most of the daughters of the Europaan Muses. That the Vniuersitie of Cambridge is not of so great a standing, as that of Oxford, is euident by the testimonie of Robertus de Remington, cited by M. Camden, viz: Regnante Edwardo primo (it should rather be read secundo) de studio Grantbridge facta est Academia sicut Oxonium: where the word sicut* doth not import an identity of the time; but a relation to Oxford, as to the patterne. We see this truth yet clearer in the Bull of Pope Iohn the 21th, the cotemporary of our Edward the 2d, as I find it in the worke of that great searcher of Academical Antiquities, Mr Brian Twine: Apostolica autoritate statuimus,

(saith the Bull) quod Collegium magistrorum and scholarium eiusdem studij (speaking of Cambridge) Vniversitas sit c^nsenda, etc. But what need more then a determinate sentence of the first Parliament, holden vnder our now gracious Soueraigne? For when the Clarke of that Court had put the name of Cambridge before Oxford; the Parliament taking disdainfully that Hysteron proteron, commanded the Antiquities of both Vniuersities to be searched; and after search made, gaue verdict for Oxford. The most renowned Vniuersity thus founded, grew not suddenly (as it seemes) into esteeme. For when William of Wainslet, Bishop of Winchester, (and founder of that excellent Colledge in Oxford, dedicated to Mary Magdalen, whereof I am an vnworthy member) perswaded at Oxford to founde some Colledge; imm^ potius Cantabrigiae (replyed the King) ut duas, si fieri posset, in Anglia Academias habeam. Of this inough, and perhaps more then mine Aunt Cambridge will conne me thanke for.
That the Brittain^s were descended from the Gaules, Caesar in his Commentaries doth affirme, and M. Camden prooueth with vnanswerable arguments.Camden. To omit therefore the fable of Brute, and the Catalogue of 68 Kings, before the comming of the Romans hither: certaine it is, Caesar found the people very vnciuill and illiterate, all the learning being lo^ked vp in the brests of the Druides; who not writing any thing, but telling and teaching by word of mouth, kept the people in a barbarous ignorance. From these Druides, the Gaules receiued their discipline, and he that desired to be perfect in it, came to Brittaine, and here learnt it. The Country continued a Roman Prouince till after the yeare 400* when Proconsul Aetius taking with him away the Legionary Souldiers, to defend Gallia from the Franks and Burgundians, left South Brittaine a prey to the Scots and Picts. To represse the fury of these invaders, the Romans hauing denied; the Brittaines sued to Aldroenus, king of Armorica, (now Brittaine in France) for aid: whose brother Constaentine, hauing beaten back the Scots and ^icts, was crowned King: a dignity which he inioyed not long, being stabbed by a Pict. Him succeeded his son Constantius, murdred by the meanes of Vortiger,

Earle of Cornewall; who was afterwards King: and finding himself vnable to defend himself against the Picts, sent for the ^axons, a potent people of Germany. Those Saxons flocked hither a main, vnder the conduct of Hengist and Horsus; who finally droue the Brittaines into the mountainous parts, now Wales.

The Brittish Kings.

1 Constantine.

2 Constantius

3 Vortiger.

4 Vortimer.

5 Vortiger (againe)

6 Aurelius Ambros.
500
7 Vter Pendragon.
506
8 Arthur 36
512
9 Constantine 4
546
10 Conan 30
576
11 Vortipor 4
580
12 Malgo
586
13 Careticus or Caradoc 27
613
14 Cadwan 22
635
15 Cadwallan 43
678
16 Cadwallader, The last king of the Brittaines; of all which, the most infamous was Vortiger, who betrayed his country to the Saxons; the most famous was Arthur, of whom the Monkish Writers of those times relate many idle and impossible actions: doubtlesse he was a man of tryed valour, as hauing vanquished the Saxons in 12 seuerall battailes; and pitty it is* his atchieuments came not vnto vs entire in themselues, and vnmixt with the fabulous deeds of armes, attributed to him and his Knights of the round table. For by this ouer-straining his worths, the pidling writers of former times haue onely giuen posterity iust occasion to suspect that vertue, which they so much thought to adorne: and filled vs with as much ignorance of the Story, as admiration of the persons. But this hath not bin King Arthurs case alone; for in the same measure and kind, haue the French Monkes vsed Charlemaigne, and the 12 Peeres of France. This Arthur is said to haue begunne the custome of solemnizing the Natiuity of our Sauiour, for the 12 dayes next after his birth-day; with such feasts and sports, as are yet vsed by the lords of misrule in some Gentlemens houses: an ordination which the Scottish Writers of these times much blame, it being a time fitter for our devotion, then our mirth.

In this decay of the Brittish rule, the victorious Saxons erected

their Heptarchie, or seuen seuerall kingdomes.
1 The Kingdome of KENT, contained Kent only; the people of which by the testimony of Iulius Caesar, were the most ciuill and ingenious. This kingdome began vnder Hengi^t the Saxon Captain, Anno 4^5; and after the succession of 18 Kings, ended in the time of Baldred. who resigned his regality to Egbert K. of the West Saxous, 827. The first Christian King was Ethelbert, who receiued Austin, sent from Gregory Bishop of Rome, Ao 595.
2 The Kingdome of the SOVTH-SAXONS contained the Regni, now Sussex and Surrey. It began vnder a Saxon named H^lla, Ao 536; and ended after a succession of 7 Kings, in the time of Aldine, who lost it to the West-Saxons, Ao 648. The first Christian King was Ethelwold.
3 The Kingdome of the EAST-ANGLES contained the Iceni, now Norfolke, Suffolke, and Cambridgeshire. It began Ao 546, vnder the Saxon Vffa, and ended after the succession of 17 Kings, Ao 964: in which yeare Edward the elder took it from the D^nes; who before had taken it from S. Edmund the last King of the Saxons blood, Ao 869. The first Christian King was Carpenwald, Ao 630.
4 The Kingdome of the NORTHVMBERS contained Yorkeshire, Lancashire, Richmondshire, Durrham, Cumberland, Westmorland, Northumberland, and so to Edenburgh, being the ancient seat of the Brigantes and Ottadini. It comprehended the Kingdome of Deira, reaching from Humber to Tine, began by Ella a Saxon, Ao 547: and of Brenitia extending from Tine to Edenburgh, begun by Ida a Saxon, Ao 550. They were both vnited vnder the name of Northumberland by Ethelsride. It continued vnder the succession of 23 Saxon Kings, till the yeare 878, in which time it was subdued by the Danes; who afterward yeelded this Kingdome to Eldred King of the West-Saxons, Anno 954. The first Christian King hereof was Edwin, Ao 627.
5 The kingdome of the EAST-SAXONS contained the Trinobants, now Essex and Middlesex. It began Ao 614, and ended after the succession of 17 Kings* the last of which was Suthred:

in whose time Egbert king of the West-Saxons vnited it to his kingdome, Ao 832. The first Christian King was Sebert, A^ 624.
6 The kingdome of MERCIA being the greatest, contained part of the Ic^ni or Huntingdonshire. The Cateiuclani or Buckingham, Bedford, and Hertfordshiere^: the Coritani or Rutland, Northampton, Leicester, Lincolne, Nottingham, and Darbishires: and the Cornavij, or Worcester Warwicke, Stafford, Chester, and Shropshires. It began vnder Penda a Saxon Anno 626; and ended after a succession of 18 Kings, in the time of Cenolphe: when Alured ioyned it to the West-Saxons, An. 876. The first Christian King was Peada, Anno 647. After it was seazed on by the Danes, and from them againe recouered by Edward the Elder. Anno 917.
7 The most strong and prevailing kingdome was of the WEST-SAXONS, containing the Damnonij, or Cornwall and Devonshire: the Belgae containing Somersetshire, Wiltshire, and Hampshire, the Durotriges, or Dorcetshire; and the Attrebatij or Berkeshire.

The West-Saxon Kings.
522
1 Cerdicus 17
539
2 Kenricus 26
565
3 Celingus 30
595
4 Celricus 5
600
5 Coolwolfe 14
614
6 Kingil the first Christian king of the West Saxons
646
7 Kenewalkin 31
977
8 Sigebertus 1
678
9 Esewin 2
680
10 Centwin 7
687
11 Cedwalla 3
680
12 Ina 35
725
13 Edelard 14
739
14 Cuthred 16
755
15 Sigebert 1
756

Kinulphus 31

717
16 Bithricus 13
800
17 Egbert, who hauing subdued the principall kingdoms of the Saxon Heptarchie, stiled himself the first Monarch: comm^nding South-Brittaine to be called England, from the English Saxons, from whose bloud he was extracted, and ouer whom he raigned. Somewhat before this Egbert, the Danes (...) like a violent thunder-clap on the Northumbers; and (...) they were oft vanquished, yet being as often victorious they at last ^eased on the Monarchie of England.



The Saxon Monarchs.
800
1 Egbert 37
837
2 Ethelwolfe 2^
857
3 Edelbald
858
4 Edelbert 5
863
5 Edelfred 9
872
6 Alured* who totally vnited the Heptarchie into one Monarchie, leauing the Danes possession, but not Soueraignty, in Northumberland. He diuided England into sh^eres.
900
7 Edward the elder 24.
927
8 Athelstane, in whose daies liued Guy of Warwicke, 16
940
9 Edmund 6.
949
10 Eldred who compelled the Danes to be Christned 9.
955
11 Edwin 4.
959
12 Edgar, who imposed the tribute of Wolues on the Welsh 16.
975
13 Edward II, 3.
978
14 Etheldred, who being of an euill carriage, gaue hope to the Danes once more to recouer their soueraignty: who so prevailed, that Etheldred was content to pay the yearly tribute of 10000 pounds: which at last they enhanced to 48000 pounds. This tyrannie Etheldred not able to endure, warily writ vnto his subiects, to kill all the Danes as they slept on S. Bricies night, being the 12 day of November Anno 1012: which being accordingly put in execution, Swaine King of Danemarke came with a Navy of 350 sayle into England. To avoid this storme Etheldred fled into Normandie, leauing his poore subiects to the mercy of the Danish King: who tyrannized ouer them till his death: after whom succeeded his sonne Canutus, who (maugre Etheldred now returned, or his soone Edmund Ironside, a most valiant young Prince, and treacherously murdered) possessed himselfe of the Monarchie.


The Danish Kings.
1017
1 Canutus 20
1037
2 Harald 4
1041
3 Hardie Canute. After whose death, the Danes having raigned in England 26 yeares, and tyrannized 255 yeares; were vtterly expeld by the English: who crowned

Edward, surnamed the Confessour, the youngest sonne of Etheldred, for their King.

Now concerning the Danes abiding here, and going hence, as they did, I obserue three customes yet in vse amongst vs. First, each English house maintained one Dane, who liuing idly like the drone amongst the bees, had the benefit of all their labours, and was by them called Lord Dane: and euen now when we see an idle fellow, we call him a Lurdane. 2ly The Danes vsed, when the English drank, to stabbe them or cut their throats; to avoid which villanie, the party then drinking, requested some of the next sitters to be his surety or pledge, whilst hee paid nature her due: and hence haue we our vsuall custome of pledging one another. 3ly The old Romans at the expulsion of their kings annually solemnized the Fugalia: according to which patterne, the ioyfull English hauing cleered the country of the Danes, instituted the annuall sports of Hock-tide; the word in their old tongue the Saxon, importing the time of scorning or triumphing. This solemnity co^sisted in the merry meetings of the neighbours on those dayes, during which the festivall lasted; and was celebrated by the younger sort of both sexes, with all manner of exercises and pastimes in the streets; euen as Shrouetide yet (...). But now time hath so corrupted it, that the name excepted, there remaineth no signe of the first institution.

The Saxons reinthroned.
1045
15 Edward the Confessour. This King collected out of the Danish, Saxon, and Mercian lawes, one vniuersall and generall lawe; whence our Common lawe is thought to haue had its originall: which may be true of the written lawes, not of the customary and vnwritten lawes; these being certainly more ancient. He was in his life of that holinesse, that he receaued power from aboue to cure many diseases; amongst others the swelling of the throat, called by vs the Kings evill: a prerogatiue that continueth hereditary to his successours of England. Finally after his death he was canonized for a Saint: and died hauing raigned 24 yeares.
1066
16 Harald Sonne to Earle Godwin, was chosen King

in the nonage of Edgar Ad^ling, Grandchild to Edmond Iron^ide, the true heire of the kingdome. In his raigne William Duke of Normandie pretending a donation of Edward the Confessour; invaded England, slew Harald, and with him, 66654 of his English Souldiers; possessed himselfe of the kingdome: vsing such pollicy in his new conquest, that he vtterly disheartned the English from hopes of better fortune.


The Norman Kings.
1067
1 William the Conquerour 22.
1089
2 William Rufus second sonne to the Conquerour, taking aduantage of the absence of his brother Robert, then in the Holy land; was crowned King, and was after slaine in Newforrest in Hampsh: by an arrow leueld at a Deer. 13
1102
3 Henry for his learning named Bean Clarke, excluded his brother Robert from the kingdome; tooke from him the Dutchie of Normandy; and put out his eyes; hee died leauing only one daughter, viz: Maud. 35.
1136
4 Stephen sonne to Alice daughter to the Conquerour, succeeded; who to purchase the peoples loue released the tribute called Danegelt; he spent most of his raigne in war against Maude the Empresse, 19.


The Saxon l^ne restored.
1155
5 Henry II sonne to Maud the Empresse, daughter to Henry the first, and to Maud daughter to Malcolme King of Scotland and Margaret sister to Edgar Ath^linge, restored the Saxon bloud to the Crowne of England. His father was Geofrie Earle of Anion, Touraine, and Maine; which Provinces he added to the English Empire; as also the Dutchie of Aquitaine, and Earledomes of Guyen, and Poictou, by Elen^ur his wife; and a great part of Ireland. Happy was he in all things, the vnnaturall rebellions of his sonnes excepted, 34.
1189
6 Richard for his valour surnamed C^ur de Lyon, warred in the Holy land; ouercame the Turkes, whom he had almost driven out of Syria; tooke the Ile of Cyprus; and after many worthy atchieuements, returning homewards

to defend Normandy, and Aquitaine against the French: was by tempest cast vpon Austria, where hee was taken prisoner, put to a greiuous ransome, and finally slaine at the siege of Chaluz, in Limousin, 12.
1201
7 Iohn his Brother succeeded, an vnhappy Prince; neither could he expect better, being an vnnaturall son to his father, and an vndutifull subiect to his brother: hee was l^ke to haue lost his kingdome to the French, who on the Popes curse came to subdue it: Finally after a base submission of himselfe and kingdome to the Popes Legate, he was poysoned at Swinstead Abby. 17.
1218
8 Henry III his sonne, expel'd the intruding French out of England; but being vexed in the Barons warres could not doe the like in France: where, in his fathers life, they had seazed on all the English Provinces. He confirmed the statutes of Magna Charta. 56.
1274
9 Edward awed France, subdued Wales, brought Scotland into subiection; of whose king and nobility he receaued homage, 34.
1308
10 Edward II, a dissolute Prince, hated of his Nobles, and contemned by the vulgar, for his immeasurable loue to Peirce Gaueston, and the Spencers: was twice shamefully beaten by the Scots, and being deposed, was murdered in Berkly Castle. 19.
1327
11 Edward III, a most vertuous and valorous Prince, brought the Scots to a formall obedience, ouerthrew the French Armies, tooke the Towne of Callice, and many faire possessions in that kingdome, 50.
1277
12 Richard II, an vngouerned and dissolute King, lost what his father the Blacke Prince, and his Grandfather had gained; and for many enormities was deposed, and murdred at Pomfret Castle, 22.


The Lancastrian Lince.
1399
13 Henry IV, sonne to Iohn of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster third sonne to Edw. the third; was by the consent of the people chosen King: and spent his whole raigne in suppressing home-bred rebellions, 15.
1414
14 Henry V, the mirrour of magnificence and patterne of true vertue, pursued the title to France, and wonne it; being ordained heire apparant to the French Crowne, in a Parliament of their Nobility, Clergy, and Commons: but liued not to possesse it, 9.
1423
15 Henry VI, was crowned King of France in Paris, which kingdome hee held during the life of his Vnkles, Iohn of Bedford, and Humfrey of Glocester: after whose deaths, he not only lost France to the French, but England and his life to the Yorkish faction, 38.


The Yorkish Line.
1461
16 Edward IV, Earle of March, sonne to Richard D. of Yorke, sonne to Richard Earle of Cambridge, sonne to Edmund of Langley, fourth sonne to King Edward the 3d whose second sonne Lionel Duke of Clarence, married his daughter and heire Philip, to Roger Mortimer Earle of March; whose sonne Roger had issue Anne, married to Richard Duke of Yorke; and was the mother to Edward the fourth. He after nine bloudy battailes, especially that of ^owton, in which were slaine 36000 English; was quietly seated in his dominions of England and Ireland 23
1484
17 Edward V his sonne, was before his Coronation murdered by his Vnkle Richard, in the Towre of London.
1484
18 Richard III, a most wicked and tyrannicall man, to make way vnto the Diadem, murdered K. Henry the 6, and Prince Edward his sonne: 3 George Duke of Clarence his brother: 4 Hastings, a faithfull seruant to King Ed^a^d: 5, Rivers, Va^ghan, and Grey, the Queenes kindred: 6 Edward the fift his soueraign, with his young cosen Richard: 7 Henry Duke of Buckingham his deere friend, and greatest coadiutor in these his vngodly practises: and 8 his wife Anna, so to make way to an incestuous marriage with his Cosen Elizabeth: but before the solemnity, hee was slaine at Bosworth, 3.


The Vnion of the Families.
1482
10 Henry Earle of Richmond heire to the house of Lancaster, as sonne to Margaret, daughter to Iohn D. of Somerset,

sonne to Iohn Earle of Somerset, sonne to Iohn of Gaunt D. of Lancaster; after the ouerthrow of Richard, married Elizabeth daughter and heire to Edward the 4th. He was also extracted from the Brittish royall blood, as being sonne to Edmund Tudor Earle of Richmond, son to Owen Tudor (discended from Cadwallader the last Brittish King) and Katherine of France, widdow of Henry the 5th. His whole warres were against home-bred Rebells, the chiefe being Lambert, and the followers, and fautors of Perkin Warbecke, 23.
1509
20 Henry VIII, heire to both families* between which were sought for the Diadem, 17 pitched fields, in which perished 8 Kings and Princes, 40 Dukes, Marquesses, and Earles; 200000 of the common people; besides Barons and Gentlemen. This King banished the vsurped supremacy of the Popes, and beganne the first reformation of religion; though formerly he had written a book against Luther, for which the Pope intituled him Defender of the faith, 39.
1548
21 Edward VI, a most vertuous and religious Prince perfected the reformation began by his father; and was a most hopefull young King, as England euer nourished 6.
1554
22 Mary his sister, a woman not of a cruell nature, if not misled: yet so much addicted to the Pope, that in that cause there died a Q. elect, vertuous Iane G^ey. 3 Lords, 3 Dukes, many Knights and hundreds of the reformed subiects; she lost Calli^e, and died hauing ruled fiue yeares.
1559
23 Elizabeth, a most gratious and heroicke Lady, was by divine providence preserued, during the troublesome raigne of her sister, to sway this scepter. She reduced religion to its primitiue purity, refined the corrupt coynes, stored her royall Navy with all warlike munition* succored the Scots against the French, the French Protestants against the Catholiques, and both against the Spaniard she defended Belgia against the Armes of Spaine, shee comm^nded the whole Ocean, entred league with the Muscovite, and was famous for her virginity and gouernment

amongst the Turkes, Persians, and Tartars, 49.


The Vnion of the Kingdomes.
1603
24 IAMES, a most learned and religious King, sonne to Mary Queene of Scotland, daughter to Iames the fift sonne to Iames the fourth, and Margaret eldest daughter to Henry the seauenth of England: which Margaret was secondly married to Archembald Douglasse; whose daughter Margaret, was married to Mathew Earle of Lennox; whose sonne Henry Lord Darnley, was father to our most gratious Soueraigne; descended from the eldest daughter of Henry the seauenth, both by father and mother. Hee was with all ioyfull acclamations saluted King of England, March the 24, Anno 1603.

The revenewes of this kingdome were in King Henry the sevenths daies, reckoned by Boterus to be but 400000 crownes: which afterward he saith to be improu'd to a millio^ and 300000 crownes; yet falleth he farre short of the true proportio^: which since I doe not directly knowe, I will not ayme at, lest I should shoot as wide from the marke.
Concerning the place due to the Kings of England in generall councells, and the ranke they held among other Christian Princes, I finde that the Emperour of Germany was accounted Maior filius Ecclesiae; the King of France, Minor filius; and the King of England, Filius tertius, and adoptivus. The K. of France in generall councels had place next the Emperour on his right hand; the King of England, on his left hand; and the King of Scotland next before Castile. Now indeed, the King of Spaine being so much improued, is the deerely beloued sonne of the Church, and arrogateth to himselfe the place aboue all other Princes: but in the time of Pope Iulius the 2d, controversie arising between the Embassadours of these two Princes for precedency: the Pope adiudged it to belong of right vnto England. And Pope Pius the fourth, vpon the like controversie, arising between the Embassadours of France and Spaine; adiudged the precedency to the French.
The Armes of England are Mars, 3 Lions passant Gardant, Sol. The reasons why these Armes quartred with the French,

take the second place; are 1 because that France is the larger and more famous kingdome: 2 That the French seeing the honour done to their Armes, might more easily be induced to haue acknowledged the English title. 3 Because the English Armes is compounded of the Lion of Aquitaine, and the two Lions of Normandie; being both French Dutchies.
The principall orders of knighthood are, 1 of the Round Tab^e, instituted by Arthur King of the Brittaines, and one of the Worlds nine Worthies. It consisted of 150 knights, whose names are recorded in the history of K. Arthur, there where Sir Vr a wounded knight, came to be cured of his hurts, it being his fate, that only the best Knight of the whole order could be his Chirurgion. The principall of the^ were Sir Lancelot, Sir Tristrum, Sir Lambrocke; Sir Gawaine, etc. They were all placed at one Round Table, to auoide quarrels about priority and place. The Round Table hanging in the great hall at Winchester, is falsely called Arthurs Round Table; it being not of sufficient antiquity, and containing but 24 seats. Of these knights there are reported many fabulous stories. They ended with their founder, and are fained by that Lucian of France, Rablaies, to be the Ferry-man of hell: and that their pay is a peece of mouldie cheese, and a phillip on the nose.
2 Of the Garter,Camden. instituted by King Edward the third, to increase vertue and true valour in the hearts of his Nobility; or as some will, in honour of the Countesse of Salisburies Garter, of which Lady, the King had formerly bin inamoured. There are of this order 26 knights, of which the kings of England are Soueraignes: and is so much desired for its excellency, that 8 Emperours, 22 forraine kings, 20 forraine Dukes, and diuers Noblemen of other Countries haue bin followers of it. The ensigne is a blew Garter, buckled on the left leg, on which these words are embroydered, viz: Honi soit qui mal y pense. About their necke they weare a blew ribbond, at the end of which hangeth the image of S. George, whose day is the installation day.
3 Of the Bath, brought first into England 1399, by Henry the fourth: they are created at the Coronation of Kings and

Queenes, and the installations of the Princes of Wales; their duty is to defend true Religion, Widdowes, Maids, Orphans, and to maintaine the kings rights.

England hath Vniuersities two:

Oxford,


Cambridge.




Archbishops 2


Duke 1


Earles 34


Bishops 20


Marquesse 3


Viconnts 9


Barons




WALES.
VVALES is bounded on all sides with the Sea, except the East, where it is separated from England by the riuer Dee, and a line drawne to the riuer Wie. But the most certain and particular limit is a huge ditch, which beginning at the influxe of Wie into the Seuerne; reacheth vnto Chester, where Dee is mingled with the sea, euen 84 miles in length. It was built by Offa king of the Mercyans, and is in Welch called Claud Offa, that is, Offa's Dike. Concerning this ditch King Harald made a law, that what Welchman soeuer was found with a weapon on this side of it, he should haue his right hand cut off by the kings officers.
The ancients were the Silures possessing Radnor, Brecknocke, Monmouth, and Glamorgan shires: the Dimetae inhabiting Carmardan, Penbrooke, and Cardigan shires: the Ordouices dwelling in Montgomerie, Merioneth, Denbigh, Flint, and Carnarvon shires.
As for the name of Wales, some deduce it from Idwallo, sonne to Cadwallader, who with the small remainder of the Britons, retired vnto this Country. But this Etymologie is by the greater number not approued, though we find many etymons farre more wrested then this is. Others very iudiciously coniecture, that as the Britons deriue their pedegree from the Gaules, so they also retaine the name. For the Frenchmen to this day call this people Galloys; and the Country Galles: which by vsing W

for G, according to the custome of the Saxons, is Walloys and Walles: And further, the Germans as yet call some nations of France by the name of Wallons. I for my part dare be of this opinion* though I know the generall conceit is, that after the Saxons had gotten plenarie seisin and deliuerie of England, the Brittaines who fled hither, were by them called Walli or Welshmen, because they were of diuers manners and language; this name importing as much as Aliens.
The Country is very mountainous and barren. Their chiefe commodities are woollen cloathes, as cottons, bayes, etc. These merchandises are from all parts of Wales brought vp vnto Oswestre (which is the farthest town in all Shropshire) as vnto a common emporie. For hither on Mundayes (which are the market dayes) come from Shrewsbury the cloath-merchants, and drapers there dwelling; buy these commodities, carry them home, and from thence disperse them into all parts and places of the kingdome.
They haue here also a tripartite division, 1 into three circuits; for the administration of Iustice. The first conteineth Flint, Denbigh, and Montgomerie shires; the second Radnor, Glamorgan, and Brecknocke shires: the third Cardigan, Carmarthen, and Pembrooke shires: and the fourth the Counties of Merioneth; Carnarvon, and the Isle of Anglesey, Wales is secondly diuided into foure Dioceses for Ecclesiasticall discipline: and thirdly into twelue Shires; in which are comprehended Snowdon hils, the Brethen, and Plinlimmon: 1 chase, 13 forrests, 36 parkes, 99 bridges; 2^0 Riuers: the chiefe of which are Dee, arising nigh Carduvaure hils, in Merionethshire, and falling into the sea not farre from Chester. Ouer this riuer Edgar K. of England was rowed by 7 inferiour kings. 2 Wie in Latine called Vaga, arising in Plinlimmon hills, and emptying it selfe into the Seuerne at Chepstowe. The riuers which are more in the heart of the Country, (for these two are but borderers) are 1 Conwy, which arising in Merionethshire, and diuiding Denbigh from Carnarvonshire, mingleth with the sea at Aberconney. 2 Tiuie, which arising in Montgomeryshire, and passing betweene Carmarden, Penbrooke, and Cardigan shires; runneth into the sea a little below

Cardigan: and 3 Chedhydy, which running quite through Pembrookeshire, emptieth it selfe into Milford hauen; one of the most safest and capacious hauens, not in England alone, but in the whole world.
The men are of a faithfull carriage, one especially towards another, in a strange Country; and to strangers in their owne. They are questionlesse of a temper much inclining to choller, as being subiect to the passion called by Aristotle (...); by which men are quickly mooued, and soone appeased, of all angers the best and noblest. The Welch language hath the least commixture with forreine words, of any vsed in Europe; and by reason of its many consonants, is lesse pleasing.
Here are 1016 Parishes, of which are 56 market towns, (being no cities, and in them 41 castles) and 4 cities, viz: S. Dauids or Meneuia in Pembrookeshire: 2 Bangor in Carnarvonshire; 3 Asaph in Flintshire. 4 Lannaff in Glamorganshire, being all the seates of so many Bishops, who comprehend vnder their seuerall Dioceses all Wales, and acknowledge the Archbishop of Canterbury to be their Metropolitan. As for S. Dauids, it was in former times an Archbishops See; but a grieuous pestilence here raging, the See was translated into litle Brittaine in France. The ordinary market-townes; for so many as I haue seene, are generally fairer then ours in England, and were for the most part built not onely for mutuall commerce of the neighbouring villages; but also for strength and ability of resistance; as being well seated and fortified with walls and castles: Though now partly by the iniquity of time, which is ^dax rerum; partly by the negligence of the people, whose care and cost should haue maintained them; but chiefly by the policie of our Kings, who would not suffer strong forts to stand in a country almost inaccessible, and among men so impatient of the yoke: the very ruines of them are almost brought to ruine.
In this country and (as I am informed) in Cardiganshire, haue lately some siluer-mines bin found out, by that industrious and worthy Common-wealths-man, Mr. Thomas Middleton: to the glory of this particular Country, and the profit of the whole Monarchie of Great Brittaine.
After the death of Cadwallader,Milles. the Princes were no more stiled Kings of the Brittaines, but Princes of Wales: who follow in this order.

The Princes of all Wales.
690
1 Idwaello.

2 Rodericke.

3 Conan.

4 Mervyn.
843
5 Rodericke, who diuided Wales between his three sonnes. To Mervyn the eldest, he gaue Northwales; to Amarand the second, Powisland; to Cadel the yongest, South-Wales.

NORTH-WALES containeth the shires of Merioneth, Denbigh, Flint, and Carnarvan.

The Princes of North-wales.
877
1 Mervyn.

2 Idwallo.

3 Merricke.

4 Ioanes.
1067
5 Conan. 32
1099
6 Griffin. 21
1120
7 Owen. 58
1178
8 Dauid. 16
1194
9 Leoline. 46
1240
10 Dauid 116
1246
11 Leoline II. Who consulting once with a witch, was told that it was his destinie to ride through London with a Crown on his head: hereupon he growing burdensome to the English Borderers, was in a battaile ouerthrowne; his head fixt vpon a stake, and adorned with a paper crown, was by a horseman carried triumphantly through London, 1282; and so the prophesie was fulfilled. In him ended the line of the Princes of North-wales, who had for the space of 405 yeares, resisted not only the priuate vndertakers of England, who were commonly of the Nobility; but the whole forces also of many most puissant Monarchs: Whose attempts they alwayes made frustrate, by retiring into the heart of their country, and leauing the English more woods and hills to encounter, then men. But now the fatall period of the Brittish liberty being come, they were constrained to yeeld to the stronger.

What Prouinces North-Wales containeth, is before said; to these we must adde the Ile of Anglesey, (which hereafter wee shall describe) in one of whose townes, called Aberfrawe, the Princes hereof vse to reside; and thereupon were called kings

of Aberfrawe. Shrewsbury also as long as they continued masters of it, was the seat royall of these Princes, who had heere a very faire palace: which being burned in some of their broyles with England, is now converred into priuate gardens, for the vse of the citizens. The farthest bridge of ^his town called the Welch-bridge, was built by one of the Leolines, (the first as I coniecture) whose statua is yet standing on the bridge-gue there.
Milles.That this was of the three the most predominant principalitie, and to which the o^her two were in a manner tributary, may be prooued by the constitutions of Howell Dha, that is, Howell the good, Prince of South-Wales. One of which is, that as the kings of Aberfrawe, were bound to pay in way of tribute, 63 pounds vnto the Kings of London; so the Kings of Dy^e^ar, and Matrafall, (or South-wales and Powisland) should pay in way of tribute, the like summe vnto the Kings of Aberfrawe.
The Armes of the Princes of North-Wales, were quarterly Gules and Or; foure Lyons passant gardant, counter-hanged.
2 POWISLAND conteined the whole Countie of Montgomery, the greater part of Radnorshire,Camden. and part of Shropshire. By the estimate of those times, it was held to be 15 Cantre^s, or hundreds of villages, (the word Cant, signifying an hundred* and Tref, a village.) This Country was by th'aboue-mentioned Rodericke giuen vnto his second soone Amarandus; whom he chose to rule ouer the borders, because he was a man of approued valour. The residence of these Princes was at Mathrafall, who for that cause were called kings of Matrafall. It was then a great and a faire town; now nothing in a manner, but a bare name: and standeth in an equall distance betweene Welch-poole, and Lanvilling, in Montgomeryshire.
It continued a principality, till the time of Edward the first. To whom at a Parliament holden at Shrewsbury, Owen ap Griffin Prince thereof, resigned his lands and title: and receiued them againe of the King to hold in Capite, and free baronage, according to the custome of England. Avis or Havis daughter and heire to this Owen, was married vnto Iohn Charleton a Valect, (or Gentleman of the priuie Chamber) to Edward the 2d: by

whom in right of his wife, he was made Lord of Powis. It continued for foure descents in this line; and then the marriage of Iane, daughter and heire of Edward the last Lord, vnto Sir Iohn Grey, conveighed vnto him this title: which together with his issue, is now extinct.
The Armes of these Princes of Powis, were Or, a Lyon rampant Gules.
3 SOVTH-WALES conteined the shires of Brecknocke, Carmarden, Glamorgan, Penbrooke, and Cardigan.

The Princes of Southwales.
877
1 Cadell

2 Hoell

3 Hoell Dha

4 Owen

5 Eneas

6 Theodore the great

7 Rhese I
1093
8 Griffin IDu Ch^sue.

9 Rhese II

10 Griffin II, in whom ended the line of the Princes of South-wales, after they had with great struggling maintained their liberty, the space of 300 yeares or there-about. The English nobility had at seueral times plucked many townes, Lordships, and almost whole shires, from this principate: which were all againe recouered by this last Griffin; who not long enioying his victories, left the fruits of them to his two sonnes, Cynericke, and Meredith, both whom our Henry 2d tooke, and put out their eyes. Yet did the Welchmen, as well as in such a time of calamitie they could wrestle, and tugge for their liberty; till the felicity of Edward the first, put an end to all the warres and troubles in these part.

It may perhaps be maruailed at, why Rodoricke the great, in the diuision aboue-mentioned, gaue vnto his yongest sonne, the greatest and most fruitfull part of this whole Country. To which we answere, that South-wales indeed was the greater and richer; but yet accompted the worser part; because the Nobles there refused to obey their Prince; and also for that the Sea-coasts were grieuously infested with Flemmings, English, and Normans. In which respect also the Prince was enforced to remoue his seat from Carmarden, then called Maridune; vp higher vnto Dynefar or Devenor castle, where it continued euen till the Princes themselues had left to be: who for this cause were called Kings of Dynefar.


When King Edward had thus fortunately effected this great businesse, he gaue vnto his English Barons, and other gentlemen of good revenue and potencie, diuers signieuries and estates here; as well to honour their valour shewed in the conquest, as to engage so many able men, both in purse and power, for the perpetuall defence and subjugation of it. As for the lordship of Flint, and the townes and estates lying on the sea-coasts, he held them in his own hands, both to keep himselfe strong, and to curb the Welch, and (wherein he dealt like the politique Emperour Augustus) pretending the ease of such as he had there placed; but indeed to haue all the armes, and men of imployment vnder himselfe onely.
This done, he diuided Wales into six shires, viz: 1 Glamorgan, 2 Carmarden, 3 Pembrooke, 4 Cardigan, 5 Merioneth, and 6 Carnarvon, after the manner of England. Ouer each of these as he placed a particular English Lieftenant; so was he very desirous to haue one generall English Vicegerent, ouer the whole body of the Welch. But this when they mainly w^thstood, he sent for his wife, then great with child, to Carnarvon; where, when she was d^liuered, Milles. the king assembled the Brittish Lords, and offered to name them a Gouernour borne in Wales, which could speak not one word of English, and whose life no man could taxe. Such a one when they had all sworne to obey, he named his yong son Edward, since which time, our Kings eldest sonnes are Princes of Wales. Their investiture is performed by the imposition of a cap of estate, and a coronet, on his head that is invested, as a token of his principality: by deliuering into his hand a verge, being the embleme of gouernment: by putting a ring of gold on his finger, to shew him how now he is a husband to the Country, and a father to her children; and by giuing him a patent, to hold the said principalitie to him and his heires Kings of England. By which words, the separation of it from the Crowne is prohibited; and the Kings keep in themselues so excellent an occasion of obliging vnto them their eldest son^, when they pleased. In imitation of this custome, more ex Anglia translat^ (saith Mariana.) Iohn the first of Castile and Leon, made his son Henry Prince of the Asturia's; which is a Country so craggie and

mountainous, that it may not improperly be called the Wales of Spaine. And all the Spanish Princes euen to these times are honoured with this title of Prince of the Asturia's.
Notwithstanding this prouident care of Edward the first, in establishing his Empire heere, and the extreme rigour of Law here vsed by Henry the fourth, in reducing them to obedience after the rebellion of Owen Glendower: yet till the time of Henry the eighth, and his father, (both being extract from the Welch blood) they neuer contained themselues, or uery seldome, within the bounds of true alleageance. For whereas before they were reputed euen as Aliens; this Henry made them (by act of Parliament) one Nation with the English; subiect to the same Lawes; capable of the same preferments; and priuiledged with the same immunities. He added sixe shires to the former number, out of those Countries which were before reputed as the borders or marches of VVales; and enabled them all to send knights and burgesses vnto the Parliaments; So that the name and language only excepted, there is now no difference between the English and Welch; happy vnion.
The same King Henry established for the ease of his Welch subiects, a Court at Ludlow, like vnto the ordinary Parliaments in France; wherein the Lawes are ministred according to the fashion of the Kings Courts of Westminster. This Court consisteth of one President, who is for the most part of the Nobility, and is generally called the Lord President of Wales; of as many Counsellers as it shall please the King to appoint; one Atturney; one Sollicitour; one Secretary; and the foure Iustices of the counties of Wales. The same Ludlow, (for this must not be omitted) is adorned with a very fair castle; which is the Palace of such Princes of VVales, of the English blood, as haue come into this Country, to solace themselues among their people. Here was yong Edward he fift, at the death of his father: and here died Prince Arthur, eldest son to Henry 7th, both being sent hither by their fathers to the same end, viz: by their presence to keep in order the vnquiet Welchmen. And certainely as the presence of the Prince was then a terror to the rebellious, so would it now be as great a comfort to this peaceable people.
What the reuenues of this principality are, I cannot say; yet we may boldly affirme that they are not very small, by these two circumstances, in the marriage of the Lady Catharine of Spaine, to our abouenamed Prince Arthur. For first her father Fernando, being one of the wariest Princes that euer were in Europe, giuing with her in Dowry 200000 Ducats; required for her iointer, the third part only of this principality, and of the Earldome of Chester. And 2ly after the death of Prince Arthur, the Nobles of the Realme perswaded Prince Henry, to take her to wife; that so great a treasure, as the yearely revenewe of her ioynture, might not be carried out of the kingdome.
The Armes of the Princes of Wales differ from those of England, only by the addition of a labell of three points. But the proper and peculiar device, and which we commonly, though corruptly, call the Princes Armes; is a Coronet beautified with three Ostrich feathers, and inscribed round with Ich^dien, that is Iseru^: alluding to that of the Apostle, the he^re while hee is a child, differeth not from a servant. This Coronet was wonne by that valiant Prince, Edward the blacke Prince, at the battaile of Cressie, from Iohn King of Bohemia, who there wore it; and who^ he there slew. Since which time it hath beene the cognisance of all our Princes.
I wil now shut vp my discourse of Wales with that testimony of the people, which Henry the 2d vsed in a letter to Emanuel Emperour of Constantinople, The Welch nation is so aduenterous, that they dare encounter naked with armed men; readie to spend their bloud for their Country, and pawne their life for praise: and adding only this, that since their incorporating with the English, they haue shewed themselues most loyall, hearty, and affectionate subiects of the State.

There are in Wales,

Bishops 4


Earles 4.


Barons.




THE BORDERS.
BEfore we come into Scotland, wee must of necessity passe through that batable ground, lying betweene both kingdomes,

called THE BORDERS: the inhabitants wherereof are a kinde of military men, subtile, nimble, and by reason of their often skirmishes well experienced, and aduenturous. Once the English border extended as farre as vnto Edenborough, East; and to Sterling, West: nigh vnto which last towne, there was ouer the Friths of Dunbritton, a bridge built; and in a crosse thereon standing, there was written this pasport,
I am free march as passengers may kenne;To Scots, to Brittans, and to Englishmen.
But when England groaned vnder the burden of the Danish oppression, the Scots well husbanded that aduantage; and not only enlarged their border to the Tweede; but also tooke into their hands, Cumberland, Northumberland, and Westmorland. The Norman Kings againe recouered these Prouinces, making the Borders of both kingdomes to bee Tweede, East; the Solway, West; and the Cheviot hills in the midst. Of any great warres made on these borders, or any particular officers appointed for the defence of them, I finde no mention till the time of Edward the first; who taking aduantage on the Scots disagreements, about the successour of Alexander the third; hoped to bring the Country vnder the obedience of England. This quarrell betweene the two nations he began, but could not end; the wars surviuing the author. So that what Velleius saith of the Romans and Carthaginians, I may as well say of the Scots and English: for almost three hundred yeares together, aut bellum inter eos populos, aut belli praeparatio, aut infi^a pax fuit. In most of these conflicts the Scots had the worst, so that Daniel in his history seemeth to maruell how this corner of the Ile could breed so many, had it bred nothing but men, as were slaine in these wars: yet in the raigne of Edward the 2d, the Scots (hauing thrice defeated that vnhappy Prince) became so terrible vnto the English Borderers, that an hundred of them would fly from three Scots. It is a custome among the Turkes not to beleeue a Christian or a Iew complaining against a Turk^, except the^ occusation be confirmed by the testimony of some Turke also: which seldom hapning is not the least cause why so litle iustice is there done the Christians. In like manner it is the law of these Borderers

neuer to beleeue any Scot complainining against an Englishman, vnlesse some other Englishman will witnesse for him; and so on the other side: Ex iure quodam inter limitaneos rat^ (saith Camden in his Elizab.) nullus ni^i Scotus in Scotu^, nullus nifi Anglus in Anglum, testis admittitur. This custome making void in this fashion al kinds of accusations, was one of the greatest causes of the insolencies on both sides committed. Besides t^ere were diuers here liuing, which acknowledged neither King: but sometimes were Scots, sometimes English, as their present crimes and necessities required protection or pardon. To keepe in this people, and secure the Borders, there were in each Kingdome three officers appointed called the Lords wardens of the Marches: one being placed ouer the East, the other ouer the West, the third ouer the middle borders. In England the Warden of the East Marches had his seat at Berwicke (a towne of great strength, and which for the conveniency of its situation, was the first thing which the English tooke care to defend, and the Scots to surprise) of which he was also gouernour. The Warden of the West Marches, had his seate in Carlile, which Henry the 8th for that cause well fortified. The Warden of the middle Marches had no set place of residence, but was sometimes in one place, sometimes in another, according as occasions required. But Imperij medium est, terminus ante fuit, by the blessed marriage of the kingdomes, that being now the middle of one, which was then the bounds of two Empires: these officers, and the cause of them, the warres, are quite extinct.


SCOTLAND.
SCOTLAND is the Northerne part of Brittaine, and separated from England by the riuers Tweed, and Solway; and the Cheuiot hils extending from the one to the other. It is in length (according to Polidor) 480 miles, but of no great breadth; there being no place distant from the Seas 60 miles; and the Country ending like the sharpe point of a wedge.
There is in all o^ most of our Brittish Maps, a great ouersight committed, which I could wish were reformed: for whereas

Scotland is by the best iudgements reckned to be 160 longer then England; England is in these Mappes made well nigh 100 miles longer then Scotland.
The denomination is taken, not as fabulous antiquaries think from Scota daughter to an Aegyptian Pharaoh; but from the Scoti, Scy^t^, or Scythi, a people of Germanie, ouer whose Northerne bounds the name of Scythia did once extend. These first ce^zed on a part of Spaine, next on Ireland, and Anno 424, on the West of this Country. More of this theame may bee read in M. Camden, who most iudiciously confuteth the absurd fables, and groundeth his relations vpon more then probable truths.
The Country is diuided into the Highland and the Lowland. The people of the former are either liuing on the Westerne co^tinent of Scotland, and haue some smacke of ciuility; or in the Out-Iles, which (as his Maiestie hath in his Bas: Doron) are all vtterly barbarous, and are no waies to be reduced to ciuility, but by planting Colonies of the more in-land and orderly Scots amongst them. The Lowlanders bordering on the East are of the like ingenious dispositions and language, almost with the English. They are the ofspring of the Saxons, as euidently doth appeare, 1 by their behauiour; 2 their language; and thirdly by the testimony of the Highlanders (who are the true Scots, and speake the Irish tongue) who call both the Lowlanders, and the English, Saxons. And very probable it is (for so much I haue heard a judicious Gentleman of this nation affirme) the Scots and Saxons invading this Iland nigh at the same time; that the Saxons might seaze vpon the Easterne parts, confronting their cou^try; as that the Scots did possesse the Westerne side, which lay next vnto Ireland and the Westerne Ilands, from whence they first came into Brittaine.
Scotland is farre more barren then England. The chiefe commodities are course cloathes, Freezes, Fish, Hides, Lead-oare, etc.
The Gospell was first preached here by Palladius, Ano 431: they now follow the reformation begun by Luther, and seconded or perfected by Zuinglius and Caluin.
The people had not long since one barbarous custome:

which was, if any two were displeased, they expected no law; but bang'd it out brauely, one and his kindred, against the other and his, and thought the King much in their common, if they granted him at a certaine day to keepe the peace. This fighting they call their Feides* a word so barbarous, that were it to bee expressed in Latine, or French, it must be by circumlocution. These deadly feids, his Maiestie in his most excellent Basilicon Doron, aduiseth his sonne to redresse with all care possible; but God hath giuen him a long life, to see it in his owne daies remedied* wherein he hath gotten a greater victory ouer that people, then euer any forraigne Prince, or any of his predecessours: an act indeed truely royall, and worthy himselfe. An other custome they once had of that nature, that the like hath hardly beene in Christendome; which tooke beginning as the Scottish historians affirme, in the raigne of Ewen the 3d, who is the fifteenth King in their Catalogue, after the first Fergus. This Ewen being a Prince much addicted, or rather wholy giuen ouer vnto lasciuiousnesse; made a law that himselfe and his successours should haue the maidenhead or first nights lodging with euery woman, whose husband held land immediatly from the crown: and the Lords and Gentlemen of all them, whose husbands were their tenants or homagers. This was it seemes the Knights service, which men held their estates by; and continued till the daies of Malcolme Comnor, who at the request of his wife Margaret (she was the sister of Edgar Etheling) abolished this law: ordaining that the tenants by way of commutation, should pay vnto their Lords a marke in mony, which tribute the historians say is yet in force. It was called Marcheta mul^eris: but whether from Mar^, a horse in the old Gall^que, (implying the obscene signification of Equitare) as M. Selden thinkes: or Marca the summe of mony by which it was afterward redeemed I ca^not determine.
The principall riuers are 1 Forthea. 2 Clada. and 3 Tay, all nauigable. The famous or miraculous things rather of this cou^trey, are 1 the Lake of Mirton; part of whose waters doe congeale in winter, part of them not: 2ly the Lake of Len^ox 24 miles round, in which are 30 Ilands, one of which is driuen to

and fro in every tempest. 3ly the deafestone 12 foot high, and 33 cubi^s thicke; of this rare quality, that a musket shot off on the one side, cannot be heard by a man, standing on the other.
The Ancients were first the Gadeni, containing Tiuidale, Tivedale, Mer^h, and Lothien. 2ly the Selgovae of Lidisdale, Eusdale, Eskdale, Anansdale, and Nidisdale. 3l^ The Novantes, of Gallowa^e, Carrect, K^le, and Cunningham. 4ly The Damnij of Clu^dsdale, Stri^eling, M^nteth, and F^fe. 5ly The Caledonij, of S^ratherne, Argile, Cantire, Albanie, Lorne, Perth, and Anguis. 6ly The Vernines of Mernis, and Mar. 7ly The Talzali of Buquh^. 8ly The Vacomagi, of Loquabre and Murray. 9ly Cantae of Rosse and Sutherland. 10ly The Catine of Cathnes. And lastly the Cornubij of Strathnaverne, the farthest Country Northwa^d of all Brittaine.
These Provinces are diuided 1 into diuers Sherifdomes, which be^ng hereditary, are a great hinderance to the execution of iustice, so that there is no way to remedy this mischiefe, so speeding, as when they are escheated, to dispose of them according to the laudable custome of England. 2ly Into 13 Dioceses of Ecc^esiasticall gouernment, which diuision was made by Malcome the third Anno 1070. the Bishops before exercising their ^unctions, in what place soeuer they came. Archbishops they had none till the yeare 1478; the Bishops of Yorke being before the Metropolitans of Scotland.
The greatest friends of the Scots were the French, to whom the Scots shewed themselues so faithfull, that the French King committeth the defence of his person, to a selected number of Scottish Gentlemen: and so valiant, that they haue much hindered the English victories in France. And certainely the French feeling the ^mart of the English puissance alone, haue continually heart^ed the Scots in their attempts against England; and hindred all meane^ of making vnion betweene them: as appeared when they broke the match agreed on, between our Edward the sixt, and Mary the young Queene of Scotland; but now this great matter is happily effected. Their greatest enimy was the English, who ouercame them in many battailes, ceazed on the kingdome, and had longer kept it, if the mountaines and vnaccessible

woods had not beene more true to the Scots, then their owne valour: for so much his Maiestie seemeth to intimate in his speech at Whiteh^ll 1607. And though (saith he) the Scot^es haue had the honour and good fortune neuer to be conquered; yet were they never but on the defensiue side, and may in part thanke their hills and inaccessible passages, that saued them fro^ an vtter ouerthrowe, at the hands of all them that euer pretended to conquer them. But
I am cuncti gens vna sumus, sic simu^ in aevum,One only nation now are we,And let vs so for euer be.
The chiefe Citties are Edenburgh, of old called Castrum Alatum in Lothien, where is the Kings pallace, and the Court of iustice. It consisteth chiefly of one street, extending in length one mile; into which runne many petty lanes: so that the whole compasse may be well nigh 3 miles. It formerly belonged to the English, from whom oppressed with the Danish tyrannies, the Scots tooke it, Anno 960. 2 Glasco in Cluidsdale, an Archbishops See; and an Vniuersity, founded 1554* by Bishop Turnbull, 3 S. Andrewes in Fife, honoured with the same prerogatiues. It is called in Latine Fanum R^guli, and tooke both this and the English name on this occasion. The bones of S. Andrew the Apostle, were translated from Patra in Morea, where hee did suffer martyrdome, vnto Constantinople: from whence they were brought hither by Albat^u Regulus a Monke, Anno 378. He built ouer them a monastery, which after grew to be a Citty; called in memory of the founder Fanum Reguli; in memory of the Saint, S* Andrew. The Bishop hereof is the Metropolitan of all Scotland. 4 Sterling (or Striueling) in the hundred so called; neere vnto which hapned the most notable discomfiture, that euer the Scots gaue the English: who besides many Lords, and 700 Knights and Gentlemen of note, lost, as the Scottish writers say, 50000 of the common sort (ours acknowledge 10000 only) the King himselfe (who then was Edward the 2d) being faigne to sly for his life. Some Scottish writers affirme the purer siluer which we call Sterling mony, to haue bin h^re coined. Wee may as well say that all our Siluer bullion,

comes from Bullion in France. The truth is, that that denomination came from the Germans, of their easterly dwelling, tearmed by vs Easterlings: whom King Iohn first drew into England, to refine and purifie our siluer. 5 Aberdon in Marr. 6 Dond^^ in Ang^is. 7 Perth, or S. Iohns towne.
This kingdome contained once two populous nations; Scots and Picts What the former were hath already beene said; the latter (to omit the confutation of them who hold them to bee descended from the Agathirsi, of Scythia) were very Brittaines: who when the Roman Eagle had with her blacke wings darkned the South part of the Iland; fled into the Northerne pa^ts, as preferring penurious liberty before fetters of gold. These men vsing the ancient custome of painting their bodies, after their Countrymen had conformed themselue^ to more ciuill courses: were by the Romans called Picti. they long swaied here alone, till the yeare 424; in which the Scots now growne populous, did first set footing in Brittaine: with whom at their first arriuall, they contracted an offensiue and defensiue league, against the Brittaines; whom on all sides they most miserably tortured. It hapned at the last that Achaius married Fergusia, sister to Hungust King of the Picts; by her he had issue Alpine: who after the death of Hungust dying without issue, was in the iudgement of the Scots, to succeed in the Pictish Kingdome. But the Picts alleaging a law of not admitting Aliens to the crown, chose one Ferereth for their king; with whom A^pine warring, was after many victorious exploits slaine. This quarrell thus begunne, was maintained by their successours, till after many bloudy victories, and ouerthrowes on both sides; Kenneth K. of the Scots vanquished Donsken King of the Picts, and extinguished not only their kingdome, but their very name: (vnlesse we will beleeue that some of them did fly into France, and there forsooth vanquished, and inhabited the Countries called now Pictavia and Picardie.) From this Kenneth the first Monarch of all Scotland, we will beginne our Catalogue; leauing out that rabble of Kings mentioned by Hector Boetius, in his hist^ry of this kingdome and nation. Neither shall I herein I hope offend the more iudicious sort of the Scottish nation, especially since I

deale no more vnkindly with their Scota, and her successours; then I haue done already with our own Brutus, and his. The first Scottish King that setled himselfe in the North of Brittaine, is according to the aboue-named Hector Boetius, one Fergus; which in the time that Coyle gouerned the Brittans, came, forsooth, into these parts out of Ireland. From him vnto Eugenius, we haue the names of 39 kings in a continued succession; which Eugenius, together with his whole nation, is said to haue beene expelled the Iland, by a ioynt confederacie of the Romans, Brit^ns, and Picts. Twenty and seuen yeares after the death of this Eugenius, they were reduced againe into their possession here, by the valour and conduct of one Fergus the 2d of that name. To this Fergus I referre the beginning of the Scottish kingdome in Brittaine, holding the stories of the former 39 Kings, to bee fabulous and vaine: neither want I probable coniecture for this assertion; this expedition of Fergus into Brittaine, being placed in the 424 yeare of Christ, at what time the best writers hold the Scots to haue first seated themselues in this Iland. The king of chiefe note betweene this Fergus, and Kenneth the first Monarch of all Scotland; was Achaius: who contracted the offensiue and defensiue league with Charles the great, betweene the kingdomes of France and Scotland. The conditions whereof were. 1 Let this league betweene the two kingdomes indure for ever. 2 Let the enimies vnto one be reputed and handled as the enimies of the other. 3 If the Saxons, or Englishmen invade France, the Scots shall send thither such numbers of Souldiers, as shall be desired: the French King defraying the charges. 4 If the English invade Scotland, the King of France shall at his own charges, send competent assistance vnto the King of Scotland. Neuer was there any league, which was either more faithfully obserued or longer continued, then this betweene these two kingdomes: The Scots on all occasions so readily assisting the French, that it grew to a prouerb, or by word, he that will France winne must with Scotland first beginne.
Now before I come vnto Kenneth, I will in this place relate the story of Machbed, one of his successours: a history then which for variety of action, or strangenesse of euent, I neuer

met with any more pleasing. The story in briefe is thus D^ncan King of Scotland, had two principall men whom he employed in all matters of importance; Machbed and Banquho. These two travelling together through a forrest were mette by three Fairies, or Witches (Weirds the Scots call them) whereof the first making obeisance vnto Machbed, saluted him Thane (a title vnto which that of Earle afterward succeeded) of Glammis, the second, Thane of Cawder. and the third, King of Scotland. This is vnequall dealing said Banquho, to giue my friend all the honors and none vnto me: to whom one of the Weirds made answere, that he indeed should not be King, but out of his loynes should come a race of kings that should for euer rule Scotland. And having thus said they all suddenly vanished. Vpon their arriuall to the Court, Machbed was immediatly created Thane of Glammis; and not long after, some new seruice of his requiring new recompence, he was honoured with the title of Thane of Cawder. Seeing then how happily the prediction of the three Weirds fell out in the two former; hee resolued not to bee wanting to himselfe in fulfilling the third; and therefore first hee killed the King, and after by reason of his command among the Souldiers and common people, he succeeded in his throne. Being scarce warme in his seat, he called to minde the prediction giuen to his companion Banquho, whom herevpon suspecting as his supplanter he caused to be killed, together with his whole kindred, Fleance his son onely with much difficulty escaping into Wales. Freed now from this feare, he built Dunsinane Castle making it his ordinary seat: and afterward on new feares consulting with certaine wizards about his future estate; was by one told that he should neuer bee ouercome till Bernane wood (which was some few miles distant) did come to Dunsinane Castle: and by the other that he neuer should be slaine by any man borne of a woman. Secure then as he thought, he omitted no kinde of libidiuousnesse or cruelty for the space of 18 yeares, for so long he raigned, or to say better, tyrannized. Mackduffe gouernour of Fife, ioyning to himselfe some fewe Patriots, which had not yet felt the tyrants sword; priuily met one night at Bernane wood, and early in the morning marched, euery man bearing a

bough in his hand the better to keepe them from discouery; toward Dunsinane Castl^; which they presently tooke by s^aladoe. Machbed escaping, was pursued, ouertaken, and vrged to fight by Mackduffe; to whom the tyrant halfe in scorne replied* that ^n v^ine he attempted his death: for it was his destinie neuer to b^ slaine by any man borne of a woman. Now then is thy fatall houre come, said Mackduffe, for I was neuer borne of a woman, but violently cut out of my mothers belly, she dying before her deliuery: which words so danted the tyrant, though otherwise a man of good performance, that he was easily slaine; and Malcolme Conmor the true heire of the Crowne, seated in the throne. In the meane time Fleance so thriued in Wales that he fell in loue with the Welch Princes daughter, and on her begat a sonne named Walter. This Walter flying Wales for a murther, was entertained in Scotland, and his descent once knowne, he was preferred to be Steward vnto King Edgar, from which office the name of Steward became as the sir-name of all his posterity. From this Walter descended that Robert Steward, who was after in right of his wife, King of Scotland; since which time there haue been successiuely nine Soueraignes of this name in Scotland. But it is now high time (the prophecies being fulfilled, and my story finished) to attend King Kenneth, and his successours.

The Kings of all Scotland.
839
1 Kenneth 17.
856
2 Danald 6.
862
3 Constantine 13.
875
4 Ethus 15.
890
5 Donald. II. 13.
903
6 Cons^an^ine II. 30.
933
7 Malcolmne, 16.
949
8 Ingulph 12.
961
9 Duffe.
961
10 Kenneth II. 33
994
11 Constantine III. 10.
1004
12 Malcolme II. 30.
1034
13 Duncan 6.
1040
14 Machbed 18.
1057
15 Malcolme III. 39.
1096
16 Donald Bane 2.
1098
17 Edgar 9.
1107
18 Alexand. ^he fierce
1124
19 David 29.
1153
20 Malcolme IV. 12.
1166
21 William 49.
1213
22 Alexander II. 38.
1250
23 Alexander III. 37. After the death of this king began that tedious and bloodie warre for the kingdome of

Scotland; betweene the husbands of the last Kings three Neices. And when they could not amongst themselues compose the difference; they referred the cause to our Edward the first, as to the supreame soveraigne of that kingdome; and he selecting 12 Scottish, and 12 English Counsellours, with generall consent of all adiudged it to Iohn Baliol, husband to the late Kings nighest kinswoman.
1300
24 Iohn Baliol an Englishman; but forgetfull both of English birth and English curtesies, hee inuaded the kingdome of England in hostile manner, and was taken prisoner, 6.
1036
25 Robert Bruce husband to the second sister, succeeded by the generall consent of the Scots; but hee being dead, our Edward the third setled S. Ed. Baliol in the kingdome. 24.
1332
26 Edw. Baliol sonne to Iohn Baliol, was reiected by the Scots for adhering too closely to our Edward; who therefore harried Scotland with fire and sword. 10.
1342
27 Dauid Bruce seated by the Scots, was an vtter enemy to the English; and inuading England when Edward the third was at the seige of Calice: he was taken prisoner by Queene Philip, 29.
1371
28 Robert Steward King of the Scots, in right of his wife being eldest sister to the last King, was descended from the ancient Princes of Wales, thereby restoring the Brittish blood vnto the Scottish throne, 19.
1390
29 Robert III. 16.
1406
30 Iames taken prisoner by our Henry the fourth, as he was going to the Court of France. In his absence Robert Duke of Albanie gouerned Scotland 18 yeares; and this King being inlarged by our Henry the fift, raigned 24 yeares more.
1448
31 Iames II, 14.
1462
32 Iames III. 29.
1491
33 Iames IV. hee was married vnto Margaret, eldest daughter to Henry the seauenth; yet he against the peace,

and all reason, inuaded England with 100000 men; he was met with by the Earle of Surrey (hauing 26000 men in his Army) nigh vnto Flodden; where hee was slaine, together with two Bishops, 12 Earles, 14 Lords, and his whole Army routed. 23.
1514
34 Iames V. This man inheriting his Fathers hatred against the English, inuaded their borders in the yeare 1542 and was met by the Lord Wharton, then Warden of the West Marches. The battailes being ready to ioyne, one S^ Oliuer Sincleer the Kings fauorite, though otherwise of meane paren^age, was by the Kings directions proclaimed Generall: which the Scottish Nobility tooke with such indignation, that they threw downe their weapons, and suffered themselues to be taken prisoners, there being not one man slaine on either side. The principall prisoners were the Earles of Glencarne and Cassiles, the Barons Maxwell, Oliphant, Somervell, Flemming, with diuers others; besides many of the Gentry. He raigned 28 yeares
1542
35 Mary, an vnfortunate Princesse, was first married to Francis the second of France, by whom hauing no issue she was remarried to Henry L. Darnly.
1567
36 IAMES the VI, sonne to Mary Queene of Scotland and Henry L. Darnly, was crowned King before the death of his mother: he tooke to wife Anne daughter vnto Christierne King of Danemarke; and was called to the Crowne of England after the death of Queen Elizabeth, vpo^ the 24 of March 1603 Here can I not o^it the prudent foresight of Henry the seuenth who hauing two daughters to marry, bestowed the elder on the King of Scotland, and the younger on the King of France; that if his owne issue male should faile, and a Prince of another nation must inherit England; then Scotland as the lesser kingdome should follow and depend vpon England; and not Engl^nd wait on Fra^ce, as on the greater. Neither will I here passe ouer the prophecy, attributed in the Polychronicon, vnto an holy Anchoret that liued in King Egelred his time, which is this* English men for that they wonneth them to drunkennesse, to treason, and ^o rechlessenesse of Gods house; first by Danes, and then

by Normans, and the third time by Scots, whom they holden least worth of all, they shallen be ouercome. Then the world shall bee vnstable, and so diverse and variable, that the vnstablenes of thoughts shall be betokened by manny manner diversity of cloathing. Certainely by this happy vnion of the kingdomes is this prediction accomplished; the circumstances of time so patly agreeing, and the Scots neuer subduing England, but by this blessed victory.

The principall order of Knighthood in this kingdome is of S. Andrew, instituted by Hung^us King of the Picts, to hearten his subiects against Athelstane King of England. The Knights weare about their necks a coller interlaced with Thistles, with the picture of S. Andrew pendant to it. It tooke this name because after the battaile, Hungius and his Souldiers went all barefoot to S. Andrew; and there vowed that they and all their posterity, would thenceforth vse his Crosse as their ensigne, when soeuer they tooke in hand any warlike expedition. The word is Nemo me impune lacessit.
The reuenewes of this Crowne Boterus writeth to be not aboue 100000 Crownes; and though they were farre more, yet certainely not comparable to those of England: here being no commodity in this kingdome to allure strangers to traffique; 2ly, The Country it selfe being barren. and 3ly, Many of the subiects, those especially of the Westerne parts, and out Iles, so vnwildy, that they cannot be very beneficiall to the treasurie.
The Armes are Sol, a lyon rampant Mars, within a double tressure counterflowred. This tressure counterflowred was added to the Lyon by Achaius King of Scotland, at what time he contracted the perpetuall league with France; signifying (saith H^ctor Boetius) Francorum opibus leonem exinde esse muni^^dum.

Here are in Scotland. Vniuersities 4.

1 Edenburgh.


2 Glasco.

3 S. Andrewes.

4 Aberdon.




Archbishops 2


Duke 1


Earles


Bishops 11.


Marquesses.


Vicounts.


Barons.






IRELAND.
Maginus.IRELAND environed on all sides with the Sea, standeth West of Brittaine; next vnto which, it is the biggest Iland of Europe, containing in length 400, and in bredth 200 miles. It is situate vnder the 10th and 12th Climates, the longest day being 16 hou^es and more.
Camden.The Iland hath by some bin tearmed Scotia, because the Scotti comming from Spaine, dwelt there. The most vsuall name amongst old writers, is Iernia; the moderne, Hibernia; the English, Ireland; and though some frame a wrested Etymologie fro^ Iberus a Spanish Captaine, some from Irnalph a Duke hereof, and others ab Hyberno aere, the winter-like and cold aire; yet certainly the name proceedeth from Erinland, which in their old language signifieth a westerne land.
Their own Chronicles, or Fables rather, tel vs, how Caesarea, Noahs Neece, inhabited here before the Floud; and how 300 yeares after the Floud, it was subdued by Bartholanus a Scythian, who ouercame here I know not what Giants. Afterward Nemethus an other Scythian Prince, and Delus a Gracian, came hither; and last of all Gaothel, with his wife S^ota, one of the Pharaohs daughters, who must needs name this Iland Scotia. Not to honour such fopperies with a confutation, doubtlesly the first inhabitants of this Iland came out of Brittaine. For Brittaine is the ^ighest Country vnto it, and so had a more speedy wastage hither; secondly, the ancient Writers call this Iland, a Brittish Iland; and thirdly, Tacitus giueth vs of this Country this verdict, Solum, coelumque, cultus and ingenia homi^um, ha^d multum a Britannia differunt; the habits and disposition of the people were not much vnlike the Brittaines.
The people are generally strong and nimble of body, haughtie of heart, carelesse of their liues, patient of cold and hunger, implacable in enmity, constant in loue, light of beliefe, greedy of glory; and in a word, if they be bad, you shall no-where finde worse; if they be good, you shall hardly meet with better. But more particularly both men and women within the Pal^, and

such places where the English discipline is heartily embraced, are conformable to ciuility; the Kernes (for by that name they call the wilde Irish) extreamely barbarous; not behauing themselues as Christians, scarcely as men.
They vse the Irish language, spoken also in the West of Scotland, and the Hebrides or westerne Ilands. They receiued the Christian faith by the preaching of S. Patricke, Anno 335. At this present, the more ciuill sort follow the reformation according to the Church of England; but the Kernes either adhere to the Pope, or to their own superstitious fancies.
The soyle of it selfe is abundantly fruitfull, as may be seen in such places, where the industry of man playeth the midwife with the earth, in helping her to bring forth; but on the contrary, where agriculture, and laborious manuring of the ground is deficient, there also the fruits of the earth are not, and cannot be abundant.
Famous hath this Country bin in former times for the piety and religious liues of the Monkes; amongst whom I cannot but remember Columban, and of him this memorable apothegme: He being offered many faire preferments to leaue his Country, replyed, It becommeth not them to embrace other mens riches, that for Christs sake had forsaken their owne. But now I should sooner find pietie amongst the Cannibals of America, then the Kernes of Ireland.
Amongst other prerogatiues of this Iland, this is one, that it breedeth no venemous serpent; neither will any liue here, brought from other Regions. Hence of her selfe she thus speaketh,
Illa ego sum Graijs Glacialis Hibernia dicta,Cui Deus and melior rerum nascentium origo.Ius commune dedit, cum Creta altrice Tonantis,Angues ne nostris diffundant sibila in oris.I am that Iland, which in times of oldThe Greekes did call Hibernia y^^e-cold:Secur'd by God and Nature from this feare,Which gift was giuen to Crete Ioves mother deare,That poisonous snakes should neuer here be bred,Or dare to hisse or hurtfull venome shed.
The other miraculous things in Ireland are, 1 all the breed of it, (except women and Gray-hounds) are lesser then in England.Maginus. 2ly, there is a lake aboue Armach, into which if one thrust a peece of wood, he shall find that part which remaineth in the mud, converted to iron; and that which continueth in the water, turned to a whet-stone: which, if those reports be false, is worthily deserued of their first authors. Thirdly, the Kine will yeeld no milke, vnlesse their calues are by them, or their calues skinnes stuffed with hey or straw.
Camden.The state of the Clergie hath bin little beholding to fortune: In former times some of the Bishops had no more revenewes then the pasture of two milch Kine: and now the violent stomacks of Impropriatours, haue so farre deuoured that which our Ancestours consecrated to religious vses, as the glory of God, and the maintenance of his Ministers: that in the whole Prouince of Connaght, the stipend of the incumbent is not aboue 40 shillings, in some places but 15 shillings. So that the Irish must needs be better fed then taught; for ad tenuitatem beneficiorum necessario sequitur ignorantia sacerdotum; and the poore Vicars plea deserueth to be heard, their case pittied, their estate amended*
The chiefe riuers are 1 Shennin or Sinei, which beginning in Vlster, runneth the course of 200 miles, to the Verginian Sea, and is nauigable 60 miles. 2 The Slane. 3 Awiduff, called by the English, Blackwater. 4 Showre. These and the other riuers of principall note, take along with you, according as I find them registred by that excellent Poet M. Spencer, in his Canto of the mariage of Thames and Medwaie,
There was the Liffie rowling down the lea,The sandi^ Slane, the stonie Aubrian,The spacious Shenin spreading like a sea,The pleasant Boyne, the fishie-fruitfull Banne,Swift Awiduffe, which of the EnglishmanIs call'd Blackwater; and the Liffar deepe,Sad Trowis that once his people ouer-runne,Strong Allo tumbling from Slewtogher steepe,
And Mulla mine, whose waues I whilome taught to weep.

There also was the wide embayed Mayre,
The pleasant Bandon crown'd with many a wood,
The spreading Lee that like an Iland faire,
Encloseth Corke with his diuided floud;
And balefull Oure, late stain'd with English bloud:
With many more, etc,

The principall lakes (of which this Iland is full) are Lough Earne, Lough Foyle, and Lough Corbes, in length 20, in bredth 4 miles, in which are 300 Ilets abundant in Pine-trees.
Ireland is diuided into 5 Prouinces, which formerly were Kingdomes, viz:
1 MVNSTER hath on the East Lemster, on the West and South the Sea, and on the North Connaght: It is diuided into the Counties of Kerrie, Waterford, Desmond, Corke, Tiperarie, and Holy Crosse. The chiefe Cities are, 1 Limericke on the banks of Shennin. 2 Corke. 3 Kinsall, which was fortified in the last Irish troubles by Don Iohn d' Aquila, and a Spanish Garrison, and 4 Waterford on the Shoure.2 CONNAGHT hath on the East Meth, on the West the Sea, on the North Vlster, on the South Mounster. It is diuided into the Counties of Mato, Twomond, Galway, Slego, Roscoman, and Letrim, this last belonging once to the O Rorkes. The chiefe Cities are 1 Bunratti. 2 Gallway, the third City of Ireland for fairnesse and largenesse.3 VLSTER hath on the South Meth and Connaght, on all other parts, the Sea. It is diuided into the Countries of Louth, Canan, Fermanagh, Doun, Monagham, Armach, Antrim, Tirconnel, Colran, and Tir Oen, whose rebellious Earles haue bin so long traitours to England, and disturbers of the Ilands quiet. The chiefe Cities are 1 Dundalke in Louth. 2 Dungannon, the residence of the great Onecles. 3 Arma^th, the seat of an Archbishop, one of whom is famous for writing against the liues of the Roman Cleargy. 4 Dongall in Tir Connell; and a London Derrie, built and peopled by the Citizens of London.4 METH hath on the East the Sea, on the West Conaght, on

the North Vlster, and on the West Lemster. It is diuided into the Counties of East-Meth, West-Meth, and Long-ford. The chief townes of it are 1 Kellye. 2. Trim. and 3 Tredagh.5 LEMSTER hath on the East and South the Sea, on the West Conaght, on the North Meth. It is diuided into the Counties of Kilkennie, Caterlogh, Kildare, Kings Countie, or Ophalie, Queenes Countie or Lease, W^isbford, and Dublin, The chiefe Townes are 1 Mary Bourg in Lease. 2 Philips town in Ophali^. 9 Kildare, one of whose Earles was complained of to Henry the eight, and when his aduersary concluded his invectiue, with, Finally all Ireland cannot rule this Earle; the King replyed, then shall this Earle rule all Ireland; and so for his ^ests sake he made him deputy. 4 Dublin seated on the L^ffie, is the Metropolis of Ireland, the residence of the Lord Deputy, the See of an Archbishop, and an Vniuersity. It was built by Harald Harfager, the first King of Norwey, and after the English conquest, was peopled by a Colony of our Bristoll men.
The whole number of Counties in Ireland is 32, in euery of which is a Sheriffe, and diuers Iustices of peace, as in England. They are gouerned after the Lawes of England: and formerly their grieuances were referred to, and their Statutes enacted at our Parliaments; but now the Deputy hath power of assemble the States, and make what Lawes, or reforme what customes the necessity of the time requireth.
Ireland once was diuided into fiue several Kingdomes, and first suffered a forraine power vnder Turgesius and his Norwegians, who were soone rooted out by the policy of the petty king of Meth, who was the only Irish Prince in fauour with the tyrant. This king of Meth, (by name Omalaighlilen) had to daughter a woman of renowned beauty, whom Turgesius lusting after, demanded of her father to be his Concubine. The Methian Prince vnwilling to grant, yet daring not to deny this petition, or, to say better command, for such are tyrants petitions) made answere, that he had in his tuition besides his daughter, a beuie of most beautifull Virgins, out of which he should choose as many as he pleased for his priuate pleasures. Turgesius reioycing at this motion, desired him with all speed to effect this meeting.

But the King of Meth attiring in the habits of women, a company of yong Gentlemen, who durst for the common liberty, adventure their seuerall liues, conducted them into the tyrants bed-chamber. And they according to the directions giuen the^, when for that little modesties sake he had in him, he had commanded all his attendants to auoide the roome: assaulted him now ready for, and expecting more kind embraces; and left him dead in the place. The Methian King had by this time, acquainted diuers of the better sort with his plot; all which vpon a signe giuen, rush into the palace, and put to death all the Norwegians, and other attendants of this tyrant. After this the Roytel^ts enioyed their former dominions, till the yeare 1172, in which Dermot Mac Morock king of Lemster, hauing forced the wife of Maurice O Rorke king of Meth, and being by him driuen out of his kingdome, came to the Court of England for succour. To this petition, Henry the second, then King, condescended, sending him ayde vnder the leading of William Strongbow Earle of Penbrooke, who restored King Dermot, and brought a great part of the Iland vnder the English subiection. Iohn king of England was the first who was intituled the L. of Ireland, which stile was granted him by Pope Vrban the 3d, who for the ornament of his royalty, sent him a Plume of Peacocke feathers, (and when Tir Oen stiled himselfe Defender of the Irish liberty, he was by the then Pope honoured with the like present.) The Kings of England retained this title of Lords til the yeare 1542, in which Henry the 8th in an Irish Parliament, was declared K. of Ireland, as a name more ^acred, and repleat with Majestie, then that of Lord: at which time also he was declared to bee the supreame head vnder God of the Church of Ireland; and the people vtterly disclaymed all the pretended jurisdiction of the Popes of Rome. Since the first plantation there, of our English people, the Countrey haeh bin gouerned by a Vice-Roy (whom we vsually call the Lord Deputie) then whom there commeth no Vice-gerent in Europe more neere the Majesty and prerogatiue of a King. These Deputies notwithstanding the large extent of their commission, could neuer wholly subdue the Iland, or bring the people to any ciuill course of life: the fathers inflicting

a heauy curse on al their posterity, if euer they should sow corne, build houses, or learne the English tongue To this ind^sposition of the Irish themselues, let vs a^ the defects of the k^ngs o^ England, and Irish Deputies in matter of ciuill policie, as I find them particularized by Sir Iohn Dauies, in his worthy and p^thy discourse of this subiect. I will only glean a few of them. First then, a barbarous cou^try is like a field ouer-grown with weed, which must first be well broken with the plough, and then immediatly sowne with good and profitable seed: so must a wild and vnciuill people be first broken and ploughed vp by warre, and then presently sowne with the seed of good lawes and discipline: lest the weedes reuiue in the one, and ill manners in the other. Here then was the first defects in our English Kings, not to tame and take down the stomack and pride of this people; though either ciuill or forreine warres perhaps occasioned this neglect: and also of the Ir^sh Deputies, who at such times as the people vpon a smal^ discomfiture, were crest-falne, neglected the so keeping of them by seuerity of discipline. The 2d ouer-sight concerneth particularly our kings, who gaue such large possessions and regalities vnto the first conquerours, that the people knew no authority in a maner, aboue their immediate Lords. 3ly The Laws of England were not indifferently communicated to all the Irishrie, but to some particular Families and Prouinces onely; whereby the rest of the people being in the condition of outlawes, or at the best of aliens, knew not how to behaue themselues as subiects: and this concerneth the Kings also. The 4th defect was particularly in the deputies, who hauing made good and wholsom^ lawes against the barbarous customes of the common-people, and inhumane oppression of the Lords; neuer put them in execution: as if they had bin made rather for a terrour, or a shew, then any intent of vse or benefit to the state. And to these foure may most of the rest be reduced.
In these termes of wildnes and non-subjection stood ^reland, vntil towards the end of the reign of Q. Eliza^eth, at what time began the rebellion of Tirone, who ingaged the greatest part of the Irishrie, both Lords and commons in that action; which ending in the ouer-throw of that vngratefull rebell, not only ^rushed

the ouer-much powerablenesse of the Irish Nobility; but made the finall and full conquest of the whole Nation. So true is it that Euery rebel^ion when it is surprest, doth make the Prince stronger, and the subiects weaker. Ireland thus broken and ploughed, that glorious Q^eene died, a Victor ouer all enemies; and lest the sowing of it vnto his Maiesty now reigning, who omitted no part of a skilfull seedesman. First then there was an (...), or Act of obliuion made, whereby all the offences against the Crowne were remitted, if by such a limited day the people would sue out their pardons: and by the same Act, all the Irishrie were manu-mitted from the servitude of their Lords, and receiued into the kings immediat protectio^. 2ly the whole kingdome was diuided into shires, and Iudges Itinerant appointed to circuit them; whereby it hath followed that the exactions of the Lords are layed aside, the behauiour of the people is narrowly looked into, the passages before vnknowne vnto our Souldiers, are laide open by our vnder-Sheriffes and Bayliffes; and the common people seeing the bene^it and security they inioy by the English Lawes, and loth to plead alwayes by an Interpreter, beginne to set their children to Schoole, for the learning of the English tongue. 3ly, the Irish were not rooted out, as in the first plantation in Leimster, and the English only estated in their ^oomes: but were only remoued from the woods, bogs, and mountaines, into the plaine and open country; that being like wild trees transplanted, they might grow the milder, and beare the better fruit. And 4ly, wheras there was before but one freeholder in a whole country, which was the lord himself, the rest holding in villenage, and being subiect to the lords immeasu^able taxations; whereby they had no incouragement to build or plant. Now the lords estate was diuided into two parts, that which he held in demeane to himselfe, which was still left vnto him; and that which was in the hands of hi^ tenants, who had estates ^ade in their possessions according to the Common law of England, paying insteed of vncertain Irish taxations, certain English rents: wherby the people haue since set their minds vpon repairing their houses, and manuring their lands, to the great increase of the priuate and publique revenue.
Thus haue you seene Ireland, which before serued onely as a graue to burie our best men, and a gulse to swallow our greatest treasures; being gouerned neither as a country free nor conquer'd; brought in some hope by the prudence and policie of her present king and late Deputies, to proue an orderly Commonwealth, ciuill in it selfe, profitable to be the Prince, and a good strength to the British Empire. For how way-faring men trauel without da^ger, the ploughman walketh without feare, the laws ar^ administred in euery place alike, the men are drawne vnto villages, the woods and fastnesse left to beasts, and all reduced to that ciuility, as our fathers neuer saw, nor can we wel sample out of ancient historits.
The revenues of this kingdome are said by Walsingham, in the time of Edward the third, to haue beene yearely 40000 pounds; but his successours to this present age, haue scarce got so much as the keeping of it cost them; King Richard the 2d being by the same Walsingham reported, to haue spent 30000 markes out of his own purse, ouer and aboue the money which he receiued there. Whether this Country were so profitable to Edward 3d or not, I dare not determine: certain I am, that the revenues at this time are double what they were before; and more orderly payed into the Exchequer then euer: the customehouse yeelding yearely no lesse then 30000 pounds.
The Armes of Ireland are B, an Irish harpe O, stringed A: which coat his now Maiestie to shew himselfe the first absolute King of Ireland,Guilliam. did first marshall with the royall armes of England.

He^^ is one only Vniuersity, viz: Dublin.

Archbishops 4


Earles


Bishops 17


Vicounts


Barons




THE LESSER ILANDS.
Camden.THE LESSER ILANDS are the
Orcades.Sorlinges.Hebrides.Sporades.


THE ORCADES.
THE ORCADES or Isles of Orkney, are in number 32, and are situate against the most Northerne Cape of Scotland, the chief of which is Pomonia, whose prime town is Kirkwall, honoured with a Bishops See, and strengthned with two castles. This Iland is well stoared with tinne and lead, and is at this day by the Inhabitants called Mainland. The second Iland of note is Hethy, called by Ptolomy, Ocetis. The people are (according to Maginus) great drinkers, but no drunkards, bibacissimi sunt incolae, nunquam tamen inebriantur: they vse the Gothish language, which they deriue from the Norwegians, in whose possession they once were, and of whose qualities they still retaine some smacke. These Iles in Solinus time were not inhabited, being ouer-grown with rushes; now they are in a measure populous and fertile; and were first discouered by Iulius Agricola, the first that euer sailed about Brittaine. In latter times they were possessed by the Normans or Norwegians, who held them till the yeare 1266: when Magnus King of Norwey surrendred them vp to Alexander King of Scotland; which surrendrie, some of the succeeding Kings did afterwards ratifie.
Two dayes sayling North of these Orcades, lieth Shetland, an Iland belonging to the Crown of Scotland; and is by many supposed to be the Thyle of the Ancients. For first it standeth in the 63 degrees of latitude, in which Ptolomie placeth Thyle: 2ly it lyeth opposite to Bergen in Norwey, against which Pomponius Mela hath seated it: and 3ly Caspar Peucerus hath obserued, that this Shetland is by marriners called Thylensell; a name in which that of Thyle is apparantly couched. That I and was not Thyle (as most say) we shall anon shew you.


THE HEBRIDES.
The HEBRIDES or HEBVDE, or Westerne Ilands, because situate on the West side of Scotland, are in number 44: the chiefe of which are Ila 24 miles long, and 16 broad, plentifull in Wheat, Cattle, and Heards of Red-deere. 2 Iona, famous for the Sepulchers of the Scottish Kings, whose chiefe Town is S^dore. And 3 Mula, which is 25 miles bigger then the rest. The people both in language and behauiour resemble the Wild Irish,

and are called Redshankes; a people, as his Majestie in his Basilicon Doron teacheth vs, allutterly rude, and without all shew of ciuility; such as permit not themselues to be gouerned by the Lawes, nor to be kept vnder by Discipline, legum severitate, and iudiciorum metu se illigari non patiuntur, saith M. Camden. These Ilands were also bought by Alexander the third, of Magnus King of Norwey.


THE SORLINGES.
These Ilands being called by the Belgians or Netherlanders SORLINGS; by the English, Silly; by Antonine in his Itinerary Sigdeles, by Solinus, Silures; and by some Greeke Writers Hesperides, and Cassiterides: are situate ouer against the most Westerne Cape of Cornewall, from which they are distant 24 miles: They are in number 145, of which ten only are of any estimation, viz: 1 Armath. 2 Agnes 3 Sampson. 4 Silly, the name-giuer (as it seemeth) vnto the rest. 5 Brefar, 6 Rusco. 7 S. Helens. 8 S. Martins. 9 Arthur, and 10 S. Maries, the chiefe of all the rest, as being eight miles in compasse, sufficiently fruitfull, and strengthened with a castle called Stella Maria, built by Queene Elizabeth, and by her furnished with a garrison. These Ilands are well stored with Grasse, Graine, and Lead, which last from hence was first carried into Greece. Hither the Roman Emperours banished condemned men to worke in the Mines. These Ilands were subdued to the English Crown by Athelstane.


THE SPORADES.
I call not these Ilands by this name, because they are memorized in any Author, ancieut or moderne, by this name; but because being many,Camden. I know not in what generall name I may more fitly include them: the chiefe of which are 1 Man, 2 Anglesey, 3 Iarsie, 4 Gernsie, 5 Wight.
1 MAN is situate iust ouer against the Southerne part of Cumberland, from which it is distant 25 miles, and was judged to belong to Brittaine rather then to Ireland, because it fostred venemous serpents brought hither out of Brittaine. It is in length 30 miles, in bredth 15 miles, and but 8 in some places. The people hate theft, and begging; they vse a language mixt of the Norvegian and Irish tongues. The soyle is abundant in

Flax, Hempe, Oates, Barley, and Wheat, with which they vse to supply the defects of Scotland, if not the Continent it selfe, yet questionlesse the Westerne Iles, which are a member of it. For thus writeth the Reuerend Father in God, Iohn Mericke, late Bishop of this Iland, in a letter to M. Camden, at such time as he was composing his most excellent Brittania. Our Iland (saith he) for cattle, for fish, and for corne, hath not onely sufficient for it selfe, but sendeth also good store into other Countries; now what Countries should need this supply (England and Ireland being afore-hand with such prouisions) except Scotland, or some members thereof, I see not. Venerable Bede numbred in it 300 Families, and now it is furnished with 17 Parish Churches. The chiefe Townes are 1 Balacuri, and 2 Russin or Castle-towne, the seat of a Bishop, who though he be vnder the Archbishop of Yorke, yet hath he no voice in the English Parliament. In this Iland is the hill Scea-full, where on a cleare day one may see England, Scotland, and Ireland: here also are bred the Bernacles or Soland Geese, of rotten wood falling into the water. This Iland was taken from the Brittaines by the Scots, and from them regained by Edwin king of Northumberland; afterward the Norwegians seazed on it, from whom Alexander the third wrested it: and about the yeare 1340. William Montacute Earle of Salisbury, descended from the Norwegian kings of Man, wonne it from the Scots, and sold it to the Lord Scroope; who being condemned of treason, Henry the fourth gaue it to Henry Percie Earle of Northumberland: but he also proouing false to his Soueraigne, it was giuen to the Stanlies; now Earles of Darbie.
2 ANGLESEY is counted a Shire of Wales, and bordereth on Carnarvonshire. It is in length 20, in bredth 17 miles, containing in former times 360 villages and Townes, of which the chiefe are Beaumar^sh towards Wales, 2 Newburg, and 3 Aberfraw, on the South-side. This Iland for its abundant fertility in all things necessary to preserue the life of man, is called rhe Mother of Wales. It was once the seat of the Druides, first conquered by Suetonius Paulinus, and vnited to the English Crowne by the valour of Edward the first.
3 IARSEY is in compasse 30 miles, and sufficiently strong,

by reason of the dangerous Seas. It containeth 12 Townes or Villages, the chiefe being S. Hilarie, and S. Malo. The ground is plentifull in graine, and Sheep, most of them hauing 4 hornes; of whose wooll our true Iarsie Stockings are made. This C^sarea or Iarsie, is ruled by a Gouernour appointed by the King of England, to whom are added as assistants 12 men, selected out of euery severall Parish.
4 GERNSEY (formerly Sarnia) is distant 20 miles from Iarsey, to whom it is farre inferiour in respect of fertility and largenesse; but more commodious because of her safe harbours. It containeth 10 Parishes, the chiefe being S. Peters. These Ilands lye both nigh vnto Normandy and Brittaine; the people vse the French tongue, and are the only remainder of the English rights in France. In their Ecclesiasticall Discipline they follow the Church of Geneva, as most affected by their French Ministers, and are both subiect to the Diocese of Winchester.
5 WIGHT is seuered from Hampshire by a little narrow, and dangerous straight of the Sea. It containeth 20 miles in length, and 12 in bredth; the soyle is very answerable to the husbandmans expectation, the Sheepe beare delicate fine wooll, and the trees store of fruit. Here are 2 Parkes, and one Forrest, as also 36 Townes and Villages, the principall being Newport, Yarmouth, and Brading. The Iland is very strongly seated and strengthened. The South part toward France is vnaccessible, by reason of the steepy and ruggie rocks which there guard it; the North shoare toward Hampshire is flat and leuell, and for that cause fortified with three castles: viz: Yarmouth, the Cowes, and Sandhead castle. In the midland there is Garesbrooke castle only, in which is prouision of armour for 5000 men; in euery village is a great piece of Ordinance: yet are not these external strengths so much auaileable, as the internall animosity of the inhabitants. It is subiected to the County of Southampton for her gouernment, and was taken from the Brittaines by Wolphar King of Mercia. Of this Iland Henry the sixt crowned Henry Beauchamp Earle of Warwicke, king; which title ended not long after in the death of this Beauchamp.
There are diuers other Ilands, as Dennie, Londay, and Chaldey

in the Severne Sea: Than^t and Sheppie neare Kent, Holyfarne, and Cockat Ilands on the confines of Northumberland; with many others, of which being of no account, I forbeare to make mention.
Thus much of the Brittish Ilands.




OF THE NORTHERNE ILANDS.
THe NORTHERNE sea is by some called Mare Scythicum; by Iuvenal, Oceanus Glacialis; by the Cimbrians in their tongue Marimorusa, that is, the dead sea; and by Tacitus, Mare Pigrum. The Tacitus best describeth it, and out of him I afford it you. Trans Suionas mare aliud pigrum, and prope immotum quo etc. Beyond the Swethlanders there is another sea so slow, and almost immoueable, that many think it to be the bounds which compasse in the whole World.Quad^. Some are perswade that the sound of the Sun is heard, as he riseth, out of this sea; and that many shapes of gods are seene, and the beames of his head Illuc usque (and fama vera) tantum natura. At this sea (the report is credible) is the end of nature and the world. The principall Ilands dispersed in it are Groenland. 2 Island 3 Freezland 4 Nova Zemla. 5 Sir Hugh Willoughbies Iland.
1 GROENLAND is situate vnder the Northerne cold Zone, the ongest day in Summer being 3 moneths and a halfe: it is in length more then 600 miles. This Country ^is not yet sufficiently discouered, but generally knowne to abound in grasse, which nourisheth great store of cattle: and giueth aire to a people dwelling in caues, and delighting in Necromancie. The chief Town is S. Thome, and Alba the next. In this Iland the Londoners haue met with a good trade of fishing; and for that cause, further searching into it, and oftner frequenting it, haue giuen it the new name of King Iames his new land.
2 ISLAND is about 400 miles in length, a damnable cold Country, whence it seemes to take its name: The people hereof, (as some in Norway) vse dryed fish insteed of bread, the best commodity is their fish, which they exchange with forraine

Marchants for other things, of which they haue more vse, and lesse abundance. The Island Ling is famous all ouer Europe. The chiefe Townes are Hallen, and Seh^fholten, honoured with the seats of two Bishops In this Iland is the hill Hecklefo^t, vomiting flames of fire like Aetna of Sicily: of which also the blind Papists haue the same superstitious opinion; namely, that vnder them is Purgatory. This Iland is subiect vnto the Kings of Swethland, and is generally conceiued to be that Iland, called of old, Thyle, of which frequent mention is made in Poets, as Tibi serv^at ultima Thyle, in Virgil: nec sit terris ultima Thyle, in Seneca. The reason which perswadeth them to this conjecture, is, because it is indeed the remotest part of the old world: but greater reasons are against it. For when Solinus saith, Multa sunt circa Britanniam insulae, e quibus Thyle ultima; I hope Thyle must be one of the Brittish Iles: and when Tacitus saith, Insulas quas Orchadas vocant, invenit domuitque dispecta est and Thyle; I am certa^n Island is so faire from being kenned from any part of the Orcades, that it is at least eight degrees distant. But to what Iland the name of Thyle more properly belongeth, we haue already told you.
3 FREEZLAND, called in Latin Frizlandia, to distinguish it from Frizia or Freizland in Belgia; is vnder the North-frigid Zone, but not so farre within the Artick Circle as Island: the longest day being here almost 20 houres. The only riches of it is their Fish, for which commodity it is neuer without the ships of Flemmings, Scots, Danes, Hautsmen, and English, which especially so frequent it, that it hath by some bin called the Westerne England It is almost as bigge as Ireland, and is subiect to the King of Denmarke.
4 NOVA ZEMIA lyeth on the North of Muscovie and Lapland, and is famous for nothing but the Pigmies which are here supposed to inhabite.
5 Sir HVGH WILLOVGHBIES LAND, so called, because he first discouered it, Ao 1553: and because he was thereabouts frozen to death: For being sent by the London Marchants in the tim^ of Edward the 6, to search a new way toward Muscovia, Cathaia, and China; the weather prooued so

extreme, and the frost so vehement, that his ship was set fast in the ice, and his people were frozen to death; the ship being found the next yeare, with a perfect descrip^ion of their voyage and fortunes. This enterprise, notwithstanding so disastrous a beginning, was prosecuted by the English, vnder the leadi^g of Ienkinson, Burrough, and others; who haue discouered halfe the way to China, euen as farre as the riuer Obi, and the Easterne confines of Muscovia: but the rest is left vncertain to further voyages in future ages.
Thus much of the Northerne Ilands.


 A TABLE OF THE LONGITVDE AND LATITVDE of the chiefe European Cities.

A
Lo.
Lat.



ANgiers

18
10
47
27



Antwerpe.

24
30
51
48



Avignion

22
40
44
40



Amsterdam

27
34
52
40


B
 
 
 
 



Besancon

20
30
46
30



Burges

22
10
46
20



Buda

42
 
47
 



Burdeaux

17
50
44
30



Bononia

35
50
43
33



Basill

31
 
47
40


C
 
 
 
 



Constantinople

56
 
43
5



Cales

5
10
37
 



Conimbre

11
25
40
 



Colleine

30
30
51
 



Copenhagen

34
30
56
50



Corinth

51
15
36
55



Cracow

42
40
50
12



Caragossa

22
20
42
22



Cane

19
20
49
45



Cambridge

 
 
 
 



Compostella

6
 
20
 



Camienza

50
20
52
40


D
 
 
 
 



Doway

25
 
50
^0



Dole

27
 
46
10



Dublin

 
 
 
 


E
 
 
 
 



Edinburgh

19
20
58
 


F
 
 
 
 



Francfort ad Od.

34
 
50
30



Francfort ad Moe.

30
 
50
30




Florence

43
 
34
 



Ferrara

44
 
36
 



Friburg

4
 
 
 


G
 
 
 
 



Geneva

28
 
45
45



Granada

17
15
37
30



Genoa

45
20
15
20


H
 
 
 
 



Heidelberg

33
 
49
25


I
 
 
 
 



Ingolstads

32
10
48
40


L
 
 
 
 



London

20
 
51
30



Leiden

27
20
52
10



Lyons

25
40
44
30



Lovaine

23
 
51
 



Lisbon

10
50
38
50



Leige

29
 
50
30


M
 
 
 
 



Mentz

27
30
50
30



Marpurg

 
 
51
40



Millaine

44
20
33
 



Modena

43
50
35
40



Maiorca

39
50
33
 



Musco

 
 
61
 


N
 
 
 
 



Naples

46
 
39
30



Nidro^ia

89
45
60
50



Nismes

25
 
42
30


O
 
 
 
 



Oxford

19
 
51
30



Orleans.

22
 
47
10


P
 
 
 
 



Paris

23
20
48
 



Poicteirs

20
 
50
10



Padua

44
45
36
10



Pavia

44
 
33
5



Prage

29
10
46
10


R
 
 
 
 



Rome

41
20
38
 



Rheimes

25
25
48
30



Riga

43
45
59
 


S
 
 
 
 



Salamanca

14
4
24
20



Siguenca

18
2
 
 



Siena

42
20
36
15



Strigonum

 
 
 
 



Syracuse

40
30
37
30



Stockholme

47
 
60
30



Strasburg

27
50
48
44



Sivlll

14
20
37
30


T
 
 
 
 



Tolledo

16
40
40
10



Tholouse

20
30
43
58



Triers

4
 
45
50



Tubing

 
 
48
50



Turine

31
30
43
45


V
 
 
 
 



Venice

37
 
44
50



Valence

21
10
39
55



Valadolit

15
45
42
5



Vienna

31
45
48
20


W
 
 
 
 



Wittenberg

 
 
50
20



Witzburg

 
 
50
 


Y
 
 
 
 



Yorke.

23
30
54
30



THE END OF EVROPE.




OF ASIA:
ASIA is separate from Europe by the Aegean, Propontis, Euxine Sea; by Palus Moeotis, Tanais, Duina, and a line drawne from the one to the other: and from Africk by the Red-Sea, and the Aegyptian Istmus.
This most famous Country borroweth her denomination from ASIA, daughter to Oceanus and Thetis, wife to Iapetus, and mother to Prometheus. It stretcheth in length 5200, and in breadth 4560 miles.
This Country hath worne the Garland of supereminency: 1 Because here man was created and put to till the land. 2ly Here our Saviour Christ was borne, wrought his diuine miracles, and suffered for our saluation on the Crosse. 3ly Here were done the actions memorized by the holy pen-men of the Old and New Testament. 4ly Here were the first Monarchies of the Babylonians, Assyrians, Persians, and Medes. 5ly This is the common mother of vs all, from whence, as from the Troian horse, innumerable troopes of men issued to people the other parts of the vnhabited world.
Through this Country runneth the hill Taurus, which reckoning his seuerall bendings in and out, is 6250 miles long, and 375 broad. For it beginneth about Caria and Lycia in Anatolia, and is in diuerse places called by diuerse names, as Caueasus, Parapomisus, Niphates, Sarpedon, Periadres, Gordiaei, Anti Taurus, etc. Through this hill are three principall passages, viz: 1 Out of the rest of Anatolia into C^licia, called Pylae Ciliciae, of which more anon^ 2ly Out of Scythia into Armenia, of which more at large when we come into that Country. and 3ly One of Scythia into Media, which are cal'd by reason of their neighbourhood to the Caspian Sea, Caspiae portae. These are the most

famous, containing eight miles in length, but for breadth scarce wide enough for a Cart to passe, and are supposed to haue been the worke of men rather then nature. The 2d mountaine of note is Imaus, which beginning in the shore of the North Ocean, and running directly towards the South, keepeth almost the same Meridian, viz: the longitude of 130 degrees, and crosseth the hill Taurus, euen in a manner at right angles. And as Taurus diuideth the North of Asia from the South; so doth this the East from the West: and maketh that ancient diuision of Scythia, into Scythia intra Imaum, and Scythia extra Imaum.
The principall regions of Asia are 1 Anatolia. 2 Syria. 3 Palestina. 4 Armenia. 5 Arabia. 6 Media. 7 Assyria. 8 Mesopotamia. 9 Persia. 10 Chaldaea. 11 Parthia. 12 Hircania. 13 Tartaria. 14 China. 15 India. 16 The Ilands which lay dispersed either in the Indian Seas, or in the Mediterranean.

ANATOLIA.
MaginusANATOLIA is limited on the East with the riuer Euphrates; on the West with Thracius Bosphorus, Propontis, Hellespont, and the Aegean; on the North with Pontus Euxinus; on the South with the Rhodian and Lycian Seas.
It was formerly called Asia Minor, to distinguish it from Asia the greater: but now Anatolia (and corruptly Natolia) from its more Easterne situation in respect of Greece (...). There is another Asia contained also in this Natolia called Asia Propria, and Asia (...), which comprehendeth Caria, Ionia, Lydia, Aeolis, and both the Phrygia's. This is that Asia which is meant Act. 19.10. where it is said that all Asia heard the word of the Lord Iesus: and Act. 19.27. where it is said that all Asia and the world worsh^pped the Temple of Diana: neither of which places can be vnderstood either of Asia the greater, or of Anatolia, but of this only.
This Country is situate vnder the fift and sixt Climats of the Northerne temperate Zone, the longest day being 15 houres and a halfe. It is adorned with many commodious Hauens, and was once of great fertility, but is now laid wast and desolate, greivously

lamenting the ruines of 4000 Citties and Townes.
The people were once valiant and industrious, now so much addicted to a luxurious effeminacy, that the Turkes (vnlesse co^strained by vrgent necessities) neuer inrole their children in the number of Ianizaries. Here once florished the faith of Christ, sealed by the blood of many of this nation. Here were the seaven Churches to which Iohn dedicated his Reuelation; 1 Ephesus, 2 Smyrna, 3 Thiatyra, 4 Laodicea, 5 Pergamus, 6 Philadelphia, 7 Sardis: All whose Candlesticks haue beene long since remoued, and now Mahumetisme hath so farre encroached on them, that few Christians remaine, and they which are, are of the Church and communion of Greece.
This Region comprehendeth the seuerall Prouinces of Cilicia. 2 Pamphylia. 3 Lycia. 4 Caria. 5 Ionia. 6 Lydia. 7 Aeolis. 8 ^hrygia minor. 9 Maior. 10 Bythmia. 11 Pontus. 12 Paphlagonia. 13 Galatia. 14 Cappadocia. 15 Lycaonia. 16 Pisidia. and 17 Armenia minor.

1. CILICIA.
On the South-east of Anatolia is CILICIA, watred with the riuer Cidnus, whose water proued very infectious to Alexander the Great; and deadly to the Emperour Fredericke the first, who was here drowned as he was bathing himselfe.
In this Province is the hill Anti-Taurus, in the straights of which mountaine called Pylae Ciliciae, was fought that memorable battaile, betwixt Seuerus and Pescenninus Niger, for the Monarchie of the world. Wherein the Nigrians being possessed of the entrance into the straights, manfully withstood the Seuerians, till at last a sudden tempest of raine and thunder, continually darting in their faces, the very heauens seeming to bee against them; they were compelled to leaue the passage, and the victory to the enimy, hauing lost 20000 of their fellow Souldiers. Nigh vnto this place Alexander with 30000 men, ouercame the Army of Darius king of Persia, consisting of 600000 Souldiers, whereof 110000 lost their liues. The chiefe Citties are Nicopolis, built by Alexander, in memory of his victory. 2 Pompeiopolis, built by Pompey the great, after his victory ouer the Pirats: who not only Lorded it ouer the Sea, but wasted and

spoiled the villages of Italie it selfe. Pompey being victor and having inflicted exemplary punishment on the ringleaders, with the rest peopled this new Towne and the Country adioyning; allowing them competent possessions, least want and necessity should againe enforce them to the like courses. An action truly commendable, and worthy so great a Captaine, rather to take occasion of offending from the people, then after offence done to punish them. Hythlodaeus in the Vtopia, somewhat bitterly, though perhaps not vniustly, inueigheth against our lawes, for ordaining death to be the guerdon for theft; Cum multo potius providendum fuerit, vti aliquis esset prouentus vitae; ne cuipiam ^it tam dira furandi primum, deinde pereundi necessitas. 3 Alexandria, built also by Alexander, and to distinguish it from Alexandria of Aegypt, called Alexandretta, and now Scanderone, a famous hauen. And 4 Tarsus, the birth-place of S. Paul, to which place Ionah intended to fly when he was sent to Niniueh. The inhabitants are giuen most to the pasturing of Goats of whose Fleeces they make their Chamblets: and to the keeping of horses, of which here is such store, that the Turkish Emperour culleth euery yeare from hence 600 horses of seruice.


2 PAMPHILIA.
On the West side of Cilicia lieth PAMPHILIA, watred with the riuers Melas and Oestros; whose chiefe Townes are Seleucia built by S^leucus, one of Alexanders successours. 2 Perga where Diana was worshipped, and 3 Faselis. The people of this Countrey, and of Cilicia, were called Soli, from whose barbarous kinde of pronunciation came the word Soloecismus. Amongst these Aratus was borne. In this Country is the riuer Eurymedon, in and nigh vnto which Simon the sonne of Miltiades, captaine generall of the Athenians, ouerthrew the sea and land forces of the Persians in one day. Hee tooke and sunke no fewer then 40 ships, and 300 Gallies in the sea-sight: which ended, he stowed the Persian ships with his best men attired in the h^bit, and wauing the colours of the Persians. Vpon their approach the Campe was opened, and all prepared to entertaine their victorious Countrimen. But the Greekes once in, suddenly put them to the sword, and tooke 20000 of them prisoners.



3 LYCIA.
On the West side of Pamphilia is LYCIA, watred with the riuer Xanthus, of which the people hereabout were called Xanthi: who being too weak for Harpagus the Persian Kings Leiftenant, first burnt their wiues, children, seruants, and riches, and then made a sallie against Harpagus, who put them all to the Sword. They were called Lycij afterward from Lycus, sonne of Pandion. Before the Roman conquest this Prouince was gouerned by a common Councell of 23 men, culled out of their 23 Citties, of which the chiefe now is Patras. 2 Isaurus, which being brought vnder by Servilius, gaue him the surname of Isauricus. 3 Phaselis, a Towne as much enriched, and haunted by Pirats, as Algeirs is now adayes. This Towne was taken by the same Servilius, at what time Pompey scoured the Seas; whose victory ouer that rabble of pirats we cannot sufficiently admire, if either we consider the speedinesse, as gotten in little more the^ a month; the easinesse, the Romans not loosing one vessell; or the euent, the Pirats after that time neuer infesting and troubling the Seas.


4 CARIA.
On the West side of Lycia is CARIA, so called from its king Cara, who first inuented the science of Diuination by the flying of Birds called Augurie. The people hereof were in former times accounted very valiant, and as saith Mela, Eo armorum pugnaequeamans, vt alien^ etiam bella mercede ageret: as the Switzers in these our times doe. In this Country is the riuer Salmacis, said to inseeble all such as either dranke of it, or bathed in it. From whence the Poets tooke their fiction of Salmacis and Hermapoeditus described by Ovid* and from whence came the phrase Sal^^acida spolia sine sanguine and sudore, mentioned by Tully in his booke de Officijs, and there vsed for effeminate or veneriall conquests. The chiefe Citties are Mindum, which being but a small Towne had great Gates, so that Diogenes the Cynicke cried out; Yee Cittizens of Mindum take heed your Citty runne not out of your Gates. 2 Halicarnassus, where Dionysius Halicarnasseus was borne, who writ the history of Rome for the first 300 yeares. The whole Prouince is in some approued Authors named

Halicarnassus: and Artemisia, who aided Xerxes against the Grecians, is called the Queene of Halicarnassus. This is she, who in the honour of her husband Mausolus, built that curious sepulchre, accounted one of the worlds wonders; it being 25 Cubits high, and supported with 36 curious pillars: of which Martial.

Aere nam vacuo pendentia Mausolaea,
Laudibus immodicis Cares ad astra ferunt.
The Mausolaea hanging in the skie,
The men of Caria's praises deifie.

3 Magnesia, which together with Lamsacus and Mius was assigned by Xerxes to Themistocles, when being banished his Country, he fled to his greatest enimy for entertainment; and there met with more safety then Athens would, and more honours then it could afford him. So that he might well say periissem nisi periissem. The King also was in a manner ouer-ioyed with his presence, as hauing (as he thought) on his side the man which had most hindred his conquest of all Gre^ce; insomuch that many nights he was heard, euen in the midst of his sleepe, to clappe his hands, and cry out, habe^ Themistoclen Atheniensem.
These 4 Countries are now called Caramania, from Caramon a Captaine of Aladine, the last Turkish King of the Zelzuccian familie: who after the decease of his Soueraigne, erected here a kingdome; which remained till Baiazet the second of the Oguzian or Ottomanicall family subverted it. It is now a Zanziack-ship, and yeeldeth to the great Turke 80000 Duckats yearely.


5 IONIA.
On the North side of Carta is IONIA, whose chiefe Citties are 1 Miletum, the birth-place of Thales and Anaximeres. 2 Smyrna. 3 Colophon, both which stroue for the birth of Homer, as also did fiue others.
Septem vrbes certant de stirpe insignis Homeri;Seuen Citties vndernamed did striueWhich had seene Homer first aliue.
1 Smyrna. 2 Rhod^s. 3 Colophon. 4 Salamis. 5 Chios. 6 Argos. Athe^ae
Whether Homer purposely concealed his Country, that men of all places might challenge him for theirs, I cannot say: only this I am sure of, that Paterculus spake it in the commendation of Hesiodus, the next Greeke Poet in order after him; that he had made knowne his birth-place: qui vit^vit ne in id, quod Homerus, incideret; patriam and parentes testatus est. The 4th Citty of note is Ephesus, whereof Timothy was Bishop. To the people of this Citty did St Paul direct one of his Epistles. Finally this Towne is famous for the buriall of S. Iohn the Euangelist, who went aliue into the graue, and by some learned men is thought not yet to be dead, but only sleeping. 2ly, For the te^ple of Diana; which for the spaciousnesse, furniture and workmanship, was accounted one of the worlds wonders. It was 200 yeares in building, contriued by Ctesiphon: being 425 foot long and 220 broad: sustained with 127 pillars of marble 70 foot high; whereof 27 were most curiously grauen, and all the rest of marble pollisht. It was fired 7 times, and lastly by Erostratus (that night in which Alexander was borne) to get himselfe a name, 5 Priene the birth-place of Bias. In this Country is the hill L^tmus the dwelling place of Endimion, who being much addicted to the study of Astronomie, and hauing found out the course and changes of the Moone; is by the Poets fained to haue beene the Moones darling, or sweet heart. Others adde that Iupiter hid him in a caue vnder this hill, casting him into a dead sleepe (whether notwithstanding the Moone descended to kisse him) whence arose the old prouerbe Endimionis somnium dormit.
The Ionians immediatly after the taking of Croesus were subdued by Harpagus Leiftenant to Cyrus the first Persian Monarch. Such of them as p^efer'd a free exile before a domesticall prison, planted Colonies in the westward parts, and among others that of Marseiles (vnlesse as others coniecture it were a plantation of the Phoenicians) others liuing in an vnwilling subiection in the time of Darius Histaspis againe revolted. In which rebellion the Athenians assisted the Ionians, which was the principall motiue of the inuasion of Greece, by the same Darius.
On the South of this Prouince is the little countrey Doris:

the people whereof together with the Ionians and Aeolians, were anciently only accounted Greeks; and the other nations of Asia, Barbarians; the chiefe Citties are 1 Cnidis and Ceraunus.
This Country is now called Sarachan, from Sarachan; who after the death of Aladine erected here a petty kingdome; subdued by the Ottoman Kings.


6 LYDIA.
On the Northeast of Ionia, is LYDIA; watred with the rivers Caistrus, famous for his abundance of Swannes; and Maeander which hath in it 600 windings in and out.

Quique recurvatis ludit Maeander in vndis.
Maeander plaies his watry prankes
Within his crooked winding bankes.

The people of this Countrey are said to haue beene the first coyners of money, the first Hucksters and Pedlers; and the first inventers of dice, ball, chesse, and the like games, necessity and hu^ger therevnto inforcing them, according to that of Persius, Artis magister ingenijque largitor venter. For being sorely vext with famine iu the time of Atis one of the progenitours of Omphale, they deuised these games, and euery second day by playing at the^ beguiled their hungry bellies. Thus for 22 yeares they co^tinued playing and eating by turnes; but then seeing that themselues were more fruitfull in getting and bearing children, then the soyle in bringing forth sustenance to maintaine them: they sent a Colonie into Italy vnder the conduct of Tyrrhenus the sonne of Atis, who planted in the Country, called at first Tyrrhenia, and afterward Tuscanie.
This Country was also called Moeonia, and was thought to haue beene the birth-place of Homer, who is therefore called Moeonius vates, also Moeonides; and carmen Moeonium is vsed for Homers poeticall abilities, as carmine Moeonio consurgere in Ovid. Bacchus is also diuerse times called Maeonius, but for a different reason; because indeed here are in all this Country no trees but of Grapes.
The chiefe Citties are Sardis the royall seat of King Croesus. 2 Pergamus where King Attalus raigned, who made the Romans his heire: where parchment was inuented, and therefore

called Pergamenum: where Galen was borne, and liued healthfully 140 yeares: whereof he assigneth these reasons: He neuer eat or drunk his fill; 2ly he neuer eat any raw food; 3 he euer caried some sweet perfume with him. 3 Laodicea. 4 Theatyra. 5 Philadelphia.
Of these Sardis was the strongest; and when it was once taken by the Grecians, Xerxes gaue commandment, that euery day at dinner one speaking alowd, should say, that the Grecians had taken Sardis. Such an order the French had in their Parliaments during the time that Calice was English; and it were not amisse if we vsed the same custome, till it be againe recouered.
Lydia tooke its name, either from Lydus a Noblema^ of great power: or from Lud the fourth sonne of Sem. It became to bee a Kingdome somewhat before the building of Rome, vnder one Ardisius, lineally descended from Hercules, and Omphale; who was once Queene of Lydia: but after the kingdome decayed, and now was restored.

The Kings of Lydia.
3190
1 Ardisius 36.
3226
2 Aliactes 14.
3240
3 Melos, who ouercame the people of Sardis.
3252
4 Candaules, who shewing his wife naked to Giges, was by him slaine, who marrying his wife succeeded him in the kingdome. 17. The whole story is this. Candaules had to his wife a woman of vnparallel'd beauty; and supposing the greatnesse of his happinesse, not to consist so much in his owne fruition, as the notice which others might take of it; intended to shew her in natures brauery to Giges the master of his heards. Giges at first disswaded him from an attempt so foolish; but seeing no perswasion could prevaile, he condescended. When hee had seene the naked Queene, and was ready to depart, Candaules cryed to him Esto fidelis, Giges: which words the Queene marking, and seeing the backe of Giges as he left the chamber, the next morning sent for him. When holding a ponyard in her hand, she gaue him this choice, either presently to be slaine, or else to kill the King and take her to wife, with

the kingdome for her dowre. He made choice of this latter euill, and killed the foolish Candaules.
3269
5 Giges subdued all Ionia. 36.
3305
6 Ardis 37.
3342
7 Sadautes. 15.
3357
8 Haliactes II. 49.
3406
9 Croesus the last King of Lydia, subdued Doris and Aeolis; after which victories he was ouercome by Cyrus King of Persia, in which battle a son of Croesus who had beene dumbe from his cradle, seeing a Souldier ready to kill his father, suddenly broke out into these words, Rex est, cauene o^cidas. After this ouerthrowe and the captiuity of Croes^s, one of the richest Kings that euer was of old; Lydia was made a Persian prouince, Anno M. 3420.

The Lydians after this rebelled; but being againe subdued, Cyrus berea^ed them of all their Horses of seruice, dispoyled them of all their armour; and trayned them vp in all manner of loose and effeminate liuing: weakning by this meanes a powerfull nation, which before that time had not only maintained its owne liberty, but awed all the Prouinces adioyning.


7 AEOLIS and MYSIA.
On the North of Lydia is AEOLIS, watred with the Riuer Caycus. The chiefe Townes are M^rina. 2 Hidra. 3 Erithro. Nigh to this Province are both the MYSIAS, the people whereof were of so base a condition, that it grew to an adage to call a fellow of no worth Mysorum postremus. The chiefe Citty was Lampsacus, where the beastly God Priapus, was worshipped in as beastly a manner and forme. It is recorded that when Alexander was in Asia, hee intended vtterly to raze this Citty; and seeing Anaximenes come to him as an Embassadour from the Towne, bad him be silent, and swore vnto him he would deny whatsoeuer he requested: wherevpon Anaximenes intreated him to destroy the Citty, which for his oathes sake he could not doe; and so Lampsacus at that time escaped. 2 Cyzicus.


8 PHRYGIA MINOR.
On the North-East of Aeolis is PHRYGIA MINOR, ^atred with
Divine Scamander purpled yet with bloodOf Greekes and Troians which therein did die;Pactolus glystring with his golden flood;And Hermus sweet etc. as Spencer in his F. Q.
It was called Phrygia from Phryxus, sonne to Athamas king of The^es, who flying from the treacherous snares of his mother Ino, here seated himselfe. Here are the mountaines Tmolus and Ida* on which last Paris (being by his Father Priamus exposed to wild beasts fury) iudged the controuersie of the golden ball vnto Venus; respecting neither the powerfull riches of Iuno, nor the diuine wisdome of Pallas, but transported with a sensuall delight, fatall in the end to the whole Country. The chiefe Citties are Adramittiu^ mentioned in the 17 of the Acts. 2 Traeianopolis, whose name proclaimeth his founder. 3 Sigeum the ^aven Towne to Troy. And 4ly Ilium, or Troy, a famous Towne, from the people whereof, all nations desire to fetch their originall. The beauty of it may be (as some write) yet seene in the ruines, which with a kinde of Maiestie entertain the beholders, the wals of large circuit, consisting of a black hard stone cut foure-square: some remnants of the Turrets which stood on the wals, and the fragments of great marble tombes and monuments of curious workmanship. But certainly these are not the ruines of that Ilium, which was destroyed by the Grecians, but another of the same name, built some foure miles from the situation of the old, by Lysimachus one of Alexanders Captaines, who peopled it from the neighbouring Citties. Now concerning old Ilium and the fall thereof, take with you this epitomated story.
The Kings and history of Troy.24861 Dardanus sonne to Corinthus, King of Corinth having killed his brother Iasius, fledde into this Countrey, where he built this Citty calling it Dardania 31.25182 E^^chtonius. 15.25933 Tros, from whom the Country was named Troas, the Citty Troy; a King which by supporting the vnnaturall malice of Saturne against his worthy sonne Iupiter, lost his owne sonne Ga^imedes: who being taken by Iupiter whose ensigne was the Eagle, is said to haue beene snatched

vp to heauen by an Eagle. 60.26534 Ilus who built the regall pallace called Ilium. 54.27075 Laomedon, who new built Troy, which afterwards Hercules and the Grecians, iustly conceauing displeasure against the treacherous King, twice tooke and defaced: Laomedon himselfe being slai^e the latter time. 36.27436 Priamus who reedified Troy; but giuing leaue to his sonne Paris, to rauish Helena wife to Menelaus King of Sparta, forced the Greeks to renew their ancient quarrell: who after a ten yeares siege forced the Towne, hauing lost their owne men 860000, and slaine 666000 of them; Ao M. 1783: so as that of Ovid may be truely inferred.
Iam seges est vbi Troia suit, resecandaque falceLuxuriat Phrygio sanguine pinguis humus.Corne fit for Sithes now growes where Troy once stood,And the soyle's fatted with the Phrygian blood.
Concerning the taking of this Towne, two things are considerable. First whether the Grecians in these ten yeares lay continually before it; and it seemes they did not: but that rather they did beat vp and downe, wasting the Country, and robbing the Seas for the first nine yeares, and in the tenth only laid a formall siege. This is the more probable, because that in the tenth yeare of the warre, Priam is recorded by Homer in the 3d of his Iliads to haue sate on a high Tower, and learned of Helen the names and qualities of the Greeke commanders: which hee could not be thought ignorant of, if they had for so long together layne in eye-reach. Secondly by what meanes the Towne was taken; and here we finde a difference: for some historians tell vs that Aeneas and Antenor betrayed it to the enimy: but this Virgil could not brooke, as preiudiciall to his Aeneas, whom he intended to make the patterne of a compleat Prince. Hee t^erefore telleth vs of a wooden horse wherein diuers of the Greek Princes lay hidde^; which by Sinon, one of the Grecians, was brought to Troy gates; and that the people desirous of that monument of the enimies flight, made a breach in their wals* the gate not being high enough to receaue it. That this fiction of Virgil might be grounded on history, it is thought by some that ouer

the Scaean gate where the Greekes entred, was the picture of a large and stately horse: and by others, that the walls were battered by a wooden engine called a horse, as the Romans in after times vsed a like engine called a R^mme. Neither of these is much improbable, but with me they perswade not the integrity of Antenor and Aeneas.
This Province together with Aeolis and part of Lydia, are now called Carausia, from Carasus a Turkish Captain; who after the death of Aladine the last Turkish Sultan of the Zelzuccian Tribe, here erected a petty kingdome, long since swallowed by the Ottoman Emperours.


9 PHRYGIA MAIOR.
On the East side of Phrygia minor is PHRYGIA MAIOR, watred with the riuers Sangarius and Marsyas; this latter being so called from one Marsyas, who striuing with Apollo for preheminence in Musicke, was by him stead: which fact (say the Poets) was so lamented, that from the teares of the mourners grew this riuer. The chiefe Townes are 1 Gordion the seat of Gordius, who from a plowman being raised and chosen King of this kingdome, placed the furniture of his waine and Oxen in the Temple of Apollo; tie^ in such a knot, that the Monarchy of the world was promised to him that could vntie it: which whe^ Alexander had long tried and could not doe, hee cut it with his sword. 2 Midaium the seat of Midas sonne to this Gordius, who being not a little couetous, intreated of Bacchus that whateuer he touched should be gold; which petition granted, he was almost starued, his very victuals turning into gold, till he had repealed his wish: and afterward for preferring Pans Pipe before Ap^lloes Harpe, his head was adorned with a comely paire of Asses eares. 3 Apamia. 4 Colosse where dwelt the Colossians, to whom S. Paul writ one of his Epistles. 5 Pesinus where the Goddesse Cibele being worshipped, was called D^a Pesinuntia. The Romans were once told by an oracle, that they should bee Lords of the world if they could get this Goddesse. Herevpon they send to the Phrygians to demand it. The Phrygians willing to please a potent neighbour, especially the Romans being their Countrymen, as descended from Aeneas and his Troians:

granted their request, and the Goddesse is shipt for Rome. But behold the vnluckinesse of fortune. The ship, Goddesse, and all made a stand in Tiber, neither could it be againe moued forward by force or sleight. It hapned that one Claudia a Vestall virgin being suspected of incontinency, tied her girdle vnto it; praying the Goddesse, that if she were causelesly suspected, she would suffer the ship to goe forward, which was no sooner said then granted; Claudia by her girdle drawing the ship vp the streame to Rome, where I leaue the people wondring at the miracle.
The Phrygians were by Psamniticus King of Aegypt, accou^ted the ancientest people of the world, and that forsooth on this wise experiment. Psamniticus desirous to knowe to whom the greatest antiquity of right belonged, caused two children to be shut vp in a ^old, where they were suckled by Goats, al humane company being on a great penalty prohibited to visit them. All the language which the children had learned of the Goats their nurses was Bec; which with the Phrygians signifying bread, and in no other tongue, as it seemeth, bearing any signification at al, gaue the verdict on their side: but as it appeares the other nations of the world not yeelding to this sentence, by a writ of Ad melius inquirendum, impannelled a new Iury, wherein it was pronounced that Scytharum gens semper erat antiquissima. In this kingdome raigned Niobe, who preferring her selfe before Latona, had all her children slaine before her face, and shee her selfe was turned to a stone. Here also raigned Tantalus, who being rich and wa^ting wit to vse his prosperity, is fained to stand in hell vp to the chinne in water, and vnder a tree whose apples touch his lips; yet both the one and the other flie from him, of which thus Ovid,
--Tibi Tantale nullaeDeprenduntur aquae, quaeque imminet effugit arbor.Thou canst not, Tantalus, the waters tast;The tree hang'd ouer thee doth fly as fast.
This Country together with the other part of Lydia, was once the Territory of the Aidinian Kings, so called from Aidin, another Turkish Captaine; who after the death of Aladine possessed

these parts with the title of King; long since ouerthrowne by the Ottoman Familie.


10 BYTHINIA.
On the North side of the Phrygias is seated Bythinia, watred with the riuers Sangarius. 2 Ascanius. 3 Calpas. 4 Psillis. and ^ Granuicu^, nigh vnto which Alexander obtained the first victory against the Persians, of whom he slewe 20000. Nigh vnto this is mount Stella, where Pompey ouerthrew Mithridates; and Tamberlaine with 800000 Tartarians, encountred with Baiaz^t, whose Army consisted of 500000 men: of which 200000 lost their liues that day; and Baiazet being taken, was pend and carried about in an iron Cage, against whose barres he beat out his braines. The ch^efe Townes are Nicomedia, whose name declares its founder. 2 Phasso where Aesculapius was borne. 3 Heraclia. 4 Nice where the first generall Councell was held Anno 314, to which there assembled 318 Bishops to beat downe the Arian heresie. Here was also called another Councell by the Empresse Irene, but for a worse end* for in this the lawfulnesse of making and worshipping Images was established, and that verily by many substantiall arguments. Iohn one of the Legats of the Easterne Churches, proued the making of Images lawful, because God said, Let vs make man after our owne image: A sound argument to ouerthrowe one of Gods Commandements, and yet it was the^e decreed, that they should be reuerenced and adored in as ample and pious manner, as the blessed and glorious Trinity. This Citty was the imperiall seat of the Nicean Kings: the first of which was Theodorus Lascaris, who fled hither from the Latines, who had newly taken Constantinople; and began this kingdome containing Bythinia, both Phrygia's, Lydia, and Ionia. The fourth and last King was also a Theodorus, who lost it to Michael Palaeologus. 5 Calcedon, where the fourth generall Councel was assembled by the command of the Emperour Martianus, to repell the heresie of Nestorius; in this Councell were 530 Bishops. 6 Prusa or Brusa, built by Prusias King of Bythinia; which betrayed Annibal, who fled to him for succour. Fourth Libissa, where Annibal lyeth buried. This Prusa was a long time the seat of the Ottoman

Kings, till Mahomet the first beganne to keepe his residence at Adrianople.


II PONTVS.
On the North-East of Bythinia is PONTVS, watred with the riuers Parthus and Hippias. The chiefe Townes are 1 Tomos to which Ovid was banished.
Cum maris Euxini positos ad lae^ae Tomitas,Quaerere me laesi principis ira iubet.My wronged Princes wrath commands me seekeTomos vpon Euxinus left hand creeke.
For what cause this most excellent Poet was banished, is not yet agreed on. Some say it was for the vnlawfull pleasures, which he enioyed with Iulia, Augustus daughter; whom, in his Amorum, he celebrateth vnder the borrowed name of Corinna. Others imagine, that he had seene Augustus himselfe vnnaturally vsing the company of the same Iulia, his daughter; for which the offended Prince banished him: to which, it is thought he alluded, in his booke de Tristibus, where he saith, Cur aliquid vidi, cur nexia lumina feci? etc. But certaine it is, that whatsoeuer was the true reason of his exile, the pretended cause was, the lasciuious and inflammatory bookes which he ha^ written, de arte amandi; and this he in diuers places of his workes acknowledgeth. 2. Claudiopolis. 3 Flau^opolis. and Pythius where Chrysostome liued in exile. In this Country liued King Mithridat^s, who being once a friend and confederate with the Romans, to^k their part against Aristonicus; who would not consent to the admission of the Romans into Pergamus, according to the will of Attalus. Afterward conceauing an ambitious hope to obtaine the Monarchie of Asia, in one night he plotted and effected the death of all the Roman Souldiers dispersed in Anatolia, being in number 150000* in like manner, as in after times the English, taught perhaps by this example, murdred all the Danes then resident in England; and the Sicilians massacred all the French inhabiting Sicilia, as we h^ue formerly declared. He dispossessed Nicodemes sonne to Prusias King of Bythinia, Ariobarzanes King of Cappadocia, and Philemen King of Paphlagonia, of their estates; because they persisted faithful to his enimies

of Rome* he excited the Grecians to rebell, and allured all the Iles, except Rhodes, from their obedience to the Romans: and finally hauing disturbed their victories, and much shaken their estate, for the space of 40 yeares; hee was with much adoe vanquished by the valour and felicity of L. Sylla, Lucullus, and Pompey the great, three of the greatest Souldiers that euer the Roman Empire knewe: yet did not the Roman puissance so much plucke downe his prowd heart, as the rebellion of his son Pharnaces against him; which he no sooner heard, but he would haue poysoned himselfe: but hauing formerly so vsed his body to a kinde of poyson allaid (which from his inuenting of it we now call Mithridate) that the venome could not worke vpon him, he slew himselfe. He is said to haue beene an excellent Scholler, and to haue spoken perfectly the languages of 22 nations. After his death the Romanes easily recouered their own, and made that kingdome a Prouince of their Empire.


12 PAPHLAGONIA.
On the East side of Pontus is PAPHLAGONIA (so called from Paphlago, son to Phineus) watred with the riuer Parthenius. The chief city is Pompe^opolis,Mela. built by Pompey the great. 2 Sinopo famous for its plenty of brasse, Lead, and other minerals. 3 Tios of old a Colony of the Milesians; 4 Citoros built and named by Citorus the son of that Phryxus, of whom Phrygia took denomination. 4 Amysus a sea-towne once of great fame, now called Simiso. Mithridates, of whom we but now spake, was this Countryman by birth, who for that cause so loued it, that he here kept his residence,Maginus. and made the city of Sinope his regall seat. This little Country was heretofore the seat of foure d^fferent Nations, viz: 1 the Tibareni, of whom it is said, that they neuer waged warre on any enemy, but they faithfully certified them before-hand, of the time and place of their fight. 2ly the Heptacometae. 3ly the Mossynoeci, both which were a people so beastly and shamelesse, that they vsed to performe the work of generation in publique, not knowing that multa sunt honesta factu, quae sunt turpia visu: and 4ly the Heneti, to whom the Venetians, as we haue already said, doe owe their originall.



13 GALLATIA.
On the Southside of Paphlagonia is GALLATIA, so called of the Gaules, who here planted themselues vnder the leading of Brennus: to the people of this Prouince did S. Paul dedicate one of his Epistles. The chief cities hereof are 1 Gutia, or Iuliopolis. 2 Ancyra (now Angouri) famous at this present for the making of chamlets, and in former times for a Synode here holden, called Synodus A^cyricana. 3 Pisius a town of great traffique. And 4 Tavium, where there was a brazen Statua of Iupiter, whose Temple was a priuiledged Sanctuary.
The soyle is very fruitfull, but aboue all yeeldeth the stones called Amithists, which are said to preserue the man that weareth them from drunkennesse; and take name from a privativum, and (...), ebrius, which commeth from (...), vinum.
The principall riuers are 1 Tion and Halis.
The people hereof were Gaules only in name, retaining little in them of their Ancestours valour. For as the plants and trees loose much of their vertue, being transplanted into another soyle; so these men lost their natiue courage, strength, and hardinesse, being weakned by the Asian pleasures and delicacies. So as Tully saith, for a man to be good in other places, is no masterie; but in Asia to lead a temperate life, is indeed praise-worthy. So might one haue said to the Gaules: To be couragious and patient of trauell among the mountaines, was no whit admired; but to haue continued so amidst the delights of Asia, had bin indeed meritorious. But these men were so farre from assailing the Romans in the Ca^itol, that they lost their own Country to Manlius a Roman Generall. During which warre* I find no memorable act, but that of the Kings wife Chiomara; who being by a Centurion rauished, in revenge cut off his head, and presented it to her husband. Deiotarus, whose cause Tully pleaded, was king of this Prouince.


14 CAPPADOCIA.
On the East side of Gallatia, is Leucosyria, or CAPPADOCIA, the people whereof were formerly accounted to be of a very poisonous nature, insomuch that it is recorded, that if a snake did bite a Cappadocian,Turk. hist. the mans blood was poison to the snake.

and killed him. The chief cities are 1 Erzyrum, situate on the very confines of the greater Armenia; for which cause it is the Rendevous or place of meeting for all the Turkish soldiers, when there is any e^pedition in hand against the Persian; and where, after the warre or sommer ^nded, they are all again dismissed. 2 Amasia, whether the Turkish Emperous continually vse to send their eldest sonnes immediatly after their circumcision, whence they neuer returne again, till the deaths of their fathers. 3 Mazaca, called by T^berius, Neo-Caesarea, where S. Basil li^ed, who was the first Author of Monasticall liues. 4 Sebas^ia in which when Tamberlain had taken it, he buried 12000 men, women, and children in some few pits aliue together. 5 Nazianzum, whereof Gregory Nazianzenus was Bishop. 6 Nyssa, where liued another Gregory called Nyssenus, brother to S. Basil, and 7 Trapesus, or Trabezond, the Imperiall seat of the Comneni. Im^ediatly after the Latines were possessed of the Constantinopolitan Empire, Alexius Comnenus, one of the blood regall, with-drew himselfe to this town, and raised here a new Empire; containing Pontus, Gallatia, and Cappadocia, about the yeare 1205. This Empire flourished in all prosperity till the yeare 1461, when Mahomet the great took it from Dauid the last Emperour, whose name and progeny he quite extinguished.
The chief riuers of this Country are 1 Iris, and 2 Thermodon. About the banks of this riuer Thermodon, dwelt the Amazons, so called either quasi (...), because they vsed to cut off their right papps, that they might not be an impediment to their shooting: or from (...) and (...) sine pane, because they vsed not to eat bread; or from (...), because they liue together. They were originally of Scythia,Pezel. in Sleid. and accompanied their husbands to these parts, about the time of the Scythians first irruptions into Asia, in the time of Sesostris king of Egypt. The leaders of this people into Cappadocia, were Plinos and Scolpythus, two young men of a great house, whom a contrary faction had banished. They held a great hand ouer the Themiscyrij, who inhabited this region, and the Nations round about them: At last they were by treachery all murdered. But their wiues now doubly

vexed both with exile and widowhood, and extremity of griefe and feare, producing its vsuall effect, desperatnes; they set vpon the Conquerours vnder the conduct of Lampedo and Marpesia, and not only ouerthrow them, but also infinitely inlarge their Dominions: such as were subiected vnto them they called (...).

The Amazonian Queenes.
1 Lampedo first Queenes of the Amazons in Cappadocia.
1 Marpesia first Queenes of the Amazons in Cappadocia.
2 Ortera.
3 Antiopa, whose sisters Hippolite and Menalippe, challenged Hercules and Theseus to single combate: and were at last hardly vanquished, to their eternall credits.
4 Penthisilea, who came with a troop of braue Viragoes, to the aid of Priam King of Troy; she invented the battaile axe, and was at last slain by Pyrrhus, son to Achilles. Long after her death raigned Thalestris, who came to Alexander being in Hircania, and plainly told him she came to lye with him; which done, she returned: and at last by little and little this Nation was extinct. They vsed in matters of copulation, to goe to their neighbouring men thrice in a yeare: if they brought forth males, they sent them to their Fathers; if females, they kept them, and trayned them vp in all martiall discipl^ne.

The whole Country of Cappadocia, was made a Roman prouince after the death of Archelaus, the next successor to Ariobarzanes.


15 LYCAONIA.
On the South of Cappadocia is LYCAONIA, watred with the riuer Lycus. In the South of this Prouince where it consineth with Lycia,Stephanus is the hill Chimaera: in the top whereof Lyons roared; in the middle goates grazed; and in the lower part serpents lurked. Hence is Chimaera by the Poets fained to be^ Mo^ster, hauing the head of a Lyon, the body of a goat, the taile of a serpent.
Quoque Chimaera jugo medijs in partibus hircum,Pectus and ora Leae, caudam Serpentis habebat.Chimaer her mid parts from a Goat did take,From Lyon head and brest; taile from a snake.
This mountaine was made habitable by Bellerophon, who is therefore fained to haue killed the Monster Chimaera. The chiefe Cities are Iconium, once the regall seat of the Aladine Sultans. 2 List^a where Timothy was borne: where Paul and Barnabas healing a Criple, were by the blind Ethnicks adored as Gods; calling Paul, Mercury; and Barnabas, Iupiter: Howsoeuer not long after, at the instigation of some malicious Iewes, they stoned Paul, and cast him out of their city, where he recouered, and departed with Barnabas. Acts 14th.


16 PISIDIA. 17 ARMENIA.
On the East side of Lycaonia is PISIDIA, whose cities are Antiochia and Lisinia. The people of this Country hauing offended Cyrus the brother of Artaxerxes Mnemon, gaue him good occasion to leuie an Army, pretending revenge on them; but intending to dispossesse his brother of the Persian Monarchie. But Tisaphernes, Lieftenant for the King in Asia, seeing greater preparations then were sufficient, to oppresse the weak Pisidians, made the King acquainted with his suspicions, who accordingly prouided for resistance. Cyrus Army consisted of 12000 Grecians, and 100000 Persians: the Kings forces were no fewer then 9000000 fighting men. They meet at Cunaxa not farre from Babylon, where Cyrus lost both the victory and his life. The Grecians who had made their side good, and stood on termes of honourable composition, being by Tisaphernes betrayed, lost the best of their company. The rest vnder the conduct of Xenophon, made a safe retreit home, in despite of 200000 men, which followed at their heeles. This Xenophon was an agent in, and the historian of this expedition, by whose example the Spartans, and after them the Macedonians, first attempted the conquest of Persia. Eastward from Pisidia is ARMENIA MINOR, which by some is thought to be the Land of Ararat, on whose mountaines the Arke rested, the Remnants of which, Iosephus saith, were in his time to be seene. The chiefe town is Melexona, whose territory is abundant in oile and wine.
Asia being totally subdued by the Persians,Diod^rus. was not long after

taken from them by the Grecians, vnder the prosperous ensignes of victorious Alexander. After his decease, the Empire being diuided among his Captaines: Asia fell to the share of Antigonus; whose son Demetrius seised on the kingdome of Macedonia, and left Asia, subdued by Seleucus Nicanor K. of Syria and the East, being also one of Alexanders heires. The sixt from this Seleucus, was Antiochus, called the Great; who waging warre with yong Ptolomy Philopater, King of Egypt, committed by his father to the protection of the Romanes, prouoked the Senate of Rome to send Scipio (surnamed for his Asian victories) Asiaticus, against him; who compelled him to forsake Asia, which the Romans presently took into their possession. Other motiues there were to cause this warre; as that Antiochus entertained Annibal, being a professed enemy to the state of Rome; that he demanded restitution of the City Lysimachia, possessed by the Romans; that he had took into his protection Thoas, a Prince of Aetolia, revolted from the seruice of their state; but chiefly that the Romans by the ouerthrow of a King so potent, might adde to their fame and Dominion. Vnder the Romans this prouince long continued, till the Turkes by little and little, wrested it from the Empire of Greece, and subdued it to their Mahumetan superstition.
Thus much of Anatolia.



OF SYRIA.
SYRIA hath on the East Euphrates, on the West the Mediterranean Sea, on the South Palestine, and on the North Cilicia, and other parts of Asia Minor.
The inhabitants of this Country are either Mahumetans, or Christians.Brerewood. These latter are subdiuided into different Sects of Melchi^es, Iacobites, and Maronites: which as in the main points they agree with the Greeke Church, so in certain other they are repugnant vnto it. The last of these, viz: the Maronites, are only found in mount Libanus, so much renowned in holy Writ for its goodly Cedars, Their Patriarch is alwayes called Peter, he hath vnder his jurisdiction 9 Bishops, and resideth commonly

at Tripolis. They held heretofore diuers opinions with the Grecians; but in the Papacie of Clement 8th, they receiued the Roman Religion. They possesse in this hillie Country many scattered Villages, amongst all which, foure only in all Syria speake the Syriacke tongue. viz: 1 Eden, a small village, yet a Bishops See,Biddulph. called by the Turkes, Anchora; 2 Hatcheeth; 3 Sharrie, where the Patriarch of these Maronites sometimes resideth, and 4 Bolosa, or Blouza. These Maronites, though they haue acknowledged the Popes supremacy; yet they retaine still the Liturgy of the Greekes. They took this name from one Maron, who is mentioned in the fift act of the Constantinopolitan Counce^l. The Iacobites are so called from Iacobus Syrus, who liued Anno 5^0. Their opinions contrary to the Church of Greece and Rome, are 1. They acknowledge but one Will, Nature, and Operation in Christ. 2 They vse Circumcision in both sexes. 3. They signe their Children with the signe of the Crosse, imprinted with a burning iron. 4 They affirme Angels to consist of 2 substances, fire, and light. The Patriarch of this Sect is alwayes called Ignatius, he keepeth his residence at Carami in Mesapotamia, and i^ said to haue 160000 Families vnder his jurisdiction. The Melchites are subiect to the Patriarch of Antiochia, and are of the same tenets with the Grecians, excepting only, that they celebrate diuine seruice as solemnly on the Saturday, as the Sunday. They take their denomination from Melchi, which in the Syriacke, signifieth a King; because in matters of religion the people followed the Emperours injunctions, and were of the Kings Religion, as the saying is. Here are also in the mountainous parts of this Country, between it and Armenia maior, a certain people whom they call Curdi or C^ordes, descended, as it is though^, of the ancient Parthians. These men worship the diuell, and as themselues judge, not without reason. For God (they say) is a good man, and will doe no body harme: but the diuell is a knaue, and must be pleased, lest he hurt them.
The chiefe riuers are Euphrates,Stephanus. which watring the Garden of Eden, hath his fountaine in the Mountaines of Armenia, and running by Babylon, disgorgeth it selfe into the Persian sea: and Orontis, which rising about mount Libanus, and visiting the

walls of Selencia, gently saluteth the Mediterranean Sea.
This country is diuided into three Prouinces, viz; Phoenicia, 2 Caelo-Syria, and 3 Syro-Phoenicia.
PHOENICIA lyeth South towards Canaan the chief cities are 1 Ptolomais or Acris, or Acon, famous for so many christian Armies which haue besieged it: especially those of our Richard the 1,Camden. and Edward the 1. This latter was here treacherously wounded by an Infidell, with a poysoned knife, whose venome could by no means be asswaged, til his most vertuous wife (proposing herein a most rare example of conjugall loue) sucked out the poison, which her loue made sweet to her delicate palat. And as for Richard, he grew so feared and redoubted among the Turkes, that when their little children began to cry, their mothers would say vnto them, peace, King Richard is comming: and when their horses at any time started, they would put spur vnto them; and say, What you iades, doe you thinke King Richard is heere? 2 Sarepta, where Elias (who had formerly liued in mount Carmel nigh adjoyning) was sustained in a famine by a widdow, whose son he raised from death. 3 Sido^, once a famous city, now contracted into a narrower compasse, is gouerned by the Emir or Prince of the Drusians; who being the offspring of the Christians, which vnder the conduct of Godfrey D. of Bulloine, descended into these parts, doe still maintaine their liberty against the Turkes; though they haue in a manner forgot their religion, yet so that they embraced not Mahumetanisme, and are rather of no faith, then any. The white turbant they weare like the Turks; circumcision they abhor; from wine they refraine not, and account it lawful most vnlawfully to marry with their own daughters. They are a people very warlike, stoue, and resolute; and haue with great valour resisted all the attempts and warres of the Turkish Sultans. The country which they possesse, is environed with the confines of Ioppa aboue Caesarea and Palestine; and within the riuers of Iordan and Orontes, stretching it selfe euen to the plaines of Damasco. They were in the time of Amurath the 3d, gouerned by 5 Emirs or Princes, one of which was ManOgli, who so resolutely resisted Ibrahim Bassa, Anno 1585. This Man-Ogli then kept his Court and

residence at Andirene a strong place situate on a hill, and was of that wealth, that he sent to make his peace vnto the aboue-named Ibrahim, 320 Arcubuses, 20 packs Andirene silkes, and 50000 Duckats; At a second time he presented him with 50000 duckats more, 480 arcubuses, 1000 goats, 150 Camels, 150 Buffes, 1000 Oxen, and 200 weathers; by which rich gifts we may not a little coniecture at the revenue of the present Emir of S^don, who since the yeare 1600, hath reduced almost all the Countries belonging once to fiue Princes, vnder his own Empire, as containing the Townes and territories of Gazir, Barut, Sidon, Tyrc, Acre, Saffet (or Tiberias) his seat of residence, Nazareth, Cana, Mount Tabor, Elkiffe, etc. This present Emir by name Faccardin^, was not long since driuen out of his Country by the Turke, and forced to flye to Florence: but he again recouered his owne, laid siege to Damascus, and caused a notable rebellion in Asia, not yet quenched. 4 Tyre, famous for her purples, and diuers colonies dispersed ouer all the world by her Citizens. Here was once a kingdome of great antiquity, and long continuance; the most famous of her kings were Hyram, in a strict bond and confederacie with Salomon: and Pigmaleon the brother of Dido,Plutarch. who built Carthage. This gaue way to the Persian Monarchy, and after the ouerthrow of Darius, was beleagured by Alexander, who with great expence of men and mony, together with extraordinary labour and toile, at last took it. This rendition of the town was diuined by the Soothsayers which followed the camp of Alexander, vpon a dreame which he not long before had. For dreaming that he had disported himselfe with satyrs, the diuiners only making of one word two; found that (...) was no more then (...), that is, Tua Tyrus; and it hapned accordingly. It is now vnder the Emir of the Drusians. This country aboundeth with wheat, hony, oyle, and balme: the lower part whereof was the seat of Asher, of whom Moyses prophesied, Deut. 33.24. That he should dip his foot in oyle.
The second Prouince of Syria is CAELOSYRIA, whose chiefe cities are 1 Hieropolis, famous for the Temple and worship of the Syrian goddesse; the tricks and iugglings of whose

Priests to deceiue the silly people, who list to see; may find them abundantly described in the Metamorphosis of Apuleius: the relation whereof seemeth to be a discourse of the tricks of legerdemaine, which the Friers and Pardoners at this day vse in the Papacie. 2 Damascus so pleasantly situate, that the impostor Mahomet would neuer enter into it; fearing (as himselfe vsed to say) lest being ravished with the ineffable pleasures of the place, he should forget the busines about which he was sent; and make this town his Paradise. For it is seated in a very fruitfull soyle, bearing grapes all the yeare, and girt round about with most curious and odoriferous gardens. This town is famous for her founders, being Abrahams seruants; for the tomb of Zacharias; and for the conversion of Paul, who here first preached the Gospell, and scaped the snares of his enemies, being let down the walls of the house by a basket: The Syrian kings mentioned in the Bible, were of this Syria, as Benhadad etc.
The third Prouince is SYRO-PHOENICIA, whose chief cities are 1 Beritus a famous mart-town, formerly called Iulia faelix, and now Barutti; nigh vnto which, St George deliuered the Kings daughter, by killing of the Dragon. In memory of which exploit, there was a castle and an oratory built in the same place and consecrated to S. George, by whose name the valley adjoyning is yet called. 2 Aleppo, so called of Alep, which signifieth milke, which here is in great plentyl it is called in the Scriptures Aram Sobab, 2 Sam. 8.3. This town is famous for a wonderfull confluence of Marchants from all parts, who come hither to traffique. 3 Biblis. 4 Tripolis, so call'd because it hath bin thrice built: and 5 Antiochia, built and named by Antiochus her founder. Two things doth this city glory in; first that she is the Metropolis of all Syria; and therfore Hadrian being offended with the citizens hereof, intended to haue separated Phoenicia from Syria; Ne tot civitatum metropolis Antiochia diceretur (saith Gallicanus.) Secondly, because the Disciples of IESVS were here first called Christians; a people by the Heathen so hated, that they ceased not to malice and slander them continually, as men that at their devout meetings devoured infants, and had carnal company with their mothers and sisters. Among the rest, Tacitus hath shot his sooles bolt, calling

them, homines per flagitia invisos, and noviffima exempla meritos. Yet this defamation notwithstanding, they grew in 40 yeares to that number, that they were a terrour to their enemies; who suggested by that old enemy of piety, the Diuell, grieuously afflicted them with ten generall persecutions vnder the Emperours, 1 Nero, Ao 67. 2 Domitianus, Ao 96. 3 Traianus, Ao 100. 4 Marcus Antoninus, Ao 167. 5 Severus, Ao 195. 6 Maximinus, Ao 137. 7 Decius Ao 250. 8 Valerianus, Ao 259. 9 Aurelianus, Ao 278. 10 Dioclesianus, Ao 293. These persecutions were so cruell, that S. Hierom writeth in one of his Epistles, that euery day in the yeare there were murthered 5000, excepting only the first day of Ianuary: But sanguis martyrum, semen Ecclesiae; and this little grain of mustard seed, planted by Gods own hand, and watred with the blood of so many holy men, grew so great a tree, that it dispersed its branches through euery Prouince and city of the World. Neither were the Imperial armies without a wonderfull number of them, as appeared when Iulian the Rennegate hauing vomited out his soule with a Vicistitandem Galile: They elected Iovinianus Emperor, with this joyfull acclamation, Christiani omnes sumus. Constantine the Great, put an end to all persecutions, and embraced the Christian Faith on this occasion. At the same time that Constantine was appointed Emperour in Brittaine. Maxentius was by the Praetorian souldiers chosen at Rome; and Lycinus nominated successour by Maximinus. Against these, Constantine marching, and being in his mind somwhat pensiue, he cast his eyes vp to Hea^en: Where he saw in the sky a lightsome pillar in forme of a Crosse, wherein were ingrauen these words, (...), In hoe vince. The night following, our Sauiour appeared to him in a vision, commanding him to beare the figure of that Crosse in his banners, and he should ouercome his enemies. Constantine obeyeth the vision, and is accordingly victorious. After this he not only fauoured the Christians, but became one of that holy profession. This is the story according to Soc^ates Scholasticus, who writes, that the banner was in his time reserued in the Emperours palace. But Zozimus an Heathen historian, partly vpon malice to the Christians in generall,

and partly on a particular grudge to this Emperour, of whom he neuer speaketh well, deliuereth the cause of his conversion farre otherwise. Questionlesse he was a great instrument of Gods glory; In whose time God gaue such increase to his Gospell, that at last it got the vpper hand of Heathenisme: And here flourished, till the sins of the people prouoked God to remoue his Candle-stick from those places, and leaue them as a prey to misbeleeuers and Idolaters.
In Syria also was the town and Prouince of Palmyra, famous in that it was vnder the gouernment of Zenobia; a woman of such worth, that she was counted worthy the purple roabe, and to stand in opposition with Gallienus for the Empire of the world. She swayed these Easterne parts during the reigne of Gallienus, Claudius, Quintilius, and Aurelian: who taking her prisoner, led her in triumph through Rome, ita ut ea specie nihil unquam esset pompabilius.
The Syrians are called in the Bible Aramites, who were an obscure people subiect to the Persians, and subdued by Alexander the Great; after whose death, this Country, together with Persia, and other adjacent Prouinces, fell to the share of Seleucus Nicanor, a man strangely preferred. For being at the first, Gouernour of Chaldea only, he was forced to leaue Babylon, and forsake his Prouince, for feare of Antigonus, then dreadfull to all the Macedonian Captaines; and to fly into Egypt, where he became Ptolomies Admirall. After, Ptolomie fighting a pitched field with Demetrius, son to Antigonus, took Seleucus with him; and hauing wonne the battaile, gaue him aid and licence to recouer his former gouernment. Seleucus welbeloued of the people, soon made himself Master, not of Chaldea only, but of all the Persian Prouinces beyond Euphrates, and not long after (being seconded by his good friend Ptolomie, Cassander, and Lysimachus) he encountred Antigonus at Ipsus in Cilicia, where Antigonus himself was slain, and his whole Army routed. This victory made Seleucus Lord of all Asia; from whence passing ouer into Europe, he vanquished and slew Lysimachus: seauen moneths after which victory, he was slain by Ptolomie Ceraunus, whose patron and protectour he was: being yet the last surviuour

of all Alexanders Princes, and the only possessour of all the Dominions which his Master had, either by inheritance, or conquest. His successours although they were Lords of all Asia, yet since in Syria they kept their residence, were commonly called Kings of Syria.

The Kings of Syria.
Ano M.

3654
1 Seleucus Nicanor 31
3685
2 Antiochus S^ter 19
3704
3 Antiochus Theos 15. he began the tedious war with Egypt.
3719
4 Seleucus Calliuicus 20
3739
5 Seleucus Ceraunus 3
3742
6 Antiochus Mag. 3^. he lost Asia, and plagued Iudea.
3778
7 Seleucus Philopater 12
1790
8 Antiochus Epiphan. the scourge of the Iewes 12
3802
9 Antiochus Eupater, whose Captain Lysias tyrannized ouer Iudea; as also did
3804
10 Demetrius Soter by his Captaine Nicanor; and was deposed by
3814
11 Alexander a fained son of Antiochus Eupator 5
3819
12 Demetrius Nicanor 2
3821
13 Antiochus Sedeces, 3 slain by
3824
14 Triphon the usurper 3
3827
15 Antiochus Pius 12. who being in wars against the Parthians, was dispossessed by
3839
16 Demetrius Nicanor: 4, who for his cruelty was deposed by
3843
17 Alexander Zebenna, an Egyptian of meane birth. 2
3845
18 Antiochus Griphus 29
3874
19 Seleucus and Antioch. Cyzicenus

20 Philip and Demetrius. During

the raignes of these kings, ciuill warres had devoured all the bloud royall of Seleucus.
3884
21 Tigranes king of Armenia, the Seleucidan stocke thus failing, was chosen, and established King of Syria; and was the most potent King of this Country, after the death of Antiochus Magnus: as being King of this Syria by election; of Armenia by succession; of Media and Assyria by conquest; and hauing a superintendencie ouer the Parthians, presuming on his strength, he sideth with Mithridates (whose daughter he had married) against the Romans, and is vanquished by Lucullus: who with the losse of fiue Romans only, and the wounds of an hundred, is reported to haue slain of his enimies aboue 100000 men. Finally, being again broken and vanquished by Lucullus, he yeelded himself to Pompey, who being appointed Lucullus successour, depriued him of the honour of ending that warre; and retaining to himself Armenia and Media only, he left all Syria to the Romans, hauing raigned 18 yeares: The gouernment of this Country vnder these new Lords, was accounted to be one of the greatest honours of the Empire; the Praefect here of hauing almost regall iurisdiction ouer all regions on this side Euphrates, with a superintendencie ouer Egypt. Niger the concurrent of Severus, was Praefect here; and also Cassius Syrus, who being a natiue of this Country, and welbeloued by reason of his moderate and plausible demeanour, had almost tumbled M. Antoninus out of his Throne. On this occasion it was enacted by the Senate, that no man hereafter should haue any militar or legall command in the Prouince, where he was borne: Lest perhaps supported by the naturall propension of the people, one of their own Nation; and hartned by the powerablenesse of his friends, he might appropriate it to himself, which was common to the Senate and people of Rome. From the Romans this Prouince, and Palestine (as we shall presently shew you) were extorted by the Saracens.

Thus much of Syria.



PALESTINE hath on the East Euphrates, on the West the Mediterranean sea: on the North it is bounded with Phoenicia; on the South with Arabia.
This Country was first called the land of Canaan, from Canaan the son of Cham. Secondly, the land of Promise, because the Lord had promised it to Abraham and his seed; thirdly, Israell of the Israelites, so called from Iacob, who was surnamed Israel; fourthly Iudea, from the Iewes or people of the tribe of Iudah; fiftly Palestine, quasi Philistim, the land of the Philistins, a potent Nation herein; and now sixtly the Holy land, because herein was wrought the worke of our saluation.
It is situate between the third and fourth climats,Maginus. the longest day being 14 houres and a quarter. It is in length 200 miles, and not aboue 50 in bredth; yet of that salubrity of aire, and fertility of soile, flowing with milke and hony: that before the comming of the Israelites it maintained 30 Kings: and afterward the two potent kingdomes of Israel and Iudah, in which David numbred one million, and 300000 fighting men, besides them of the tribe of Beniamin and Levi.
The people hereof were of a middle stature,Iosephus. strong of body, vnconstant and resolute; and are now accounted a periurious vagabond nation, and great vsurers. Their Religion in its purity was first taught by diuine inspiration; afterward published in the two Tables of the Law at mount Sinai; but now they haue added their own inventions, giuing as much credit to the Talmud, as to the Scriptures. They were of 3 sorts or sects; 1 Iewes, 2 Samaritans, 3 Proselites. The first were of the naturall language, and originall of the Tribes: the second were such as Salmanasser placed in Samaria, from whence he carried the Israelites captiues; these retained only the fiue bookes of Moses: the third were such as came from other Countries to learne the Religion of the Iewes. They were subdiuided also into other sects, as Pharises, Sadduces, Esseni, a^d Scribes; etc. Of these the Scribes are resembled to the Canonists in the Church of Rome; and are thought to haue receiued that name about the time that Dauid diuided the Leuites into certaine Classes or Formes. Their office

was double; 1 to read and expou^d the Law in the Temple and Synagogues: and 2ly to execute the office of a Iudge, in ending and composing actions. The Esseui are so called from Ascha, that is, facere; because they wrought with their hands. They liued together, as it were, in Colledges, and in euery one had their (...), or Chappell for their deuotion. All their estates they inioyed in common, and receiued no man into their fellowship, vnlesse he would giue all that he had into their Treasury; and not then neither vnder a three yeares probationership. The Sadduces deriue their name either from Sado^, who is said to haue liued about the time of Alexander the Great, and to be the Author of this Sect: or from Sedech, which signifieth Iustice. They belieued not the being of Angels or spirits, the resurrection of the body, and that there was a Holy Ghost, they credited not, they receiued only the Pentateuch, and in many other things agreed with the Samaritans. The Pharisees owe their name to Phares, which signifieth both interpretari and separare, as being both interpreters of the Law, and separatists from the rest of the Iewish Church. They held the contrary opinions to the Sadduces, and besides the Pentateuch, or fiue bookes of Moses, adhered also vnto traditions. They denied also the sacred Trinity; they held the fulfilling of the Law to consist in the outward ceremonies; they relyed more on their own merits, then Gods mercy; they attributed most things to destiny; and refused commerce with Publicans and sinners. Their Philacteries were broad scrolls of parchment bound about their heads, wherein were written the 10 Commandements, vainly so interpreting that of De^ter. cap. 6. vers. 8: mou^ buntur super oculos tuos.
The chiefe riuers of this Country are Cedron, and 2 Iordan. This latter arising out of Mount Libanus, and hauing run a long course in a narrow channell, first augmenteth his bed in the sea or lake of Galilee; then again the waters are contracted, til they expatiat themselues in the sea of Tiberias or Genesareth; and lastly finisheth his course in the Dead sea; a^ sea which hath no intercourse with the Ocean; a sea because salt: dead, because no liuing thing can endure its bituminous sauour; from abundance of which matter, it is also called Lacus Asphaltites. Nigh vnto

this sea once stood the infamous cities of Sodom and Gomorrah, destroyed with fire from heauen, and now there groweth a tree whose apples exceeding fair to sight, moulder away to nothing as soon as touched.
This Country hath had diuers diuisions; as first into the seuerall Nations of the Amorites, Perezites, Philistines, etc. After the conquest of these people, it was diuided between the people of Israel into 12 Tribes, as the Tribe of Iuda, Beniamin, Ephraim, etc. When Ieroboam had made that great breach in the kingdome of Dauid, it was diuided into the kingdomes of Iuda and Israel: of which the former contained only the two Tribes of Iuda and Beniamin; the latter the other ten. When the Israelites were transported into Assyria, and other Inhabitants sen^ hither; these new commers were from Samaria the chief City of their Prouince, named Samaritans; and when the men of Iuda returned from the captiuity of Babylon, then began they first to be called Iewes. At what time the whole Country fell vpon that diuision which it still retaineth, viz: into the foure Prouinces of Galilaea, Iuda, Idumaea, and Samaria.
GALILEA is the most Northerne part of Palestin^, it is diuided into the Higher and the Lower. The higher Galilie is also called Galilea gentium, either because it is betweene the rest of the Holy land and the Gentiles; or else because it was by K. Solomon giuen vnto Hiram King of Tire. It contained the tribes of Asher, Naphtali, and a part of the Tribe of Dan. The chiefe Citties of the Tribe of Asher, were 1 Acon. 2 Tyre. 3 Sidon. 4 Sarepta, all which we haue before mentioned in our description of Phoenicia. 5 Ap^ek, whose wall falling downe, slewe 27000 of Benhadads Souldiers; after 100000 of them had bin slaine by Ahab. 6 Giscala the birthplace of Iohn or Iehochanan, one of the three seditious in the Citty of Ierusalem, at the siege of it by Titus. In the Tribe of Napthalim the principall townes are and were, Iabin where the 24 Kings met to giue battle to Ioshua: to the King of this Towne also was Sisera Leiftenant, who was ouerthrowne by Debora, and slaine by Iael. It was also called Hazor. 2 Capernaum (seated on the influxe of Iordan into the Sea of Galilie) so often mentioned in the Scriptures.

3 Cinnereth called afterward Genesareth, whence the Lake or Sea of Galile is called the Lake of Genesareth. That the children of Dan were here in part seated is easily prooued out of Ioshua, the 19. and 47 vers. where it is said that the coast of the children of Dan being too little for them they went vp, and fought against Leshem, which they tooke and called Dan. This Leshem, is rendred by some interpreters Laish, and is the place where Abraham vanquished Chedorla^mer and his confederats. The other Citties are Hamath. 2 Ramath. 3 Ziddim, and 4 Cedesh. But whether these foure Citties belonged also to the Da^ites, or were accounted as appertaining to Napthalim, I cannot determine. In this Country are the two spring heads of Iordan, whereof the one is named Ior, the other Dan.
The Lower Galile containeth the Tribes of Zabulon, and Isachar. In the Tribe of Zabulon, the chiefe Citties are or were Gaba, called since Hippopolus, of a regiment of horse, there garisond by Herod. 2 Cana where our Sauiour wrought his first miracle, turning water into wine. 3 Bethsaida, the birth-place of Peter, Andrew, and Philip. 4 Tiberias on the Sea of Galile, which is also called the Lake of Tiberias. In this Citty was Mathew called, and the daughter of Iairus raised from death to life. 5 Sephoris made by Herod Antipas the regall seat of the Lower Galilea. and 6 Nazareth, where Mary was saluted with those ioyfull tidings by an Angell as she sate in her chamber. Of this cha^ber I cannot but insert this famous legend. It was after the virgins death had in great reuerence by the Christians, and remained in this towne till the Holy-land was by the Turkes and Saracens subdued Anno 1291. Then was it most miraculously transported into Sclauonia; but that place being vnworthy of the Virgins diuine presence, it was by the Angells carried ouer into the sea coast of Italy Anno 1294. That place also being infected with theeues and pirats, the Angells remoued it to the little village of Loretto, where her miracles were quickly divulged: Insomuch that Paul the 2d built a most stately Church over this Chamber; and Xistus the fift made the Village a Citty. And thus we haue the beginning of our Lady of Loretto. Here is in this Tribe also the brooke Chison, and mount Tabor, where

Christ was transfigured. Here also is the high seated Citty of Iotapata, which Iosephus the historian, being gouernour of both Galilies, so brauely defended against Vespasian. In the Tribe of Isachar the chiefe Citties are Tarichaea with great difficulty taken in the Iewish warres. 2 Enhadda, nigh vnto which Saul slew himselfe, and 3 Daberoth, seated in the valley of Israel: a valley famous for the many battails fought in it. As of Gedeon against the Madianites; Saul against the Philistines; Ahab against the Syrians; the Christians against the Sarracens; and Iohn against Iehoram. In this Lower Galile was our Saviour very conuersant, wherefore Iulian the Apostata called him a Galilean.
2 SAMARIA is not here taken in that large extent by which it comprehended the kingdome of the ten Tribes; but in a stricter limit for that part of Palestine which is seated between Iudaea and Galilie. The people hereof were as we haue said the discendants of such Assyrians, as were by Salmanassar sent hither to possesse the inheritance of the captiue Israelites. They were to the Iewes in their aduersity most deadly enimies: but when God had giuen them rest and felicity, who but the Iewes shalbe their Cosens. This hollow-hearted dealing so offended the Iews that they reputed the Samaritans for reprobates and schismatickes. So that when they went about to calumniate our blessed Sauiour, they could finde no more grieuous reproach, then to say he was a Samaritan, or (as if they had beene alone) one that conuersed with Diuells. And though the Iewes would not vouchsafe to marry with them, yet they inhabited most of their good Townes; some of which they had totally wrested into their owne hands: in the others they were mingled. This Province of Samaria comprehended the Tribes of Ephraim, Gad, Ruben; and the two halfe Tribes of Manasses; the one situate on the Mediterranean, the other beyond Iordan. In the halfe Tribe of Manasses on the Mediterranean, the chiefe Citties are Bethsan, which being growne old, was by the Scythians at their irruptions into Asia the lesse, reedified, and named Scythopolis. On the walls hereof did the Philistines hang the bodies of Saul and his sonnes. 2 Thebes where the bastard Abimelec was wou^ded by a stone, which a woman threw from the wall; and perceauing

his death nigh, commanded his Page to slay him, that it might not be said he died by the hands of a woman. 3 Ephra, or H^phra, where Gedeon dwelt, and nigh vnto which the said Abimelech slew 70 of his brethren; a heathenish cruelty, and at this day practised by the Turkes. 4 Endor where Saul went to consult with a witch. 5 Iezreel, a regall Citty, in the which I^ram kept Court when he was deposed and slaine by Iehu. Here was Naboth stoned for his vineyard, and here did Dogges licke the blood of Iezabell. 6 Caesarea Palestina, first called Straton, but after by this name, which Herod who new built and beautifi'd it, gaue to it in honor of Caesar. Here Paul disputed against Tertullus, in the presence of Festus the Roman President: here Cornelius was baptised by Peter: and here Herod Agrippa was smitten by an Angell, and eaten of wormes; after his rhetoricall Oration, which the people called the voice of God and not of man. 7 Antipatris, whether the Souldiers lead Paule by the command of Lysias. 8 Megiddo, etc. In the Tribe of Ephraim, the chiefe Citties are Samaria, the metropolis of the kingdome of Israel, built by Omri King hereof, a magnificent and stately city, and was called Samaria fro^ Shemer, of whom the hill whereon the Citty stood, was bought. It was by Hircanus the High Priest beaten to the ground, but repaired againe by Herod, who to flatter Caesar called it Sebaste, for the Greekes called Augustus (...). Here lay the bodies of Elisha, and Iohn the Baptist. 2 Bethel where Ieroboam erected one of his golden Calfes, by which he made Israel to sinne. 3 Sichem which was by Simeon and Levi destroyed, for the rauishment of Dinah. Here R^b^am reiecting the Counsell of the old men, and following that of the young; made that irreparable schisme in the kingdome of David. Neere vnto this Towne Iudas Maccabaeus ouerthrew Lysias. 4 Lidda where Peter (virtute Christi, non sua) healed the sick of the palsie. It is since called Diosp^lis, and in it S. George was beheaded. 5 Ramatha or Arimathea, the Citty of Ioseph, who buried the body of Christ. 6 S^lo seated on a mountaine so called, in which the Arke of the Lord was kept, till the Philistines tooke it.
On the other side of Iordan was the habitation of the children

of Gad, Reuben, and the other halfe of Manasses. The country of these last was called Basan, whose last King was Ogg, a man of that large proportion,Sr W. Ral. and Adricom. that his bed made of iron, was 9 Cubits long, and foure broad. It hath beene also in the time of the Roman Monarchy called Trachonitis, because it is bounded Eastward with the hills of Gilead, which the Cosmographers of that age called Trachones. Some also call it Iturea, but improperly: for Iturea was seated more toward Syro-Phoenicia and North to Damascus, and was so called from Ietur one of the sonnes of Ismael. It was also a part of the Country of Decapolis, so named of ten prime Citties in it, which extended from Bethsan South, to Libanus North; from the mountaines of Gilead East, to the Mediterranean West. Of this Decapolis wee finde frequent mention in the new Testament, as Math. 4.25. Mark. 7.31. etc. Thus hauing cleered my passage in respect of the diuersitie of names. I will proceed to the Citties: The chiefe whereof are Butis, Berenice, or Pella demolished by Alexander Iannaeus King of the Iewes. 2 Edrey, the royall seat of Og King of Basan. 3 Astaroth sometimes peopled with Giants, for which cause the Country adioyning is tearmed the Region of Giants. Here Astoreth the Goddesse of the Zidonians was worshipped in the forme of a Sheep. 4 Gaulon where the sect of the Gaulonites began, and 5 Hus, the birth-place of Iob. The chiefe Citties of the Gadites are Gadara and Gergesa, the people whereof intreated our Sauiour to depart fro^ their coasts: for to both these people the story is attributed: by Mathew to the last; by Luke and Marke to the first: not that they were both one, but because they were neighbour Citties, and so their bounds confounded. 3 Iab^sh Gilead, the Cittizens whereof buried the bodyes of Saul and his sonnes. 4 Bethharam rebuilt by Herod Antipas, and called Iulius in honour of Livia, Augustus wife, translated into the Iulian family. 5 Succoth. 6 Ramoth Gilead where Iacob and Laban swore each to other; where Ahab seeking to recouer it from the Syrians lost his life; and in the leaguer of which Iehu was chosen king. 7 Rabba (now Philadelphia) vnder the walls whereof Vriah was slaine by the command of Dauid. At the siege of this Towne, that most excellent and politique

Captaine Ioab hauing brought it to tearmes of yeelding, sent for the King to haue the honour of taking in so defersible a City. In the Tribe of Reuben the chiefe Citties are 1 Machaerus an exceeding strong Citty, standing vpon so high a rocke that it is euery way inaccessible. In this town Iohn the Baptist was slain. 2 Beth Bara where Iohn baptized, and where Moses made his diuine exhortations to the people, 3 Abel-Sittim seated in the Country called the plaines of Moab. This was the last encamping place of the Israelites vnder Moses. It was after called simply Sittim, and yeelded the wood so often mentioned in the Scripture whereof the Arke was made. 4 Ramath Baal, to which place Balack brought Balaam to curse the people. This was the chiefe Citty of the worshippers of Baal; which was, as some say, the same with Priapus.
IDVMEA, was the habitation of the Edomites, the of-spring of Esau, who also inhabited the Country South of Israel, called Mount Seir, or the wildernesse of Edom; in which the children of Israel were stung with the fiery Serpents; and which is counted a part of Arabia the stonie. This Idumea of which we treat, was not wholy in the hands of the Edomites, but possessed in part by the Philistines, a people which of all other most vexed the Israelites, and kept them in that bondage, that they left the^ not a Smith in any of their Citties and Townes to sharpen their irons with. These Philistines together with the Edomites were by King Dauid made subiect, but neuer could they be expelled the land. In the raigne of King Ioram, we finde how the Philistines brake into Iuda, ransacked the Kings pallace, and tooke prisoners his wife and children. What was the end of this nation, I as yet knowe not; this I answere, that for the puissance of this people, the whole Country was by heathen writers tearmed Palestine. In the raigne of King Ioram, also the Edomits revolted; and continued in that free state till the time of Hireanus the high Priest: who taking most of their Townes, made them subiect to the Iewes, compelled them to be circumcised, and from thenceforth they were reputed as Iewes. This Country of Idumea contained the Tribes of Dan, and Simeon. The chiefe Citties of the Tribe of Dan are Ioppe (now Iaffa) a famous Mart

Towne, where Ionah tooke ship to fly vnto Tarsus; where Peter raised Dorcas from death to life; and where he lying at the house of Simon a Tanner, was in a vision taught the conuersion of the Gentiles. This Citty they report to haue beene built before the flood; and here they say raigned Cepheus, whose daughter Andromeda was by Perseus deliuered from the sea-monster; some of whose bones the people vsed to shew to strangers euen till the flourishing of the Romans. Iust as our Cittizens of C^ventrie and Warwicke shew the bones of the Dun-Cow of Dunsmeare heath, and the bones of I knowe not what Giants shine by Earle Guy. 2 Gath the Country of that huge Giant Goliah. 3 Accaron, or Ecron, where Bel-zebub was worshipped to whom Ahaziah sent to inquire of his health. 4 Asotos or Asdad where was a sumptuous temple built to the honour of the Idol Dagon; and neere vnto which Iudas Maccabeus was slaine by Bacchides Leiftenant to Demetrius. 5 Ciriathiarim where the Arke of the Lord twenty yeares was kept in the house of Aminadab, viz: from the sending it home by the Philistines, till Dauid fetcht it to Hierusalem. The chiefe Citties of Simeon, are 1 Ascalon where Semiramis was borne; so also was Herod that killed the infants; who comming to be King of the Iewes, verified the prophecy of Isaak to his sonne Esau: that the children of Esau should not only breake the yoke of Iacob from off their neck, for that hapned vnder Ioram; but should also haue dominion ouer them, which was now fulfilled. 2 Gaza an exceeding faire and strong Towne, in which the Persians did lay the tributes and customes of these Westerne Provinces; from whence all riches and treasures are also called Gaza. 3 Cariaths^pher, i. e. the Citty of books, which some hold to be an Vniuersi^y, or the Academie of old Palestine. 4 Bersheba where Abraham and Abimelech swore to each other; where. Hagar wandred with her sonne Ismael; and where Isaac dwelt for a long time. This Town vvas by the Christians in their vvarre in this Country vvell fortified, as bounding on Arabia, and being the Southerne limit of the holy land, vvhich extendeth from hence to Dan or Laish, North.
IVDAEA is of the same extent now, as it was when it was

the kingdome of Iuda, containing the two great and puissant Tribes of Iuda, and Beniamin. The chiefe Citties in the Tribe of Iudah are Arad situate in the entrance from the Wildernesse of Ed^m into Iudaea. 2 Cerioth or Carioth, the birth-place of Iudas Iscariot, who betraied our Sauiour Christ. 3 Iethir or Iattir nigh vnto which was fought the memorable battaile, wherein Asa King of Iuda, by the help of God, discomfited Zara King of the Arabians, whose armie consisted of a Million of fighting men. 4 Maresa the natiue soyle of the Prophet Michah. Nere vnto this Towne Iudas Maccabaeus ouerthrew Gorgias. 5 Emaus, nigh vnto which Iudas Maccabaeus (after he had formerly beaten Apollonius) gaue Gorgias the third ouerthrow. Here our Redeemer shewed himselfe after his resurrection to two of his Disciples: it was afterward called Nicopolis. 6 Hebron one of the ancientest Citties of Canaan. It was the seat of the Giants called Anakim, or the sonnes of Anak. This word Anak signifyeth a chaine worne for ornament; and it seemeth that this Anak enriched with the spoiles of their enimies, wore a chaine of gold; leauing both the custome and name to his posterity. We read the like of Manlius Torquatus in the Romane histories. This Towne did Abraham buy for a buriall place for his dead, and in it his wife Sarah was first buried; and after her, foure of the Patriarchs. Adioyning to this Town is the plaine of Mamr^ where Abraham the father of the faithfull sitting in his Tent, was visited from heauen by God in the shape of a man. Here Dauid kept his Court before the winning of Ierusalem; to this place came the Tribes to anoynt him King ouer Israel; and hither came Absalom vnder the pretence of paying his vowes, to vsurp the kingdome of his father. 7 Tecoa, the Citty of Amos the Prophet; as also of that woman, who by the words which Ioab put into her mouth, perswaded the King to call Absolon from exile. In the Wildernesse of Tecoa, there assembled the inhabitants of Moab, Ammon, and Mount Seir, to ouerthrow Iuda. But the Lord being appeased by the publique fast, proclaimed and kept by Iehosophat and the people, sowed dissentions amongst them; So that the children of Ammon and Moab stood vp against the inhabitants of mount Seir vtterly to slay and destroy

them; and when they had made an end of the inhabitants of Seir, every one helped to destroy another. 8 Libna, a Citty seated in a corner of Iuda, running betweene the Tribes of Dan and Beniamin. This Citty revolted from Ioram King of Iudah, at the same time the Edomites did: and continued a free state euen as long as Iudah continued a kingdome. 9. Ziph, in the Wildernes whereof Dauid hid himselfe from the fury of Saul. Hither when Saul persued him, Dauid came into his Camp (the watch being all a sleep) and tooke thence his speare, and a Cruse of oyle, and departed. Abishay would faine haue killed him; but Dauid though he knew that Samuel had ministerially abdicated Saul from the kingdome, and that himselfe was appointed in his steed; would not touch him, but left him to the iudgements of the Lord* whose annointed he was. 10 Bethlem, or (to distinguish it from another of this name in Zabulon, called) Bethlem Iudae, where Christ was borne; and the innocent suffered for him, before hee had suffered for them. In this generall Massacre of young children, a sonne of Herods which was at nurse, was also slaine. Which being told vnto Augustus, he replied, he had rather be^ Herods hogge then his sonne. On the frontire of this Country towards the Philistines, was that strong Castle, which Herod repayring called Herodium; It was seated on a hill, the ascent vnto which, was made with 200 steps of marble exceeding faire and large. In this Country also, are the hills of Engaddi, in a Caue of which Dauid cut off the lap of Sauls garment; and all along the bottome whereof were the gardens of Balsamum or Opobalsamum: the trees of which were by Cleopatra (at such time as she gouern'd M. Antonie and the East) sent for to be replanted in Heliopolis of Aegypt; and Herod, who durst not deny them, plucked them vp by the roots and sent them to her.
In the Tribe of Beniamin, the chiefe cities are 1 Gilgal where Ioshua first did eat of the fruits of the land; where he circumcised such of the people as were borne in the pera^bulation of the Wildernesse, where he kept the Passouer; nigh to which he pitched vp the 12 stones as a memoriall to posterity, that the waters of Iordan had diuided the^selues to giue passage to the children of Israel; and where Agag King of the Amalekites was

hewne in peeces by Samuel. 2 Mispah famous in being the ordinary place of assembly for the whole body of the people, in matters of warre or peace; as also in that standing in the midst of Canaan, it was (together with Gilgal) made the seat of iustice, to which Samuel went yearely to giue iudgement to the people. 3 Gebah the North border of the kingdome of Iuda, toward Israel. 4 Gibba, where the abusing of the Levites wife by the young men of this towne; had almost rooted the Tribe of Beniamin out of the garden of Is^ael. 5 A^, a great and strong Citty, in the siege of which the Israelites were first discomfited; but when by the death of Achan, who had stolne the accursed things, the campe was purged; Iosuah by a warlike stratagem surprised it. 6 Gibbon the mother Citty of the Gibeonites, who presaging the vnresistable victories of the Israelites, came to the Campe of Iosuah, and by a wile obtained peace of Iosuah and the people. Saul about 400 yeares after slew some of them, for which fact the Lord caused a famine of the land, which could not be taken away till seuen of Sauls sonnes were by Dauid deliuered vnto the Gibeonites, and by them hanged. This famine did God send, because in killing these poore Gibeonites, the oath was broken, which Iosuah and the Princes swore concerning them. 7 Iericho de^troyed by the sounding of Rammes hornes, was not only leueld by Iosuah to the ground, but a curse inflicted on him that should attempt the building of it. This curse notwithstanding, at the time whe^ Ahab raigned in Israel, which was about 500 yeares from the ruine of it; Hiel a Bethelite, delighted with the pleasantnes of the place reedified it. But (as it was foretold by Iosuah) as he laid the foundation of the walls, he lost his eldest sonne; and when he had finished it, and was setting vp the gates thereof, he lost also his yongest. It may bee Hiel when he began this worke minded, not the prophecy; it may be he beleeued it not: peraduenture he thought the words of Iosuah not so much to proceed from the spirit of prophecie, as from an angry and vexed heart; they being spoken in way of wish or execration. And it is possible, it may be he chose rather to build the eternity of his name, vpon so pleasing and stately a Citty; then on the liues and issue of two young men. Ouer against

this Iericho on the other side of Iordan, are the mountains of Nebo, on which the Lord shewed vnto Moses the Country which he had promised to the posterity of Iacob. 10 HIERVSALEM the Citty of the Lord, built by Mel^hisedec Prince and Priest of Salem, in the Country of the Iebusites, and therefore called Iebusalem, and by changing one letter only, Ierusalem. This Citty was strongly seated on the mount Sion, and strengthned with a ditch cut out of the maine rock, which was in depth 60, and in bredth 250 foot. It continued vnconquered for the first 400 yeares after the entrance of the children of Israel; and when Dauid atte^pted it; the people presumed so much on the strength of the place, that they told him their blind and lame could desend it against him. Notwithstanding Dauid by the valour of Ioab, that fortunate and couragious leader, carried the town, and made it the seat royall of the Kings of Iuda. Here was the most glorious and magnificent Temple built by Solomon, in prouiding the materials whereof, there were 30000 workme^, which wrought by the 10000 a month in Lebanon: 70000 labourers that bare burdens* 80000 quarrymen that hewed in the mountaines: and of officers and ouerseers of the worke, no lesse then 3300 men. The description of this stately fabricke you may read in the first of Kings Chap. the 6 and 7. It was destroyed by Nabuchadnezar, at the taking of Hierusalem, Ao. M. 3350. After the returne of the Iewes againe from the Babylonian captivity, it was rebuilt; but with such opposition of the Samaritans, that the workmen were faine to hold their swords in one hand and their tooles in the other, to repulse, if need were, the violence of the enimy. This Temple was not answerable to the state and magnificence of the former, so that the Prophet Haggai had good occasion to say vnto the people cap. 2. v. 3. Who is lest among you that saw this house in her first glory? Is it not in your eyes in comparison of it, as nothing? Moreouer in fiue things it was defectiue. For it wanted the potte of Manna which the Lord commanded Moses to lay vp before the testimony for a memorial, Exod. 6.32. 2ly The Rod of Aron, which only among all the Rods of the Princes of Israel, budded: and was by God commanded to be kept before the testimony, for a toke^ against

the rebells Datha^, Corah, and Abiram, Numb. 17.10. 3ly The Arke of the couenant, the making whereof is described in the 25 of Exod. and the 10 v. And the placing of it in the oracle, or Sanctum Sanctorum, is mentioned in the 1. of Kings, c. 6. v. 19. 4ly The two Tables of the law written by Gods owne finger, which were by Moses placed in the Arke of the couenant, Exod. 4.20. Deut. 10.5. And 5ly The fire of sacrifice which came downe from heauen; whereof mention is made 2. Chron. 17.1. and Leuit. 9.24. Which sire was by the Priests to bee kept continually burning. This Temple, partly because it was now ruinous, partly because it was not magnificent enough, but principally to ^urry fauour with the Iewes; Herod the Ascalonite plucked downe and reedified; making it as little inferiour to the first, so much superiour to the second. In this Temple our blessed Sauiour and his Apostles preached saluation to Iew and Gentile. It was finally destroyed by Titus the sonne of Vespasian on the tenth day of August, on which day also the first Temple was co^sumed with fire by Nabuchadneza. Certainly it is worth the noting (I hope I shal not herein be accounted superstitious) to see how happy or vnfortunate one and the same day is in diverse causes. In the warres betweene the French and Spaniards for the kingdome of Naples, Friday was obserued to be very fortunate to the great Captaine Gonsalvo; hee hauing on that day giuen the French many memorable defeats. To Charles the fist, the 24 day of February was most lucky, for on that day hee was borne, on that he tooke King Francis prisoner, and on that he receaued the imperiall Crown at Bon^nia. To omit our Henry 7th, whose luckie day was Saturday; I will returne to this Temple, which on a Sabaoth day, or Saturday, was taken by Pompey, on the same by Herod, on the same by Titus. After this ouerthrow, the Temple lay vnbuilt and in rubbish* till the raigne of Iulian that politicke enimy of the Church; who to diminish the numbers of the Christians, by the increase of the Iewes, began againe to build this Temple. But no sooner were the foundations laid, but an earthquake cast them vp againe; and fire from heauen consumed the tooles of the workmen, with stones, timber, and the rest of the materialls. As for the Citty it

selfe, it was reedified by Aelius Adrianus, who named it Aelia, draue thence the Iewes, and gaue it vnto the Christians. This new Citty was not built in the place of the old, for within this is mount Oliuet also comprehended. It is now famous for the Temple of the S^pulchre built by Helena (whom most report to haue beene daughter to Coylus a Brittish King) mother to Constantine the great. Much adoe had the good Lady to finde the place where the Lords body had bin laid; for the Iewes and Heathens had raised great hillocks on the place; and built there a Temple to Venus. This Temple being plucked downe, and the earth digged away, shee found the three crosses whereon our blessed Sauiour, and the two theeues had suffere^. To knowe which of these was the right Crosse, they were all carried to a woman, who had long been visited with sicknesse, and now lay at the point of death. The Crosses of the two theeues did the weake woman no good; but as soone as they laid on her the Crosse on which the Lord died, she leaped vp and was restored to her former health. This Temple of the Sepulchre euen at the first building, was highly reuerenced and esteemed by the Christians of these parts, and euen vntill our daies is it much resorted to, both by Pilgrims from all parts of the Romish Church, who fondly and superstitiously hope to merit by their iourney: and also by diuerse Gentlemen of the reformed Churches, who trauell hitherward; partly for curiosity, partly for loue to the antiquity of the place; and partly because their generous spirits imitate the heauen and delight in motion. Whosoeuer is admitted to the sight of this Sepulcher, payeth nine Crownes to the Turkish Officers; so that this tribute only is worth to the grand Signeur 80000 Duckats yearely.
All this while we haue made no mention of the Levites, for they indeed made no Tribe, but had assigned vnto them 48 Cities for their habitations, proportionably taken out of the 12 Tribes. So was it ordered by the Lord, partly that they being set apart to his seruice, might be in euery place ready to instruct the people; and partly to fulfill the prophecy which hee had spoken by Iacob, who told Leui at his death, that hee would divide him in Iacob, and scatter him in Israel. The like fortune hee prophecied

to Simeon, of whom we read in the 19 of Ioshua, v. 19, that he had no setled habitation; but was taken ^n, to inhabite a part of the portion of Iudah. Now to make vp the number of the twelue Tribes, Ioseph was diuided into Ephraim, and Manasses: and the Le^ites were reckoned to belong to that Tribe, within who^e territory th^t Citty which they dwelt in stood. Their maintenance was from the tenths or tithes, the first fruits, offerings, and sacrifices of the people: and as it is in the 18th of Ioshuah v. the 17. The ^riesthood of the Lord was their inheritance. There were of them foure kindes, 1 Punies or Tirones, which from their childhood till the 25 yeare of their age learned the duties of their offices. 2ly, Graduates, (...), which having spent foure yeares in the study of the Law, were able to answere and oppose in it. 3ly Licentiates, (...), which did actually exercise the Priestly function. And 4ly Doctors (Rabbins, they vsed to call them) who were the highest in degree.
The Iews called also Hebrews from Heber, one of Abrahams progenitors; or Hebraei quasi Abrahaei: at their descent into Egypt were but 70 soules; being the issue of Iacob and his 12 sons; namely 1 Ruben, 2 Simeon, 3 Leui, 4 Iudah, 5 Zabulon, 6 Issachar, 7 Dan, 8 Gad, 9 Asher, 10 Naphali, 11 Ioseph, 12 Beniamin. The posterity of these Patriarchs continued in bondage 215 yeares, vntill the yeare of the world 2453: at which time the Lord, mooued with their oppressions by the Egyptians, with a strong hand deliuered them; and placed them in these parts inhabited by the Hittites, the Amorites, the Perezites, the Iebusites, etc. At their first comming hither, and long after, they were gouerned by Iudges; whom God ordained, and the people elected: of whose acts, as also of the Acts of the Kings, I hope I shal not need to make any mention; there being none who either doe not, or ought not to knowe them. I will only obserue Chronologically the times of their gouernment, and specifie such things as the sacred pen-men spared.


The Iudges of the Iewes.
A. M.

2454
1 Moses 40
2494
2 Ioshua 32
2526
3 Othoniel 8.
2630
4 Ehud 80.
2670
5 Deborah and Baruc 40.
2710
6 Gedeon 40.
2750
7 Abimelech 3
2753
8 Thola 5.
2758
9 Iair 6.
2764
10 Iephte 7
2771
11 Elon 10
2781
12 Abeson 7.
2789
13 Abdon 8.
2809
14 Sampson 20.
2829
15 Eli 40
2869
16 Samuel 4.

At which time the people desired to haue a King like to other nations.

The Kings of the Iewes.
2873

Saul 17.

2890

Dauid 40.

2930

Solomon 40.



The Kingr of Iudah.
A.M.

2971
1 Roboam 17.
2988
2 Abiah 3.
2991
3 Asa 41.
3031
4 Iosaphat 25.
3056
5 Ioram 4.
3060
6 Ochozias 1.
3061
7 Athaliah 7.
3067
8 Ioash 40.
3107
9 Amasias 29.
3136
10 Ozias 52.
3188
11 Ioatham 16.
3204
12 Achas 13.
3217
13 Ezechias 29.
3247
14 Manasseh 55.
3302
15 Ammon 2
3304
16 Iosias 31.


Ioachas.



The Kings of Israel.
A.M.

2971
1 Ieroboam 22.
2993
2 Nadab 2.
2995
3 Baasa 24.
3019
4 Ela 2.
3021
5 Zamridies 7.

6 Amrior Omri 8.
3029
7 Achab 22.
3051
8 Ahazia 2.
3053
9 Ioram 12.
3065
10 Iehu 28.
3093
11 Iehoahaz 17.
3110
12 Ioas 16.
3126
13 Ieroboam II, 41
3167
an Interregn. 15
3182
14 Menahem 10.
3192
15 Tekaliah 2.
3194
16 Pekah 20.
3335
18 Ioachim 11.

19 Ieconias 11.
3346
20 Zedekias; in whose time Nabuchadnezar the great destroyed Hierusalem, and carried the people captiue into Babylon, where they liued in exile 70 yeares, which time being expired, Cyrus the King of the Persians gaue them leaue to returne to their Country, and to reedisie their Citty and Temple, which worke being finished they chose them for their Governours.
3214
17 Hosea 18. who was vanquished by Salmanassar, and the Israelites carried captiue into Assyria; 3232.


The Dukes or Gouernours of Iewry.
A.M.

3427
1 Zorobabel 58
3485
2 R^sa Mosollam.
3551
3 Iohanna ben Resae.
3604
4 Iudas Hircanus 31
3635
5 Ioseph 7
3642
6 Abner Semei 11
3653
7 Eli Mattathia 12
3665
8 Aser Mah^t 9
3674
9 Naged Artoxad.
3684
10 Haggai 12
3692
11 Maslot Nahum 7
3699
12 Amos Syrach 14
3713
13 Mattathiah Siloack 10
3723
14 Ioseph II.60
5783
15 Iohannes Hircanus 16.

He was the last gouernour of Iudea, which descended from the stock of Dauid. During the gouernments of these Captains since the Babylonian captiuity, the kingdome of the Iewes was plagued on both sides by the Kings of Egypt and Syria: who ransacked their Cities, slaughtered their people, made hauock of their goods, and compell'd them to eat forbidden flesh, and sacrifice to Idols. To reforme these enormities, Mattathias and his fiue sonnes resisted the impetuous fury of Antiochus Epiphanes, and his Syrians; ouer whom when they had victoriously triumphed, the Iewes chose Iudas, surnamed Macchabaus, one of the worlds nine Worthies, for their Captaine.

The Macchabaean Princes of Iewry.
3799
1. Iudas Macchabaeus vanquished 3 populous Armies, conducted by Apollonius, Gorgias, and Lysias, men of great valour and experience; being Captaines to Antiochus. 6
3805
2 Ionathan vanquished Bacchides and Alcinus, Captaines

to Demetrius 18
3823
3 Simon. 8
3831
4 Iohannes Hircanus, slain by the Parthians 31


The Macchabaean Kings of Iudah.
3862
1 Aristobulus the first King of Iudah, after the Babylonian captiuity, starued his mother, and slew Antigonus his brother.
3863
2 Alexander a great tyrant, slew of his subiects 50000 in battle; and commanded 800 of his principall enemies to be hanged before his face. 27
3890
3 Alexandra or Solomne, wife to Alexander. 9
3899
4 Hircanus, elder son to Alexander, was disturbed in his succession by his yonger brother Aristobulus; but was at length firmely established in his Throne by Pompey: who carried Aristobulus, with his sonnes Alexander and Antigonus, captiues to Rome. Alexander escaping out of prison, troubled the quiet of his Country, till he was surprised by Gabinius, and slain by Seipio; after whose death Antigonus set free by Iulius Caesar, depriued Hircanus of his kingdome, and cut off his eares: revenge suddainly followed this villany; for he was slain by Marcus Antonius, and his kingdome giuen to a stranger.


The strange Kings of Iewry.
3930
1 Herod the Ascalonite, son to Antipater, an Idumean, was by Octavius Augustus created King of Iewry; at which time the kingdome being departed from Iudah* CHRIST was borne. 40
Ao C. 7.
2 Archelaus raigned king 10 yeares, and then lost his principality, reseruing only the title of Tetrarch; his partners in rule being Philip, whose wife Herodias was; 2 Herod Antipas, who killed Iohn, and in whose time CHRIST suffred. 3 Lysanias.
40
3 Agrippa Herod was made king of Iudah, the other Tetrarchies being added to his dominions; he imprisoned P^ter and Iames, and was finally striken by an Angel, and eaten with wormes. 24
47
4 Agrippa minor, before whom Paul pleaded, was the

last king of the Iewes; for in his time Ierusalem was ouerthrowne, and the kingdome made a Roman Prouince, Anno 73.

When Salmanassar had subdued the 10 tribes, and carried them captiue, he planted a new set of inhabitants in this country; that so fruitfull and well situate a part of his Empire might yeeld its iust tribute; and not lye open to the fury of the next invader. But the Romans not hauing (it seemeth) so much policie or prouidence, as those whom they accounted barbarous; hauing laid the Country desolate, left it vnfurnished of new Colonies; whereby the Persians, next the Saracens, and after them the Turkes, entring the Roman Empire at this doore, haue successiuely driuen the Romans out of the whole house. Now that we may the better perceiue how the Romans had weakned, and almost vtterly rooted out the Iewish Nation: we will relate some of their particular massacres: which were not more cruelly inflicted on them by their enemies, then iustly deserued by themselues: they wishing (though, I suppose, not desiring) that the innocent bloud of our Sauiour should be on them and their children. First then the inhabitants of Caesarea slew of the Iewes in one day, about 20000: and such as fled were took and imprisoned by Florus the Lieutenant of Iudea. To reuenge this slaughter of the Iewes, set vpon the Syrians; in which skirmish 13000 of them were slain: The people of Alexandria put 50000 of them to the sword: they of Damascus 10000. Antonius a Roman Captain, slew in Ascalon 10000 of them; and Cestius an other Captain, 8040 persons. Now to come to the warres here managed by Vespasian: This Vespasian in the siege of Aphaca, slew and took prisoners 17130 persons; in Samaria 11600 persons; in Iosopata 42200 persons; in Ioppa so many killed and drowned themselues, that the Sea threw vp againe 4200 dead bodies, and the rest so totally perished, that there remained none to carry tydings vnto Hierusalem of the losse of the town. In the city of Tarichea were slain and made captiues 45000 persons, besides those which were giuen to the king Agrippa. In Gamala there perished 90000, and none left aliue but only two women. In Gascala 5000 men died by the

sword In the city of Gadara there were slain 32200, besides an infinite number of such as had drowned themselues. In Hierusalem it selfe there died 1100000 of them, partly by the sword, and partly by the famine, the worser enemy of the two; there were found 2000 in priuies and sinkes; and 97000 taken prisoners, insomuch that 30 Iewes were sold for a pennie. Now that Hierusalem was able to contain so huge a number of people is euident, in that when Cestius was Lieftenant of Iewry, the high Priest did at his request number the people which came thither to eat the Paschall Lambe, and found them to be two millions and 700000 liuing soules, all sound and purified. For to Leapers, or men hauing a flux of seed, or women in their monethly tearmes, or to strangers, it was not lawfull to eat it. And when Titus laid siege to the City, it was in the Feast of the Passeouer, when most of the people were there assembled, God (as it were) thus imprisoning them. All these massacres, besides diuers others which I haue omitted, and infinite numbers which were slain in the fields and villages, which drowned themselues, and which were priuatly made away, amounting in all to almost two millions of people, hapned in the compasse of foure yeares, beginning at the 12th of Nero, and ending at the second of Vespasian: Yet was not the whole Nation rooted out, till the yeare 136; for then this miserable people hauing stirred two notable rebellions; the one vnder Traian, and the last vnder Adrian the Emperours, were generally banished their natiue country, and neuer again permitted to inhabite it, otherwise the^ as strangers. After this desolation, the Iewes were dispersed all ouer the World, and especially in Spaine, where Adrian commanded many of them to dwell: yet they found euery-where so little fauour, that hauing diuers times bin put to grieuous mulcts and ransomes, they are at last euen quite thrust out of Europe also. They were banished out of England by Edward the first, Anno 1290: Out of France by Philip the faire, 1307; Out of Spaine by Ferdinand the Catholique, 1492: Out of Portugall by Emanuell 1497: Out of Naples and Sicily by Charles the fift, 1539: yet are they found in great numbers in the Romish parts of Germany and Poland; in most Cities of Italy, especially

Rome, where there are no lesse then 15000 or 20000 of them, and also in the Popes Country of Avignion. The reason why they are permitted to liue thus vnder our holy fa^hers nose,Sands rel. is forsooth an expectation of their conversion: Which is a meere pretence, the reason indeed being the benefit hence arising to his Holines coffers. But the hopes of their conversion is small, and the meanes lesse. For besides the scandall, datum and acceptum, by the Papists fond worshipping of images so peremptorily contrary to the first table of the Law; they are not permitted to see any books of the Christian Religion, no not so much as the New Testament: and (which worketh most vpon men of their mettall) because at their conversion they must quit all their goods to the Church; as being ill gotten, and so by consequence the workes of the diuell, which in their baptisme they promise to renounce. They haue also a Synagogue at Amsterdam, and are pretty thick spred ouer the Dominions of the Turkes; who notwithstanding so hate them for crucifying of CHRIST, that they vse to say in detestation of a thing, I would I might dye a Iew: Neither will they permit a Iew to turn Turke vnlesse he be first baptized.
What the revenues of this kingdome haue amounted to, since the diuision of it vnder Roboam, I know not. The Word of God specifieth the sum of them in the dayes of Solomon, 2 Chr. 9, 13: viz: 666 Talents of Gold (besides his Custome-house) which amounteth to two Millions and 997000 pounds a yeare, a huge summe for so small a kingdome.
Ierusalem was reedified by Aelius Adrianus, and giuen to the Christians; from whom it was taken by Cosroes and the Persians, Anno 615. from them it was forcibly wrested by Haumar and the Saracens, Anno 637. Next it fell into the power of Cutlu Moses and the Turkes, Anno 1009: vnder whose oppression when it had long groaned, Peter the Hermite stirred vp the Westerne Princes to relieue the distressed Christians; whose designes obtained their wished effect, vnder the banners of that victorious Prince Godfrey of Bullen, Anno 1099. This Godfrey for his merits, was to haue bin invested with the royall wreath of Maiesty; which he denyed, thinking it vnmeet to

weare a Crown of Gold, where his Sauiour had worne a crown of Thornes.

The Christian Kings of Palestine.
1099
1 Godfrey of Bullen.
1100
2 Baldwin 18
1118
3 Baldwin II. de Bourg. 15
1133
4 Milliscent 9
1133
4 Fulke Earle of Aniou 9
1142
5 Baldwin III 21
1163
6 Almexie 10
1173
7 Baldwin IV. 12
1185
8 Baldwin V.
1185
9 Guie of Lysingham, the last king of Ierusalem; during whose time Saladine the Sultan of Egypt won the kingdome, Ano 1187: which his successours defended against all invasions, till the yeare 1517, in which Selimus the first, Emperour of the Turkes, added the Holy land, together with Egypt, to his Empire. When Ierusalem was taken by the Christians, the German Emperours name was Fridericus; the Popes Vrbanus, the Hierosolymitan Patriarchs Heraclius, and so also were they called when the Christians again lost it. This is the conceit of Roger Houonden, in the life of Henry the second: but how it can agree with Chronology, I see not.

After the taking of Hierusalem by Sultan Saladine, the Christians retired their forces into some of the other townes of the Holy land, which they made good against the Enemy; and defended them vnder the gouernment of these three kings following, viz:
10 Conrade M. of Montferrat.11 Henry E. of Champaigne.12 Iohn di Brenn; the last Christian king that euer had possessions in Syria, or Palestine. Yoland the daughter of this Iohn di Breenn, was wife to Fredericke King of Naples, who in her right entituled himself king of Hierusalem, and so now doe the Kings of Spaine; as heires vnto, and possessers of the kingdome of Naples. Concerning this title, it would not be amisse to insert this story. When the late warres were hot

betwen England and Spaine, there were Commissioners of both sides appointed to treat of peace. They met at a Town of the French kings, and first it was debated what tongue the negotiation should be handled in. A Spaniard thinking to giue the English Commissioners a shrewd gird, proposed the French tongue as most fit; it being a language which the Spaniards were well skilled in; and for these gentlemen of England, I suppose (said he) that they cannot be ignorant of the language of their fellow-subiects: Their Queene is Queene of France as well as England. Nay infaith my Masters, replyed Dr Dale, (the master of the requests:) the French tongue is too vulgar for a businesse of this secrecie and importance, especially in a French Town. We will rather treat in Hebrew, the language of Hierusalem, whereof your Master is king; and I suppose we are therein as well skilled as you in the French. And thus much for this title.
Bara.The Armes of the Christian kings in Ierusalem was Luna, a crosse crosset crossed, Sol, which was commonly called the crosse of Hierusalem.
After the recouery of the Holy land from the Turke, these 3 orders of knighthood were instituted,Grimston. viz:
1 Of the Sepulcher, instituted by Queen Helena, the Mother of Constantine the Great. They were bound to defend the blessed Sepulcher, to warre against the Infidels, and to defend Pilgrims.2 Of St Iohn of Ierusalem begun by one Gerard, not long after Godfrey of Bullen, Ano 1124, and confirmed by Pope Gelasius the second. The roabe is a white Crosse of 8 points, their duty is to defend the Holy land, relieue Pilgrims, and succour Christian Princes against the Infidels, they were to be of noble extraction. They grew in time to be infinit rich, especially after the Templars were suppressed; most of whose possessions were transferred vnto this order:Stow in the surv. of London. insomuch that they had at one time in Christendome no fewer then 20000 Lordships; and in England the Prior of their order was accounted the prime Baron of the Realme. But now their intrado is not a little diminished by the with-drawing of the Kings of England, and other Protestant

Princes from the Church of Rome. We haue spoken of these Knights already, when we were in Malta: now I will only tell you, that their first Master was Foulke of Villaret; the last that had his residence in Hierusalem, Peter of Aste, in whose time they being expell'd Palestine, seised on Rhodes, are now seated in Malta, the present Master being Aloph of Vignacourt.3 Of the Templers, instituted by Hugh of Payennes, Ao 1113, and confirmed by Pope Eugenius. Their ensigne was red crosse, in token that they should shed their blood to defend CHRISTS Temple. They were buried crosse-legged, and wore on their backs the figure of the Crosse; for which they were by the common people called Crossebacke, or Crouch-back, and by corruption* Crook-backe. Edmund Earle of Lancaster, second son to our Henry the third, being of this order, was vulgarly called Edmund Crookebacke; which gaue Henry the 4th a foolish occasion to ^aigne, that this Edmund (from whom he was descended) was indeed the eldest son of King Henry: but for his crookednes and deformity, his yonger brother was preferred to the Crown before him. These Knights had in all Prouinces of Europe their subordinate gouernours, in which they did possesse no lesse then 16000 Lordships: the greatnes of which revenue was not the least cause of dissoluing the Order. For Philip the faire, King of France, had a plot to invest one of his sonnes with the title of King of Ierusalem, and did procure of the Pope the revenue of this Order: which he might the better doe, because Clement the 5th then Pope, for the loue he bare to France, had transferred his seat from Rome to Avignion. But heerein his hopes deceiued him; for this Order being dissolued, the lands thereto belonging were giuen to the Knights Hospitalers, or of S. Iohn. The crimes prooued against this Order was 1 their revolt from their professed obedience vnto the Patriarch of Hierusalem who w^^ their visitor. Secondly, their vnspeakable p^ide; and thirdly their sinnes against nature. The house of our Law-students in London, called the Temple, was the chiefhouse of the Knights of this Order in England; and was by the Knights of S. Iohn, whose principall mansion was in Smithfield, sold vnto

the Students of the Lawes, for the yearely rent of 10l; about the middle of the reigne of Edward the third.
These three orders M. Selden (and deseruedly) putteth not in his Titles of Honour, in that they were prohibited to kisse a woman; honourarie knighthood, and the loue of Ladies, going together like vertue and reward.
Thus much of Syria and Palestine.


OF ARMENIA.
ARMENIA hath on the East, Media and the Caspian sea; on the West,Maginus. Euphrates and the Euxine sea; on the North, Tartary; on the South, Mesopotamia. But before we descend to the particulars of this Country, it is necessary we should take a survay of those mountaines, which lying East of Euphrates, part this Country from Anatolia.Knolles. These mountaines are reputed to be those parts of the hills Taurus, and Anti-taurus; which are called Periadres, Scodrisci, and Amamus. The people here inhabiting, are more famous for nothing then their want of all things, stout, cruell, and warlike; maintaining themselues by hunting and stealing: as men liuing in so barren a soyle, that husbandry were vain and fruitlesse. They haue among them many beggerly villages, and few townes, the chiefe whereof is Maras, once the seat of their Kings; the people for the most part following the temperature of the Aire, and the fauourable aspect of the Sunne, in their remooues and dwellings. Their last king was Aladeules, whom the Turkish histories (who make frequent mention of him) call the mountaine king. He was a man who shrewdly molested Baiazet the second, in his conquest of Carmania; and Selmus the first in his warres against Persia; and hauing for many yeares molested, and impeached the victories of the one and the other; he was by Selimus taken and slain: and his kingdome being made a Turkish Prouince, these mountaines and their passages became subiect, and open to that Nation, Anno 1515.
The Armenians are generally good Archers, merry, carelesse of honour, desiring ease, great bodied, comely, and willing to be soothed.

The women tall, but homely, kind to their children, poore and incontinent; accounting it a great credit to them, if they can please and become acceptable to such guests, as their husbands bring into the house: and most of the Virgins becomming mothers at ten yeares old; and bearing about in their armes, the witnesses of their abilities in that kind. Swearing is had in great respect with both, and such as cannot pick and steale, are deemed block-heads and sheep-biters.
The whole Country is diuided into three Prouinces. 1 Colchis. 2. Georgia. 3 Turcomania.
COLCHIS lyeth on the Euxine Sea, towards the North and East;Brerewood. the people hereof receiued the Christian Faith by Matthias; and now differ from other Christians their neighbours, in three circumstances only; viz: 1 in not baptising their children till the eighth yeare: 2ly in not entring into the Churches til the 60th yeare; but hearing diuine seruice, standing without the Temple: and 3ly in dedicating their youth to theft and rapine; their old age to the difficult work of repentance; They are vnder the jurisdiction of the Patriarch of Constantinople.
In this Country raigned Aetas, from whom Iason stole the Golden Fleece, by the aid and sorceries of Medea. This Country is now called Mengrelia: the chief townes whereof are 1 Aluati, and 2 Fassum on the banks of Phasis, 3 Dioscurias, where there were 300 seuerall languages spoken, because of the abundance of Marchants of all kingdomes: so that the Romans kept here continually 30 Interpreters, to mediat between the people and the Gouernour.
2 GEORGIA hath not its name from S. George, whom here they greatly reuerence; but from the Georgi, who long before that time inhabited the adjacent Countries. It is bounded on the East with Media, on the West with Colchis; on the North with Albania, or Swiria; and on the South with the greater Armenia, or Turcomania: so that it lyeth just between the Euxine and the Caspian seas. The people are good souldiers, and receiued the Gospell in the time of Constantine the Great, on an occasion related by Socrates Scholasticus, indeed very miraculous, and (I doubt) vnworthy credit, and therefore I omit it. At this day

they consent in most doctrinall points with the Grecians, only they acknowledge not the Patriarch of Constantinople, but haue a Patriarch of their own, who is for the most part resident in his house on Mount Sinay in Palestine, and hath vnder his iurisdiction 18 Bishops.
This Prouince was formerly called Iberia; the chiefe townes being 1 Lori, 2 Bascapan, 3 Testis, exceeding strongly fortified by the Turkes, to defend their new conquests from the Persians; and 4 Tomanis. Out of this Region, the Egyptian Sultans vsed to chuse their Souldiers or Mamaluskes, who at last grew so powerfull, that they assumed to themselues the kingdome of Egypt; which they long time valorously defended.
TVRCOMANIA is seated in the midst between Colchis and Iberia. The chiefe Townes are Albanopolis, where S. Bartholomew was buried. 2 Van, which both by its naturall seat, and artificiall fortresses, is a strong bulwark against the Persian invasions. 3 Arminig the Metropolis of the Country at this time. 4 Trigranocerta, built by Tigranes, one of the most mighty Kings that euer ruled in this Country, as hauing added Media, Syria, and Parthia, to his own Dominions. This Prince married the daughter of Mithridates K. of Pontus, and aided him against the Romans: but with what successe, we haue already told you in Syria. As for his new city Tigrano certa, it was by Lucullus the Roman Generall, besieged and taken; wherein besides other riches was found 3000 talents in ready mony. 5 Artaxata, once the chief city of Armenia, so called, either because it was seated on the riuer Araxis; or from Artaxes a progenitour of Tigranes, who was the Founder of it. It is now called Coy, and was in the middle age named Esechia. Famous it is for two notable bat^ailes fought by it; the first between Lucullus and his Romans on the one side; against Mithridates and Tigranes on the othe^: wherein the Romans were victors: the second, between Selimus Emperour of the Turkes, and Hismael the Persian Sophie, wherein the Turkes were Conquerours,Knolles. Anno 1514. A victory which he bought with the losse of 30000 of his best men, and such a terrour to the whole Army; that the Turkes to this day call it, the only day of doome. The fields adioyning to the towne

wherein this cruell battaile was fought, are called the Chaldean fields. 6 Sebastia, the residence of the Patriarch of the Armenians, who differ from their neighbour Christians, in receiuing infants to the Lords Table, immediatly after Baptisme: secondly, in abstaining from vnclean beasts: thirdly, in fasting on Christmasse day: and fourthly, in holding their children ouer the fire, as a necessary circumstance in Baptisme, because Iohn the Baptist told the people which followed him, that CHRIST should baptise them with the spirit, and with fire; in which place he meaneth not materiall fire, but the liuely purgation of the Holy Ghost, according to the nature of fire. The Church of this sect is gouerned by two Patriarchs, whereof the one hath vnder his iurisdiction this Turcomania, comprehending 150000 Families, besides very many Monasteries: and the other hath vnder him the two Prouinces of Armenia the lesser, and Cilicia, comprehending 20000 Families or thereabouts.
This Country being formerly, and properly called Armenia the greater, to distinguish it from a lesser of the same name in Anatolia, is now vulgarly called Turcomania; which name it deriueth from the Turkes, who being a people of Scythia, and too populous to be sustained with sufficient food in so barren a Country; broke through the Caspian streight, and seated themselues here in the yeare 844. Here they liued an obscure life, neither knowne nor regarded, till such time as Mahomet a Saracenicall Sultan of Persia, hauing imbarqued himselfe in a needlesse warre against the Caliph of Babylon, (which warre he could neithet finish with sa^ety, nor remit without losse of reputation) hired those Turkes to strengthen his part against the Caliph, by whose multitude and valour, he got a noble victory of his enemy. Perceiuing now how necessary it was to hinder their returne homeward, he stoppeth all the passages towards Armenia, intending to vse the Turkes (as they doe now their Asaph) to blunt the sword of the enemy. This treacherous dealing of Mahomet, could not but stirre vp a fury in the inraged multitude; who presently arme themselues, and by the fortunate conduct of Tangrolipix, gaue the Persians such an ouerthrow; that they lost, and the Turkes wonne, he Persian kingdome,

Anno 1030.
Thus was Tangrolipix inthronized in the Persian chaire of Estate, which he not long after left to his son Axan; against whom Cutlu Moyses stirr'd vp some vnnaturall commotions: which seeming preiudicial to their new seated Monarchy, were strangled in their cradle, and Cutlu Moyses was sent with an army, to conquer what he could from the Christian Emperours; the report of whose approach, made all Asia to tremble, and many of her Prouinces, to submit themselues to his vict^rious troopes.

The Turkish Kings in Lesser Asia.
1 Cutlu Moyses, cousin to Tangrolipix, the first Turkish Sultan in Persia; wonne Media, part of Armenia, Cappadocia, Pontus, Bythinia.
2 Solyman, against whom Godfrey of Bullen fi^st tryed his souldiers.
3 Mahomet.
4 Musat, Sultan of Iconium, subdued Mahomet the sonne of Solyman, and died possessed of all the Turkish Prouinces in Lesser Asia.
5 Calisastlan, wrested from his brother Iaqupasan, Amasia and Ancyra; from Dodune, Sebastia and Cesarea. He ouerthrew Emmanuell Comnenus, and vnited Phrygia to his Dominions.
6 Rencratine dispossessed his brothers Masut Cappatine, and Cailhosroes of their inheritance: Towards the latter end of his raigne, the Tartarian Cham Heccata, had driuen the Turkes out of Persia, where there flourished two especiall Families: the Zelzuccian Tribe, from whence descended the Persian Sultans, as also the Aladine Kings in Asia: the Oguzian, of whom in their due place.


The Aladine Kings in Lesser Asia.
1 Aladine descended in the first line from Cussanes the last Turkish Sultan of Persia, with many of his Nation, seated himselfe in Cilicia; which he had taken from the Gre^ians: making first Sebastia, and after Iconium, the place of

his residence.
2 Azaline.
3 Iathatine* slain by Theodorus Lascaris.
4 Iathatine II, driuen out of his kingdome by the victorious Tartars, and died in exile.
5 Masut and Cricubades, were by the Tartarian Emperour placed in the Throne, as his tributary Princes.
6 Aladine was the last of the Zelzuccian Family in Asia; after whose death, and the departure of the tyrannizing Tartars; the more powerfull Captaines diuided the Lesser Asia between themselues.


The Zelzuccian Family in Palestine.
As Axan successor to Tangrolipix, furthered the conquest of Cutlu Moses against the Christians; so he imployed Melech and Ducat, two of his kinsmen, against the Saracens; from whom they quickly conquered Syria and the Holy land, not long after recouered by the Princes of the West; against whom the Sultans of Damascus opposed themselues diuers times to their detriment. It fortuned at last that Almericus King of Ierusalem, made warre with the Caliph of Egypt, who vnable to resist him, implored aid of Noradin King of Damascus. He sent vnto his succour, Sarracon a fortunate Captaine; who not only repell'd the force of the Christians, but subdued the kingdome to himselfe. His successor Saladine also recouered the Holy land: but after his death, Palestine was lost to the Tartars; and Egypt to the Mamaluckes, who not long after regained Ierusalem. And thus ended the Zelzuccian Tribe in all the Turkish Dominions.


The Oguzian Family, or line of Ottoman.
Solyman the chief of the Oguzian Family, and Prince of Machan, flying the fury of the Tartars, was drowned in Euphrates; leauing the guiding of his wandring subiects to his son Etrogul; who obtained of the last Aladine, the village Sagutae in Bythinia, for himselfe and his handfull of subiects. To him succeeded his son Ottoman, Anno 1280, who to reuenge some iniuries done to his people by the improuident Christians, took from them the City Nice; and took vpon him the title of Sultan, after the death of Aladine, in the yeare 1300. To this time,



and to these small beginnings must we reduce the Ottoman Empire.

1300
1 Ottoman the first Turkish Sultan of this Tribe, vnited to his Lordship of Saguta, Bythinia, Cappadocia, and part of Pontus. 28
1328
2 Orchanes took the Citty Prusa, and made it his residence; and was the first that put footing in Europe. 22
1350
Amurath wonne the Thracian Chersonesiu, the strong City Adrianople, Servia, Bulgaria, and Misia, where he was slain by a common Souldier. 23
1373
4 Baiazet made himself master of a great part of Thrace, Macedon, and Phocis. He was taken by Tamberlaine, and brained himselfe in an iron cage, in which the insolent Conquerour vsed to carry him. 26
1399
5 Mahomet vnited the dismembred Empire of his father, and inlarged it with Dacia, part of Sclavonia, and the rest of Macedon. 17
1416
6 Amurath II, subdued from the Constantinopolitan Empire, all Achaia, Thessaly, Epirus, and died before the walls of Croia, 34


The Ottoman Emperours.
1450
7 Mahomet II, surnamed the Great, and first Emperour of the Turkes, ruined the two Empires of Constantinople and Trabezond, 12 kingdomes, and 200 Cities. 34
1481
8 Baiazet II, subdued the Caramanian kingdome, part of Armenia, and droue the Venetians from Moreah, and their part of Dalmatia, 31
1512
9 Selimus hauing poysoned his Father; subverted the Mamaluckes of Egypt, bringing it together with Palestine, Syria, and Arabia, vnder his yoke. 7
1519
10 Solyman the magnificent, surprised Rhodes, Belgrad, Buda; with a great part of Hungary, Babylon, Assyria, Mesopotomia. 48
1567
11 Selimus II, an idle and effeminate Emperour, by his Deputies took from the Venetians, the Ile of Cyprus;

and from the Moores the kingdome of Tunis, and Algiers. 8
1575
12 Amurath III took from the disagreeing Persians, Armenia, Media, and the City Tau^is, and the Fort Guierino from the Hungarians 20
1595
13 Mahomet III took Agria in Hungary, which Kigdome had likely bin lost, if he had pursued his victory. 8
1603
14 Achmat, who the better to inioy his pleasures, made peace with the German Emperour, and added nothing to his Empire. 15
1618
15 Mustapha, brother to Achmet, succeeded; a novelty neuer before heard of in this kingdome, it being the common policy to strangle all the yonger brothers; howsoeuer this Mustapha was preserued, either because Achmet being once a yonger brother, took pitty on him: or because he had no issue of his body, and so was not permitted to kill him.
1618
16 Osman succeeded his Vnkle Mustapha; but being by the Ianisaries slain in an vproare, Must^pha was again restored: yet long inioyed he not his Throne; for the same hand that raised him, pluckt him down, and seated young Amurath in the place.
1623
17 Amurath IV, brother to Osman, now raigneth.

By these Princes hath that Monarchy bin built, which in Europe containeth all Dacia, Graecia, all the Aegaean Iles, and the Taurica Chersonesus: in Asia, the Prouinces already described, Arabia, Assyria, Media, Mesopotamia, Rhodes, Cyprus, and other small Ilands`; and in Africke, Egypt, and the kingdomes of Tunis and Algiers. Nor is this their title any thing short of so vast an Empire; for this Solyman stileth himself in a letter to Villerius, great Master of the Rhodes; at such time as he intended to invade that Iland. Solyman king of kings, Lord of Lords, most high Emperour of Constantinople and Trabezond, the most mighty King of Persia, Syria, Arabia, and the Holy land; Lord of Europe, Asia, Africa, Prince of Mecha, and Aleppo, ruler of Ierusalem, and soueraigne Lord of the Vniuersall

Sea, and all the Ilands therein, etc.
The Turkes are generally well complexioned, of good stature, proportionably compacted, no idle talkers, no doers of things superfluous, hot and venerious, seruile to their Emperour, and zealous in religion. They nourish no haire on their head, and therefore keep on of all sides, counting it an opprobrious thing to see any vncouer their head, and vse to say when they dislike any thing which they haue seene or heard. I had as liefe th^u hadst shewne me thy bare skull. In their familiar salutations they lay their hands on their bosomes, and a little decline their bodies: but when they accost a person of ranke, they bow almost to the ground, and kisse the hem of his garment. Walking vp and downe they neuer vse, and much wonder at the often walking of Christians. Biddulph relateth, that being at his ambulatory exercise with his companions; a Turke demanded them whether they were out of their way, or their witts? If your way (quoth the Turke) lay toward the vpper end of the Cloister, why come you downwards: if to the neather end, why goe you backe againe. Shooting is their chiefe recreation, which they also follow with much lazinesse, sitting on carpets in the shaddow, and sending some of their slaues for their arrowes. They preferre, as they passe the streets, the left hand before the right; as being thereby made master of his sword with whom they walke. As they shaue their heads, so they weare their beards long, a signe of freedome; but the ^laues keep theirs shauen and close cut.
The women are of small stature, for the most part ruddy, cleere, and smooth as the pollished Iuory; as neuer ruffled with the weather, and often frequenting the Baths: of a very good complexion, seldome going abroad, and then masked: lasciuious within doores, pleasing in matters of incontinency, and they are accounted most beautifull, which haue the greatest eyes, and are of the blackest hue. Euery Turke is permitted to haue fou^e wiues, and as many slaues as he is able to keepe: yet are they to meddle with none but their owne; the offending woman being drowned, and the man dismembred. These women liue in great awe and respect of their husband, neuer sitting with him at the table, but waiting till he hath done, and then withdrawing into

some by-roome. If their husband haue bin abroad, at his comming in they all rise from the stooles whereon they sate, kisse his hand, make their obeisance, and stand as long as he is in presence. The children which they haue, they carry not in their armes as we doe, but astride on their shoulders. They liue immured from the sight of the world, and permit not any male children, no not their owne sonnes, to come amongst them after they are 12 yeares old. From their husbands they cannot be divorced but on speciall occasion: but their husbands may put away them, or giue them to their slaues, when, and as often as they list. Far better is it with the sisters, or the daughters of the Sultan, to whom, when her father or brother bestoweth her on any of the Bassa's, he giueth her a dagger, saying, I giue thee this man to be thy slaue and bedfellow, if he be not louing, obedient, and du^i^ull vnto thee, I giue thee here this Canzhare or dagger to cut off his head. When they are married, their husbands come not to bed vnto them vntill they are sent for, and then also they creepe in at the beds feet. That euer any of these Ladies made vse of their dagger I could neuer read: only I finde that Lutzis Bassa the chiefe man in the whole Empire next the Sultan himselfe, and of him very much beloued, hauing giuen his wife which was sister to Solyman the magnificent, a box on the eare; was vpon complaint by her made, thrust from all his honours, banished into Macedon, and had doubtlesly beene slaine, if the Emperors loue, and his own merits had not pleaded for him. And this is all the prerogatiue of a Sultans daughter, her sonnes being accounted as meere and ordinary Turkes only, and neuer being preferred aboue the ranke of a common or inferiour Captaine.
The better sort of the Turkes vse the Sclauonian tongue, the vulgar speake the Turkish language; which being originally the Tartarian, borroweth from the Persian, their words of state; from the Arabicke, their words of religion; from the Grecians, their words and tearmes of warre; and from the Italians, their tearmes of nauigation.
They were formerly Idolatrous Pagans, and were first initiated in Mahumetanisme* when they got the Soueraignty of the Persian Scepter. The degrees in their religion are 1 the Sassi or

Nouices: 2 The Calsi or readers: 3 The Hogi or writers of books; for printing they vse not: 4 The Na^pi or young Doctors: 5 the Caddi, whereof there is at least one in euery Citty to iudge of offences. 6 The Mudressi, who vse to ouersee the Caddis. 7 The Mulli, or principall Church gouernour vnder the Mufti. 8 The Cadulescais, whereof there are only three; one for Greece, the other for Anatolia, the third for Egypt and Syria; these sit with the Bassa's in the Diuano, to determine of temporal suits. 9 The Mufti, whose sentence in law and religion is vnaccountable; he abaseth not himselfe to sit in the Diuano, nor affordeth more reuerence to the Emperour, then he to him.
His forces are either for the Sea or the Land. His Sea forces are great in regard of his spacious sea coasts; vast woods, and number of subiects: he neuer suffered aboue one defeat, and that at Lepanto; yet the next yeare he shewed his Nauy whole and entire. Gallies are his only vessells, which being vnable to cope with ships of any bignesse, were not only the occasion of that ouerthrowe; but also haue heartned the Florentine, only with 6 great ships of warre to swagger in the Seas; so that for more safety, the tribute of Egypt is of late sent to Constantinople by land. The Captaine Bassa, or Admirall notwithstanding with a Nauy of 60 sayle, maketh a progresse about the Seas and Sea-Townes, to annoy the enimy, suppresse Pyrats, collect the tributes, and to redresse the abuses committed in the maritine Town^s belonging vnto the Admiralty: which annuall circuit is begunne in May and ended in October.
Their land-forces are either horse or foot. They which serue on horseback, are the Spahi and Asapi: these latter seruing to weary the enimies, and dull their swords with their multitudes of whose bodies the Ianizaries vse to make mounts whereon to assault the walls of a besieged Towne; and are by them so co^temned, that a Ianizarie once sold two of them for a sheepes-head. As for the Spahi, they till they are inrolled into pay, are of the same originall and education with the Ianizaries; and called by the same name Azamoglans. Their pay is 10 Aspers a day* The Turke is able, and doth maintaine 150000 Horse at little or no cost; which no other Prince can doe with 14 Millions

of Gold: for wheresoeuer any parcell of land is conquered, it is diuided into diuers parts, and committed to the manuring of diuers men whom they call Timariots. These are to pay vnto the Emperour certaine rents, and at their own charges to send to his wars so many horse, excellently appointed for the field: and which is the chiefe point of their seruice, to keepe the subiects in all parts of his Empire in awe; for being as they are dispersed in all quarters of his dominions, the people can no sooner stirre, but these will be assembled and be vpon them. These Timariots are in all accounted to amount to 719000 fighting men; whereof 257000 haue their abode in Europe; 462000 in Asia and Africa. Were it not for these Timariots, as the Turks saying is, no grasse would growe where the Grand Signeurs horse hath once set his hoofe: for if the care of manuring the ground were committed to the peasants, and not to militarie men; the greatest part of the grou^d in this Empire would grow wast and desolate. These Timariots were instituted by Othoman the first Turkish King of this family; and a curse by him laid on them that should annihilate the institution. The name is deriued from the Turkish word Timar, signifying a stipend.
But the nerues and sinewes of this warlike body are the Ianizaries, who by originall being Christians, are chosen by the Turkish officers euery fiue yeares, out of his Europaean dominions: and so distributed abroad to learne the language, customes and religion of the Turks: afterward according to their strength, will, or disposition, placed in diuers chambers. They of the first Chamber, are preferred some to bee Chiausies, such as goe on Embassies, and execute iudgements: others to be Sansiaks, or Gouernours of Citties, some to bee Bassa's, or commanders of Horsemen, and others to be Beglerbigs (id^est, Lord of Lords) to command the rest in generall. They of the other Chambers are the Ianizaries, or Praetorian Souldiers of his Guard, to whose faith and trust the care of the Emperours person is committed. ^he tithing of these young spring alls is, as we haue said euery fift yeare, and oftner sometimes as his occasions serue. By which meanes he not only disarmeth his owne subiects, and keepeth them from attempting any stirre or innouation in his Empire:

but spoileth also the Prouinces hee most feareth of the flower, sinewes, and strength of their people; choice being made of the strongest youthes only, and fittest for warre. These, before they are inrolled in pay, are called Azamoglans, and behaue themselues with much submissenesse toward their Seniours and Governours: but when once they are honoured with the title of Ianizaries, they grow by degrees into an intollerable pride and haughtinesse, Till of late, they were not permitted to marry; neither now can any of their sonnes be accounted any other the^ a naturall Turke (whom of all people they account the basest) the eldest only excepted; to whom this prerogatiue was granted by Amurath the 3d when he came to the Crowne. They are in number 40000, of which 16000 are alwaies resident in Constantinople. In this Citty they are diuersly imployed, being as Constables to see the peace kept; as Clarks of the market to see to the weights and measures; as Officers to arrest common offenders; as Warders to looke to the gates; to guard the houses of Embassadours; and to trauell with strangers for their more safety; in which charge they are very faithfull. Their pay is but fiue Aspers a day, and two gownes yearely; neither are their hopes great, the command of 10, 20, or 100 men being their greatest preferment: yet are they very obsequious to their captaine or Aga; who is in autority inferiour to the meanest Bassa, though in power perhaps aboue the chiefest. For the crafty Turkes ioyne not power and authority together and if they obserue the Ianizaries to loue and respect their Aga too much, they quickly depriue him of life and office. The founder of this order was Amurath the first, Ano. 1365; their greatest establisher Amurath the 2d; their name signifieth young Souldiers. Now concerning these Ianizaries, we will farther consider the sway they beare in designing the successour: 2ly their insolency toward their Emperours and his Officers. 3ly Their behauiour in the vacancy of the throne: and 4ly their punishments.

1 Concerning the first, I neuer find any particular sway the Iauizaries carried in the designation of their Emperour, till the death of Mahomet the great; when the Bassa's hauing chosen Corcut the sonne of Baiazet, were ouerruled by the Aga and

his Ianizaries, who more inclined to Baiazet his father, and son to Mahomet. Though I am not ignorant, that when this Mahomet succeeded in the Throne; the ioyfull acclamations made by these Souldiers, were accounted the chiefest signe of his secure and perpetuated establishment. But the chiefe instance of their power herein, was the inthronizing of Selimus; who being but the 7th sonne to this Baiazet, was not only preferred by the^ before his brethren in his fathers life time; but by their aids also he seuerally mastered them, and in the end poysoned his father. To omit other examples, euen the last yeare Anno 1622, they slew the young Emperour Osmen, drew the now Sultan out of prison, and established him in the royaltie.
2 As for the next, the first example in which I find them peccant toward their Prince, was at the beginning of the raigne of the aboue mentioned Baiazet; when hearing of the intended death of Achmetes Bassa whom they loued, they brake open the Court gates, and told the Emperour, they would teach him like a drunkard, a beast, and a rascall as he was; to vse his great place and calling with more sobriety and discretion. Not long after conceauing farther displeasure against the said Baiazet, they shook their weapons against him, and refused to take him in the midst among them; and were not, without great and vile submission on his part, appeased. Against Selimus the first they also mutined, when being resolued to winter in Armenia, for the better pursuit of his victories toward the Persian; he was by them forced to returne home vnto Constantinople. Against Solyman they mutined so violently, that they compelled him to displace Rustan his chiefe Bassa and fauorite. Against Amurath the 3d, for placing ouer them a new Aga, they so strongly opposed themselues; that first they set fire on Constantinople, and burnt therein, besides shops and warehouses, 25 great Innes, 7 Temples, and 15000 houses: and in the end constrained him to giue them money; and to yeeld also into their hands two of his chiefe Counsellours, by them supposed to be their aduersaries; whom they drew about the streets. Finally (to omit the late tumult 1622 abouenamed) in the yeare 1600, they grew so disco^ented with Amurath the 3d, that they not only threatned to

destroy the principall officers of the Court, and the banishment of the Sultanesse his mother, but the deposing of himselfe also.
3 Now for the third. I finde it to haue beene the custome of these Ianizaries, betweene the death of an old Emperour, and the beginning of the new; to commit diuerse enormities: as the rifling of the houses of the Iewes, and Christians, among whom they dwelt; the murdering of the Bassa's, and principall men about the Court, whom they suspected not to haue fauoured them; and a number of the like outragious insolencies; for of these we finde frequent mention: as after the death of Amurath the 2d, and Mahomet the great, this last time the Marchants of Constantinople being naturall Turkes, scaped not their rauenous hands, neither could Mahomet Bassa avoid the fury of their swords. This spoile they tooke for so certaine a due, that if they were disappointed of it, they would presently raise commotions both in Court, Field, and Citty; vnlesse some present satisfaction were made them. To this end Achmat distributed among them 2 Millions and a halfe of Duckats: Selimus the first two Millions; others made an increase of their daily pay. But Selimus the 2d distributing among them 100000 Sultanies only, was by them prohibited to enter into his Seraglio, till he had inlarged his bounty; and the great Bassa's were wrapped about the pate with their Calliuers, for perswading them to quietnes. Now to preuent the dangerous and factious liberty, which in the vacancy of the Empire was vsually committed; the death of the old Emperour was with all secrecy concealed, till the arrivall of the new. To omit others, I will instance in the deaths of Mahomet the first, and Solyman only. This Solyman died at the siege of Sigeth in Hungary, which was so cunningly concealed by Mahomet Bassa the space of 20 daies: that before the Ianizaries knewe of it, his sonne Selimus had possessed himselfe of Constantinople, and came also to their army then in retreit homeward. For this Mahomet priuatly strangled the Physitians and Apothecaries which knewe of his death; commanded the Souldiers to goe on in their siege; and diuerse times shewed them their Emperour sitting in his horse-litter, as (being troubled with the Gout) he vsed to doe; and when the Citty was taken,

marched homeward with his dead body sitting still in the same manner. So after the death of Mahomet, the Bassa's of the court called their Diuanos as formerly they vsed; gaue order for the leuying of an Army, as if some war were intended: and the Kings Phisitians went vp and downe with their potions, as if they had him still in cure. But the Pensioners and Ianizaries misdoubting the matter, with all eagernesse desired to see him: which when the Bassa's durst not deny, they appointed the next day for their visitation. The next day the dead body was apparelled in royall large roabs, placed in a chaire at the end of a long Gallery, and a little boy cunningly placed behind him, to mooue the Kings hand to his head, as if he should stroke his beard, as his manner was: which signes of life and strength, the Souldiers seeing, held themselues contented, and so was his death concealed the space of 41 daies.
4 As for the last. These insolent and vnsufferable pranks committed so commonly by these masterfull slaues, so exceedingly stomached Baiazet the 2d, that he secretly purposed with himselfe, for curing so dangerous a disease, to vse, a desperate remedy: which was to kill and destroy suddenly all the Ianizaries. It is like that this Baiazet being a Scholler, had read how Constantine the great had ca^^ed the Praetorian Souldiers, and destroie their Campe, as men that were the causes of all the stirs in his Empire, and whose pride was come to an intollerable heighth: and hauing the same cause to destroy his Ianizaries, hoped to produce on them the same effect. But they hauing notice of the plot, for the time continued so vnited and linked together, that he durst not then attempt it; and they afterward siding with his some Se^imus, cast him out of his throne into his graue. Since which time the Emperors neuer durst punish them openly, but when any of them proueth delinquent, hee is sent priuily in the night to Pera; where by the way he is drowned, and a peece of Ordinance shot off, to signifie the performing of the Sultans command.

Now for the Emperours themselues, we will consider them in matters of pleasure; in matters of ceremony; and in matters of state: these last being considerable in their three main points,

which are the murdering of their bretheren; the remoouing of their sonnes; their reuenue: and therein a touch of their gouernment. To these we will adde what apparent symptomes may be obserued to prognosticate the standing, decreasing, or increasing of this puissant Monarchy.
1 For the first, he hath not so few as 500 (sometimes 1000) choice Virgins, kept in a Seraglio by themselues; all slaues, born of Christian parents, and indeed the rarest beauties of his Empire. When he is disposed to take his pleasure with any of them they are all ranked in a long Gallery, and she is by the Aga of the women prepared for his bed, to whom hee giueth his handkercher. She that beareth him the first sonne is honoured with the title of Sultanesse (Queene mother we may call her) neither can he make any of them free, vnlesse he marry them. When the Sultan dieth, all his women are carried into another Seraglio, where they are strictly looked to, and liberally prouided for, and not seldome times are bestowed by the succeeding Sultan on his great Bassa's, and such as hee chiefly fauoureth, which is a principall honour. They are attended on by women onely, and Eunuches, these being not gelded only, but depriued of all their genitalls, and supplying the vses of nature with a siluer quill; which inhumane custome was brought in among them by Selimus the second, because he had seene a gelding couer a mare.
2 Their ceremonies are either performed by them, which is for the most part the building of a Mosche only to help to the saluation of their soules: or towards them by others, which are most apparant in the entertainment of Embassadours. For whe^ such come to his presence, they are led betweene two of his Courtiers, and comming before the throne on both sides whereof the Bassa's sit with admirable silence, resembling rather statua's then men; they bow themselues to the ground with all humility, laying their hands on their breasts, but neuer vncouering their heads, which (as wee before noted) is an vndecency. When they are to depart they goe all backwards, it being accounted very irreuerent to turne their backe parts towards a Prince so glorious. The reason why they are thus brought in betweene two, is said to be for their great honour; but is indeed

a feare they haue, lest the grand Signeur vnder the pretence of a salutation, or the deliuery of an embassie, should be stabbed. This warines they haue vsed euer since Miles Cobelits a Seruian; who scrambling from among the slaine at the battle of Cassoua, and being admitted to the speech of Amura^h the first, the author of that ouerthrowe; stabbed him into the belly with his dagger.
3 Amongst all the iarres and discontents that be, none haue beene with more vnkindnesse begun, or more eagernesse prosecuted, then those of brothers; not only in priuate families, but in the stemmes of Princes: the multitude of pretendants, being the originall of most ciuill warres. To preuent these publike emotions, the Emperours of Habassia vse to immure vp all their younger children in the hill Amara; the Persians to put out the eyes of their yonger brothers; and the Turkes to murther them: strange and horrid courses; whereby to auoid the feare of a warre in the state, they stirre vp a warre in their owne bowels. The first that among the Turkes began this barbarous cruelty, was Baiazet the first, on his brother Iacup: whom immediatly after his fathers death, he strangled with a bow-string: this being the ordinary instrument of their fratricide, because thereby none of the blood-royall of Ottoman is spilt. After him Mahomet the great caused his young brother then at nurse, to die the death, and was not without much adoe, perswaded from being the executioner himselfe. Amurath the 3d caused his fiue brethren to be at once strangled before his face; and Mahomet his sonne, no fewer then 19 in one day. By this course they imagine their owne estate to be infinitly secured, as knowing that Mustapha a younger sonne, stirred a rebellion against Amurath, aud Zemes against Baiazet, both the second of those names: that Solyman, Musa, and Isa, seuerally afflicted Mahomet; and Corcut, Selimus; the first of these names also. But yet they wil not knowe, that nothing sooner putteth their younger brothers into these acts of hostility, then an ineuitable certainty of a violent and vnnaturall death: whereas were they but secure of life, and a liberall and Princely maintenance, it is more then probable, they would rest content, as in other kingdomes the yonger

Princes doe. And notwithstanding this barbarous pollicy, they are not quite free from feare; as knowing that counterfeits haue heretofore much disturbed the qui^t of their predecessours: for thus we finde Amurath the 2d to haue beene vexed by one that tooke vpon him the name of Mustapha, elder brother to Mahomet, the^ ^ate deceased; and much was he furthered and aided by th^ ^^eek Princes This hath beene of the vulgar pollicies of Princes, to kindle flames of sedition in their neighbours Countries. In the infancy of the Roman Empire we finde a counterfeit Agrippa, after that a counterfeit Ne^o, and two counterfeit Alexanders in Syria. But neuer was realme so oft^n troubled with these mockings, ^s England; a counterfeit Richard the 2d, being made in the time of Henry the 4th: a counterfeit Mortimer, in the time of Henry the 6th: a counterfeit D. of Yorke: a counterfeit Earle of Warwicke, vnder Henry the seaventh: and a counterfeit Edward the sixt vnder Q. Mary. To preuent walking spirits, Mahomet the third, laid out the dead bodies of his father and 19 bretheren, as a common spectacle for all that passed by, or would come to behold them. The present Grand Signeur Mustapha, miraculously scaped the bowestring twice; first when his brother Achmat, and secondly when Osmen his young cosen were made Sultans; and is the first that in this Empire did euer succeed in the collaterall line.
4 The remouing of the young Princes is done for three reasons: 1 to weane them from the pleasures of the Court; 2l^ To traine them vp in armes, and inu^e them to hardnesse: and 3ly, and principally, to auoid the danger of a competitour, whereof old Princes are especially iealous. The common places destinat to this princely exile, are Amasia in Cappadocia, Magnesia in Caria, and such l^ke townes of Natolia. Neither doe the old Sultans by such a great distance think themselues secure altogether: but carry a vigilant eye ouer their sonnes actions, and haue intelligence of almost euery particular thought; the least suspition being cause sufficient to destroy them. So we finde Mustapha sonne to Solyman, the hopefullest branch that euer sprang from the Ottoman tree, to haue beene shamefully strangled by the command of his father; vpon a rumour only of a marriage,

which hee was said to haue negotiated with the Persian Kings daughter. When these Princes are once setled in their gouernments, it is a crime meriting no lesse punishment then death, to depart thence and come vnto Constantinople, before their fathers death, or vnlesse they are by their fathers sent for. Of this we haue a tragicall example of Mahomet, a Prince of great hope sonne to Baiazet the 2d: who desiring to see the fashion of his fathers Court, left Magnesia where hee was by his father confined; and attended by two or three Gentlemen came in the habit of a sea-faring man to Constantinople; and hauing obtained his desire, he returned to his charge. This strange action being quickly divulged abroad, and by diuerse variously interpreted, stirred such iealousies in the suspitious head of his old father; that he tooke order not long after to haue him secretly poysoned.
5 As for the ordinary reuenue, it consisteth either in mony receaued, or in mony saued. The mony saued is first by the Tartars, of whom he can continually command 60000 to attend him in his warres without any pay, but the spoile of the enimy. And 2ly by the Timariots, who nourish and bring into the field more horses then any Prince in Christendome can keepe (as we haue already said) for 14 millions of gold. The mony receaued is (according to Boterus) only 15 millions of Sultanies, which is nothing in respect of so great an Empire: the chiefe reaso^ where of is the tyrannicall gouernment of the Turke, which dehorteth men from tillage, marchandize, and other improuements of their estates; as knowing all their gettings to lye in the Grand Signeurs mercy. His extraordinary reuenew is vncredible: for besides that no Embassadour commeth before him empty handed; no man is master of his owne wealth farther then stands with the Emperours liking. So that his great Bassa's are but as spunges, to suck vp riches till their coffers swell, and then to be squeezed into his treasurie. These men as he aduances without enuy, so can he destroy without danger; no man here hoping for partakers if he should resist, as not being ignorant that one mans fortune is built on the defined ouerthrow of another. Such riches as they gaine, if they hap to die naturally, returne to the

Emperours coffers; who giueth only what he pleaseth to the children of the deceased. These Bassa's haue in their particular Prouinces, their Divanos, or Law courts, where iustice hath formerly beene administred with great integrity, but now not a little corrupted: yet the comfort is, that such as miscarry in their right, shall without delaies knowe what to trust to; and the Bassa's vpon complaint to the Emperour, are sure to die for it. Ouer these Bassa's (the chiefe of whom is the Vic^er Bassa, or President of the Councell) preside two Beglerbegs; one for Greece the other for Natolia.
6 Concerning the present state of the Empire, many iudge it to be rather in the wane, then the increase; which iudgement they ground vpon good reasons; whereof these are the chiefe. First that the body is growne too monstrous for the head, the Sultans neuer since the death of Solyman accompanying their armies in person; but rioting and wasting their bodies and treasures at home: that the Ianizaries who haue beene accounted the principall strength of this Empire, are growne more factious in the Court, then valiant in the camp; corrupted with ease and liberty, drowned in prohibited wines, enseebled with the co^tinuall converse with women, and fallen from their former ancestry of discipline: that of late they haue giuen no increase to their dominions: and as in the paths of vertue, non progred^est regredi, so in Empires by violence gotten, when they cease to be augmented, they beginne to be diminished: that rebellions haue in these latter times beene in this Empire strangely raised, and mightily supported; which commotions the former Sultans were neuer acquainted with: that the greatnesse of the Empire is such, that it laboureth with nothing more then the waightinesse of it selfe; so that it must in a manner needs decline pondere pressa suo, ouerburdened by its own mightinesse: that as in a naturall body surfet killeth more then a fasting; so in the body politike, too much extent sooner ruineth then too little or a mediocrity: that the sonnes of the Grand Signeur, whose brauenes of minde is by their father euer suspected; are (contrary sometimes to their owne nature and will) nursed vp in all effeminacy which once rooted in their youth, doth alwaies after assubiect

them to the basenesse and softnes^e of pleasures: that they haue lost much of that feare and terrour, which anciently their very name carried with it, insomuch that not the Venetians only by Sea haue often mated, and once ouerthrowne him; the Hungarians, haue for 200 yeares withstood his greatest forces; the Polonians forced him to a dishonourable retreat and composition; but the poore Prince of Transilvania diuerse times did discomf^te him, the Florentine with 6 Ships only aweth him; and the Emir of Sidon ceaseth not daily to affront him: that by the auarice and corruption in the Court now raigning, all peace and warre, all counsells and informations, all wrongs and fauours are made saleable: that is more then apparant that their Empire is at the height, Et quod naturaliter procedere non potest (saith Velleius) recedit; Empires when they can ascend no higher, must by the ordinary course of nature haue a fall. All these are indeed more then probable prognostications of a dying Monarchy: but yet there is one greater, which is the present face of the state. The late Emperour Mustapha is yet childlesse, and as report giueth vs vtterly disabled for generation. The young brother of Osmen, is but a weake staffe for so huge an Empire to leane on, considering not only the infinite sicknesses^, and casualties of childhood; but also the danger he may iustly expect from Mustapha his vnkle. For likely it is that he hauing at the death of Achmat, receaued the gouernment, and after by the faction of Osmen being deposed, restored and displaced againe, and his life continually indangered: will secure himselfe from the like afterclapps, which may happen vnto him, when this young boy shall be a little older; by the taking of him away, if it bee (as no question but it is) possible. And so wee haue the end of the Ottoman race. Supposing then the O^toman line to faile (as in all likelyhood it may) what then becommeth of this vast Empire? Three there are which will bid faire for it, viz: the Crim Tartar, the Bassa's, the Ianizaries. The Crim Tartar may plead a composition, which is, that he supplying the Turkes Armies with 60000 men without pay; is for these succours to succeed in this Empire, whensoeuer the heires male doe sayle: and besides this, he may hope for no small succours from his confederate, and

allye the great Cham, to recouer his pretended right; and adde to the present glory of the Tartars, the renowne of getting so glorious a booty. The Bassa's may conceaue no small hope of dividing the whole Monarchie among themselues; partly by the example of Alexand^rs Captains, who after their masters death there being yet some of the blood royall remaining, parted among themselues his dominions: partly by an example in their owne state, when after the death of Aladine 2d; Caraman, Sarachan, Aidin, Carasus, and the rest of the more powerfull captaines, divided among them, the Turkish kingdome in lesser Asia,: and partly because being seated in most of the Prouinces as gouernours, and hauing diuerse bands of Souldiers at command; they may easily make that their owne, in which they are so fairely estated already: for so we finde the Sultans, or prouinciall gouernours of the Caliphs, to haue vsurped those Countries as proprietaries, to which they came but as substitutes. The Ianizaries may also build their hopes on very faire foundations, as being the sword and buckler of the Ottoman Empire: by their valour it being not only gotten, but preserued. We see the Praetorian Souldiers (or Ianizaries) of the Empire of Rome, which was a body farre more politique and better compacted then this, to haue created out of the Souldiers their Emperours; the Senate and Prouinces neuer daring not to confirme their election. But aboue all examples, that of the Mamaluckes of Aegypt is most pregnant, who were borne of Christian parents as these are; appointed for the guard of the Sultans, as these are; purposely hi^ed to take from the naturall subiect the vse of armes, as these are; men of approued valor, and the greatest bulwarke of that Turkish kingdome; against the Christians, as these are; and why may not these be like vnto them also, in sitting in their masters seat. Add hereunto that they are already (in a maner) possessed of Constantinople, the head town, and heart of the Empire; and their hopes are not vaine. For my part, I hold the^ to be the men most likely, vnlesse the Princes of Christendome, laying aside priuat malice, ioyne all in armes to strip this proud Peacock of her feathers: and (vpon so blessed an aduantage) to breake in peeces with a rod of iron, this insolent and burdensome

Monarchy. A thing rather to be desired the^ expected. But this by way of supposition only, and as in a dreame. I awake.
And thus much I thought conuenient to insert in this place, concerning the originall, proceeding, and continuance; the naturall dispositions, pollicies, and forces of the Turkes.
These three Prouinces of Armenia being iointly considered, haue suffered much viciscitude of Fortune. For after they had long breathed a free aire, they were all subdued, 1 to the Persian Monarchy by Darius. 2 To the Groeians by Alexander, after whose death the Country was gouerned by an interrupted succession of many tributary Kings. The last of these Tigranes, taking on him the protection of Syria, prouoked the Romans to send Pompey against him: by whom he was according to the chance of war^e taken prisoner, and sent captiue to Rome. 3 His kingdome was conuerted to a Prouince of the Roman Commonwealth. 4 In the diuision of the Empire betweene Theodosius his two sonnes; this Country fell to the share of Arcadius. 5 In the raigne of Heraclius it gaue way to the vnresistable fury of the Saracens. 6 Anno 844 it became the habitation of the Turkes, a nation not so much as dreamt of. 7 The inundation of the Tartars, and their violent head-spring Zingis ouerwhelmed it. 8 The Egyptian Sultans, and the Mamalucks lorded ouer it. 9 The Persians, and 10 now the Turkes are masters of it.
Thus much of Armenia.



OF ARABIA.
ARABIA is bounded on the East with the Persian Gulfe* on the West with the Red Sea; on the North with Mesopotamia, and Palestine; on the South with the Ocean.
The people hereof are extreamely addicted to theft, which is the better part of their maintenance: they hate all sciences, as well Mechanicall as Ciuill, yet boast they much of their Nobility: they are of meane statures, feminine voices, swift of foot, raw-boned, and tawny. They differ not much from the old Arabians, who were a vagabond and theeuish nation. The most

ciuill of them were they of Arabia Faelix, who yet wanted not many barbarous customes; one whereof was the community of one wife only, amongst a whole stocke or kindred: and for her to accompany another man, was the death of them both. A king of this Country had 15 sonnes and but one daughter, who according to the custome was when she came to age, the co^mon wife of all her brothers. The young Lady wearied with such a continued excesse of dalliance, vsed this deuice to prohibit their too frequent accesse to her. It was the fashion that euery one which vsed to one woman, had staffes of a like making; and when any of them went in to their common wife, the setting of the staffe before her chamber dore, forbad entrance to the rest till it were remoued. This young Princesse secretly got a staffe like vnto these of her brothers, which when she was desirous of priuacy, she placed at her chamber dore, and so diuers times deceaued her brothers of their pleasures. It hapned that all the brothers being together, one of them departed towards his sisters lodging where finding a staffe before the dore, and knowing where he had left the rest of his brothers; he accused her of adultery; but the truth being knowne, the Lady was quitted, and her brothers visitations were afterwards limited.
This Country is 4000 miles in compasse, and is vsually divided into Arabia Deserta, Petrosa, and Foelix. The people of al vse the Arabicke language, which not being confined within the narrow bounds of this one Prouince, extendeth it selfe through Palestine, Syria, Mesopotamia, Egypt, all Barbary, (excepting Morocco) and is the sacred language of the Mahometans.
ARABIA DESERTA, is the place where the people of Israel wand^ed 40 yeares long, vnder the command of Moyses; being fed with Manna from heauen, and waters out of the dryest rocks. The soile is neither fit for herbage nor tillage, being couered ouer with a dry and thick sand. These sandy desarts are Seas of Arabia; their ships, the Camels; being beasts content with little sustenance, vsually carrying 600 waight, and sometimes a thousand. The inhabitants of this region are few, so are their Citties, the chiefe whereof is Bassora.
ARABIA PETROSA is so called, either because it is so

rocky; or from Petra the chief Town, now called Rathalalah: the second town of note, is Aresh, or Arissa, consisting of a few houses, and a royall Castle, garrison'd with a hundred souldiers. 3 Ezion Geber on the coast of the Red sea, where Solomon's Navy kept station, before they put saile towards Ophir; and after they returned thence. The Country is barren and desolate, bearing neither grasse, nor trees; the palme only excepted; good store of dromedaries it hath, a beast of such swiftnes, that it will easily carry a man 100 miles a day. Here is also good store of Ostriches. But I returne to Petra, which I find to haue bin straightly besieged by Seuerus, and before him, by Traian but with like successe: The Romans in the skirmishes and assaults being alwayes put to the worst: nor did Traia^e escape so free, but he was compelled to cast away his Imperiall habite, and flye for his life; the next man vnto him being slain with a dart. Nay (if we may credit Dion, who is neuer sparing of the like prodigies) the Heauens fought against the Romans, with thunders, lightnings, whirlewinds, tempests; as often as they made any battery against the City. This Country containeth the regions Nabathaeae, and Agara, whereof the first is somtimes vsed for all Arabia, as in Ovid,
Eurus ad Auroram Nabathaeaque regna recessit.Eurus vnto the East did flye,Where blest Arabia doth lye.
The other was possessed by the Saracens or Hagarens, descended of Abraham and Hagar. Here also dwelt the Emmins and Zanzummims cast out by the Amorites and the Moabites: here also dwelt the Midianites, to whom Moses fled and kept sheep: here also is Mount Horeb. This part of Arabia was first subdued and made a Prouince of the Empire by Palma, Lieftenant of Syria, vnder the aboue-mentioned Traiane.
ARABIA FOELIX containeth the Peninsula, girt almost round with the Persian Gulfe, the Red sea, and the Ocean. In this Country is the Phoenix, which growing old, burneth it selfe, and from the ashes a new Phoenix is ingendred. This is the most fruitfull and pleasant Country in Asia, abounding with Gold and Pearles, with Balsamum, Myrrhe, and Frankincense,

especially about Saba the principall City, (whence that of the Poet, Thure Sabaeo:) the rest of note being 2 Medina, in or nigh vnto which, the Impostor Mahomet composed his Religion. This Town was the first that yeelded vnto Mahomet, after he began by force of Armes to establish his Religion, and begin his Empire. And questionlesse the taking hereof gaue great reputation to his enterprise; for Medina being taken, what City durst make resistance? 3 Zarvall the residence of the Caliphs, till the building of Bagdet by Bugiafer. 4 Mecha, wherein Christians are not permitted to enter, lest (I suppose) they should see the absurdities of the Mahumetans adoration of their great Prophets Sepulchre: whose body inclosed in an iron Coffer, was by an Adamant drawne vp to the roofe of the Temple, where it still hangeth. 5 Oran, the key of the South Ocean. 6 Danchali. 7 Elter, the only Town in Arabia, where the Christians are of the greater number. The first Roman that euer made expedition into this Country, was Largus, President of Aegypt vnder Augustus; one Samos being then King hereof. The Romans at first entrance, found no resistance; but when by the extraordinary heat of the aire, and drinking salt water, sicknes began to grow hot among them, the Arabians lustily falling vpon them, made them retire with more speed, and lesse honour, then they came thither. This Arabia is by Curtius called, Odorum fertilitate nobilis regio, for the Frankincense, wherwith (as we now said) it aboundeth: and is indeed so delicious a cou^try, that Danaeus, in his Commentary on Augustines Enchiridion ad Lawrentium, is perswaded, that it was the locall place of Paradise; Dicitur (saith he) terrestris Paradisi regio and pars quaedam esse Arabia, quae nunc appellatur Foelix.
This Country followed the fortune of the foure great Monarchies, and was long subiect to the Greeke Emperours, euen vntill the raigne of Heraclius: who imploying certain Arabians in an expedition against Persia: not only denied them wages, but told them, that that was not to be giuen to dogs, which was prouided for the Roman Souldiers. Hereupon the Arabians revolt, and chuse Mahomet for their ring-leader.
This Mahomet was borne in Itrarip, a Village of Arabia,

Anno 572 his father was a Pagan, full of Idolatry; his mother a Iew blinded with superstition: from which worthy couple, could not but descend so godly an Imp as was Mahomet. At the Age of 16 yeares, he bound himself to a Marchant, whose affaires he managed with such care and discretion, that vpon the death of his Master, his Mistris took him for her husband; he being then aged 25 yeares. With her he liued till the 38th yeare of his age; but then God permitting, and the Diuell tempting him to it, he began to affect the name and estimation of a Prophet; and so cunningly he demeaned himself, that a sudden opinion of his sanctity was quickly divulged. After this he exhorted the Arabians, to renounce their alleagiance to the Greeke Emperours. Thus he being now made Captain of a rebellious multitude, inducted among them a new Religion, consisting partly of Iewish ceremonies, which he learned of one Abdalla; partly of Christian precepts, taught him by Sergius a Nestorian Monke; and partly of other phantasticall fopperies, which his own inventions suggested vnto him.
The book of this Religion is called the Alcoran. It was composed by Osmen the 4th Caliph; who seeing the Saracens daily inclining to diuers Heresies, by reason of some false copies of Mahomets Lawes; and that the Empire by the same meanes was likely to fall into ciuill dissentions: By the help of his wife, who was Mahomets daughter, he got a sight of all Mahomets papers, which he reduced into 4 Volumes, and diuided into 206 Chapters: commanding expressely vpon paine of death, that that book, and that only, should be receiued as Canonicall, throughout his Dominions. The whole body of it is but an exposition and glosse of these 8 Commandements.
First, euery one ought to beleeue that God is a great God, and only God, and Mahomet is his Prophet. They hold Abraham to be the friend of God, Moyses the messenger of God, and Christ the breath of God; whom they deny to be conceiued by the Holy Ghost* but that Mary grew with Child of him by smelling to a Rose, and was deliuered of him at her brests. They deny the mystery of the Trinitie, and punish such as speake ^gainst CHRIST, whose Religion was not (they say) taken away,

but mended by Mahomet. And he who in his Pilgrimage to Mecha, doth not comming or going, visit the Sepulchre of CHRIST; is reputed not to haue merited, or bettered himselfe any thing by his iourney.
2 Euery man must marry to increase the Sectaries of Mahomet. Foure wiues he alloweth to euery man, and as many concubines as he will, between whom he setteth no difference either in affection, or in apparell, but that his wiues only can inioy his Sabbaoths benevolence. The women are not admitted to their Churches, nor after death to Paradise: and whereas in most or all other countries, fathers giue some portion with their daughters, the Saracens giue money for their wiues: which being once payed, the contract is registred in the Cadies booke, and this is all their formality of marriage. More of this theame we haue spoken in Turcomania.
3 Euery one must giue of his wealth to the poore. Hence you shall haue some buy slaues, and then manu-mit them: buy birds, and then let them flie. They vse commonly to free prisoners, release bond-slaues, build Can^s for the reliefe of Passengers, repaire bridges, and mend high wayes. But their most ordinary almes consist in Sacrifices of Sheep or Oxen, which when the solemnity is performed, they distribute among the poore: insomuch that you shall hardly find any beggers among them.
4 Euery one must make his prayers fiue times in a day. When they pray* they turne their bodies towards Mecha, but their faces sometimes one way, sometimes another way, beleeuing that he shall come behind them, being at their devotions. The first time is an houre before Sun-rising; the second at noone day; the third at three of the clock afternoone, the fourth at Sun-setting; the fift and last before they goe to sleep. At all these times the Cryers keep a bawling in the steeples (for the Turkes and Saracens haue no bels) for the people to come to Church. And such as cannot come, must when they heare the voyce of the Cryers, fall down in the place where they are, doe their deuotions, and kisse the ground thrice.
5 Euery one must keepe a Lent one moneth in the yeare. This Lent is called Ramazan, in which they suppose the Alcoran

was giuen vnto Mahomet, by an Angell. This fast is only intended in the dayes, the Law giuing leaue to frolick it in the nights, as they best please.
6 Be obedient to thy parents; which Law is the most neglected of any, neuer any Children being so vnnaturall as the Turkish.
7 Thou shalt not kill: which they keep vnviolated amongst themselues: but the poore Christians are sure to feele the smart of their fury. And as if by this Law the actual shedding of blood only were prohibited, they haue invented punishments for their offenders, worse then death it selfe; as 1 the strappado, which is hanging of them by the Armes drawne backward: when they are so bound, they are drawne vp on high, and let downe again with a violent swing, which vnioynteth all their back and armes. Secondly, they vse to hoyse vp their heeles, and with a great cudgell to giue them 3 or 400 blowes on the soles of their feet. Thirdly, it is ordinary to draw them naked vp to the top of a gibbet, or towre, full of hookes; and cutting the rope, to let them fall down again. But by the way they are caught by some of the hookes, where they commonly hang till they die for hunger.
8 Doe vnto others as thou wouldst be done vnto thy selfe. To those that keep these Lawes, he promiseth Paradise, spred here and there with silk carpets, adorned with flowry fields, watred with Crystalline riuers, beautified with trees of Gold, vnder whose coole shade they shall spend their times with amorous Virgins, whose mansion shall not be farre distant. The men shall neuer exceed the age of 30, nor the women of fifteen; and both shall haue their virginities renewed as fast as lost.
Friday he ordained to be the Sabbaoth day, partly to distinguish his followers from the Iewes, and Christians, who solemnize the dayes ensuing; but principally because he was on that day proclaimed Caliph, and solemnly so created. Wine, and swinesslesh are the principall things forbidden by the Alcoran, the last whereof they abstemiously refrain from; but on the first they are so sotted* that when they come at it, they seldome goe home again vnled; insomuch, that all the Wines in Constantinople haue bin thrown about the streets, and death made the penalty

for any that will presume to bring any more into the City.
Mahomet taught them that euery one should be saued by his own Religion, him only excepted that revolteth from the Alcoran, vnto another Law; and that at the end of the World* all men that professed any Religion, should goe into Paradise; the Iewes vnder the banner of Moses, the Christians vnder the banner of CHRIST, and the Sarracens vnder the banner of Mahomet. They compell no man therefore to abiure the faith in which he was borne, but commend and approue secretly such as they find zealous and constant in their own Religion: yet holding it an especiall honour to haue dayly new Proselites, they incite them by hope of freedome and preferment, which with many are motiues too much preuailing. Hence I haue heard many say, that it is better for a man that would inioy liberty of conscience, to liue in the Countries professing Mahumetanisme, then Papistry: for in the one he shall neuer be free from the bloody Inquisition; in the other he is neuer molested if he meddle not with their Law, their Women, or their slaues.
The opinions which they hold concerning the end of the World, are very ridiculous; as that at the winding of a horne, not all flesh only, but the Angels themselues shall die; that the Earth with an Earth-quake shall be kneaded together like a lump of dough; that a second blast of the same horne shall after 40 daies restore all again; that Cain shall be the Captaine or ring-leader of the damned, who shall haue the countenances of dogs and Swine; that they shall passe ouer the bridge of iust^ce* laden with their sinnes in satchels; that the great sinners shall fall into hell, the lesser into Purgatory only, with a thousand of the like fopperies.
This Religion thus compiled, was greedily receiued by the Sarracens, a people of Arabia Deserta; so called (not of Sara, but Sarra) signifying a desert, and Saken, to inhabite; or f^om Sarak, betokening theeues, a name fitly correspondent to their nat^^es. The causes of the deplorable increase and continuance of his irrel^gious Religion, are 6. 1 The greatnes of the victories of the Sarracens; who easily compelled the conquered to

embrace their superstitions. 2 A peremptory restraint of all disputation in any point of Religion whatsoeuer. 3 The suppression of Philosophy and humane Arts; the light of which, could not but erect the grossen^sse of their tenents. 4 The sensuall liberty allowed of hauing variety of wiues. 5 The promise of (...) after death; with which a sense not inlightned with the spirit of God, cannot but be more affected, then with a meere speculatiue hope of spirituall delig^ts. And 6 the forbidding of Print^ng, and printed books; by which the people might truly know the verity of Christian Religion, and the apparent falshood of their own Mahumetan.
Mahomet was of low stature, schald-headed, euill proportioned, and as euill conditioned; being naturally addicted to all villanies, infinitly theeuish, and insatiably leacherous. He was troubled almost continually with the Falling-sicknes; to mask which infirmity, as repugnant to his pretended omnipotency; he said it was only a diuine rapture, wherein he conversed with the Angel Gabriel. He was well seen in Magick, by whose aid and help of the Di^ell, he taught a white Pigeon to feed at his care, affirm^ng it to be the Holy Ghost, which informed him in diuine precepts. By these policies he strengthned himself with the discontented Arabians, who first freed themselues from the allegiance to the Grecian Empire; but not without some resistance of the Philarchi, or Nobility of Mecha, who droue him forcibly from their territories, which not long after he subdued, casting thence the Greeke o^^icers. From this returne of his, after his flight from Mecha, the Sarracens began their computation of yeares (as we from CHRISTS Natiuity) which they call the Hegira; which beginneth about the yeare of our redemption 617: concerning which time, I cannot but obserue, that Mahomet compiled his diuelish doctrine, beginning his Empire; and Boniface the third his Antichristian title, beginning his Empire, nigh about the same yeare.


The Caliphs or Amira's of the Saracens.

A.C.
A.H.
 
 


623
6
1
Mahomet the broacher of this heathenish superstition.

9


632
15
2
Ebubezer subdued the City Haza. 2


634
17
3
Haumar a mighty Prince, conquered Syria, Palestine, Persia, Egypt, and Mesopotamia 12


647
30
4
Osmen subdued* Carthage, and the greatest part of Barbary 10


657
40
5
Mnauias won Cyprus, Rhodes, and part of Lesser Asia 24


684
67
6

Gizid.



 
 
7

Habballa.



 
 
8

Maruan.



685
68
9
Abdimelech established the begun conquests of Armenia and Mesopotamia. 22


707
90
10
Vlidor Vbit sent the Saracens to Spaine, who there wrought great victories 9


716
99
11
Zulcimin, whose Captain Mulsamus bes^eged Constantinople, till his ships were burnt, and his men consumed with the plague. 3


719
102
12
Haumar II. 2


721
103
13
Gizid II. 4


725
107
14
Eu^lid conquered Cappadocia, 18


743
125
15
Gizid III.


744
126
16
Hyces, in whose time Charles Martell made hauock of the Saracens in France.


745
127
17
Maruan II, inuaded Cyprus, and took it. 6


752
133
18

Abuballas. 5



756
138
19

Habdallas.



 
 
20
Bugiafer Abugefer built the City Bagdet.


777
159
21

Mahadi 9



786
168
22
Musa or Moyses. 1


787
169
23
Arachid or Aron compell'd Irene Empresse of Greece, to pay him and his, tribute. 23


110
193
24
Mahamad or Mahomet II* 5


815
198
25
Habdallas, who took and spoyled Creet, and ouerthrew the Greekes: he spoiled also Sicilia, Sardinia, and Corsica. 17


832
215
26
Mohamet III, wasted Italy, burnt the suburbs

of Rome, and ruinated the forenamed Ilands. 40 Others reckon these Caliphs to haue succeeded Mahomet II.


815
198
25

Manion. 12



827
210
26

Mu^etzam. 8



835
218
27

Wacet 4



839
222
28

Methucall. 12



851
234
29

Montacer. 1



852
235
30

Abul Hamet. 6



858
241
31

Almatez 4



863
245
32
Motadi Bila. 10* after whose death the Egyptians with-drew themselues from their obedience due to the Babylonian Caliph, and chose one of their own, to whom all the Arabians, or those of the Mahometan Religion in Africa and Europe submitted themselues. Of the Aegyptian Caliphs, when we come into that Country; take now with you the names only of the Syrian or Babylonian Caliphs; for story of them I find litle or none.





The Babylonian Caliphs after the diuision.

A. C.
A. H.
 
 


870
252
1

Mutemad 21



891
273
2

Mutezad. 8



899
281
3

Muchtaphi 8



907
289
4

Muchtedar 24



931
313
5

Elhaker 1



932
314
6

Ratze 7



939
321
7

Muctade 4



943
325
8

Musteraphe 2



945
327
9
Macia and Taia. 44


989
371
10

Kadar. 41



1030
412
11

Kaim. 5



1035
417
12

Muctadi. 60



1095
477
13

Mustetaher. 22



1117
499
14

Musteraschad 18



1135
517
15

Raschid. 25



1160
542
26

Musteneged. 9



1169
551
17

Mustazi. 10



1179
561
18

Narzay. 36



1225
597
19

Taher.



 
 
20

Mustenatzer



1255
638
21
Mustatzen
the last Caliph or high-priest of the Sarracens, in Syria and Babylon. Yet haue they still remaining a carcasse of the old Body, one whom they cal Caliph, at whose hands the neighbour Princes vse to receiue their Diadems and Regalities: and so we find Solyman the magnificent,

after his conquest of Chaldea, M^sopotamia* and Assyria, to haue bin by one of these poore titulary Caliphs, created king of Babylon, Anno 1543.



This vnweildie Body of the Sarracen Empire, hauing thus two heads, began apparantly to decline; loosing to the kings of Leon and Oviedo, the greatest part of Spaine: to the Genois, Sardinia, and Corsica: to the Normans, Naples and Sicily: and finally most of their Empire, with their very names, to the Turks and Tartars* For Allan a Tartarian Captain, starued Mustatzem a Babylonian Caliph, in his Towre of Bagde^, and rooted out all his posterity: and Sarracon the first Turkish king of Egypt, brained the last Egyptian Caliph with his horsemans Mace, leauing not one of his Issue or kindred surviuing. The office of the Caliphs is now executed in the Turkes Dominion by the Musti, or chief Priest of the Sarracens.
As Mars shewed himselfe a coadiutor to these Moores in their stupendious triumphs, so also did Phoebus powre down no lesse celestiall influence, on such as addicted themselues to schollership. Bagdet in Chaldea, Cairoan, Fess, Morocco in Barbary, and Corduba in Spaine, were their Vniuersities: out of which came the Philosophers, Avicen, and Averroes: the Physicians Rhasis, and Mesue: The Geographers Leo and Abilfada; and almost all the Textuaries and found Writers, as Hali, Algazel, Albumazar, etc. in Astrology; from whom the greatest part of our Astronomicall and Astrologicall termes are borrowed.
There is now no Kingdome, Iland, or Prouince, which acknowledgeth the Empire of the Saracens, but the Kingdome of Fesse, and Morocco in Barbary. And now it is time to returne again to Arabia, which followed (as we told you) the fortune of the foure great monarchies. In the conquest of it by the first three, there occurreth nothing of any note; in the last, this is most remarkable. When Alexander was in his adolescencie or boyage, he on a time sacrificing to the gods, cast into the fire with both his hands, abundance of myrrhe and frankincense; which Leonidas one of the Nobility marking, aduised him to be more sparing of that precicus and deare commodity; til he was master of the Country where it grew. This admonition Alexander

(when he had conquered Arabia) remembring, sent a ship laden with frankincense to Leonidas, bidding him hereafter serue the Gods more liberally, It was subdued vnto the Turks by Selimus the first, immediatly after his conquest of Egypt: yet are the people rather tributaries vnto, then prouincialls of the Turkish Empire. Two kings they haue of their own, whereof the one continually resideth in some good town of Arabia: the other haunteth about Syria, and the Holy land; liuing in tents, and being followed by the wild and theeuish Arabs.
Thus much of Arabia.


OF ASSYRIA, MESOPOTAMIA, AND CHALDEA,
ASSYRIA hath on the East Media, on the West Mesopotamia,Maginus. on the North Armenia minor, and on the South Susiana, a Prouince of Persia.
This Region took its name from Assur, second son to Sem, who with his Family retired himself hither, after the confusion of tongues. It is now (as Maginus informeth vs) called by Niger, Adrinsa; by Mercator, Sarth; by Pin^tus, Mosul; by some, Azemia; by others, Arzerum. It containeth the Provinces of old Adiabene, Arrapachite, and Sittacene.
It is a custome, which hath from all antiquity bin vsed in this Country, that the maides which are marriageable, are yearely brought forth in publick, and set to sale to such as would marry them: and the mony which was giuen for the fairest, was by the Arithmeticall proportion of Iustice, giuen to the more deformed for their portions, to make them goe off the better and quicker. And hence perhaps the Fathers of our times vse to giue least mony with such of their daughters, whose beauty is a sufficient dowry: but to grease the fat sowes, with the addition of some hundreds of pounds; which made the merry fellow say, that the mony was a good match, if the wench were absent.
The chiefe Cities were and are Ninive, built by Ninus th^ Assyrian Monarch; a great City, of three dayes journey, and in

circuit 66 miles. The walls hereof were in heigth 100 foot, in bredth able to contain 3 Carts a brest: Towres in the wall 1500, euery one 200 foot high: In the Hebrew it is called Ruhaboth; in Eusebius time Nisib; now almost ruined to nothing.

Sic patet exemplis oppida posse mori.
Examples plainly doe affirme,
Townes haue for life a settled tearme:

Through this City ranne the faire and famous riuer Euphrates; of which there was an old prophesie, that the town should neuer be forced, till the riuer prooued its enemy. This made Sardanapalus make it the seat of warre against Belochus and Arbaces; who hauing for three whole yeares besieged it, the riuer ouer-flowed its bankes, and ouer-threw twenty furlong of the walls: Which accident compelled Sardanapalus to that desperat extremity, that he burned himself; and the enemy entred the Town. To this City Ionah was sent to preach, here being 1200000 persons that knew not the right hand from the left. 2 Arzeri, whence the whole Region is called Arzeri. 3 Aruela, nigh vnto which, Alexander fought his third and last battle against Darius, and his Persians; who being in number 800000, went home fewer by farre then they came thither. Not long after this victory, Darius died, and Alexander was installed in the Persian Monarchy. 4 Serta. 5 Musall, the seat of the Nestorian Patriarch.
MESOPOTAMIA hath on the East Tigris, on the West Euphrates, on the North the hill Caucasus, on the South Chaldea. This Country in holy Scriptures is called Padan Aram; as also Mesopotamia, quasi (...), because it is invironed with the riuers Tigris and Euphrates, which ouerflow the Country, as Nilus doth Egypt, making it very fertile; and now it is called Dierbecke.
The soyle is exceeding fertile, yeelding in most places 200, in some 300 increase. Here Abraham was borne: hither he sent his seruant to choose a wife for his son Isaack: hither Iacob fled from his brother Esau. And here Paradise is by men both skilled in Diuinity, and Geography, affirmed to haue stood. Yet

amongst all sorts of Writers we find different opinions. Some make Paradise to signifie a place of pleasure, and the foure Riuers to be the foure Cardinall Vertues: but these allegories on the Scriptures are not warrantable. Others place it in the aire, vnder the circle of the Moon; and tell vs that the 4 riuers in the Scriptures mentioned, fall down from thence, and runn^ng all vnder the Ocean, rise vp again in those places where they are now found: but this is so vain a foppery, that I will not honour it with a confutation. Such as make Paradise locall, are also diuided into 3 ranks, (for I omit the rest) whereof some place it vnder the Aequator; but this agreeth not with the bounds prescribed by the Holy Ghost. Some conceiue the 4 riuers to be Tigris, Euphrates, Nilus, and Ganges; and that Paradise was the whole World: but this cannot be, for then when Adam was driuen out of Paradise, it must also follow that he was driuen out of the World, which were absurd. Those of the soundest judgments place it here, in an Iland which is made by the Riuers Tigris and Euphrates, and some branches running from them: the vppermost of them they defend to be Pison (falsely rendred Ganges) which watereth the land of Havilah, now called Susiana; and the lowermost to be Gihon (improperly translated Nilu^) as running through Aethiopia Asiatica, which we shall further explain when we come into Africke. The reasons are, because Nilus and Ganges are too farre distant, and different in their course to spring from one fountaine, and that this Country is situate East of Arabia, where Moses was when he wrote Genesis.
The chief Cities are Rechiais, formerly Edessa, whereof Agbarus was gouernour, who writ an Epistle to our Sauiour CHRIST,Herodian. and from him receiued an answer; the Copies wherof Eusebius setteth down in the end of his first book. Neare vnto this town Antoninus Caracalla, son to Septimius Severus, Emperour of Rome, was slain by the appointment of Macrinus, Captain of the Guard, herein disappointing Caracalla, who intended to haue made Macrinus shorter by the head. For Caracalla, conscious of his own vnworthines to rule the Empire, and fearing reuenge for the many murders he had in Rome committed;

sent to Maternianus his friend, desiring him to enquire of the Magicians, who should be his successour: He returned answer, that Macrinus was the man. The packet of Letters among which this was, was brought to Caracalla, as he was riding in his Chariot, who therfore deliuered them to Macrinus, whose office (besides the gouernment of the Praetorian gua^d) was to read and answer Letters of ordinary import. The Letter concerning himself comming to his hand, he seeing his imminent perill, resolued to strike the first blow; and to that end entrusted Martialis, one of his Centurions, who killed the vnfortunate Emperour, as he with-drew himself, levandae vesica gratia. It will not be any way amisse in this place to note; that all, or most of the Emperours before Constantine (who first receiued the faith) died vnnaturall deaths: but such as succeded him, went to their graues in peace, and full of yeares: from Iulius Caesar vnto Constantine, are numbred 40 Emperours, of which, Iulius was openly murdred in the Senate-house: Augustus death was hastned by his wife Livia; Tiberius by Macro, Caligula was slain by Cassius Chereas; Claudius poysoned by Agrippina: Nero and Otho laid violent hands on themselues. Galba and Vitellius were massacred by the Souldiers; Domitian by Stephanus; Commodus by Letus and Electus; Pertinax, and Iulianus by the tumultuous Guard; Caracalla by the command of Macrinus; Macrinus, Heliogabalus, Alexander Severus, Maximinus, Maximus, and Balbienus, successiuely by the men of warre; Gordianus by Philip; Philip by the Souldiers; Hostilianus by Gallus and Aemilianus; they by the Souldiers; Valerianus died prisoner in Parthia; Florianus and Diocl^sian were the Authors of their own ends. Aurelianus was murdred by his houshold seruants. Gallienus, Quintilius, Tacitus and Probus by the fury of the military men. I haue out of this bedroll, purposely omitted such Emperours as were made by the Armies, without the approbation of the Senate; as also the Caesars, or designed successours of the Empire; most of whom got nothing by their designation or adoption, but ut citius intersicerentur. Some of these were cut off for their misdemeanours: some for seeking to reviue again the ancient Discipline: and some that others

might inioy their places. The chief cause of these continuall massacres, proceeded originally from the Senate and Emperours themselues. For when the Senatours had once permitted the Souldiers to elect Galba, and had confirmed that election, Evulgato (saith Tacitus) imperij arcano, principem alibi quam Romae fieri posse; more Emperors were made abroad in the field by the Legions, then at home by them. Secondly, from the Emperours, who by an vnseasonable loue to their guard souldiers, so strengthened them by priuiledges, and nusled them in their licentious courses; that on the smallest rebuke, they which were appointed for the safety of the Princes, prooued the Authors of their ruine; so truly was it said by Augustus in Dion: Metuendum est esse sine custode, sed multo magis a custode metuendum est. The last cause (be it causa per accidens, or per se) was the largesse which the new Emperours vsed to giue vnto the men of seruice. This custome was begun by Claudius Caesar, and continued by all his successours; insomuch that the Empire became saleable, and many times he which bade most, had it: As we see in Dion, when Sulpitianus offering twenty S^stertiums to each Souldier, was (as if they had bin buying a stock at Gleeke) outbidden by Iulianus, who promised them 25 Sestertiums a man. So that Herodian ius^ly complaineth of this donatiue. Id initium causaque militibus fuit, ut etiam in posterum turpissimi contumacissimique evaderent; sic ut avaritia indies, ac principum contemptus, etiam ad sanguinem usque proveherentur. But it is now high time to goe on in my journey to Carra, obseruing only by the way, that when the valorous Christians had recouered this Country, and the Holy land; for the more facile administration of Iustice, they diuided the whole Conquest in 4 Tetrarchies; namely 1 Hierusalem, 2 Antioch, 3 Tripolis, 4 This Edessa; vnder euery one of which were many subordinate Lords, being all subiect to the Kings of Hierusalem. 2 Carra, called (Genesis 12.) by Moses, Haran; where Abraham dwelt, hauing left Vr. In this town the Moon was worshipped in both sexes: some honouring it as a female; then she was called Dea Luna; others as a male, and then Deus Lunus was his name: but with this fortune, both: Qui Lunam faemineo nomine putabat nuncupandam,

is mulieribus semper inserviat; at vero qui marem Deum esse crediderit, is uxori dominetur. I dare presume there were but few men of the former Religion: So vnwilling are they to be vnder the command of their wiues; neither will I herein blame them. Nigh vnto this town was Crassus the Romane Lieftenant, and one of the richest men that euer that Commonwealth knew* (for he was worth 7100 talents; the tenth being deduced, which he offered to Hercules, and three moneth corne giuen to the poore) vanquished by the Parthians, and their King Herodes.
--Miserando funere CrassusAssyrias Latio maculavit sanguine Carras.Crassus by a defeat lamen^ed staine;With Roman blood th'Assyrian Carras plaines.
It is now called Carr Amida, or Caramit, and is the seat of a Turkish Bassa, who is of great command in those parts. 3 Madri^.
CHALDEA is bounded on the East with Assyria, on the West with Syria, on the North with Armenia, and on the South with Arabia Deserta.
The chief Citties were Vr, now Horrea, whence Abraham* departed when he went to liue at Haran. 2 Erech. 3 Accad. 4 Carnell. and 5 Babel (Gen. 10.10.) This Babel (in the Hebrew it signifieth confusion) is famous for the confusion of languages, which here hapned: for immediatly after the Vniuersall deluge, Nimrod the son of Chus, the son of Cham, perswaded the people to secure themselues from the like after-claps, by building some stupendious Edifice, which might resist the sury of a second deluge. This counsell was generally embraced, Heber only and his Family, contradicting such an vnlawfull attempt. The maior part preuailing, the Towre began to reare a head of Maiesty, 5164 paces fro^ the ground: hauing its basis and circumference equall to the height. The passage to goe vp, went winding about the out-side, and was of an exceeding great bredth, there being not only roome for horses, carts, and the like meanes of carriage, to meet and turne; but lodgings also for

man and beast, and (as some report) grasse and corne-fields for their nourishment. But God beholding from high this fond attempt, sent amongst them (who before were one language) a confusion of 72 tongues: which hindred the proceeding of this building, one not being able to vnderstand what his fellow called for.
Bring me (quoth one) a trowell, quickly quicke;One brings him vp a hammer: hew this bricke(Another bids) and then they cleaue a tree:Make fast this rope, and then they let it flee:One calls for planks, another morter lackes:They bring the first a stone; the last an axe.
Thus being compell'd to desist from so vnluckie an enterprise, they greedily sought out such as they could vnderstand, with whom consorting themselues, they forget their former acquaintances, and now are diuided into 72 different nations: comprehending about 24000 men, besides women and children. Of these 72 nations, 27 of seuerall language, being the posterity of Sem, dispersed themselues about Asia: 30 others, of the loines of Cham, peopled Africk: and 15 more, being the issue of Iaphet, withdrew themselues towards Europe, and Asia the lesse. The sonnes of this Iaphet were first Gomer, from whom are descended the Germans and Gauls, called of of old Gomeri, and Cimbri. 2 Magog, father to the Magogins, or Scythians. 3 Madus, the author of the Madians, or Medes. 4 Tubal, the progenitour of the Spaniards. 5 Iavan, the parent of the Greeks and Ionians. 6 Meschus, the founder of the Mescates ^or Cappadocians. 7 There^, whose of-spring is the Thracians.
From out this Gomers loynes they say sprung allThe warlike nations scattered ouer Gaul,And Germans too, yerst called Gomerites.From Tubal Spaniards, and from Magog Seytes.From Madai Medes, from Mesech Mazacons,From Iavan Greeks, from Thyras Thracians.
Sem had fiue sonnes: from Elam descended the Elamites or Persians: from 2 Assur the Assyrians: from 3 Arphaxad the Arphaxadians, or Chaldes (his sonne Heber was father to the Hebrews^)

from 4 Aram the Aramites, or Syrians: and from Lud, the peoply of Lydia.
The Sceptred Elam chose the Persian hillsAssur Assyria with his people fills:Lud Lydia; Aram all Syria had,And Chaldey fell to learned Arphaxad.
The sonnes of Ham were foure only: from Canaan descended the Cananites, being subdiuided into Hittites, Perezites, Amorites, Iebusites, etc. 2 from Cush, the father of the first Babylonian Monarch Nimrod, sprang the Cushians, or Aethiopians* from 3 Phut, the Phutians, Lybians, and Mauritanians, among whom there is a riuer of this name. from 4 Misraim the Aegyptians.

Phut peopled Lybia, Misraim Aegypt mann'd,
The first borne Cush the Aethiopian strand:
And Canaan doth nigh Iordans waters dwell,
One day ordained to harbour Israel.

These being thus dispersed, and afterward growing too populous for their first habitation; continually went out to seeke new dwelling places* So the Gauls filled Brittanie, the Brittaines Ireland; the Irish Scotland, and the Iles; so the Tyrian and Phoenicians planted their Colonies in diuers places, the Saca came into Saxonie, and the northerne regions continually vsed to send abroad the superfluity of their inhabitants. And thus much in this place concerning the confusion of tongues, and peopling of the world by diuers nations after the vniuersal deluge.
Babylon, howsoeuer the towre was hindred, went forward and was finished by Semiramis, whose wals were in circuit 60 miles 200 foot high, and 50 Cubits broad. As Semiramis once was platting her haire, newes was brought her of the revolt of this Towne; wherevpon leauing her head halfe vndrest, she went and besieged it; neuer ordering the rest of her haire till she had againe recouered it. How it fell into the hands of Cyrus, we learn out of Xenophons Cyri paideia which was in this manner. The riuer Euphrates ranne quite through the towne, round about whose banks the politike Prince cut many and deep channells: into which, when the Babylonians were securely merry at a generall feast, he suddainly drained and emptied the riuer, conueying

his whole forces into the Towne all along the dry and yeelding Channell, and in little time made himselfe master of it. From the Persians it revolted in the raigne of Darius Histaspis, and that sustenance might not be wanting to the men of warre they strangled the most part of the women; being in actions of this quality, not so much as necessary euills. When they had for twenty months so defended the Towne, that the Persians had lesse hope then euer of preuailing; Zopirus one of Darius Captaines, mangling his body and disfiguring his face by cutting oft his nose and eares; fled to the Babylonians, complaining of the tyranny of his King. They crediting his words, and knowing his prowesse, committed the charge of the whole army vnto him; as a man, to whom such barbarous vsage had made the King irreconcileable. But he taking his best opportunity, delivered both the Towne and Souldiers into the hands of his Soveraigne. Here died Alexander the Great, after whose death the Grecian Captaines regardfull rather of their owne ambitio^s, then the common loyalty; diuided the Empire among the^selues; leauing the body of the King 8 daies vnbutied. A wonderfull change of fortune: he who liuing thought the world too little for his valour, being dead found no place big enough for his body. Aristotle saith, that when Babylon was taken by the Greeke army, vnder the leading of this Macedonian Captaine; it was 3 daies, before one part tooke notice of the conquest. Nabuchadnezar mightily increased this Citty; which being almost ruined, was reedified by Bugiafar, Caliph of the Sarracens, at the expence of 18 millions of gold: and because of the many Gardens contained in it, hee caused it to bee called Bagadet or Bagdet, from Baga, in the Arabian tongue signifying a Garden. This is still a Towne of great traffiq^e, between which and Aleppo Carriers trauell very often with many hundred Camels laden with commodities. This Conuoy is called the Carauan. Between these two places they haue a custome of sending Post-pigeons, or sending by Pigeons letters of all occurences in hast; which is done in this manner. When the hen-doue sitteth and hath young, they take the Cock Pigeon, and put him into a cage; whom when he is by the Carauan carried a daies iourney off,

they set at liberty, and he straight flyeth home to his make. When by degrees they are perfectly taught, the Carriers and Marchants on any accident, fasten a letter about one of their necks; and they being freed, without any stay hast to the place from whence they were brought. And such as at home doe watch their returne, clime their hole, and taking a way the letter, are certified of the estate of the Carauan, or any other tidings whatsoeuer.
The chiefe principall riuers of these Countries are 1 Euphrates beyond which the Romans could hardly extend their Empire: and 2 Tigris so named for its swiftnesse; the word in the Medians language signifying an Arrow: this riuer ariseth about Libanus, and disburdeneth himselfe into the Persian Sea.
The faith of Christ was first planted here by Iude the Apostle; and now is almost worne out by the Mahumetan superstition.
The language is diuers, some men speaking the Arabicke; some the Persian, others the Turkish language.
Out of Chaldea the 3 wise men of the East are thought to haue come, who worshipped Christ and presented guifts vnto him. Here florished many and the very first Astronomers, who had two great helps to perfect this science: first a plain country yeelding a faire sensible Horizon (for the rationall is a like to hils and vallies) and by consequence profitable to the obseruation of the Heliacal, Acronical, Matutine, and Vespertine rising and falling of euery starre: secondly a long life, fraught with sufficient experience, concerning the motion (whether commning with the Primum Mobile, or proper to euery distinct Spheare) of all the starres and Planets.

The Assyrian or Chaldean Monarchs.
1798
1 Nimrod, called also Saturnus Babylonicus, the sonne of Chus, the sonne of Cham, was the first that euer bore title of King. 25.
1845
2 Belus or Iupiter Babylonicus, whose Image was worshipped by the Heathenish and Iewish Idolaters, vnder the name of Baal and Bel, 26.
1907
3 Ninus vnited to his Empire the kingdome of Armenia,

Media, Arabia, Bactria, and Lybia 52.
1959
4 Semiramis the foundresse of Babylon, subdued the Aethiopians, the Indians, and their King Staurobates, 42. She was borne at Ascalon, a Towne in Syria, and exposed to the fury of wild beasts. But being borne not to dye so ingloriously, she was brought vp by Shepheards, and at full age presented to the Syrian Viceroy, who gaue her in marriage to his only sonne. Going with him to the wars she ^ell in acquaintance with Ninus, who liking her body and spirit tooke her to his bed. This bred in him a greater affection toward her, so that he granted her at her request, the command of the Empire for fiue daies; making a decree that her will in all things should be punctually perform'd: which boone being gotten, she put on the royall robes, and commanded the King to bee slaine. Hauing thus gotten the Empire, she exceedingly enlarg'd it, leading with her an army consisting of 100000 Chariots of warre, three millions of foot, and halfe a million of horse. A woman in whom there was nothing to bee honoured and applauded, but her insatiable lusts.
2001
5 Ninus, or Aramphel, as the Scripture calls him, 38.
2039
6 Arias 30.
2069
7 Arabius 40.
2109
8 Belus 30.
2139
9 Amatrites 38.
2177
10 Belochus Prisc. 35
2212
11 Belochus Iun. 52.
2264
12 Altades 32.
2296
13 Mamitus 30.
2326
14 Mancaleus 30.
2356
15 Spherus 20.
2376
16 Mancaleus II, 30.
2406
17 Sparetus 40.
2446
18 Ascatades 40.
2486
19 Amintes 45.
2511
20 Beloehus Iun. 25.
2526
21 Bellopares 30.
2586
22 Lamprides 22.
2618
23 Sosares 20.
2638
24 Lampares 30.
2668
25 Panmas 45.
2713
26 Soramas 19.
2732
27 Mitreus 27.
2759
28 Tautanes 32.
2791
29 Tautes 40.
2831
30 Tineus 30.
2861
31 Dercillus 40.
2901
32 Eupales 38.
2939
33 Laostines 45.
2944
34 Pyrithiades 30.
3014
35 Ophrateus 20.
3034
36 Ophraganeus 50.
3084
37 Ascrasapes 24.
3126
38 Sardanapalus 20.

Of these 38 Kings we finde scarce any thing remaining but the names, which are in this order registred by Berosus, or rather by Annius a Monke of Viterbum in Tuscanie, who hath thrust vpon the world the fancies of his owne braine, vnder the name of that ancient historian. The chiefe Kings of note after Semiramis were,
1 Ninus, Amraphell or Zameis her son, who sudued the Arians, Bactrians, and Caspians; but was otherwise a man of effeminate and vnkingly carriage.2 Belus extended the Assyrian Monarchy to Iudaea, subduing many nations: he was for his valour sirnamed by the after-writers Xerxes, i. e. the warriour, or the conquerour.3 Mamitus reuiued againe the ancient discipline, corrupted by his predecessours; he awed Syria, and Aegypt.4 Ascatades perfected the conquest of Syria.5 Belochus Priscus was the author of diuination, by the flying of Birds called Auspicium. Of soothsaying there were in all 4 Kings; 1 this Auspicium, quasi auispicium, taken from the flight of Birds, either on the right or the left: and hence the proverb commeth ami sinistra, good lucke; because in giuing the right hand is opposite to the receauers left: or from the number of the Birds, whence Romulus was promised the Empire before his brother, because he had seene the double number: or lastly, from the nature of them, whence the same Romulus seeing the vultures was, saith Florus, spei plenus vrbem bellatricem fore, ita illi sanguini and praedae assuetae aves pollicebantur. 2ly Aruspicium ab aras inspiciendo, in which the Soothsayers obserued whether the beast to be sacrificed, came to the Altar willingly or not; whether the intrailes were of naturall colour, exulcerate, etc. or whether any part was wanting. All Histories and Poets afford variety of examples of this kinde; I need giue no particular instance. This diuination was first practised by the Hetrurians, who receaued their knowledge from one Tages, who arising to certaine plowmen out of a furrow, taught them this skil and then vanished. 3ly Tripudium quasi ter^ipudium, or terripanium, was a coniecturing of future successes, by the rebounding

of crummes cast into chickens. Wee haue an instance of this in the life of Tiberius Gracchus, who being busie about the Law Agraria; was forewarned by the keeper of his Chickens to desist, because when he had cast the crummmes to the coop, one only of the Chickens came out, and the same without eating returned in againe: which was a signe of ill lucke, as the greedy devouring of them had beene of good. But Tiberius not regarding the omen, was that day slaine. It is said to haue beene invented by the Lycians. 4ly Angurium ab auium garritu, was a pr^diction from the chirping or chattering of Birds; as also by the sounds and voices we heare we knowne not whence, from what cause. In this latter kinde, the death of Iulius Caesar was diuined, by the clattering of the armour in his house; and the poisoning of Germanicus by the sounding of a Trumpet of it's owne accord. In the former an Owle schreeching in the Senate house, was deemed ominous to Augustus: and a company of Crowes accompanying home Seianus, with great clamours and croakings; was deemed fatall to that great fauorite: and so it prooued.6 Sardanapalus being wondrous effeminate, and vnworthy to gouerne so potent a nation; was deposed by Arbaces, Captaine of Media; and Belochus, Leistenant of Babylon; who compelled Sardanapalus to burne himselfe with all his riches for feare of more paine.
The treasure which Sardanapalus burnt with him, was 100 millions of talents in gold; and 1000 millions of talents in silver: which in our mony amounteth to 20 thousand and 500 millions of pounds. A masse of mony which surely had not seen the Sunne in many yeares, (I had almost said ages) and therefore growne rustie, desired a fire to purge it. This Sardanapalus afforded it; it may be to end his life with that, in which he placed his Summum bonum: It may be in spight vnto his enimies: and it is possible it might be in policy; that so great a treasure not fallen to the possession of his foes, might so much the more disable them from making resistance against, or detaining the Empire from his next successor. For it is of all things the most foolish both to loose our treasure, and with it to enrich our aduersaries.

On which consideration the Spaniards fired their Indian fleet at Gades, and the Genoais theirs at Tripolis; that their lading might not come into the possession of their enimies; the English and Mahumetans. After the death of this Sardanapalus, Arbaces tooke Media and Persia with the confining Prouinces: Belochus strengthned himselfe with Assyria, Chaldaea and the adiacent regions; his kingdome being called the new kingdome of Assyria.
The new Kings of Assyriae, and Chaldea.31461 Phul Belocus, the beginner of this new Monarchy.31942 Phul Assur, destroyed Galile, 23.32173 Salmanasar, who destroyed Samaria, ruined the kingdome of Israel, and carried the 10 Tribes to perpetuall captiuity, 10. This is the Nabonassar of the Chronologers.32274 Sennacherib, whose blaspheamous hoast was vanquished by Angells from heauen, and he himselfe murthered by his two sonnes, 7.32335 Aserrhaddon, who reuenging his fathers death on his brothers, was deposed by his deputy of Chaldea, and the seat royall transferred from Ninivie to Babylon, 10.32436 Merodach Baladan, gouernour of Babylon 40.32837 Ben Merodach 2.33048 Nabocpullassar, wh^vanquished Pharaoh, Necho K. of Egypt, 25.33399 Nabuchodonaser the great, commonly called the Hercules of the East. He conquer'd Egypt, repaired Babylon, subuerted Ninive: and in the 18 yeare of his raign he destroyed Hierusalem, and carried the people captiue vnto Babylon. The last 7 yeares of his raigne, hee was distract of his wits, and liued like the beasts of the field according to the word of God spoken by Daniel cap. 4. during which time his sonne Euilmerodach, Nicrocris his daughter, with her husband Niglissar, and their son Labosarodach; successiuely gouerned the state, as protectours, and therefore are by some reckoned as kings. Finally Nabuchodonazar hauing recouered his senses, died

when he had raigned 44 yeares.338310 Evilmerodach, slaine by Astiages King of the Medes, 26.340911 Balthassar, sonne to Evilmerod^ch, a Prince of dissolute and cruell nature, was assailed by Darius and Cyrus successours of Astiages, by whom his Empire was taken from him, and himselfe slaine 17. A.M. 3426.
That this was the end of Balthassar, is the common opinion. But Ioseph Scaliger in his learned and industrious worke, de emendatione temporum, maketh him to bee slaine in a tumult by his owne people: who elected into the Empire a Noble man of the Medes, called in prophane stories, Nabonnedus; in diuine Darius Medus; who after a 17 yeares raigne, was slaine by Cyrus King of the Persians. By the leaue of so worthy a man, this cannot hold good. For the Lord by his Prophet Ieremie, had pronounced (Chap. 27.) That all nations should serue Nabucadnezzar, and his sonne, and his sonnes sonne: whereas Nabonnedus was a Prince of a strange bloud, and so the nation were not to serue him; and in Balthassar, the sonnes sonne of Nabuchadnezzar, was this oracle finished. But let vs examine his arguments; and withall the scoffes, which very prodigally he bestoweth on such as maintaine the contrary opinion. Natio Chronologorum, the whole rout of Chronologers: boni and diligentes viri, good simple meaning men: and addunt alia nihilo veriora, are his first complements. Vt igitur, quod chronologorum est, omnes resipiscant, etc. therefore that they may repent their euer being Chronologers, he bringeth in Berosus, cited by Iosephus, in his first booke against Appion. But Berosus there maketh Nabonnedus (to whom he saith the kingdome of Balthassar was by the people deliuered) to be a Babylonian; and not as Scaliger would haue him say, a noble man of the Medes: neither can the authority of Berosus, countervaile that of Daniel, who in his 6 Chapter telleth Balthassar, that his kingdome should be divided among the Medes and Persians. His 2d argument is drawne from the nature of the word (...), as it is in the same Chapter; and Darius the Mede tooke the Empire: by which word, tooke, is implied,

not a forcible inuasion, but a willing acceptance of the Empire offered. To this we answere, that Darius indeed tooke the Empire quietly and willingly* being offered vnto him by Cyrus, and his armie, consisting of Medes and ^ersians: who according to the word of God, had taken it from Baltassar, Darius being then absent. Quid si probauero (saith he) eum cognominatum fuisse Medum? he hath yet one tricke more then all these: and Medus must not be the nationall name, but the surname of Darius; which he proueth out of a fragment of Megasthenes, cited by Eusebius, in his worke de praeparatione Euangelica, where he is called (...), etc. an argument of all others the most slight and triuiall. For beside^ that (...) may there as well be the name of his nation, as his family; and besides that it thwarteth the places of Ieremie and Daniell already quoted: it is diametrally opposite to another place of the same Daniell, in his nineth Chapter, where he is called Darius of the seed of the Medes. Of this Darius more anon when we come into Media: As for Nabonnedus, questionlesse he was the same with Balthassar. For besides that Iosephus, and Berosus attribute to either of them the raigne of 17 yeares: the same Iosephus (who might best knowe the truth in this case) telleth vs, that Balthassar was by the Babylonians, called Naboandel; a name not so great a stranger to Nabonnedus, as Scaligers Darius, or Herodotus his Labinitus. But in this, wee must pardon Ioseph: scorne and contradiction was a part of his essence. For had he not beene in some things singular; in all, peremptory: he had neither beene a Scaliger, nor the sonne of Iulius.
After the death of Balthassar, these Prouinces haue hitherto followed the fortune of the stronger potentate: as being subiect to 1 The Persians. 2 Graecians. 3 Romans. 4 Persians 5 Sarracens. 6 Persian Sophies; from whom during the Persians civill warres, Amurath the 3 Emperour of the Turkes subdued them.



OF MEDIA AND PERSIA.
MEDIA is limited on the East with Parthia, on the West with Armenia, on the South with Persia, and on the North with the Caspian Sea. This Sea is so call'd from the Caspij, a people of Scythia, whose Southerne coast bordreth on this Sea. 2ly The Hircanian Sea, of Hircania, a neighbour Province of Persia: and now 3ly Mari d^ Bacchu of the Citty Bacchu s^ated nigh vnto it. It is the biggest Sea absolu^ely of all them, which haue no commerce with the Ocean.
This Country is generally barren, especially in the northern parts; so that they make their bread for the most part of dried Almonds, their drinke of the roots of certaine hearbs, and feed ordinarily on Venison. Yet is it not defectiue in pasture grou^ds, here being some grassie plaines of that bignesse, that 50000 horses may pasture on them. Here was that liquor called Oleum Med^acum, with which they vsed to enuenome their arrows which being shot from a slacker bowe (for a swift and strong motion tooke its vertue from it) did burne the flesh whereinto it fastned with great violence; and was of that nature, that nothing could mitigate the furie of it, but dust throwne into the wound; water rather increasing then allaying the heat and torture.
The chiefe Citties are Sultania, famous for the fairest Mosque of the East. 2 Symmachia, the strongest place of all Media, taken by the Turkes An. 1578; and made the seat of a Turkish Bashaw by Osman Beg, immediatly after the taking of Tauris 1585. 3 Nassivan called of old Nasuana. 4 Eres another strong peece. 5 Ardonille, the birth-place and seat of residence and dominion, to Bunie and Aider, the first authors of the Sophian sect and Empire in Persia: and the buriall place of Ismael the first Sophie or Emperour of Persia, of this line. 6 Tabris, or Tauris, in compasse 16 miles, containing in that space about 200000 inhabitants. The ayre hereof is very wholsome, but windie and cold; the cause why the Persian kings made it their place of residence in the summer; as they did Susis in the

winter. This Tauris is by some supposed to bee the same with Ecbatana, and hath beene thrice taken by the Turkes; namely, by Selimus the first; 2 by Solyman the magnificent; 3 by Osman, Generall to Amurath the 3d; who hath fortified it with a Castle. 7 Seruan, whence the whole Prouince is called Sh^ruan. 8 Baccu. Whence the Caspian Sea is called Mari di Baccu.
Nigh vnto Media is the Countrey Albania, now called Zuiria, a Cou^try little beholding to the labour or industry of the husbandman; yet of its owne accord, yeelding for one sowing most times two, sometimes three reapings. As for the people, they greatly honour old age, but account it a soloecisme in manners, to make any mention of the dead: and of these it is that Plinie (how truely I knowe not) reporteth, that they are ho^^y haired from their youth and see by night as well as by day. The chiefe Towne is Caucasiae Portae, built hard vpon the hill Caucasus, one of the best fortefied townes of the East: it was said by Plinie to be ingens naturae miraculum, and is now called Derbent; a strong Citty, enuironed with two walls, and fortefied with iron gates: taken neuerthelesse it was in the last warres against the Persian, and still remaineth vnder the Turkes. The chiefe riuers of this Prouince are Arasse, and Ciro. The ancient Citties of this Country were Laodicea. 2 Apamia. 3 Rhaga, etc
PERSIA is bounded on the East with the riuer Indus, on the West with the Persian Gulfe, on the North with the Caspian Sea, and the riuer Oxus; on the South with the maine Ocean. This Oxus is famous, first for being a bound fatall to monarchies, as we shall tell you when we come into Tartarie: and 2ly for the famous passage of Alexander ouer it. For hauing pursued Bessus, the murderer of Darius, vnto this riuer, and not knowing how to passe ouer it; there being neither ships on it, nor any timber nigh at hand to build them: hee caused a great many bagges and bladders to be stuffed with strawe; and so on them in six daies transported his whole armie. So that I may truely say with his owne historian, Vnum id consilium quod necessitas subiecerat, inijt, necessity is the best author of inuentions. The men are much addicted to hospitality, and poetrie; Lordly

in their complements, phantasticall in their apparell, magnificent in expences, louers of learning, maintainers of Nobility, and desirous of peace. The women are gorgeous in attire, delightsome in sequestration of pleasure, truly louing, neat and cleanly.
Their religion is Mahumetanisme, in which they differ from the Turks about the successours of Mahomet (as shall be shewed anon) and some other circumstances; hence the Turks reputing them schismaticall, continually persecute them with the fire and the sword. Their language is as much vsed in the East, as the Latine in the West.
The Christian religion was planted here, as also in Media, Hircania, Carmania, etc, by S. Thomas; and in other of the Provinces by S. Andrew.
This Empire containeth these seuerall Prouinces.

1 PERSIS, now called Far, abounding in mettalls of Gold, Siluer, and pretious stones; euery where is moistned with ample lakes, and pleasant springs: a Country fertile in all things, except fruit, which they most want; as hauing no trees but Palme trees. The chiefe Citties are 1 Siras or Persepolis, built by Perses, sonne to Perseus sonne to Iupiter and Danae; who also chang'd the name of Elamites into that of Persians. For so we are informed by Isidor Persae (saith he) populi sunt a Perseo rego vocati, qui a Graecia Asiam transiens, ibi barbaras gentes graui diuturnoque bello perdomuit, and victor nome^ subiectae genti imposuit. This Persepolis was the seat royall of this Empire, for which cause Alexander at the request of the lewd Curtizan Lais, co^manded it to be set on fire; but afterward repenting so great a folly, he reedified it. 2 Casbin, the residence of the present Sophies brought hither from Tauris by Sophie Tamas. It is also called Hispaan, and is said to be a daies iourney about on horse backe. It is well walled, and fortefied with a strong fort; and beautified with two Seraglioes, the walls whereof are made of red marble, and paued with Mosaique worke. The chiefe street hereof is called the Atmaidan, being in figure fouresquare; euery side a quarter of a mile in length: round about which are scaffolds set, for the people to sit and behold the King and his Nobles, at their exercises of shooting, running, and the like:

here also doth the Sophie sometimes administer iustice in person. 3 Sava. 4 Bescant. 5 Lara.
Sr. W. Ral.2 SVSIANA, or Cusestan is situate Eastward of Persis. It is so called quasi Chushiana from Chus, the sonne of H^m, the son of Noah; who first peopled here, and afterward withdrew himselfe more Southwestward, where the three Arabians now are, calling them the land of Chus: which are that land of Chus (our translatours read it the land of Aethiopia) which the riuer Gihon is said to encompasse, Gen, 2.13. this Gihon being indeed the more Westerly branch of the riuer Emphrates. Chus being thus departed this Country, left it to his son Hauilah; from whence it is in the Scriptures called the land of Hauilah where there is Gold, and which the riuer Pison is said to compasse Gen. 2.11. which Pison is the Southerne branch of the riuer Tigris or Hiddekel, called by Curtius, Pisotigris, and Pasitigris; Peruenit (saith he) rex ad fluvium, Pasitigrin incolae vocant, which he presently affirmeth to fall into the Persian Sea, as Tigris and Euphrates also doe. Now that there was another land of Hauilah, beside that in India, which we shall in due time mention; is euident out of the Scriptures: for whereas Saul smote the Amalechites from Sur to Hauilah, 1. Sam. 15.7. certainely it must be vnderstood of this Hauilah or Susiana, being the Easterne bound of that nation; and not of Hauilah in India; it being no where found that Saul was so great a traueller. The chief Citties hereof are 1 Susa, where the ancient Persian Princes vsed to keep Court in time of winter, as being more Southerly then Ecbatana, 2 Saum. 3 Casa.
3 CARMANIA is situate on the East of Susiana. The chiefe Citties are 1 Gad^l. 2 Cobinum. 3 Caramania, (now, as also the Prouince, called Chyrman) famous for cloath of Gold, and the best Scimitars;Adrianus. a weapon of such value amongst the Mahumetaus; that at the ouerthrow of the Turkish Nauie at Lepanto, the Turkes which were taken prisoners, cast their Seimitars into the Sea, least the Christians should get into their power such excellent weapons.Plutarch. In this Country it was that Alexander being returned out of India, kept his Bacchanalia, in imitation of Bacchus, who had first conquer'd that nation, Night and

day he was continually feasting with his friends, on a scaffold drawne with 8 horses; his companions following in their chariots, some adorned with purple and silke, others with flowres and greene boughs, themselues wearing garlands on their heads, and carrying their carowsing cups in their hands. In this army there was neither helme, sword, arrow, or buckler seene^ al their armour was cups, barrells, and flaggons; their skirmishing, eating, drinking, laughing, and singing. Attended they were by minstrells, playing on their Flutes, by women dancing, boyes shooting, all playing the drunken fooles most naturally. Thus marched they through the Country of Carmania, in as great dissolutenesse, as if Bacchus himselfe indeed had beene there, and lead the mummery; and for seauen whole daies this sottishnes continued. So that Curtius well obserueth: Si quid victis saltem aduersus comessantes animi fuisset, mille hercule viri, modo and sobrij, septem dierum crapula graues in suo triumpho capere potuerun^; a thousand sober men of the Persians, had their hearts beene answerable to the occasion, might haue defeated this drunken armie, and recouered the libertie of their Country.
4 GEDROSIA confineth Eastward on Carmania,Plutarch. and extendeth to the riuer Indus. The chiefe Citty is Gedroson. In this Country it was that Alexander placed the monument of his Indian conquest. For intending to make his name immortall among that barbarous people, he made on the Westerne banke of Indus (which is in Gedrosia the forme of a campe; enlarged it with greater Cabbins then were sufficient for a man to lodge in; and builded in it higher mangers then horses could feed in. He caused also armours to be made of bigger proportion then his Souldiers bodies; and Bits for horses of extraordinary compasse and length; all which hee scattered about his Campe for the sauage people in time to come to wonder at. All that he did in this was, the occasioning of a suspition in many vndersta^ding men, that his actions were lesse then it is thought; since hee laboured so earnestly to make them thought more then they were.
5 DRANGIANA lieth Northward to Gedrosia:Ptolomie. the chiefe Citties are 1 Timocani, 2 Sishan (formerly Prolasia)* 3 Sige,

whence the whole Prouince is now named Sigeshan. 4 Mulebet where Aladine, a seditious Persian, made a terrestriall Paradice, which he promised to al his Partizans: but the company growing too great for the safety of the kingdome, they were al quickly dispersed; and Aladine with his fooles Paradice both taken away together. Some attribute this fiction of Paradice to Aladeules the mountaine-King of Anti Taurus, vanquished by Sel^m the first. The whole story is thus: Aladine inhabited a vallie in this Country,Paul. Venet. the entrance into which he fortified with a strong Castle called Tigado. Hither hee brought all the lustie youths, and beautifull maidens of the adioyning Prouinces* The women were confined to their chambers, the men to prison; where hauing endured much sorrow, they were seuerally cast into dead sleepes, and conueyed to the women, where they were entertain'd with all the pleasures youth and lust could desire, or a sensuall minde affect. Hauing inioyed this happinesse a whole day, they were in a like sleepe convaied to their irons. Then would Aladine informe them how they had beene in Paradice, and that he could seat them there eternally, if they durst hazard their liues in his quarrells. This when they had sworne to doe, they were destinated to the massacre of such Princes, as were like to proue his bad neighbours; and they accordingly did execution. These men the Italians call Assassines (whence we vse the phrase to Assassinate) the name importing as much as theeues or cut-throats: such a one was he who murdered the Count to Tripolis in the warres for the holy land; and such a one was he who so desperately wounded our Edward the first, at the siege of Ptolemais or Acon.
6 ARIA is situate North on Drangiana, it is now called Sargulzar, the chiefe Citty being called Aria. The people of this Country hauing rebelled against Alexander, were by him vanquished; and compelled to hide themselues in a Caue, situate on the top of an vnaccessible rocke; and with small strength easily defended. But to Alexander nothing was impossible, for he piling vp a great masse of timber euen with the caues mouth when the winde conueniently serued, set it on fire. By this device the Caue was filled so full of heat and smoake, that most

were stifled, some halfe burnt, and the rest contented to yeeld to the Victors mercy. In this Country also it was that Philotas his treason against Alexander was discouered, and himselfe accordingly rewarded. Finally, of this Country Satibarzanes was gouernour, who reuolting from Alexander, and ioyning battailes with him, boldly challenged any of Alexanders Captaines. This challenge was accepted by Eriguis, an aged, but spiritfull Souldier; who speaking alowd, quales milites Alexander habeat ostendam, gaue the onset, and at the second venew slew him. After whose death the Arians returned to their obedience.
7 ARACHOSIA is Eastward on Drangiana. Hereabouts the mountain Taurus is called Caucasus, on which vinctum Promethea fuisse antiquitas tradit, saith the Historian. Prometheus is indeed by the Poets sained to haue stolne fire from heauen, and to haue made a man of clay: for which presumptuous fact, Iupiter bound himon the hill Caucasus; where a vulture co^tinually fed on his Liuer. But according either to the truth of story, or their guesse at least, who make some story the ground of euery Fable; Prometheus being a very wise man, instructed the dead and clayie carcasses of others with wisdome: and that being very desirous to learne the nature of the starres, (which is the fire he stole from heauen) he made the highest part of Mount Caucasus his studie: where the inward care he had to accomplish his desire, might iustly haue bin compared to a vulture gnawing on his entrailes; and of this opinion is S. Augustine. The chiefe cities of this Countrie are 1 Sin, 2 Cabul, called anciently Alexandria, or (for distinctions sake) Alexandria Arachosiae. It was built by Alexander, at the foot of the hill Caucasus, and made a Macedonian Colonie; here being 7000 old Macedonian souldiers left by him to people and inhabite it. The whole Country is called now by the new name of the towne Cabul.
8 PARAPOMISVS is North to Arachosia, it tooke its name from the mountaine Taurus, which extending it selfe through all Asia, is called according to the diuersity of places after diuers names; and in these parts. Parapomisus. A mountainous

and hillie Countrie it is, scarce knowne in the time of Alexander to its next borderers: at what time the people were so rude, that the barbarous Nations their neighbors held them not worthie their acquaintance. Agreste hominum genus, and inter Barbaros maxime inconditum, saith Curtius. The hills were high and barren, the valleyes indifferently fruitfull, but so shadowed with the mountaines, that their clearest day was but a twilight. Their buildings were base and low, their villages smal and beggerly: Their chiefe towne is now callrd Candatura, a well frequented market.
9 SACA lyeth yet more North on the borders of Scythia, the people hereof called the Sacae, were the progenitours of the Saxons; who leauing their country, seated themselues in the North part of Germanie: where they increased both in multitude and valour, growing a terror to their neighbours. The people of this Country liue yet in a barbarous fashion, hauing neither towne, nor house; but liuing in caues, and making theft their best calling.
10 HIRCANIA is situate somewhat Eastward from Sacae, and bordereth Northward on the Hircanian or Caspian Sea. The whole Prouince is nothing but a continued Forrest in a manner; and so Alexander when he conquered this Countrie found it. For the Hircanians so tied the boughs and spriggs of the trees together, that it was impossible for Alexander to come at them, till with incredible paines to his souldiers, he had caused the wood to be cut downe: at sight of which, the people whose hope was, that the Kings more earnest affaires would not licence him to stay so long about the enterprise; yeelded themselues. These Forrests giue lurking holes to infinit numbers of Tigers, celebrated in all Writers for their horrible fiercenesse; whence it grew to a common adage concerning cruell men, that they had sucked a Hircanian Tiger.


Hircanaeque admorunt ubera Tigres.

The chiefe cities hereof, are Telebrota, 2 Samariana, 3 Carta, and 4 No^barea, once honoured with an Oracle. The chiefe riuers in all these Prouinces are Bundimire and Ilment, 3 Sirto, and 4 Hidero* with diuers others; some of which haue so s^eep

a fall into the sea, that vnder the waters the people resort to sacrifice or banquet; the streame shooting violently ouer their heads without wetting of them. Particularly the riuer Zioberis in Hircania, is most famous; which rising out of the hils of that Country, and hauing runne a long continued course, hideth his waters vnder the earth for the space of 38 miles, and riseth againe into the riuer Rodagho, an other riuer of that Country also. It is said that Alexander made tryall of the truth hereof, by casting into the water two oxen, whom the streame at its owne rising cast vp againe.
The Medes so called of Madai the sonne of Iaphet, were subdued by Ninus, the 3d Monarch of the Assyrian^: vnder whose command they long continued faithfull, till the degenerate life of Sardanapalus, incited Belochus gouernour of Babylon, and Arbaces Lieftenant-generall in Media, and the adioyning Region, to lay a foundation of their own future greatnes. The disposer of kingdomes suted their thoughts with an end answerable to their desires. Belochus retained Assyria; and Arbaces is inthronized in the maiesticall palace of the Medes.

The Monarchs of the Medes.
3146
1 Arbaces, (in whose time Phidon an Argiue, found out the vse of weights and measures) was the founder of the Median Monarchie.
3174
2 Madanes. 50
3224
3 Sosarmus. 30
3254
4 Medsdus. 25
3279
5 Cardicceas. 13
3292
6 Deiocis, who founded Ecbatana. 17
3309
7 Pha^r^^s a man of great prowesse and fortune: he made all Asia stand in feare, and compelled the Persians to be his tributaries. 22
3331
8 Cya^xes vnited to his Empire the Saracens, and the Parthians. This King was so ouer-laid by the Scythians, who in the reigne of Phaortes had broke into Media, that he was litle better then their rent-gatherer. But hauing endured them for aboue two yeares, he plotted their final extirpation, and committed his designe to the nobles,

who willingly gaue eare to it. One night they invited the chiefe of the Scythians to a banquet, where hauing well liquor'd them, and put them all to the sword; the baser sort willingly returned homewards. 40
3371
9 Astiages, who hauing married his daughter Mandanes to Cambises King of Persia,Iustin. dreamed that she had made so much water, as drowned all Asia: hereupon hee commanded Harpagus one of his Noblemen to see the Child killed; but he loathing so cruell a fact, committed the charge of executing the Kings Commandement, to Mithridates the Kings heard-man. He preserued the life of the yong infant, whose fortune at last lifted him vp to the Persian Monarchie; when abhorring his Grandfather for that intended cruelty, he both bereft him of his kingdome, and confined him to Hircania, when he had raigned 35 yeares, A.M. 3406.
3406
10 Cyaxares, sonne to Astiages, of the age of 52 yeares, succeeded his father. For Cyrus pretending no quarrell to his Vncle, who had neuer wronged him; left vnto him the Kingdome of Media, and tooke vnto himselfe the soueraigntie of Persia, which before was tributary to the Medes.

At this diuision of the Median Empire, as Torniellus in his Annals, (and that not improbably) is of opinion, it was also agreed on, that Cyrus should take the daughter and onely child of Cyaxares to wife; that they should both ioyne together in subduing of their neighbours; that whatsoeuer they wonne, should then belong to Cyaxares, (who was euen then an olde Prince) during his life; and that Cyrus should bee his heire. In the twentieth yeare of their seuerall raignes, they tooke Babylon, slew Baltazar, and destroyed the Empire of the Chaldeans. This action, the Scriptures attribute wholly to Cyaxares (who is by them called Darius Medus) whereof S. Hierome alleageth three reasons, 1o ordo aetatis, 2o regni, 3o propinquitatis: 1 Darius was older, 2ly the Empire of the Medes was more famous then that of the Persians; and 3ly the Vncle ought to bee preferred before the Nephew. We may adde to these three, the composition

aboue-mentioned, made betweene these Princes, at the beginning of their diuided reignes. The Greeke Writers attribute the victory onely to Cyrus, and that on three reasons also. 1 the Persians desirous to magnifie Cyrus their owne Country-man, gaue him all the glory of the action; and from the Persians the Greekes had it. Secondly, Cyrus only was imployed in the siege, (Darius then being absent) and by his valour and conduct, was the Empire of the Chaldaeans ruined: and thirdly Darius liued not fully two yeares after this great victorie, so that before remote Nations had taken notice of the conquest, Cyrus was in the Throne. Iosephus onely in the II Chapter of his 10 Booke, cutteth the thread euen betweene these two Princes, and telleth vs that Darius with his allie Cyrus, destroyed the estate of the Babylonians. That this Darius Medus of Daniel, is the Cyaxares of the Greekes, is more then manifest. For Iosephus in the place aboue-cited telleth vs, (...); that he was Astiages sonne, and is otherwise called by the Greekes: now aske the Greekes what was the name of Astiages sonne; and Xenophon will tell you, that it was Cyaxares. As for the name of Nabon^edus, which Ioseph Scaliger in spight of reason, and the whole world of Chronologers, would thrust vpon this Darius Medus: we haue already refelled it, though we are not ignorant, that Helvicus, and Calvisius, two worthy Writers, haue followed him as in all his Can^n, so also in this particular errour. Af^er the death of this Cyaxares, Cyrus succeeded in his Throne, and the Empire of the Medes was incorporate into that of the Persians.

The Monarchy of the Persians.
3406
1 Cyrus hauing vanquished Astiages, vnited to his Empire of Persia, the Countries of Armenia, Phrygia, Cappadocia, Arabia, and also the Mona^chy of the Assyrians: af^er which victories he was slaine by Tomiris a Queene of Scythia. This Cyrus is magnified by Xenoph^n, as Aeneas by Virgil, Vlysses by Homer. ^9
3435
2 Cambises subdued Psamniticus the last King of Aegypt, which Countrey he vnited to his owne Empire. He

hauing a minde to marry his owne sister, was told by the Wisemen, that they knew no law admitting such a coniunction, but that there was a law, that the Persian Kings might doe what they listed. This King was a very bloudy Tyran.


The inter-regnum of the Magi.
Herodotus.Cambises at his expedition into Aegypt, constituted Patizithes one of the Magi, Vice-Roy in his absen^e, He hearing of the kings death, conferr'd the Kingdome on his own son Smerdis, making the people belieue that he was the brother of Cambises: A matter of no difficultie, considering how retirement from the publique view, was a chie^e point of the Persian maiestie. But the Nobles either knowing the true Smerdis to bee slaine, or suspecting the ouer-much retirednes of the new king, began to search out the matter. Otanes had a daugther, which was one of the kings concubines; her he commanded when the King took next his pleasure with her, she should feele whether he had any cares, for Cambises (in I know not what humour) had cut off the eares of this Magus. This commandement shee obeying, found out the falshood. The seuen Princes inform'd of this imposture, ioyne together, and slew this Pseudo-Smerdis in the 8 moneth of his reigne. This done, to auoide contention, they agreed among themselues, that the seuen Princes meeting in the palace greene, should acknowledge him for King, whose horse before the rising of the Sunne, first neighed. The euening before the day appointed, Darius horse-keeper brought his masters horse into the greene, together with a ma^e which the horse then couered. In the morning the Princes met, and Darius horse knowing the place, and missing his mare, neighed lustily; and the Princes presently acknowledge Darius king.

The restoring of the Kingdome.
3443
3 Darius Histaspis, one of the seuen Persi^n Princes or Gouernours, thus elected King, tooke Babylon (which had revolted) by the ingenious fetches of Zopirus, and ouercame all Asia, and Greece. He is called in the Bible Ahasuerus, and had for his second wi^e Hester 36
3479
4 Xerxes to reuenge the ouerthrow at Marathron, attempted

to subdue the Greekes: by whom he was ouerthrowne in the navall battle of Salamis; and that famous and honourable exploit of the Grecians at Thermopilae. 21.
3500
5 Artaxerxes Longinanus was he who sent Esdras to rebuild the Temple of the Lord; and receiued Themistocles being banished from Athens 44
3544
6 Darius Nothus 19, in whose time Aegypt revolted.
3563
7 Ar^axerxes Mnemon. 36
3599
8 Ochus surpassing Cambises in tyrauny, first slew his two brothers, then recouered Aegypt, subdued Cyrus, Iudaea, and Syria. 26
3625
9 Arsames slaine villainously by the Eunuch Bagoas; lest he should reuenge the death of his Father, whom this Bagoas had also slaine 4
3629
10 Darius Gouernour of Armenia, was by the means of Bagoas made sole Monarch of Persia: he was ouerthrowne by Alexand^r the Great in three battles, viz: of Granucins, of Cilicia, and of Arvela: and so the Empire of the Medes and Persians was transferred to the Macedonians, A.M. 3625.

The certaine revenues of this Monarchy seeme to haue been 1456 Talents; for so much the last Darius yearely receiued. What the casuall revenues were, is doubtfull; though manifest it is that they farre exceeded the certaine. For 1 the Persian Monarchs were Kings of 127 Prouinces: Secondly, Darius offered to Alexander for the ransome of his mother and two daughters, 30000 talents of gold* Thirdly, Alexander found in the treasurie of Damascus 2600 talents; in that of Susa 50000 talents of gold vncoyned, in that of Pasargadis, 6000 talents, in that of Echbatana 26000 talents; in that of Persepolis 120000 talents; in all 204600 talents, besides the infinite riches of the treasurie of Babylon, yeelded into his hands by Bag^phanes, and other places of note, not particularly specified, a h^ge and vnspekable summe. Fourthly, in that the gold and riches which Alexander, now a conquerour, sent from Persia to Macedon and Greece, (besides that which euery Captaine and common Souldier had prouided and laid vp for his own maintenance) loaded 10000 Mules, and 5000 Camels.
After this ouerthrow of the Persian Monarchie, this nation lay obscure 535 yeares, viz: from the yeare 3635 yeare of the world, to the 228 yeare of Christ: of which time they were 83 yeares vnder the Syrian successours of Alexander; and 452 yeares vnder the Arsacidan kings of Parthia* (...) etc. For after Darius had lost his kingdome to Alexander the Macedonian, and after the Victor himselfe was dead also, the more potent Captaines diuided Asia among them. But discords daylie arising, and the Macedonian puissance by these often broyles not smally broken; Arsaces one of the Parthian nobility, perswaded the barbarous people of the East, and among them the Persians, to cast off the Greeke yoke, and stand for their libertie: he himselfe taking vpon him the title of King, and investing himselfe with a Diademe, A.M. 3718. The Persian^ by this revolt, got litle or nothing, hauing indeed not changed the tyrannie, but the tyrant: yet vnder the Parthian gouernment they continued till A.C. 228 At that time the Parthians hauing beene barbarously by Caracalla massacred, and after, in a battle, which continued three dayes, shrewdly broken by Macrinus, (as there we shall more fully informe you:) Artaxerxes a generous minded Persian, his name (no doubt) suggesting high thoughts vnto him; husbanded this oportunity so well, that he slew Artabanus the last king of Parthia, and once more brought the royall seate into Persia. Yet was not this so easily effected, the Parthians notwithstanding their ^ormer losses, maintaining a cruell fight for three dayes together: so difficult was it to vanquish that nation, when their forces were broken; impossible, when they were whole. Artaxerxes, proud of this successe, sent a peremptory embassie vnto Alexander Severus, the then Roman Emperour, to haue all the Prouinces in Asia, which had formerly belonged to the Persian Monarchy, re-deliuered vnto him a matter not so easily granted as demanded. For Severus to suppresse so insolent an enemy, marched toward Persia with an Army Romanly appointed; which, to finde his enemy more worke, h^e diuided into three parts: whereof the first was appoin^ed ^o march into M^diz; the second into Parthia; the third, himselfe led in the mid-way betweene

both; to succour both as occasion required. This deuice succeeded not happily; for his two first Armies being by the Persians broken, he with much danger and haste, retired backe with the third. This was a good beginning for the Persian Empire, the establishment followed not long after; Aurelianus the Emperour being vanquished and taken prisoner by Sapores the second King of this race; so that now the name of the Persian grew so terrible to the Romans, that Constantine the Great transplanted all the Colonies and Garrisons of the North-west parts of the Empire, into the East; to keepe the Persians from growing too farre vpon the Roman Prouinces: and remooued also the seate of the Empire nigher vnto them, from Rome to Constantinople. And thus hauing shewne you the beginning and establishment, the foundation and building of the new kingdome of the Persians; take along with you the Catalogue of their Kings, vntill they once more lost the soueraignty of their own Nation, and became slaues againe.
The second race of the Persian Kings.A.C.Freigius.2281 Artaxerxes. 152432 Sapores 312743 Ormisdates. 12754 Vararanes 3.2785 Vararanes II. 162946 Vararanes, III.2947 Narses 7.3028 Misdates 703109 Sapar 738010 Artaxerxes II. 1139111 Sapores, II 539612 Varanes 1040613 Isd gertes 2142714 Vararanes IV. 2044715 Vararanes V. 1746416 Perozes 2048417 Valens 448818 Canades 1149919 Lambases. 450320 Canades (again) 3053321 Cosroes 4858122 Hormisdas 858923 Cosroes 3962824 Siroes 162925 Adhesir.26 Sarbatus.27 Bornarim.28 Hormisda:
who being vanquished by Haumar and his Saracens, Anno 634; buried the glory of this renowned Nation, in the graue of obliuion and infamie.
The Saracenicall Caliphs, hauing added this kingdome to

their huge Empire, appointed here their Deputies, whom they honoured with the name of Sultan or Sold^ns; which were for a long tract of time, true receiuers and repayers of the profites and intrado, due to their Emperours or Caliphs. At last Mahomet a Persian Sultan, intending to shake off the decaying co^mand of the Babylonian Caliph, and not being able to compasse so great a designe, without the assistance of a forraine power; called the Turkes to his succour: by whose meanes he ouerthrew Pisafiris the Caliph; and denying the Turkes leaue to returne home, compelled them to seeke their owne s^fety, in the ruine of him and his new kingdome; into which succeeded Tangrolipix the Turkish Captaine, Anno 1030.

The third race, or the Turkish Kings of Persia.
1030
1 Tangrolipix.

2 Axan, of whose successours I am so farre from finding register, that I neuer read but only of
1198
Cussanes; who was vanquished by Zingis and his Tartars, Anno 1202: and thus ended, and thus beganne the Turkish and Tartarian Kingdomes, or Dynasties in Persia.


The fourth race, or Tartarian Kings of Persia.
Purchas.1 Haalon appointed King by Zingis the great Cham.
2 Habkaikason.
3 Nicador Oglan.
4 Tangador.
5 Argonaan.
6 Geniotukon.
7 Baduham.
8 Gazim.
9 Abuzaid, after whose death, the more potent Princes seased on the chiefe parts of the Kingdome. In this confused Anarchie it remained, till the Tartarians burning in ciuill dissention; gaue a kind opportunity to Gempsas a Parthi^n Sultan, to free his owne subiects and the Persians from the Tartarian bondage: who entred seuerally with an Army royall into the country, which he quickly made his owne; the competitors in this common danger, neither, laying aside their priuate hatreds, nor so much as joyning together in counsell to gi^e him resistance; but seuerally fighting, were

all vanquished. This effected, he was with a generall consent both of the Commons and Nobility, chosen Sultan or King of Persia.


The fift race, or Parthian Kings of Persia.
1450
1 Gemsas, Soldan of Parthia. His issue did not long enioy the Persian Monarchy: for Tamberlan like a violent whirlewinde, driuing all the East before him, dispossessed the Parthian race of Persia, leauing it to his sonne. But Philosophie teacheth vs, that no violent motion is of long continuance; and policy may instruct vs, that a kingdome forced to bow vnder a populous army, is not so established to its ouer-runner; but that the fury of the warre once past, it may and doth recouer its former liberty: like a reed or tender plant, which yeeldeth to a furious winde; but the storme once ouer-blowne, it recouereth its former straightnesse. So fared it with the Tartarians, for not long after the death of Tamberlane, the Parthian race recouered this kingdome, the last of which line was

2 Malaoncres, ouercome in fight by
1453
3 Vssan Cussanes, a Prince of the Armenians.

4 Iacup. During the raigne of these two latter kings, hapned this memorable alteration of Religion and state in ^ersia.

Mahomet the Law giuer of the Saracens, by his last Will and Testament, bequeathed to his cosen Hali, being the husband to his daughter Fatime, all his estate, with the title of Caliph: but Abubezer, Haumar, and Osmen, three powerfull men of Arabia, and great assistants to Mahomet, successiuely followed one another in the Caliphate. After their death, Hali hoped a more comfortable Sunne would shine vpon his sincere proceeding; but Mnavias a valiant man of warre obtained that dignity; and to hinder all future claimes, slew Hali with his sonne Ossan, and 11 of the sonnes of this Ossan, the twelfth escaping with life. From this twelfth sonne, by name Musa Ceresin, one Guine Sophie deriued his pedegree, Anno 1360; and considering that now there had no Caliph beene in long time, began to contriue the establishing of that honourable estate, in his owne family: but he leauing this life, left also the rude lump

of his begunne proiects, to be licked ouer with the industrie of his sonne Aider Sophie: He being a man of great sanctity and much power, as fortified with the surest bulwarke, viz: the constant affection of the people; was thought by Vssan Cussanes, a husband worthy of his daughter. But Iacup his sonne and successor, seeing the glory of this sunne, to obscure the lesser lamp of his reputation; and fearing what he could doe, not what he would, cau^ed him to be slaine: and deliuered Ismael and Solyman his two sonnes to Amazar one of his Captaines, to cast them in prison. Amazar of a more ingenious disposition, afforded them not only liberty, but also good education: insomuch that Ismael Sophie, a towardly yong gentleman, vowed reuenge for the death of his father; which vow he fulfilled, hauing ouercame and slaine King Iacup, and his sonne Elvan. After this victory, he being crowned King or Sophie, or Shangh of Persia, altered the forme of Religion, making Hali and himselfe the true successours of Mahomet: but condemning Ab^bezer, Haumar, and Osmen, with the Turkes, as rebels and Schisma^icks. Hence proceeded the diuers iarres, which to the Persians losse haue hapned betweene them and the Turkes; the Persians burning whatsoeuer booke or monument they finde concerning those three; and the Turkes holding it more meritorious to kill one Persian, then 70 Christians. Surius in his Commentaries, writing purposely the acts of this Ismael, saith; that the Iewes on some fond conceit, were strongly perswaded that he was their Messias: but it proued quite contrary, there neuer being man that more vexed and grieued them, then he.

The sixt race, or Sophies of Persi^.

Freigius.1 Ismael Sophie.

2 Tamas.
1575
3 Ismael ^ menses.

4 Aider Mirises 15 dayes.
1576
5 Mahomet Codobanda, seated in the throne by his sister Periancona, who slew her brother Ismael, and betrayed Aider: during these ciuill broyles, Amurath took from them Media, and all Armenia.
1585
6 Abas (for ought I can learne) now liuing.

The compasse of this Sophian Empire, is, or was before the avulsion of the two Prouinces, 4560 miles; being of equall length and breadth; euery side of which quadrangle extended it selfe 1140 miles.
The revenues in the dayes of Sophie Tamas, amounted to 4 or 5 millions of gold; which hee, by doubling the value of his coyne, raised to 8 millions; but now they are much diminished; and the Turke hauing gotten from them so much ground, as is diuided into 40000 Timariots, and receiuing the yearly income of one million.
Thus much of the Persian State.



OF PARTHIA.
PARTHIA is bounded on the East with Aria, on the West with Media, on the North with Hiroania, and on the South with Charmania. It is now called Erach.
The chiefe cities are 1 Guerde, 2 Iesdi, 3 Hispaa, (formerly Hircatompile) of that bignesse, that the Persians call it hyperbolically, Halfe the world. 4 Tigranocerta, built by Tigranes King of Armenia. 5 Ctesiphon the royall seat of the Arsacides: a Town diuers times besieged by the Roman Emperours, but most commonly without successe. Vnder the walls of this Town died Iulian the Apostata, a bitter enemie to the Faith of Christ. For though he was no open persecutor, yet he forbade the Christians the vse of prophane learning: thinking the prohition of that, to bee the principall meanes to weaken the Faith of Christ; the vse whereof our moderne Schismatickes thinke to bee the onely hinderance of the inlargement of the number of the faithfull. Not considering how that confutation is most powerfull, which is drawne from the doctrine and tenets of our aduersaries: nor calling to minde how S. Paul in his Epistles, citeth in the first of Titus, Epimenides; in the 17th of the Acts, Aratus; and in the first and 15th of the Corinths, the Poet Euripides. But see, the vngodly policie of this Emperour, hath drawne me out of my way. I returne.
Iustine.The Parthians are descended from the Scythians, (whose language, though somewhat mixt with the Median tongue, they yet retaine) who being banished their natiue soyle, peopled these parts, and were called Parthians, i. ^ Exles. A rude people they were, and so base, that none of Alexanders Captaine; would vouchsafe to be their king. At last they were brought to a ciuill conformity of manners, apparell, and warlike discipline, by their first King Arsaces; in ^onour of whom all their Kings were called Arsacides, as the Roman Emperors Caesars; the Aegyptian Kings Pharaohs, and Ptolomies. At the first rising of this A^saces, Seleuc^^ Callenicus King of Syria, vnder whose Empire they were, made head against him^ but Arsaces was victorious; since which victory, the Parthians kept the day whereon it was wonne, as festiuall; that being the first day of their liberty and reputation.
This people were much addicted to shooting with bowes, and profited in this exercise so well, that they were accounted the most expert Archers in the World. Hence was it that M. Crassus in his expedition against them, being told by an Astrologer, that his iourney would proue disastrous, because the Sunne had some euill aspect in Scorpio: cryed, tush, tush, I feare not Scorpio, but Sagittarius. They vsed to fight most when they retired, making their retreat more dismall then the onset: Shooting sometimes from betweene their legges, sometimes backwards, Terga conversi metuenda Parthi, (as Seneca saith.) Certainely the Aire and Earth seeme to haue combined together to make them expert in archery and horsemanship.Dion. Caelum enim quod siccum est, nervos intentos facit, regio tota plana est, and ob eam rem equis accommodata: the aire being dry, seasoneth their strings; and the Country plaine, exerciseth their horse. Next the Parthians, I am perswaded that the English haue bin reputed the best bow-men; these hauing gotten as many noble victories ouer the French, as euer the other did ouer the Roman. At this time archery is euery-where neglected, the gunne silencing all former offensiue weapons, but how iustly I know not: it is a disputation aboue my moderating, Sir Iohn Smith, and Sir Roger Williams hauing defended their seuerall parts in it, and

many good iudgements siding with the one and the other. I come now to the Kings.

The Kings of Parthia.
A.M.

3718
1 Arsaces 23
3741
2 Mi^hridates 20
3761
3 Pampatius 12
3773
4 Pharnaces 8
3781
5 Mithridates II subdued Media:

6 Phraortes.Freigius.
3857
7 Artabanus

8 Mithridates III
3903
Herodes, who vanquished Crassus, and slew 20000 Romans, and because Crassus was so couetous, he caused molten gold to bee powred downe his throate. This disgrace was after reuenged by Ventidius,Dio^. Marke Antonies Lieftenant, the first man that euer triumphed ouer the Parthians; of whom he slew a great number, and amongst the rest Pacorus the Kings sonne. The day of the battail being the same in which Crassus had formerly bin discomfited. Ventidius after this victorie, was in faire possibility to haue ruined his kingdome, or at least shrewdly shaken it; had not Antonie in an enuious humour, called him from that seruice. Finally Herodes was slaine by his sonne Phraortes.

10 Phraartes II a valiant Prince, but wicked and cruell, against him marched Marcus Antonius with a populous armie, which wa^ted little of an absolute ouerthrow: of 16 legions scarce sixe returned home in safety. This King submitted himselfe and Kingdome vnto Augustus, restoring the Roman ensignes, and freeing the Captiues taken at the defeat of Crassus. The only marke of the Parthians subiection, was their receiuing Kings at the appointment of the Senate and Emperours of Rome, which also lasted not long. Foure Kings of the Arsacidan stock succeeded, viz: 11 Phaartes, 12 Orodes, 13 Vonon, 14 Tiridite^* who was dispossessed of his kingdome and life, by Artabanus a stranger to the blood.

^ Artabanus the first King of the Parthians, not being of the Arsacidan line. 2 Bardanes, 3 Goterzes, 4 Vonones, 5 Vologeses, 6 Artabanus II, 7 Pacorus, 8 Cosroes, 9 Parnaspates,

10 Vologeses II, 11 Vologeses III.

12 Artabanus the last King of Parthia, whose ouer-throw by the valour of Artaxerxes, the first Persian king of the second race, was the period of this flourishing estate; which in her chiefest glory was the sole Lady of 18 subordinate Kingdomes.

Heredotus.This subuersion of the Parthian state, as it was primarily wrought by the vnresistible power of Heauen; so may wee referre it, as to a second cause vnto the barbarous massacre of this people by Antoninus Caracalla, and a quarrell thence arising, Caracalla hauing negotiated a marriage with this Artabanus daughter, and going to solemnize the nuptials, was met by the old King; accompanied with the flower of his soldiers, people, and nobles, in their triumphall ornaments. No sooner was this honourable retinue come nigh his Armie, but the watch word giuen, the Roman soldiers (according to their Emperours directions) put them all to the sword; the King himselfe hardly escaping with life. Caracalla being dead, Macrinus his successor was assaulted by the reenforced Parthians, who after a three-dayes battaile, hearing how Caracalla had bin slaine by Macrinus, made peace with him, there hauing beene in these 3 dayes businesse, great losse on both sides: so that it was now no mastery for the Persians to surprise a kingdome thus weakned, and vnable to make resistance.
Parthia thus conquered, Anno 228, continued a member of the Persian Monarchie, till the ouer-throw of Ormusda the last of the second race: when this Country falling together with Persia into the hands of the Caliphs, had her proper Sultans. Ao 1350, Gempsas a Soldan of this Countrie, recouered the reputation of the Parthians, by subduing the Persians, as we haue told you: and together with Persia, it is now subiect to the Sophios.
Thus much of Parthia.


OF TARTARIA.
Maginus.TARTARIA is bounded on the East with the Easterne Ocean, on the West with Muscouie, and Moldauia; on

the North with the Scythicke, or frozen Ocean; and on the south with Mare Caspium, the hill Taurus, and the wall of China.
This Country extendeth it selfe from East to West, 5400 miles; and from North to South, 3600 miles.
This Country was of old knowne by the name of Scythia; whose inhabitants were the posterity of Magog, the son of Iaphet; called first Magogins afterward Scythes from Scythus their first King. The seuerall inhabitants were first Essedones, men who reioyced most at their parents deaths; of whose heads trimly wrought, and rounded with Gold, they vsed to make their carowsing cups. 2 Agathyrsi, who vsed to paint themselues; euery one the more noble he was, the more deformed and stained: for which cause, some haue conceited our Pictes, to haue drawne their originall from hence. 3 Nomades, who having no houses, vsed there to abide longest, where the fodder for their cattle was best; which being once consumed, they departed. 4 Axiacae, who were very valiant, but withall barbarous and inhumane; vsing in their warres to drinke the blood of him whom they first slewe, euen as it distilled out of his wounds. 5 Geloni, who vsed to apparell themselues with the skinnes of their enimies heads; and their horses with the skinne of their bodies. and 6 Neuri, of whom (beleeue it who list) it is reported, that they could turne themselues into Wolues, and anon againe resume their true being.
The Country by reason of the many riuers running through and sometimes ouerflowing it; was very abundant in grasse: but in fuell so deficient, that their fires were made of bones, insteed of wood. This name of Scythia extending it selfe into Europe, euen vnto all regions lying North from Danubius, called also Sarmatia, and Scythia Europaea: and so populous hath it alwaies beene* that it is by diuerse authors stiled the mother of all inundations, vagina gentium, and officina genoris humani.
From hence indeed Hunns, Herules, Franks, Bulgarians,Circassians, Sueues, Burgundians, Turkes, Tartarians,Dutch, Cimbers, Normans, Almaines, Ostrogothes,Tigurins, Lombards, Vandals, Visigothes:Haue swarmed like Locusts round about this ball,And spoyl'd the fairest Prouinces of all.

As she was populous, so were the people also valourous. They thrice ouerranne all Asia, ouercame the Egyptians, Parthians, Medes,Heredotus and Persians; these last by the hands of a woman, viz: Tomyris: who to reuenge the death of her son Spargapises slaine by Cyrus, encountred him in open field, cut of 200000 of his men, and chopping off his head threw it into a cauldron of bloud saying, Satia te sanguine quem sitisti. Darius the successour of Cambises, either to reuenge this ouerthrowe, or to get reputation, or to requite a former incursion of this people into Asia, in the time of Cyarxes which we before haue mentioned; entred with a huge armie: but with little honour and lesse safety, as we shall anon perceaue. These were the only armies that euer were brought into Scythia, no potentate after this daring to enter the Country in hostile manner.Consent of time.

The Kings of Scythia.
1 Scytha.
2 Napis.
3 Phitro.
4 Sagillus.
5 Targitaus.
6 Plinos.
7 Scolopithus.
8 Panaxagora.
9 Tanais.
10 Indathirsus.
11 Saulius.
12 Spargapisis.
13 Tomyris.
14 Aripethes.
15 Sciles.
16 Octomasades.
17 Lanthinus, in whose time the Persian king Darius leading an Armie of 700000 men, was vanquished by the Amazons, Hircanians, and other nations of Scythia. The whole narration is thus. Darius on the causes lately mentioned, intended an expedition into Scythia: from which neither the example of Cyrus, nor any reason could disswade him. For his better iournying, he built a bridge ouer Thracius Bosphorus, and another ouer Ister; about that place where it parteth Bulgaria from Moldauia. To the keepers of this last bridge hee left a cord hauing in it sixtie knots; willing them every day to vntie one of them, and if he returned not till the knots were all vntied, he licenced them to depart. This done hee marcheth vp into the Country, the Scythians still flying before him, and leading him into the most desert and vnuitualed parts of the Countrey.

When they had him at this pinch, they sent to him an Embassadour with a bird, a mouse, a frogge, and a handfull of arrows, b^dding the Persians, if they could, to read them that riddle; and departed. Darius coniectured that the Scythians had submitted themselues, by deliuering into his hands their Earth, Ayre, Water, and Armes; hieroglyphically specified in their present. But Gobrias one of the seauen Princes gaue this interpretation. O yee Persians, vnlesse yee can like a Bird fly through the ayre, like a Frog swim through the water, or like a Mouse make your way vnder the earth; ye can by no meanes escape the Scythian Arrowes. Indeed this commentary agreed best with the text: for the Scythians following him, or rather driuing him before them, cut off many thousands of his Armie.

There was a long controuersie betweene the Aegyptians and those people for antiquity; which was at last pronounced to belong to the Scythian* with this verdict, Scytharum gens semper antiquissima. Anacharsis the Philosopher was of this countrey.
There were diuers other Kings of Scythia, whose names lye obscured for want of a Historiographer: And now the very name of Scythia is extinct.
As for the Tartars, they are by some supposed to be the ofspring of the ten Tribes, whom Salmanassar led away captiue; and that especially for two reasons.Breerwood The first is, that the word Tatari (by which name they rather ought to be called, then by that of Tartari) signifieth in the Syriacke and Hebrew tongues, a remnant. To this we answere, that the name of this people is deriued from the riuer Tartar, as some; or from the region called Tartar, where they first dwelt, as most thinke: and againe that though the Hebrew word (...) signifie a remnant, yet can it not be properly applyed to the Tartars, who so infinitely exceed the Iewes, that they cannot be thought to bee a remainder of them. 2ly They alleage for proofe, that this people vse circumcision, the character of the Iewish nation. To this wee reply that circumcision was common to many people besides the Iewes, as to the Aegyptians, Aethiopians, etc. and that rather as a nationall custome, then a religious ordinance: and againe that

the Tartars cannot be proued to haue receaued circumcision, before they receaued Mahumetanisme. 3ly There is brought to confirme this opinion, a place of Esdras, chap. 13. lib. 2. where it is said, that the ten Tribes (that they might the better keepe Gods statutes) passed ouer the riuer Euphrates, and after a iourny of a yeare and a halfe, came into a country called Arsareth. This we refell by shewing the impossibilities; for the Tartars (when their name was first known) were meere Idolaters, had no remembrance of the law, obserued not the Sabboth, nor any other points of the Iewish religion: and so the ten Tribes retired not hither to keepe Gods statutes. 2ly Euphrates lieth quite West from Assyria, and those places to which Salmanassar transplanted the Israelites; and so it could not bee passed ouer in a iourney toward the North. And 3ly it is very improbable that the ten Tribes should either bee so simple, as to leaue Assyria where they were peaceably setled; or so valiant, as to force a passage through those Countries of Scythia, which neither Persians, Greekes, or Romans were able to withstand. But of this people more anon.
Tartaria is now vsually diuided into these parts,
Precopensem.Asiaticam.Antiquam.Zagathai.Cathai.
Adrianus.TARTARIA PRECOPENSIS containeth all Taurica Chersonesus, and the Asiatican banks of Tanais. The chiefe citties are 1 Precops, whence the whole nation is called Precopensis. 2 Crim, the ancient seat of the Tartarian rulers, whence named they were the Crim Tartars. 3 Oczackow, the residence of the present Princes. 4 Capha (anciently Theodosia) a towne of great trafficke, which Mahomet the Great took from the Genois. The Tartarians were first placed in this Country by Baido (or Roido) a braue Captaine, which subdued all Muscovia. Mahomet the great co^tracted with them a league; that the Tartar should aid the Turke on all occasions with 60000 men, and those to demand no pay: to requite which, the Tartar is to succeed in the Turkish Empire, if at any time the issue male should happen

to faile. After this couenant, the great Turke vsed (as still hee doth) to send the new elected Cham a banner, as a token of his approbation of their election.
The men of this Country,Boter. as of the other 4 parts, are swarth, not so much by the heat of the sunne, as their own fluttishnesse; illfauored, thick-lipp'd, flat-nosed, broad-shouldered, swift of foot, laborious, and vigilant; barbarous euery where in behaviour, especially in Antiqua and Asiaticae. In religion they are some Pagans, some Mahumetans. The women are sutable to the men, wanting and scorning mony; adorning themselues with gew-gawes of copper, feathers, and latton.
TARTARIA ASIATICA, called also Muscovitica, and Deserta (as anciently Sarmatia Asiatica;) is situate about the bankes of the riuer Volga. The people here for the most part, liue in Tents made of beasts skinnes, and account it a great misery to stay longer in a place, then the pastures afford meat for their Cattle. For this reason they sow no corne, making horseflesh their chief food, either warmed a little at their saddle bow or schorched with the sunne; and vse to drinke sowre Mares milke. They liue together in troopes, which they call Hordes, and in their iournies and remoues too and fro, they obserue the Pole-starre. Of these Herdes the more inclinable to ciuility are they of Astrachan and Casan; who liue in houses, sowe Corne, and build defencible Townes: which good orders haue beene but of late vsed, viz: since they were made subiect to the Muscouite, by the valour of Basilius and his sonne Iohn Basiliades. Before they were subdued by the Muscouite,Maginus. they were diuided states, and had two seuerall Kings or Rulers. Casaus last King by name Chelealcezks, submitted himselfe to the Emperour of Russia, and became his tributary: but againe reuolting, hee was vanquished in field, and his people eternally made subiect Ano 1553. The Horde of Astrachan is situate Southeast of Casan, downe toward the Caspian Sea, and was conquered by Basilius Anno 1494. Next to these, the principall hords are Zavoll, and Noyhan. Zavoll called the great Hords, or the Hord of the Zavolhenses, lieth betweene the riuer Volga, and Iaich: and is as it were the mother of the rest. It had particular kings till the

yeare 1506, when the Cham of the Precopenses subdued them: but they discontentedly bearing the yoke, gaue vnto Basilius a faire opportunity, to bring them vnder the empire of Muscouy: which accordingly hee did. Noyhan called the Horde of the Noyacenses, is the most Northerne Horde of all, and hath the most warlike people. They were first gouerned without any King after the manner of Venice: but at last the Country was diuided betweene three of the most potent among them. Now they are againe vnited vnder one Prince or Duke, who is tributary to the Muscouite.
The chiefe Citties are 1 Casan. 2 Noyhan. 3 Scarayckzicke. 4 Astrachan, nigh vnto which Selimus the second, receaued a memorable ouerthrowe by Basiliades. Betweene this Country Precopense, and Muscouia, liue the Mordwits: a Tartarian people, which participate of all religions; being baptized like the Christians, circumcised as the Iewes, and Turkes, and worshipping Idols like Pagans.
Purchas.TARTARIA ANTIQVA, is the old habitation of the Tartars; from whence they dispersed themselues like a violent whirle-winde ouer Europe and Asia. The people are iust of the same life and conditions with them of Asiatica. This Country lieth farthest North, as extending beyond the Polare circle, and butting on the frozen Ocean; and though the vulgar lie either in skinne Tents, or vnder their Carts, yet haue they some ^ewe Citties; as 1 Coras, famous for the sepulchre of the Tartarian Chams. 2 Caracora, where Cingis was first saluted Emperour. 3 Chinchitalas. 4 Campion: these Citties belong to the Kingdome of Tenduc. The people hereof account it a great honour, to haue their wiues and sisters, at the pleasure of such as they entertaine: and when vpon the command of Mango Chan, they had for three yeares abstained from this beastly practise; they obtained a restitution of it againe, vpon a protestatio^, that they could neuer thriue since they left it.
Here is in this Country a beast of exquisite shape, about the bignesse of a Goat; which euery full Moone hath a swelling vnder the belly: which, the hunters (at that time chasing the said beast) hauing cut it off, and dried it against the Sunne; proueth

a most dainty pleasing perfume. In this Country is the Wildernesse or Desert called Lop: From whence came King Tabor, whom Charles the fift burned at Mantua 1540; for perswading the people to returne to Iudaisme: and in this Countrey groweth Rhubarbe, an herbe of that excellent nature, that the whole world is beholding to these Barbarians for it, as a soueraigne helpe for many diseases.
ZAGATHAI, called of old Scythia intra montem Imaum, is situate about the Caspian Sea; extending to the borders of the Sophian Empire. It comprehendeth the Prouinces of Bactria, Sogdiana, Margiana, Turchestan, and Zagataia.
Margiana lieth South to Tartaria Antiqua, and East to Hircania: the chiefe Citties are 1 Indion, called once Alexandria Margianae; a Towne which Antiochus Soter king of Syria fortified with a strong wall. 2 Maran, nigh vnto which Ismael Sophie ouerthrew the Cham of Tartarie.
Sogdiana, lieth on the North of Bactria: The chiefe Citties are Oxiana, seated on the riuer Oxus. 2 Maruca. 3 Alexandria Sogdianae built by Alexander at his going toward India. Here also stood in the time of Alexander, the strong and famous City of Cyropolis, built by Cyrus, to fortifie his borders against the Scythians. It held out against that great Macedonian, a long time; and he himselfe comming nigher to the walls, then discretion would permit an ordinarily Generall; had such a blow on the necke with a stone, that he fel to the ground, his eyes swimming in his head, and his whole armie giuing him for slaine. But reuiuing, he tooke the towne by a mine, and leuel'd it with the ground.
Bactria lieth East to Margiana, and South to Sogdiana; this Country is now called Chorazzau, the two former Iess^^bas from their greene turbats. These Bactrians are by Curtius said to haue beene a people very cruell, alwaies in armes, resembling much the Scythians, whose neighbours they were; and (which was their greatest vertue) multum a Persarum luxu abhorrentes, nothing so effeminate as their Lords the Persians. Ouer these Bessus was Captaine, who so villanously betrayed Darius; and was by Spitamenes serued with the same sawce; who deliuered

him into the power of Alexander, and hee into the ^ands of the hangman. The chiefe Citties are 1 Istigias, one of the most pleasant Citties of the East. 2 Chorazzan, whence commeth the name of the whole region. 3 Bud^san formerly Bactra. In the time of the Assyrian Monarch Ninus, here raigned the first king Zoroastes, who is said by some, first to haue inuented Astronomy: which assertion I dare not affirme, considering that the fathers before the flood were well seene in this science. Perhaps the inuention hereof is attributed to the king, either for that he first committed that to writing, which was taught by tradition: or else compiled the confused writings of others, into one methodicall body. Against him Ninus made warre, but was forced to fly with the losse of 10000 Assyrians; and hauing againe repaired his armie, encountred Zoroastes, slew him, and vnited Bactria to his Monarchie. Afterward it was made subiect to the Persians, then to the Syrian successours of Alexander, til the yeare of the world, 3720: in which time Theodates, one who was but gouernour of 1000 Citties and Townes (by which we may guesse at the former populousnesse) assumed to himselfe the title of King: which honour continued in his family, til the yeare 3786; when Enchrendes the last king, was slain by the Bogdians, and Drangians. Then returned it to the Syrians; afterwards it was sub^ected to the Romans, vnder whom it receaued the Christian faith by the preaching of St Thomas, together with the other two Prouinces. The Persians, Sarracens, and now the Tartars haue beene successiuely their Lords.
Turchestan, is the Country where the Turkes first inhabited, before their irruption into Armenia. The chief Cities are Calba, and Ocerra. That this people tooke the name of Turkes, either from the Teucri, the Troians, or from Turca a towne of Persia, is friuolous to affirme; considering how long before the Turks had any commerce with the Persians, Pomponius Mela placeth the Turcae and Thyrsagetae together in this tract: and as for their descent from the Troians, I hold it so vaine, that it needeth no confutation. The first time that euer this people tooke on the^ any military emploiment, was in the raigne of the Emperour Mauritius, about the yeare 600: when they were discomfited

by Chaganus, Captaine or Cham of the Avares, another Scythian nation, of whom wee haue before spoken in Hungarye. Their second expedition as it was more necessary, hunger enforcing them to it; so was it also more prosperous: stating them in a great part of the greater Armenia, Anno 1844; and what they haue since done, we haue there told you.
Zagataie, the name giuer at this day to all the Prouince; tooke its name from Sachetaie a Noble man of the Tartars: to whose care this part of their new Empire was committed. To him succeeded Ogg, who was the father of Tamerlane; who by marriage with the daughter and heire of Gino Chan, obtained the Tartarian Empire. Hee subdued the Aegyptians, Syrians, Persians, and Turkes; against whose vnfortunate King Baiazet the first, he conducted an Army of 700000 fighting men, and wonne a famous victory of his enimy: hee terrefied the Muscovites, and frighted the puissant King of China: and dying diuided his Empire amongst his sons; who lost it in as short space as their father had conquered it: nothing remaining not subdued, of which Tamerlane was not possessed, before his warre-like expeditions.
The chiefe Citties are 1 Bochara, the seat of the Prouinciall Gouernour. 2 Sarmachand, which gaue both a Cradle and a Graue to mighty Tamerlane. This Citty hee enriched, with all the treasurie and spoiles of his manifold victories; and in one instance to speake the rest, he sent hither from Damascus only, 8000 Camels laden with spoiles, and choicest moueable goods. From this Tamerlane the great Moguls are descended. This Towne was originally called Matacanda, and was by Spitamenes (who hauing deliuered Bessus into the hands of Alexander, afterwards revolted from him) made good against the Macedonians: Menedemus with 3800 men besieging it. But Spitamenes preuailed, slew Menedemus, and 2300 of his Souldiers; and then fled to Bactria: where he was slaine by his wi^e, and his head presented to the Conquerour. At this Towne also was it that Alexander in a drunken fury, slew his friend Clytus; who at the battaile by the riuer Granvicus, had saued his life, by receauing a blowe directed at him.
CATHAIE is bounded on the East with the Orientall Ocean, on the West with the other Tartarian Prouinces, on the North with the Scythicke Sea, and on the South with China. This is thought to haue beene the ancient habitation of the Seres; who being excellent in the weauing of silkes, which they made of a fine wooll growing on the leaues of trees, occasioned all silkes to be called Serica. It is said of this people, that they had neither theefe, nor whore among them.
The soyle aboundeth with variety of fruits; superfluously furnished with Rice, Graine, Wooll, Silke, Hemp, Rhewbarbe, Muske, and excellent fine Chamlets. So that it scorneth to giue precedency to any of the flourishing Prouinces in Europe.
The people are very warlike, strong in matters of action, fearelesse of the greatest dangers, and patient of labour and want. They are of meane stature, little eyes, sharpe sight, and weare their beards thinne. They are of a very good wit, dresse them selues gorgeously, and fare on occasions sumptuously. Finally these and they of Zagataie are the most honourable people of the Tartars, indifferently ciuill, louers of arts both mechanicall and ciuill, and inhabiting diuerse faire Citties. The chiefe are 1 Caraian where the women vse to gild their teeth. 2 Tebeth, famous for her abundance in Corall. 3 Cambalu, seated on the riuer Polysanga, honoured with the great Chams residence, and enriched with a mighty confluence of Merchants of all sorts: besides other merchandises, there are euery yeare 1000 Carts loaded with silke, sent thither from China. This Citty is in compasse 28 miles besides the Suburbs; in which besides other inhabitants of all sorts, are 50000 Astrologers, or rather fortune tellers. 4 Xaindu, the Pallace of the Emperor, is of a fouresquare figure, euery side extending 8 miles in length: within this quadrate is another, whose sides are 6 miles long, and within that another of foure miles square, which is the Pallace it selfe. Betweene these seuerall walls, are Walkes, Gardens, Orchards, Fish-ponds, places for all manner of exercise, and Parkes, Forrests, Chases for all manner of game.
Cathaie was anciently called Scythia extra montem Imaum, and tooke, no doubt, this name from the Cathei, whom the textuarie

Geographer Strabo, placeth in this tract. The people hereof were conuerted by S. Andrew, and long continued Christians though infected with the opinions of Nestorius, whose sect at this day is spread all ouer the East. They differ from the Church of Rome and Greece, saying that in Christ were two persons, as well as two natures. 2, that the Virgin Mary ought not to be called (...). 2 Their Priests may marry when and as often as they will. The chiefe meanes by which this heresie is so propagated, was by the wickednesse of Cosrees, a king of Persia; who vpon a meere hatred to Heraclius the Greeke Emperour, inforced all the Christians inhabiting his dominions, to become Nestorians, or abandon their country. Their Patriarke hath his residence at Musal in Mesopotamia; which dignity is not electiue, but descendeth from the Father to the sonne. The solemnities of marriage because they are somewhat vsuall, I will now relate vnto you. Their wiues they see not till they are married, but hearing a good report of the young woman, sollicite her father for her. If he yeeld, then they meet at the Chancell of the Church, in which there is a partition: the man and his friends standing on the one side; the womar and her friends on the other. When they are met, the Cassise, or Churchman, biddeth the yong man put his hand through a hole in the partition, and take his wife by the hand; which he doth. Then commeth the mother of the young woman, and with a sharpe pointed instrument all to be pricketh the new married mans hand. If when he feeleth the smart, hee letteth his wiues hand goe; they take it for a signe that he will not loue her: but if he hold her fast, and wring her by the hand till she cry; then is he counted a louing man, and her friends are glad that they bestowed her on him. After the marriage consummate, if a male child be borne vnto them, the father looseth his owne name, and is called by that of his eldest sonne; and if the fathers name bee Moses, and the sonnes name Ioseph; the father is no more called Moses, but Aben Ioseph, that is the father of Ioseph: so highly doe they reuerence marriage, and the fruit thereof posterity.
The people of this Country inioyed all the immunities of good subiects vnder the Nestorian kings of Tenduch; to whom

the name of Prester Iohn more ^ightly belongeth, then to the Emperour of Habassia, or Aethiopia interior. The last of these Kings of Tenduch was Vn-cham, who vsing indirect dealings towards the Tartars, a base and obscure people; prouoked the^ now ready to leaue his neighbourhood, and seeke new habitations, to turne their whole forces against him: whom they easily vanquished, and made Cingis their Captaine king of T^nduch.
It is recorded that Cingis before he ioyned battaile with Vn-Cham, consulted with his diuiners and Astrologers of the successe. They taking a greenereed cleft it asunder, writ on the one the name of Cingis, and Vn-Cham on the other: and placed the^ not farre asunder. Then fell they to reading their Charmes and coniurations, the two reeds fell a ^ighting in the sight of the whole army, and Cingis Reed ouercame the other: whereby they foretold the ioyful newes of victory to the Tartars, which accordingly hapned. And this was the first step by which this base and beggerly nation beganne to mount vnto the chaire of Empire and Soueraignty: whereas before they liued like beasts hauing neither letters nor faith, nor dwelling, nor reputation, nor valour, nor indeed any thing fitting a man.

The great Chams of Tartary
1162
1 Cingis, Cinchius, Zingis, or Changius, was made king or Cham of the Tartars: hee subdued Tenduch and Cathaia; Changing the name of Scythians and Scythia, to Tartarians and Tartaria, 6.
1168
2 I^cuchan Cham, or Hoccata succeeded. In his time the name of Tartar was first knowne in Europe; Ao. 1212 in which yeare they droue the Polesockie from the banks of the Euxine Sea. By his Captaine Bathu or R^ido he subdued Muscovia, planted his Tartars in Taurica Chersonesus* wasted Hungary, Bosnia, Seruia, Bulgaria; and by his o^her Captaines tooke Persia from the Turkes.

3 Zaincham, Bathu, or Barcham, ruined the Tarkes kingdome of Damascus, and Asia the lesse.

4 Gino Cham, whose daughter conveighed the Empire vnto her husband Tamirlane or Tamberlan.

5 Tamir Cutlu, Tamir Cham, or Tamirlane, a great

tyrant, but withall an excellent Souldier: that it is thought that he subdued more Prouinces in his life time, then all the Romans had done in 800 yeares, at what time their Monarchie was at the height.

6 Allan.

7 Mango, to whom Haiton an Armenian Prince, and chiefe compiler of the Tartarian history, went for aide against the Caliph of Babylon.

8 Cobilai.

9 Tamor. Thus farre Paulus Venetus, and Haiton Armenius haue spoken of the Tartarian proceedings: what Kings haue since raigned we cannot learne; nor what memorable acts haue beene done among them. The great distance of Countries and difficulty of the iourney haue hindred further discoueries: For the great Cham, the Duke of Muscovie, and the king of China, will neither suffer any of their subiects to travel abroad; nor permit any forrainers to view their dominions, or enter into them, vnlesse either Embassadours or Marchants.

This gouernment is tyrannicall; the great Cham is Lord of all; and in his tongue, besides which they haue almost no laws consisteth the power of life or death: he is called by the simple vulgar, the shaddow of spirits, and sonne of the immortall God. At the death of the Cham, the 7 chiefe Princes assemble to crowne his sonne; whom they place on a blacke course cloath, telling him if he raigne well, heauen shall be his reward: if ill, hee shall not haue so much as a corner of that black cloath to rest his body on: then they put the Crowne on his head, and kissing his feet, sweare vnto him fealty and homage. And at the funerall of these great Monarchs they vse to kill some of his guard souldiers, whereof hee hath 12000 in continuall pay: saying vnto them: Ite and domino nostro seruite in alia vita. Paulus Venetus reporteth, that at the obsequies of Mango Cham, no sewer then 10000 were slaine on this occasion.
These Chams are for the most part seuere iusticers, and punish almost for euery small fault with sudden death; but theft especially: insomuch that a man in Cambalu taking a paile of milke from a womans head, and beginning to drink thereof; was vpon

the womans outery apprehended, and presently cut in sunder with a sword; so that the blood and the milke came out together. The next capitall crimes to these are lying and adultery; which among the very first lawes of Cingis, were enacted to be punishable also by death.
This Country is vnder the same clime with Muscovia. The chiefe riuer of the Precopenses, is Tanais: of Asiatica, Volga, ^nd Petzora: of Antiqua, Tartar, whence the nation tooke their name: of Cathay, Curata. 2 Poiysanga. 3 Zaiton. 4 Mecon, as also the Lakes of Guyan, 2 Dangu. 3 Dandu. 4 Catocara: and lastly of Zagataie, 1 Iaxartes. and 2 Oxus. This last is a fatall bound of Monarchies: the Persians neuer passed it to extend their dominions, but receaued some notable ouerthrowe, as that of Cyrus against the Scythians: and the Tartars fare in the same manner attempting the like matter, as when Saba the Cham of Zagataie, was ouerthrowne by Ismael Sophie of Persia. These two last arise from the branches of Mount Taurus, and exonerate their full stomackes into the Caspian or Hircanian Sea.
Thus much of Tartaria.


OF INDIA.
INDIA is bounded on the East with China, on the West with the riuer Indus, from whence it taketh denomination; on the North with Tartarie, on the South with the Ocean.
This Country extendeth in length from China to Persia, 3600 miles; and stretcheth from Taurus to the Ocean: this being the biggest country, comprehended vnder one name, of any in the world, excepting Tartaria and China. It is situate betweene the first and sixt Climats, the longest day being in the South parts of 12 houres only; but in the North fifteen houres and a halfe.
Concerning the monst^ous fables which fore-going times haue deliuered vnto vs, giue me leaue to say; that as the Poets of old, vsed to fill vp the times of which they were ignorant, with strange fictions, and prodigious metamorphoses; or as our

moderne Geographers in their Maps of the world, fill vp those vnknowne parts thereof, of which they can giue vs no certaine description, with strange pictures, and vncouth shapes of beasts and trees: so also the writers in former ages, haue filled the more remote Countries of which they knowe little, with such impossible and incredible relations. Hence there haue beene attributed to this India, the tales of men with dogges heads; of men with one legge only, yet of great swiftnesse; of such as liue by sent; of men that had but one eye, and that in their foreheads; and of others whose eares did reach vnto the ground. It is reported also, that this people by eating a Dragons heart and liver, attain to the vnderstanding of the languages of beasts; that they can make themselues, when they list, inuisible; that they haue two tubbes, whereof the one opened yeelds winde, the other raine, and the like. But of these relations and the rest of this straine, I doubt not but the vnderstanding Reader knoweth how to iudge, and what to beleeue; for my part I am of the same minde with Curtius, Plura equidem transcribe quam credo; nec enim affirmare ausus sum quae dubito, nec subducere sustineo quae accepi.
The old inhabitants of this Country were the Daedalae, Mazaga, Abisarae, Sop^ites, Gangarides, Phartasii, Sobij, Malli, Sabracae, Musicani, Oxydracae, etc. all conquered by Alexander in his expedition into this Country. The Malli and Oxydracae are most famous, for a story attributed vnto the^, which is this. Alexander besieging the chiefe Citty of the Oxydracae, saith Curtius (of the Malli, saith Plutarch) was the first that scaled the walls, and the last that could doe so; the ladder breaking as soone as he was at the top. Standing thus alone as a marke to all their darts, he was by his Souldiers desired to leap downe among them; but he in a daring brauado leaped into the towne among his enimies: where it was not only his good hap to light vpon his feet, but to haue an old tree at his back to defend him behinde. In this posture he is said to haue maintained the fight a long time against all the townsmen; killing two of them with his owne hands, and by that example teaching the rest to bee more mannerly: till being wearied and dangerously wounded,

he was forced to leaue his feet, and commit the weight of his body to his knees. In this case Leonatus Peucestes, and some other of his Captaines came to assist him, who defended their dying master, till the whole Army entred the Towne, and put all the people to the sword; in reuenge of their King, whose life they had little hope to enioy, though he with much danger did afterward recouer. For my part, I giue little or no credence to this story, ranging it in the same catalogue of truth with the aduentures of Donzel del Phoebo, Rosicleer, Beliauis, Amadis, and the rest of the rabble of Knights errant: neither is this the first time that Curtius hath disgraced the soundnesse of Alexanders iudgement, and the truth of his actions, with the like idle and impossible tales, though indeed in this particular he saith that it was multo magis ad temeritatis quam ad gloriae famam.
The principall riuers of this Country are, 1 Indus the boundary of the Persian and Indian Empires; which hauing his head in the mountaine Caucasus, now called Naugrariot; openet^ himselfe with two mouthes into the Indian Ocean; hauing first runne a course of 900 miles. 2 Ganges, of which more anon. 3 Hydaspes, on whose banks Alexander built Bucephalia in honour of his horse Bucephalus there dying. On the bankes of this riuer stood the Citty of Nysa also, the chiefe Citty of India in the time of Alexander. 4 Acesines. 5 Hirotis. and 6 Zaradus; all three emptying themselues into the Indus.
This Country, euen in ancient times hath beene noted for abundance of all things, either necessary for the maintenance of life, or pleasant to the relish of the palate: as also for abundance of Camels, Apes, Dragons, Serpents, Rhinocerots, and Elephants. These Elephants doe seeme to haue a smack of reason, and certainely partake more of humane ingenuitie, then any othe^ brute creature whatsoeuer. The Elephant which King Porus rode on, seeing his master strong and lustie, rushed into the thickest of Alexanders Armie; but when he perceaued Porus to grow faint, he withdrew himselfe, and kneeling down receaued all the arrowes shot against his master in his owne trunke.
Bacchus was the first that entred and conquered this Country, as indeed what regions first or last hath not he brought vnder

his winie Empire. Hence one thus descanteth,
First Bacchus did this Country ouer-runne,And set vp trophies in the conquered East:Oh would he had gone on as he begunne,And neuer turned to subdue the West.Might Indus banks haue borne his branching vines,Nor Europes streames bin stain'd with sweeter wines.
After Bacchus, Semiramis Q. of Assyria was the first that euer entred India in hostile manner; part whereof she made tributary, and slew Staurobates the king thereof. Next vnto her, Alexander the great invaded it, at which time there were many kings and free Cities* whom the Gymnosophists perswaded to defend their liberty. These Gymnosophists were to the Indians as the Druides to the Brittaines, and are called by the Indians, Brachmanni. These are had in great reuerence: and liue for the most part, a very austere and solitary life, in caues and desarts, seeding on herbes, and wearing poore thinne weedes: and for a certaine time abstaine from all kind of vice: But that time once past, they may (as it were) by priuiledge, defloure virgins, and commit what riots they list. Others of them liue together with the people, as being their ordinary Priests. Of these Alexander surprised 10, one of which was Calanus, to whom hee propounded strange questions, and receiued strange answers. Hee first dealt with Taxiles a prudent Prince, whose kingdome was bigger then Aegypt; who both ouercame and was ouercome by Alexander in curtesie. Next with King Porus in a more hostile manner; for he discomfited his Army, and tooke Porus prisoner, who was foure cubits and a shafes length high. Afterward he sailed downe the Ganges, vnto the maine Ocean; and was the first and last (till of late) that euer durst adventure such a navigation. After this expedition of Alexand^r, the Indians inioyed many yeares of peace. The successours of Alexander were for the most part on the loosing hand: the power of the Romans they rather knew by report, then triall: yet was it not amisse to enterta^ne a potent, though remote state, in termes of amitie. Therefore they sent Embassadours vnto Augustus, who presented him with a number of Tigers,Di^^. (which

beasts till then, the Roman people had neuer seene;) and which was most pleasing, a litle boy borne without armes, who with his feet could bend a bow, shoot, and play on a winde instrument as exactly, as others with their hands. Traian the Emperour had a great desire to see this Countrie; but after these times by litle and litle, histories haue bin in a manner silent concerning it. For notwithstanding that there was continuall trafficke from the Red sea hither: and betweene the Persian, Turkish, and Indian merchants for spices, and the other commodities of this Region: yet were not these merchants acquainted with the state of the country; because they entred not into it, but were met by the Indian merchants at Sarmachand, being (as it were) the common Emporie. Neither did the Aegyptians at all enter into India, but were met by the Indians at Ormus, or some other Iland: (euen as now the Chinoys make some of the Philippinae, the staple of their trade with the Spaniards; whom they licence not to come into the Continent among them:) but our moderne navigations haue with-drawne the Maske of obscurity, and shew vs her liuely portraiture in as liuely colours. It enioyeth two summers, an exact temperature of the aire, and double increase. Abound it doth in all manner of Mineralls, except Copper and Lead: stored with all sorts of Cattle, except horses: more particularly with Mines of gold, precious stones, spices of all sorts, and Ciuet: Wheat only and Vines are wanting, that so this Countrey might be beholding to others, as others to this.
The people are indifferently ciuill and ingenious, both men and women imitate a maiestie in their train and apparell,Purchas. which they sweeten with oyles and perfumes, adorning them with Iewels, Pearles, and other ornaments befitting.
They are now a natioo composed of 5 seuerall people, 1 the Indians or natiues, which are in part Gentiles, in part Christians. Those which are Gentiles retaine among them many of their old customes, as not knowing their wiues after they haue borne them two children; not accompanying them if after fiue yeares cohabitation they can raise no issue by them, but exchanging them for others; as neuer being rewarded for any military

exploit, vnlesse they bring with them an enemies head in their hand; killing their friends before sicknesse withereth them, etc. As for the Christians (to which Religion they were converted by S. Thomas) they still retaine the name and profession, which they haue now reformed (I should haue said deformed) according to the Church of Rome; which was effected in a Synode held for that purpose at Goa, Anno 1599, at what time they deliuered vp all their bookes to the censure of the Roman-Spanish Archbishop of Goa, to be by him corrected; and permitted their Liturgie also to be by him altered. Before this vnion, they vsed 1 to administer the Sacrament with bread seasoned with salt; 2ly insteed of wine (because India affordeth none) to vse the iuyce of rasins, softned in water one night, and so pressed forth: 3ly not to baptize their children til 40 daies old, vnlesse in danger of death: 4ly to permit no images in their Churches but of the Crosse onely: 5ly to debarre their Priests from second marriages: and 6ly to paint GOD with 3 heads on one body, denotating thereby the Trinity. The second sort of people which inhabite this Country, are Mahumetan Persians and Tartars, especially since the Moguls great victories here. 3 Iewes, who liue straglingly dispersed in all quarters. 4 Arabians, or Moores, who 200 and odde yeares past, seazed on some hauen-townes, driuing rhe Natiues vp higher into the inland Countrie. And 5 the Portugals, who possessing some few Sea-townes, commodious for trafficke, bragge of the conquest of the whole Country, which they are in no more possibility to conquer, then the French was to subdue Spaine, when he was possessed of the fort of Perpignan, pawned to him by Iohn King of Arragon and Navarre.
The riuer Ganges ariseth in the Scythian hils,Purchas. and carrying with it an incredible breadth and depth, disburdeneth it selfe into the South Ocean. The breadth of it is in the narrowest place 8, in the broadest 20 miles; the depth of it is neuer lesse then 100 foot. That this riuer is not that which is called in the Scriptures Pison, which compasseth the land of Havilah, where there is gold; we haue already proued in Mesopotamia: our reason being drawne from the ouer-large extent which must then

be necessarily giuen to Paradise; in which the riuer Pison is said to haue risen. And though indeed India is thought, and that truely, to be the land of Hauilah; yet why should Ganges that diuideth India, be thought to be Pison, rather then Indus which boundeth it; and which also lieth farre neerer to Tigris and Euphrates, then this Ganges? But to make it more plaine: certaine it is that there were two lands of Hauilah; the one so named from Hauilah, the sonne of Iocktan, (who with his brothers Ophir and Iobab, dwelt toward the East, Gen. 10. ver. 29.30,) which is this India, or a part of it: and the other so named from Hauilah, the sonne of Chush, (of whom mention is made in the 7 verse of the same Chapter,) which is the land of Susiana, a butting North on Mesopotamia. This Ganges yet, though it be none of the riuers of Paradise, is as famous as those which are. For downe this riuer did Alexander with such danger saile to see the Ocean: To this riuer the superstitious Indians goe deuoutly on pilgrimage; strongly beleeuing that they are secure of saluation, if at the time of their death they may drinke of this water. This riuer-flowing the Country, enricheth it, as Nilus doth Egypt: and finally it diuideth the whole Countrey into two parts, viz: India intra Gangem, and India extra Gangem.


INDIA INTRA GANGEM.
INDIA INTRA GANGEM, called also INDVSTAN, is diuided into 47 Prouinces or Kingdomes: whereof two haue yet their proprietary kings, namely Narfinga and Calecute: the rest are vnder the command of the great Mogor, Mogul, or Mongul. The chiefe of the 47 Prouinces are
1 NARSINGA, which hath a king acknowledging no superiour command. The people hereof vse to burne the wiues together with their husbands; and she is thought to haue bin most louing during his life, which is now most willing to accompany him in his death: and offer her selfe to his Manes at the funerall pile, whereunto thus alludeth the Poet,
Et certamen habent lethi, quae viua sequaturConiugium; pudor est non licuisse mori.Ardent victrices and praebent pectora flammae,Imponuntque suis ora perusta viris.Tis not to die a shame, they therefo^e striueWho may be fam'd to follow him aliue:The victor burnes, yeeldes to the flame her brest,And her burnt face doth on her husband rest.
This kingdome is confined with the mountaine Guate on the West; and the Gulfe of Bengala on the East, with the mount Guadaverno on the North, and the Promontory Comari on the South: and is in compasse 3000 miles. The chiefe Cities are Maleaper or S. Thomas, where the body of the Apostle was burnt; but Dorotheus saith, that he resteth at Calamina, where he was slaine with a Dart. 2 Narsinga. 3 Bisnagar, burnt by 4 Sarac^nicall confederates, Anno 1567. 4 Candragni. The revenues of this Prince are no lesse the^ 12 millions of Duckats: his forces for warre are wonderfull; he ledde an armie consisting of 31690 horse, 60000 foot, and 558 Elephants, against Idalcan a neighbour Prince, whom he discomfited. To this King also belongeth the city of Tarnassarie, which once had its peculiar kings, who were able to bring into the field 100 Elephants and 100000 horse and foot.
2 MALAVAR containe^h the Westerne part of that, which of old was called Aurea Chersonesus, viz: from the mountaine Guate on the East, to the Indian Ocean West; from the Promontory Comari on the South, to the riuer Gangericor on the North; the length whereof is 900 miles, the breadth nothing comparable. There are 7 Prouinces, viz: 1 Trauanear, 2 Colan, 3 Cochin, 4 Crangonar, 5 Tauo, 6 Cononor, 7 Calecute, all borrowing their names from their chiefe townes. These were all vnder one king, till about 80 yeares agoe, and somwhat more: at what time Sema Pereimal the last king, being a Mahumetan; and intending to finish his dayes in Mecha; diuided his kingdome into 6 parts, giuing them to sixe of his kinsmen. Fiue of these at this day are vnder the great Mogul, the other obeyeth the K. of Calecute, who is able to bring into the field 100000 fighting men; of whose valour the Portugals haue had often experiment, but alwayes to the losse of the Indians. The chiefe of these townes are Cononor, pleasantly seated for trafficke, as

hauing a harbour no lesse safe, then capacious: it is distant from Calecute 10 leagues. 2 Coccinum, or Cochin, distant from Calecute 30 leagues. The gouernour of this Town is the Pope or summus Pontifex of the Brachmans: and 3 Calecute, which for 3 miles together lyeth along the Sea shore It is a custome here for the King to giue to some of the Brachmanni, the hanselling of his nuptial bed. For which cause not the kings, but the kings sisters sonnes, succeed in the kingdome; as being more certainly knowne to be of the true royall blood: and these sisters of his, choose what Gentleman they please, on whom to bestow their virginities; and if they proue not in a certain time to be with child, they betake themselues to these Brachman stallions. Calecute is a famous mart town, and the staple of al the India^ traffick.
3 BALASSIA, or the kingdome of Bocan, is famous for its inexhaustible Mines of Gold and Siluer; the chiefe Cities are 1 Balassia, 2 Bocan, whence the duplicity of the kingdomes name: the first is seated on the riuer Gaibon; the last was once the seat of her own Kings. 3 Senergian.
4 CAMBAIA called also Guzara, hath on the East Mandao, on the West Gedr^sia;Maginus. on the North Dulcinda; on the South the Ocean. It is a Country very fruitfull, and exceedingly thick set with men and villages, of which last here is thought to bee no lesse then 600000. It was once the seat of the Rusbeti, who are the ancient nobility of this Countrie: whom the Saracens vnder the leading of one Machumat, subdued about 160 years since. To this Machumat succeeded his sonne Mamudius, to him Badurius; who making an vniust warre against the King of Mandao, compelled him to call Miramudius a Mogul Tartarian of Zagatai to his aide: who crushed by force of Badurius, and subdued the great Kingdome of Cambaia to himselfe; and yet the armie of the Cambaian consisted of 150000 horse, and 500000 foot, he had 1000 peeces of Ordinance, 500 Wagons laden with Gun-powder and Bullets, 200 Elephants, and 500 chests full of Gold and Siluer. In this kingdome are 60000 Villages, Townes, and Cities. The chiefe whereof are 1 Ardauat once the kings seat. 2 Campanael, 3 Citor, a City of 12 miles compasse,Adrianus. which the King of Cambaia tooke from the

Queene of Crementina, Anno 1536. 4 Tanaa. 5 Cambaia a mighty City, and as populous, containing 800000 persons.
5 MANDAO is so called of Mando the chiefe City, which being 30 miles in compasse, held out a siege of 12 yeares against Miramudius, or Merhumed: after which time it was surrendred. 2 Moltan, where the women ride booted and spurted, a fashion lately imitated by some mimicke dames of England. 3 Scernus on the riuer so called: and 4 Polymbothea. This Mandao was a kingdome of power sufficient, till Badureus of Cambaia oppressed it; after whose defeat, Marhumid the Mogul feazed also on this kingdome: shewing that the easiest way for a Prince to ruine his own estate, and endanger his neighbours, is to make a gap open for a forrain power, to compose a homebred dissention.
6 BENGALA is famous for its multitude of Rhinocerots; a kingdome once free, till Echebar the Mogul vnited it to his Empire. Tbe chief Cities are Catigan and Satagan on the banks of Ganges (called also Chaberis and Guenga.) 3 Bengala, nigh vnto Sinus Gangeticus, now called the Gulfe of Bengala. Nigh vnto this towne is the place called Gongasagie, that is the entrie into the sea; in which are many fishes called Sea-dogges; into which place they which are wearie of this world, and desire to haue a quick passage into Paradise, cast themselues to be devoured of these fishes: perswading themselues that the next and readiest way thither, is through their iawes. 4 Ouros, the seat of the Bengalan kings: and 5 Banneras, seated on the riuer Ganges.
7 ORISTAN or Orissa, is peopled for the most part with Christians of S. Thomas; so called because he converted them. Many of the people haue their legges made after the manner of an Elephants legge, which punishment the rest thinke to be inflicted vpon them, because their Progenitours massacred the blessed Apostle. The chiefe Cities are 1 Orissa, once the Kings seat. 2 Ramana, 3 Vlna, where (if I remember aright) the women in a foolish pride, blacke their teeth, because dogges teeth (forsooth) are white.
8 CANORA, called also the kingdome of Decan, was the

habitation of Venozarares; whom Sanosaradine king of Delli either totally cast out, or subiected to his command: and as his deputie substituted one Abdessan, to whom in that regencie succeeded his sonne Mamudza In his time Sanosaradine dying, left his sonne to inherit his estate; as able to rule so many different nations, as Phaeton to rule the Chariot of the Sun. This defect Mamudza perceiuing, made himselfe absolute King of Canora; and diuiding the whole into 18 parts, he appointed as many Lieftenants Generall to gouerne them. These 18 Captaines combining together, stripped him of all his dominions; and then falling at oddes about the extent of their kingdomes, were quickely brought vnder subiection by Adabar the Mogul.
The chiefe cities are 1 Vltabat. 2 Danagar, 3 Lispor, famous for her quarries of Adamants. 4 Melind. 5 Barticala: and 6 Onor.
9 DELLIE, was the ancient seat of Belemi, whom the Saracens vanquished: from which Victors descended Sanosaradine, who Anno 1300, subdued Canora: and from whose successours the Moguls taking it, haue euer since honoured Dellie, the chiefe City hereof,Adrianus. with their residence. The other being 2 Chesmnr, famous for the study of Magicke. 3 Tremel. 4 Fatabar.
This mighty Empire now contracted almost into one body, and formerly diuided between 47 seuerall Princes, hath to be amazement both of Indians, and all people whatsoeuer, beene conquered in lesse then 90 yeares, by the great Moguls: so called (I thinke) for that they descended from the Mogul Tartars; for before the Tartars freed themselues from Vncham King of Tenduc,Purchas. they were diuided into Mercat, Metrit, Summongul, Iccomongul, and Mongul Tartars; from which last the name of Mongul hath most probability to be diriued.

The great Moguls, or Mogors.
1 Emanpaxda, who first shewed the Tartars the pleasure of India.
2 Marhumed, who Anno 1536, subdued Cambaia, Mandao,

Balassia, and other pettie kingdomes.
3 Adabar, the Conquerour of Malavar, Dellie, and Canora.
4 Mahomet Selabdin Echebar, who vnited Bengala and most of the rest of the inferiour kingdomes.
5 Marad now liuing.

The revenues of this Empire cannot but be wonderfull,Boterus. co^sidering that the King of Narsinga's amount to such a value: yet he cannot cofter vp much treasure, considering the men of warre which hee keepeth in continuall pay. Neither is his strength in field inferior either to the greatnesse of his Empire, or the largenesse of his intrado; he being able to raise 300000 Horse.
The subiects reuerence this Prince exceedingly, making it holyday when he cutteth his haire, or shaueth his beard; and spreading the way by which hee is at any time to passe, with costly ornaments, and delicate perfumes. He is alwaies carried on mens shoulders in a pompous chaire, adorned with purple, gold, and precious stones of great value.
There is no Prince either in Europe, Asia, or Africa, to whom the great Monguls shew such great respect and loue, as they haue done, and now doe, to our late Queene, and present King: They also esteeme our soldiers very much, especially since two or three of the Queenes ships, braued 18 of the Portugals, in the sight of many of his subiects: an adventure which could not but reioyce him; considering the enmity betweene him and them.


INDIA EXTRA GANGEM.
INDIA EXTRA GANGEM hath on the East China, on the West the rest of India. This part of India, Maginus maketh to be the kingdome of China; but vpon what ground, or by what reason perswaded, I know not: Sure I am that Ptolomie placeth the Sinae or Chinoys, East of India, and therefore cannot be part of it. As for his diuision of India intra Gangem, into the lower, containing the Countries already described; and the higher, comprehending the Countries here vnder-named; I will not stand to examine it: well knowing this diuision to haue bin

for no other cause invented, but that China might with more facilitie be beleeued, to be this India extra Gangem.
This India hath formerly bin diuided betwixt 12 Potentates, of no small riches and puissance: but now by the puissance and prosperous fortunes of the King of Barma, it is wholly subiect to their command: the most remarkeable of these 12 Kingdomes, are these seauen.

Purchas.1 MACIN, famous for the wood called Aloes, by the Arabians called Calambuco, by Latine Writers Lignum vitae. This Wood for its sweet sauour, is valued at its waight in pure siluer: as being not onely seruiceable for the pompous funerals of great Princes; but also for Bathes: and with the Indians is held an vnparallell'd medicine, for many grieuous and dangerous maladies. The chiefe City is Macin.
2 ARRACHAN is environed round with mountaines, and impenetrable Woods; the Cities of most note are Arrachan, distant from the Sea 45 miles; and 2 Ava, famous for her abundance of Gemmes.
3 CAMBOIA taketh its name from the chiefe city Camboia, situate on a riuer, which arising in China, so augmenteth his waters, that his own Channell being insufficient to receiue them, he renteth the Earth into 100 Ilands; and at last he filleth a Lake with his streames of 60 miles long. This Towne is of great trafficke and commerce for its plenty of Gold, Siluer, and Aloes.
4 CAVCHINCHINA aboundeth with the like commodities. The people hereof in some few places are said to be Anthropophagi. The chiefe Cities are Cauchinchina, situate on the Sea, and much frequented by a continuall concourse of Marchants; for Porceline, or China dishes here made. 2 Cacum.
5 BARMA called by some Brama, was before the comming of the Portugals into India, a kingdome of no estimation; being subiect to the command of the Kings of Pegu, whose Lieftenants only they were, till about 60 yeares since: when one of the Barmian Princes, Gouernour of Tangu, seazed on the kingdomes of Meliotali, Calan, Micand^, and Aua. He assaulted Pegu, and wonne it: hee beleagured Odia with 1000000

Souldiers, and forced it: He entred the kingdome of Siam, and totally subdued it, making all the rest of his neighbours his homagers.
6 SIAM, or regnum Sornaum, was not long since the Queene and Lady of this part of India: but now is subiect to the King of Barma,Purchas. who wonne it Anno 1565. The principall Cities are Malacca, in compasse 20 miles; seated in an vnwholsome aire, yet a towne of great resort for the trafficke of spices. It is now subiect to the Portugals, who haue here an Archbishop and a Colledge of Iesuites. 2 Siam, the people whereof are very opiniatiue, that after 2000 yeares, the World shall bee consumed with fire; and that vnder the ashes shall remaine two egges, whence shall come forth one man, and one woman, who shall repeople the World anew. It is situate on the banke of the riuer Menan, which euery yeare ouer-floweth the Country for the compasse of 120 miles: by which floud, the King of Pegu besieging this Towne, Anno 1567, with an Army of 900000 men, was forced to raise his siege; leauing behind him in the waters, all his souldiers, except 70000 onely. This is a most pleasing city, whose statelinesse giueth name to the whole kingdomes. Here are besides the Natiues, about 30000 housholders of Arabians. 2 Odia on the riuer Cuipumo, on which 200000 boats great and litle, are continually floating: This Towne containeth 400000 families, and is the residence of the Kings of Barma. 3 Tonazarin, where they vse to hang their dead bodies, supposing it to be more honourable to be eaten of birds, then wormes.
7 PEGV so called of the chiefe city Pegu,Maginus. is blessed with a rich soyle. and a harborous sea-shore, extending 300 miles in length, in which the principall hauen is Martabane. As for the city of Pegu, it is the fairest and most elegant City of all India; strengthned with large and defensiue walls, and adorned with neat and proportionable houses. It standeth on a riuer so named, and is distant from the sea 25 miles. The other townes of note are Tauay, and Losmin; a Towne of great commerce. This Country about the yeare 1560, acknowledged no king but her owne; whom about that time one of the Gouernours of Tangu

deposed; possessed himselfe of the chiefe City Pegu; and Anno 1567, hauing discomfited the king of Siam, vnited these diuers members vnder one head: and dying, lest his new-rais'd Empire to his sonne, a Prince of a vicious and tyrannicall nature; and not more cruell to his subiects, then they disobedient to him. Whereupon preparations are made on both sides, the people to defend their liberty, the king to preserue his royalty. During these ciuill discords, the titulary King of Siam, whose late ouerthrow was not yet fully digested; came violently into the Country of Pegu: burning Corne, Grasse, and Fruits; kil^ing man, woman, and childe; and hauing satisfied his fury, returned to his home. This spoyle of the fruits of the earth, was but a prologue to an vnsupportable famine; which consumed all the inhabitants of this flourishing Kingdome: except such whom the Granaries of the City Pegu preserued, Anno 1598. For here the fathers deuoured their children: the stronger preied vpon the weaker; not onely deuouring their more fleshie parts, but their entrails also: nay they broke vp the skulls of such as they had slaine, and sucked out their braines. This calamity incited another tributary Prince of Tangu, to make his best advantage out of his neighbours affliction; he therefore assaulted and entred Pegu, where he found as much treasure as 600 Elephants, and as many horses, could conveniently car^y away. This hauock being made, he villainously murdred the King, Queene, and their children, and departed; leauing the gleaning of his spoyle to the King of Arrachan; who, Anno 1600, was expelled by the King of Siam, who inioyed it not long: for the King of Barma hauing with an Army of 100000 fighting men, and 40000 Elephants, subdued the kingdomes of Macin and Arrachan: followed the current of his victories; conquered Siam, droue the King thereof from Pegu, where he hath built a most magnificent palace; and is now the sole Monarch of the 12 kingdomes of this India.

A more particular relation of this king, and his new-setled estate, we cannot yet vnderstand: what his revenues are, what his gouernment, what his forces. M^rchants whose inquisitiuenesse into the state-matters of other Princes is dangerous;

cannot giue vs any satisfaction: Schollers and experienced statists are not permitted to obserue: and such of the natiues as could giue most light to these obscurities, are not suffered to leaue the smoake of their own chimnies.
Thus much of India.


OF CHINA.
CHINA hath on the East Mare del Zur; on the West I^dia; on the North a wall extending 1000 miles in length betweene the Chinoys and the Tartarians,Purchas. built by Tzaintzon the 117^h King; on the South the Ocean.
The people are in the composition of their body, short-nosed, and black-eyed; they weare long garments, and haue very thinne beards, consisting of not aboue 20 haires. And as it is said that the Negroes doe paint the diuell white, as being a colour contrary to their owne: so these Chinoys when they make the portraiture of a deformed man, they paint him in a short habite, a thicke beard, broad eyes, and a long nose. From the description of the body, to proceede to that of the minde: it is said that the Chinoys are ingenuous and politicke, much delighting in proficiencie in manuall arts: for the sonne is bound to follow the fathe^s occupation; which law preuenting the roauing about of idle people, and exciting in euery brest an emulation of euery art;Description of China. maketh the inhabitants excellent artificers. In giuing almes they are bountifull to the maimed and the lame, but reiect the blinde, as being sufficiently able to get sustenance for themselues, by corporall labour, as grinding of Corne, etc. They haue long inioyed the benefit of Printing, before it w^s knowne in Europe. They print not as we vse, from the lef^ hand to the right; nor as the Iewes, from the right to the left: but from the top of the leafe, downward to the bottome. Gunnes also haue bin vsed among the^ time out of minde: whence they are so well conceited of themselues, that they vse to say; they themselues haue two eyes, the Europaeans one, and the rest of the people, not one.
That gunnes were in vse among them euen when Bacchus made his expedition into India (which was some three or foure yeares before or after the departure of Israel out of Egypt) Sir Walter Raleigh seemeth to affirme: because Philostratus in the life of Apollonius Tyanaeus, telleth vs, how Bacchus was beaten from a city of the Oxydracae by thunder and lightning; which he interpreteth to be the Cannon. Certainly himselfe in another place of his most excellent booke, acknowledgeth this Philostratus to haue written fabulously; and therefore no fit foundation for a conceit so contrary to probability, and the opinion of all times. Besides, whereas Dion telleth vs, that by the benefit of Thunder and Lightning from Heauen, Severus discomfited Pesceninus Niger; and by the same meanes was himselfe repulsed from the walls of Petra, in Arabia: we may (if this interpretation hold good) as easily maintaine, that Seuerus had great Ordinance in his campe, and the Arabians in their town. As for Printing, whether Iohn Gertrudenberg learned it of the Chinoys; or whether good Inventions like good wits do sometimes jumpe, I dare not determine: sure I am that hee first taught it in Europe; and as some say, in the yeare 1440. At Harlem it is said to be first practised, and at Mentz perfected. Now whereas it is by some doubted, whether the Art of Printing be auaileable to the proficiencie and aduancement of Learning, or no; I must not herein be both iudge and party: but must leaue the decision hereof to such who are not all interessed in the cause. Only this I dare boldly say, that this most exquisite Invention is too much abused, and prostituted to the lust of euery foolish and idle paper-blurrer; the Treasury of Learning being neuer so ouer-charged with the froath and scumme of foolish and vnnecessary discourses. And herein (though all nations haue their share) the Germans are most blame-worthy; whose Treatises (though neither worth the Printers hand, nor the Readers eye) flye so thicke amongst vs, euery yeare twice: that we may iustly thinke them as ouer-wise in their owne, so somewhat short of a true proportion of discretion, in our conceits. And so I leaue the Chinoys and their inventions.
The Aire is very temperate, the soyle pleasant and fertile, abounding

with Barley, Rice, Wooll, Cotton, Oliues, Vines, Flaxe, Silke, all kinde of Mettals, Fruits, Cattle, Sugar, Hony, Rueba^be, Porceline dishes, Camphire, Ginger, all kindes of Spices, Wood, Muske, and Salt; the custome of which Salt, in only one Town, viz: Canto, yearely amounteth to the value of 180000 Crownes.
The Country is for the most part very plain, insomuch that they haue Coaches and Carts driuen ordinarily with sailes; and the seas so calme, that the small barkes in which they saile, haue only an high bough standing in the midst of them, by the helpe whereof they saile swiftly along the coasts. These plaines are tilled and sowed with all manner of fruit, of more excellency and perfection then those of the Westerne parts;Boterus. as also are their pearles, and the Bezoar, better then those of America. It yeeldeth an hearbe out of the which they presse a delicate iuyce, which serueth them insteed of wine; and also preserueth their health, and freeth them from those euils, which the immoderat vse of wine doth breed vnto vs. They haue two, and in some places three haruests in a yeare: few mountaines, but plaines of an hundred leagues compasse. They eate thrice in a day, but sparingly: their drinke they drinke hot, and eate their meate with two sticks of Ivory, Ebony, or the like; not touching their meat with their hands, and therefore no great filers of linnen: The vse of siluer forkes in eating with vs, with our sprucer gallants, so much vsed of late, was no doubt an imitation of this.
The riuers and waters of all sorts runne gallantly through these plaines, with an vnspeakable profit for navigation and tillage: neither doe the waters in abundance of fish, yeeld at all to the fertility of the soyle in fruits. The chiefe riuer is Polisango.
China is of wonderfull bignes, well nigh equalizing all Europe; for it is said to be 3000 leagues in compasse,Description of China. and 1800 leagues in length. As for the name of China it is vsed only by vs of Europe, the inhabitants calling themselues Tamans, and Tabencos; the Arabians, Tzinin; Paulus Venetus* Mangi; and their neighbours, Sangley: China therefore is to be deriued from the Sinae, a people, whom Ptolomie the old Geographer, knowing

the name of them, rather then the power* placeth in those parts: which seemeth the more probable, because the Latine Writers doe yet call it Sinarum regio. And concerning the posi^ion of it in respect of the Heauens, it reacheth f^om the Tropick of Cancer, to the 53 degree of latitude; and extendeth from the 130th to the 160^h degree of longitude. It is diuided into 15 Prouinces, to the least of which, our Europaean Countries cannot admit comparison: which together with their Townes and Cities thus follow.


The Prouinces, Townes, and Cities of China.

Pr.
T.
C.



Canton.

190
37



Fegvien.

99
33



Olam.

130
90



Sisnam.

150
44



Tolench^a.

135
51



Cansaie.

122
24



Minchien.

29
25



Ochian.

74
19



Honan.

102
20



Pagnia.

150
47



Xaiton.

78
27



Quinchen.

113
45



Chegvean.

95
39



Susuam

105
41



Quinsay

114
38



Whose Metropolis is Suntien, vulgarly called Quinsay, containeth in circuit 100 miles, hauing in the midst of it a lake of 30 miles compasse, in which are 2 goodly Ilands, and in them 2 magnificent Palaces, adorned with all necessaries either for maiestie, or convenience: in which are celebrated the publicke feasts and marriages of the better sort. This lake is nourished with diuers riuers, the chiefe being Polysango, and Cacamacan, on which riuer 12000 bridges lift vp their stately heads, vnder whose immense Arches, great ships with sailes spread abroad, and top and top-gallant, may and doe vsually passe. This City partly by the fury of warres, partly by the violence of Earthquakes, hath now lost no small part of her ancient beauty and renowne. The other cities of China, are 1 Quinchar, 2 Vnguen, famous for the abundance of s^gar there made. 3 Nanquin, seated 9 leagues from the sea, on a faire and navigable riuer, wherein ride for the most part, no fewer then 10000 of the kings shippes, besides such as belong to priuate men. This Town is in compasse 30 miles, being girt

with 3 faire bricke walls, hauing large and stately gates: the streets are in length two leagues, wide, and paued: the number of the houses is about 200000; so that it may equall 4 of the f^i^est Citties of Europe. 4 Paquin or Pagnia where the King continually resideth; and that either because the ayre hereof is more healthfull and pleasant, then any of the other: or because it lieth neere vnto the Tartars, with whom the Chinoys are in perpetuall warre* so that from hence the dangers which may by their inuasions happen vnto the Country, may with more conuenience be either preuented, or remedied. Of the Pallace more anon, only this of Paquin now; which is, that whereas all the other P^ouinces of this great Empire are gouern'd by substitutes, this and that of Tolenchia, only are gouerned immediatly by the King in person. 5 Ceivan. 6 Cengivan. 7 Lochean, containing 70000 families. 8 Colius, famous for Porceline. 9 ^aiton, whose harbour is neuer without 500 ships. and 10 Suchean seated in the Marishes like Venice: a rich and goodly City, and very famous for trafficke. All these Citties notwithsta^ding the greatnesse and magnificence of their foundations, are defectiue in that point of elegancie which our stately Churches and more sumptuous buildings, for the dispatch of publike businesses abound within these parts: their houses also are very low, and destitute of porches, galleries, and windowes, the principall ornaments in Architecture. These Citties differ not one from the other in the fashio^ of their building, but only in quantity; much like the Citties of Vtopia mentioned by Sr Thomas Moore, Idem situs omnibus, eadem vbique, quatenus per locum licet, rerum facies: so that I may say with the Poet, vnam si noueris, omnes nosti;Grimston. knowe one, knowe all: and this is their manner of building. There are two great broad streets crossing one another in the very middest; so straight that a man standing in the middle may discerne either end: and at the end foure gates stately built and strengthned with iron.
These 15 Prouinces containe 70 kingdomes, 1593 walled townes, 4200 vnwalled Townes, 1154 Castles, 591 Citties; besides such an in^inite number of Villages, that the whole Country seemeth but one Citty. Herein inhabite 70 millions

of people, out of which the King (whom they call the Lampe of the world, and sonne to the shining sunne) in his warlike expeditions chuseth neuer lesse then 300000 foot, and 200000 horse; without which compleat number hee daigneth not to march. From such a number of subiects, and superfluity of Marchandise; he raiseth a reuenew of 120 millions of crownes yearely.
Boterus.We haue said that the number of inhabitants is no lesse then 70 millions, which if it seeme incredible, may bee made probable enough: if wee consider the spaciousnesse of the Country; 2 the secret goodnesse of starres, and temperature of the ayre. 3 the abundance of all things necessary to life. 4 That it is not lawfull for the King to make any warre but meerely defensiue, and so they enioy perpetuall peace. 5 That it is not lawfull for any Chinois to goe out of the Country. And 6, that here the sea is as well peopled as whole Prouinces elsewhere: for the ships doe resemble a Citty, in them they buy, sell, are borne, and dye. And on the riuer which watreth the walls of Nanquin vp to Paquin,Purchas. which is no lesse then 300 leagues; the shippes are so thicke ranged, that it seemeth to be a continuall street.
The people hereof are Gentiles, and conceaue thus of the creation; that there was one Taine, who created Panzon, and Panzona, whose posterity remained 90000 yeares: but they for their wickednesse being destroyed, Taine Created Lutitzam, who had two hornes; from the right came men, from the le^t women. When any of them dieth they cloath him in his best apparell all perfumed, set him in his best chaire; and there all his nerest kindred kneeling before him, take their leaue with teares. When he is coffined they place him in a roome richly furnished and set by him a table full of viands and good cheere, with candles continually burning on it. Not much vnlike to which ceremonies, we finde, how whilst the funerall was preparing for Francis the French Kiug; his Statua apparelled in royal roabes, with the Crowne, Scepter, etc, was laid on his bedde: whether dinner and supper was duely serued in, with the like state and solemnity, as when he was liuing. But to returne againe to my dead Chinois; when he hath layen, as is aboue said, 15 daies; he is carried forth to his funerall, the place whereof is in the fields:

for to be buried within the walls, were a thing of all others the most wretched: hither when they are in the manner of a procession, come; they burne his body, and with it men, cattle, and other prouision, for his attendance and sustenance in the other world.
The first King of China was named Vitei,Hist. of China. who raigned 100 yeares: from whom to the present king, Boneg, are numbred 262 Kings; which haue swaied the regall Scepter of these parts in a continuall succession, the space of 4000 yeares and more, if we will credit the relations wee haue from thence. And which addeth to the miracle, they haue alwaies liued vnconquered, vnlesse it were in the daies of Farfar, the 242 king. He was told by prophecy, that he should bee depriued of his kingdome, by one which had 100 eyes: which ^ell out accordingly, when Chisanbaan (which name signifieth 100 eyes) Lieftenant to Vzan a Tartarian Prince, subdued China: which when it had beene for the space of 93 yeares vnder 9 Tartar Gouernours; was freed by the valour of one Gombu, chosen for this act by the people the 51 king of China.
The greatest Courtiers belonging to this Prince are Eunuchs, whom their parents in their infancy geld to make them capeable of this preferment; and of whom there are no fewer then 160000, continually attending. His Pallace where hee is most resident is in Paquin, co^passed with a triple wall (the outwardmost of which would well environ a large town) within which space, besides the many lodgings for the Eunuches; are Groues, Hills, Fountaines, Riuers, and the like places of pleasure: yet is it not equall in workmanship to the Pallaces of the Princes of Europe.
The Empire of China did once extends its power ouer all the Orientall Ilands,Boterus. and, as some affirme, ouer no small part of America, and almost all Scythia. But as we finde in ancient historians, that the Romans hauing by the fury of two violent tempests, lost no fewer then 206 of their ships and gallies; resolued to abandon (and for a long time did forbeare) the Seas, which had vsed them so vnkindly: So the Chinois hauing receaued a great ouerthrowe, and losse of 800 ships, nigh vnto Zeilan; they

freed all the Ilands from obedience vnto them, and contented themselues with the bounds which nature had bestowed on them. And of their moderation herein, we haue a late example. For when the people of Corea, a small Prouince abutting on the confines of China, were inuaded by the Iaponites; they submitted themselues vnto the King of China: who hauing repulsed the enimy, and thereby cleared his own Country from danger; presently redeliuers ouer vnto the Coreans, their Towne and libertie.
Thus much of China.


THE ORIENTALL ILANDS.
THE Ilands of Asia are either in the Mediterranean Sea, as Rhodes, and Cyprus; or in the Orientall Ocean, as 1 Iapan. 2 Zeilan. 3 Moluccae. 4 Iaua maior. 5 Summatra. 6 Borneo. 7 the Philippinae, etc.
Purchas.1 IAPAN, situated ouer against Cantan in China on the East, and the straights of Anian South: is in length 600 miles, in breadth in some places 90, in others 30 only. The soyle and the people participate much of the nature of China, but that the Iaponites are more superstitious, as washing their children as soone as borne, in riuers; and putting off their shooes before they enter into the dining chamber. Perhaps these may bee the Ilanders, who in meere opposition to the Chinois, put off their shooes in salutation, because they of China put off their hats: To whom our factious Puritans are fitly compared; who oppose themselues against the Papists in things decent and allowable, though this opposition be accompanied wi^h many grosse absurdities.
The chiefe Citties of this Iland are 1 Ossacaia. 2 Bunguin. 3 Fianocanca.Adrianus. 4 Meacum. which once contained in circuit 21 miles, though now not halfe so big. 5 C^ia. 6 Bandum, which is said to be an Vniuersity bigger then Paris. Here are in this Iland 66 kings, some of which are so rich that their houses are couered with gold. The chiefest of these kingdomes is called the kingdome of Tenze, which of it selfe comprehendeth fiue

of these petit Realmes, all lying about Meacum; and doth now Lord it ouer 50 of these 66 kingdomes: so that the K. of Tenze writeth himselfe the Soueraigne Prince of Iapon. This augmentation of the Tenzean kingdome, came wholy by the valour of Faxiba, the father of Taicosama now liuing; who the better to assure himselfe of his new conquests, transported the vanquished Kings from one Country to another: to the end that being remoued out of their commands, and placed among strange subiects, they should remaine weake, and without meanes to reuolt against him: a politicke and mercifull course. What the reuenewes of this King are, we cannot certainly tell, onely wee may guesse them to be very great, in that he hath two millions of gold, for the yearely rent of that Rice, which is gathered out of the possessions which he hath reserued for himselfe.
This Iland was discouered by Antonio Mota, a Portugall, and his fellowes, An. 1542. It is much frequented by the Iesuites, of whom 200 are said to liue here; Xavier one of Ignatius first companions leading the way.
2 ZEILAN or Sarrandill lieth in the Gulfe of Bengala.Purchas. It is in length 250, and in breadth 140 miles. So fruitfull that grasse groweth, and trees beare fruit all the yeare long without intermission. The chiefe Citties are Zeilan, and 2 Columbus. There are herein 6 Kings, all tributary to the great Mongull. This Iland in fashion resembleth an egge, and is by a narrow channell diuided from the cape Comari. The people are actiue, expert in iuggling, and excellent managers of a hobby-horse, by which seats of actiuitie they get mony all ouer India.
3 The MOLVCCOES are fiue in number, abounding with all sorts of spices. The principall of the fiue are Tidore, Gilolo, and Terenate; all of them 18 miles in compasse: vnder the ki^g of Terenate 70 Ilands submit their delicious commodities. Ad vnto these Moluccoe^ the Ilands of Banda or Bantan, both for the vicinity in situation, and qualities: as abounding more in N^^megs then any of the Ilands of India, and for that cau^e m^ch frequented. The chiefe Towne is Nera. In all these Ilands as well of Banda, as the Moluccoes, the faith of Christ b^gu^neth now to take deepe root; though according to the (...)

of the Roman Church. It is reported that in this Iland there is a fruit, of which if a woman that is with child eat, her child will presently moue:Galuano. that there is a riuer plentifully stored with fish whose water is yet so hot, that it doth immediatly scald off the skin of any beast that is cast into it: that some of the men haue tayles, and most of their swine haue hornes: that they haue oysters which they call Bras^, the shells whereof are of so large compasse, that they Christen children in them: that in the Sea there are stones which growe and increase like fish, of which the best lime is made: that there is a bird called Monicodiata, which hauing no feet, is in continuall motion; and that there is a hole in the backe of the Cocke, in which the hen doth laye her eggs, and hatch her young ones. I binde no man to beleeue these relations: for my part I say with Horace,
Quodcunque ostendis mihi sic, incredulus odi.What euer thus thou tell'st me, IWill alwaies hate it as a ly.
Purchas.4 IAVA is either the greater or the lesser. The Greater is in compasse 3000 miles, and for its wonderfull fertilitie, is called the Epitome of the world. The inhabitants vse to eat the bodies of their dead friends, accounting no buriall so honourable, nor obsequie so applausiue. This is also a custome among many of the rest of the Indians,Herodotus. and so hath beene euer since the beginning of the Persian Monarchie. Herodotus reporteth how Darius Histaspis vnderstanding this custome; and withall knowing how the Graecians vsed to burne their dead bodies: sent to the Greekes, that it was his pleasure they should eat the bodies of their dead: But they vsed all meanes of perswasion and entreatie, not to be inforced to so brutish and barbarous an obseruation. Then commanded he the Indians to conforme themselues to the fashion of the Graecians; but they also more abhorred to burne their dead, then the Greekes did to eat them. So impossible is it for a custome either to be suddainly lest off, or to seem vndecent and inconvenient. The ch^efe Citties are, 1 Paliban. 2 Megapeger. 3 Agacin. and 4 Ballambua. The lesser Iava is 2000 miles in compasse, and diuided betweene 8 Kings: The people are good Sea-men and great Pirats. The chiefe Towns

are 1 Basnia, and 2 Sam^ra Lambri. The Aequator goeth in the midst betweene these two Ilands.
5 BORNEO is equally diuided by the Aequinoctiall into 2 parts; putting, as it were, bound between the dominions of the king of Borneo, on the North side; and of Laus, on the South side. The Idolatrous people reuerence the Sunne and Moone, who^ they deeme to be man and wife; and thinke that the starres are their children. They salute the Sunne at his rising with great reverence, repeating certaine verses. Their publike affaires are handled in the night; at which time the Counsellours of state meet and ascend some tree, viewing the heauens till the Moone rise, and then goe into the Senate house.
6 SVMMATRA was by Aristotle in his booke de Mundo, esteemed to be the biggest Iland of the world: but modern experience hath found it otherwise; it being onely 700 miles long, and 200 broad. The Aequator cutteth through it, so that the Sunnes vicinity doth make it abundant in Pepper, Ginger, Aloes, Cassia, Silke, Gold, and Siluer. Here are 29 kings, the chiefe being of Pedir and Aceni; whose subiects are the most louing men to their enimies that are, for otherwise they would neuer eat them. They vse the skulls of their eaten enimies insteed of mony, exchanging them for their necessaries; and hee is accounted the richest man that hath most of these in his house. Here is a hill called Balalvanus which continually burneth: and here are reported to be two strange fountaines, whereof the one runneth pure Balsamum, and the other the best Oyle. The chief Citties are Daren. 2 Pazzen. and 3 Androgeda.
7 The PHILIPPINAE are so called of Philip the second of Spaine, in whose time they were discouered by Legaspi a Spaniard, Ao 1564. They are in number 11000, of which 30 are vnder the King of Spaine; and haue receaued Christianitie, the rest remaining in Idolatry. The Chinoys were heretofore Lords of these Ilands, till they did voluntarily abandon them, confining their Empire within the continent. Vpon this relinquishment the people fell into ciuill warres, euery man becomming a tyrant, and the stronger preying on the weaker: which diuisions and factions gaue, no doubt, great helpes to the Spaniards in their conquest of them.
There is another great frie of Ilands ouer against China, which the Marriners affirme to be no lesse then 7448; and another skull of them about India, no fewer in number then 127000, all which laid together would make a continent as large as three foure parts of Europe, and are still groaning vnder the burden of heathenisme. These Ilands stand so nigh the one vnto the other, that they seeme not only to such as are a far to bee all but one firme land: but whosoeuer also passeth between them, may with his hands touch the boughes of the trees on the one side, and on the other. Of these and the other Indian Ilands, trauellers relate many incredible fables; as that here be hogges that haue two teeth growing out of their snowts, and as many behind their eares, of a spanne and a halfe long: a tree whose westerne part is ranke poison, and the Easterne part an excellent preseruatiue against it. They tell vs also of a fruit, that whosoeuer eateth shall for the space of 12 houres be out of his wits; and of a stone, on which whosoeuer sitteth, shall suddenly haue a rupture in his body. Wee are told also that hereabouts are taken Tortoises of that bignesse, that ten men might sit and diue within one of the shells; and that here is a tree which all the day time hath not a flowre on it, but within halfe an houre after sunne-set, is full of them. All huge and monstrous lies.
It shall not be amisse before we leaue these Easterne Countries, to take a superficiall survey of such Castles, Townes, and Ilands, as are at this day in the possession of the Spaniards; who by this meanes are a terrour to the neighbouring Princes.
In the Persian Gulfe they possesse the Ile of Ormus, which though it be barren, yet it standeth conueniently for the trafficque of Persia, Arabia, and India. The customes only of this little Iland, afford the King, which is a Mahumetan, 140000 Seraffs yearely. This kingdome is tributary to the Portugalls, who first fortified themselues here, Ao 1506. Of this Iland the Arabians vse to say,
Si terrarum orbis, quaqua patet, annulus esset,Illius Ormusium gemma decusque foret.If all the world should be a ring, the stoneAnd gemme thereof were Ormus Ile alone.
They haue in Cambaio, the Townes Tana, Basa, and Daman; where 800 Portugalls scorned the whole fleet of the great Mogul: as also the Iland Diu, which was giuen them by Badurius the last king of Cambaia, for their aid against Marhamed the Moger or Mogul.
3 In Decan or Canora, they haue Chaul, which Misamalucco a potent Prince of these parts besieged, but could not force it, Ao 1573. They haue also Goa the Spanish Vice-Roys residence, who hath here his Councel, Chanceries, and officers. This town was beleagured by Idalcan another Prince, with 35000 horse, 6000 Elephants, and 250 peeces of Ordinance; but in vaine.
4 In Malauar they haue Chalen and Colan.
5 In Zeilan they haue fortified Columbus, bragging of one of the fairest hauens in the world.
6 In Siam they are Lords of Malaca, and the adioyning Castle; in which when they surprised it, they found 900 peeces of Ordinance.
7 In the Moluccoes they enioy Terenate. Yet for all these fortresses, the English and Hollanders will not be hindred from trafficke with these Indians; by which commerce what benefit accreweth to our State, I meddle not.
Thus much of the Orientall Ilands.


OF CYPRVS.
THe Ilands in the Mediterranean sea, are Cyprus and Rhodes.
CYPRVS situate in the Syrian Sea,Ortelius. is in compasse 550 miles; extending from East to West 200 miles, and is in breadth but 65 miles. It is situate vnder the fourth climate, the longest day being 14 houres and a halfe: and is 60 miles distant from the rockie shore of Cilicia, and a hundred from the maine land of Syria.
The ayre is in summer time exceeding hot and sweltrie;Sands. the soyle is moistned with some fewe brookes, meriting rather the name of torrents, then riuers; which being generated for the most part by raine water, are not seldome exhausted by the heat of the Sunne: insomuch that in the raigne of Constantine

the Great, this Iland was for 36 yeares together almost vtterly forsaken, no raine falling all that time. These inconueniences notwithstanding, it is stored with such plenty of all things, that without the helpe of any forraine nation, it is of it selfe able to bu^ld a tall ship from the keele to the topsayle, and so to put it to Sea furnished with all things needfull for a voyage, or a Sea-fight. It also aboundeth in Wine, Oyle, Corne, Sugar, Cotton, Hony, Wooll, Turpentine, and Allum, Verdegree^e, all sorts of mettals, store of Salt, Grograms, and other commodities; wherevpon this Iland was once called Macaria (i. e. happy) 2ly Cerastis because it butted toward the East with one horne. 3ly Amathusia: and 4ly Cyprus from the abundance of Cypresse trees there growing. This Iland was consecrated to Venus, who is hence called Venus Cypria, and Dea Cypri, Sic te diua potens Cypri, in Horace: and in Ovid,
Festa dies Veneris tota celeberrima CyproVenerat ipsa suis aderat Venus aurea festis.Venus feasts hollowed through all Cyprus came,And Venus faire was present at the same.
The people hereof are warlike, strong, and nimble; of great civility, hospitality to their neighbours, and loue to strangers of al nations,Dion. Iewes only excepted. For in the Empire of Traiant, the Iewes inhabiting Aegypt, and the confining Countries, ioyned themselues together, and chose one Artemio their Captaine; vnder whose conduct they entred into, and laid desolate this Iland killing in it 240000 liuing soules; and not without much bloudshed were presently vanquished and slaine by Lucius the Emperours Lieftenant. Since which time the Cypriots permit no Iew to enter the Country; but come he thither voluntarily, or be he beaten in by force of tempest, they lay hands on him and put him to execution.
This Country is famous for the birth of 1 Aesclepiades, the author of the verses so named;Sands. and 2 Xenophon, the historian. 3 Zeno. 4 Apollonius the Philosopher; and 5 Solon, one of the wise men of Greece. The other six being, Periander of Corinth, 2 Bias of Priene: 3 Thales of Miletum. 4 Pittacus of Mitilene. 5 Cleobulus of Lindum. 6 Chilo of Sparta. Here also was borne

the Christian Martyr S. Barnabie.
The Iland is diuided into 11 Prouinces, in which the chiefe riuers are Pedeus and 2 Tenus.Maginus. The chiefe Citties are 1 Paphos, built, as it is by most said, by Cineras (the father of Myrrha, and father and grandfather to Adonis) who so called it in memory of his father Paphus. It was of old famous for the Temple of Venus. 2 Famagusta on the South-Sea, built by Teucer, and called Salamine: at the besieging of which town the Turkes spent 118000 great bullets. 3 Nicosiae, almost in the midst of the Country. This Towne was anciently called Fremitus, and Leucetum. 4 Amathus where Venus also was worshipped, and from whence the whole Iland was called Amathusia. 5 Ceraunia, now called Cerines, built by Cyrus when he had vanquished the 9 Kings of this Iland. 6 Arsinoe now called Lescare renowned for the groues of Iupiter.
Cyprus was first made a kingdome by Teucer, who after the Troian warre came hither: afterwards it was diuided betweene nine petty Princes, all of which were subdued by Cyrus the first Monarch of the Medes and Persians. His Empire being subuerted by Alexander, this Iland was giuen to the Ptolomies of Egypt: from whom M. Cato conquered it to the benefit of the Roman Empire. The treasure which Cato found here in ready mony and moueables, amounted vnto 7000 Talents: which he fearing to loose by Sea, diuided the summe into many small portions, which he put into seuerall boxes, viz: in euery box 2 Talents and 500 Drachmas. At the end of every box he fastned a long rope with a peece of corke at the end; by which floating aboue the water, the money if by shipwrack it were lost might be espied again: which were not much vnlike the buoyes which Marriners fasten by long ropes to their anchors, that they may be the sooner found. The pretence of the Romans to this country was very weake, Avarius magis quam iustius sumus assecuti, are the words of Sextus Rufus. Cyprus being made a Romane Prouince, was in the diuision of the Empire assigned to the Constantinopolitan Emperour,Turk. hist. and gouerned by a succession of Dukes, till the yeare 1184. At this time, Andronicus Comnenius vsurping the Greeke Empire, compell'd Isaacius Comnenius,

one of the bloud royall to shift for himselfe; who seasing on this Iland made himselfe king hereof, and ruled till the yeare 1191. In which Richard the first of England, being denied the common curtesie of taking in fresh water; and seeing the Souldiers abused by the Cypriots, not only tooke the King prisoner, but subdued the whole Iland. And as Paterculus telleth vs, that when Marcus Antonius had captiued Artamasdes king of Armenia, Catenis, sed ne quid honori d^esse, aureis vinxit. So did our Richard keepe herein a decorum toward this prisoner, binding him not in bonds of iron, but siluer. King Richard hauing thus possessed himselfe of this Country, sold it for ready mony, (which for the managing of his intended wars against the Turks he most needed) vnto the Templers; and taking it vpon I know not what discontent againe from them, he bestowed it on Guy of Lusignan, the titulary and miserable king of Hierusalem, receauing in way of exchange the title of that lost and shipwraced kingdome, with which title he and some of his successours were for a time honoured. In the posterity of this Guy, this Iland continued free and absolute till the yeare 14^3, when Melechella (or Melech^aset) Sultan of Aegypt, inuaded this Country, took Iohn, king hereof prisoner, ransomed him for 150000 Sultanies, restored him to his kingdome, and imposed on him and his successours, the yearely tribute of 40000 crowns. This Iohn was father to another Iohn, whose two children were Carlotte a legitimate daughter, and Iames a bastard sonne. Iames after the death of his father, dispossessed his sister Carlotte of the Crowne, by the consent and helpe of the Sultan of Aegypt; and the better to strengthen himselfe against all opposition, he took to wise Catharina Cornerie, daughter by adoption to the Venetian Senate. Her, he dying made his absolute heire; and she seeing the factious nobility, too head-strong to bee bridled by a female autority, like a good child, resigned her Crowne and Scepter to the Venetian Senate, An. 1473. These defended it against all claimes (paying only as tribute to the Egyptian, and after to the Turkish Sultans, the 40000 Crownes) till the yeare 1570; when Mustapha generall of the Turkes wrested it from the Venetians to the vse of his master Selimus the second, who

pretended title to it as Lord of Egypt. The gouernour of the Venetian forces at the time of this vnfortunate losse, was Signior Bragadino; who as long as hope of succours, meanes of resistance, or possibility of preuailing continued: with incredible valour made good the towne of Famagusta, in whose defence consisted the welfare of the whole Iland. At last hee yeelded it on honourable conditions, had they beene as faithfully kept, as sincerely agreed on. For Mustapha the Turkish Generall inuiting to his Tent the principall men of worth in the Town, caused them all to be murdered: and as for Bragadino himselfe, he commanded his eares to be cut off, his body to be flead aliue, and his skinne stuffed with straw to be hanged at the maine yard of his galley. The chiefe of the prisoners and spoiles, were in two tall ships and one gallion sent vnto Selimus, but hee neuer saw them: for a noble Cyprian Lady destinated to the lust of the Grand Signieur; fired certaine barrells of powder; by the violence whereof both vessells and bootie were in part burned, in part drowned. A famous and heroicke act. The yeare after this losse, the Venetians wonne the battle of Lepanto; which so fleshed them, that they said that their little losse in that fight was but as a bloodletting for the generall good: but a Turke ingeniously compared the losse of Cyprus to the losse of an arme, which could not without a miracle be recouered; and the losse of Lepanto battle to the shauing of ones beard, whose haire groweth the thicker: For the next yeare the Turke shewed his Armada whole and entire, brauing with it the whole Christian forces.
What the reuenue of this Iland is I cannot certainely determine.Maginus. The profits of salts only and the custome house yeelded to the Signeur of Venice, when it was in their hands, a million of Crownes yearely. For these customes and profits were farmed for 500000 Crowns a yeare, which being turned into the chiefe Cypriot commodities, were at their vnlading in Venice counted double worth the mony. To this adde the lands belonging to the former kings, and now by deuolution to this state; and the reuenue cannot but be much more.
The Armes are quarterly first A,Bara. a crosse potent, betweene

foure crossets, Or: 2ly Barr-wise of eight peeces A and B, supporting a Lyon passant B, crowned O: 3ly O a Lyon G: 4ly A a Lyon G.

Cyprus containeth

Archbishop, 1.


Bishops 3.


Thus much of Cyprus.


OF RHODES.
RHODOS, or RHODES, is situate in the Carpathian Sea, ouer against Caria a Prouince of lesser Asia. It is in circuit 120 miles, and taketh denomination from Rhodes the chief Citty, honoured with the mighty Colossus; made by Chares of Liudum, in the space of 12 yeares. This Colossus was made in the image of a man, being 80 cubits high, and so bigge that the little finger of it was as bigge as an ordinary man: the brasse of this statua was so much, that when Mnaui generall of Caliph Osmen, vnited this Ile to the Mahumetan Empire; it loaded 900 Camels. This image was made in honour of the Sunne, who once a day at least kisseth this Iland; bee the ayre in all other places neuer so ouercast with clowdes: And it is by some said that from hence the people were called Colossians. Whether this be a truth or a coniecture I wot not, certainely they were not those Colossians, to whom S. Paul directed one of his Epistles, they being inhabiters of Anatolia, and there haue we made mention of them.
The people of this Ile were alwaies very expert in maritine affaires, and are called by Florus, Populus Nauticus. They aided the Romans against Philip king of Macedon; and when all the other Ilands of the Mediterranean reuolted to Mithridates of Pontus, this only adhered to the Romans. And Pate^culus in expressing the hard tearmes of the Roman state in the warre against king Perseus; bringeth it in for almost a miracle, that Rhodij ipsi fidelissimi antea Romanis, dubiaiam fide, proniores in Regis partes visi sunt. It fell in diuision of the Empire to the Graecians, from whom the Sarracens tooke it and held it, til that the knights of S. Iohn in Hierusalem, being vtterly driuen out of

Asia by the Turkes, ceased on it; 1308. These knights sorely infested the Turkes till the yeare 1522, in which Solyman the Magnificent inuaded it; and Lilladamus Villiers being great Master desended it as farre as humane puissance, or warlike pollicie could extend; but multitude ouermastred valour, and on Christmas day, the Turk entred Rhodes as conquerour. Though he might say (as Pyrrhus once said of his victory ouer the Romans) that such another victory as that would haue vndone him; he lost so many of his best Souldiers, and brauest commanders. The Towne Rhodes whereof the Iland taketh its name, and on whose strength both formerly and at this time dedendeth the welfare of the whole Iland; is situate on the East part of the Ile, on the bottome of a hill, and the brinke of the Sea: so that it enioyeth a faire and a safe hauen for commodity, and for strength hath two walls, 13 high Towres, 5 bulwarks, besides diuers sconces and outworks; this towne and Famagusta being indeed the two most defensible holds in all the Turkish Empire. It is inhabited only by Turks and Iewes, the Christians hauing free commerce and traffice in it all the day time: but on paine of death leauing it at the night time. It was formerly a famous Vniuersitie, this Rhodes, Marseils, Alexandria, Athens, and Tarsus being the old Academies of the Romane Monarchie: and hither Tiberius withdrew himselfe, when Augustus had declared Caius and Lucius to be his heires; pretending only a desire to study, whereas the true cause was his enuy of the young Princes preferments.
West of Rhodes, betweene it and Crete, lieth Carpathos, an Iland of 70 miles circuit, now called Scarpanto: famous only in causing the adiacent waters to be called the Carpathian Sea.

Rhodes containeth.

Archbishop, 1.


Bishop. 2.




A TABLE OF THE LONGITVDE AND Latitude of the chiefe Asian Citties.

A
Lo.
 
La.
 



Antiochia

27
30
39
 



Aleppo

72
30
38
 



Arminig.

76
 
41
 



Ava

142
30
27
50





B
 
 
 
 



Babylon.

82
20
33
 



Bethlem

65
45
31
50



Baccu

88
50
42
 



Bulgar

88
30
54
30



Bengala.

125
10
21
20


C
 
 
 
 



Cale^ut.

112
40
10
30



Cabul.

112
20
31
 



Casan.

96
10
35
10



Capha.

68
50
48
 



Cambalu.

161
10
51
10



Cambaia

142
20
11
40



Cantan.

149
 
25
 


D
 
 
 
 



Damascus.

69
 
35
 



Decan.

113
20
14
 



Delle

114
19
5
 


E
 
 
 
 



Ephesus

57
40
37
40


F
 
 
 
 



Famagusta

69
20
30
30



Fassum

57
50
45
40


G
 
 
 
 



Goa.

112
20
14
40



Gaza.

70
50
33
 


I
 
 
 
 



Indian.

105
40
38
 



Ierusalem

66
 
31
40



Iericho.

73
 
33
 


L
 
 
 
 



Liamp^

160
20
34
40


M
 
 
 
 



Mandao

125
0
25
 



Malaca.

136
30
 
5



Mecha.

75
30
25
 



Medina

73
 
27
20



Meacum.

106
30
23
15


N
 
 
 
 



Ni^e

57
 
41
40



Niniue

82
 
36
40



Narfinga.

119
 
18
 



Nicomedia

63
30
44
20



Nicopolis

56
30
45
 


O
 
 
 
 



Ormus.

92
0
19
0



Odia

138
30
12
 



Oxiana.

107
 
41
20


P
 
 
 
 



Pacem

132
 
4
 



Persepolis

90
40
30
40



Ptolomais

66
40
29
40


Q
 
 
 
 



Quinsay

153
 
40
 


R
 
 
 
 



Rhodes

58
 
35
 


S
 
 
 
 



Smyrna

60
20
40
30



Susis

73
40
48
 



Sigestan.

105
 
31
 



Sarmacand

109
 
44
 



Samaria

72
20
33
40


T
 
 
 
 



Tarsus.

71
20
40
 



Tauris.

90
30
38
10



Tenduc

168
30
57
30



Tirus

72
10
36
30



Trebezond

740
30
44
40



Troas

31
 
48
10



Tripolis

72
20
37
 



Tidore.

160
40
0
40


X
 
 
 
 



Xaindu

168
40
55
40


Z
 
 
 
 



Zeilan

138
 
11
20



THE ENDE OF ASIA.




OF AFRICA.
AFRICA is a Peninsula,Maginus. encompassed almost round; with the Red Sea on the East, the Atlanticke Ocean on the West, the Southerne Ocean on the South, and the Mediterranean on the North. Where the Sea is defectiue, to make it a co^pleat Iland, there is a litle Isthmus which tieth it to Asia. This Isthmus is but 60 miles in length, so that diuers haue begun a Trench to let in the Mediterranean: as first Sesostris; secondly Darius the King of Persia and Egypt; thirdly one of the Ptolomies; and fourthly a capricious Portugal; that an easier way might be found toward India, and the Easterne Countries: but they all desisted on the same reason, viz: lest the Sea (being obserued to be higher then Egypt) should sometimes ouer-flow the Country,Plutarch. and spoile the waters of Egypt. A greater proiect then this we now recited, was by Cleopatra the last Queene of the Ptolomean line in Egypt, attempted on this Isthmus, which was this: When Marke Antonie was by Augustus encountred in the Navall battail at Actium, Cleopatra fearing the successe, fled out of the battail with the 60 ships appointed to her guard. Being come to the North part of this Isthmus, she gathered together all her portable riches, and intended to hoist her shipping out of the Mediterranean sea, and hale them ouer this Isthmus into the Red sea: whence shee had intended to take saile, and together with her Antonie, and some of her choyce fri^nds, to seek out some new habitation, far from the danger and bondage, which the present war threatned. But from this, Ant^ni^, (who vainly hoped for a change of fortune) disswade^ her.
The forme of Africke is like a Pyramis reversed,Boterus* the Basis

whereof is in breadth 1920 miles, the Conis very narrow; but from the Pyris or Conis, to the Basis, it extendeth it selfe the space of 4155 miles, being much lesse then Asia, and farre bigger then Europe.
The old Geographers knew very litle of this Country, supposing most or all beyond mount Atlas, not to be inhabited; because it is situate vnder the Torrid Zone, and therefore tooke its name from (...) and (...), that is, without cold. Pomponius Mela guessed the more inward parts thereof to be inhabited with strange people, as 1 Augilae, whose wiues on the marriage night, vsed to prostitute themselues to all commers; she being had in most honour, which had that night accompanied most men. But after that night, coniugall chastity was highly prized among them. 2 Gampsaphantes, a naked people, and ignorant of the vse of weapons. 3 Blem^^^^, who being without heads, had their eyes and mouth in their brests: and 4 Aegypani, who (shape only excepted) had no other humane quality to shew they were men. These people (as he thought) possessed some small part of the Country; the rest he knew not, or with others deemed it inhabitable. But later discoueries haue seene the co^trary, finding the Country to be frequently inhabited; and the coolenes of the nights, by the Mists, Dewes, and gentle gales of wind, to parallell the heat of the Day.
Quodque die Solis violento excanduit aestu,Humida nox reficit, paribusque refrigerat horis.What is by Day Sun-burnt, the Night renewes,And iust as much doth coole with pea^ly dewes.
The Country howsoeuer is full of sandy desarts, and vncouth wildernesses, full of Lions, Leopards, Elephants, Crocodiles, Sea-horses, Hyaena's, and such like: which caused this old proverb, Africa semper aliquid apportat novi.
How Africa distracted with seuerall Principates, came vnder the power of the Romans; shalbe specified in diuers places. The Romans continued Lords of it, vntill the yeare 428, Theodosius the second then commanding the East, and Valentinian the West: for in that yeare the Vandals seazed on it. The Vandals, o^ Vind^lici, were a people of Germany, and were possessours

of that part which is now called Sueviae. They were called into Gallia by Stilico, whom Theodosius the Great had left as ouer-seer to his son Honorius. They accepted this invitation partly on hope of a more fruitfull soyle, partly to auoid the fury of the Hunnes and Gothes; who yet tormented them, chasi^g them out of Gaul, into Spaine. With them entred the Suevi and the Alani: the Suevi had to king, Hermeric; the Vandals, Gundericus; and the Alani, Atace. The battle of Merida ruinated the power of those nations; so that the Vandals could not but willingly accept the offer of Bonifacius, the Emperors Vicegerent in Africa; who stomaching to see his office bestowed on Castinus, an vnworthy man, and his Enemy; betrayed the Country to these Vandals, in the last yeare of the life and reigne of Gundericus.

The Vandall Kings of Africa.
412
1 Gundericus 16
428
2 Gensericus, who at the request of Eudocia, the widow of Valentinian, invaded Italy, sacked the city of Rome, the spoyle whereof for 14 dayes he gaue to his souldiers; but at the request of Eudocia, whom he afterward married, he did not burne it. This Eudocia was wife to the Westerne Emperour Valentinian; who hauing a minde to a Lady of Rome, the wife of one Maximus; he cunningly slipped Maximus Ring off his finger, and by that token sent for the Lady to come to Court, and when she was come, rauished her. To reuenge this disgrace, Maximus slew Valentinian, made himself Emperour, and forced Eudocia to be his wife. But she stomaching a match so vnequall to her high birth, and hauing some incling of the manner of her husbands death, sent for Gensericus into Italy. This Gensericus conquered Carthage, and Hippo, and reigned 40 yeares.
476
3 Honoricu^ 7
484
4 Gundamundus. 12
499
5 Thr. ^imundus 24
523
6 Hildericus 7.
530
7 Gilmer. 5. This King was ouercome by Belisaruis a worthy and politick Leader, whom the Emperour Iustinian imployed in this seruice. And thus ended the Kingdome of the Vandals, hauing continued 146 yeares.

Belisarius, after this good seruice, was imployed by Iustinian against the Gothes then raigning in Italy; against whom he proceeded very fortunatly. But being on I know not what envy called to Constantinople, his eyes were put out, and he was faine to beg his bread, at the gate of the Temple of S. Sophia. A bad reward for so good a seruant.
Hist. of Sp.The Gothes of Spaine as litle loued the neighbour-hood of the Romans in Africa, as formerly of the Vandals; whereupon King Theude, in the last yeare of his raigne, sent an army against them. Those Souldiers on a superstitious feare, would not fight on the Sunday: but the Romans hauing no such scruple, assaulted them, and put them all to the sword; leauing not one to carry newes of this ouerthrow. I dare not so far put my sickle into this Haruest, as to limit out the extent of Sabboth-keeping; which commanding vs to doe no worke, doth seeme to prohibit vs to work for our own safe-guard. Neither can I impute this abstinence from defence, to Religion, but superstition: for workes of necessity are allowed by the best Diuines, as consonant to Gods Word, to be done on that day. But on a meere fancy to destroy our selues, and bereaue God of that glory, which resistance might yeeld in such a case; is not only not co^manded, but forbidden by piety and Christian policy. So was it by our Sauiour, permitted to his Disciples, to pluck the eares of corne on the Sabbaoth day; and the drawing of the Oxe and the Asse out of the ditch, is allowed by him which was Lord of the Sabbaoth. If then it be lawfull to take from Gods seruice some part of that day, for the safety of our cattell, and the necessary sustenance of our own liues: then much more doubtl^sse are we bound, on that day also to prouide for the defence of our Country, which (as Tully saith) Omnes omnium charitates complectitur. The ancient Iewes were in this kind so vainly scrupulous, that when Hi^rusalem was by Pompey besieged, they on that day omitted all kind of resistance, which the politique

Captain obseruing, vsed no assault on the week dayes; but Saturday being come, with all his forces he assaulted the Town, and in the end on that day, took it. Vpon the same aduantage, was it afterwards taken by Sosius and Herode; and on the same, a third time, by Titus Vespasian: the Iewes being all this while so superstitiously sottish, that no example or danger would moue them to repulse the enemy. So truly was it said of Dion. (...): Etita (Iudaei) nihil quicquam perpugnantes, in potestatem hostium die Saturni venerunt More discreet, and in my iudgment, no lesse religious was the decree of Mattathias, the father of the Maccabees; when he saw that 1000 of his Countrymen, had on the Sabboth bin slain by Antiochus Souldiers; they not casting a stone at them: which was, that whosoeuer shall come to make battaile with vs on the Sabboth day, wee will fight against him, neither will we die all as our brethren did, that were murdered in the secret places. Now concerning the other workes allowed on this day, as those of charity and Religion, together with those of magnificence, (as the adorning of our bodies with our better rayment, and the furnishing of our Tables with more hospitable prouision) I will here say nothing, as not pertaining to my story of the Gothes discomfiture, whose superstition occasion'd me to digresse so farre. To conclude all, let me tell you how a Iew (which people to this day doe very strictly and superstitiously obserue their Sabboth) being at Alexandria, and refusing to take ship, when the wind serued very happily to saile into Palestine, because it was Saturday; the better to cousen his conscience, hired a Ianizary to beat him aborde; which taske the Ianizary partly in loue to knauery, and partly in hate to the Nation, performed not by halfes, and in jest; but lashed him sorely, and to the purpose.
After this ouerthrow of the Gothes, and the subuersion of this Vindelician kingdome; Africa continued Roman, till their vtter expulsion by Hucba a famous Leader; whom Osmen the third Caliph of the Saracens, destinated to the conquest of this Country. Of the translation of which Empire, thus Du Bartas.


The Almane and North-Vandall, beaten both
From Corduba and Sevill by the Goth
Seaze Africke first, which afterward they lost
To wise Iustinians valiant Roman host.
And Romans since ioyn'd with the barbarous troope
Of curled Moores vnto th' Arabian stoope.

The vsuall diuision of it is into 1 Barbarie, 2 Numidia, 3 Lybia, 4 the Land of Negro's, 5 Aethiopia Interior, 6 Aethiopia Exterior, 7 Aegypt, and 8 the Ilands.

OF BARBARIE.
Pur^ha^.BARBARIE, so called by the Saracens from Barbar, signifying a murmuring sound, (for so seemed the olde language to the new Conquerours) hath on the East, Cyrenaica; on the West, the Atlanticke Ocean; on the North, the Mediterranean; on the South, the hill Atlas. It comprehendeth the Countries anciently called Numidia antiqua, Africa propria, Mauritania Caesariensis, and Tingitana; now it is vsually diuided into the kingdomes of 1 Tunis, 2 Algeirs, 3 Fesse, and 4 Morocco: all which are of like fertility, and peopled with the like inhabitants.
The fertility consisteth in Fruits, Figges, Oliues, Dates, Sugar, and Horses of excellent beauty, strength, and seruice.
The men are of a duskish colour, comely of body, stately of gate, implacable in hatred, constant in affection, laborious, and treacherous: The women sumptuous in iewels, beautifull in blacknes, hauing delicate soft skinnes. Heare (if you list) a further Character of this people out of Herodian. Mauri genus sunt hominum (saith he) suapte natura caedis avidissimum, nihilque non facile audens, and desperatis similes; contemptu viz: mortis and periculorum.
TVNIS hath on the East Cyrenaica, on the West Algiers. It is diuided into 5 Prouinces,B^terus. bearing the names of the Metropolis: 1 Constantina, in which is Bona, where S. Augustine was borne; and Hippo where he was Bishop. 2 Bugia, once a kingdome of its own iurisdiction. 3 Ezzab, wherein is the City

Cairaon, built by Hucba, who being Captain-Generall to Osmen, the fourth Saracenicall Caliph, subdued all Barbary. His posterity gouerned it 170 yeares, when Escan, his last successor was slaine by Maladi one of his Captaines: from whom Ioseph King of Morocco, violently with-held it; after which it followed the fortune of Tunis. 4 Trip^lis, so called because of the three prime Cities, Abroton, Taphia, and Leptis. This Tripolis, and its Prouince, was by the Genoys taken from the king of Tunis, and sold to him of Fesse: from whom, when they of Tunis had regained it, it fell into the hands of Ferdinando, king of Castile; whose Nephew Charles the fift, gaue it to the kings of Malta; and they not long after, were forced to leaue it, by the valour of Sinan Bassa, Lieftenant to Selim the second, Anno 1551.
The fift Prouince is Tunis, whose chiefe Cities were 1 Vtica, where Cato kill'd himselfe, now called Biserta. 2 Madaura, where Apuleius was borne. 3 Thystrus,Herodotus. where Gordianus the elder was saluted Emperour, by the yong men of this Prouince: who hauing in a tumult murdred their Procurator, and well knowing the cruelty of Maximinus then Emperour; saw no course so suiting with their desperate states, as to wipe out their present treason, with an attempt of higher nature; and thereupon compell this Gordianus, Proconsul of Africke, to take vpon him the Empire. This act, as it was pleasing to the Nobles and commons of Rome; so was it as distastfull to Maximinus, and his faction. Capellianus an other of his Procurators, with a sufficient army, set vpon and ouer-threw the vnexpert Africans: and slew in the battaile, the sonne of the new Emperour: who ^earing this lamentable report, and fearing the inexorable nature of his enemy, hanged himselfe. 4 Carthage. The Country was peopled by the Phoenicians, as fled from the victorious swords of Ioshua, and the Israelites. To these long after, Dido sister to Pigma^eon ioyned her Tyrian troopes, and built this City, A.M. 3078; before the building of Rome, 135 yeares* This Town stood iust opposite to Rome, whose Rivall it was in wealth, valour, and desire of the vniuersall Empire.
Vrbs antiqua fuit (Tyrij tenuere Colon^)Carthago, Italiam contra, Tyberinaque longeOstia, diues opum, studijsque asperrima belli.There wa^s an ancient City call'd as thenCarthage, and built by banisht Tyrian men,Iust 'gainst old Tibers mouth, and Italy;Great in wealth, skill'd in martiall chivalry.
It contained 21 miles in circuit: the Citizens were called Poeni, and are still infamous for their periury, and false hearted dealing. That they were of the Canaanitish race, may be proued, 1 by the name Poeni, or Phoeni, litle differing from the Phoenices. 2ly we find in Herodotus, how Cambises hauing totally conquered Aegypt, intended a warre against the Carthaginians, who were then a state (it seemeth) of some power; but the Phoenicians, being the only sea-faring men, Cambises then had absolutely denied to be agents in that seruice; they being sprung from the same tree that the Carthaginians were. 3ly we read in Procopius, (out of whom it is cited by Evagrius Scholasticus) how on two marble pillars, situate nigh vnto Tingis, or Tanger, there was in the Phoenician language and character engraued, Nos fugimus a facie Iosuah praedonis, filij Nave. This last we before touched.
The Common-wealth of Carthage was in these parts so potent, that they stroue with the Romans tooth and naile for the Empire of the World, but lost their owne liberty, being ouerthrowne in 3 seuerall warres by the Romans. The first was for the possession of Sicilie, Sardinia, and Corsica: The second was begun by Hannibal, who terrified the Romans with many fatall ouer-throwes; but was at last ouercome by Scipio, hauing kept the Romans worke 18 yeares; and then this great City submitted. But being vnwilling to endure such a mutation, from being Queene of Africa, to be a handmaid to Rome, she again revolted, and was vtterly razed to the ground. Caesar after rebuilt it, and planted therein a Colonie of the Roman people. It grew in small time to be frequently inhabited, and abounding in riches: yet so farre from her ancient reputation, that her chief glory was to be rather sought in her ancient, then present fortunes. Populi Romani colonia, olim imperij eius pertinax aemula; and

priorum excidio rerum, quam ope praesentium clarior: was her true character in the Geographer Mela's dayes. Long after this in the flourishing of Christianity in these parts, the Archbishop hereof had vnder his iurisdiction 120 Suffragan Bishops. Out of the ruines and cinders of Carthage, finally destroyed by the Vandals, and Saracens; like the yong Phoenix out of her dams ashes, arose Tunis, a City of 9000 families, seated nigh vnto a most delicate safe harbour,Boterus. which the Spaniard^ strengthned with the fort of Goletta: which, after they had consumed 40 yeares in building, was by the continuall labour of the Turkes leuelled with the ground in 39 dayes.
This Country was called Numidia, containing also Africa propria, and was the Kingdome of Masinissa, whom his sonne Micipsa succeeded; after whose death, Iugurth hauing kill'd his brethren Adherbal, and Hiempsal, manfully withstood the Romans; whose attempts sometimes by force, sometimes by subtilty but chiefly by money and bribes, he ouer-threw and made frustrate: and fuit in Iugurtha (saith Florus) quod post Annibalem timeretur. At last being broken by Metellus, vanquished by Marius, and by Boechus deliuered into the hands of Sylla: he was by Marius led in triumph vnto Rome. In this triumph was carried 3700 pound weight in golde; in siluer wedges 5775 pound weight; and in ready coyne, 28700 Crownes: it being the custome of the Romans in their triumphs, to haue carried before them all the riches and money, which they had brought out of conquered Countries, to put into the common Treasurie. Thus besides others did Paulus Aemylius, when triumphing for his victory ouer Perseus king of Macedon, he caused the ready money which he had brought out of Greece, to be carried in 750 vessels; euery vessell (as Plutarch relateth) containing 3 talents: a masse of treasure so infinite, that the Roman people were for many yeares after, free from all kind of taxe and imposition.
After the death of Iugurth, who at Rome was starued in prison; Numidia was giuen to some of the confederate Kings of the Romans; whose guise it was (as Tacitus noteth) habere servitulis instrumenta etiam reges. The first King was Hiempsal,

who relieued Marius in exile: the second was Hiarba, an other of the Marian faction, vanquished by Sylla's Captaines. The third was a second Hiempsal, sonne (if I e^re not) to Bacchus King of Mauritania: to who^ Sylla gaue this Prouince. The last was Iuba, sonne to this Hiempsal, of whom, more annon: who being slain, Numidia was made a Roman Prouince, Crispus Salustius being the first Lieftenant of it. The Romans lost it to the Saracens, after whose conquest this Prouince had many Kings, all forced to bow vnder the command of the Kings of Morocco: one of whose Deputies in these Countries, vsurped the soueraignty, and left it intire to his posterity: who peaceably enioyed it, till Muleasses the yongest son of Mahomet, hauing kill'd his eldest brother, and put out the eyes of 20 of the other, tooke on him the kingdome. Roseta the only one, which escaped this massacre, by the aide of Solyman the magnificent, regained, and was enforced to leaue it as a prey to Muleasses, by the valour of Charles the fift, and his Castilians, Anno 1535. After many troubles this tyrant had his eyes put out by his son Amida. He was dispossessed by his brother Mahomet: In whose life, the Turkes razed the Spanish fort of Goletta; and after his death, succeded him in his kingdome of Tunis.
Dion.ALGIRS, ARGEIRS, or TESESINE, was of old called Mauritania Caesariensis; Mauritania, from the Mauri, who inhabited it, and the Westerne tract: and Caesariensis from the chief City Caesarea. This City was by a more ancient name called Iol, and was the seat of K. Bacchus; who betrayed his friend Iugurth, to L. Sylla; who in regard of this seruice, did afterward enrich Hiempsal, the son of this Bacchus, by giuing him the kingdome of Numidia also. His sonne Iuba ^iding with Pompey (the heire of Sylla's faction) in the ciuill warres, gaue a great ouer-throw to Curio, Caesars Lieftenant in Africke, Curio himselfe being slain, his whole Army routed, and such as were taken prisoners murdered in cold bloud. He was after the ouerthrow and death of Pompey, encountred and discomfited by Caesar himselfe; who presently made Numidia a Prouince of the Empire, giuing Mauritania to Bacchus and Bogud, two of his consederates. These continued not long friends: for during the succeeding

Triumvirate, Bacchus dispossessed Bogud of his part, and was confirm'd in both by Augustus Caesar: but he suddenly after dying, the whole Country of Mauritania, as well this called Caesariensis, as that other called Tingitana, were Prouinces of the Roman Empire, and so it continued, till the Vandals, and after them the Saracens made hauocke of it.
This kingdome,Maginus. bounded on the East with Tunis, and on the West, with Fess and Morocco, contameth these fiue principall Cities; 1 Hubeda. 2 Tegdenit. 3 Guagido. 4 Argeirs, a Towne not so large as strong; and not so strong as famous. Famous for being the receptacle and retrait-place of the Turkish Pirats, who domineere so infinitely ouer the Mediterranean, to the great dammage of the Merchants of all Nations, that frequent those seas: As also for the shipwracke which Charles the fifth here suffred; who besieging this Towne, lost in the Hauen of it at one tempest, besides an infinite number of karvels and small boats, diuerse strong Galleyes, 140 Ships, a great many excellent peeces of Ordinance, such a number of gallant horses, that in Spaine, the race of horses for seruice was like to haue beene lost for euer, and aboue halfe his men. It is situate in or nigh vnto the place of Iol, ot Caesarea; and is esteemed to contain about 1000 families. The buildings are very sumptuous; the innes, bathes, and temples very beautifull; and euery occupation hath a seuerall place or street by it selfe. These long enioyed the benefite of proprietary Princes, till such times as Selimes, and Mahomet, falling out, made the first, and that an irreparable breach in the gouernment; for Selimes to strengthen his side, implored the aide of Hairaccius Barbarossa, a noble Pirat; who taking his best advantage, slew the dis^oincted brethren, and setled himselfe in the kingdome; which he had scarce made warme, when he left it to Hairadine Barbarossa his brother, Ao 1514. This Hairadine droue the Spaniards out of Bugia, and was so renowned for martiall prowesse, that Solyman the Magnificent made him Lord high Admirall of his Fleet; which office, when to the preiudice of Christendome, he had fortunatly and for long time vndergone; he died lamented, and made the Turko his heire in the kingdome.
The 5 City is Telesine, which grew from the ruines of Haresgol, to that greatnesse, that it contained 16000 families. In the distracted decay of the Saracenicall Empire, many petty Gouernours vsu^ped the Maiesty of a kingly title; and amongst the rest, this City, with the confining territory, boasted in the presence of a peculiar Prince. But this cause of ioy endured not long For Abulthasen, king of Fesse, much impaired the Maiesty of the kingdome, by making it ^ubiect to his command: which when they discontentedly obeyed, they at last made a generall revolt, and assumed their liberty, vnder diuerse kings of their owne City: one of which was Abucbemen, who incurring a generall hatred, because by reason of his supine neglect, Ferdinando King of Castile had surprised and fortified Oram and Masalquiuer, two commodious Hauens; made an easie passage for his brother Ahuzeiden, to the Diadem. This Ahuzeiden was vanquished by Hairadine Barbarossa, Anno 1515: who was driuen back by the valour of Charles the fift; and Abuchemen restored: his successor Abdalla, shaking off all allegiance to the Spaniard, submitted himselfe, and after his death, the kingdome of Tel^sine, to the tuition of Solyman the magnificent. This City Telesine, is adorned with many beautifull temples, though defiled with superstition, and hath fiue dainty colledges, curiously wrought with Mosaique worke. It seemeth to haue been strong, in that we find how it sustained a siege of 7 yeares, by Ioseph the puissant King of Fesse, and in the end forced him to raise it: neither was it taken by the aboue-named Abuthasen, vnder a siege of 30 moneths. The second Towne of note is Batha, now almost ruin'd by warre. 3 Cran, a Towne of 10000 families, taken by Peter of Navarre for the Spaniards, 1509, and in vaine besieged by the Turke 1562. 5 Masalquivir or Masala^bir, a most famous Hauen-towne, taken also by the Spaniards, about the same time.
The chiefe riuers of these two Countries are 1 Maior, parting Tunis from Algiers; 2 Zan, and Malvi^, diuiding Algeirs from Fesse and Morocco.
FESSE and MOROCCO were once comprehended vnder the generall name of Mauritania Tingitana, so called of

Tingis (now Tanger) a principall Town in those dayes, and was that part of Mauritania, which Iulius Caesar hauing discomfited Iuba,Dion. gaue vnto Bogud one of his associats How this, and the other part of Mauritania, became one R^m^n P^ou^nce, wee haue already told you; as for the diuision of it i^to the two Prouinces, this of Tingitana, and that other of Caesa^^nsis, it was made by Claudius, who hauing pacified some tu^ul^^ in this Country, thus diuided it, and appointed the gouernment of it to two Roman Knights.
These two Kingdomes haue on the East, Algeirs; on the West, the Atlanticke Ocean; and are parted one from the other, by the riuer Marbea, or Omirable. The other riuers of note are 2 Tensilt. 3 Sus. 4 Subu. 5 Lyssus.
FESSE is diuided into 7 Prouinces, in which the chiefe Cities are 1 Fesse, (so called from Fesse, i. Gold, abundance whereof was found in digging the foundation) was built by Id^e a Mahumetan Prince. It is diuided by the riuer Sabu into 3 parts, all of which containe 82000 housholds, and 700 Moschees, or Saracenicall Temples: the chiefe of which is Carne, or Caraven, being a mile and a halfe in compasse. It hath 31 gates, great and high, the roofe is 150 yards long, and 80 broad; round about are diuers porches, containing 40 yards in length, and 30 in bredth; vnder which are the publick store-houses of the town. About the walls are pulpits of diuerse sorts, wherein the Masters of their Law read vnto the people such things as they thinke pertaine to their saluation. The revenue hereof is 200 duckats a day on the old rents, for so much it was, Anno 1526 when Leo Afer wrote. The Marchants haue there a Court or Exchange, inclosed with a strong wall, with 12 Gates, and 15 streets. There is also a Colledge called Amarodoc, a most curious and delicate building: It hath three Cloysters of admirable beauty, supported with 8 square pillars of diuers colours; the roofe curiously carued, and the arches of Mosaique, of gold and azure. The gates are of brasse, fairely wrought; and the doores of the priuate chambers, of inlayed worke. This Colledge did cost the Founder King Abuchenen, or Abu Henen, 480000 Crownes, 2 Ham Lisnan, a Town built in the more mountainous

parts of the Country, by the old Africans, famous for the Te^ple of an Idol here worshipped; to which at certain times men and women resorted in the night; where, after their devotions ended, and the c^ndles put out, euery man lay with the woman he first touched: the exact platforme of th^ Family of Loue 3 Septa, or S^nta, a town in the hands of Spaine. 4 Tanger, called of old Tingis, nigh vnto which, Hercules killed Anteus. 5 Mahenes. 6 Alcazer Guer, nigh vnto which the three Kings, Sebastian of Portugal, Mahomet, and Abdelmelech, competitors for this kingdome, were slain in one day. There was slain at the same time also,Camd. Eliz. the great English rebell, Stuckley: who fled out of Ireland to Rome, Anno 1570, where hee was by the then Pope, louingly welcom'd, as a dutifull sonne to the Church. He was by the Pope appointed for the Conquest of Ireland, and was for that end furnished with a troope of 800 souldiers, paied by the King of Spaine; and was by his vnholy Holinesse, created Marquesse of Lemster, Earle of Wexford and Caterlogh, Vicount Murraugh, and Baron Rosse. Thus prepared, he began his voyage, Anno 1578, toward Ireland: but hearing of the wars in this Country, and desirous to make a part in them, he lost here (the Popes fatherly benediction notwithstanding) not his souldiers only, but his own life. and 7 Aguer.
MOROCCO is diuided into 7 Prouinces, the chiefe Cities of which are Morocco,Purchas. built by Abderamen; once the Metropolis of Barbary, as containing 100000 housholds: but now inferiour to Fesse for populousnesse, spaciousnesse, and beauty. The chiefe buildings hereof, are the Church and the Castle. The Church is bigger, though not so beautifull as that at Fesse; and hath a Towre so high, that the hills of Azasi, being 130 miles distant, may be thence easily discerned. The Castle is very large, and on a Towre thereof stand 3 Globes, made of pure golde, weighing 130000 Barbary Duckats. Diuerse kings haue gone about to take them downe, and convert them into money: but haue all desisted, by reason of some strange misfortune that hath bin inflicted on them: so that the common people thinke they are kept by a guard of spirits. 2 Tangouista. 3 Fesodet. 4 Taradent. 5 Massa, abounding in Amber: and 6 Alarach.
When the Saracens had ouer-runne Barbarie, there came into these parts two potent Families, viz: the Marine, and Lan^une Families: of the later was Abderamen, who hauing builded Morocco, surprised and tooke Fesse from the contentious sonnes of Idre. The two kingdomes were thus ioyntly gouerned, till the yeare 1212; in which, when Alphonso King of Castile had slaine King Mahomet Enaser; and his sonnes were at oddes about the inheritance: one Habdulach, of the Marine Family, made himselfe King of Fesse; and by the valour of his sonne Ioseph, made Morocco tributary. This Habdulach by co^putation of time, seemeth to be the Admiralius Murmelius, mentioned by Mathew Paris, to whom our King Iohn, Anno 1214, sent such a base, degenerous, and vnchristian-like embassage. This strange name Admiralius Murmelius, was by that good Writer vnhappily stumbled on, insteed of Miramumalim; which also is corrupted from Amir Elmumenin, that is, princeps fidelium; an attribute which these Princes as yet retain. The story is this. King Iohn being ouer-laide in his Barons warres, sent certaine Embassadours to this great Monarch for aide; offering to hold his kingdome of him, and to receiue the Law of Mahomet. The Moore maruailously offended with this offer, told the Embassadours, that he had lately read Paules Epistles, which he liked so well, that were he now to chuse a Religion, he would before any other embrace Christianity; but euery one ought (said he) to die in his owne Religion, and for leauing the Faith wherein he was borne, was the onely thing which he disliked in that Apostle. This said, he called vnto him Robert of London, Clearke, one of that Embassie, of whom he demaunded the forme of our gouernment, the wealth and situation of the Country, the manners of the people, the life and person of the King; in all which particulars being satisfied, he grew into such a dislike of our king, that euer after he abhorred the mention of him. In the posterity of this Habdulach, the two Kingdomes remained, till the yeare 1508, when as Mahomet Ben Amet, called by his own command Xeriff, (which is the name that the lineall successours, and kindred of Mahomet are called by) being a poore Hermite, plotted to make his sonnes

the chiefe Princes of Mauritania Tingitana. For this cause, he sent them in pilgrimage to Mecha, whence they returned with such an opinion of Sanctity, that the King of Fesse made Amet, one of them, Gouernour of the famous Colledge Amadorac; and Mahomet, the other, Tutor to his children: the yonger, Abdel, staying at home with their father. In those dayes, the Portugals grieuously infested the tributary kingdome of Morocco* to represse whose fury, Amet and Mahomet, asked and obtain^d Licence. They discomfite Lopes Barriga, and his Portugals; they subdue Sus, Hean, and Dencalie, three great Prouinces; they enter Morocco, poison the King, and salute Amet the Xeriff of Morocco. To further their future victories, the King of Fesse dieth, and Amet his successour confirmed this Amet in his new purchased royalty.

The Xeriffs of Barbary.

1 Amet denied superiority, to Amet of Fess, whom he ouer-threw, and was slaine by his owne brother.
1540
2 Mahomet, who vnited the kingdome of Fess to Morocco.
1557
3 Abdela.

4 Abdela II, had 10 brothers, of which he slew 8. Amet was spared for his supposed simplicity; and Abdelmelech escaped to the Turkes.

5 Mahomet, expell'd by Abdelmelech and the Turkes, ^led to Sebastian King of Portugal; who, together with the two competitors, was slain in one day, nigh vnto Alcager Guer.
1578
Hamet* who extended his Empire to Lybia and Numidia.
1603
The three sonnes of Hamet, viz: Muley-Shecke, Boferes, and Sidan,Purchas. contended for the Kingdome. In these warres, Boferes, and Muley died; but Abdela, sonne to Muley-Shecke, maintained the warres against Sidan. During these troubles, Sidan Hamet, Ben Abdelan, a Hermite of great prowesse, seized on the City of Morocco, from whence he was compell'd to retire, by the valour* of Prince Sidan, and Side Hean, another Hermite, Anno 1616. And thus standeth the state of the Xeriffia^t^

Sidan enioyeth the Citty Morocco; Side Hean hath fortified himselfe in Tar^dant; Abd^la liueth by robberies; Fesse standeth on her guard; and the other townes are gouerned by peculiar Magistrates: what the euent will be, is vncertaine.

Th^ reuen^es of the Xeriff^ are very great, which they leuy out of the tenths of their subiects graine, besides a Duck at for euery Pole, male or female, aboue 15 yeares of age: in Marchandize he receaueth of a Cittizen, two in the hundred; of 2 stranger, ten: Church and Colledge lands are escheated to him; Iudges make him their heire, etc.
What for^e they are able to drawe into the field, may euidently be seene in the siege of Magaza^,Grimston. a towne of Fesse, but in possession of the Spaniards* which he beleagured with 200000 men. Yet can hee not hold any warre aboue three months, because the Souldiers liue vpon his daily allowance, whose prouision not being able to be caried continually with them, make them many times to retire.
Thus much of Barbarie.


NVMIDIA AND LYBIA.
BEfore we come to Numidia, wee must passe ouer Mount Atlas (now called Anch^sae,Stephanus. or Montes Clari) a hill of that height, that the toppe of it cannot be seene. It deriues its name, from Atlas king of Mauritania, who dwelt in the bottome of it: whom the Poets faine, to be by Perseus turned into this hill. The daughters of this Atlas, dwelt in the Ilands Hesperides, situate in the Atlanticke Ocean; where they had a tree which bore a golden fruit, taken thence by Hercules, after he had killed the Dragon, their guardian. Then he captiuated king Atlas himselfe, who was a man of great stature, and was fained by the Poets to sustaine heauen (...) shoulders: and that, either because of his skill in Astronomi^; or because the hill Atlas is of such heigth, that it seemes to touch the heauens. And so we e^ter into Numidia.
NVMIDIA ha^h on the East, Egypt; on the West, the Atlanticke Ocean; on the North, Atlas; on the South, Lybia: the Numidia

so much spoken of in the Roman histories, is not this, but that which is now part of the kingdome of Tunis.
This Country takes its name from the Numidae, which may perhaps be so called from their manner of life, which is after the custome of the Nomades, liuing without houses, vner their Wagons, and Carts, as Lucan testifieth of them.
Nulla domus, plaustris habitant, migrare per arvaMos, atque errantes circumvectare Penates.They dwell in waines, not houses; and doe strayThrough fields, and with them lead their Gods each way.
And worthily may they owe their names to them, from whom they borrow their nature: for the people to this day spend their liues in hunting, and stay but three or foure daies in a place, as long as the grasse will serue the Camells. This is the cause why this Country is so ill peopled, the Townes so small in themselues, and so remote from others. An example hereof is Te^set a great Citty in their esteeme, which yet containeth but 400 housholds, and hath no neighbours within 300 miles of it. The Country aboundeth with Dates, whence it is called Dactylorum regio, and in the Arabicke Biledulgerid, which signifieth also a Date region. These Date tree* are some male, some female; the first bringeth forth only flowres; the other, fruit: yet herein is the male beneficiall to the increase of the Dates: for vnlesse a flowred bough of the male, be ingrafted into the female, the dates neuer proue good. This fruit is the chiefe diet of the people; but this sweet meat hath sowre sawce; for it commonly rotteth their teeth betimes: as for the stones of these Dates, they feed their Goats with them, whereby they growe fat, and yeeld store of milke. It is ill inhabited, by reason of the abundance of sands, so that in some places the towns are 300 miles distant. The ayre is of that nature, that if any one bee troubled with the French disease, he shall here finde present remedy. The inhabitants are base and vile people, theeues, murderers, and ignorant of all things: but the Arabians that are mingled with them, are ingenious, liberall, and ciuill.
The chiefe Citties are 1 Stasilet, 2 Dausen. 3 Dara, where Mahomat Ben Amet, and his three sonnes, the founders of the

Xer^ffian Empire, were borne; 4 Lapsa, and 5 Teffet.
LYBIA hath on the East Nilus, on the West the Atlanticke Ocean, on the North, Numidia; and on the South the land of Neg^ce^. In this Country Arius the hereticke was borne, who being a Priest of Al^xandria, hatched that diuelish doctrine, against the pe^petuall diuinity of Christ: To beat downe which h^r^sie, the first Councell of Nice was called; the Nicene Creed m^d^* and the clause of one substance with the father, proued to be consentaneous to the word. To subscribe to the decrees of th^ Councel, Arius was sent for by the Emperour Constan^ine. To Const^n^inople he went, hauing written his owne hereticall tenets, which he hid in his bosome; and reading before the Emperour the decrees of the Councell, he writ a recantation of his heresy, swearing that he meant as he had written. Which words the Emperour referred to the recantation, but hee to the paper o^ his owne tenets in his bosome. When he had taken this oath he went in triumph through the streets of the Citty; till a necessity of nature enforcing him, he withdrew aside vnto a house of ease, where he voided out his guts, and sent his soule as a harbinger to the Diuell, to prouide roome for his body.
In this Country liued the Garamantes, supposed to bee the vtmost people Southward; and the Psylli, who were of a nature so venomous, that they could poyson a snake: Insomuch that when their wiues were deliuered, they would throw their children amongst a heard of Serpents; supposing that child to bee borne of an adul^erat bed, the very smel of whose body would not driue away a whole brood of the like poisonous vermin. This people is famoused in Herodotus for an expedi^ion they made against the South winde. For when this wind, blowing abroad the hills and desarts of sand, had dried vp those small rilles and waters they had among them; they to reuenge this iniury, by common cons^nt armed themselues, and went to fight against (...). But they tooke not the South winde v^prepared, for hee ^^steri^g vp his forces incountred them with such a braue vol^^^ (...) ^and, tha^ he ouerwhelmed and slew them all. A better (...) was the Northwinde to the Cittizens of Rhegium, in (...) and better wa^ he rewarded: for hauing scattered a mighty

fleet, which Dionysius prepared against them, he was by the common counsell made free of their Citty.
The name of Lybia is to be deduced either from Lybs a king of Mauritania, or Lybs the South winde, which gently breatheth from these places; or from Lybia a Queene hereof. It is now called Sarra, which signifieth a desart: for the whole country is full of great sandy desarts, to which the violent heat of the Sunne addeth continuall nourishment.
Hinc facta est Lybie raptis humoribus aest^Arida-- as Ovid.Hence Lybia, all its moisture drawne on highBy the attractiue Sunne, is made so dry.
Those desarts are so tedious, that Marchants vse commonly to trauell eight daies, without sight of any riuer, lake, bush, or tree. The greatest are of Azacad, and Zanhaga.
The people differ not much from the Numidians; but if there be a worst, certainely it must fall to the Lybians share. They worship a God called Psaphon, who, when he liued, taught divers Birds which he caught, and then set at liberty, to say, that Psaphon was a great God: wherevpon the simple people, smitten with admiration, afforded him diuine worship.
The chiefe Citties are 1 Huaden. 2 Guargata, and 3 Toherraum.
The people in matters tending to religion, are heathens, for the most part; but some there are of the naturalls, among who^ the Saracens, comming out of Arabia and Barbarie (Countries almost totally Mahumetan) haue planted their superstition: and in matters of pollicy, both these nations follow one methode, hauing no king nor lawes; but are gouerned by the chiefe man in euery Tribe.
Thus much of Numidia and Lybia.


TERRA NIGRITARVM.
TERRA NIGRITARVM, or the land of Negroes, hath on the East Aethiopia superior, o^ the West, the Atlantick Ocean; on the North, Lybia; on the Sou^^, the kingdome of

Manicongo, in Aethiopia inferior. Of this, thus the Doue,
The land of Negroes is not farre from thence,Neerer extended to th' Atlanticke maine;Wherein the blacke Prince keepes his residence,Attended by his Ietty-coloured traine:Who in their natiue beauty most delight,And in contempt doe paint the Diuell white.
The inhabitants doe almost want the vse of reason, most alienat from dexterity of wit, and all arts and sciences, prone to luxury and are for the greater part Idolaters, though not without some small admixture of Mahumetans, and Christians. When the Portugalls first sailed into these coasts the people hereof took their ships for great Birds with white wings: and after, vpon better acquaintance, they could not be brought to beleeue, but that the ey^s which were casually painted on the back^ of the ships, were the eyes by which they saw how to direct themselues in their course. Gunnes seemed to them, for their hideous noise, to be the works of the Diuell: and for bag-pipes, they took them to be liuing creatures; neither when they had beene permitted to f^ele them, would they be perswaded but that they were the worke of Gods owne hands. The very Nobles, (if so noble a name may without offence be giuen to so blockish a people) are so stupid, that when they are in presence of their king, they neuer looke him in the face, but sit flat on their buttocks, with their elbowes on their knees, and their hands on their faces: and for their greater gallantrie, they annoint their haire with the fat of fishes, which maketh them stinke abominably.
The Country is abundantly stored with gold and siluer, very fine and pure: so that had not the Portugals affected the honor of discouering new worlds, as much as wealth; they might haue made as rich a factory here, as at the Indies.
It is so called, either because the people are of a blacke colour, or from the riuer Niger. This riuer from the fifteenth day of Iune, ouerfloweth al the adiacent fields, the space of 40 daies And in so many more recollecteth his waters, into their proper Channels: the whole country being indebted to these inundations, for its fertility, which otherwise could be but small; since

the drinesse of the soyle can afford no exhalations, whereby clowdes may be generated, and the earth refreshed with moysture. This riuer hideth his Channell vnder ground, the space of six miles. The second riuer of note is Senega, vpon whose Northerne Banke, the people are cole blacke; but on the south only tawnie.
The chiefe Prouinces, or kingdomes (of which here are 25) are
1 GVALATA, where there is no administration of lawes.2 GVINEA, where there is neither Towne, nor Castle, except it be that of Mina, built and fortified by the Portugalls for their better trading here. The people hereof account the principall part of beauty, to consist in a flat nose, and therefore they presse them downe in their infancy.3 TOMBVTVM, Where the king causeth such as haue any commerce with the Iewes to be slaine; and where the people spend their whole liues in dancing, and singing. The King of Tombutum, is the richest Prince in all this part of Africke, keepeth a royall pallace; and hath to his guard 3000 horsemen; and of footmen an infinite number. He hath some Scepters, which weigh 1300 pound waight a peece: and continually maintaineth a great number of learned men.4 MELLI, a Cou^try of 300 miles in length, hath the richest, ciuillest, and most industrious inhabitants, of any among these Nigrites.5 CANO, a Country abounding in Limmons, and Pomgranates.6 GIALOFI, the people whereof are of that admirable nimblenesse, that they would leape vpon a horse when hee galloped; stand vpright when he ran fastest; turne themselues about and suddainely sit downe: and as often as they listed, dismount, and mount againe ^n a trice.7 BENIN, the people whereof doe cut and rase their skinne with three lines drawne to their nauell* esteeming it necessary to saluation. They vse all, both men and women to goe naked till they are married; and then to bee ^l^ath^ only from the wast to the knees: so that had our 5 Thomas Moore ^iued ^n these parts, he had in some measure had (...) he among

other strange plots in his Vtopian Commonwealth, telleth vs how there it is the custome, for some reuerend old sire, to bring in naked the young man; and some hoarie old matrone to present naked the young woman, betweene whom a marriage is motion'd. For, saith he, in buying a horse, the chapman not only vieweth his naked carkcase, but taketh off also his trappings and s^ddle, lest vnder them some blame might lie hidden: and why the^ in chusing of a wife, should we take one of who^ we see no more then the face (vniv pal^rae spatium) and perhaps scarce that. But the conuenience of this libidinous plotte, I leaue to your censure.8 NVBIA, which once wholy peopled by Christians, is now falne to its former Idolatry, for want of Ministers to instruct them: they sent once to the Emperour of Aethiopia for teachers, but were by him vnchristianly reiected. Here is a poison, wher^of the tenth part of a graine, will dispatch a man in a quarter of an houre^ and is sold for 100 Duckats the ounce.9 BORNVM, where the people haue neither children, wiues, nor names; but are distinguished by some externall accident.10 GOAGA, where the king hath no reuenewes, but what be forcibly taketh from his enimies.11 GANAGA, where the king hath no estate, but what his Nobles please daily to allow him.
The chiefe Townes of these Prouinces are 1 Tombutum. 2 Gen^i. 3 Agadez. 4 Guangara. 5 Songum. 6 Chouinum, the third Citty in estimation of all Africke. This Country altogether vnknowne, or very little discouered in times of old; was first, if not found, yet plainely manifested by the Mahumetan Priest^: who out of a supersticious zeale to propagate their doctrine; made a passage to these parts, Anno ^08, at which time here was nei^her king, nor commonwealth. Ioseph king of Morocco* fi^st subdued them: afterwards the Lybians became their Lord^ whose last gouernour Soni Halin, was slaine by Ischia, Anno 1526; and the Negroes againe recouered their long lost libertie insti^uting diuers king^, and amongst others, Ischia was worthily mad^ K^^g ^f Tombu^um. Af^er this aduancement, he quick^y vnited many of the weak kingdomes to his own* which

at this day is the greatest of the foure, in whose hands kingly authority remaineth. The other three are of 1 Bornum, which is somewhat lesse, 2 of Gualata, whose kingdome is confined within the limits of that one Prouince. and 3 of Goaga, who possesseth the remainder.
Thus much of Terra Nigritarum.


OF AETHIOPIA SVPERIOR.
PRius diuidenda antequam definienda sunt aequivoca, is as vndoubted a truth in nature, as a true rule in Logicke: and therefore before I come to the particulars of Aethiopia, I will cleere my passage, in respect of some ambiguity of the na^^^. For, whereas the Interpreters of the Bible in all lang^ages, render the word Cush by Aethiopia, and the Cushites by Aethiopians: they therein giue occasion to many incongruities in sense, and reason. For should we suppose the riuer Gihon, mentioned in the second of Genesis, to compasse about this Aethiopia; we should make Paradise to be of too large extent. 2ly, Whereas it is said in the second of Chron: cap. 14. that Zerah king of the Aethiopians, came against Asa, with an hoast of a million and 300 Chariots: this cannot properly be attributed to this Aethiopia, both, for that it is likely that the king of Egypt, would neuer suffer so huge an army to passe through his Country; and for that we finde in the same chapter, how Asa, to reuenge this inrode, destroyed the Citties of Zerah, euen vnto Cera; which is well knowne to stand in Arabia Petraea on the South border of Iudaea. 3ly, Whereas it is said in the 29 of Ezechiel, that the land of Egypt should be laid wast from the towne of Siene, to the borders of Aethiopia: if it bee meant of this place it cannot be good sense; Siene being the very border towne, betwixt Egypt and Aethiopia; and is as if one should say, the English conquered all France, between Callice and Douer. Aethiopia therefore mentioned in these and sundry other places, must bee conceaued to be the land of Chus, or the Cusi^es, which lay between Aegypt and Assyria, the Red sea, and Persian gulfe; conta^ning Arabia Dese^ta, Petraea, and part of Felix. But not altogether

to dislike all translations, one distinction will salue all; which before I set downe I must tell you, (referring the first peopling of this Country till anon) that the Graecians gaue it the name of Aethiopia, from (...), vro, and (...) vultus: because the violent heat of the sunne schorched the faces of the inhabitants:
Aethiopia is
AfricanaSuperior, of which now.Inferior, of which in the next Chapt.Asiatica, which extended from the red Sea vnto the Persian gulfe, and is that Aethiopia which is so often mentioned in the old Testament.
Now that you may not suspect this distinction to be meerly fained, and gathered vpon no grounds; see what I haue transcribed out of Herodotus, speaking of the expedition of Xerxes, against the Greekes. (...), etc. Arsames (saith he) was Captaine of the Arabians, and the Aethiopians, that are beyond Aegypt. The more Easterne Aethiopians, were ranked with the Indians, nothing differing from the other in the structure of their bodies, but in their haire and voice only: the Easterne Aethiopians wearing their haire smooth; they of Lybia, curled. The Aethiops of Asia were armed like the Indians, etc. but the Aethiops of Africke (the very words of my distinction) were arayed with the skinnes of beasts, etc. So farre Herodotus.
AETHIOPIA called SVPERIOR, because it is more north then the other: and also Interior, because it is encompassed about with the other (vnlesse where it is bounded with Lybia, and the land of Negroes North) is called also Abasine, either from Abas a prime riuer hereof, or from an Egyptian word signifying scattered nations. It comprehe^deth the regions, once called Aethiopia sub Aegypto, Trogloditica, and Cinnamomifera.
Of the Troglodites, ^omponius Mela giueth vs this character, Nullarum opum domini sunt Trogloditae, strident magis quam loquuntur. As for their houses they were (saith he) no better the^ Caues, and their food no better then Serpents. Plinie reporteth two strange things of this Country; 1 that the ayre and ground are so parching hot, that the people not only dare not goe out of dores without shooes; but that they rost their meat also by

setting it in the Sunne. 2ly That here is a lake, whose waters are thrice a day, and thrice a night, exceeding salt and vnpleasing, but at all other times most sweet and delicious to the pallat. Iosephus writeth that Moses hauing slaine the Egyptian, fled into this Country, and here married the daughter of Iethro Prince of it: but this is vtterly false, for Moses fled into the land of Madian, Ex. 2.15. which is on the other side of the red Sea, in Arabia Petraea.
This Country being as big as Germanie, France, and Italie, laid together, is but meanely populous, the d^stemperature of that climate, and the dry barrennesse of the ground, not admitting a multitude. For this cause Africke is by Strabo compared to a Leopards skinne, the distance of whose spots sheweth the dispersednesse of Townes, and habitations in these torrid countries. This region is scarse in wheat, but sufficiently plentifull in Rice, Barly, Beanes, Pease, and the like. They haue abundance of Sugars, Minerals of all sorts, and infinit heards of Oxen, sheep, Goats: Finally, there is no Country vnder heauen fitter for increase of plants, and liuing creatures; if industry were not deficient. The people are much inclined to barbarisme, destitute of all learning, not to be credited vnlesse they sweare by the life of their Emperour. They hate a Smith equally with the Diuell. Their colour is generally oliue tawny, excepting onely their king himself, who is alwayes of a white complexion, a wonderfull prerogatiue, if true. This blacknes of th^ir bodies, is by the Poet attributed to the burning of the world, by Phaeton;
Sanguine tum, credunt, i^ corpora summa vocato,Aethiopum populos nigrum ^raxisse colorem.Their bloud (tis thought) drawne to the outward part,The Aethiopians grew so black and swart.
But the true cause of it and its speculation, I will deferre till I come to treat of America.
The Christian faith was first preached here by the Eunuch of Q. Candace, who was baptized by Philip the Deacon; but not totally propagated ouer the whole Empire, till the raign of Abraham, Anno 470: who in his life, entituled himselfe Defender and propagator of the religion of Christ; and was after

his death, canonized for a Saint, The particularities of their opinions, wherewith they haue infected the true purity, I finde thus registred. 1. They vse to circumcise both males and females. 2 They baptize the males 40, the females 80 daies, after their circumcision. 3 After the receit of the Sacrament they are not to spit tell Sunne-set. 4 They professe but one nature, and one will in Christ. 5 They accept only the three first generall Councells. 6 Their Priests liue by the labour of their hands, for they allow them nothing, and permit them not to begge. 7 They rebaptize themselues euery Epiphany day in lakes and ponds; because that day they suppose Christ to haue beene baptized by Iohn, in Iordan.
The chiefe riuers of this Country are 1 Abas (formerly called Astabus) springing from the lake of Barenna. 2 Toccas^i. once Astaborus. 3 Nilus, whose spring vnknowne to ancient writers, is by some supposed to arise out of the lake of Zemre: thence this famous riuer taketh his course towards Egypt, and diuers times meeting with lower vallies, falleth downe headlong with such a force and fury; that the continuance of the noise deafeth all the neighbouring inhabitants. In this Countrey are many Sluces, Ditches, and by-channells, to curb the otherwise vncontroleable power of the riuer, which else would ouerflow all Egypt. In respect hereof the Sultans of Egypt, haue a long time paid vnto the Emperour of the Abassines, a great tribute: which when the great Turke, supposing it to be a needlesse custome, did deny; this people, by the command of their Emperour, did breake downe their dammes, and open their sluces: whereby drowning Egypt, they inforced the Turke not only to continue his tribute, but to giue them also great summes of mony for the remaking of these dammes and sluces. The fourth river of note is Zairo, which arising in the more mountainous parts, endeth his long pilgrimage in the lake Zemre. Here are also some lakes reported to be of that poisonous nature, that whosoeuer drinketh of them, either falleth immediatly madde, or is for a long time trobled with a drowsines. Of which Ovid.
Aethiopesque lacus: quos si quis faucibus hausit,Aut furit, aut patitur mirum grauitate soporem.Who doth not know the Aethiopian lake,Whose waters he that drinks his thirst to slake;Either groweth mad, or doth his soule oppresseWith an vnheard of heauy drowsinesse.
This Country howsoeuer most replenished with Christians of any in Africke; yet hath it on the East, many Mahumetans; on the West, many Heathens, mingled with the Christians. These Christians shew a booke of eight volumes, written, as they beleeue, by the Apostles, assembled for that end at Hierusalem; the contents whereof they obserue most solemnly.
The chiefe Citties are first Saba, built by Queene Maqueda, or rather by her repaired, and beautified. It hath 4 gates made of Alablaster and Iaspis stone, wrought with antique workes, and the dores thereof curiously carued. It hath 5000 houses great and sumptuous, the streets spacious, and so shaded with pent-houses, that men may walke safe from the violence of the Sunne or raine. From the name of this Citty, it is thought that the Queene of Saba, which came to see Solomon, was Queene of this Country. 2 Aruma, built by king Aruc. 3 Cossomum. 4 Zameta the residence of Bernagassus. 5 Erocco, and Suachon, the only hauens of this Emp^re, being vnder the Turkes. 6 The K. Court which is as a wandring Citty: for which his Tents and Pauilions belonging to him, and his retinue; hec couereth no lesse then 10 miles. 7 Tanapo, of old the residence of the Aethiopian Emperours, sacked and ruined by Petronius, President of Egypt. For when Candace (the predecessour, I beleeue, of her, whose Eunuch was baptized by Philip) had ransacked and wasted Egypt, with fire and sword: Petronius, Lieftenant to Augustus, draue them home; harried the whole Country, put this Citty to the spoile, and to preuent the like inrodes, fortefied the frontiers of his Prouince. 8 Zembra, nigh vnto the lake so called, where in the yeare 1570, certaine workmen purposely sent from Florence, by Duke Francis, built a royall pallace; which is sometimes honoured with the presence of the Emperour.
There are in this Empire 70 tributary kingdomes, the chiefe whereof are,
1 BERNAGASSVM, whose Pro-rex is known by the same

name, lyeth toward the red Sea, and bordreth on the Turke, who receaueth hence the yearely tribute of 1000 Crownes,2 TIGREMAON, famous for her mines of Gold.3 ANGOTE, where the people vse Salt, Pepper, and iron insteed of mony: and seed on raw flesh. This custome of vsing Salt, Pepper, and the like, insteed of mony, was in former times among most people, the only bartery or way of excha^ge. So in Homer, Glaucus golden armour was valued at 100 kine; and Diomedes armour, at ten only. Afterward in iustice commutatiue, it was deemed convenient to haue some common Iudge, or valuation of the equality or inequality of goods: the inuention of which, the Iewes attribute to Cain: the Grecians, to Hermodice, the wife of Midas: the Romans, to Ianus. It is called Nu^mus, or (...) from (...); because it was ordained by law: Pecunia, either because in elder times, the chiefe of their wealth consisted in Cattle (as now among the Irish) or from a Cowe (Pecus) which was stamped on it: and Moneta a monendo, as Suidas saith; because when the Romans stood in need of mony, Inno monebat, that they should vse iustice, and there should be no want of mony. To this Goddesse, Dea pecunia, the Romans erected a Temple, and worshipped it in the figure of a woman, holding a paire of scales in one hand; and a coraucopia in the other.4 AMARA, where there is a hill of the same name, being in circuit 90 miles; and a daies iourny high* on the toppe whereof are 34 pallaces, in which the younger sonnes of the Emperour are continually inclosed, to avoid sedition; wherein they inioy whatsoeuer is fit for delight, or princely education; and out of which one of them, who is most hopefull or best liked, is againe brought out, if the Emperour die sonne-lesse, to be made successour. This mountaine hath but one ascent vp, which is impregnably fortified, and was destinate to this vse Anno 470, or thereabouts; by the Emperonr Abraham Philip; aduised herevnto, as he gaue out, by an heauenly vision. In one of these pallaces is a famous Librarie, wherein are many bookes, which with vs are either in part, or totally lost: as the Oracles of Enoch, with the misteries which escaped the floud being by him

ingrauen on pillars; the whole workes of Livie, and others.5 GVAGERE, of old called Meroe, an Iland in the riuer Nilus, being 175 miles long, and 125 broad. The chiefe citty was Meroe, so named of Meroe, mother to Cambises; to continue whose memory, her sonne built this Citty.6 FATAGAR, 7 DANCALI. 8 GOYAMI, in which is the lake Zembre. 9 BAGAMEDRAN. 10 XOA.
Chus was the first Prince of this Country, Regma the 2d, and Dodan the 3d. From these kings till the time of Aruc, the people liued in Caues, and rockie holes. He taught them to build houses; and to lead the way, built Aruma. The fourth from Aruc, was Maqueda, called in holy writ the Q. of Saba, and of the South. She went to Hierusalem to heare the wisdom of Solomon, and see the order of his house: and as their stories relate, returned home great with child by Solomon. This child being borne was called by his mother, Melilech; but by Solomon, Dauid: since which, the Kings were called Dauids; till Indian the Eunuch of Q Candace returning home, baptized his young Prince, calling him Philip. Hitherto we haue spoke^ out of their owne Chronicles, but they we knowe are no Gospell. That Chus planted in Arabia, we haue already told you, as also what absurdities arise, from supposing the land of Chus to bee this Aethiopia: most probable therefore it is, that this country was in processe of time, peopled by the progeny of Ludim and Phu^; who were seated on the Mediterranean shore of Africk. Now whereas Stephanus hath, in his opinion, decided the controuersie, making Sheba, the sonne of Chus, the father of the Arabians; and Sheba, the sonne of Regma, the father of the Aethiopians, and for this cause hath found out a pretty criticisme that Sheba, when it was writte^ with ^ Samech, must be rendred Aethiopia; and Arabia, when it is written with ^ Shin; this co^cei^, is in my opinion (as the rest of that straine are) more nice then wise; it being euident, that both Sheba the son of Chus, and Sheba the son of Regma, peopled Arabia. As for Q. Maqueda, doubtlesse she was Queene of the Sabaeans, not the Aethiopians. For, besides the longsomnesse of the iourney, too much for a woman and a Queene to trauell; it is very probable when Shisacke king

of Egypt spoyled Hierusale^, in the raign of Rhehoboam; that the King of Aethiopia, who, if this be true, was at that time the sonne of Maqueda; would not haue suffered Egypt to haue laien quiet, whiles his brother Rhehoboams Country was a wasting, if there had beene any such tie betweene them. To leaue these fables then, the first story which we meet with concerning the Aethiopians,Herodotus. is in the time of Cambises, long after Solomon, who hauing vnited Egipt to Persia, intended also to haue vnited Aethiopia to Egypt. Vpon this motion, Embassadours were sent to trie the strength of the King, and search the passages of the Country: carrying with them as presents, a purple habit, some brace^ets, a box of sweet oyntments, and a tunne of wine. The Aethiopian receauing these tokens, accounted the vnguent and purple, slight and effeminate; the bracelets he openly laught at, as being too weake to hold in a prisoner (for he took them to be bonds:) only the wine he was delighted with, and sorrowed that this country yeelded no such liquor. At the dismission of these Embassadours, they were amongst other guifts, presented with a bowe of wondrous strength; the Aethiopian bidding the^ tell their master, that vntill euery Persian could bend that bow, it would be no safe medling with his people: adding withall, that Cambises might thanke the Gods, for giuing the Aethiopians so contented mindes, that they thought not on conquering their neighbours kingdomes. To returne againe to our Aethiopian story, which now beginneth to be more credible. After the baptizing of the first Philip by the Eunuch, all the succeeding Emperours were called Philip; till the religious raigne of Iohn, honoured with the title of Saint: since whose death till this present time, they are called Iohns, with the praenomen, as some will of Presbyter; affirming that he executeth as well the ministeriall as the kingly office, Idem hominum Rex, divumque Sacerdos: But as others, and that more probably, of Pretiosus; for the word Prete-gian, by which name his subiects vse to call him, importeth no lesse. They neuer had disastrous successe in any affaires, till the yeare 1558, in which the Turks seazed on Barnagassum: and since, Anno 1603, when the last Emperour was slaine by the King of Adel. The person of this Emperour is much honoured,

nay adored by his subiects, to whom he sheweth himselfe but thrice in a yeare, viz: on Christmas, Easter, and Holyrood day: by which retirednesse he maketh his presence more acceptable, as holding nothing to be more derogatory from the Maiesty of a King, then to make himselfe too common an obiect, for the eye of the vulgar. The like kinde of state, was once kept by those kings of France, who withdrawing themselues from all publike affaires, vsed only to shew themselues (as wee haue already said) on May-day. A greater retirednesse then this, is that of which Velleda, Queene of the Tencteri, a people of the Rhene, is reported by Tacitu^ to haue vsed. For when the rest of the Germans then in armes, sent Embassadours to her, to informe her of her victory against the Romans; they were prohibited either to speake to her, or see her; Arcebantur aspectu, quo venerationis plus inesset. Such a keeping of state, the politique Prince Tiberius vsed, when the German legions mutined; for he daigned not to goe himselfe to see them pacified, but the reason was, quia maiestati maior e longinquo reuerentia. And no doubt the same keeping of distance, swaied much with him when hee forsooke Rome, and kept Court priuatly at Caprea; though I deny not, but a propension to follow his vnnaturall pleasures, the more securely, together with the deformities on his face, had also their powers vpon his resolution.
The title of this great and mighty Emperour, runneth thus. N.N. supreame of his kingdomes, and the beloued of God, the piller of faith, sprung from the stocke of Iudah, the son of David, the sonne of Solomon, the sonne of the columne of Sion, the sonne of the seed of Iacob, the sonne of the hand of Mary, the sonne of Nahu after the flesh, the sonne of St Peter and Paule after the spirit; Emperour of the higher and lesser Aethiopia, and of ^he most mighty kingdomes, dominions, and Countries of Goa, Caffares, Fatigar, Angola, Barne, Balignazo, Adea, Vangne, Goyami where are the fountaines of Nile, Amara, Banguamedron, Ambea, Vangucum, Tigremaon, Sabaim, the birth^place of the Queene of Saba, Bernagassum; and Lord of all the Regions vnto the consines of Egypt. It seemeth by this title, that these Aethiopian Emperours, howeuer the truth of story goeth

conceiue themselues to be sprung from Solomon, and Maqueda (or Nizaule as Ioseph nameth her) the Queene of the South. For better confirmation whereof, it is by some reported, that the Armes of this kingdome, are the same with those of the Tribe of Iuda, which are a Lyon rampant in a field Or; and that the motto of them is to this effect, viz; The Lyon of the Tribe of Iudah shall ouercome. But Bara an expert Herald, giueth this Prince no such coat-armour: his Armes according to him being Luna, a crosse portate Mars, charged with a crucifixe Sol; betweene two scourges of the second.
His revenues cannot but be great,Boterus. considering that his expences both of Court, and Army discharged; he alwayes coffers vp 3 millions in a yeare; Insomuch that he offered the Portugals, if they would warre against the Infidels, one million of Gold; and another of men: which later was more (sure) then he could performe, seeing he could neuer leuie halfe the number in his owne greatest extremities.
Thus much of Aethiopia Sup^rior.


OF AETHIOPIA INFERIOR.
AETHIOPIA INFERIOR, called also Exterior, hath on the East, the Red Sea; on the West, the Aethiopian Ocean; on the North, Terra Nigritarum, and Aethiopia Interior; and on the South, the Southerne Ocean. It was said of this Country, that it was mountainous towards the West, sandie in the midst, and desart towards the East.
The vsuall diuision of this Region is into 5 parts, 1 Aian, 2 Zangibar, 3 Monometapa, 4 Cafaria, 5 Monicongo.
AIAN lieth betweene the mouth of the Red Sea, and the Riuer Calimanci: it comprehendeth the two potent kingdomes of Ab^x, and Adel. The king of this later by name Guad^ameth, or Grand Amida, had a great hand ouer the deceased Emperour of the Habassines: this Country aboundeth with Flesh, Hony, Waxe, Corne, Gold, Ivory, and great store of Sheepe, whose tailes are 25 pound waight, The prime Cities are, 1 Arar,

2 Zeil^, 3 Borbora, all situate without the streights of the Red Sea, and much frequented by merchants. Zeila was the chiefe of them, built nigh vnto the Bay which Ptolomie called Sin^s Avaliticus, from the Avalites, or Abalites, who are said to haue dwelt hereabout. It had in it some buildings that seemed to be very ancient: and was sacked and burned by the Portugals, Ao 1516.
The kingdome of Abex, or Adea, is situate betweene Adel, and Habassia, to which last it is tributary. The chiefe Towns are 1 Brava, 2 Pate, and 3 Gogia: these two last belonging to the Portugals, who tooke them vnder the conduct of Tristran de Cugna.
ZANZIBAR extendeth from the riuer Quilimanci, to M^^^motapa. The people as well of this Prouince, as of Aian, are on the shoare side descended of the Arabians,Purchas. whose superstition they embrace. The more inland people are the true natiues, and still adhere to their Gentilisme.
The chiefe Towns are 15, and giue name to as many kingdomes. The first Corova, 2 Calen, 3 Anzuga, 4 Monculo, 5 Badin, 6 Melinda, 7 Momboza, 8 Quilao, whose King named Abraham, gaue the Portugals leaue to build fortresses in his Country, Anno 500: but they fondly presuming on their own strength, deposed this Abraham, Anno 1509; for which fact, the Arabians demolished their Forts, and sent them to learne better moderation in their prosperous estates. The people of this Quiloa, haue among them a strange custome, which I will mention rather for the rarity, then decencie. They vse when they haue any female children borne vnto them, to sow vp the priuate passages of nature, leauing only a small passage for the vrine. Thus sowed, they keep them carefully at home, ill they come to a marriageable age; then they giue the^ to their neighbours for wiues. And she (of what ranke or condition soeuer she be) that is by her husband found to want this signe of her perpetuall virginity: is with all kinde of ignominie and disgrace sent home vnto her parents; and by them as opprobriously receiued.
The 9 Prouince is Mosambique, 10 M^mbara. 11 Monbizo.

12 Macaos. 13 Embroe. 14 Mordomugi. 15 Safila, which for its abundance of Gold and Ivory, is by some thought to be that land of Ophir, to which Solomon sent; and of this opinion Mr Purchas seemeth to be. But this is not very probable; for first, Ophir the sonne of Ioctan, of whom mention is made in the 10 of Gen. verse 29: and from whom the land of Ophir, in all likelyhood tooke its name; is in the next verse, said to haue planted in the East; whereas this Safila is situate South-west from Chaldea, in which the confusion of tongues, and dispersing of the people, began. 2ly, It is impossible for the navie of Solomon, which lay at Ezion Geber, to haue spent 3 yeares in comming hither, and returning: which we find to haue bin the vsuall times of finishing the voyage to Ophir, 1 Kings. chap. 10. Ophir then is some part of India; but whether it were the Iland of Sumatra, or one of the Molucco's, or the land of Malavar, called by the ancients, Aurea Chersonesus, I dare not determine: considering what worthy men maintaine these seuerall opinions.
The principall riuers are 1 Coava, 2 Quama, 3 Magnice.
MONOMOTAPA, Bonomotapa, or Bonemotaxa, is environ'd almost round with waters; hauing on the West and South the riuer called Rio d' Infanto; on the East, the Ocean; and on the North, the riuer Quama. This Country is in compasse 450 miles, and aboundeth with such store of Elephants, that no lesse then 5000 are yearely kill'd, for their teeths sake. Here are said to be 3000 mines of Gold, the chiefe being Manica, Boro, and Quitiavi.
The chiefe Prouinces are 1 Motana, 2 Tocoa, 3 Melcucba. 4 Quinibebe, 5 Berfaca, 6 Bavagal. The chiefe Cities are Monomotapa, Zimbas, and Tongum the Kings seat, where Anno 1560, one of them was christned by Gonsaluo a Iesuite, whom not long after by the perswasion of some Arabians, he caused to bee slaine.
The people hereof are Heathen for the most part, yet they worship not idols, but beleeue in one god, who^ they call Mozimo, and in some places are very prone to receiue the Faith of CHRIST. They punish nothing more seuerely then witchcraft, theft, and adultery. In the punishment of Delinquents, they

vse no prisons, but execute them assoone as they are apprehended; which is the cause that the vulgar sort haue no doores to their houses, this being an honorable priuiledge belonging to Lords onely. The King of this Country is alwayes called by the name of Monomotapa: he is serued on the knee; and when he drinketh, or cougheth, all that are about him, make such a shout, that all the Towre rings of it. All that come into his presence, must sitdown, for to stand is a signe of dignity, and the chiefe honour that can be afforded vnto any. He is said to haue for his guard 200 mastiues. The women are here much respected. The Monomotapa himselfe if he meet them in the street, giuing them the way. They are not to be married, till their menstrua, or naturall purgation, testifie their ability for conception; and therefore they solemnize the first fluxe thereof, with a great feast.
CAFRARIA hath on the East Rio d' Infanto, on the West and South, the Ocean; and on the North, Lunae montes. It taketh its name from Cafars, which in the Arabicke signifieth Heretickes: which though common to all Heathens, is yet appropriated to this Region, as destitute of another name. This Country extendeth towards the South with a long Promontory, called Caput bonae spei, or C^p de bunna speranza: which was discouered, together with these Southerne parts of A^rick, by Vasco di Games, Anno 1497. The top of this Cape is a faire and pleasing plaine, adorned with great variety of flowers, and couered with a carpet of grasse; it is called the table of the Cape, and yeeldeth a large prospect ouer the Sea on all sides. The Sea here is very rough and tempestuous, and hath to the Spaniards proued oftentimes very vnkind: whereupon a Spanish Captain being sorely vexed with a storme, expostulated with GOD, why he suffred so good Catholickes to endure such torments; and permitted the English Heretickes and blasphemers to passe so easily. The people liue like beasts, are black as pitch, and therefore vse when they would represent any vgly thing, to make it white: they haue flat noses, and thick lippes. They haue some villages in which they liue together; and in euery village a king or lord to whom they are subiect.
MANICONGO hath on the East, Habassia; on the West, the Aethiopique Ocean; on the North, the land of Negroes; on the South, the hills call'd Lunae montes. These Countries were discouered by Dego Can, a Portugal, Anno 1486. They are very populous, insomuch that they sell vnto the Portugals yearely, 28000 slaues, as it is supposed; who are all carried to Brasil, there to worke in the mines. The principall Townes are 1 Benza, called by the Portugals, since they initiated this Nation in the Faith of Christ, S. Sauiours, or S. Salvedore, 2 S. Paul lying on the Sea shore, a Town built and fortified by the Portugalls, for the better assurance of their trade: and 3 Loanda, seated iust opposite to S. Paul, in an Iland of the same name; caused (as it is thought) by the mud and dirt, which the riuer Coanzo brought thither. It is the principall hauen-towne of these parts.
This Country is watered by the riuers Bengo. 2 Coanzo. 3 Dande. 4 Loz^. 5 Ambres. 6 Zai. The people hereof were by the Portugals instructed in the Faith of Christ: which againe they renounced, as being not able to conforme their liues vnto it.
The Prouinces appeare in this swelling and voluminous title of the present King, Alvara king of Congo, Sango, Bambu, Sandi, Bango, Batta, Pempa, Abundi, Matama, Quizama, Angol^, Cacongo: Lord of the Congeries, Amolaze, Langelungi, Anziqui, Cucchi, and Laangi. Most of the latter nam'd nations are Anthropophagi, and haue shambles of mans flesh, as vsually as we of ordinary meats. The people doe alwayes kill their children so soone as they be borne, lest they should be a hinderance to them in their vagabond wandrings, and transmigrations. But to conserue the nation, they vse to buy or steale yong striplings, from the neighbouring Countries. Amongst the more ciuill Prouinces, Angola is of most esteeme, which not long since reuolted from their subiection and allegiance to the King of Congo: and is certainly a most populous Prouince. For in the battle betwixt the King of this Country, and Paulus Diazius a famous Leader of the Portugals, t^e King had in his Army, 1200000 souldiers; yet a few of his enemi^s, wisely and p^li^iquely gouerned, gaue him a dismall, and fatall ouerthrow, 1582.
Thus much of Aethiopia Inferior.



OF EGYPT.
Maginus.EGYPT is bounded on the East with the Red Sea; on the West, with Cyrene; on the North, with the Mediterranean; on the South, with Habassia. In the place where this Aegypt and Habassia meet, is the last cataract of Nolus; which is a fall of the waters, after much struggling with the rocks for passage, an incredible way downe into the lower valleyes. The hideousnes of the noyse which it maketh, not onely deaueth all the bydwellers, but the hills also are torne with the sound: For as Lucan:
Cuncta tremunt undis, and multo murmure montisSpume^s invictis albescit fluctibus amnis.The noyse the mountaines shakes, who roare in spightSands.To see th'vnvanquish'd waues cloath'd all in white.
Yet you may diuerse times see the Countrey people, in a litle boat, able to containe but two onely, venture down these falls; aed appearing after they are long lossed in the waters, a great distance off, as if they had beene shot out of an engine.
This Country was first inhabited by Misraim, the sonne of Chus, the sonne of Cham, and was called in the Hebrew tongue Misreia: the footsteps of which name remaineth amongst the Arabians, who call it Misre. 2 It was named Oceana, from Oceanus a King hereof. 3 O^iriana, from Osiris. 4 Aegyptus, from Aegypt; being the surname of Rameses, a Prince of great power.
The Country is in length from Siene, to the Mediterranean Sea, 562 miles; and in bredth, from Rosetta West, to Damiata East; about 140 miles. But it continueth not alwayes in this bredth for lessening it selfe Southwards, like a Pyramis reversed, it is in some places but 37 miles broad, and at the very point or bottome, but foure. It is situate betweene the second and the fift Climates, so that the longest day is 13 houres, and a halfe.
The inhabitants, though this Countrey lie in the same Climate with Barbary, are not black, but tawnie and brown. They were the inventers of the Mathematicall Sciences, and are still

endued with a special dexterity of wit; but are somwhat slothfull, and giuen to riot and luxury; merry also and sociable companions. The old Egyptians are by Pomponius charactred, to haue vsed to weepe and mourne ouer their dead bodies, dawbed ouer with dung; to haue held it almost a piacle to burne or bury them, but hauing embalmed them, to haue laid them in some inward roome of their houses. The men (saith he) keepe home, and spinne; the women manage the greater businesses: the men carry burdens on their heads, the women on their backs. Not much vnlike to which last custome, they haue still one of a new stampe; for here the women pisse standing, and the men couring on their knees. They worshipped in euery Town and its Territory, particular gods; but the god by them most adored, was Apis; an Oxe, blacke all ouer his body, hauing a white starre in his fore-head, the effigies of an Eagle on his backe, and two haires only in his taile. It seemeth his deity was not much respected by strangers; for Cambises when hee conquered Egypt, ran him with his sword through the thigh, causing all his Priests to be scourged: and Augustus being here,Dion. would not vouchsafe to see him, saying; (...), dios se colere consuevisse, non boues, a speech worthy so braue a Prince.
For its abundant fruitfulnesse this country was called Horreum populi Romani; and in the time of Ioseph, supplied Iacob and his Family with corne. Now also is the goodnesse of the soyle such, as is contained in these two verses of Lucans.
Terra suis contenta bonis, non indigna mercis,Aut Ievis; in solo tantatest fiducia Nilo.The Earth content with its owne wealth, doth craueNo forreine Marts, nor Ioue himselfe; they haueTheir hopes alone in Nilus fruitfull waue.
This Nilus hath his head either in the mountains of the Moon, or the lake Zembre in Aethiopia interior: and running in one continuall Channell, till it washeth the midland of Egypt, is before its influx into the Sea, diuided into 7 other Channels, or mouthes; namely 1 Heracleoticum, 2 Bolviticum, 3 Schaniticum, 4 Patinicum, 5 Mendesium, 6 Caniticum, 7 Pelusiacum. The

first and last of these currents being sarre distant at the Sea; and growing into one, at the first point of the riuers diuision; make the part which is called Delta. because it ve^embleth the Greek letter D. The other part is called Thebais, from Thebes, the chiefe Town of it. This Nil^s, from the 15 day of Iune, swelleth aboue his banks the space of 40 dayes; and in as many more gathereth his waters again to their proper bounds. If it flow not to the height of 15 Cubits, then the Earth is deficient in her abundance of increase, for want of moisture: and if the waters surmount the superficies of the Earth, more then 17 cubits; then like a drunken man it cannot produce its naturall operations, as hauing its stomach (as it were) ouer-laid, and surcharged with too much liquor: but if the meane be granted, there is no Country can brag of such abundance, the corne being all inned before the end of May. During this inundation, the beasts and cattle liue on the hills, and in the Townes, to which they are before-hand driuen; and there are, til the decrease of the waters, foddered. As for the Townes and villages, they stand all on the toppes of the hills, and at the time of the floud, appeare like so many Ilands. Commerce and entercourse is not a ^ot diminished; for skiffes and the like boates, supply the places of horses and camels, transporting safely and speedily, the marketmen and their commodities, from one Town to another. When the riuer doth not thus ouer-flow the Country, it is not onely the vsher to a following dearth; but prognosticateth some ensuing mischiefe to the State and Princes thereof. And it is by Authors of good credit related, that in the 10th and 11th yeare of Cleopatra, the riuer increased not: which was obserued to be a fore-teller of the fall of two great Potentates, this Cleopatra, and her sweet-heart Antonie. A second commodity arising fro^ this inundation of the Nile, is the health it bringeth with it; for the plague, which here often miserably ^ageth, vpo^ the first day of the floud doth insta^tly cease: insomuch that wheras 500 dye in Caire, the day before; the day following there dieth not one. A third strangenesse in this riuer is, that keeping its waters together, it changeth the colour of the Sea farther into the Mediterranean, then the sea can thence be discerned. A fourth miracle

is, that not in fruits onely, but in producing liue creatures also, it is euen to wonder fruitfull: as Ovid,
Namque ubi deseruit madidos septemfluus agrosNilus, and antiquo sua flumina reddidit alveo;Plurima cultores versis animalia glebisInveniunt--For when the seauen-mouth'd Nile the fields forsakes,And to his ancient Channell him betakes;The tillers of the ground liue creatures findeOf sundry shapes, ith' mud that's left behinde.
This riuer is in length almost 3000 miles, and being the onely riuer of Egypt, affordeth the onely drinke to the Egyptians, and is of such vertue, that when Pesceninus Niger saw his Soldiers grumble for wine; what (saith he) doe you murmure for wine, hauing the waters of Nilus to drinke? On the bankes of this riuer, down towards Alexandria, stood that famous Labyrinth, built by Psamniticus. It contained within the compasse of one continued wall, 1000 houses, and 12 royall palaces, built and couered with marble. It had onely one entrance, but innumerable wayes within, turning and returning, one sometimes ouer the other, and all in a manner invious to men not acquainted. So Mela describeth it. The building was more vnder the Earth, then aboue, the marble stones being laid with that art, that neither wood, nor cement, was imployed in any part of the fabricke. The chambers were so disposed, that the doores vpon their opening, did giue reports no lesse terrible then thunder: and the maine entrance all of white marble, adorned with stately columnes, and most curious workes of imagerie. On the bankes of this riuer also, grew those sedgie weedes called Papyri, of which Paper was in former times made. They diuided it into thinne flakes, whereinto it naturally parteth: then laying them on a table, and moistning them with the glutinous water of the riuer; they pressed them together, and so dried them in the Sun. By meanes of this Invention, bookes being easier to be transcribed and reserued; Ptolomaeus Philadelphus made his excellent Library at Alexandria; and vnderstanding how Attalus king of Pergamum, by the benefit of this Aegyptian paper,

striued to exceed him in that kind of magnificence, prohibited the carrying of it out of Aegypt. Hereupon Attalus invented parchment, called from the place of its invention, Pergamena; from the materials thereof, being sheepe skinnes, Membrana: the conveniencie whereof was the cause, why in short time the Aegyptian paper was worne out; in place whereof succeeded our paper made of ragges: the Author of which invention, our progenitours haue not committed to memorie. Before the vse of these papers and parchment was knowne, I obserue 3 kindes of writing: 1 on the inward side of the barke of a tree, which is in Latine called Liber, and whence we call our bookes Libri. 2ly on tables framed out of the maine body of a tree, which being called Caudex, gaue the Latines occasion to call a booke Codex, 3ly they vsed to couer their Tables ouer with waxe, and thereon to write what they listed, from whence tabellarius now signifieth a letter carrier. The instrument with which they wrote, was a sharpe-pointed iron, which they called Stylus, a word now signifying (the originall hence taken) the peculiar kind of phrase, which any man vseth; as negligens stylus in Quintilian; and exercitatus stylus in Cicero. I should haue told you how they vsed also to write in leaues, and how the Sybils Oracles being thereon written, and scattered abroad, were called Sybillae folia; and from whence perhaps, we still vse to say, a leafe of paper: but of this enough.
The people of this Country were instructed in the Gospell by Saint Marke, which they generally retained till the comming of the Saracens: at what time most of them embraced Mahumetanisme. The remainder of the Christians, being in a country so populous not aboue 50000, are called Copties; and that either from (...), scindo, because they vse Circumcision: or from Coptas, a town where the most of them reside: or from Aegophti, a name corrupted from Aegypti. They are in a manner all Iacobites, from whom notwithstanding, as from all other Churches, they differ in some things, viz: 1 They conferre all sacred orders, vnder the Priesthood, vpon Infants immediatly after Baptisme; their parents till they come to 16 yeares of age, performing their office for them: secondly they allow marriage

in the second degree of consanguinity, without any dispensation: thirdly, they obserue not the Lords day, nor any other festiuals, but onely in the cities; and fourthly they embrace and ^ead in their Liturgies, a Gospell, written (as they say) by Nicodemus.
In the time of Heathenisme, the Priests were held in equall honour with their kings; who expressed their conceits, both belonging to Religion and worldly affaires, by the shapes of beasts, birds, trees, etc. which they called Hieroglyphickes, of which two or three examples out of Orus will not be impertinent. For aeternity, they painted the Sunne and the Moone, as things which they belieued had no beginning, nor would haue any end. For a yeare, they painted a snake, with his taile in his mouth; to shew how one yeare succeeding another, kept the world still in an endlesse circle. For a moneth, they painted a palme tree; because at euery new Moon it sendeth forth a new branch. For God, they painted a Falcon; as well for that he soareth so high, as that he gouerneth the lesser birds for integrity of life, they painted fire and water, both because these Elements are in themselues most pure, and because all other things are purified by them. For any thing that was abominable to the gods, they painted a fish; because in their sacrifices, the Priests neuer vsed them; and the like. From this manner of expressing ones selfe, the invention of letters is thought to haue had its originall; the history whereof, take briefly, and word for word, out of Tacitus: Primi per formas animalium Aegypti, etc. The Egyptians first of all expressed the conceptions of the minde, by the shapes of beasts; and the most ancient monuments of mans memory, are seene grauen in stones, and they say, that they are the first inventers of letters. Then the Phoenicians, because they were strong at sea, brought them into Greece, and so they had the glory of that, which they receiued from others. For there goeth a report, that Cadmus sayling thither in a Phoenician ship, was the inventer of the art among the Greekes, when they were yet vnexpert and rude. Some record that Cecrops the Athenian, or Livius the Theban, and Palamedes the Grecian, did finde out 16 Characters, at the time of the Troian warre; and

that afterward Simonides added the rest. But in Italy the Etrurians learned them of Demaratus the Corinthian; and the Aberigines of Evand^r the Arcadian. So far Tacitus. That the Phoenici^ns were the first inventers of Letters, I dare not affirme; and as backward am I to referre the glory hereof to the Egyptians; for certainly the Iewes were herein skilled before either: yet that the Phoenicians were herein Schoolmasters to the Greekes, I thinke I may with safety affirme, hauing Lucan in consent with Tacitus.
Phoenices primi (famae si creditur) ausiMansuram ^udi^us vocem signare figuris,Phoenicians first (if fame may credit haue)Dar'd in rude Characters our words t'engraue.
As for these lesse vulgar Letters, which the Latines call Cip^rae, and whereof euery exercised statesman hath peculiar to himselfe; they were first invented by Iulius Caesar, when he first began to thinke of the Roman Monarchie; and were by him in his letters to his more priuate and tryed friends, vsed: that if by misfortune they should be intercepted, the Contents of them should not be vnderstood: (...), ne obvia literarum lectio c^ivis esset. Augustus one of the greatest politickes of the world, had an other kinde of obscure writing; for in his letters of more secrecie and importance, hee alwayes vsed (...), to put the letter immediatly following in the order of the Alphabet, for that which in ordinary writing he should haue vsed. As for Brachygraphie, or the Art of writing by short Characters, so vsefull for the taking of a speech or sermon as it is spoken; I cannot say either who was the Author, or whether the Invention be ancient, or more moderne; onely I finde in Dion, that Maecoenas that great fauourite of Augustus Caesar, and fauourer of Learning, did first finde out certain notes and figures, ad cel^ritatem scribendi, for the speedier dispatch of writing: (...), (they are the very words of my Author) (...). But I now make haste to take a survey of the cities.
Pomponius Mela saith, that there were in this Country, the

number of 2000 Cities: and Herodotus affirmeth, that here were 1020: Which lesser reckoning can not now be verified. The chiese of the present are 1 Alexandria, built by Alexander the Great, now called Scanderia, a Town of great Marchandize; and which in the Nicene Councell, was ordained to bee one of the foure Patriarchall Cities: the other three being Antioch, Rome, and Constantinople. The inhabitants of this Towne, as they abound in all wealth and pleasure, so in all licentiousnes of life and speech; not sparing their Gouernour, nor the Roman Emperours, Lords Paramount of their Country. Caracalla, sonne to Seuerus, euen when he came to honour their City with his presence, scaped not scot-free. But he of a hasty nature, and impatient of all personall and verball abuse; calling an assemblie of all the youths of the City, as if out of them he would choose some to attend on his person; suddenly commanded his souldiers to put them all to the sword. The slaughter was so great, and the waters of Nilus so discoloured with blood, that now the riuer might not improperly bin called the Red Sea. In this Town, Anno 180, Gautenus read Diuinity and Philosophy; from whom it is thought, that the orders of instituting Vniuersities first began in Christendome. 2 Pelusium, now called Damiata, besieged often by Christian Armies. The most famous of these sieges, was that of Iohn di Brenne, the titu'ary King of Hierusalem, and the confederate Princes of Europe, Anno 1220, This siege continued 18 moneths, during which time, the plague and want of sustenance so raged together, that the Town was in a manner dispeopled. Of these extremities the besiegers knew nothing, till it fortuned that two ventrous soldiers, admiring the silence and solitude of the people, in a bravada scaled the walls, but saw no man to make resistance. This being certified to the Captaines, the next day the whole Army entred the Town, where they found in euery house, and euery corner of the streets, whole heapes of dead bodies, some slaine by famine; others by the pestilence: a lamentable and ruthfull spectacle. 3 Bubastis, where Diana was worshipped. 4 Heliopolis, (now called Betsamis)* whereof Potipharah, whose daughter Asineta, was by Pharaoh giuen in marriage to Ioseph, was

Prince. These foure Ci^ies are in the 30 of Ezechiel, called No, Phisebeth, Shin, and Aven. 5 Siene, now Asna. 6 Thebes built by the Tyrant Busiris, conta^ng 17 miles in circuit, and opening 100 Gates 7 Nicopolis, now Munia. 8 Canopus, where Osiris had his chiefe Temple, 1 Arsi^^e, or the City of Crocodiles, to which beasts the Citizens attributed diuine honour. It is now called Sues, and is a Hauen Town standing at the very No^th end of the Red Sea: in the time of the Ptolomies a Town of great commerce, now almost abandoned, yet is it still a station of some of the Turkes galleyes, which being built at Caire, are taken againe in pieces, and brought hither on the backes of Camels. 10 Niloscopium, now called Elinichius. 11 Matared or Matarea, where the ground is so sertile, that the people are ^ain to couer it with sand, to moderate the strength of it. 12 Coptus, 13 Memphis, nigh vnto which were the Pyramides. 14 Rosetta. 15 Cairo, built nigh to the place where Memphis, or Babylon Aegyptiorum, was situated. It is in compasse but 8 miles, within which space are 18000 streets; whereof euery one hath two Gates: which being locked, make euery street an impregnable Castle; which Selimus the first found to be true, when he spent 3 dayes in passing through it with his victorious Army* This City is so popul^us, that it is reputed in good health, if there dye but 1000 in a day, or 300000 in the whole yeare; I meane when the plague,Bot. of Cities which euery seauenth yeare vseth to visit them, is rife amongst them. 15 Gleba rubra, which was burned by Phero, called also Amenophis, the fourth Lat^hu^; on this occasion. This Phero being blind, was told, that is hee washed his eyes with the vrine of a woman,Herodotus. which being a wife, had knowne but one man, he should recouer his sight. After many vaine trials, be found one woman, whose vrine helped him; her he married: and causing all the others whom he had tryed, to be gathered together in this Town; he si^ed the Town and all the women assembled in it.
Famous is this Country, 1 for that raine is seldome seene amongst them, whose absence is supplied by Nile; and if a cloud happen to dissolue on them, it bringeth on their bodies innumerable sores, and diseases. 2ly for the Pyramides, built nigh vnto

Memphis, whereof two are most famous. The first and greatest was built by Che^ps, who in this worke imployed 100000 men, the space of 20 yeares. The charges of Garlick, Roots, and Onions only, came to 1600 Talents of siluer. The basis of this Pyramis contained in circuit 60 Acres of ground; and was in height 1000 ^oot, being made all of marble. Now when Cheops wanted mony, he prostituted his daughter to all commers, by which dishonest meanes, he finished his building: and she besides the mony due vnto her Sire (for I cannot call him father) desired for her selfe of euery man that had the vse of her body, one stone: of whom she got so many, that with them she made the 2d Pyramis, almost equall to the first, as Herodotus writeth.
It is supposed by many good Diuines, and recorded by Iosephus, that the bricks which the children of Israel did burne, were partly imployed about such Pyramides. But now
Barbara Pyramidum sileat miracula Memphis.Let barbarous Memphis cease to raiseHer wond^ous Pyramids with such praise.
On the East side of Egypt is the Red Sea, so called of the colour of the sands: as also Sinus Arabicus. It is in length 1600 miles. It is ^amous for the miraculous passage of the Israelits through it, and the drowning of Pharaoh Cenchres, and his people; as also for that through it the spices of India and Arabia were brought to Alexandria; and thence by the Venetians dispersed through all Europe, Africa, and Asia. I suppose I shall not doe amisse to set down Historically, a relation of the beginning, continuance, and period of the traffick through this Sea. Ptol. Philadelphus, 277 yeares before the Incarnation, was the first that set a foot this navigation;Galvano. Cosir (of old called Myos-Horm^s) on the Sea side, was the ordinary Hauen, out of which they hoysed ^aile for India; and into which they returned full fraught with their commodities. From hence they were by land conveighed to Coptus, and so downe the Nile to Alexandria: by which trafficke, the City grew exceeding rich; insomuch, that the custome-house there yeelded Ptol. Auletes, 7 millions and a halfe of gold, yearely. The Romans being Lords of Egypt, enhanced the customes to double that summe. They sent into India euery

yeare (as Pliny witnesseth) 120 ships, whose lading was worth 1200000 Crownes; and there was made in returne of euery Crowne, an hundred. When the Vandals, Lombards, Gothes, and Moores, had torne in pieces the Roman Empire, all commerce between Nations began to cease; at last perceiuing the inconvenience, they began anew; conveighing the Indian commodities, partly by land, partly by water, vnto Capha, in Taurica Chersonesus, belonging to the Genoys. Next, Trabezond was made the Mart-Towne; then Sarmachand in Zagetace; where the Indian, Turkish, and Persian merchants, met to barter wares: the Turks conveighing their merchandise to Damascus, Barutti, and Aleppo; from whence the Venetians transported it to Venice, making that the common Emporium of Christendome. Once againe, viz: Anno 1300, the Soldans of Aegypt restored the passage by the Red Sea: which hauing continued more then 200 yeares, is discontinued by the Portugals, Spaniards, English, and Dutch, which bring them to their seuerall homes by the backe side of Africke; so that not only the traffick of Alexandria is almost decayed; the riches of the Venetians much diminished; but the drugs and spices haue lost much of their vertue, as impaired by too much moisture.
This sea is also called Mare Erythraeum, on whose bankes dwelt that Sybill which was called Erythraea. These Sybillae seem to haue taken denomination from (...), 1. Iovis consiliorum consciae. They were in number ten, viz: 1 Persica: 2 Lybica. 3 Delphica. 4 Cumaea. 5 Samia. 6 Hellespontiaca. 7 Tiburtina. 8 Albunea. 9 this Erythraea. 10 Cumana, which last is affirmed to haue writte^ the 9 books of the Sybils. They were al presented by an old Woman to Tarquinius Superbus; but he not willing to pay so great a summe of money as was demanded, denied them: whereupon the old woman burnt three of them, requiring as much money for the other sixe, as for all; which being denied, she also burned the other three, asking as much for the three remaining, as for the rest: which Superbus, amazed, gaue, and the old trot vanished. These bookes contained manifest prophesies of the kingdome of Christ, his name, his birth, and death; these were burned by the arch-traitour Stilico: So

that those prophesies which are now extant, are onely such as are extracted out of others writings, wherein mention of them was made.
All along the shores of this Sea, as also in the most desart places of the country, are abundance of palmes; trees of very strange properties. They growe in couples male and female, both thrust forth cods full of seed; but the female is only fruitfull, and that not except growing by the male, and hauing his seeds mixed with hers. The pith of these trees, is an excellent sallad, better then an hartichoke, which in tast it much resembleth. Of the branches they make bedsteeds, lattices, etc. Of the leaues, baskets, mats, fannes, etc. Of the outward huske of the Codde, cordage; of the inward brushes. The fruit it beareth is like a figge, and finally it is said to yeeld whatsoeuer is necessary to the life of man. It is the nature of this tree, though neuer so huge or ponderous a waight were put vpon it, neuer to yeeld to the burden; but still on resist the heauinesse thereof, and to indeauour to lift and raise it selfe the more vpward: for which cause it was giuen to conquerours in token of victory, it being the embleme or hierogliphicke of a souldiers life, and perseuerance. Hence figuratiuely it is vsed, sometimes for precedency, as huic equidem consilio palmam do, in Terence, sometime for the victory it selfe, as non auferent tamen hanc palmam, in Plinie; and plurimarum palmarum homo, for a man that had wonne many prizes in the fence* schoole, in Cicero pro Roscio: but for the signe of victory more naturally, as in that of Horace,
--Palmaque nobilisTerrarum dominos evehit ad deos.The palme the signe of victoryDoth equall men to Gods on high.
Sithence that Cyrene, and the Ile Pharos, are reckoned as part of Egypt; we will describe them here, as members of the same body.
CYRENE hath on the East Egipt; on the West, the kingdome of Tunis; on the North, the Mediterranean; and on the South the hill Atlas. The most ancient name hath beene Pontapolitana, from the fiue Citties, Cyrene, Ptolomais, Arsinoe, Apollonia,

and Berenice. The soyle is barren both of fruits, and waters, the people rude, and liuing by theft: yet hath it giuen ayre to the ingenious spirits, of Aristippus the Philosopher, Callimachus the Poet, Eratosthenes the Mathematician, and Simon of Cyrene, whom the Iewes compelled to carry our Sauiours Crosse.
In the borders of this Country toward Barbary, stood the famous altars, called Arae Philenorum, erected on this occasion. There had beene many iarres and discontents, betweene the citizens of Carthage and Cyrene, for their bounds. At last it was agreed, that at a set time, two men should bee sent out of each Towne, toward the other; and where they met, there should be erected a boundary of their seuerall dominions. These Phil^ni, being appointed for Carthage made such hast, that they got far into the Country of the Cyrenenses, before they we^e mette. Wherevpon the Cyrenenses being inraged, offered them a bad choice; either to die in the place, or to goe backe out of their Country. The young men preferring common good before priuate safetie, accepted the first; were murdered: and the Carthaginians in their honours founded these altars.
In this Country stood the Oracle of Iupiter Hammon, whither when Alexander trauelled, hee saw for foure daies space, neither Man, Beast, Bird, Tree, nor Riuer: this Temple lying on the more Southerne part of the Country, which is sicke of the same disease with Numidia, and Lybia. For this Country is all ouer couered with a light sand, which the windes remooue continually vp and downe, turning valleyes into hills, and hills into valleies. Cambises that cruell and bloody king, as irreuerently esteeming the Gods, as hee bas^ly handled his subiects, sent his army hither to ouerthrow this Temple. But in the passage towards it, his whole forces were ouerwhelmed, and smothered with the sands, being to the number of 50000 fighting men.
The chiefe Citties of Cyrene at this present, are Cyrene which of old had emulation with Carthage, for great^^s of the towne, and extent of the territory. 2 Fessan. 3 Barca, the name giuer to the whole Country.
PHAROS is a little Iland ouer against Alexandria, in which for the commodity of Saylers, the king Ptolomeus Philadelphus built a watch towre, which was accounted one of the 7 wonders of the world: the other 6 being 1 the Pyramides. 2 Mausol^^um. 3 The Temple of Ephesus. 4 The walls of Babylon. 5 The Colossus of Rhodes. And 6 the statue of Iupiter Olympisus. This watch-towre, or Pharus, was of wonderfull height, ascended by degrees, and hauing many Lanternes at the toppe, wherein l^ghts burned nightly, as a direction to such as sayled by Sea. The materialls were white marble; the chiefe Architect, Sostratus of Guid^s; who ingraued on the worke this inscription, Sostratus of G^idos, the sonne of Dexiphanes, to the Gods protectors, for the safeguard of Saylers. This inscription hee couered with plaister, and theron ingraued the name and title of the king the founder; that that soone wasting and washed away, his owne which was written in marble, might be eternized to posterity. Nigh vnto this Pharus, Caesar pursuing Pompey into Egypt, and hauing discontented the king thereof, by demanding pay for his Souldiers; had his Nauie, which here lay at anchor, assaulted by Achilles, one of young Ptolomies seruants, Caesar himselfe being then in Alexandria. Hearing of the skirmish he hasted to Pharos, meaning to succour his navie in person: but the Egypti^ns making towards him on all sides, he was compelled to leap into the Sea, and swimme for his life; and though to avoid their Darts he sometimes ducke^, ^et held he still his left hand aboue the water, and in it diuerse books, which he carried safe vnto his ships, and animating his men got the victory. It is said that Egypt hath onely two doores; one by land, which is the strong Towne of P^lusium or Damiat^^ the other by water, which is this Pharus. Tota Aegyptus maritimo accessi^, Pharo; pedestri ve^o, (...), velut cla^^^tri^ muruta existimatur.
Here also was the artificiall Towre, built by Ptolomie, which being by reason of magicke ench^ntments impregnable, was by him laid leuell to the ground wi^h a handfull of beanes; of which thus our Sp^^c^r discoursing of K. Ri^nce's g^asse,
Who wonders not that reads so wondrous worke,But who doth wonder that hath read the Towre;Wherein th' Aegyptian Phao long did lurkeFrom all mens view, that none might her discou're;Yet she might all men view out of her bowre.Great Ptolomie it for his Lemans sakeYbuilded all of glasse by Magick power;And also it impregnable did make.
But when his loue prou'd false, he with a Beane it brake.
Mauethon in his history of Egipt maketh a Catalogue of 300 kings wanting eight, which raigned before Amasis, vnder 17 seuerall Dynasties, whose names it would be needlesse and tedious to recite: considering the fabulous reports, and vncertainties, which are related of them. Osiris only is worthy mention, in whose time it is thought Abraham went downe into Egipt. He, and his successours, were all called Pharaohs, whom we wil omit till we come to Amasis: who for his politick institutions, deserueth to stand in the forefront of the catalogue, as fou^der of this kingdome.

The Egyptian Pharaohs of the 18 Dynastie.
2242
1 Amasis in whose daies Iacob went into Egypt, 25.
2267
2 Chebron 13.
2280
3 Amenophis 21.
2301
4 Mephres 12.
2313
5 Mispharmutosis 26.
2339
6 Thuthemusis 9.
2348
7 Amenophis, II, who commanded the male children of Israel to be slaine, 31.
2379
8 Orus M. 38.
2417
9 Azengeres 12.
2429
10 Acherus 9.
2438
11 Cenchres, he was drowned in the Red Sea 16.
2454
12 Acheres 8.
2462
13 Cherres 15.
2477
14 Danaus, whose 50 daughters were married to the 50 sonnes of his brother Egyptus, and slew their husbands: for which fact Egyptus expelled Danaus, 5.
^482
15 Rameses Egyptu^, of whom the Country was called Egypt: he ruled 68 yeares.
2550
16 Menophis, or Miris* 40


The 19 Dynastie of the Latti.
2590
17 Zetus 55.
2645
18 Ranses 66.
2711
19 Sesostris, or Vexoris 40.
2751
20 Amenophis III, 26.
2777
21 Thuoris 7.

Of these fiue Latti, two only are of fame, viz: Amenophis, of whom we haue already related a pretty story: and Vexores, or Sesostris, who being a Prince of great wealth and puissance, had brought in subiection all his neighbouring kings; whom hee compelled in turnes to drawe his Chariot. It hapned that one of these vnfortunate Princes, cast his eye many times on the coach wheeles; and being by Sesostris demanded the cause of his so doing, he replied: that the falling of that spoke lowest, which but ^ust before was in the height of the wheele, put him in minde of the instabilitie of fortune. The king deeply waighing the parable, would neuer afterward be so drawne in his Chariot. He also was the first that encountred the Scythians in battle; for hauing already in conceit conquered them, he led his army against them. The Scythians maruelled that a king of so great reuenewes would wage warre against a nation so poore, with whom the fight would be doubtfull, the victory vnprofitable, but to be vanquished a perpetuall infamie and disgrace. For their par^s they resolu'd to meet him as an enimy whose overthrowe would enrich them. When the armies came to ioine, the E^^ptians were discomfited, and pursued euen to their own dores by the enimie. But the Scythians could not enter the cou^try, because of the sens; with whose passages they were vnacquainted; and so they returned.

The 20 Dynastie of the Princes Diapolitani, ruled Egypt 177 yeares, after which followed the 21 Dynastie of these K.
2961
22 Sm^ndes, called in the Bible, Sesac. 26.
2985
23 Psensenses 41.
3028
24 Nepher Cherres* 4
3032
25 Amenophis, IV. 9.
3041
26 Ossocorus, 6.
3047
27 Spi^^tes, 9
3056
28 Pers^se^^es, ^,
3060
29 Cheops 50.
3110
30 Cephrenes 56.
3166
31 Micerinus, 6.
3172
32 Asycis 6.
3178
33 Sabacus 50.
3208
34 Sethon, 33.
3278
35 Psamniticus 54.
3333
36 Necho, who slew fias at the battle of Megiddo, 17.
3349
37 Psamnis 6.
3355
38 Apries, 35.
3390
39 Psamnenites, 6. In the daies of this King Cambyses, the second Persian Monarch, subdued Egypt, and made it a member of his Empire; vnder which it continued subiect till the dayes of Darius Nothus, the sixt Persian king, from whom the Egyptians reuolted and chose for their K.
355^
1 Amartheus 6.
3558
2 Neph^rites 6.
3564
3 Achoris 12.
3576
4 Psamuthes 1.
3577
5 Nectanebos 18.
3595
6 Theo 2.
3597
7 Nectanebos, II. In the 18 yeare of the reign of this King, Egypt was againe recouered by the valour of Ochus, the eight Emperour of Persia. And when Alexander had ouerthrowne Darius, he came, and without blowes wonne this fertile kingdome, which yeelded him, during his life, the yearely value of 6000 talents. After his death, this kingdome fell to the share of Ptolomeus the sonne of Lagi, from whom all the subsequent Kings of Egypt were called Ptolomies.


The Ptolemean Kings of Egypt,
3641
1 Ptolomaeus Lagi, called by Daniel, the King of the South, Chap. 11. 40.
3681
2 Ptol. Philadelphus, he filled the Library of Alexandria, with 700000 volumes; and caused the 72 Interpreters to translate the Bible, 36.
3717
3 Ptol. Evergetes 26.
3743
4 Ptol. Philopator. 17,
3760
5 Ptol. Epiphanes, 24.
3784
6 Ptol. Philometor, 35.
3819
7 Ptol. Euergetes, II, for his deformity called Phiscon, 29.
3848
8 Ptol. Lathurus, 27,
3865
9 Ptol. Alexander. 10.
3875
10 Ptol. Lathurus, II, 8.
3883
11 Ptol. Auletes, 30.
3913
12 Cleopatra, a woman of most exquisite beauty: she killed her selfe that she might not be ledd in triumph through Rome. These Ptolomean Princes of Egypt, were for the most part in warres with the kings of Syria, in which they were by turnes victorious, and vanquished: neither Prince hauing cause to boast of his bargaine. After the death of Cleopatra, whose life and loue with Marcus Antonius, I will not now relate; this Country fell to the share of the Roman Emperours, and was by them highly prized, and warily looked into. The Gouernour hereof, was at the best but a Gentleman of Rome; no Senator being permitted to come into it: it being a maxime of state, not to suffer men of great houses, to come into that country, whose reuolt may indanger the whole Empire. Of this nature was Egypt, for besides the naturall situation of the place very defensible; and besides the abundance of money with which it was stored* this Country alone ^urnished the Citty of Rome with corne for foure months yearely: whence Vespasian being chosen Emperour by the Syrian legions, and hearing of the defeat of his concurrent Vitellius, hastned hither, to this end only, that detaining the ordinary prouision of victualls, hee might by famine compell the Citty of Rome, to stand at his deuotion, Vt vrbem quoque, externae opis indigam fame vrgeret. When the seat of the Empire was transferred, the Egyptians were vnder the Emperours of Constantinople; w^ose burden being i^supportable they implored the aid of the Saracens: who driuing thence the Greekish garisons, made them tributary to Haumar, the 3d Caliph of Bagdet. Afterwards they chose a Caliph of their own nation, and revolted quite from the obedience of the old ranke of Caliphs; so that hence forth yee haue two Caliphs or Saracenicall Popes, the one resident at Caire, to whom the Moores or Saracens of Africke and Europe submitted themselues: the other at Bagdet or Babylon, who Lorded it oue^ ^he rest.



The Egyptian Calyphs.

A. C.
A. H.
 


870
247
1 Achmades 10.


880
257
2 Tolon 3.



883
260
3 Hamaria 20.


903
280
4 Aharun, 37.


940
317
5 Aschid 3,


943
320
6 Abigud 27.


970
347
7 Meaz. 5.


975
352
8 Aziz 21.


996
373
9 Elhacom 23.


1019
396
10 Etaher 16.


1035
412
11 Mustenatzer 60.


1095
472
12 Musteale 5.


1100
477
13 Elamir 35.


1135
512
14 Elhaphit


 
 
15 Elphaiz, the last Egyptian Caliph. Yet I am not ignorant that Helvicus addeth seauen others, namely 1 Assareddin. 2 Zeliheddin. 3 Selaheddin. 4 Eladel. 5 Elchanel. 6 Essalach: and 7 Elmutam, after whose death, slaine, as he saith by one Azeddin Ibik, the Mamaluckes made themselues Masters of Egypt. But by the leaue of so worthy a man, this cannot hold good: or the Mamalucks, as we shall anon see, succeeded not the Caliphs in the gouernment of Egypt; but the Turkish kings. As for the names recited, I suppose them only to be the names of the Turkish kings, corrupted, or altered, according to the diuersity of language; for who seeth not Sarracon to bee meant by Assareddin, Salad^ne, by Zeliheddin and Selaheddin; Meledine, in Eladel; and Melechsala, in Essalach. But I see only with mine own eies, perhaps another wil not so discerne them.



Elphaiz the last Caliph, being ouercharged with the forces of Almericus King of Hierusalem; sent for succor to Noradine, a Turkish king of Damasco,Knolles. who sent vnto his aid Sarracon, a valiant and circumspect warriour. He not only cleered the coast of Almericus forces, but made himselfe the absolute king of the whole Country: and the better to secure his estate, hee dashed out the braines of the Caliph with his horsemans mace, and then rooted out all his kindred, and issue.

The Turkish Kings of Egypt.
1153
1 Sarracon, the first Turkish king of Egypt.
1156
2 Saladine, that glorious Conquerour of the East,

who wanted no vertue to eternize him in succeeding ages, nor no gift to glorifie him in the kingdome of heaven, but the sauing knowledge of Christ 16.
1172
3 Saphradine, the only sonne of n^ne, which escaped the fury of his most execrable Vnkle.

4 Meledine, who ouercame the Christians without the losse of a man, at the siege of Caire; by letting loose the sluces of Nilus: which drowning their Army, enforced them to couenant at his pleasure.
1249
5 Melechsela a worthy Prince, who ouercame S. Lewis the ninth, king of France; and going with him towards Damiata, was villanously slaine by his Souldiers, called Mamaluckes.

These Mamaluckes were the of-spring of Georgia, and Colchis, vulgarly called the Circassi: whom this Melechs^la bought either of their parents, or of the Tartars, then newly possessed of these Countries, to supply the defect of the effeminate Egyptians. These slaues now knowing their own abilities, slew their Lord and Master Melechsela; and appointed one Turquimeneius, a man of great spirit and valour, for their king; and loath to re-giue the supreame authority into the hands of the Egyptians, nor permitting their sonnes the name and prerogatiue of Mamaluckes; they yeare by yeare chose some of their owne Country, whom they gaue to diuers countrymen to learne the languages and religion of Mahomet. This being effected, they allotted them to higher preferment, vsing such discipline with them, as the Turkes doe now with their Ianizaries: who perchance may make as great a mutation in the Turkish Empire, as the Mamaluck^s did in the Egyptian. So vnsafe it is for a Prince to commit the tuition of his person, or the defence of his Realm to such; whom hope of profit, and not naturall allegiance maketh faithfull. Our Constance was murdered by his Guard of Picts. Most of the Roman Emperours by such Souldiers, whom hope of prey, not free seruice to the Prince, drew into the field. And I thinke no man is ignorant how often principalities, especially those of Italy, haue beene indangered by mercenary Martialists. Francisco Sforza fought vnder the banners of the

Millanoys, and on hope of more allowance reuolted to the Florentines, the enimies of that Dutchie. Guiacopo Picinino with his dependants, followed the ensignes of Ferdinand of Naples; left him to fight for his vowed enimy, Iohn of Aniou; whom also he forsooke in his greatest need. I will not specifie, yet I will not exempt the Switzers, and their dealing in this kind towards the French: so that I may apply that which the Gospell speakes of the hireling Ministers, to the hireling Souldier, They will flie when the enimie commeth, and not lay downe their life for their flocke. Now as it is vnsafe for a Prince to commit the guard of his person to the faith of forrainers: so also is it dangerous for him, in the defence of his Realme or State, to rely on their fidelitie. A moderate supply of men, mony, or munition, from a confederate King, is, I confesse, in most cases conuenient, in some necessary: as well to saue the natiues from the sword; as to trie a friend, and interest an allie in the same cause. But to inuite so great a number of succours, as from helpers may become Masters, and oppresse the people whom they came to defend: is that rocke on which many Realmes haue suffered shipwracke; and which a good Pilot of the state, should with all care avoid. For as in the sicknesse of the body natural, it is hurtfull to a mans health and life, to take more physick then it may (after the effect thereof be wrought) either digest, or put out againe: so in the body politick, it is a perillous matter to receaue more succours, then what (after they haue done the deed they were sent for) we may either with conueniency reward and settle with vs; or at liberty expell. Of all surfets, this of forraigne supplies is most vncurable; and Ne quid nimis, if in nothing else true, is in this case, oracle. There is no kingdome (I am verily perswaded) vnder the Sun, which hath not beene by this means conquered; no Commonwealth, which hath not beene by this meanes ruined. To relate all examples, were infinite and tedious: to inferre some, pleasing to the reader; and to illustrate the point, not vnnecessary. To beginne with former times. Philip of Maced^n, called into Greece, to assist the Thebans against the Phocians, brought all that Countrey vnder his command. The Romans by ayding the Sicilians against the Carthaginians,

possessed themselues of that flourishing Iland: by assisting the Hodui, against the Sequani, mastred France: by succouring Androgeus, against Cassibelan, seazed on Brittaine: by siding with the Aetolians, against Perseus, vnited to their Empire, all the Empire of Macedon; and by the same course what not? In after ages, the Brittaines called in the Saxons, and were by them thrust out of all: the Irish called in the English, by whom they were in processe of time totally subdued: and the Indians called in the Mongull Tartars, who now Lord it ouer them. These forraine supplies are inuited or let into a Country, commonly in three cases. First, when some one man vpon discontent, or desi^e of reuenge, openeth a way for them; and so Count Iulian let the Sarracens into Spaine, to reuenge himselfe on Don Rodrigo, who had rauished his daughter. 2ly, When a weaker faction maketh way for them, to ouerthrowe or counterpoise the stronger: so the Burgundians oppressed by the faction of Orleans, made way for Henry the fift to passe into France: and so the English Barons likely to be vanquished by king Iohn, sent for Prince Lewis into England. And 3ly when a king ouerburdened by a forraine ^oe, whom he is neither able to repell or resist, maketh vse of a forraine friend; which may chance to proue a physicke worse then the sicknesse, and in which cases plus a ^^dico est quam a morbo mali: so the Neapolitans being ouerlaid by the French, implored the ayd of the Spaniards: and so the last Caliph of this Egypt, where we now are, being ouercharged by Almericus king of Hierusalem, receaued succours from the Turkes: by which meanes both these kingdomes became a prey to their friends, and auoiding Scylla, fel into Charybdis. Nay somtimes it so hapneth, that these forraine succours ioyne with those whom they came to expell, and hauing vanquished the natiues, diuided the Country betweene them: and so we finde the Burgundians, being by Stilico called into Gallia to expel the Franks then newly entred; to haue ioyned forces with these Franks, and neuer to haue parted, till they had in a manner cast the deceaued Romans quite out of Gaule. Only among so many histories, we find the Low-countrymen to haue thriued by these courses, who by the assistance of forraine friends cleered themselues

from the fangs of Spaine: which obiection I confesse to be true, and for the honour and integrity of the English nation, am aboue measure glad of it; who saw no further then the defence of their neighbours, and aimed at no other end then the vertue it selfe.. But giue me the like instance and I will quit my cause; for the same Low-countreymen, found the French and German Souldiers, vnder the Prince of Orange, to bee but turne-tailes; and as for Francis Duke of Alanson, whom they had made Duke of Brabant, and their gouernour generall: his chief plot was to make himselfe an absolute tyrant ouer them. So that I thinke I may safely conclude, that forraine succours are of all remedies, the least to be trusted, and the last to be tried: but it is now more then time that I returned vnto the Mamaluckes.

The Mamalucke Sultans of Aegypt.
1250
Knolles.1 Turquimeneius, being promoted to this kingdome, released king Lewis taken prisoner (as is aboue said) by his predecessour Melechsela: but performed not halfe the conditions of the peace.

2 Clothes, or as others call him, Melech, taking adua^tage of the miseries of the Turkes, in his time shrewdly shaken by the Tartars; seazed on the greater part of Syria, and Palestine.
1260
3 Bandocader, perfected the begunne conquests of Melech. He tooke the strong Citty of Antioch, and the Country about it, from the Christians; and entring into Armenia, did there great harme also.

4 Melechsait, or Melechsares, in part repaired the Mamalucks kingdome in Syria and Palestine, which had beene shrewdly shaken by Edw the first, then Prince of England; and Henry Duke of Mecklebourge.
1289
5 Elpis or Alphix, established the conquests of his predecessour: he tooke the Citties of Tripolis, Beritus, Sidon, and Tyre: all which he razed, that they might not be seruiceable to the affaires of the Christians.
1291
6 Araphus, or Eustrephus, by birth a German, released Henry Duke of Mecklebourge, after hee had beene prisoner

26 yeares. He rooted the Christians out of Syria, took Ptolomais the last Towne they there held; and so razed it that he made it fit to be ploughed.

7 Melechnesar, when he was Lieftenant to Araphus, was discomfited by Cassanes, a great Prince of the Tartars, with the losse of 40000 Egyptians: but Cassanes being departed, he recouered againe all Syria, and destroyed Hierusalem; for which seruice hee was afterward made Sultan of Egypt.

8 Melechadel, whom I suppose to bee that Sultan that gouerned Egypt, when Tamerlane with vnresistable violence conquered it; but of this I am no certaine: neither can I meet with so much as the names of any of his successours, till Caithbeius.
1465
9 Caithbeius much reformed the state of Egypt, and was a stout enimy of the Turkish Sultan Ba^azet the 2d.
1498
10 Mahomet, sonne to Caithbeius, was by the Mamaluckes deposed; it being contrary to their custome, that the sonne should in the kingdome or name of Mamaluck succeed the father. He being deposed there arose diuerse factions in the Court; insomuch that in three yeares, here were foure Sultans, viz: this Mahomet, 2 Campsous Chiarcesius, 3 Zanballat, 4 Ton^mbeius.
1501
11 Campson Gaurus, reformed the distracted and factious state of this Country, and for 16 yeares gouerned very prosperously: but siding at last with Hismael the Persian Sophie, against Selimus the first Emperour of the Turkes; he drewe his kingdome into a warre, in which his armies were ouerthrowne, and himselfe slaine in the battaile.
1517
12 Tononibeius, succeeded Campson, as in his Empire, so in his misfortunes: for hee was ouercome by Selimus the first, 1517; and Egypt was made a Prouince of the Turkish Empire, and so continueth.

The reuenewes of this kingdome, were in the time of the Ptolomies, no lesse then 12000 Talents. Nor were they much lesse if ought be at all, when the Mamalucks ruled in this country:

For Campson Guarus at his Coronation, gaue no lesse then ten millions of Duckats at one clap amongst his Souldiers. But the Turkes at this day, partly through their tyrannicall gouernment; and partly through the discontinuance of the vsuall traficke through the Red Sea; receaue no more then three millions: one of which, is hoorded in his owne Coffers; the second is appropriated vnto his Vicegerent Bashaw, for support of his charge; the third is distributed amongst his Presid^arie Souldiers, and such of them, as by land, guard his own mi^^on to Constantinople; for by Sea he dareth not venture it, for feare of the Florentines.
Thus much of Aegypt.


THE AFRICAN ILES.
The AFRICAN Ilands are either
in the Ethiopicke sea, as
Magadascar.Zocotara.in the Atla^ticke sea, as
S. Thomas.The Princes Iland.The Gorgades.The Canaries.The Azores.The Hesperides.
1 MAGADASCAR, called also the Iland of S. Laurence, aboundeth with all manner of fruits; as also Beasts wild and tame. The inhabitants are of a duskie colour, curled haire, and Idolaters. The chiefe Towne is Magadascar. This Iland is in length 1200, in compasse 4000 miles; and situate vnder the Southern Tropique. It was discouered by the Portugalls, Ao 1506; The people are trecherous and vnhospitable; they vsed not to trade with others, neither suffered they others to trade with them: and though the Portugalls haue obtained a little trafficke with them, yet are they not permitted to come on land. The soyle yeeldeth cloues, Ginger, and Siluer; it is enriched with safe harbours, faire riuers, and plentie of fruit, and cattle: a Countrey too good for so base a people. For besides their two good qualities aboue-mentioned, they are ignorant of prayer, and festivals:

they haue no distinction of months or yeares, neither haue they any proper names for the daies of the weeke. The onely thing laudable in the^ is the restraining themselues to one wife.
2 ZOCOTARA lieth iust at the mouth of the Red Sea, and is some 10 degrees North from the Aequator; being in length 60, in breadth 24 miles. This Iland is much troubled with windes, molested with drinesse, and wanteth most things convenient to vitall sustenance. The chiefe Citty is Zocotara, the place of the kings residence: whose subiects are of tall stature, ash^e colour, and before the arriuall of the Portugalls, a kind of Christians, in sect Iacobites. The Portugalls haue here taken and fortified two Townes, viz: Coro, and Benin. The Iland though deficient in necessaries to life, is yet well replenished with Apothecaries drugges, and in especiall it yeeldeth the Aloe Zocatrina, Nigh hereunto are two Ilands, the one inhabited by men only, the other only by women, who at certaine times doe meet but stay not long together: the ayre of the one (as it is reported) not being healthie to the others inhabitants.
3 St THOMAS is in compasse 180 miles: It is of a round figure, and lieth directly vnder the Equinoctiall line. It is so fruitfull of sugar, that 40 shippes are loden with it euery yeare: The prime Citty is Pavoasan. When it was first discouered, it was nothing but a wood; but is now inhabited by Portugalls, and Negroes: the Negroes attaining diuerse times to 100 yeares of age; the Portugalls neuer exceeding 50. Wheat here sowne never commeth to any good; neither will it beare any fruit that hath a stone in it.
4 The Ile Del Principe, or the PRINCES ILAND, is situate betweene the Aequator, and the Tropicke of Capricorne; nigh vnto it is the Ile of Helens: they are both vnder the command of the Spaniard. The last took name from the Saints day where on it was discouered; and the first, because when the Portugalls had conquerd it, the reuenues hereof were allotted to the Portugall Prince.
5 The GORGADES, anciently called the Gorgons, where Medusa, and her two sister dwelt. This Medusa is said by the Poets, to haue beene a woman of great beauty; who either for

suffering her body to be abused by Neptune in one of the Temples of Pallas; or for pre^erring her selfe before Pallas: had by the same Goddesse her haire turned into snakes, and t^is property annexed vnto the^, that whosoeuer looked on her, should ^e turned into stones; which qualitie it retained after shee was slaine, and beheaded by Perseus. Thus, and farre more fabulously the Poets. The Historians (for as some think omnis fabula fundatur in historia) relate, how this Medusa was indeed a Lady of such exceeding beauty, that all men that saw her were amazed; and of such wise and subtile brain, that for that cause only men attributed vnto her a Serpents head: She abounding in wealth, and by piracie molesting the Seas of Europe, was inuaded by an army of Grecians, vnder the leading of Perseus, who in a single combat slew her. Perseus when he plucked off her helmet, admiring that beauty which he had destroy^d, cut off her head and carried it vnto Greece: where the people beyond measure wondred at the rare compositure of her face, and the exceeding beauty of her haire; and are therfore said to haue by her head bin metamorphosed into stones. So Pausanias in h^s Crrinthiacs. These Ilands are in number nine; and because they are situate nigh to Cape Viride in the land of Negros, are called Insulae Capitis Viridis. They all doe abound with Goats. The chief is S. Iames; whose prime towne is Ribiera, at this time fortified by the Spaniards.
6 The CANARIES are in number seauen. From these Ilands come our Canarie wines; which* fume into the head lesse, please the pallate more, and better helpe the naturall weaknesse of a cold stomach, then any other wines whatsoeuer. The Ilands abound in Canarie Birds, and sugar Canes, of which our best Marmolets are made. The Ilands were anciently for their fertility, and rare immunities, called the Fortunate Ilands; but now Canaries, either from the abundance of Dogges, which the Spaniards found here; or from the Ile Canarie, which was then the chiefe. The second of much note is Palma, where shipps vse to touch going towards America. The third Ten^riffe, 90 miles round: the inhabitants of which neuer heard of a showre or river; but receaue all their fresh water from a most high mountaine,

wherein there is a tree couered continually with a moist cloud, which euery noone dissolueth into water, and is by cisternes conveyed into diuers parts of the Iland. The other foure are Gomera, 2 Hierro, 3 Lansarotte, and 4 Fuerte Ventura; in a^l which it was accounted the basest office in the world to slay a beast, and therefore that charge belonged vnto their prisoners. Their flesh they did eate raw, for want of fire; and tilled (or rather turned vp) the ground with oxe hornes. Wiues they had many, with who^ they vsed for hospitalities sake, to lodge their friends; and in like curtesie to accompany theirs: this being as familiar and ordinary a complement in some places, as kissing is with vs.
7 THE AZORES are in number 9, viz: 1 S. Marie; 2 S. Michael, 3 Gratiosa, 4. S. George, 5 Pico, 6 Faiall, 7 Flores, 8 Corvo, 9 Tercera, which being the principall, giueth now name to all the rest, being called at this day the Tercera's. They were first discouered by the Flemings, and called the Flemish Ilands. Tercera it selfe aboundeth in Oade, called by vs Iland Oade: It is in compasse 18 miles, and was the last place that held out for Don Antonio against the Castilians. The second Iland of note is S. Michaell, famous in that our moderne Geographers, haue from the Canaries, or Fortunate Ilands (where the ancient Geographers placed it) remooued hereunto the first Meridian, whose office is to d^uide the East part of the World, from the West: and secondly, because the Compasse when it commeth vnder the Meridian line, drawne through this Ile, hath not (as the Marriners obserue) any variation at all, but pointeth directly to the North: whereas in other parts, or lesser Meridians East and W^st, it pointeth not directly North, but more or lesse to the North-east, or to the North-west; and this is called the variation, or the North-westing, and the North easting of the compasse. The third Iland of note is F^iall, taken by Sir Walter Raleigh, Anno 1597, maugre all opposition of the Spaniards. This Action was called the Iland voyage, and was vnder-taken aswell to diuert the warre, wh^ch the Spaniards threatned to bring to our own home; as by seasing on some of these I^ands, to interrupt the Spanish Fleet in their returne, or hinder them

in their setting out: by which meanes the Spaniards wanting their Indian ^old, might be brought to more conformity. And though the English kept not their winnings, yet so rich was the bootie purchased in this expedition, that it amounted to 400000 Crownes. All these Ilands were subdued by the Portugalls, vnder the conduct of Prince Henry, (sonne to Alphonso the fift, and father to Iohn the second) who first made the Portugals in love with the seas, Anno 1444.
8 The HESPERIDES, situate not farre from the Gorg^des, are often memorized by the Poets. For here dwelt the daughters of Atlas; here grew the golden apples kept by a dragon, and taken hence by Hercules; and here was the abode of blessed creatures, said to be called the Elysian fields. Of any Writer in my conceit, Plutarch best describeth them, and out of him I afford it vnto you; (...), etc. These two Ilands are parted by a litle streight of the sea, and are distant from the continent of Africk 10000 furlongs. They haue raine there very seldome, but a fine sweet dew, which maketh the earth very fertile, with litle or no paines to the husbandman. The weather is continually faire, the seasons all temperate, and the Aire neuer extreme. A blessed country, wherein Sertorius desirous now to liue quietly, hearing report of it, had an earnest desire to passe away the remnant of his dayes. So farre, and to this purpose Plutarch.
Thus much of the African Iles.



THE LONGITVDE AND LATITVDE of the chiefe African Cities.

A
Lo.
La.
 



Al^xandria

66
30
30
 
 



Agadez

38
20
23
30
 



Agisi^ba

24
 
7
 
 



Algeirs

33
 
35
20
 



Amara

63
30
30
 
A



Angola

45
10
7
 
A



Asna

66
30
25
 
 


B
 
 
 
 
 



Bangamedrum

62
30
6
 
 



Bernagassum

70
 
13
 
 



Benomotapa

55
 
26
 
A



Bona

37
10
35
40
 



Braua

74
30
 
30
 



Bugia

34
30
35
10
 


C
 
 
 
 
 



Caput bonae spei

50
30
35
 
A



Caput Viride

9
50
40
10
 



Caire

67
30
30
 
 



Cyrene

53
30
32
 
 


D
 
 
 
 
 



Damiata

69
 
32
40
 



Danca^i

66
50
17
10
 



Dara

66
50
12
 
 


F
 
 
 
 
 



Fatigar

74
 
2
40
A



Fesse

81
50
32
50
 


G
 
 
 
 
 



Gumea

18
 
9
10
A



Guangala

37
30
25
50
 



Goaga

55
 
22
 
 


M
 
 
 
 
 



Magadascar

77
 
19
 
A



Medera

8
10
31
30
 



Manicongo

47
10
7
 
A



Morocco

30
 
30
30
 



Melinda

71
20
3
20
A



Meroe

68
20
16
10
 



Membuza

72
 
4
50
A


P
 
 
 
 
 



Palma

6
20
28
 
 


S
 
 
 
 
 



Saba

68
20
8
40
 



Septa

22
 
35
40
 


T
 
 
 
 
 



Tanger

30
50
35
20
 



Tombutum

20
50
15
 
 



Telesine

29
 
34
 
 



Tunis

30
 
36
 
 


Z
 
 
 
 
 



Zama

74
40
11
40
A



Zocotara

88
 
12
50
 



Zanzibar

73
5
6
30
A



Zeila

80
 
11
12
 



Zimbaos

9
 
25
20
A



A is the note of a Southerne Latitude.

THE END OF AFRICA.



OF AMERICA.
THis great tract of Land is most aptly called the NEW WORLD. New, for the late discouery; and World, for the vast spaciousnesse of it.Purcha^. The most vsuall, and yet somwhat improper name, is AMERICA, because Americus Vespuccius discouered it: but sithence Columbus gaue vs the first light to discerne these Countries, both by example and directions; and Sebastianus Cabot touched at many parts of the Continent which Americus neuer saw: why is it not aswell called Columbana, Sebastiana, or Cabotia? The most improper name of all, yet most vsual among Marriners, is the WESTERNE INDIES: Westerne, because of the West situation; and India, because by that one name they expresse all wealthie (if remote) countries.
Many are of an opinion, and that rather grounded on coniecturall probabilities, then demonstratiue arguments; that this America was knowne long before our late discoueries. Their first reason is drawne from the doctrine of the Antipodes, which being among the ancient Philosophers, cannot but inferre a knowledge of these parts: to which we answere, that there was indeed a knowledge of the Antipodes by demo^stratio^ only; but not in fact: or if you will, we will say that it was known there were Antipodes; but the Antipodes were not knowne. Secondly, they say that Hanno a Carthaginian Captaine, discouered a great Iland: but he (saith Mela) sailed not Westward, but Southward, and lighted on a great Iland, which whatsoeuer it was (perhaps Magadascar) sure I am it was not America, and returned home, wanting not (as he told the Senate) Sea-room,

but victuals. Thirdly they produce these verses of Seneca, to inferre a knowledge of this great Country.

--Venient annis
Secula seris, quibus Oceanus
Vincula rerum laxet, and ingens
Pateat tellus, nec sit te^ris
Vltima Thule.--
In after-age the time shall come,
In which the all-deuouring foame
Shall loose its proper bounds, and shew
Another Continent to view:
Nor frozen Island shall we see
The vtmost part of th'Earth to be.

This argument (I hope) can bring no necessary or probable illation to apprehensiue eares; for the Poet in this Chorus, sheweth aswell the continuall dangers, as possible effects of navigation; that there might be, not that there were more nations discouered, then were knowne Fourthly, some affirme these Indies to be the land of Ophir, to which Solomon sent his Navy for Gold But Ezion-Geber, where this Navie lay at anker, till victuals and necessary tacklings were prouided; was situate in the very mouth of the Red sea; whereas if he had sent this way, his course had bin by the Mediterranean Seas, through the streights of Gibraltar, and so Westward through the vast Ocean. Fiftly, our more curious then profound Antiquaries obserue, the Brittish language to be here spoken in former times; and to haue left some smatterings of it till this day, namely that a bird with a whitie head is called Pengwin; and the like* And therefore went about to intitle Q Elizabeth to the soueraignty of these Countries: but she wisely did reiect these counsels, and not louing to put her sithe into another mans haruest, knew that aswell Welch-men, as others, might by force of tempest bee driuen to these parts; and hauing no possibility of returne, m^ght easily implant some part of their language in the memories of the people: So that yet we may conclude, that this country was vnknowne to former ages.
Now, as Mela the Geographer saith of Brittaine, then

newly conquered by the Romans: Britannia qualis sit, qualesque progeneret; mox certiora, and magis explorata dicentur: quippe tam diu clausam apperit ecce principium maximus, (he meaneth Claudius Caesar) nec indomitarum modo, sed and incognitarum ^nte se gentium victor: so may I say of America. What kinde of Country America is, and what men it produceth, we shall continually hereafter know more certainly: s^nce those puiss^nt Princes of Spaine haue opened vnto vs the Countrie so long vndiscouered; and inhabited not only by vnvanquisht, but vnknowne Nations. For God remembring the promise of his son, that his Gospell before the generall Iudgment, should be preached to the people of euery Nation: stirred vp Christ^pher Colon, or Columbus, borne at Nerui in the Country of Genoa, a man of an heroicke spirit, borne (as it seemeth) to attempt new matters. He considering the motion of the Sunne, could not perswade himselfe, but that there was another world, to which the Sunne imparted his light, after his departure from our Horizon. This world he hoped to discouer, and opening his intent to the Genowaies, Anno 1486, was by them reiected. Hereupon he sent his brother Bartholomew Columbus, to motion the matter to Henry the 7th, then King of England: but he vnfortunatly hapned into the hands of Pirats, who after long imprisonme^t, enlarged him Assoone as he was at liberty, he came to the English Court, and sollicited his brothers cause: the King ioyfully entertained the action, and sent for Christopher Columbus to come vnto him. But God had otherwise disposed of this rich purchase; for Columbus not knowing of his brothers imprisonment, nor hearing any thing of his hoped successe: thought his proffer to haue bin neglected or contemned; and thereupon he made his desires knowne at the Court of Castile; where after many delayes, he was furnished with two ships only; and those not for the conquest, but discouery. With this small assistance, he sailed in the maine Ocean, more then 60 dayes, yet could not as yet descry any land; so that the discontented Spaniards began a mutiny, and desirous to returne, would not goe a foot forward. At last the wary Italian, seeing the cloudes carry a clearer colour, then hitherto they had done; and thinking that this

clearenesse proceeded from some nigh habitable places; restrained the time of their expectation within the compasse of three dayes: in that space, if no land offred it selfe to their view, ingaging himselfe to returne. At the end of these three dayes, one of the company descried fire, an euident argument of the adiacent Country: which presently after, they apparantly discerned, Anno 1492. This Region was an Iland, by the inhabitants called Hailie; but by Columbus in honour of the Spaniards, Hispaniola Afterward he discouered Cuba, and with much treasure and greater content, he returned to Spain-ward: and after two great navigations (besides this) finished, he died, and lyeth buried at Seuill. The Spaniards notwithstanding the good seruice of this man, did not sticke after his death onely, to depriue him of the honour of these discoueries, attributing it to I know not what Spaniard, whose Cardes and descriptions this Columbus had met withall: but in his life also they would often say, that it was a matter of no such difficulty to haue found out these Countries; and that if hee had not done it, some-bodie else might.
At the first arriuall of the Spaniards into this Country, they found the people without all manner of apparell, nought skilled in Agriculture, making their bread of a kind of root, called Maiz, a root wherein is a venomous liquor, not inferiour to most deadly poysons; but this iuyce they crush out, and after hauing dryed and prepared the root, make their bread of it. They worshipped diuelish spirits, whom they called Zemes; in remembrance of whom they kept continually certaine images as it were, made of cotton wooll, like to our childrens babies. To these they did doe great reuerence, as supposing the spirit of their Zemes to be in them: and the diuel to blind them the more, would make th^s^ puppets seeme to moue, and make a noyse. They stood also in great feare of them; for if their wills were not fulfilled, the diuell straight executed vengeance on some of the children of this blinded and infatuated people. They thought the Christians to be immortall, wondring at the masts, sailes, and tacklings of their ships, (themselues knowing no ships, but ^uge troughs made of some great-bodied trees) but this opinion

of the Christians immortality continued not long; for hauing taken some of them, they held their heads vnder the water till they were choaked; by which they knew them to bee mortall. They were quite destitute of all good learning, reckoning their times by a confused obseruation of the Moone; and strangely admiring to see one Spaniard know the health and affaires of another, by a letter only. They were of a simple honest nature, without fraude, giuing entertainment after their kind, and grossely conceiued the immortality of the soule, supposing that beyond certain hills, they knew not where, those that died in defence of their country, should inioy eternall happinesse. They esteemed of Gold and Siluer, as of drosse, with which notwithstanding for the colour sake they adorned themselues, as also with Shells, Feathers, and the like, etc.
The inhabitants (though a great part of this Country lieth in the same parallell with Ethiopia, Lybia, and Numidia) are of a reasonable faire complexion, and very litle (if at all) inclining to blacknesse. So that the extraordinary and continuall vicinity of the Sunne, is not (as some imagine) the operatiue cause of blacknesse: though it may much further such a colour; as wee see in our Country lasses, whose faces alwayes are exposed to winde and weather. Others, more wise in their owne conceit, though this conceit know no confederate, plainly conclude the generatiue seed of the Africans to be blacke; but of the Americans to be white: a foolish supposition, and convinced not only out of experience, but naturall Philosophie. As for that foolish tale of Cham's knowing his wife in the Arke, whereupon by diuine curse his sonne Chus with all his posterity, (which they say are the Africans) were all blacke: it is so vaine, that I will not endeauour to refell it. So that we must whol^y refer it to Gods peculiar will and ordinance.
They are without question the progenie of the Tartars, which may bee proued by many arguments, some negatiue, some also affirmatiue. The negatiue arguments are, 1 they haue no relish nor resemblance at all, of the Arts, Learning, and ciuility of Europe. Secondly, their colour sheweth them not to haue descended from the Africans, here being no blacke men

in all this Country, but some few which inhabite the sea-coasts ouer against Guinea in Africke: from whence they are supposed by some tempest to haue bin brought hither. Thirdly, they haue not the least token or shew, of the Arts or industry of China, India, or any ciuill Region on that side of Asia. The affirmatiue arguments proue first, that they came from Asia; next in particular from Tartarie. That they came out of Asia, is more then manifest, in that the west side of the Country towards Asia, is farre more populous then the East towards Europe: of which there can be no other reason assigned, then that these parts were first inhabited; and that from hence the rest was peopled. Next for the next, the idolatry of this people, and the particularities thereof; their inciuility and barbarous properties, tell vs that they are most like the Tartars, of any. Secondly the west side of America, if it be nor Continent with Tartary, is yet disioyned by a very small straight, as may be perceiued in all our mappes, and Cardes; as also in the descriptions of these Countries: So that there is into these Countries, a very quicke and easie passage. And thirdly the people of Quivira, which of all the Prouinces of America is the nearest vnto Tartary, are saide to follow in the whole course of their life, the seasons and best pasturing of their oxen; iust like the Scythian Nomades, or Tartarian hords: an euident argument of their descent and originall.
The Sp^^iards since their comming hither, haue behaued themselues most inhumanely towards the vnarmed Natiues; killing them vp like sheepe for the slaughter; and forcing them like beasts to labour in their mines, carry all burdens, and doe al drudgeries. Haythney, a Nobleman, being with many applausiue arguments perswaded to embrace the Christian Religion; demanded first, what place was ordained for such as were baptized, answere was made, Heauen and its ioyes: Secondly, what place was bequeathed to them who would not bee baptized; answere was made, Hell and its torments: Thirdly, which of these places was allotted to the Spaniards; and when answere was made, that Heauen was: hee renounced his intended baptisme; protesting, that he had rather goe to Hell with the vnbaptized,

then to liue in heauen with so cruell a people. The rest were driuen to the Font, like so many horses to a watringplace; and were receiued into the Church of Chr^st thick and threefold: Insomuch, that one old Frier, (as himselfe confessed to Charles the fift) sprinkled with the water of baptisme, 700000: another 300000 of them: but neuer instructed them in the articles of faith, or points of Christian Religion. Yet here our holy father the Pope, hath raised vp a new Empire, insteed of that which lately fell from his iurisdiction in Europe. This Church he gouerneth by 4 Archbishops,Grimston. of Mexico, Lima, S. Foy, and Dominico; as also by 25 inferiour Bishops, all nusled vp in his superstition.
The politique administration of Iustice is committed to the two Vice-Royes, residing at Lima and Mexico: who gather also the Kings revenues, which being the fift part of euery mans labour, amount to the yearely value of 3 millions of Crownes, and vpward.
When this new world came first acquainted with the olde, Isabel Queene of Castile, would not permit any of her husband Ferdinando's subiects to adventure here, viz: Arragonians, or Valentians: but licenced the Castilians, Andalusians, Biscaines, and the rest of her owne people only; enuying the wealth hereof to the rest. When she was dead, Fernando licenced generally all the Spaniards, excluding onely the Portugals. But so rich a prize could not so warily be fenced, but that Portugals, French, English, and now of late the Low-countrimen, haue layed in their owne barnes, part of the Spaniards haruest, who well hoped to haue had a monopolie o^ so wealthie a Region: and to haue enioyed without any riuall or competitor, the possession, (I cannot say the loue) of a country abundantly fruitfull in Spices, Fruits, and such Creatures, which the old world neuer knew: burdened with such store of kine and buls, that the Spaniards killed thousands of them yearely, for their tallow and hides only: blest with such abundance of gold, that the Spaniards found in their mines more gold then earth; a mettal which the Americans not regarding, greedily exchanged for hammers, kniues, axes, and the like tooles of iron: For before they

were wont to make their Canes or boats plaine without, and hollow within by the force of fire. Other particularities shal be specified in the particular delineation of euery Countrey; now let vs returne againe to our discoueries of this great part of the world. Columbus hauing thus fortunately begun this worthy enterprise was seconded by Americus Vespusius, a Florentine; employed herein by Emanuell King of Portugall; who finding out the Continent or maine Land of this Country, called it America. To him succeeded Iohn Cabot, a Venetian, the father of Sebastian Cabot, in the behalfe of Henry the 7th of England* and after these, diuerse priuate vndertakers and adventurers, out of all nations of Europe, that border on the Ocean. Ferdinando Magellanus, was the first that compass^d the world, and found out the South passage called Fretum Magellanicum: him followed our Drake, and Candish; Frobisher, and Dauies, attempted a discouerie of the North-west passage: Willoughby, and Burroughes of the North-east: So that (according to that elegant sa^ing of Sir Francis Bacon in his Aduancement of Learning,) This great building the world, had neuer through lights made in it, till those dayes: by which, and of all parts of Learning, this of Navigation, and by consequence of Cosmographie, hath in latter times obtained an incredible proficiencie. For proofe of which, I will draw down a small History of Navigation, from its infancie, till this perfect and complete growth. In the worlds beginning, men quietly liued at home, neither greedy of forrain commodities, nor inquisitiue after their liues or fortunes; and as the Poet hath it
Nondum caesa suis (peregrinum ut viseret orbem)Montibus, in liquidas pinus descenderat undas.The Pine left not the hils whereon it stood,To seeke strange lands, or roue vpon the flood.
But when the prouidence of God had instructed Noah how to build an Arke, for the safety of him and his, from the vniuersall Deluge; this Arke setling on the mountaines of Ararat, and there long time remaining; gaue the Phoenicians, a sea-people, a patterne, whereby they might make the waters passable. The heathen writers which knew not Noah, attribute the invention of

shipping to diuerse men: Strabo, to Minos King of Crete; Diodorus Siculus, to Neptune; who was therefore called the god of the Sea: and Tibullus, to the City of Tyre, a most potent and flourishing Common^weal^h among the Phoenicians, saying,
Prima ratem ventis credere docta Tyros.The Tyrians first did teach vs how,With a shippes keele the seas to plow.
The Aegyptians receiued this invention from the Tyrians, and added much vnto it. For whereas first the vessels were either made of an hollow tree, of sundry bordes ioyned together, and couered with beasts skinnes, which kinde of vessels are still in vse in America: the Phoenicians brought them to strength and forme; but the Aegyptians added deckes vnto them. This vse of shipping was taught the Greekes, by Danaus King of Egypt, when he fled from his brother Rameses, Nave prunus ab Aegypto Danaus advenit (saith Pliny) ante enim ratibus navigabatur: where we may see the difference betweene navis, a ship; and ratis, a barge, or open vessell; of which last sort were they, which waf^ed ouer the Grecians to the siege of Troy. Of all the Grecians, the Cretans were this way most industrious, which gaue both occasion to Aristotle to call Crete the Lady of the Sea; and to the Prouerbe, Cretensis nescit pelagus? The Carthaginians being a Colonie of Tyre, were perfect in this Art, and thereby much damaged the Romans: till it hapned that a tempest, separating a Quinqueremis, or Galley of fiue oares, from the Carthaginian Fleet, cast it on the shoare; of Italy, whereby the Romans learning the Art of ship-wrights, quickly became masters of the Sea. This chanced about the beginning of the first Punicke warre. That France, and Spaine, learned this Art from the Phoenicians, is more then probable: Marseiles in the one, and Cadiz in the other, being both Tyrian Colonies. As for the Belgians, till the Romans taught it, there was no shipping, Caesar himselfe affirming, that Ad eos mercatores minime co^meant. And the seas twixt Brittaine, and France, were so ill furnished with vessels, that Caesars souldiers were compelled to make shippes, for the transportation of his Army; singulari militum studio, (they are his owne words) circiter sexcentas and d^odetriginta

naves invenit. Hauing thus brought Navigation to the height and extent it had in those dayes, I will looke back again on the inventours of particular vessels, and the tackling to them belonging. The Phoenicians (as we haue before said) invented open vessels; the Aegyptians, shippes with deckes; they also invented the Galley of two bankes on a side, which vessels by length of time grew so large, that Ptolomie Philopater made one, of no fewer then 50 bankes of oares on one side, Large ships of burden called Circera, we owe to the Cypriots; cockboats, or ski^fes, (scaphas) to the Illyrians; brigantines, (celoces) to the Rhodians; and frigats or swift barkes (Lembos) to the Cyrenians. As for the tacklings, the Boeotians invented the oare; Daedalus, and his sonne Icarus, the masts and sailes; which gaue the Poets occasion to faigne, that those two made wings to their bodies, and fled out of Crete; and that Icarus soaring too high, melted his wings, and was drowned: the trueth indeed being, that presuming too farre on his new invention* he ranne against a rocke, and so perished: For hippagines, ferrieboats, or vessels for the transporting of horse, we are indebted to the Salaminians; for grappling-hookes to Anach^rsis; for Ancres, to the Tuscans; and for the rudder, helme, sterne, or Art of steering, to Typhis; who seeing that a Kite when shee flew, guided her whole body by her taile; effected that in the deuices of Art, which he had obserued in the workes of nature. The greatest voyages which I haue met withall in old stories, are those of Iason, Vlysses, and Alexander, with the Fleetes of Solomon, and the Aegyptian Kings. Of these, Iason and his companions, sailed in the ship Argo, (whereof Typhis aboue-mentioned was master) through the Euxine sea, and part of the Mediterranean: Vlysses through the Mediterranean only, smal gullets if compared with the Ocean. Alexander's iourney so famoused, and accounted so hazardous, was but sayling down the riuer Ganges, and 400 furlongs into the Ocean: and for the Fleets of Solomon, and the Kings of Aegypt, it is very apparant that they went with great leisure, and crawled close by the shore side; otherwise it had bin impossible to haue consumed 3 whole yeares, in going from Ezion Geber, into India, and returning

againe, which was the vsuall time of these voyages, as appeareth in the 1 of Kings, chap. 10, verse 22. After the fall of the Roman Monarchie, the most potent states by sea in the Mediterranean, were the Genowaies, and Venetians: in the Oce^n, the English, and the Hansetownes; neither of which euer attempted any discoueries. About the yeare 1300, one Flauio, of Melphi in the Realme of Naples, found out the Compasse, or Pixis Nautica, consisting of 8 windes onely, the foure principall, and foure collaterall; and not long after, the people of Bruges and Antwerp^, perfected that excellent invention; adding 24 other subordinate windes or points. By meanes of this excellent instrument, and withall by the good successe of Columbus: the Portugals, Eastward; the Spaniards, Westward; and the English, Northwards; haue made many a glorious and fortunate expedition. And now I returne to my particular descriptions of America; onely telling you by the way, that the chiefe writers in Pilotisme, or the Art of Navigation, are Petrus de Medina; Peter Nonius in his Regulae artis navigandi; and Iohannes Aurigarius in his Speculum Nauticum.

OF MEXICANA.
America is diuided into two parts
Mexicana.Peruana.
MEXICANA containeth the Northerne tract, and comprehendeth the distinct Prouinces of 1 Mexico, 2 Quivira, 3 Nicaragua, 4 Iucutan, 5 Florida, 6 Virginia, 7 Norumbega, 2 Nova Francia, 9 Corterialis, 10 Estotilandia.
MEXICO, giuing name to hal^e America, is now called Nova Hispania; whence the Kings of Spaine vse to stile themselues, Hispaniarum Reges. In this Country is that excellent tree, called Mete, which they plant and dresse, as we doe our Vines. It hath 40 kindes of leaues, which serue for many vses; for when they be tender, they make of them conserues, paper, flaxe, mantles, mats, shooes, girdles, and cordage. On these leaues grow certain prickles, so strong and sharpe, that they vse them

insteed of sawes. From the root of this tree commeth a iuyce like vnto sirrop, which if you seethe it will become hony; if you purifie it, will become sugar: you may also make wine and vineger of it. The rinde rosted, healeth hurts and sores; and from the top-boughes, issueth a gumme, which is an excellent antidote against poi^on.
It aboundeth with golden-sanded riuers, in which are many Crocodiles, (though not so bigge as the Crocodiles of Egypt) which the people eate: it is very much furnished with Goldemines. and glorieth in the mountaine Pr^pochampathe, which is of the same nature with Aetna, and Vesuvius. The limits of it are on the East, Incutan, and the gulfe of Mexico; on the West, Calformio or Mar Vermiglio; on the South, Peruana: the Northerne bounds are vnknowne: so that we cannot certainely avow this America to be Continent; nor certainely affirme it to be an Iland, distinguished from the old world. It was very populous before the arriuall of the Spaniards, who in 17 yeares slew 6 millions of them; rosting some, plucking out the eyes; cutting off the armes of others; and casting them liuing to bee deuoured of wild beasts. It is diuided into four parts, viz: Noua Gallicia, 2 Mechuachan, 3 Guastachan, 4 Tremistitan.

1 Gallicia Nova is watred with the riuers Piastla, and S. Sebastian. The principall Cities are 1 Xalisco, taken by Nonnio Gusmano, 1530, 2 Guadalaiara. 3 Capal^, now New Mexico. 4 Coanum, where the men are content with one wife, which is here a miracle. 5 Compostella: and 6 S. Esprit: all which were built by Nugno Gusman, after by taking of Xalisco he had mastred all the Prouince. The people hereof, that liue vpon the shoare, seed most on fish: they of the inland parts, on flesh, which they take in hunting. They goe for the most part naked; and before the comming of the Spaniards, acknowledged no lord, but liued in a common libertie. That Country which lieth betweene the two riuers of Piastle, and S. Sebastian abouementioned, is by a peculiar name called Couliacan; stonie it is, and rough, as the rest of Nova Gallicia; yet yeelding mines of Gold in good plenty. The chiefe Towne is S. Michael, where is a Colonie of Spaniards.
2 Mechu^can containeth in circuit 80 leagues. It is one of the best countries of New Spaine, abounding in mulberry trees, silke, hony, waxe, black amber, and such store of fish, that from them it tooke its name; Mechuoucan signifying a place of fishing. The men are tall, strong, and actiue; and speake a most elegant and copious language, and seeme to be of a very good wit. The chiefe townes are 1 Sinsonse, the residence of the olde Kings of this Country. 2 Pascuar. 3 Colima. 4 Valadolit a Bishops See. The principall hauens are S. Anthonies, and S. Iames, or S. Iago.
3 Gnastacan, is most poore in the naturall commodities of the soyle: but rich in the more ciuill life of the inhabitants. The chiefe City is Tlascalan, the chiefe city of all these parts next vnto Mexico, vnto whom only it yeeldeth precedencie. It is seated in the pleasantest part of all the country; rich it is, populous, and gouerned after the forme of a Common-wealth, vnder the protection of the King of Spaine. 2 Villeriche, a port-towne, very wealthie, because all the traffick, betwixt the olde and new Spaines, doth passe through it. The Spaniards haue in it two Colonies, viz: Pamico, and S. Iames in the valleyes.
4 Tremistatan or Mexico, is the greatest and noblest of these foure: in it are the cities 1 Villarucca, 2 Antichero, 3 Meccioca, 4 O^topan, 5 Mexico, the seat of an Archbishop, and of the Spanish Vice-Roy; whose power is to make Lawes and Ordinances, to giue directions, and determine controuersies, vnlesse it be in such great causes, which are thought fit to be referred ^0 the Councell of Spaine. This City is situate on the Lakes and Ilands like Venice, euery-where interlaced with the pleasant currents of fresh, and sea waters; and carrying a face of more ciuill gouernment then any of America; though nothing, if compared with Europe. The plaine wherein the Town standeth, is said to be 70 leagues in compasse, environed with high hills, on the tops of which, snow lieth continually. The Lake on whose banke it standeth, is 50 miles in compasse; all along whose bankes stand pleasant Townes, and diuerse houses; on which Lake also, 50000 wherries are continually plying. Mexico is in compasse 6 miles, and containeth 6000 houses of Spaniards,

and 60000 of Indians. It is a by-word, that at Mexico there are foure faire things, viz: the women, the apparell, the horse^, and the streets. Here is also a printing house, an Vniuersity, and a Mint.

Nigh to this Citty is the gulfe of Mexico, whose current is so swift and heady, that shipps cannot passe directly to and fro, but are compell'd to beare either much North, or much South. It is 900 miles in compasse; and hath two ports, one betweene the farthest part of Iucutan, and the Ile of Cuba, at which the tide with a violent streame entreth: the other between the said Cuba, and the farthest point of Florida, at which the tide with like violence goeth forth. The Sea is very tempestuous, and hath only two safe portes, viz: Havana on the North side: and 2 St Iohn de Lua, strongly fortified by the Spaniards, on the South.
The people of Mexico, or Tremistitan, are witty and industrious, full of courage and valour; good handicraftsmen if they giue their mindes to it, and rich marchants, such as so apply themselues. In their warres they vsed slings and arrowes: and since the comming of the Spaniards among them, the harcubuise. Their kings succeeded not by right of bloud, but by election; and were commonly actiue, lusty, and fit for war; the people holding it lawfull to kill their kings, if they were reputed cowards. They had among them an order of Knights instituted by the last king, which were licensed to weare gold and siluer, to be cloathed in Cotton, and to weare breeches; all which were prohibited the vulgar.
This Country is inferiour to Peru in the plenty and puritie of gold and siluer, but farre exceeding it both in the mechanical and ingenious arts here professed; and in the abundance of fruits and cattle: of which last here is such store, that many a priuate man hath 40000 kine and oxen to himselfe. Fish is here also in great plenty, that only which is drawne out of the lake whereon Mexico standeth, being reputed worth 20000 Crownes.
The Mexicans first were the inhabitants of Nova Gallicia, whence they made a violent irruption, as is coniectured, Anno 720. They lingred in diuers places, till the yeare 902, when vnder the leading of Mexi their Captaine, they built this Citty,

and called it after the name of their Generall. They were in all, 7 Tribes; which ruled long in an Aristocraticall state, till the most puissant of the Tribes called Nauatalcas, elected a king to whom they submitted themselues.

The Kings of Mexico.
1 Vitzilovitli.
2 Acamopitzli.
3 Chimalpapoca.
4 Izchoalt.
5 Motecumo. 1
6 Acacis.
7 Axaica.
8 Antzlol.
9 Motecumo II.
10 Quabutimoc.

The most fortunate of these Kings was Izchoalt, who by his Cosen Tlacaellec, subdued the other 6 Tribes, and brought them vnder the Mexican Kings. After the death of Izchoalt, Tlacaellec was by the Electours (which are six in number) chosen K. as a man of whose vertue they had formerly made triall. But he very nobly refused it, saying, that it was more conuenient for the commonwealth, that another should be king, and that hee should execute that which was for the necessity of the state, the^ to lay the whole burden vpon his backe: and that without being king, he would not leaue to labour for the publike, as well as if he were. Vpon this generous refusall, they made choice of Motecumo the first. The most vnhappy, at whose birth could not but be some disastrous aspect of the Planets, were the two last: who were both vanquished by Fernando Cortez and Mexico was made subiect to Spaine, Anno. 1521. The army which Cortez led with him, to conquer this so puissant and florishing estate, consisted of 100000 Indians, or Americans, 900 Spaniards only, 80 horse, 17 peeces of small ordnance, 13 brig^ndines, and 6000 wherry-boats, which he imploied in infesting Mexico from the lake aboue mentioned. Most of these 100000 Indians were of the Citty and territory of Tlascalan, who never held good side with the Mexicans: for which cause that citty enioyeth many immunities to this day.
QVIVIRA is seated on the most Westerne part of America, iust ouer against Tartary, from whence being not much distant, it is supposed that the inhabitants first came into this new world. It is full of herbage, and enioyeth a temperat ayre:

the people are desirous of Glasse more then of Gold; and in some places are Caniballs. The chiefe riches of this Country, are their kine, which are to this people, as wee say with vs of our Ale to drunkards; meat, drinke, and cloath, and more too. For their hides yeeld them houses, or at least the couerings of them; their bone, bodkinnes; their haire, threed; their sinewes, ropes; their hornes, mawes, and bladders, vessells; their dung, fire; their Calues-skinnes, budgets to draw and keepe water; their bloud drinke; their flesh, meat. There is thought to be some trafficke from China or Cathay hither: For when Vasques di Coronado conquered it, he saw in the further sea certaine shippes, not of common making, which seemed to be well laden; and bare in their prowes, Pellicans: which could not be co^iectured to come from any Country, but one of these two. Hauing now said thus much concerning Quiuira in generall, it is time we should proceed to her Prouinces, which are Cibola, and Noua Albion.
Cibola, lieth on the East side, and taketh its name from the chiefe Citty: the next to which is Totontoa, situate on a riuer so called. 3 Tinguez burnt by the Spaniard, who vnder the conduct of Francisco Vasquez de Coronado, made this Prouince subiect to their King, Anno 1540.
Noua Albion lieth on the West side, towards Tartary. It was discouered by that Noble Captaine, Sr Francis Drake, A. 1585 and by him called Noua Albion: because the King did willingly submit himselfe to our Queene. The Country is abundant in fruit, pleasing both the eye and the pallat; the people are giuen to hospitality, but withall to witchcraft, and adoration of diuels. The chiefe Citty is called after the name of the Prouince. Here is a Hare resembling a Want in his feet, and a Cat in his taile; vnder whose chinne nature hath fastned a little bagge, which she hath also taught him to vse as a storehouse; for in this, hauing filled his belly, preserueth the remnant of his prouision. The bound betweene this Quivira, and Mexicana^, is Mar Vermiglio, or Califormio.
NICARAGVA is Southeast from Mexico, with whom it agreeth in nature, both of soyle, and inhabitants. For the people are of good stature, and of colour indifferent white. They

had before they receaued Christianity, a setled and politike form of gouernment: only as Solon appointed no law for a mans killing of his father, so had this people none for the killer of a king both of them conceiting, that men were not so vnnaturall as to commit such crimes. A theefe they iudged not to death, but adiudged him to be slaue to that man whom he had robbed, till by his seruice he had made satisfaction: a course more merciful, and not lesse iust, then the losse of life. The Country is so pleasing to the eye, and abounding in all things necessary, that the Spaniards call it Mahomets paradise; and among other flourishing trees, here groweth one of that nature, that a man cannot touch any of their branches, but it withereth presently. It is as plentifull of Parrets, as England is of Crowes; and hath a lake 300 miles in compasse, which hauing no entercourse with the Ocean, doth yet ebbe and flowe continually. The chiefe Citties are 1 New Granado. 2 Leo a Bishops See.
IVCVTAN, was first manifested to the Europaeans, by Francisco Hernandes di Cordoua, Anno 1517. It was called Iucutan not as some conceit it, from Ioctan the son of Heber, who they thinke came out of the East, where the Scripture placeth him, (Gen. 10.30) to inhabit here: but from Iucutan, which in the American tongue, is, what say you. For when the Spaniards at their first comming hither, asked the name of the place; the Savages not vnderstanding what they meant, replied Iucutan, that is, what say you: wherevpon the Spaniards alwaies after called it by this name. The Country is 900 miles in circuit, and is a Peninsula. This Country is very fresh and plentifull, but especially about Guatimala. It is situate ouer against the Ile Cuba, and is diuided into three parts: I, Iucutan, whose Citties of greatest worth, are Campechium, Sidalancum; and one, which for its greatnesse and beauty, they call Caire. II, Guatimala, whose inhabitants haue lost halfe a million of their kinsmen and friends, by the vnmercifull dealing of the Spaniards: The chiefe Townes are Guatimala, Cassuca, and Giapa. III, Acasamill, an Iland ouer against Guatimala, vulgarly called Santa Cruza, or Insula S. Crncis. The chiefe towne is Santa Cruza.
FLORIDA hath on the East Mare del Norte; on the West,

Mexico; on the North, Noua Francia; and on the south, Virginia. It was discouered by the English, vnder the guiding of Sebastian Cabot, Anno 1497. Afterward it was possessed by Iohn Ponce, a Spaniard, 1527; who called it Florida, because hee came first to it on Easter day, which the Spaniards call Pascha Florida; or else quia Florida erat regio, because it was a flourishing Country. For indeed the Country aboundeth with goodly fruits, and hath good quantity of gold and siluer: Emeralds are also found here, and so are Turquosies and Pearles. The men of this country doe naturally loue warre and reuenge, insomuch that they are continually in warre with one or other. They are crafty also and very intelligent, as appeareth by the answere they gaue to Ferdinando Soto, a Spaniard, who was here among them Ao 1549. For when he went to perswade the people that hee was the sonne of God, and came to teach them the law: not so, replied a Floridan, for God neuer bad thee to kill and slaie thus, and worke all kinde of mischief amongst vs. The women when their husbands are dead, vse to cut off their haire close to their eares, and strew it on his sepulchre: and cannot marry againe, till their haire be grown long enough to couer their shoulders. Hermaphrodites are here also in great plenty, whom they vse as beasts to carry their luggage, and put them to all kinde of drudgery. They haue all a grosse beleefe of the soules immortality, but are otherwise idolaters. After the discouery of Ponce, this Country fell next into the possession of Iohn Ribaulte and the French, Anno 1562: but the Spaniards vnwilling to let the French be eye-witnesses of their rich booty, waged warre with them so long; that there was not a man left on either side to maintaine the quarrell: and Florida was againe abandoned, Ao 1567. The principall Citties are 1 Arx Carolina built by the French and ruined by the enimy: 2 S. Helens. 3 S. Mathewes, built by the Spaniard. Here are also three strong forts holden by the Spaniards, and well garrisond, viz. S. Iames, S. Philip, and S. Augustine; which last was taken and burnt by Sr Fraenis Drake, Ao 1586, and is againe repaired. These three forts are all which the King of Spaine hath in this Country, so that it seemeth he is not so desirous to plant it himselfe, as to hinder others from doing it.
VIRGINIA called by the natiues Apalchen, hath on the East, Mare del Noort; on the West, we yet knowe not what limit; on the North Norumbega; and on the South, Florida. It is so fruitfull, that two acres of land will returne 400 bushells of corne. There is said to be rich vaines of Allum, Pitch, Tar, Rozen, Turpentine, store of Cedar, Grapes, Oyle, plenty of sweet Gummes, dies, timber trees, mines of iron and copper; and abundance of fruit, Fishes, Beasts, Fowle, and that hearb or grain which they call Maize.
The people are of indifferent stature; they vse to paint their bodies with the pictures of Serpents, and other vgly beasts; and are cloathed in a loose mantle made of Deeres skinne, and weare an apron of the same before their nakednesse. They worship all things, and them only, which are able to hurt them, as fire, water, lightning, thunder, etc.
There is but one entrance into this Country by Sea, which is at the mouth of a very goodly bay: the Capes on both sides, being called Cape Henry, and Cape Charles, are after in some sort fortefied. It is watred with the riuers Quibequesson, and Apanawapeske. The chiefe Towns are 1 Kequoughton, 2 Iames Towne. 3 Dalefeguift. It was discouered by the English at the directions and charges of Sr Walter Rawleigh, Anno 1584, and in honour of our Virgin Queen, was called Virginia. The English haue diuerse times gone thither to inhabit; some not liking the Country returned homewards, others abided there still, and were not long since in number about 800 men, women, and children: but now the number is much diminished, the barbarous people hauing in the yeare 1622, slaine treacherously about 300 of them. The Northerne part of this Virginia, being better discouered then the other, is called NEW ENGLAND full of good new Townes and sorts, and is likely to proue an happy plantation.
NORVMBEGA, hath on the North, Nova Francia; on the South Virginia. The ayre is of a good temper; the soyle fruitfull; and the people indifferently ciuill: all of them, as well me^ as women, painting their faces. The men are much affected to hunting, and therefore neuer giue their daughters to any, vnlesse

he be well skill'd in that game also. The women are here very chast, and so well loue their husbands, that if at any time they chance to be slaine, the widowes will neither marry, nor eate flesh, till the death of their husbands be reuenged. They both dance much, and for more nimblenesse sometimes stark naked. The chiefe Towne is called Norumbega, and is possessed by the French.
NOVA FRANCIA hath on the North, Terra Corterialis; on the South, Norumbega. The earth is barren, the people barbarous. It was discouered by Iaques Cartier, of France, Anno 1534: and is inhabited besides the natiues, with some few Frenchmen. The chiefe Townes are Canada. 2 Sanguinai, seated on riuers so called. And 3 Hochelaga, a towne round in shape, and compassed about with three course of timber rampires, one within the other, sharp at the top, and two rods high. It hath about 50 great houses, and but one gate, which is shut with piles and barres. The people beleeue that when they dye they goe vnto the Starres; vnd that from thence they are conveied into certaine green fields, adorned with trees, flowres, etc. The common people which inhabit not the Townes abouenamed, dwell in their boats, which they turne vpside downe, and lye vnder them.
TERRA CORTERIALIS, or Di Laboredora, hath on the North, Estotiland; on the South, the riuer Canada. This great riuer ariseth out of the hill called Hombuedo, his whole course is 900 miles long, 800 mile nauigable: at his aestuarium 105 miles in breadth. It is called also the riuer of the three brothers, and by some the riuer of S. Laurence. It taketh name from Gaspar Corterialis, a Portugall, who first discouered it, Ao 1500. The men are barbarous, of colour brown, swift of foot, cloathed in beasts skinnes, and are very good archers. They liue in Caues, or base Cottages, adorne themselues with siluer and brasse bracelets, and generally feed on fish. The chiefe of their Villages are 1 Breste. 2 Cabo Marzo. and 3 Santa Maria.
ESTOTILAND hath on the South Terra Corterialis; and on the North, the Streights called Fretum Davisij, from Iohn Davis an Englishman: who endeauoured to finde out a more

commodious and quicke passage to Cathaia and China, than was yet discouered, by the North of America: which designe of his he beganne luckily, but accomplished it not with the like prosperous euent. Yet was not he the first that euer attempted this passage, Sebastian Cabot giuing the first ouset, Anno 1497; and Sr Martin Frobisher seconding his beginnings, 1576. He made in all three seuerall voyages, brought with him some of the natiues, and a great deale of Ore, which being in England tried, did scarce quit the cost: a great promontory hereof hee called Queene Elizabeths foreland, and the Sea running by it Frobishers straights. On the other side of these straights, lieth Groenland; and not farre distant Freizland: one of whose kings by name Zichmi, imployed Nicholas and Antonio Zeni, two brothers, to discouer the adiacent Countries. This they vndertook with a noble resolution, and performed with as much care; discouering the shore of this Country, and then returned, Anno 1390. The soyle is sufficiently enriched with naturall endowments: the inhabitants also are indued with a greater readinesse of wit, and soundnesse of iudgement, that the other Americans. This Prouince is called by vs English, New found land; and was rediscouered by some of our Captaines, 1527; who imposed most of their names, which are yet retained. The Seas about this Country abound with fish, insomuch that in 4 houres, 2 or 300 of them are commonly taken. They are hence conveyed into all parts of Europe, and vented by the name of New found land fish. The natiues vse also to fish, and venture on the great Ocean in little boats made of leather: which, when their fish is caught, they carry home vnder their armes.
Thus much of Mexicana.


OF PERVANA.
PERVANA containeth the Southerne part of America, and is tied to Mexicana, by the Istmus or streight of Darien being no more then 17 miles broad; others make it 12 only. Certaine it is, that many haue motioned to the Counsell of Spaine, the cutting of a nauigable channell through this small Istmus,

so to shorten the common voyages to China and the Moluccoes. But the Kings of Spaine haue not hitherto attempted it, partly because if he should employ the Americans in the work, he should loose those few of them, which his people haue suffered to liue: partly because the slaues, which they yearely buy out of Africa, doe but suffice for the mines and sugar-houses: but principally, least the passage by the Cape of good hope, being left off; those seas might become a receptacle of Pirats. I haue read of many the like attempts begunne, but neuer of any finished. Sesostris king of Egypt, Darius of Persia, one of the Ptolomies, and a late capricious Portugall, had the like plot, to make a passage from the red Sea, to the Mediterranean: so had Caesar, Caligula, and Nero, Emperours of Rome, vpon the Corinthian Istmus: another of the same nature had Charles the great, to let the Rhene into the Danowe: the like Lucius Verus, to ioyne the Rhene and the Rhone; all which in their peculiar places we haue already touched. Nicanor also king of Syria, intended to haue made a channell, from the Caspian to the Euxine Sea; an infinite proiect: but neither hee nor any of the rest could finish these workes; God, it seemeth, being not pleased at such prowd and haughty enterprises; and yet perhaps, the want of treasure hath not beene the least cause, why the like proiects haue not proceeded: besides the dreadfull noyses and apparitions, which (as we haue already said) continually affrighted the workemen.
The compasse of this part of America, is 17000, of the other, 13000 miles: It comprehendeth 1 Castella Aurea. 2 Guiana. 3 Peru. 4 Brasile, 5 Chile.
CASTELLA AVREA, so called for the abundance of gold; containeth the Northerne part of Peruana, and part of the Istmus. It is admirably stored with Siluer, Spices, Pearles, and medicinall hearbs: and is diuided into foure Prouinces, viz: 1 Castella del Or.o 2 Nona Andaluzia. 3 Noua Granata. 4 Cartagena.
Castella del Oro situate in the very Istmus, is not very populous, by reason of the vnhealthfulnesse of the ayre, and noysome sauour of the standing pooles. The chiefe Citties are 1 Theonyma,

or Nombre di dios, on the East; and Panama, on the west side. They were both built by Didacus Niquesa; and the first had this name, because Niquesa hauing beene crossed with many dismall chances, and misaduentures; when he came hither, bad his men now goe on shore, en nombre di dios, in the name of god. The ayre in the place where he built them, being very vnhealththie; the King of Spaine, Ao 1584, commanded that they should be plucked, both of them, downe, and rebuilt in a more conuenient place: which was performed by Peter Aria. Through these two Townes, commeth all the trafficke that is betweene Spaine and Peru, for whatsoeuer commodity commeth out of Peru is vnladen at Panama, carried by land to Nombre di dios, and there shipped to Spaine: and vice versa.
I should wrong my Countrey, in concealing the worth of her people,Camden if I omitted the attempt of Iohn Oxenham, one of Sr Francis Drakes followers, on this place. This man arriuing with 70 companions, a little aboue these townes, drewe a land his ship, couered it with boughs, and marched ouer the land with his company guided by Negroes, vntill he came to a riuer where he cut downe wood, made him a pinnase, entred the South Sea, went to the Ile of Pearles, lay there 10 daies, intercepted in two Spanish shippes, 60000 pound weight in gold, 100000 pound waight in barres of siluer, and returned safely againe to the maine land. And though through the mutinie of his company, he neither returned to his country, nor his hidden ship; yet is it an aduenture not to be forgotten, in that neuer by any other attempted, and by the Spanish writers, with much admiration, recorded.
Andaluzia Noua hath on the North, Castella del Oro; on the South Peru. The best Citties are Tocoio, now S. Margarets, and 2 Santa Espritta.
Noua Granada is situate on the south side of Carthagena: The chiefe Citties are Tungia, directly vnder the Aequator 2 Tochaimum. 3 Popaian, built by one Sebastian Belalzar, who first subdued this Country. 4 S. Foye an Archbishops seat, and a Court of Iustice. 5 Palma. and 6 Merida, called after this name from Merida in Spaine. This Country is very strong, by

reason of its situation among stonie rockes which enuiron it and through which there are very narrow passages: yet is it full of pleasing valleyes which yeeld much fruit; and hath in it some mines of gold and siluer.
Cartagena hath a fruitfull soyle, in which groweth a tree, which if any one touch he will hardly scape a poisoning. The chiefe Citties are Cartagena (called by the natiues Calamur) which Sr Francis Drake surprized, 1585; and besides inestimable summes of wealth, tooke with him from hence 240 peeces of Ordnance. 2 Abuida. 3 S. Martha on the riuer d' Abuida (called also S. Iohns, and Rio di Grand) 4 Venezuela. 5 New Cales. These three last regions are called Terra Firma, and are the Basis of this reuersed Pyramis.
GVIANA hath on the East, and South, the riuer Maragnon called also Amazone, and Orellana; on the West, the mountains of Peru; and on the North, the great riuer Orenoque, or Raliana. This riuer is nauigable with ships of burden 1000 miles, but with Boats and Pinnases almost 2000 miles; and borroweth his latter name from S. Walter Raleigh, who first of all, to any purpose, made a plenary survey of this Country, her commodities, and situation, Anno 1595. The riuer Maragnon, called Amazone, from the Amazons, which are fabled to liue here; and Crellana, from one so called, who first (Anno 1543) sayled in it, is nauigable almost 6000 miles, and broad towards the Sea 200 miles.
This country is directly situate vnder the Aequinoctiall line, and is the fruitfullest part of Peruana. The inhabitants in winter time dwell in trees for feare of inundations, making on them many artificiall Villages, and ranges of building. The like habitations they also haue in Brasil, and in Golden Castile: in which last Country, we finde Abibeiba the King hereof, to haue had his pallace on a tree; from which Francisco Vasques, a Spanish Captaine, could by no Rhetorick intreat him to descend, till he began to cut downe the tree, and then the poore Prince came downe, and bought his life at the Spaniards price. The old Iucolae were the Caribes; the present are the Samai, the Assawi, and the Wikeri, nations of Peru: which, when as Francisco Pizarro

had subdued that Realme, fled hither; and driuing out the Caribes, planted themselues here.
When this Country was first opened, and the riches of it plainely manifested, suit was made that some English forces might be sent thither, and a Colonie erected. Which motion, on mature consultation, was at last concluded to be preiudicial to the state; because of the distance of our body of warre. 2ly Because that the Spanish Armies and Colonies bordering euery way on it, might cast out our small strength^, and make the expedition dishonourable.
The chiefe Townes are, Morequito, a safe harbour, 2 Winicapora, nigh vnto which, report tell^th vs of a Christal mountain. 3 Manao, called also El Dorodo, the greatest C^tty of America; and as some relate, of the world too. For Deigo Ordas one of the companions of Cortez, is said to haue entred into this Citty at noone, and to haue trauelled all that day, and the next also, vntill night, through the streets hereof* before hee came to the Kings Pallace. It is situate on a lake of salt water, 200 leagues in length; and is by the Spaniards called El Dorada (or the guilded Citty) from the abundance of Gold both in Coine, Plate, Armour, and other furniture, which the said Deigo Ordas there saw. And 4 St Thome a Towne patched vp of stickes and durt, the bane of destruction to that vnfortunate Gentleman Sr Walter Rawleigh, Anno 1617: of whom I will say with Mr Camden in his Annalls; Vir erat, nunquam satis laudato studio, and regiones remotas detegendi, and naualem Angliae gloriam promouendi.
PERV hath on the East, the Peruvian mountaines; on the west Mare Pacificum, or Del Zur; on the North, Castella Aurea, and the riuer Peru from which, the name of all the Country is to be deriued; and on the South, Chile.
The soyle is luxuriant in all manner of graine; fortunate, in the ciuilitie of her inhabitants, frequency of Citties, and salubrity of ayre. Here is also great store of Tobacco, which though in some respect, being moderately taken, may be seruiceable for Physicke: yet (besides the consumption of the purse, and impairing of our inward parts) the immoderate, vaine, and phantasticall

abuse of this hellish weed, corrupteth the naturall sweetnes of the breath, stupefieth the braine, and indeed is so preiudiciall to the generall esteeme of our Country men, that one saith of them, Anglorum corpora qui huic plantae tantopere indulgent, in Barbarorum naturam degenerasse videntur. The two chiefe vertues ascribed to it are, that it is good against Lues ven^rea, that loathsome disease, the pox; and that it voideth rhewme. For the first, like enough it is that similes habent labra lactucas, so vncleane a disease may be fitted with so vnwholsome a medicine. For the second good quality attributed vnto it, I thinke it rather to consist in opinion then truth; the rhewme which it voideth, being only that which it selfe ingendreth. We may as well conclude that bottle-ale breaketh wind, for that effect we finde to follow the drinking of it, though indeed it is onely the same winde which it selfe conue^ed into the stomacke. But Tobacco is by few taken now as medicinall: it is growne a good-fellow, and fallen from a Physicion to a complement. A folly which certainly had neuer spred so farre, if here had beene the same meanes of preuention vsed with vs, as lately was in Turkie, by Morat Bassa: who commanded a pipe to be thrust through the nose of a Turke, which was found taking Tobacco: and so in derision, to be led about Constantinople. This vnsauory drug was first brought hither, by the Marriners of Sr Francis Drake, Ano 1585; It may be as an antidote for the immoderat vse of drinking, which our B^lgian Souldiers brought with them, 3 yeares before, from the Low countries: before which time, of all Northerne people, the English were deemed most free from that swinish vice; wherein it is to be feared, they haue now out-gon their teachers, the Dutch.
The people hold opinion, that men vse after their buriall, to ^at, drinke, and wantonnize with women: and therefore commo^ly at the death of any, they kill some of his seruants (whom they bury with him) to wait on him in the other world. They are ignorant of letters, yet are they of a good courage in the wars, feare not death, and know well how to mannage their weapons. When they haue conquer'd any Country, they vse to diuide it into three parts; allotting the first, to the seruice of their Gods;

the second to the reuenue of their King; and the third to the maintenance and reliefe of the poore: a very iust and equall diuision
This Prouince aboue any other in America, is abundant in Gold and Siluer; the mines wherof in diuers places, yeeld more of these mettles, then of earth: by which abundance, not Spaine only, but all Europe also, is more stored with pure and fine coine, then euer formerly it was. Our ancestors the Brittaines, vsed brasse rings, and iron rings, for their instruments of exchange, The most vsuall materiall of mony among the Roman Prouinces, was seldome gold or siluer, most times brasse, sometimes leather: Corium forma publica percussum, as Seneca hath it. This last kind of mony, was by Fredericke the second made currant when he besieged Millaine; the like is said to haue beene vsed here in England, at the time of the Barrons warres: and why not? Since no longer agoe, then in the yeare 1574, the Hollanders then being in their extremities, made mony of past-board. But this hapneth only in cases of necessity; the two mettals of gold and siluer, hauing for many hundred yeares, though not in such abundance, beene the principall instrument of exchange, and bartery; and so questionlesse will continue to the end of the world. Sr Thomas Moore, in the second booke of his Vtopia, preferreth iron before these mettals, Vt sine quo, non magis quam sine ^gne, atque aqua, vi^ere mortales queant. He giueth vs there also a plot to bring gold and siluer into contempt: telling vs, how the Vtopians imploy those mettals, in making of chamberpots, and vessells of more vncleane vse; eating and drinking for the most part, in glasse or earth: how they make fette^s and chaines herewith to hold in their rebellious slaues and malefactours: how they punish infamous persons, by putting gold rings on their fingers, iewels in their eares, and chaines of gold about their necks: and how they adorne their infants and little children with iewels and pretious stones; which gayeties, when they come to any age, and obserue how none but children vse them; they cast away of their own accord, as with vs our elder ones leaue off without constraint their babies, cobnuts, and other crepundia* He telleth vs further how the Embassadours of the Anemolij,

a confederate state of the Vtopians, comming amongst them richly and gorgeously attired, were taken for slaues, by reason of their gold chaines; and the basest of the traine, deemed to be the Embassadours: how the elder boyes derided the strangers for wearing iewels, as if they had beene children still: and how the people laught at their chaines of gold, as being too slight and slenders, to hold in, or shackle such big fellowes. Now saith he, the reason why they had any gold or siluer at al among them, was not for any esteeme they had of it, but to hire and wage forraine souldiers withall, when the necessities of their state required it. How this deuice would sort with the people, which Lucian fableth to be in the Moone. I knowe not, though perhaps it might fit them well enough. But I am sure in this s^blunary world, it is neuer like to take: And so I leaue it, telling you that it is by many thought that this extraordinary plenty of gold and siluer, since the discouery of these countries, is the cause of the dearth of al things in respect of former times: for where much is, much may be giue^: yet there want not some that adde also other causes, of the high prizes of our daies: viz: monopolies; combinations of merchants and craftsmen; transportation of graine; pleasure of great personages; the excesse of priuate men, and the like: but these last I rather take to be concauses, the first being indeed the principall. For, (as that excellent Sr Henry Sauill, hath it in the end of his notes on Tacitus) the excessiue abundance of (...), things which consist meerely on the constitution of men; draweth necessarily (...)* those things which nature requireth to an higher rate in the market; Capta ab Augusto Alexandria (saith Orosius) Roma in tantum ^pibus eius creuit, vt duplo maiora quam antebac, rerum venalium pr^tia statuerentur. As for that question, whether of the two kingdomes be happier, that which supplieth it selfe with mony, by trafficke and the workes of art; or that which is supplied by mines in it growing, as the gift of nature: I finde it by this tale in part resolued. Two Marchants departing from Spaine to get gold, touched vpon part of Barbary; where the one buyeth Moores to dig and delue with; the other fraughteth his vessell with sheep: and being come to the Indies

the one finding mines, set his slaues to worke; and the other hapning on grassie grounds, put his sheep to grasing. The slaues grow cold and hungry, call for food and cloathing; which the sheep-master by the increase of his cattle, had in abundance: so that what the one got in gold, with toyle, charges, and hazard; he gladly gaue vnto the other for continuall supplies of victualls and rayments, for himselfe and his seruants. In the end, the mines being exhausted, and all the gold thence arising being exchanged with the sheepheards, for such necessaries as nature required: home returneth the Sheepheard in triumph, his companion hauing nothing to shew for the improuement of his stocke. But I dare not determine a question so weighty, only I will tell you that the Hollanders and English, by the benefit of trafficke and marchandize only, wearied the late king of Spain^ and out-vied him as it were in strength and treasurie: notwithstanding his mines in Spaine, Italie, Barbary, India, Mexicana, and these of Peru; which we now handle, and which gaue occasion to this discourse.
The chiefe Citties of Peru, are 1 St Michaels, the first Colonie which the Spaniards placed in these parts. 2 Arequipa, seated on the riuer of Plata, and is the hauen Towne to Cusco. 3 Lima distant about two leagues from the Sea; the port which serueth it, being called Collao. It is built with much art, for all the chiefe streets answere to the market place: and there is scarce any priuate house which hath not water conueyed to it from the riuer. It is an Archbishops See, and residence of the Peruvian Vice Roy. 4 Cusco the seat of the ancient Kings of this nation: Who the more to beautifie this Citty, commanded euery one of the Nobility, to build a pallace here, ^or his continual residence. It hath a ^aire market place, in the midst of which two high waies thwart one another, which are 2000 miles long; straight and leuell, and which runne crosse the Country. 5 Gaiachu. 6 Portoueio, where in digging graues, the Sextons happen many times on the teeth of men, being 3 fingers broad. 7 Tomobamba glory^ng in her faire pall^ces. And 8 Caxamalca.
The chiefe riuers are 1 Maragnon. 2 Guaiachil. 3 Rio di la Plate, being 150 miles broad at the mouth, and 2000 long, or

there-abouts. Here is in this country a beast, which hath about hir neck a bagge of indifferent greatnesse; into which she putteth her yonglings at the approach of any body, and scuddeth away. And here is also said to be a fig-tree, of the which the North part which looketh towards the mountaines, bringeth forth fruit in the Summer only: the South part which looketh toward the Sea, is fruitfull onely in the winter.
The Peruvians haue thus much notice of the generall Deluge, that the Country was ouer-whelmed with waters, and all men perished except seauen; who hid themselues in a hole, which they cell Paticambo: where hauing liued in safety till the fury of the waters were asswaged, they came out of their lu^king-place, and re-peopled the Country. The chiefe of these seauen was Mangocapa; whose posterity possessing in this Country a plot of ground 20 miles in circuit, gouerned themselues in an Aristocraticall state: and at last chose them a King; which mutation of their Common-wealth, was (as by their computation is coniectured) Anno 1280, or somewhat nigh it.

The Kings of Peru.
1 Ingarcia.
2 Vanguazagnaque.
3 Vixococa.
4 Pacachuti.
5 Guaimacapa.
8 Guascar,
8 Atabaliba.
7 Mangocapa
8 Amare.

The most luckie Prince of these 8, was Guaimacapa; who extended his Empire to the largenesse it now hath. Since his death, fortune hath frowned on them all. For his two sonnes Guascar, and Atabalipa, immediatly after the solemnizing of his funerall, striued for the Empire, till Francisco Pizarro, a Spanish Captaine, ended the controuersie; by seasing on the kingdome, to the vse of his master of Spaine. Guascar was slaine, and Atabalipa seeing the whole kingdome lay at stake, laid all his riches, life, and liberty against it; and cast the Dice on a plaine, nigh to the City Caximalos, where the Dice running on the Sp^niards sides, gaue them the glory of the day, and haplesse Atabalipa remained a prisoner after an infinite slaughter of his subiects. He gaue vnto the Spaniards as a ransome for his life,

and liberty; a house piled vp on all sides, with refined Gold and siluer, being in estimation about 10 millions: which when they had receiued, they most perfidiously slew him. His two successours laboured the restoring of their ruinated inheritance, but preuailed nothing: For the wickednesse of the Peruvian was now full, and God sent these Spaniards amongst them, as executioners of his vengeance, Anno 1533. This Pizarro who subdued this most potent and flourishing kingdome, and made it a member of the Spanish Empire, was borne at Trusiglio, a village of Navarre, and by the poore whore his mother, laide in the Church porch, and so left to Gods prouidence: by whose direction, (there being none found that would giue him the brest) he was nourished for certaine dayes, by sucking a Sow. At last, one Gonsalles, a soldier, acknowledged him for his sonne, put him to nurse, and when he was somewhat growne, set him to keepe his swine: some of which being strayed, the boy durst not for feare returne home, but betooke himselfe to his heeles, ran vnto Sevill, and there shipped himselfe for America; where he so prospered, that he was by the King of Spaine honoured for his good seruice, with the title of Marquesse Anatillo, Anno 1535. The strange fortunes of this man, call into my minde the like of Sinan, a great Bassa in the court of Selimus the first; who being borne of base parentage, as he being a child was sleeping in the shade, had his genitals bitten off by a Sow. The Turkish Officers which vsually prouided yong boyes for the seruice of the Grand Signeur, being in Epyrus, (for that was Sinans country) and hearing of this so extraordinary an Eunuch, tooke him among others, along with them to the Court: where vnder Mahomet the great, Baiaz^t the second, and his sonne Selimus, he so exceedingly thriued; that hee was made chiefe Bassa of the Court; and so well deserued it, that he was accounted Selimus right hand, and was indeed the man, to whose valour especially, the Turkes owe the Kingdome of Aegypt. But this is perhaps impertinent.
BRASILE hath on the North Guiana; on the South, Rio de la Plate, and Chile; on the East, the Ocean; and on the West, the mountaines of Peru, called the Andes; which diuide the

Country of Peruana, as Taurus or Imaus doe Asia; and mount Atlas, Africke. These hills are high, craggie, and very barren; full of rauenous beasts, and poisonous serpents, which they say destroyed a whole Army of one of the Peruvian Kings, in their passages that way. Here also liue a mountaine people, farre more barbarous then the rest of the Americans, as being hairie all ouer their bodies, going altogether naked, and liuing without houses or bedding. And so I descend into the valleyes of this Country.
The Aire here is of a healthfull temper, the Earth fat and alwaies flourishing. Great store of Sugars, and wonderfull rich mines, are the sinewes of this Region. Hence commeth our red wood, which we vse in dying of cloathes, called Brasile; the trees of which are of that bignesse, that whole families liue in an arme of one of them, euery tree being as populous as many of our Villages For which cause the cities here are neither many, faire, nor populous. They which are, are called 1 S. Anna Equitum, 2 Ascensio, 3 Pernambuco, or Pernambucke, from whence I suppose that that Brasil wood is with vs called Fernanbucke, which they vse in dying and colouring cloathes red.
The people here are endowed with a pretty vnderstanding, as may seeme by him, who tartly blamed the couetousnesse of the French* for comming from the other end of the world to digge for gold: but in most places they are barbarous. Men and women goe starke naked, and on high festiual dayes, hang Iewels in their lips. These festiuall daies are, when a company of good neighbours come together to be merry, ouer the roasted body of a fat man, whom they cut in collops called Boucon, and eat with g^eat greedin^sse, and as much delectation. They haue two vile qualities, they are mindfull of iniuries, and forgetfull of benefits. The men cruell without measure, and the women infinitely lasciuious. They cannot pronounce the letters LFR: The reason of which one being demaunded, made answere, because they had amongst them neither Law, Faith, nor Rulers. They are rather swimmers, as well women as men, and wil stay vnder water an houre together. Women in trauell are here deliuered

without any great paine, and presently goe about their businesse belonging to good house-wiues: The good-man (according to the fashion of our kinder sort of husbands in England, who are said to breed their wiues children) being sicke in their steed, and keeping their bed; so farre that he hath brothes made him, is visited by his gossips or neighbours, and hath iunkets sent to comfort him.
There is in this country a litle beast, which cannot goe in lesse then 15 dayes, as farre as a man can throw a stone; and is therefore called by the Spaniards, Pigritia. Here is also an herbe called Sentida, or Viua; which if one touch it, will shut its leaues and not open them, till the man which did displease it be gone out of sight: Here also flying fishes are said to be, but I binde you not to beleeue it.
This Country was first discouered by Peter Alvari Caprali, at the expences of Emanuel K. of Portugal, Anno 1500: more exactly surveyed by Americus Vespuccius, at the charges of the said Emmanuell: next by Iohn di Empoli, a Florentine, 1503: afterward by Iohn Stadius, a German, Anno 1554. And by the Edict of Pope Alexander the sixt, was appropriated to the Portugall; the rest of America being allotted to the Castilians. In the right of Portugall, the Castilians now possesse it; though (as ^eport goeth) they are like to loose their footing. For it is said, that the West-Indian company of the vnited Prouinces, haue taken a Towne called Todos los Sanctos, standing on a capacious Bay, with the forts belonging to it; and haue since marched higher into the Country to besiege Pernanbuco, the chief town of it.
CHILE hath on the East, the Virginian Ocean; on the West, Mare del Zur; on the North, Peru; on the South, the straights of Magellanus. It containeth two Prouince^, viz: Chica, and the Patagones. It taketh denomination from the vehemencie of the cold here, (the name, it seemeth, importing as much;) which is said to be such, especially in our Summer Solstice, that horses and their riders are frozen to death, and hardened like a peece of marble. The Country toward the midland, is very mountainous and vnfruitfull; toward the sea shore, leuell,

fruitfull, and watred with diuerse riuers, flowing from the mountaines; this being the chiefe benefit the Country reapeth from them. The Spaniards finde here good plenty of golde, abundance of hony, store of cattell, and of wine enough for their owne vse: the vines brought hither out of Spaine, exceedingly prospering, as also doe all their fruits, and plants, from thence transplanted hither.
The people are very warlike, and of a gigantine stature; as being 11 foot high. Here is a riuer which runneth in the day time with a most violent force; and in the night hath in it no water at all: The reason is, that this riuer hath no constant spring, but is both begun and continued by snow falling from the mountaines; which in the heat of the day melteth into waters, and are precipitately carried to the Sea: but in the chilly coldnesse of the night, are congealed; and cannot minister new supplies to the empty Channell.
This Country was discouered by Almagrus, one of Pizarroes colleagues: and subdued by one Baldiuia, who being vnfortunatly taken prisoner by the inraged Chilois, was choaked with melted gold.
The chiefe Townes are 1 Arequipoum, much defaced by an Earthquake, 1582: 2 S. Iames, built by the Spaniards, 3 Cocimbum, 4 Villadiues, 5 Baldiuia, which for spight to its founder, was pulled downe, Anno 1599: and 6 The Imperiall, which is the best Colonie of this Country; and was, before the taking of it by the Spaniards, so populous and rich, that in a war against the Araugues their neighbours, they put into the field 300000 fighting men. It was called by the Spaniards, Imperiall; because at their first comming into this Prouince, they found Eagles with two heads, made of wood, set vpon the doores and houses of it, made perhappes by some Germans which had beene here shipwracked.
The Pyris of this American Pyramis, is called Caput Victoriae, from the ships name, wherein some of Magellanus Souldiers, by this Cape did first compasse the world. This Ferdinando Magellanus a Spaniard, and expert in navigation* was earnestly intreated by Charles the fift, to finde (if possible it might be)

a shorter cut to the Moluccoes; this request, he willing to performe, addressed himselfe to the voyage, Anno 1520, and striking Southward, passed along by this Cape; and so through the narrow Seas, since called Fretum Magellanicum, and being now arriued at the Moluccoes, was there killed in a battaile against the Ilanders; but the ship called Victoria, returned to Spaine in safety.
We vse to say that Sir Francis Drake was the first that sayled round about the world, which may bee true in a mitigated sense; viz: that he was the first Captain or man of note that atchieued this enterprise; (Magellanus perishing in the midst of it:) and therefore is reported to haue giuen for his deuice a Globe with this motto, Tu primus circumdedisti me. This navigation was begun Anno 1577, and in two yeares and a halfe, with great vicissitude of fortune, finished: concerning which his famous voyage, a Poet then liuing directed to him this Epigramme:
Drake, pererrati nouit quem terminus orbis,Quemque semel mundi vidit uterque polus:Si taceant homines facient te sydera notum;Sol nescit comitis immemor esse sui.Drake whom th'encompass'd earth so fully knew,And who^ at once both poles of heauen did view;Should men forget, the Sun could not forbeareTo chronicle his fellow-trauailer.
This Fretum Magellanicum, these Magellan straights, are by M. Iohn Dauies, who professeth to know euery creeke in them, thus described. For 14 leagues within the Cape of S. Marie, lieth the first straight, where it ebbeth and floweth with a violent swiftnes: the straight not being fully halfe a mile broad, and the first fall into it very dangerous and doubtfull. Three leagues this straight continueth, when it openeth into a sea, 8 miles long, and as many broad; beyond which lyeth the second straight, right West South-West from the first, a perillous and vnpleasing passage, 3 leagues long, and a mile in bredth. This straight openeth it selfe into another Sea, which is extended euen to the Cape of Victorie, where is the straight properly called

the straight of Magellane: a place of that nature, that which way soeuer a man bend his course, he shall be sure to haue the winde against him. The length hereof is 40 leagues; the bredth in some places 2 leagues, in others not halfe a mile; the channell on the shore-side 200 faddome, and so no hope of ancorage; the course of the water full of turnings and changings, and so violent, that when a ship is once entred, there is no returning. On both sides are the high mountaines, continually couered with snow, from whence proceede those dangerous counterwindes that beat on all sides of it: a place certainly vnpleasing to view, and hazardous to passe. So farre, and to this purpose, M. Dauies.
Thus much of Peruana.


THE AMERICAN ILANDS.
The AMERICAN ILANDS are either
In the Verginian Sea, or Mare del Noort.In the Pacifique Sea, or Mare del Zur.
THe Ilands in the Pacifique Ocean, or Mare del Zur, are
1 INSVLAE SOLOMONIS, which are in number many: the chiefe of which are 18, the rest not worth the looking after. Of these 18, the three greatest are, Gaudalcanall, S. Thome, and S. Isabella. The Ilanders are of a yellowish colour, and goe naked. They were discouered by Lope Garcia di Castro, Anno 1567: and called Insulae Solomonis, because he thought them to be the land of Ophir, to which Solomon sent for his gold.2 INSVLAE LATRONVM, vsually called Ladrones, were discouered by Magellanus; who gaue them that name, because the inhabitants stole away his cock boate.
The Ilands of the Verginian Ocean, so called a vergendo, or Mare del Noorte, are
1 MARGARITA, and CVBAGNA, situate nigh vnto Castella Aurea. They are deficient in Corne, Grasse, Trees, and Water; insomuch that sometimes the people gladly change for a tunne of Water, a tunne of wine. The abundance of precious

stones, maketh some amends for these defects, from whence the name of Margarita is imposed on it: in especiall, it yeeldeth the gemmes which the Latine Writers call Vniones, because they alwaies grow in couples. Nulli duo reperiuntur indiscreti (saith Pliny) unde nomen Vnionum scilicet Romanae imposu^re deliciae.3 TRINIDADO is not farre distant from the former. It was discouered by Columbus, in his last voyage, Anno sc: 1497: and is well stored with Tobacco.4 BACALAOS are certaine Iles iying against the influxe of Canada, nigh vnto Corterialis; and owe their first discouery vnto Sebastian Cabot, Anno 1447. The people of these Ilands, in their most formall expression of reuerence to their King, vse to rubbe their noses, or stroake their for-heads: which if the king accepteth or obserueth, and meaneth to grace the party so adoring him, he turneth his head to his left shoulder; which is a note of especiall fauour.5 BORIQVEN is diuided into 2 parts, whereof the North part is most plentifull of gold; the South part, of vitall prouision; as birds, cattle, and corne. Some riuers here are, but of no greatnesse; the principall being called Cairobonus. This Iland is ^ituate North of Guiana. It is in length 50, in bredth 18 miles; and is called also Insula S. Iohan. The first that set foot in it was Iohn Ponce a Spaniard, Anno 1527. The principall cities are S. Iohns, and 2 Port Rico; ruin'd by Henry Earle of Cumberland, Anno 1597.6 IAMAICA or Insula S. Iacobi, was once very populous, but now almost destitute of inhabitants; the Spaniards hauing slaine in this and the former Iland, more then 60000 liuing soules: insomuch that women, as well here, as on the Continent, did kill their children before they had giuen them life; that the issues of their bodies might not serue so cruell a nation. This Iland is in length 280 miles, in bredth 70 miles. It is well watred hath two townes of note; Oristana, and Seuill; and acknowledgeth Columbus for its first discouerer.7 CVBA, called also Fernandina, is long 300, and broad 70 miles. It is full of Forrests, Lakes, and mountaines: and was

first made knowne to the Europaeans, by Columbus his second navigation. The people here are prohibited the eating of serpents, as a dainty reserued for the higher powers. The Ai^e is very temperate, the soyle very fertile, producing brasse of exact perfection, but gold somewhat drossie. It aboundeth also with ginger, cassia, masticke, aloes, cinamom, sugar, and hath of flesh, fish, and fowle, no scarcity. The people before the Spaniards arriuall here, were tenants in common, money not being knowne among them, nor the meaning of meum and tuum vnderstood by them. The chiefe Cities are S. Iago, a Bishops See: and Hauana a safe rode for shippes, and the staple of Merchandise. Here also rideth the King of Spaine's Navie, till the time of the yeare, and the conveniency of the winde, ioyne together to waste them homeward. It is seated on the Northerne shore, as also is S. Iago, this last being built by Iago, or Iames de Valasco, and of him so named. The other Towns of note are S. Christophero, and 4 S. Trinitie on the South.8 The LVCAIE aboue 400 in number, g^ory in the matchlesse beauty of their women; and mourne for the losse of a million of her inhabitants,Purcha^. murdred by the Spaniards.9 BERMVDAE, are called also Summer Ilands, because Sir Thomas Summers gaue vs a more exact relation of them, then before had beene. They receiued their first name from one Iohn Barmudaz, who first gaue vs notice of them: they are in number no lesse then 400: The biggest resembling a halfe Moone, hath in it a Colonie of English; who affirme it to bee very fruitfull, and agreeable to an English nature.10 HISPANIOLA, called by the natiues, Haitie; now lamenteth the losse of 3 millions of her inhabitants, murdred by her new masters of Spaine. It is in compasse 1400 miles: inioyeth a temperate Aire, a fertile soyle, rich mines, Amber, and Sugar. In 16 dayes herbes will ripen, and roots also, and be fit to be eaten: a strong argument of the exact temperature of the Aire. It giueth place in no respect to Cuba, but excelleth it in diuerse, three especially: 1 the finenesse of the gold, which is here digged more pure and vnmixed: 2ly in the increase of the sugar; one sugar-cane here filling 20, and sometimes 30 measures: and

3ly in the goodnesse of their soyle for tillage, the corne here yeelding an hundred folde. This fertility is thought to be caused by foure great riuers, which water and enrich all the foure quarters of the Country, viz: 1 Iuna, the East; 2 Attihinnacus, the West; 3 Iacchus, the North; and 4 Naihus, the South* all foure springing from one mountaine, which standeth in the very midst and center of the Country.
The chiefe Townes are S. Domingo, ransackt by Sir Francis Drake, Anno 1585, 2 S. Isabella, 3 S. Thome, 4 S, Iohn, 5 Maragna, 6 ^ortoroy^.

Hic status, haec rerum nunc est fortuna novarum.
And this is at this present time
The fortune of the new found clime.

Thus much of the Ilands.


THE LONGITVDE AND LATITVDE of the chiefe American Cities.

A
Lo.
 
La.
 



S. Anna Eq.

318
30
27
30
A



Ascensio

363
20
19
 
A


B
 
 
 
 
 



Boriquen

273
20
19
40
A


C
 
 
 
 
 



Chile opp.

299
30
36
 
A



Coanum

259
40
31
 
 



Canada

305
10
50
20
 



Cartagena

300
 
20
10
 



Cusco

297
20
13
30
A



Caxamalca

298
30
11
30
A



Cuba

296
 
31
40
 


G
 
 
 
 
 



Guatimala

303
 
24
20
 



Guaiachil

294
30
2
30
A


H
 
 
 
 
 



Hauana

292
10
20
 
 



Hechelaga

300
50
44
10
 


I
 
 
 
 
 



Iamaica

298
30
17
 
 



S. Iago

298
10
32
10
 



Isabella

 
10
32
10
 


L
 
 
 
 
 



Lima

296
40
23
30
A



Lucaeio

299
 
27
30
 


M
 
 
 
 
 



Maragna

281
30
19
30
 



Margarita

314
10
10
50
 



Martha

301
20
10
40
 



S. Michael

291
40
6
10
A



S. Michael

327
10
47
20
 



Mexico

283
 
38
30
 


N
 
 
 
 
 



Nova Albion

235
 
50
 
 



Nova Calizia

298
15
2
40
 



Norumbega

315
40
43
40
 



Nombre di dios.

294
30
9
20
 



Navaca

300
20
17
10
 


P
 
 
 
 
 



Panama

294
10
8
10
 



Pap^ian

297
30
1
50
 



Q
 
 
 
 
 



Quito

293
10
 
10
A



Qu^vira

233
 
41
40
 


S
 
 
 
 
 



Sanguinai

306
40
55
 
 



S. Spiritus

322
30
13
20
 


T
 
 
 
 
 



Totontoon.

248
20
36
 
 



S. Thome.

 
 
 
 
 



Tombez.

291
40
4
10
A



A is the note of Southerne Latitude.
THE END OF AMERICA.



OF THE VNKNOWNE PARTS OF THE WORLD.
THus much of the knowne parts of the World: the VNKNOWNE PARTS of the world; or rather such, of which we haue but litle, and that no certaine relation; are either NORTHERNE, or SOVTHERNE.

--Atqui
Quo properas mea Cymbae? redi: satis ardua Ponti
Navimus; Ecce Auster pluvias iam cogere nubes
Incipit: hic tutum non est (mihi crede) morari.
Dum licet, in portum tondamus, nubila clarum
Reddiderint ubi pulsadiem, revocabit ab alto
Nos Triton scopulo, atque iterum tentabimus aequor.
But whither goeth my barke? returne; for wee
Haue slic'd the capring b^ine inough: See see
The South winds ginne to gather clouds apace,
'Tis no safe tarrying in so fierce a place.
Whil'st thou hast time retire O wearied barke
Into safe harbour: when the clouds which darke
The worlds bright eye, shall be dispell'd away;
And Phoebus shining make a lightsome day.
Tritons shrill trump shall once recall againe
Thee from thy harbour to the foaming maine.
And wee with all our power will surely try
What of these VNKNOWNE LANDS we may discry.

(...). AMHN.

