


NINE BOOKES OF VARIOVS HISTORIE, ONELIE concerning Women: Inscribed by the names of the nine Muses.

The first booke which is CLIO, treating of the Goddesses Coelestiall, Terrestriall, Marine, and Infernall.
BEFORE wee enter into a particular tractate of these Goddesses, it shall not bee amisse to speake something of the opinions setled in sundry Nations, concerning them: Who were their first Adorers and Worshippers; the multiplicitie of their gods; and what seuerall rights, and customes, obseruations and Ceremonies they vsed in their Oblations and Sacrifices. The Aethiopians are said to bee the most ancient, and the first beginners of Diuine adoration, as Diodorus is of opinion; Imagining in themselues, and verely beleeuing some of their gods to bee euerlasting, and others to participate of a mortall and corruptible nature. The Phoenicians, they deliuered admirable and strange things concerning their gods, and the first beginning and Creation of things; aboue all others hauing in Diuine worship Dagona and Chamas. The Atlantides (a people of Affrica) they are confident that the generation of the gods proceeded from them, and the first that raigned amongst them they called Coelum, which is heauen. The Augitae another nation (in the Affricke Continent) acknowledged no other deityes than the Ghosts of such noble persons as were deceased, to whose sepulchers they vsuallie repayred to demand answers of all such things wherein they doubted. The Theologie of the Phrygians was not much different from theirs. The Persians neither erected Statues nor Altars, they worshipped the Heauen, which they called Iupiter; the Sunne, by the name of Mithra; the Moone, Venus; the Fire, the Earth, the Winds, and the Water. Isiodorus saith, the Graecians first honoured Cecrops, whom they stiled Iupiter, and were the first deuisers of Images, erecters of Altars, and offerers of sacrifice. The Iewes, as Cornelius Tacitus relates, apprehended but one diuine power, and that onely they acknowledged. The Germans of old (as the same author affirmes) were of opinion, That the gods could not bee comprehended within walles, nor haue any humane shape appropriated vnto them, measuring their incomprehensible power by the magnitude of the heauens.

Now concerning the diuers opinions of men, what this supreame deity should be; some held it the vniuerse or the gloabe of the world: of which opinion was Origines in his fift booke against Celsus. The Stoicks held it to bee the first world; the Platonists, a second world; and diuerse other Sectists of Greece to bee a third world. Thales Milesius called God, a Mind, that fashioned all creatures out of the water, that knew no beginning, and was not capable of end. Anaxmiander he ascribed a deity to the starres and the planets, and these coelestiall bodies, attributing no honor to that Mind, of which Thales dreamed. Anaximenes, thought it to be the Infinite ayer, to which hee attributed the Originall of all causes, and deriued the birth of the gods from thence; for so Saint Augustine and Cicero affirmes. Democritus Abderites (as Cicero and Arnobius testifie of him) was of opinion, that it was a Mind of fire, and the soule of the world. Plutarch in the life of Nu^^, sets downe Pythagoras his opinion concerning this godhead, and thus defines it: A Minde still trauelling, neuer out of motion, but disperst and diffus'd through all the parts of the world, and things naturall; from which all creatures whatsoeuer that are borne take life. Lysis and Philolaus, call it an vnspeakeable number, or a summity of the greatest or smallest number, for so Origines faith. Archelaus Physicus would haue all things to be created of earth, and (as Epiphanius testates of him) the beginning of all things to proceede from thence. Pherecidas taught that the earth was before all other things, and therefore to that he appropriated a diuinitie, Heraclius Ephesius, contested the gods to be made of Fire; so Varro writes of him: of the same beleefe was Hippasus Metapontinus (witnesse Simplicius.) Anaxagoras Clazomen called his god Homoeomeria, that is, Likenesse of parts; and that a diuine thought was the producter of all things whatsoeuer: So Augustine reports of him; others, that he held an infinite Mind to be the first moouer. Prodicus Coeus, as Epihanius tels vs, plac't his god in the foure Elements: likewise in the Sun and the Moone; in which two planets there existed a liuing vertue. Diogenes Apollonaites deriued his god from the Ayre, as the matter from whence all things had their reality, as likewise that it did participate of diuine reason, without which nothing could be created. Cleanthes Assius would haue his god of the Firmament, as diuerse other of the Stoicks. And as Arnobius witnesseth of him, sometimes he called him the Will: now the Minde: then that part of the ayer which is aboue the fire: and sometimes againe the Reason. Straton made Nature his summum bonum. Antisthenes Atheniensis, he taught that there were many popular gods, but one onely Architector of the fabricke of the world. Chrysippus Silix the Stoicke, hee taught that god was a naturall power endued with diuine reason; and then againe, he called him a Diuine necessity. Zeno Citteieus, called him a diuine and naturall Law; and sometimes the Firmament. Zenophanes Colophonius called him, Whatsoeuer was infinite in a conioyned mind, or one vniuersall and euery thing that (as Theophrastus saith of him) he imagined to be god. Parmenides Eliates, called him fantasme, or an apprehension of an Imaginarie thing, something resembling a crown; which the greeks call Stephanos, conteining within it a fierie light, an orbe, or girdle which compasseth and embraceth the heauens: adhearing to his fantasie were Cicero and Simplicius. Empedocles Agrigentinus, he would haue foure natures of which all things should subsist, and these he taught to be diuine: as also, that they had byrth, and should see end; for so Cicero writes in his book de natura deorum. Theodorus and Epiphanius speake of one Theodorus sirnamed Atheos, the Atheist: He affirmed the gods to be meere

toyes, and not worthie of diuine honors that would persuade men by their examples to theft, periurie, and rapine. Protagoras Abderita was of opinion, That it was not lawfull to inquire concerning the gods, whether they were or were not, or of what nature and qualitie. Xenocrates Chalcedonius made eight gods, in the wandering starres the number of fiue, in the whole number of the planets one, a seauenth in the Sunne, an eight in the moone. Plato Atheniensis went more diuinely to worke; who taught that it is neither the ayre, nor reason, nor nature, but that there is one onely God by whom alone the world was fashioned, and made persect, and miraculous. Zenophon Socraticus held argument, That the forme of the true God, was not visible, and therefore his essence not lawfull to be sought into. Ariston the Stoicke affirmed, that God might be comprehended within his owne substance. Aristotle proposed, That one Mind gouerned the whole world, and that it was the prime and principall cause of all things. Speucippus constituted a naturall liuing power, by which all things were gouerned, and that he stil'd a deity, for so Arnob. in his eighth booke reports. Alcmaeon Crotoniates did attribute a deitie, to the Sunne, the Moone, and the rest of the Planets; in his ignorance (as Cicero speakes of him) giuing immortality to things meerely mortall. Ecphantus Siracusanus, as Erigines relates of him, imagined the diuinitie to exist in the mind and soule. Brachmanae, (who were the Indian wise men, or Sophoi) called it the Light; but not as the splendour of the Sunne, or Ayre, but the light of reason; by which wise and vnderstanding men might enquire i^to the darke and mysticall secrets of nature. Lactantius and Cicero, say that it was the opinion of the Stoicks, for the most part, That this instrumentall power was a diuine substance, intelligeable and ayerie, but wanting forme; yet to bee transhapt, or made like to whatsoeuer it best pleased it selfe. The same Philosophers attributed a god-hood to the starres and all other coelestiall bodies. Heraclides Ponticus, thought the World and the Minde, both diuine, and was of opinion that this forme of the deity was mutable, reducing the earth and the heauens within the compasse of Godhead. Epicurus Atheniensis, hee made him gods of Atoms of Moates, allowing them bodies differing from men, but bearing humaine forme. M. Terentius Varro, supposed him to be the soule of the world, and the world it selfe to be god. Cicero defines him thus, a certaine pure and free mind seperate from all mortall commixtion, euer moouing, and all things knowing; and Origines adhering to the opinion of Exilneus, concludes, that the gods are euer during, not subiect to corruption, and yet altogether without prouidence. But least I should grow tedious in the search of so many diuerse opinions, which to some may appeare impertinent to the tractate in hand, yet not altogether vnnecessary to such who haue not trauelled in the search of these Antiquities; I wil come neerer to the matter, and to speake of the goddesses, as we promist. Hesiod hath left to memorie, that there are no lesse than thirtie thousand gods within the compasse of the world, and euery one haue seuerall predominance ouer men, beasts, fish, foules, and all other creatures vegetatiue and sensatiue. Tertullian hee speakes of three hundred Ioues or Iupiters counted by M. Varro. Therefore it was not permitted amongst the Romanes, to adore any other gods or goddesses than such as were approoued and allowed by the Senate. In the books of the high Priest it was thus written, Let no man bring in an innouation of any new gods, or aliens, to be priuately adored, vnlesse they be publikely approoued: onely such as haue from antiquitie beene held Celestiall, and vnto

whom Temples and Alters haue beene consecrated: let none else haue diuine worship. The Heathen of old amongst their goddesses, counted these, P^dicitia, Concordia, Mens, Spes, Honor, Clementia, and Fides: that is, Bashfulnesse, Concord, the Mind, Hope, Honour, Clemency, and Faith. Pliny writes of a Temple in Rome, dedicated to Honour. Certaine liuing creatures and other things were in the old time reuerenced as gods. The Trogloditae (as the same authour testifies) worshipped a Tortoise. The Aegyptians had in honour, ga^licke, and onyons; they haue the Crocodile likewise in diuine adoration, to whom they offer sacrifice, but the Ombytae chiefly a people of that countrey, by whom he is held most sacred; and if it so happen that their children be by him deuoured, the parents reioyce, imaginiug they are specially beloued of the gods, that are thought worthy to beget food to please their appetits. Serpents are honoured by the Phoenicians. In Gade^a a citie of Spayne, two Temples were erected; the one to Age, the other to Death: to one as the mistresse of Experience: to the other, as a quiet harbour or cessation from all miseries and calamities. In other cities were the like instituted to Pouertie, and to Fortune: lest the one should afflict them, and that the other should fauor them. Floods likewise and riuers were esteemed as deities, some portraide in the figure of men, and others in the semblance of beasts. Amongst the Lacaedemonians as Plutarch relates, Temples were edified, one to Feare, another to Laughter, a third to Death. The Aeyptians worshipped the Sunne and Moone, the Goddesse Ibis, a cat, an eagle, and a goate. The Syrians adored a doue: the Romanes a goose, by reason that by cackling of geese the Capitall was preserued from the sacke. Amongst the Thessalians it was held an offence Capitall to kill a Storke. Those that inhabite the Island Syrene, honour the fish called Pharos: those that dwell in Moeotis, the fish Oxiringus: In Ambracia, a Lyonesse, because in times past a Lyonesse ceased vpon a Tyrant and tore him to pieces; by which they were restored to their ancient liberties. Those that liue by Delphos, a Wolfe, who by scraping vp the earth discouered a great quantitie of gold buried, and till then concealed. The men of Samos, a Sheepe; the Argiues a Serpent; the Islanders of Tenedos, a Cow with calfe; after whose conception they tender her as much seruice, as to a woman young with child. A Dragon in Alba (a groue iuft opposite against Iunoes Temple) was honoured by the Spartane virgins: to which at certaine times they went, and fedde him from their hands. The Aeyptians had Aspes likewise in great worship, which they fostered and brought vp together with their children. The Thebanes honored a Sea-Lamprey. There were gods called Medioxum dei, or middle gods: of which Plautus in his Cistellaria makes mention, Ita me dij deoeque superi, et inferi and mediorum; as the gods and goddesses supernall or infernall, or those betwixt them both, etc. He speakes likewise of Dij potellarij, such as had power ouer the dishes that were vsed in sacrifices: to which Ouid hath reference in this verse, Fert. Missos Vestae pura patella cibos: The cleane platter presents those cates sent to Vesta. And Plautus in another place, Dij me omnes, magni, minuti, and patellarij, etc. There be others called Semones; who haue domination ouer as much as lyes open from the middle region of the ayre to the earth, and they are called by vs semi-dei or halfe-gods: Fulgentius calls those Semones, that for the pouertie of their desert are not worthy a place in the heauens: Amongst whom he reckons Priapus, Hippo, and Vertumnus. In Italy there were diuers others called Dij municipates, as belonging to priuate men in citties, not called into any publicke office; as amongst the Crustuminians, Delventinus;

amongst the Narnienses, Viridiarius; amongst the Astrulanians, Ancharia; amongst the Volcinienses, Nortia. But now of the Goddesses in order.

Of the Goddesses, Coelestiall: and first of IVNO.
IVNO is the daughter of Saturne, the Queene of the gods, and chiefe of those that are called Coelestiall. The wife and sister of Iupiter, Goddesse of Power and Riches, and soueraignesse of marriage, and all coniugall contracts. The Festiualls kept in her honour, were called Herea, which was a n^me appropriated to her owne person: so Enneus saith, as Cicero cites him in his first booke of offices, Vos ne velit an me regnare Hera? Will the mistresse haue you to raign, or me? where some take Hera for fortune. One of hir Priests, as Virgill testates, was Calibe, of whom he thus speakes.

Fit Calibe Iunonis anus templique sacerdos.

The old woman Calibe was priest in Iunoes Temple.Ouid in his 2. booke Metamorph. nominates Alcinoe.

Ante tamen cunctos Iunonis templa colebat,
Proque viro (quinullus er at) veniebat ad Aras.


Alcinoe before the rest did Iunoes Temple grace:
And for a man (for men were none) had at her altar place.

She was honoured most in the Citie of Carthage, the chiefe cittie of Affrica: of which Virgill in his first booke Aeneiad. thus speakes:
Quam Iuno fertur terris magis omnibus vnamPost habita Coluisse, Samo--.
Which onely (saith he) Iuno is reported to prefer before all other countries, euen Samos it selfe. Statius in his first booke Theb. saith that shee was much honoured in the citie called Prosimna: but in Samos (an Island compast in with the Icarian sea) shee was chiefely celebrated, as said to be there nourced in her infancie. In Argos and Micene, two chiefe cities of Achaia shee was likewise much honoured, as their Queene and Patronesse, for so Horace affirmes lib. 1. Carmin. Ouid in his 6 booke De fastis saith, that the people called Phalisci, haue her in great adoration, calling them Iunonicol^, as those that honour Iuno. Of her chastitie, maiestie, her brawling and chiding with Iupiter, her reuenge vpon his strumpets and bastards, diuers things haue beene diuersely commented, of which I will insist vpon some fewe. Iuno hauing in suspition Semele the daughter of Cadmus and Hermione to haue beene often prostituted by Iupiter, shee changed her selfe into the shape of her nource Beroe, persuading her that shee should beg of him, That he would grace her so much as to lie with her in the same state and maiestie, with which he bedded Iuno* that as his power and potencie was great aboue all, so her embracings and wantonnings might be remarkeable aboue others: which he vnwillingly granting, and she as vnfortunately obtaining, was the occasion that she with her pallace were both consumed in his fires and thunders.
It is related of Iuno further, that when shee and her husband being reconciled and pleasantly discoursing, held argument betwixt themselues, Whether in the act of generation men or women tooke the greatest delight? and that by ioint consent their controuersie was to be determined by Tyresias (one that

had beene of both sects:) Tyresias giuing vp his censure, That women were by nature the most wanton; her sport turned into spleene, and her mirth into such madnesse, that shee instantly bereaued him of his sight, and strucke him blinde: to recompence which losse, Iupiter inspired him with the spirit of Diuination and Prophesie; to which, her continnued anger further added, That howsoeuer hee truely prophesied, yet his presages should neuer bee beleeued.
Alcmena too, growing great of Hercules, and readie to bee deliuered, shee taking on her the shape of a beldame, sat her downe before her owne altar with her knees crossed, and her hands clutched, by which charme shee stopped the passage of her child-birth; which Gallantis espying, and aprehending (as it was indeed) that to be the occasion why her ladie could not be deliuered, she bethought her of a craft to preuent the others cunning; for leauing Alcmena in the middest of her throwes, shee assumes a counterfeit ioy, and with a glad countenance approcheth the altar to thanke the gods for her Ladies safe deliuerie: Which Iuno no sooner heard, but vp shee riseth and casts her armes abroad; her knees were no sooner vncrost and her fingers open, but Alcmena was eased, and Hercules found free passage into the world. Gallantis at this laughing, and Iuno chasing to be thus deluded, she afflicted her with an vnheard off punishment by transhaping her into a Weesill, whose nature is to kindle at the mouth; that from the same jawes with which shee had lied to the gods about Alcmenaes childbearing she should euer after bring foorth her young.
No lesse was her hatred to all the posteritie of Cadmus: for when Agaue had lost Penthaus; and Antinoe, Acteon; and Semele had beene consumed by Ioues thunders; and there remained onely two, Athames and Ino, shee possest them both with such madnesse, that hee being on hunting, transpierst his sonne Learchus, mistaking him for the game he chased; and Ino snacht vp young Melicertes and with him cast her selfe downe headlong into the Sea, from the top of an high promontorie. But at the intercession of Venus, who was borne of the waues, Neptune was pleased to ranke them in the number of the Seagods, so that Melicertes is called Palemon; and Ino, Leucothoe. I could further relate of manie other poeticall Fables, as of Ixion, who entertained and feasted by Iupiter, attempted to strumpet Iuno, and adulterat the bed of Iupiter; which to preuent, and shunne the violence of a rape, she fashioned a Clowd into her owne similitude and semblance, which Ixion mistaking for Iuno, of that begot the Centaures. As also, the birth of her sonne Vulcane, and her daughter Eccho; he lame, and shee so deformed, that being ashamed to shew her selfe or appeare to the eyes of any, she hath so conceald her selfe in thicke woods and hollow vaults and cauernes, that neuer any part of her could euer yet be discouered more than her voice.
Yet to shew that in all these seeming fables golden meanings were intended, I will briefely thus illustrate them: Iuno was therefore called the daughter of Saturne, because the world was created by God, the great worke-master of Nature. Then, in his course was Time borne; from thence, Ether, which is, whatsoeuer is aboue the Element of Fire, the Firmament, or the Sky; and next that, the Elements: The highest next Iupiter is Aer, namely Iuno, the moderatresse of the life of man, by whom the treasures of raine and haile are disposed and gouerned: of the Aire waxing hot, are generated creatures, trees and plants, etc. whose temperature hath an influence in the bodies and

mindes of reasonable creatures: therefore when from water Aer is next begot, shee is sayd to be nourisht by Oceanus and Thetis; when the force of the Element workes with the Aer in the procreation of creatures, shee is then sayd to be the wife of Iupiter: when shee is changed into fire, then shee brings forth Vulcan: when the benignitie of the aire hath cooperation with such things as are generated, shee is then stiled the goddesse of marriage. So likewise it is saied of Ixion, that for attempting the bed of Iupiter he was from heauen cast downe into hell; which some would bring within the compasse of historie: But that hee is there tortured vpon a wheele incessantly turning round, must needs include moralitie. Most probable it is that Ixion disgrac't and banisht from the court of that king whose wife he had sought to adulterat, was thereby made of all men the most wretched and miserable, as one excruciated with perpetuall ambition and enuie: for such as vnder the imaginarie Idea of vertue apprehend the realitie of vaine glorie, they can attempt nothing good, nothing sincere or lawdable, but all their actions are criminall, irregular and meerely absurd; importing thus much, That their estates can haue no continuance, that by sinister and indirect courses seeke to clime to the heigth and crowne of glorie.

CYBELE.
SHe is the wife of Saturne, and is called the mother of the gods. Her Chariot is drawne with Lions. To her, Ida and Dindimus (two mountains of Phrygia) weare sacred, whereupon Virgill saith,
Alma parens, Idaea deum cui Dindima sacer.
From that place she is called Dindimene, by Martiall.

Non per mistica sacra Dindimenes.
Not by the mysticall oblations of Cibele.

In Phrygia the ministers of this goddesse, called Galli, kept certaine feast daies in her honour, after the manner of Fencers or Gladiators, contending amongst themselues euen to the shedding of much blood; which when they saw to flow plentifully about their heads and faces, they ranne to a certaine floud not farre thence, sacred to the goddesse, and in that washt both their wounds and weapons: the like did the Romanes in Almo, a riuer neere to Rome, the eleauenth of the Calends of Aprill, which Valerius Flaceus remembers:
Sic vbi Migdonios Planctus sacer abluit Almo:Letaque iam Cybile--
Where Almo, the Migdonian knockes laues off,And Cybele now reioyceth--
Reate (as Sylius saith) a citie in Vmbria, is sacred to her, so is Berecinthus a mountaine in Phrygia, of whom she takes the name of Berecinth^a. Apuleius, lib. 11. calls her Pesinuntica of Pesinuntium a citie amongst the Phrygians. Ouid in his Metamorp. amongst her priests, reckons vp Alphitus: and Virgill in his 11 booke, Choreus. Melissa was a woman priest, of whom all that succeeded her were called Melissae. Plutarch in Mar. nominats one Barthabaces, Per ea tempora, etc. About those times came Barthabaces priest to the great mother of the gods, saying she had spoken to him in her Temple, and predicted victory. This Cibele is likewise called Vesta, and Rea. The rights of her sacrifices performed in her honour Ouid in his Fastis thus expresseth:
Of old with tincling sounds, did Ida ring,But weakely, as young Infants crie or sing.Some beate their Bucklers, some their emptie caskes;(For this, of Cibeles Priests, the labour askes)The mysteri's conceald: yes still remainesAn imitation of those auntient Straines.Cimbals for Helmes; for Targets, Timbrils play,The Phrigian Pipe still sounds, as at that day.
Her priests were called Curetes, and Coribantes; as also Idaei Dactili, who like mad-men wagging their heads and playing on Cimbals ran about the streets, prouoking others to doe the like: They came from Ida in Phrygia into Creete, in which Island they cald a hill by the name of Ida.
The Poets (who in their Fables hid all the mysteries of learning, as the Egyptians in their Hierogliphicks) by the mother of the gods, would haue vs thus much vnderstand, That when they meant to signifie to our apprehensions, that the earth, as the stabilitie of the world, and firmament of all naturall bodies, from whence all things borne had beginning; they therefore call Cybele or Vesta the mother of the gods, and to her sacrifices brought all the first fruits of the earth as due to her. Further to expresse the nature of the earth, many things haue from antiquitie beene remembred touching her: for Rhea signifies the force or strength of the earth who passeth and shifteth, piercing into the generation of things.


VENVS.
SOme report her to be borne of the Nymphe Dione, daughter to Oceanus and Thetis: Others, that she was borne of the foame or froath of the Sea. She is the goddesse of Loue, the wife of Vulcan, the sweet heart of Mars, the mother of Cupid and the Graces; She goes armed with Torches, and bound about with a marriage girdle. Her chariot is drawne by Swannes, as Iunoes with Peacockes, as Ouid in his tenth booke Metamorph.

--Iunctisque per Aera Cignis
Carpit itur--.


With yoaked swannes she trauels through the ayre.

The like witnesseth Horace, Statius, Siluius, and others. The places to her most sacred, were Amathus, an Isle in the Sea Aegeum, of which she tooke the name of Amathusa or Amathusis. She was honoured in Cyprus; and especially in Paphos, a cittie of that Isle: likewise in Memphis where she had a Temple: of Cyprus she had the denomination of Cypria, Cypris, and Cyprigena: of Paphos, Paphia; of Gnydos, Gyndia. Pliny reports that Praxitiles was nobilitated for his grauing of Marble, but especially for the Statue of Gnidian. Venus. The Idalian woods, the Ciclides, and the hill Cythera were to her sacred. Of Erix a mountaine in Sicilia she was called Erecina: as Horrac. Carmin. lib. 1.

Siue tu mauis Erecina ridens.

Concerning hir loue to Mars, and his mutuall affection to her, it is frequent amongst the Poets: onely I will introduce Ouid in his second booke de arte Amandi:
Fabula narratur toto notissima Coelo,Mulciberi capti Marsque, Venusque dolis, etc.
This Tale is knowne to all and spoken still,Of Mars and Venus tooke by Vulcans skill:The god of warre doth in his browe discouer,No more a frowning souldier, but a louer.To his demands what could the Queene oppose?Cruell, or hard? alas, she's none of those.How oft the wanton would deride his trade!Polt-foot; and hard-hand, blacke with Cole-dust made.He's pleas'd to see her imitate his pace:What ere she doth, her beauty seemes to grace.At first their meetings they conceal'd with shame,None to their bashfull sinnes could scarce giue name.The tell-tale Sunne (who can deceiue his sight?)Sees, and to Vulcane doth of all giue light.Oh Sunne, what bad example hast thou lent?Aske her a bribe; she hath to giue content,So thou wilt secret be. Vulcane downe sits,And his obscure wyres to the place he fits:The worke so fine, that it beguiles the eye,About their bed, he plac't them, lowe, and hye.He makes as if to Lemnos he would scoure,The louers keepe appointment iust at th'houre;And catcht together in his wierie snare,Naked and fast bound Mars and Venus are.He calls the gods to witnesse, they are spide;Soft hearted Venus scarce her teares can hide:Their hands to vaile their cheekes they cannot git,Or shodow that which to behold's vnfit.One of the gods said smiling, If they beTedious, good Mars* bestow thy bonds on me.Scarce at thy prayers, oh Neptune, th'are vntide;Mars hasts to Creete, to Phaos Venus hi'de:What by this cott'st thou Vulcane? what they twoBefore with shame did, now they boldly doe.Their lusts it did encourage, not asswage;And thou hast since repenced of thy rage.
Of her loue to Adonis, the incestuous issue of Mirrha and her father Cyniras; how he was slaine of the boare, and how his blood was turned into a purple flower by the power of the goddesse: her doating vpon Anchises, the father of Aeneas; it might appeare superfluous to insist vpon. Therefore to auoide all prolixitie, I will briefly come to the mysteries included.
Because some creatures are borne of corruption,Morall. and others by copulation, the Poets by Venus would illustrat what is requisite and conuenient to both: To those which are bred of corruption, the mediocritie of heate, and clemencie of the heauen is very necessarie to their breeding. Againe, to those that

are begot by coniunction, male with female, most conuenient is the temperature of the aire, for the matter of generation being of the most subtile part of the blood, it acquires a moderat heate, which is chiefly helped by the Spring: for the temperature of the Spring is called the baude to all procreation: and therfore the ancient writers, to expresse the matter of the seede, and moderation of the aire (both necessarily to meete in the appetite of generation) haue fabulated, That Venus was borne of the generatiue parts of Heauen, as also of the Sea: For these parts, are the mediocritie of heate by motion, which is vsefull and necessitous in the begetting of all creatures whatsoeuer.


MINERVA.
SHe is likewise called Pallas, borne of the braine of Iupiter; shee is the goddesse of Wisedom, Discipline, and Armes, and therfore called Bellona; and therefore translated into the number of the gods, because the inuention of artes and sciences are attributed to her. The places celebrated to her deitie, were Ithinas a hill neere to Athens, where shee had a Temple errected; the mountaine Pireas, in Attica; in Aracinthus, a place in Aetolia, from which (as Statius writes) she was called Aracinthia. Plinie saith that Nea, one of the Islands called Ciclades, was peculiar to her. But Athens was her place of most honour, which citie she is sayd to haue built: From thence she hath the name of Athnaea, Attica, Cecropia, and Mosopia: Horace Carm. lib. 1. The great citie called Alcomeneum, scituate in Boetia, hath likewise by the testament of the first founder submitted it selfe to her patronage. Of Scira, a prophet of Elusina, shee was called Sciras. The solemnisation of her feastiuals were called Panathenea. There were certaine wreastling contentions, which Theseus in Athens first instituted to this goddesse, as Plutarch hath deliuered. She had likewise her Quinquatria yearely celebrated, which were kept sacred fiue daies after the blacke day, (and therefore so called) the blacke day was immediatly after the Ides. In her sacrifices it was their custome to offer a Goat, because as Plinie hath left recorded, The biting of the goat is preiudiciall to the Oliue tree, whose fruit Minerua best loueth; the verie licking of the rinde with their tongues makes it barren. Shee slew the beast Alcida, a monster that from his mouth and nosthrils breathed fire. Aelianus writes, that when Alexander brought his armie against Thebes (amongst manie other prodigies) that the image of Minerua, sirnamed Atalcomineides was burnt by a voluntarie flame, no fire being neere it. At Assessum she had two Temples: from that place she was called Minerua Assessia. From other places where shee was worshipt, she tooke the name of Pallenides and Pedasia: Alea from her temple amongst the Tegeates. Tutelaris she was called by the inhabitants of Chios, and honoured as an Oracle amongst the Aegyptians; she had only a porch amongst the Seians. In some places her statues were couered with gold, in others they were of plaine stone. She had a Temple in Sigeum: three others, Sciradis, Aegis, and Crastiae: she was by some called Minerua Vrbana, and Minerua ^sliadi. Herodotus writeth that when Xerxes transported his armie into Greece, passing by Troy and being perusing the antiquities thereof; vpon his departure thence, at the altar of Minerua, hee sacrificed a thousand oxen in one day. Manie things are fabled of her by Poets, as of her contention in weauing, with Arachne, which I purposely refer to her storie as it falls in course. She is the Hierogliphick of Wisedome,

and therefore the Poet Martianus writes that she was borne without a mother, because that in women there is scarce anie wisedome to be found. In a Hymne vpon Pallas hee is thus read:
Hanc de patre ferunt, sine matris saedere natam;Prouida consilia, quod nescit curia matrum.
Of father therefore, without mother borne;Because learn'd courts, the womens counsell scorne.
The Maclies and the Auses, are two nations that border vpon the spacious Fenne Tritonides: Their virgins in the yearely feast of Minerua, in celebrations of their rights to the goddesse, diuide themselues into two armies, and fight one part against the other, with stones, clubs, and other weapons of hostilitie: such as perish in the conflict, they hold to bee no true and perfect Virgins, because not protected by the goddesse: But shee that hath borne herselfe the most valiant in the conflict, is by common consent of the rest, richly adorned, and beautified with the best armour, according to the manner of the Greekes, her head beautified with a Corinthian crest or plume, and seated in a Chariot drawn through the Tritonian Fenne. They haue it by tradition, that Minerua was the daughter of Neptune and the Fenne before named, and being reproued by her father, shee tooke it in such scorne, that shee vtterly reiected him and gaue her selfe to Iupiter, who adopted her his daughter. Zale^cus when hee commended his lawes to the ^ocrenses, to make them the better obserued by the people, told them, Minerua had appeared to him, and did dictate and propose to him whatsoeuer he had deliuered to them. The most famous of Poets, Homer, hee made Minerua a companion with Vlysses in all his trauels; in whom hee personated the most wise man amongst the Grecians, who freed him from all daungers, labours, and ship-wreckes, and brought him in safetie to his Countrie, Parents, Queene, Sonne, and Subiects: thereby intimating, That by Wisedom and Knowledge all difficult things may be easily vndergone. This is that winged horse Pegasus, by which Perseus subdued so manie monsters. This is that shield of Pallas, to which the Gorgons head being fastned, turnes the beholders to stone, amazing the ignorant and vnlearned. Agreeable to this is Homers first booke of his Odissa, the argument I giue you thus in English:Odissa. lib. 1.
Pallas by Ioues command from heauen discends,And of the Paphian Mentor takes the shape,In which she to Telemachus commends?Such Greekes as from reuenging Hellens rapeWere home returnd, Nestor amongst the rest,And Menelaus; vrging him to inquireOf them, who in the warres at Troy did best?And whose heroick acts did most aspire,But of Vlysses, chiefely to learne newes,What course he takes, or what attempt pursues.
Againe in the second booke.Perioch. 2.

Vnknowne to fierce Antinous and his mates,
Telemachus from court in secret steales,
On him Ioues daughter, bright Minerua, waites,
And taking Mentors shape her selfe conceales.
He by the goddesse Vrgence, straight prepares
For such a voyage, instantly prouiding
All needfull helpes, apt for such great affaires.
Their ship made readie: vnto Pallas guiding
He trusts himselfe: by helpe of saile and care,
They put to sea, and loose the sight of shore.

Perioch. 6.Vlysses suffering ship-wrecke, and cast naked vpon the shore of Pheacus, he was assisted further by her, as followes in the sixt and seuenth arguments.

The wearied Greeke, all naked steps on shore,
Whether Nausiaca discends to play,
With other Virgins, as it was before
Their custome: vp the Greeke starts spying day,
With a faire flocke of Ladies him beside;
Vp by the rootes he teares the hearbes, and grasse,
Thinking with them his nakednesse to hide;
And so proceedes vnto the queenelike lasse.
Pallas his patronesse, moues her to pittie,
She giues him both her chariot and attire,
So to Mineruas Temple, neere the citie,
He's proudly drawne, guarded by many a squire:
Thus in her altars sight, being lodg'd that night
He striues with insence Pallas to requite.
Minerua takes a Virgins shape vpon her,
Perioch. 7.And to the citie first Vlysses brings.
But after, to aspire him to more honour,
Into the Pallace (th'ancient seate of kings.)
Arete, wife to Alicinous, first demaunds,
Where he receiu'd those garments, and what fate
Brought him that way? the Princesse vnderstands
The vtmost that Vlysses can relate.
Therefore the Queene accepts him as her guest,
The night persuades, they part to seuerall rest.

In all his negotiations and trauels, Pallas was still his assistant, for Wisedome neuer forsakes anie man in necessities: in so much, that after hee had freed his court of his wiues vnruly sutors, hauing slaine them all, and was now peaceably possest of his kingdome, she was still constant to him in all his extremities. Which I will conclude with the foure and twentieth argument of Homers Odisse, and the last booke.

Tartaream vocat in sedem Cillenius vmbras.


The mutinous Ghosts of the sad wooers slaine:
Mercurie forceth to the vaults belowe,
What Time th'heroick spirits, thronging complaine,
That Agamemnon should be murdred so,
These being yong men of chiefe beautie, and age,
Why they so presse in heapes demand the cause:
And are resolu'd, 'mongst whom Vlisses sage,
And chast Penelope, gaine much applause;
Especiallie from Agamemnons ghost,
Who had to him a fate much contrarie;
Yet whom in life he had respected most.
Meane time Vlisses (that much long'd to see
His father^ old Laertes) freelie tells
His fortunes, dangers, trauells, miserie,
Both forreine and domesticke; what strange spells,
Witchcrafts, and ship-wracks, had so long detein'd him
From his graue Father, and his constant Queene,
And to what dyrefull exegents constrein'd him;
In what strange coasts and climats he had beene.
By this, the Fathers of the Sutors dead,
(Grieuing their Sonnes should so vntimely fall)
Take counsell, and 'gainst th'Ithacan make head:
These he opposes, and repells them all;
But gathering new supplyes, by Ioues command,
Pallas from heauen descends t'attone these iarres,
To free all forraine forces from the land,
And by her wisedome compromise these warres.
By his decrees, and her owne wisedome guided,
Armes are surceast, all difference is decided.

Pallas hath beene often inuocated by the Poets, but amongst infinite I will onelie instance one, and that for the elegancie. Homer in his long peregrination through Greece and other countries, sometimes by sea, and sometimes by land, and by the reason of his blindnesse groaping his way, hee happened to passe by a place where Potters were at worke, and setting such things as they had newlie moulded, into their furnace: who finding by his harpe (for he seldome trauelled without it, being one of the best meanes he had to get his liuing) that hee had some skill in Musicke, intreated him that hee would play them a fit of Myrth, and sing them a fine song; which if hee would doe, they would giue him so manie small pots and necessary drinking cups for his labour, vayles that belonged to their trade. The conditions were accepted; and he presentlie to his harpe sung this extemperoll dittie, called Caminus, or Fornax.

Oh Potters, if you'l giue to me that hyre
Which you haue promis'd, thus to you I'le sing:
Descend, o Pallas, and their braines inspire,
And to their trade thy best assistance bring,
That their soft chalices may harden well,
And their moist cups of clay waxe browne and dry;
This being done, they may with profit sell,
And customers from all parts come to buy,
Not to the market onelie, but euen here
Where they be forg'd and burnt: so shall it be
When I am pleas'd, and you haue sold them deere,
Profit to you, and couenant with me.
But if you mocke me, and my meede deny,
All hydeous mischiefes to this furnace throng,
May those grosse plagues that thicken in the sky,
Meete at this forge, to witnesse this my wrong.
Hither rush Smaragus, and with him bring
Asbetes and Sabactes: quench their fire,
Oh Pallas, 'bout their roomes their models fling,
On Ouen, shoppe, and furnace vent thine Ire:
Else let Omodomas with too much heat
Cracke all their vessels, and their art confound,
Pash all their workes to mammocks, I intreat;
Pull furnace, forge, harth, house, and all to ground,
That they may bruise together in their fall,
(Whilst all the Potters quake) with such a ruine,
As when huge masts are split and cracks withall,
The warring winds, the sea-mans wracke pursuing.
In such a tempest let the chimneyes shatter,
And the vast frame within his basses sinke:
Whilst 'bout their eares the tyles and rafters clatter,
That all their pipkins, steanes, and pots for drinke,
And other vses, may be crasht to powder;
And so conuert againe into that myre
Whence they were forg'd. Or if a horror lowder
May be deuis'd, here vent thy worst of Ire.
Else let that Circe. Witch that calls Apollo father,
Who can from hell the blackest furies call,
All her infectious drugs and poysons gather,
And sprinkle them on worke-men, worke and all.
Let Chiron to this forge his Centaurs bring,
(All that suruiued the battell, 'gainst Ioues sonne)
That they these pots against the walles may ding,
And all their labour into ruine runne,
Till what they see, be nothing; and these heare
Spectators of this wracke, may howle and yell,
And their great losse lament with many a teare,
Whilst I may laugh alooofe, and say 'twas well.
And to conclude, That he that next aspires
But to come neere the furnace where they stand,
May be the fuell to these raging fires,
And be consum'd to ashes out of hand:
So may the rest that shall escape this danger,
Be warn'd by these, how to deride a stranger,

That the former writers might demonstrate vnto vs, That humane actions are not altogether so gouerned by the force coelestiall, but that there is some place left open for mans prudence, and wisedome; and besides, to deliuer vnto vs how acceptable the knowledge of good things is to him who is the giuer of all graces: they therefore left this expression to posteritie, that Wisedome

was the daughter of Iupiter, and borne without a mother, since God is onelie wise, and men not so, but meerelie in a similitude or shadow. Therefore to manifest the power of Wisedome, they feigned her to come into the world armed, because the wise man respects not the iniuries of Fortune, nor puts his trust in any worldlie felicitie, further than by counsell and patience to subdue the one, and moderate the other; still placing his hopes in that fountaine from whence she first proceeded. Next, because the feare of the Lord is the beginning of Wisedome, shee is said to haue co^batted Giants, the sonnes of the earth: such as in that great Gigomantichia, would haue pluckt Iupiter out of his throane: by which are intended the presumptions of nature, and the insolencies of men; who, all seruice and adoration to the diuine powers neglected, are not affraide to make insurrection against heauen it selfe. I may therefore conclude, that all humane wisedome different against the diuine will, is vaine and contemptible, since the good man is onelie wise, and in the grace and fauour of his maker.


DIANA.
SHe is the daughter of Iupiter and Latona, the goddesse of Virginitie and Chastitie. In the heauen shee is called Luna, the Moone; in the Earth, Diana; in Hell or amongst the Infernalls, Proserpina: of which three-fold power, she is called Triformis, and Triula. The places sacred to her, were (as Valerius Flaccus affirms) Parthenius, a flood of Paphlagonia. She with her brother Apollo, was borne in Cinthus, a mountaine hanging ouer Delos; of whom Statius saith, they are both called Cinthij. In Ephesus, a cittie of Ionia, or Lydia, she had a magnificent Temple numbered amongst the seauen wonders of the world. In Bauron, a cittie of Attica, she was likewise honoured. And as Lucan testates, in Taurus, a mountaine in Sicilie: and as Virgil, in Delos,
Notior vt canibus non iam sit Delia nostris.
Not Delia to our dogges is better knowne.
Horace reports her to haue two mountaines in Italie dedicated to her deitie, Auentinus and Algidus. In her sacrifices, a Hart was still offered at her Altar; and dogges or hounds, as Ouid writes:
Exta canum Triuia vidi mactare Sabaeos:Et quicunque tuas accolit Haeme Nyues.
The Sabaeans and the Thessalians inhabiting the snowie mountaine Haemus, vsed dogges in their oblations. Of her Temple at Ephesus, it shall not bee amisse to speake a word or two by the way. Plutarch in his booke De vitando Aere alieno, saith that the Temple of Diana was a Sanctuarie, wherein all debtors were safe from their creditours. As the Vestalls of Rome had the time of their seruice distinguished into three parts, in the first to learne the mysteries of Vesta; in the second to do the ceremonies; and in the third, to instruct others that were ignorant: so amongst the Priests of Diana in Ephesus, the first order of them gaue them the name of Melieres, that is, to be capable of the Priesthood, but not admitted; the second was Hieres, that was in present

office; the third Parieres, that was dead from the seruice. This statelie and magnificent structure was first erected by the Amazons, so beautifull and sacred, that when Xerxes had with sword and fire wasted and demolisht all the Temples of Asia, he spared onelie that, as the richest iewell of the world. It is reported of one Herostratus, a wicked and debosht fellow, who finding in himselfe nothing good to preserue his memorie, and willing that his name should liue to posteritie, set this Temple on fire, for no other purpose, but that hee would bee talkt on: the Ephesians vnderstanding this his malicious ambition, they made it death once to name him. Cornelius Nepos writes that the same night that this famous structure was ruin'd and defaced by fire, Alexander was borne in Pella, in the three hundered and eighth yeare after the building of Rome: so that at the extinguishing of one light of the world, another was kindled. It being demanded of one of Dianaes priests, Why Diana being a goddesse, would suffer her Temple to be vtterlie destroyed? and what she was doing the while? It was answered againe, That it was done vnawares to the goddesse, for she was that night at the labour of Olimpias, and busied about bringing Alexander into the world. Notwithstanding this great ruine, the people of Ephesus caused it to bee re-erected, and made both richer and more beautifull than before: of which worke Dinocrates an Architectour of Macedonia was chiefe. Diana (as Plutarch in his Simposaicon saith) is called Elitheia,Lib. de Solert. animal. or Lucina, as also Locheia, as goddesse of child-birth: she is called also Dictinna. And in his Solertia animalium, that Apollo would be called Lycoconos; and Diana, Multicida Elaphibolos: The one for killing so many Wolues; the other, Harts. Amongst the Aegyptians she is called Bubastis: she is celebrated (witnesse Herodotus) amongst the Thressae, and the Peloniates: amongst the Bizantians she hath the name of Diana Orthosia.
The Poets faine that she is continuallie exercised in hunting: for no other reason but to instruct and incourage all such as prophesse virginitie to shunne sloath and idlenes: so Ouid,
Otia si tollas periere cupidinis arcus.
Take sloath away, aud Cupids bow vnbends:His brands extinguish, and his false fire spends.
Diana and Phoebus, were therefore said to be the children of Latona, because in that, the ancient Poets would signifie the beginning of the world: for when the matter whereof it was made, was a meere confused Masse, and without shape, because all things were obscure and hid: that darknes is signified in Latona; and whereas they make Iupiter their Father, it imports as much as if they should fetch Iupiter out of this darknes, called the Sun and the Moone. More plainelie, the Spirit of the Lord said, Let there be light; of which Light, Apollo and Diana, the one by day, and the other by night, are the greatest: by this inferring, that the generation of the world began first from Light.


CERES.
THe Goddesse of fruites and graine, and daughter to Saturne and Ops, a Law-giuer to the Sicilians: therefore by Virgill called Segifera. In Eleusis, a cittie of Attica, she had diuine worship; because she there taught

plantation and agriculture; and of that place had the name of Elusina: she was honoured in the mount Aetna: in Aenna and Catana, two citties of Cicilie, From whence, as Claudian relates, she had the name of Aetnaea, Aennaea, and Catanensi^: the like doth Selius, etc. Lactantius reports, that into these her Temples erected in these citties, it was not lawfull for any man to enter. The manner of the rights among the Phigalenses were, that no Sacrifices should bee slayne, onely the fruits of planted trees, Hony-combs, and new shorne wooll, were laide vpon the Altar, and sprinkled with sweete oyle, and were set a fire, burnt and offered: these Customes were priuatelie and publikelie obserued yearelie, as Pausanias left recorded. The Argiues sacrifice to this goddesse by the name of Ceres Clithonia, vpon certaine set dayes in the Summer, after this manner: Their Sacrificiall pompe is attended by the chiefe Magistrates of the cittie: after which companie, the women and children next followed, the boyes all in white roabes with chaplets about their browes of Hiacinthes interwouen: and in the lagge end of the same troope were driuen a certaine number of faire and goodlie oxen, but bound in strict bands, and drag'd towards the Temple: being thither come, one of these beasts with his cords loosed was driuen in, the rest of the people standing without the gates, and looking on; who, no sooner see him entred, but shut the gates vpon him: within the Temple, are foure olde women priests with hatchets and kniues, by whom he is slaine, and one of them hath by lot the office to cut off the head of the sacrifice. This done, the doores are againe set open, and the rest, one by one forc't in, and so in order by the same women slayne and offered. In a booke of the scituation of Sicilie, composed by Cl. Marius Aretius, a Patritian, and of Syracusa: Intituled Chorographia Siciliae; In the cittie Aenna, saith he (as Strabo consenting with him) were borne Ceres, and her daughter Libera, whom some call Proserpina; From which place shee was rap't, and therefore is this cittie to her sacred. Neere to this cittie is a riuer of an infinite depth, whose mouth lyeth towards the North, from whence it is said Dis, or Pluto, with his chariot made ascent, and harrieng the virgin thence, to haue penetrated the earth againe not farre from Syracusa. This is that most ancient Ceres whom not Sicilia onely, but all other nations whatsoeuer celebrated. Most certaine it is, that she was Queene of the Sicilians, and gaue them lawes, taught them the vse of tillage and husbandrie; and that her daughter Libera was transported thence by Orcus, or Dis, king of the Molossians. In her Temple (part of which, not many yeares since was standing) were two statues of Marble; one sacred to her, another to Proserpina; another of brasse, beautifull and faire, but wondrous antient. At the entrance into the Church in an open place without, were two other faire portraitures; one of her, another of Triptolemus, large and of exquisite workemanship: In Ceres right hand was the image of Victorie most curiouslie forged. This Historie with many other, is with much nimble and dextrous witte fabulated by Ouid: to whose Metamorphesis I referre you.
In Ceres is figured to vs,Morall. an exhortation to all men to bee carefull in the manuring and tilling of the Earth, since Ceres is taken for the Earth, the treasuresse of all riches whatsoeuer; and iust is that vsurie and commendable which arriseth from thence: for the fertilitie that growes that way, is begot by the temperature of the weather, and the industrie of mans labours. Shee is therefore sayd to wander round about the earth, and ouer the spatious Vniuerse, because of the obliquitie of the signe-bearing circle, and the progresse

of the Sunne beneath that, by which Sommer is in some parts of the world at all seasons of the yeare, and elsewhere when not here. Besides from hence this moralitie may bee collected, No man vnpunished can despise the gods: for miseries are the hand-maides of dishonestie, therefore of force a wicked and irreligious man is subiect and incident to fall into many distresses and casualties: therefore Pietie towards heauen, Wisedome in managing our affaires, and Thriftinesse in the disposing of our priuat fortunes are all requisite in an honest, religious, a parsimonious, and well disposed man.


PROSERPINA.
THe daughter of Iupiter and Ceres, shee was honoured in Cicilie, of which Prouince shee was called Cicula, of whom Seneca thus speakes,
Vidisti Siculae regna Proserpinae?
Hast thou seene the kingdomes of Sicilian Proserpine?
She is likewise called by Lucan, Ennaea, of the citie Enna.

Elo^uar immenso terrae sub pondere, quae te
Cintineant Ennaea dapes?--


Shall I, oh Ennaea, discouer on what dainties thou feedest
Beneath the huge waight of the Massie earth?

Manie fables of Proserpina haue bin introduc'd for our better instruction, by the ancient Poets; which is onely to expresse to vs the nature of the seedes, and plants; for Proserpina, by whom is signified the Moone, shining to vs one halfe of the moneth, and lying the other halfe in the armes of her husband Pluto, that is, being halfe the yeare in Heauen and the other in Hell, sixe moneths beneath the earth, and as manie aboue: so is it with the vertue of plants, whose sappe for sixe moneths space, is by reason of the subterren cold, forc't and diffused vpward into the boughes and branches: againe, by the extreamitie of the Winters vpper cold, it is compulsiuely driuen backe downeward into the roote, beneath the earth: for so doth nature impart her power and vertue to all creatures and naturall bodies whatsoeuer, that they many obserue a mutualitie (if I may tearme it so) in their cooperation. After the like manner is the day sorted out for our labours and affaires, the night for our rest and repose. So likewise in explicating the power of Luna, or the Moone: some call her the daughter of Hiperion or the Sunne, because shee being Corpus diaphanes, that is a bodie cristaline, like reflectiue glasse, transferres the light receiued from her father, vpon the earth to vs; for which cause she is called also the sister of the Sunne: by the swiftnesse of her course her proper motions are declared. To expresse her nature alwaies appearing to vs greater, or lesser, is to signifie her strength and multiplicitie of working, therefore they alot her a garment of diuers and sundrie colours. In attributing to her the double sexes of male and female (as some haue commented) the reason is, in that as shee is woman, shee infuseth an humor necessarie and profitable to the nutriment of all creatures: in respect of her

virile nature shee allowes a moderate and sensible heate, much auailable to increase, for without this heate, in vaine were her opperation, which is easily proued in all creatures that are pregnant and bringing foorth: therefore, shee is called Lucina, as the goddesse that brings creatures to light. She is likewise operatiue to corruption, which is the reason that sicke men and such as are troubled with anie greeuous maladie, are most in daunger of death in the criticall daies of the Moone.


NEMESIS.
SHee is the goddesse of Reuenge and Wrath, and punisher of the proude and vaineglorious. She had a Temple in Ramnus, a towne in Attica, from which shee tooke the name of Rhamnusia. Aristotle by the passion of Indignation, and affection of Commiseration, saith Nemesis is figured; and both of these tooke in the better part: Indignation when good men are troubled and vexed to see bad men vse good things ill: Commiseration, to see honest and just men crost with the disasters of the world. Plutarch in his booke de capienda ex hostibus vtilitate, speaking how ridiculous it is for anie man to reproue another of that vice of which hee is himselfe guiltie, or taint anie man for the least deformitie vnto which hee is subiect himselfe, brings in Leo Bizantius a crooked back't fellow, gybing at him, because hee had a weakenesse and an infirmitie falne into his eies: to him he thus answered, Why dost thou mock me for this mischance by fortune, when thou thy selfe carriest Nemesis vpon thy backe by nature. Of what power this Nemesis was, and how honoured, manie Authors as well amongst the Greekes as the Latines, haue laboured industriously to make manifest, I will insist on few: Ausonius from the Greeke interpreted this Epigram:
Me lapidem quondam Persae advexore trophaeum,Vt fierem bello: nunc Ego sum Nemesis.Ac sicut Graecis victoribus asto trophaeumPunio sic Persas vaniloquos Nemesis.
The Persians tooke me hence long since,From Greece a stone: and vowTo make me a warres-Trophy stand,But Nemesis I am now.But as I to the victor GreekesA Trophy now appeare,The prating Persians NemesisI punish with my feare.
The Historie from which both Epigrams are deriued, Pausanias recites much after this manner: From Marathon (saith he) some threescore leagues distant is Rhamnus, a citie bordering vpon the Sea, iust in the way to Oroxus: by which stands the Temple of Nemesis, a goddesse, who is the ineuitable reuenger of such men as are haughtie, proud, and contumelious. It seemes the barbarous Perseans vnder the name of Nemesis doe comprehend Indignatio: for comming towards Marathon, and despising the Athenians, as not able to interpose their

incur^ions. They tooke a stone of white Marble, as if they had alreadie obtained the victorie: of which stone Phidias (the excellent statuarie) made the portraiture of Nemesis: A faire crowne vpon her head, with forrest harts carued about it, and many small Imageries pourtraieng Victorie, in her right hand a golden cuppe, in which the Aethiopians were figured. Some thinke her the daughter of Oceanus, some of Iupiter, others of Iustice. Ammianus Marcellinus in his booke of the deedes of the Emperour Gallus, speakes to this effect: These and such like things (saith he) Adrastia (vnder whose name by a double signification, we vnderstand Nemesis) oft times workes in vs, being a certaine sublime law of some High power effectuall in the opinions of men, and plac't, or hauing residence about the Lunarie circle, who suppresseth the loftie neckes of the proude, and from the lowest of despaire erects the minds of the humble. For when the wise and vnderstanding men would illustrate to vs, nothing to be more acceptable to heauen, or more commodious to the life of man, than a moderation of the mind, as well in prosperitie as aduersitie; they deuised many fables, to exhort men nobly to indure the miseries and afflictions of this life, with constant sufferance and resolued patience. And because many had by such examples yeelded their submisse shoulders to the burden of disasters, but in prosperitie, and in the superabundance both of Wealth and Honour knew not how well to behaue themselues; they therefore introduc't Nemesis the daughter of Iustice (a most graue and seuere goddesse) to see punishment inflicted vpon such, that in the excesse of their felicitie, and height of their authoritie prooue ouer other men Tyrants, and therefore intollerable.


LATONA.
SHe was honoured in Delos, as there being deliuered of Apollo and Diana, to illustrat whose historie the better I will giue you a taste out of Lucians dialogues,Luc^an. in Dial. superior. the interloquutors are Iuno and Latona. You haue brought to Iupiter two beautifull children saith Iuno. To whom she replyde, We cannot all, we can not all, indeede, be the mothers of such sweete babes as Vulcan. Iuno replyes, Though he be lame, as falling from the vpper region downe to the earth, by the negligence of his father, yet is he profitable and vsefull both to gods and men; for Iupiter, he prouides thunders; for men, armour and weapons: when on the contrarie, thy daughter Diana imployes her selfe onelie in hunting and vnnecessarie pastime, an extrauagant huntresse, neuer satiate with the blood of innocent beasts: Thy beautifull sonne pretending to know all things, to bee an exquisite Archer, a cunning Musitian, a Poet, a Physitian, and a Prophet; and not of these alone the professour, but the Patron. To this purpose hath he set vp Temples and Oracles, here in Delphos, there in Claros, and Didimus: by his dilemmaes and oblique answers to questions demanded (such as which way soeuer they be taken, must necessarilie fall out true) deluding and mocking all such as come rather to bee resolued of their doubts and feares, or to know things future: by these illusions raising an infinite gaine and riches to himselfe, to the losse and discommoditie of others; his foreknowledge meerelie consisting of legerdemaine and iugling. Nor is it concealed from the wise, how in his predictions, he dictates false things as often as true. For could he exactlie and punctuallie presage all things to come, why did he not foresee the death of his Minion, and know before that he was to

perish by his owne hand? why did he not predict, that his ^oue Daphne (so faire hair'd and beautifull) should flie and shunne him as a monster hated and scorned? these with infinite others considered^ I see no reason thou shouldst thinke thy selfe more happie in thy children than the most vnfortunate Niobe. To whom Latona replyed: I well perceiue (great goddesse) wherein this many killing and much gadding daughter, and this lying and false prophesieing son of mine offends you, namely, that they are still in your eie glorious, numbered amongst the gods, and of them esteemed the most beautifull: yet can you not denie but that he is most skilfull in the Voice and the Harpe, exceeding whatsoeuer can be vpon the earth, and equalling, if not preceading, that of the Spheres in heauen. I cannot chuse but smile sayth Iuno: Is it possible his skill in musicke should beget the least admiration? when poore Marsias (had the Muses not bin partiall, but judg'd indifferently of his side) had gain'd of him prioritie: but he alas by their vniust sentence, lost not only his honor in being best, but being vanquished, hee most tyranously had his skinne stead off for his ambition: and this your faire Daughter and Virgin, is of such absolute feature and beautie, that being espied naked by Acteon (bathing her selfe in the fountaine) shee transform'd him into a Hart, and caused him by his owne dogges to bee torne in peeces, least the young man should suruiue to blabbe her deformities. Besides, I see no reason why to women in labour and trauell in child-birth, shee should shew herselfe so carefull and common a mid-wife euerie where, and to all, if shee were as shee still pretends to be, a Virgin. With her Latona thus concluded: You are therefore of this haughtie and arrogant spirit, because you are the sister and wife of Iupiter, and raigne with him together, which makes you to vs your inferiours so contumelious and harsh: but I feare I shall see you shortly againe weeping, when your husband leauing the heau'ns for the earth, in the shape of a Bull, an Eagle, a Golden shower, or such like, shall pursue his adulterate pleasures. Ouid in his sixt booke Metamor. and his third fable sayth, That Niobe the daughter of Tantalus, borne in Sypile, a citie of Lidia, hauing by Amphion sixe braue sonnes and as many daughters, though shee were forewarned by the daughter of Tyresias to bee present with the Thebans at their sacrifice to Latona and her children, yet shee contemptuously denied it, preferring her selfe in power and maiestie before the goddesse; and her owne beautifull issue, before the others: at which contempt the goddesse much inraged complained to Appollo and Diana, in whose reuenge, he slew all the young men, and shee the virgins: with griefe whereof Amphion slew himselfe, and Niobe burst her heart with sorrow. Latona is by interpretation Chaos,Moral. it was beleeued that all naturall bodies seedes of things, mixt and confused, lay buried in darknesse. Some take Latona for the earth, and therefore Iuno did oppose the birth of the Sunne and Moone, by reason of the frequent fogges and damps arising, by which the sight of these two glorious planets, are shadowed and kept from our eyes; for when by the thickenesse and tenebrositie of the clowdes, the Sunne is weakned and made of lesse force, oft times there proceeds a pestilent aire, with many pests and diseases preiudiciall both to sensible creatures and to plants: but when the Sunne resumes his vertue and vigor, then by the purifying of the aire all these infections are dispersed and scattered, vnlesse they haue proceeded so farre as to contagion. And so much for Latona.



FORTVNA.
ANtium a citie of the Latines, bordering vpon the Sea, had Fortune in great reuerence, to whom they erected a magnificent Temple. Wherefore Horace thus speakes:
Oh Diuae gratum quae regis Antium.
So Rhamnus or Rhamnis, a towne in Attica, where Nemesis and Fortune were held in equall reuerence; and from hence rather called Ramnusia. In Praeneste a citie of Italy, Sortes and Fortuna were held in like adoration, of which they were called Praenestine. Petrus Crinitus in his first booke of honest discipline and the sixt chapter, concerning this goddesse, rehearseth these verses from Pacuuius:
Fortunam insanam esse, and Brutam perhibentPhilosophi:Saxique ad instar globosi praedicant esse,Volabilem.Quia quo saxum Impulerit Fors, Ea CadereFortunam autumant:Caecam ob eam rem esse vocant quia nilCernant quo sese applicet.Insanam autem aiunt quia atrox incertaInstabilisque sitBrutam quia dignum aut indignum,Nequeat ignocere.
Which I thus English.

The Philosophers tell vs that Fortune is both mad
and bruitish:
They preach to vs, that like a round rolling
Stone, shee is voluble:
Intimating, that wheresoeuer chance shall force,
Fortune shall incline.
Therefore they make her blinde, because shee can
discerne nothing to which shee can applie her selfe,
They terme her madde, because shee is cruell without
Pitie: vncertaine and vnstable.
Bruitish; because she cannot distinguish betwixt
what is right and iniurie.

Hitherto Pacuvius, whose verses M. Cicero commemorates. Plinie to Vespasian speakes thus, concerning the power of Fortune:
Through the whole world (sayth hee) and in all places, at all houres, and by all tongues, Fortune is still inuokated, and she alone; she is onely nominated, shee alone is accused, alone made guiltie, solely thought vpon, solely commended: solely reproued, and with her reproches adored; of many shee is held mutable and blind: shee is wandering, inconstant, incertaine, diuerse, and a fauourer of the vnworthie, at her shrine are all things expended, to her are all things acceptable, offered; she altogether swayes, guides, and directs the reason of mortall men.
Amongst

the Scythians she is painted without feete; she had onely hands, and feathers. Amongst the Smyrnians, with her head she supported heauen, bearing in one of her hands the horne of Amalthea, that is, of Plentie. She is described by Pausanias, in the statue of a Buffe or wilde Oxe: but amongst all her figures and attributes,Liu. lib. 2. let me not forget that of ingenious master Owens, the Epigramatist, speaking of Fortune:
Spem dat pauperibus diuitibusque metum.She is the Poore mans hope, and the Rich mans feare.
Liuie,Lib 8.Dyonisius Halicarnasseus, Lactantius, Plutarch, and others, affirme that the statue of Fortune which stands in the Latine way,Lib. 2. cap. 8. with the Temple, was dedicated at the same time that Coriolanus by his mothers intercession, withdrewe his forces from the sacke and spoile of Rome. Which image was heard to speake these words,
Rite me matronae vidistis, riteque dedicastis.
So superstitious they were in the daies of old that they attributed all their intents, actions, and euents of things, to the guidance and will of Fortune, nay that shee had a power in their verie birthdaies, and dayes of death: as of Euripides the most famous Tragick Poet, hee was borne on the same day that before Salamine, the Greeks and the Meades fought that famous Sea-battel, and died vpon the birth day of Dyonisius senior, the tyrant of Sicily. When as (Timaeus sayth) at one instant, Fortune tooke away the imitator of Tragicke calamities, and brought in their true actor and performer. Ascribed it is to Fortune, that Alexander the Conquerer, and Dyogenes the Cynick, should die both on a day: and, that king Attalus left the world, the same day of the yere that he entered into the world. The like was read of Pompey the great, the same day of the moneth that he was borne in Rome, the same (or as some will haue it the day after) he was beheaded in Aegypt. Pyndarus the Greeke Poet, borne in Pithea, consecrated many diuine Hymnes to Appollo, patron of the place. Florus remembers Carniades in the celebration of Platos birth day, whom he calls a stout champion of the Accademie, obseruing that they were both borne on the feast day of Appollo, Plato in Athens, where the Thargetia were acted; and Carniades in Cyrene, where the Carnia were celebrated; both these feasts falling vpon the seuenth day, on which his priests say Appollo himselfe was borne, and therefore they call him Septimanatus, and Hebdomagenus, as much as to say, the seuenth day borne. Those therefore that call Plato the sonne of Appollo (as Plutarch saith) haue done the god no indignitie or dishonour, hee hauing succeeded him in the Oracles of diuine philosophie, of whom Tindarus Lacedemonius hath left this character:
Non hic creditus est mortali de patre natusesse: Deo genitore satus--
Deriu'd from mortall parents he was not:No, 'twas some Deity that him begot.
Plutarch in his quest. Rom. the 64. question, demands why Seruius Tullius dedicated a Temple to little Fortune, or Short? (for so the Latine words imply, being Paruae and Breui) because saith he, that in the beginning from basenes and obscuritie (as being borne of a captiue mother) by the benefite of Fortune

he was exalted to the principalitie of Rome: or doth this change not rather shew her power than her pouertie, that she is a gyant, and no dwarfe? Of all the other Deities, Seruius was knowne to celebrate her with the most Diuine honours, and to inscribe her in all his actions: for he not onely built Temples to Fortuna bonae spei, of good hope; Auerruncae, to turne away her anger; Blandae, to her smiling; Primogeniae, as to the eldest child of Inheritance; Virili, as she was manly: but he erected one also to his owne proper fortune. He gaue her also the denominations of Conuertentis, turning, or turning towards; Bene sperantis, of well hoping; and Fortunae virginis, Fortune the Virgin; likewise Viscosae, as catching and clinging to vs in all our attempts and actions. May it not therefore be obserued, that this Temple, and these rights and ceremonies were celebrated to Little Fortune, that she may assist and much auaile vs euen in things of the smallest moment? Teaching vs, that in all occurrents and euents we ought to intermit no occation or opportunitie that may auaile vs, for the smalnesse in shew or sleightnesse in appearance. But to apply these things to our better vse, and shew that all these Diuine attributes bestowed on this goddesse were heathenish, and absurd, I hold opinion with Plutarch, lib. de Fortuna, That Wisedome guideth the life and actions of man, not Fortune. Was it by Fortune (saith he) that Aristides liued in pouertie, when it was in his owne power to purchase wealth? or that Scipio hauing taken Carthage, neither saw the prey, nor tooke part of the spoyle? That Philocrates hauing receiued so many Talents of Alexanders, spent them vpon strumpets, and Fishes. That Lasthenes and Euthycrates, by proposing to themselues no other felicitie than the throate and belly, lost Olynthus? If these things be attributed to Fortune, we may as well say, Cats, Goates, and Apes, are by chance giuen to voracitie, lust, and squirilitie. If all things be attributed to fortune, what can be deuised? what learnt? what citties gouernment could subsist? or what Kings counsell be managed without prouidence, and wisedome to direct it? did Fortune sway all? Many bruite beasts are better furnisht in their nature and condition than man; some are arm'd with hornes, some with teeth, some with prickles, not so much as the Porcupine, nay the Hedge-hogge, but as Empedocles saith:
Dorsum horret spinis and spicula torquet acuta.
Some of their feete are armed with horne, most of their backes cloathed with hayre; Man onely, as Plato saith, is left by nature naked and vnarmed, without shooe or garment.

Vnum sed hec largita, emollit omnia.

She hath yet bestowed one thing vpon him, which makes good all the rest, The vse of Reason, Industrie, and Prouidence: nothiug more wild, or more swift than the horse, yet he runnes to mans vse: The dogge is a beast, fierce and cruell, yet his seruant and keeper: with the Forrests beast, the Ayers foule, and the Seas Fishhe feedes and banquets: what beast is greater than the Elephant? or to behold, what more terrible? yet to him he is a spectacle of pleasure, like a play in a publike Theatre? Anaxagoras saith, That bruit beasts excell man in all things, yet whatsoeuer they haue, man applyes to his owne vse; hee gathers the honie from the Bee, and drawes milke from the Cow, yet in all this, Fortune hath no hand, onely Counsell and Prouidence. Looke but into crafts, arts, and sciences, we see mettalls tried, houses built, statues caru'd, yet not any of these by chance or accident; for the arts crafts (as we call them) acknowledge Ergana, that is, Minerua (not Fortune) for their goddesse and Patronesse.

It is recorded of a Painter, that hauing drawne a horse in all his liniaments, colours, shape, and euery thing in their true posture, onelie the foame forced from the horses mouth by the curbe or bit of the bridle he had not done to his mind; which often blotting out, and againe seeking to make perfect, but in vaine, in a great vexation and anger, he cast his pencell (being then full of the same colour) against the table, which hitting in the same place gaue so fortunat a dash, that what art could not doe, meere chance and accident made compleat and perfect: and this is the onelie master-peece of Fortune that I haue read off. In all sciences, Artificers vse their rules, squares, lines, plummets, measures, numbers, least any particle of their cunning should be conferd vpon hap or accident. There is a prouidence euen in tuning of an instrument, in slackning or stretching the string; in the kitchin to season meate to the pallat: nor doth any man that hath bought cloath to suite himselfe, kneele downe and make his orisons to Fortune, to make them vp and fit them to his bodie. Hee that hath gathered together abundance of treasure and riches, hath many captiues about him, and seruants to attend him, dwells in a Pallace with many porches and gates, sees it furnisht with costlie hangings, sumptuous beds and tables, without true wisedome to manage all these, apprehends no true felicitie or happinesse of life. Therefore one asking Iphicrates, why hauing armes, and bowes, and weapons, and other militarie ornaments, What kind of man he was that profest not any? he answered, he was that man that had dominion ouer all these, and power to vse them at his pleasure. Therefore wisedome is neither gold, nor siluer, nor glorie, nor health, nor riches, nor strength, nor beautie; it is onelie that which by knowing how to vse them well, makes them laudable and profitable, without which they are meerelie vaine, barren, yea, and oft times damnable, and to him that inioyes them brings trouble and shame. I will conclude this tractate with the saying of the Poet,
Vires exiguae sunt mortaliumSed calliditate multiplici,Belluas Maris and Terrestria,Et sub Coelo volitantia omnia homo domas.Small is the Strength of mortall man,Yet full of craft and skill:Sea and land monsters he can tame,And bring birds to his will.



Of the Goddesses called Selectae.
THese Goddesses were honoured amongst the Gentiles. Canina, Leuana, Edulica, Potina, and Statana; these, as they are opiniated, haue the gouernment of children in their infancie, till they finde their feet, and can stand, or begin to goe. Canina lookes to them in their swathing bands, whilst they are bound vp and mantled. Leuana lifts them from the earth when they chance to fall, and keepes them from breaking or spoyling their faces. Edulica and Potina, haue the charge of the meat and drink by the nurses prouided for

them: Fabulana teacheth them when they begin to prattle; and Vagitana to still them, least they should spoyle themselues by too forcible crying. Libentina, is a ^audie goddesse, and an ouerseer of their lusts and pleasures. There are likewise Aldonea, Albeona, Voluna, Pellonia, all diligent and circumspect about men. Pellonia, she keepes off and beats backe their enemies. Then there is Agenoria, Strenua, and Stimula, which stirres vp men, and accites them to some action or other. Numeria, to helpe them in numbers, and to make euen their accounts. Augerona, she is in stead of a Physitian to ease their Maladies, and to preuent or helpe against diseases. Febris, which is the Ague, was made a goddesse, and had a chappell allowed her in the pallace. Postuerta and Orbona were two others. Prosa directed the tongue in the voluble speaking of Prose. Sentia, had predominance ouer quicke and wittie sentences. In marriages, child-births, and funeralls, they vsed the inuocation of others, as Deneuerra, I^tercidones, Domiduca, Manturna, Virginenses, Lucina, Prema, Parrunda, Populonia, Mena, Tellumone, Rusona, Naenia. For corne and graine were Tutulina, Nodinum, Volutina, Patalena, Hostilina, Florae, Lactucina, Natura, Auerrunca, and Runcia. Against theeues they had Spineo^is: and to preserue their fruites from blasting, and that they might ripen in time conuenient, Fructesa. Rurina was goddesse for the countrey, Mountaines, and Promontories. Empanda, ouer the Plowefeasts, and countrey pastimes. To these were added Tanagraea, Antenorta, Larunda, Moneta, Larentia, Maiesta, Ventilia, and infinite others. Those which they called the select goddesses, were in number eight, Tellus, Ceres, Lucina, Iuno, Diana, Minerua, Venus, and Vesta.
Anaitis. Shee was a goddesse that was particularlie adored by the Lydians, and not knowne to any other nation: to her seruice were selected the choise and pickt damsells out of the chiefe and principall of the Nobilitie. These had no sooner beene in her ministerie and admitted to serue at her Altar, but all modestie and shamefastnes set apart, they exposed their bodies to publike prostitution; by this meanes to be made more capable of husbands, and better practised against marriage.
Angerona. She was a goddesse honoured by the Romanes, when the whole cittie laboured of a disease called the squinancie, which is an inflammation or fierie heate of the Iawes, breeding a tumor in the throat, which suddainelie (if not preuented) suffocates and stoppes the passage of the breath: In this extremitie they offered many sacrifices to her. Her Sacreds and Festiualls were called Angeronalia. Her image was, with her finger laid vpon her lips. Pliny in his second booke thus speakes of her: Angerona, to whom the Romans vse to sacrifice, the thirteenth of the Calends of Ianuarie, hath her effigies in her Temple, with the mouth cloased or sealed vp.
Strabo.Atergatis. A goddesse honoured by the Syrians, so saith Strabo, That beyond Euphrates is the great citie Bambice (whom some call Edessa, others Hierapolis) in which Atergatis the Syrian goddesse hath diuine reuerence.
Drias, or Bona dea, was adored by the Roman Matrons, as also by the ordinarie women of lesse state and qualitie:Tibul. lib. 1. to whose sacrifices, no man could bee at any time admitted: of her Tibullus speakes,
Sacra bonae maribus non adeunda deae.
Her name was Drias, the daughter, or (as some will haue it) the wife of Fannus, who was of that modest Temperance and Continencie, that she so much retyr'd her selfe from the sight of all men, that she neuer walked abroad, nor was at any time seene in publicke. A great aspertion and calumnie still liues

vpon the Sepulchre of Pub. Claudius, a noble man of Rome, in that he was so impudent and irreligious, as to violate her rights and ceremonies; For in her Temple (as Iuuenall amongst others remember of him) he adulterated Pompeia, the daughter of Quintus Pompeius, and niece to Sylla.

--Nota bonae secreta deae--

Bubona and Carna is the goddesse of oxen, and heards of cattell, all such she takes to her charge: but Carna was called Dea Cordinis, The goddesse of the henge or hooke, on which the doore or gate hangeth or mooueth. Ouid in his first booke de Fastis, thus writes:
Prima dies tibi Carna datur dea cardinis haec est,Numine clausa aperit claudit aperta suo.The first dayes Carnaes; She of doores,The goddesse is and guide:She by her power, ope's closed gates,And shuts such as stand wide.
The Antient writers affirme, that shee was held to haue predominance ouer the intrails, and all the interiour parts of man or woman: to whom they made their orisons, that shee would keepe and preserue their harts, liuer, lungs, and bowels, free from anguish and the disease of consumption. To her Brutus erected a Temple.
Dice, and Deuerra. Dice was one that had power ouer the Tribunall, or seat of iudgement: she had imployment in taking vp quarrells, ending strifes, compounding law-cases, and deciding all contentions whatsoeuer. Her ministers were called Dioastae, quasi litem diremptores, as much in our english tongue as if we should call them Peace-makers. Deuerra was a goddesse too, and held in reuerence, for no other reason than that she preserued them from ominous nightbirds called Scopae.
Empanda. She had the charge of all such things as were negligentlie left open; where she tooke the charge, it was held to be more safe than vnder locke and key.
Feronia. She is a goddesse of the wods memorated by Virgill in these words,
--Et viridi gaudens Feronia luco,
Feronia reioycing, and taking pleasure in the greene groaues.
Flora. She was first a strumpet in Rome, of extraordinarie fame, state, and beautie, who by her prostitution attain'd to such an infinite wealth, that she at her owne proper charge, not onelie repayred, but new built a great part of the walles of Rome. After her death, she constituted the people of Rome for her heire: for which bountie they caused her to be deified, and offered vnto her diuine honours. Her feasts were called Floralia. Of her Ouid thus speakes in his fifth booke Fastorum:
Hunc mens impleuit generoso Flore maritus,Atque ait arbitrium tu dea Floris eris.
Tro and Thor. These are the names of a goddesse and a god,Saxo Gramat. spoken of in the historie of Saxo Gramatic^s.
Furina. Is the goddesse of theeues; her sacrifices are kept in the night, as best affecting deedes of darkenes. The Etruscians call her the goddesse of lots,

such as are drawne for the taking vp of controuersies.
Iuuen. Satyr. 8.Hippona, She hath the gouernment and protection of Horses, whom hostlers and groomes of stables haue in great adoration, her picture is still in the place where their horses stand: of her Iuuenall speakes in his eighth Satyre.
Horchia, is a goddesse worshipped in the cittie of Etruria, as the genius of the same place. From her the village by, called Horchianus, takes name.
Lauerna. She is ouer theeues, who make supplication to her for good and rich booties, as that she would charme the houshold with sleepe, keepe the dogges from barking, and the doore h^nges from creeking, to defend them from shame,Horac. epist. lib. 1. and keepe them from the gallowes. Horace in his first booke of Epistles,
--Pulchra LauernaDa mihi fallere, da sanctum iustumque videri.

Viz.
Oh faire Lauerna, grant me that I may cosine and deceiue: but grant me withall that I may appeare to the world, a iust man, and an holy.

Mania was a goddesse, and mother of the Lares, or houshold gods, to whom children were vsed to be offered in sacrifice, for the safetie of their familiar friends that were in trauell by land or sea, or in any feare of danger. But Iunius Brutus in his consullship altered the propertie of that oblation, and changed the innocent liues and blood of infants, into the heads of garlicke and poppie, which serued in the stead thereof.
Medetrina, Mellonia, Mena, Murcea, etc.
Medetrina, she was the medicinall goddesse, and was called so a Medendo, she had power in the ministring of Physicke, her solemnities were called Medittinatia. So likewise Mellonia was thought to be goddesse and chiefe Patronesse of honie. Mena had predominance of some secrets belonging to women. Murcea, was she that was worshipped by such as were lazie, idle, and sloathfull.
Nundina. She was a goddesse amongst the Romans, taking her denomination of the ninth day,Macrobius. called ^ies Lustricus. In that day children had their names giuen them, as Macrobius relates, the males on the ninth day, the females on the eight day after their birth.
Pecunia likewise was numbred among their goddesses.
Pitho, Razenna, Robigo, Rumilia.
Pitho was thought to be the goddesse of eloquence: the Latines called her Suada.
Razenna, was one amongst the Etruscians, who was to rule in wedlocke, and marriages.
Robigo and Robigus were a two sex deitie, of whom the Romans were opinionated, that they could preserue their sheaues and vnthresht corne from being mustie or mouldie. Their festiualls were called Robigalia.
Rumilia, was the the protectresse of sucking infants, as ancient writers are of opinion: for Ruma signifies mamma, a dugge, and therefore sucking lambes are called Subrumi.
Runcina belongs to the gardens, and is said to be the goddesse of weeding; her, the poore women weeders haue in great reuerence.
Seia, Segesta, Tutilina, etc.
Seia, the ancients report to bee the goddesse of sowing; and Segesta had her name from the binding vp of the sheaues: both these had their Temples in Rome in the time of Pliny.
Tutilina and Tutanus were gods, so called of Tutando, preseruing, or keeping safe. Ennius calls them Aeuilernos and Aeuilogros, as much as, Euer liu'd, and euer in the perfectnes and strength of their age: because it was in full power and vigor, not subiect to mutabilitie or capable of alteration. In naming of gods, we may as well vse the feminine as the masculine, and the masculine as the feminine gender, as Virgill speaking of Venus.

Discendo and ducente deo Flammam inter and hostes,
Expedior.


Downe come I, and the god my guide, I make no stay,
But boldlie through the enemy and fire I force my way.

Vacunadea, was Ladie and Gouernesse ouer those that were vacant and without businesse; especiallie had in reuerence by swaines and husbandmen, who after the gathering of their haruest had a cessation from labour.
Vallonia was held to be the goddesse of vallyes.
Vitula Dea, had predominance ouer youthfull myrth and blandishments: For Vitulari was by the ancient grammarians taken for gaudere, to be glad or reioyce.
Volupta is held to be the goddesse of Pleasure.
Rhaea. This goddesse hath by the Poets allowed her a charriot drawne by foure Lyons, a Crowne vpon her head of Citties, Castles, and Towers; and in her hand a golden Scepter. Priests could not offer at her Altar before they were guelded, which order was strictlie obserued in memorie of A^yos a beautifull Phrygian youth, and much beloued of Ceres, but would no wayes yeeld to her desires: because (as he excused himselfe) he had past a vow of perpetuall chastitie; but after, not mindfull of his promise (as Dorytheus Corinthius in his histories relates) he comprest and defloured the nymph Sagaritides, of whom he begat Lydus and Tyrhenus. Lydus gaue name to Lydia, as Tyrhenus to Tyrhena. For this, the inraged goddesse stroke him with such furor and madnesse that he guelded himselfe, and after would haue cut his own throat, had not she commiserating his penitence, transformed him to a Pine tree, or as others will haue it, restored him to his sences, and made him one of her Eunuch priests. Nicander in Alexipharm. saith, her sacrifices were obserued euery new Moone with much tinckling of brasse, sound of Timbrels, and strange vociferation and clamours. Some fable, that Iupiter being asleepe, and dreaming, let that fall to the earth which may be called Filius ante patrem; of which the earth conceiuing, produc'd a genius in an humane shape, but of a doubtfull sex, male and female, called Agdiste; the gods cut off all that belonged to the masculine sex, and casting it away, out of that first grew the Almond tree, whose fruit the daughter of the flood Sangatius first tasting, and hiding part thereof in her bosome, as they wasted there and vanished, so she began to conceiue, and in time grew great, and brought forth a Cal'd Attis. Son, whom laying out in the wood, he was nurced by a goat, and fostred till he was able to shift for himselfe. As he grew in years, so he did in beautie, in so much that he exceeded the ordinarie feature of man: of him was Agdistes wondrously inamored, who when he should haue married with the daughter of the king of Pessinuntium, by the inter-comming of Agdiste, such a madnesse possest them both, that not only Attes, but his father in law likewise, caused their partes of generation to be cut quite away. Pausonias in Achaicis saith, that (for his rare beauties sake) Rhea selected Attes into her seruice,

and made him her Priest. Those of that order were called Matragyrte, as either begging publikely, or going from house to house to demaund things necessarie for her Offerings: For the Greeke word Meter signifieth Mater or Mother, and Agartes, Prefigiator or Mendicus, a Iugler or Beggar. She was cald by diuerse names, as Proserpina, Isis, Cibile, Idaea, Berecinthia, Tellus, Rhaea, Vesta, Pandora, Phrigia, Pylena, Dindymena, and Pessinuntia; sometimes of the places, sometimes of the causes. Rhaea bearing young Iupiter in her wombe, and ready to bee deliuered: knowing the predicted crueltie of Saturne, who commanded him to be slain, retired her selfe to Thaumasius a mountaine in Arcadia, fortified by Hoptodamus and his fellow giants, least Saturne should come with any forcible hostilitie to oppresse her: this mountaine was not farre distant from the hill Molossus, in a part of Lysia, where Iupiter was borne and Saturne there deluded; into which place it is not lawfull for any man to enter, onely women. Lucian in Nigrino sayth, that the Phrygian pipe was onely sufficient to yeeld musicke to her sacrifices, for that was no sooner heard but they fell into a diuine rapture resembling madnesse: neither was the Pine onely sacred to her, but the Oake,De dijs lib. 3. as witnesseth Apollodorus. Euphorion attributes to her the Vine, because out of that wood her Effigies was alwaies cut.Argon. lib. 1. Appollonius left recorded, that the Milesian priests accustomed first to sacrifice to Taetia, and Cilaenus, and after to Rhaea, the mother of the gods, whose altars were deckt and adorned with Oaken bowes. By Rhaea is maent the earth, or that strength of the earth which is most pertinent and auailable in the generation of things: Shee is drawne in a chariot, because the globe of the earth hangs in the middle of the aire, without supporture, neither inclining or declining to one part or another, and that by nature. About her chariot are wilde beasts, the reason is, shee is the producter and nourisher of all creatures whatsoeuer. Deseruedly she weares a crowne of Towers and Turrets, being the queene and mistresse of so many Townes, Castles, and Cities. By the noyse of musicke and clamours at her sacrifices, is obserued the whistling and blustring of the windes, who are necessarie in all the affaires of nature, especially in heate and cold, bearing the showers and tempests too and fro vpon their wings, to make foule weather in one place, and a cleere skie in another. Her chariot is drawne with foure Lions, which imports those foure brothers which blow from the Orient, the Australl, the Occident, and the Septentrion; these, are sayd to be her coach-steeds and hurrie her from place to place, because in generation they are much auailing: therefore as all things, as from a fountaine deriue their originall and beginning from her, she is most pertinently called Rhaea, a fluendo of flowing.
Isis or Io. She was the daughter of the flood Inachus: and as Andraetas Tinedius left written, was no better than a strumpet, who by sorcerie and witchcraft sought to attract the loue of Iupiter, in which businesse shee vsed the assistance of Iynx the daughter of Pan and Eccho, or (as some will haue it) of Suadela: this being discouered to Iuno, shee changed her into a bird which still beareth her name, Iynx, which is frequently vsed amongst witches in their sorceries and incantations: who because shee moueth her taile so much and so often, is by the Latines called A Wagtaile. Motasilla: from the intrailes of this bird, with other ingredients, was made a confection which (they say) Iason gaue to Medaea to inamourat her, in that expedition which he made to Colchos: this Ione or Io by the cunning of Iynx, lay with Iupiter in a clowde, and after to conceale her from Iuno, hee transhapt her into a cowe: but this iugling being

discouered by Iuno, shee begd her as a gift and gaue her in custodie to Argus the sonne of Aristor, whose hundered eyes Mercurie (by the commaundement of Iupiter) hauing charmed asleepe, he cut off his head and so slewe him. In these destractions, she past the Ionian sea, which from her beares the name (though Theopompus and Archidamus rather are of opinion, that that Sea tooke his denomination from Ionius, an eminent man of Illyria;) from thence she came to Haemus, and transwafted thence to a gulfe of Thracia, which by her was called Bosphorus: There were two Bosphori, the one called Cimnerius, the other Thracius (so much Prometheus speakes in his Escilus) she past thence into Scythia, and traiecting many seas, that deuide, and run by Europe and Asia, came at length into Aegypt, and by the bankes of Nilus reassumed her humane shape: and this hapned neere the cittie Iaxe, so called of Io, after which she brought forth Epaphus (as Strabo writes) in a cauerne or denneLib. 10. in Eubaea by the Aegean sea shore, which place is to this day called The Cow-house. Aula Bouis. That she past all these Seas in the shape of a Cow, the meaning is, that the ship wherein she sayled, had the image of a Cow carued vpon the sterne, and therefore was so called. By Argus with so many eyes, was intended Argus a wise and prouident king of the Argiues, whom Mercury hauing slaine, released her from his seruitude. After all her transmarine nauigations (being the most beautifull of her time) she was espoused to Apis, king of the Aegyptians: and by reason she taught them in that countrey the profitable vsurie arising from agriculture, was esteemed by them a goddesse, whose statue her son Aepaphus (after he had builded Memphis the great cittie) caused to be erected. Some more ingeniouslie and diuinelie withall, say that Isca, by which name the first woman and wife of Adam was called, imports no more than Isis, whom the Aegyptians honored as the great and most antient goddesse and mother of mankinde: for the Latines and Greekes corrupt the pronuntiation and aetimologie of the word, speaking Isis for Issa or Isca. Therefore as Isca is the wife of our great grandfather Adam, so by the auncient tradition of the Aegyptians Isis was the wife of Offidis whom the Latines call Osirides, transferring the Aegyptian Euphony, to their owne Idioma or proper forme of speech.
Ate. Ate whom some call Laesio, is the goddesse of Discord or Contention, and by Homer termed the daughter of Iupiter:
Ate prisca proles quae le serit omnesMortales.
Ate the ancient offspring that hath hurt and harmed allMankinde.
He calls her a certaine woman that to all men hath been obnoxious and perilous alluding (no doubt) to the parent of vs all Eue that first transgressed, and by some reliques of truth with which he was inlightned, for he sayth,
Filia prima Iouis quaeque omnes perdidit AtePerniciosa--
As much to say, Pernitious Ate the eldest daughter of Iupiter, who hath lost vs all. In another fable hee alludes to the same purpose, where he sayth, Iupiter notwithstanding he was the most wise of all mortalls, yet was in daies of old tempted and deceiued by his wife Iuno. And this Homer hath plainly deliuered, that the beginning of euill came first from a woman, and by her the wisest of men was beguiled. Hesiod. (in his booke of Weekes and Daies) is of the same opinion, and

writes to the same purpose: but in another kind of fable, from the old tradition. For saith he, From Pandora, a woman of all creatures the fairest, and first created by the gods, all mischiefes whatsoeuer were disperst through the face of the whole earth. And though Palephatus in his fabulous narrations, and Pleiades Fulgentius in his Mythologicis otherwise interpret Pandora, yet Hesiodus is still constant in the same opinion, as may appeare in these verses:
Namque prius vixere Homines, verum absque labore,Absque malis morboque grani tristique senecta:At mulier, rapto de poclo tegmine sparsitOmne mali genus, and morbos curasque molestas.
Which I thus interpret.

Man liu'd at first from tedious labours free,
Not knowing ill, or grieuous maladie,
Nor weake and sad old age: till woman mad
Snatcht from the pot the couer which it had,
Sprinkling thereby on mankind, euery ill,
Trouble, disease, and care, which haunts vs still.

Therefore the same authour in his Theogonia (as Cyrillus testifies in his third booke against Iulian, and in the beginning of the booke) calls women Pulchrum malum, The faire euill.
Pandora. Of her thus brieflie (the better to illustrat the former) Hesiod tells vs: that Promaetheus vpon a time offered two oxen to Iupiter, and hauing separated the flesh of either from the bones; in one of the skinnes including all the flesh without bones, in the other all the bones without any part of the flesh; and artificiallie making them vp againe, bad Iupiter make choice of these, which he would haue imployed in his sacrifices, who chused that with the bones; and taking it in great rage to be thus deluded, he to be reuenged, tooke away all fire from the earth, thereby to inflict the greater punishment vpon mankind: But Prometheus by the assistance of Minerua, ascended heauen, and with a dryed cane or reed,Carm. lib. 1. kindled at the chariot of the sunne (vnknowne to Iupiter) brought fire downe againe vpon the earth, which Horace expresseth in these words.

Audax Iapeti Genus,
Ignem fraude mala gentibus intulit.


The bold issue of Iapetus,
By his bad fraud brought fire againe among the Nations.

This when Iupiter vnderstood, he instantlie commanded Vulcan to fashion a woman out of clay, who being the most subtle and best furnisht with all kind of arts (so indued by the gods) was therefore called Pandora. Pausonias tearmes her the first created of that sex;In At ticis. she was by Iupiter sent to Prometheus with all the mischiefes that are, included in a boxe; which he denying, she gaue it to Epimetheus; who taking off the couer or lid, and perceiuing all these euills and disasters to rush out at once, he scarce had time to shut it againe, and keepe in Hope, which was lowest and in the bottome. The purpose of the Poets in this, as I can guesse, is, that since Pandora, signifies all arts, all sciences, all gifts, it imports thus much for our better vnderstanding, That there is no mischiefe or euill happens to man, which proceedes not from a voluptuous life,

which hath all the arts to her ministers and seruants: for from them kings were first instituted and raised to their honoures, by them were plots, stratagems, supplantations, and dangerous innouations attempted; with them grew emulation and enuie, discord and contention, thefts, spoiles, warres, slaughters, with all the troubles, cares, vexations, and inconueniences belonging and heriditarie to mankinde.


Of the Marine Goddesses.
IN these as in the former I will studie to auoid all prolixitie, because I am yet but at the start of the race, and measure in my thoughts, the tediousnesse of the way I am to run before I can attaine the goale intended; and therefore thus desperatly from the Earth, I leape into the Sea, direct me o ye marine goddesses, and Ampehitrite first.

AMPHITRITE.
IVpiter hauing expelled Saturne from his kingdome, by the helpe of his brothers, Neptune and Pluto, and hauing cast lotts for the tripartite Empire; the Heauen fell to Iupiter, Hell to Pluto, and the Sea with all isles adiacent to Neptune, who solicited the loue of Amphitrite, but shee not willing to condescend to his amorous purpose, hee imployed a Dolphin to negotiate in his behalfe, who dealt so well in the businesse, that they were not only reconsiled, but soone after married. For which, in the perpetuall memorie of so great and good an office done to him, he placed him amongst the starres, not farre from Capricorne, as Higinus hath left remembred in his Fables, and Aratus in his Astronomicks: others contend that Venilia was the wife of Neptune: but notwithstanding his loue to, and marriage with Amphitrite, he had many children by other Nimphes, Goddesses, and wantons. Of Lyba he begot Phaenix, Betus, and Agenor: of Cataeno, Cataenus: of Amimone, Nauplius; of Pylanes, (of whom a citie of Lacoonia bears name) Auadne, and Aone, fro^ whom the prouince of Aonia takes his denominatio^; Phaenix that gaue the name to Phaenicia; and Athon, of whom the Mountaine is so called: as also Pheaces, from whence Pheacia (now called Corcyrus) is deriued; Dorus, that giues name to the Dorij; and of Laides, the daughter of Otus, Althepus; by Astipataea he had Periclimenus, and Erginus; by Alceone the daughter of Atlas, Anathamus, Anthas, and Hyperetes; by whom certaine cities amongst the Trezenians were erected, and from them tooke their name. Of Arne hee had Boeotus: of Alope the daughter of Certion, Hippothous: of Ceclusa, Asopus: of Brilles, Orion. He begot the Tritons, one of Celaene, the other of Amphitrite: of Tyrbo, Palaemon and Neleus: of Molio, Creatus, and Eurithus; of Crisigone, the daughter of Almus, Minya; of Melantho, Delphus: of Calirhoe, Minius; of Venus, Erix: of Alistra, Ogigus: of Hippothoe, Taphius: he had one Cygnus by Caces; another by Scamandrodices, by Tritogenia, the daughter of Aeolus; Minyas of the Nimph Midaea: Aspledones of Cleodora: Pernasus of Mecio^tica (to whome, as Asclepeades relates, hee granted a Boone that shee should walke as firmely and stedfastly vpon the water as the land) Euripilus, and Euphemus: Besides these he had another Euphemus that was steersman

in the Argo, when all the braue Heroes of Greece made their expedition for the golden fleece. As also Amicis, Albion, Aello, Antheus, Amphimanus, Aethusa, Aon, Alebius, Dercilus, Neleus, Peleus, and Astraeus, who ignorantly hauing beene incestious with his sister Alcyppa, and the next day their neerenesse of blood and affinitie being knowne to him by a ring, hee cast himselfe headlong into a riuer and was drowned; which riuer as Leo Bizantius writes, was first from him called Astraeus;Lib. 3. de Fluminib. and after, Caius, of Caicus the sonne of Mercury and Ocirhoe: moreouer these were his children, Actorion, Borgeon, Brontes, Busyris, Certion, Crocon, Cromos, Crysaos, Cencreus, Chrisogenaea, Chius, Dorus, Euphemus, Ircaeus, Lelex, Lamia the Prophetesse, and Sibilla, Hallerhoitius, Laestrigone, Megaraeus, Mesapus, Ephialtes, Nictaeus, Melion, Nausithous, Othus, Occipite, Poliphemus, Piracmon, Phorcus, Pelasgus, Phaeax, Pegasus, Phocus, Onchestus, Peratus, Siculus, Sicanus, Steropes, Farus, Theseus, Hiretus, and others infinite, besides fourescore whose names are remembred: there are others scarce to be numbered, for as Zetzes sayth in his Historie,
Elatos animo enim omnes, and omnes strenuos,Hist. 51. chil. 2.Filios and amicos dicunt and amatos a Neptuno.
All that are high minded, and strong men, were esteemed as the sonnes and friends and beloued of Neptune. Amphitrite, signifies nothing else, but the bodie and matter of all that moyst humor which is earth aboue, belowe, or within the earth, and for that cause she is called the wife of Neptune: Euripides in Ciclope,In Ciclop. In Agronaut. takes her for the substance of water it selfe, Orpheus calls her Glauca and Piscosa, that is blew and full of fish, being attributes belonging solely to the goddesse of the Sea. And by the Dolphines soliciting the loue of Neptune to Amphitrite, and reconciling them, is meant nothing else but to illustrate to vs, That of all the fishes that belong to the sea he is the swiftest, the most actiue, and apprehensiue.


THETIS or TETHIES.
In Theog.HEsiod calls her the wife of Oceanus, who is stiled the father of all the floods, creatures, and gods: because (as Orpheus, Thales, and others are of opinion) all things that are bred and borne, haue need of humor, without which nothing can be begot or made corruptible. Isacius hath left recorded, that besides her hee had two wiues, Partenope, and Pampholige; by Partenope hee had two daughters, Asia, and Libia: by Pampholige, Europa, and Thracia: and besides them, three thousand other children, for so many Hesiod numbers in his Theogonia. This Thetis was the daughter of the earth and heauen, and therefore as Oceanus is called the father of the gods, so is shee esteemed as the mother of the goddesses. Epicharmus calls one Thetis the daughter of Chiron the Centaure: and Homer in his hymne to Apollo,In Hebes nupt. In Anax. the child of Nereus, which Rhodius confirmes, as also Euripides in Iphigenia and in Aulide: she was the wife of Peleus, and of all women liuing the most beautiful, of whom Apollodorus thus speakes, They say Iupiter and Neptune contended about her nuptials, but she not willing to incline to Iupiter, because she was educated by Iuno, therefore he in his rage allotted her to be the bride of a mortall man. Homer writes that she was angerie, being a marine goddesse to bee the wife of a man, therefore to auoid his imbraces, she shifted her selfe into sundrie shapes and figures: but Peleus being aduised by Chiron, notwithstanding all her transformations (as into fire, into a

Lion, and others) neuer to let goe his hold till she returned into her owne naturall forme, in which he vitiated her, and of her begot Achilles: the last shape she tooke vpon her was of a Sepia, which is a fish called a Cuttle, whose blood is as blacke as ynke, now because this was done in Magnesia, a citie of Thessaly, the place (as Zertzes in his historie records) is called Sepias:Hist. 46. Chil. 2. In prin. rer. Aeginitarum. Pithenatus and others say that she was not compelled or forced to the mariage of Pelius, but that it was solemnised in the mountaine Pelius with her full and free consent, where all the gods and goddesses, sauing Discord, were present, and offered at the wedding, for such hath been the custome from antiquitie; Pluto gaue a rich Smaragd, Neptune two gallant steeds, Xanthus and Ballia; Vulcan a knife with an haft richly carued, and some one thing some another. By Peleus shee had more sonnes than Achilles, which euerie night she vsed to hide beneath the fire, that what was mortall in them might bee consumed: by which they all died saue Achilles, who was preserued by being in the daytime annointed with Ambrosia: therfore (as Amestor in his Epithalamium vpon Thetis espousals relates) hee was called Piresous, as preserued from the fire, additur hinc nomen Pireso^s. She was the sister of Titan, and brought foorth Ephire (who was after married to Epimetheus) and Pleione,Lib. 5. who as Ouid relates in his booke de Fastis, was the wife of Atlas. These are likewise numbered amongst the daughters of Oceanus and Thetis, Acaste, Admete, Asia (that gaue name to a part of the world, till now called Asia) Climene, Idyia, Ephire, Eudora, Eurinome, Ianira, Liriope, Melobois, Metis, Plexame, Prinino, Rhodia, Thea, Thoe, Tiche, Xanthe, Ze^xo, Clitie, who was beloued of Apollo, but being iealous of his affection to Leucothoe, she had discouered it to her father Orchamus; Apollo therefore left her: in griefe of which she vowed an abstinence from all sustenance whatsoeuer, onely with fixt eyes still gazing vpon the course of the Sunne; which the gods commiserating, changed her into an Heliotropian, which is called the Suns flower, which still inclines to what part soeuer he makes his progresse. But whether shee be Tethies or Thetis she is no other than the reputed goddesse of the Sea: her name importing that huge masse of water or element (as Virgill in his Pollio sayth) necessarie to the generation of all creatures whatsoeuer. Towards the East shee is called Indica, towards the West Atlantica, where she diuides Spaine and Mauritania: towards the North Pontica and Glaciatis, as likewise Rubra, and Aethopica, for so Strabo relates, as also Rhianus in the nauigation of Hanno the Carthagenian. Stiphilus in his booke de Thessalia hath bequeathed to memorie, That Chiron a wise and skilfull Astrologian, to make Peleus the more famous, consulted with the daughter of Acloris and Mirmid^n, and betwixt them published abroad that he by the consent of Iupiter,She was called Philomela. should match with the goddesse Thetis, to whose nuptialls all the gods came in great showers and tempests (for he had obserued a time when he knew great store of raine would fal) and from that the rumor first grew, That Peleus had married Thetis. But Dailochus and Pherceides report, that Peleus hauing purged himselfe of the murder of his brother Phochus, murdered Antigone: others say that he first tooke Antigone, and after her death, Thetis; and that Chiron being an excellent Chyrurgeon, was so called for the lightnesse and dexteritie of hand (which is an exellent gift in the searching and dressing of wounds, in any of that profession.) Apollodorus saith, that Thetis after many windings, turnings, and transhapes, to prese^ue her virginitie, was at length comprest by Iupiter. The Nimphes called Dorides were her ministers and handmaides.



NEREIDES.
THey were the daughters of Nereus and Doris; he is sayd by Hesiod. to be the sonne of Oceanus and Thetis, he is stiled a prophet or south-sayer, who as Horace tells, did predict to Paris all the calamities that were to succeed at Troy. Apollonius tells vs that his cheife mansion or place of residence is in the Aegean sea. The fame is, that Hercules being sent to fetch the golden apples of the Hesperides, and not knowing where abouts they grew, went to the nymphs that dwell by the bankes of Eridamus, to be resolued by them: they sent him to demaund of Nereus who thinking to delude him by shifting himselfe into sundrie shapes, was notwithstanding held so fast by Hercules, that hee was forced to assume his owne forme againe, and tell him; for so Orpheus in his Argonauticis informes vs. He is sayd to haue a principalitie in the Sea, to be delighted in the companie of nymphs and damosells; as also to be the beginning and end of waters; of whom Orpheus in one of his hymnes thus sings:
Tu fundamen aquae tu terrae Finis, and IdemPrincipium es cunctis.
Euripides in one of his Tragedies, sayth he was educated and nourced by the waters, and calls him the father of the Nereides. He had daughters by Doris, the nymphs Halia, Spio, Pasitaea, and Lygaea; Hesiod in his Theogonia reckons of them to the number of fiftie. Doris was the sister of Nereus; Horace and others describe her with greene haire. Theocritus in Thessalijs, sayth that the birds called Halciones were to them most gratefull: some say that they vse to daunce and reuell in the waters, and play about the chariot of Triton, as nimbly as fishes. Homer in his Iliades reckons of that ranke, Glauce, Thalia, Cymodoce, Nesea, Spio, Thoe, Halie, Cymothoe, Actae, Melite, Agane, Amphithoe, Iaere, Doto, Proto, Pherusa, Dinamione, Doris, Amphinome, Panope, Callianira, Dexamine, Galataea, Amathaea, Callianassa, Climine, Ianira, Ianassa, Mera, Orithia. Hesiod besides these reckons vp Eucrate, Sao, Eudore, Galene, Glauce, Pasithaea, Erato, Eunice, Doro, Pherusa, Nesaee, Protomedeae, Doris, Panope, Hyppothoe, Hypponoe, Cymatolege, Cimo, Eione, Halimeda, Glanconome, Panto, Pautopenia, Liagore, Euagore, Laomedala, Polinome, Antonoe, Lasianassa, Euarne, Psamathe, Menippe, Neso, Eupompe, Themito, Pronoe, Nemertes. Apollodorus Atheniensis adds to these, Glaneothoe, Nonsithoe, Halia, Pione, Plesrure, Calipso, Cranto, Neomeris, Deianeira, Polinoe, Melie, Dione, Isaea, Dero, Eumolpe, Ione, Ceto, Limnoraea, and all these are held to be most beautiful: it is therfore thus fabled, That Cassiope wife to Cepheus king of Aethiopia, gloried so much in her beautie that she held herself to be the fairest woman in the world; and did not onely compare, but preferre herselfe before the nymphs called Nereides: for which, their indignation was kindled against her, and in that high measure, that they sent into those seas a Whale of an incredible greatnesse; the people consulting with the Oracle, how to appease the goddesses and free themselues from the monster; answere was returned, That it could not bee done, but by exposing their onely daughter Andromeda, fast bound to a rocke that ouerlooked the sea, to bee a prey to the sea Whale; but she was thence released by the vertue of Perseus: and Cassiope by his meanes (as a perpetuall example that all such rashenesse ought to be auoided) translated

amongst the starres, for so much Arataeus hath left to memorie in certaine verses interpreted by Cicero.
This Nerius is for no other reason said to be the sonne of Oceanus and Tethis, than to denote vnto vs the counsell, iudgement, and cunning, in guiding and directing ships by sea; and therefore to haue many daughters, which are nothing but inuentions, new deuises, stratagems, and changes belonging to nauigation. He is therefore said to be a Prophet, because in all arts and disciplines, there is a kind of knowledge, by which we foresee and diuine of things to come: for he is held no skilfull nauigator, that cannot foretell by the weather, the changes of winds, and certaine signes of tempests, thereby to vse preuention against them before they suddainelie come. Hee is also said to change himselfe into many figures, to giue vs to vnderstand, that it is the part of a knowing and vnderstanding man to arme himselfe against all chances and varietie of things whatsoeuer. It is therefore required of such a man, to vse prouidence and care in all his affaires and actions, and not to accuse the gods if any thing sinisterlie happen vnto him through his owne temeritie and rashnes; since with a prudent and well gouerned man, their helpe and assistance is alwayes present.


The daughters of TRITON.
A Cesander calls Triton the sonne of Neptune. Numenius in his booke de piscatoribus, deriues him from Oceanus and Tethis. Lycaphron in those verses wherein he tells of a cup presented vnto him by Medea, calls him the sonne of Nereus. The Poets ascribe to him the inuention of the trumpet, and that it was first vsed in the Gigomantichia, the great battaile betwixt the gods and the gyants: for in the midst of the skirmish, when the euent of the battaile grew doubtfull, Triton blew so shrill a blast, that the gyants thinking it had been the voyce of fome dreadfull and vnknowne monster that vndertooke the party of the gods, turn'd their backes and fled; by which accident they obtained a more suddaine and safe victorie. Pausonias calls Tritia the daughter of Triton, who was at first one of Mineruaes priests, who being comprest by Mars, brought foorth Menalippus, but that he had more than her, I haue not read.
Ino. She was the daughter of Cadmus and Harmonia, who with her sonne Melicerta, were entertained into the number of the Sea-gods; he, by the name of Palaemon; she, of Leucothea: both these are said to haue predominance ouer saylers, and power in nauigation. That she cast her selfe headlong into the Sea, I haue before related in the tractat of Iuno. She was a stepmother, and so prosecuted the children of Nephetes, that she would haue sacrificed one of them to the gods; for which (as Polizelus saith) her husband Athanas did prosecute her with such rage, that flying to Gerania (a mountaine amongst the Megarenses) from a rocke called Maturides she cast her selfe with her son into the sea; and of the same opinion is Pausonias: some thinke it hapned at the same time that the Nereides were dancing there, and that his bodie was transported by the waues to Sisiphus, from Exhaenuntia where the Ithnian pastimes were first celebrated to his remembrance. They of the cittie Megera affirme, her bodie to be cast vpon their shore, and by Cleso and Tauropolis, the daughters of Cleson, tooke vp and buryed. She was afterwards called Matuta, as Cicero in his Tuscal. disputations saith, Ino the daughter of Cadmus, Is she not called by the

Greekes Leucotoe, and by vs Latines Matuta. And that she is taken for the morning, is manifest by Lucretius, lib. 5. Pausan in his Messanaicis saith, that she was first named Leucotoe in a small village not farre from the cittie Corone, and that she had clemencie in the securing and preseruing of ships, and pacifying the violent and troubled billowes of the Ocean-Palaemon is also called Portunus, or the Key-carrier (as one that keepes a key of all the ports and hauens, to exclude and keepe out all forreine enemies) and the sonne of Matuta, or the Morning; in that time commonly the winds begin to breath and rise with the departing of night, and because that from the land they rush vpon the waters, they are therefore said to cast themselues head-long into the sea; for the morning is the most certaine interpreter either of succeeding winds and tempests, or of the countenance of a sereane sky and faire weather. Strabo calls Glaucus the sonne of Anthedon, a Boeotian; but Theophrastus will haue him the issue of Polybus the sonne of Mercury and Euboea: Promathidas Heraclaeota, deriues him from Phorbus and the nymph Pampaea, borne in Anthedon, a famous cittie of Boetia: Thelytus Methimnaeus in his Bacchik numbers, brings his progenie from Nopaeus. Epicus in one of his Hymnes, from Euanthes the sonne of Neptune and Maedis. He is said to haue rauisht Syma, the daughter of Iclemis and Doris, and to haue transported her into Asia: and was after marryed to Hidua, the daughter of Sydnus Scioneus, one that vsed to diue and fetch things vp from the bottome. But of his issue there is nothing left remembred. It is commented of him, that being a fisherman, and hauing taken more fishes that he could carrie vpon his backe with ease, and laying downe his burden to rest him by the shoare, there grew an hearbe which the dead fishes no sooner touched or tasted, but they instantlie recouered life, and one by one leapt into the sea: hee by tasting the same hearbe to prooue the vertue thereof, was forced to leape after them, and so was made a Sea-god. Others are of opinion, that wearied with the tediousnesse of his age, he willing lie drowned himselfe.


The wiues and daughters of PROTEVS.
ZEtzes in his foure and fortith historie, calls Proteus, the sonne of Neptune and the nymph Phenica; who trauelling from Aegypt into Phlegra, there tooke to wife Torone, by whom he had three sonnes, Toronus, Timilus, and Telegonus, all wicked and bloody minded men, who for their crueltie perisht by the hands of Hercules. Aeuripides speakes of one Psamethes, a second wife, by whom he had Theonoe and Theolymenus. He had moreouer these daughters, Cauera, Rhetia, and Idothaea. This was she that when Menelaus doubted of his returne into his countrey (hauing soiourned somewhat long in Aegypt) counselled him to apparrell himselfe and his followers in the fresh skinnes of Porposes, and counterfeit themselues to sleepe amongst these Sea-cattle, and that about the heat of the day, at what time Proteus vsed to come out of the deepes vpon the dry land, and there take a nappe with his Porposes, then to catch fast hold on him sleeping: and notwithstanding all his changeable shapes and figures, not to dismisse him, till he had reduc't himselfe to his owne natural forme, and then he would predict to him whatsoeuer was to come. This counsell giuen by Idothaea, Homer excellentlie expresseth in his fourth booke of his Odissaea. It is said of him that he could change himselfe sometimes into water, and againe to fire, to wild beasts, birds, trees, or serpents, etc. Neither did this

mutabilitie of shape belong to him onelie; for we reade the like of Thetis and Mestra, or Metre the daughter of Ereficthon the Thessalian. Periclimenus the sonne of Neleus and Polymela, and brother of Nestor, obtained the same gift of Neptune: of him Euphorion and Hesiod speaks more at large. Empusa is remembred by Aristophanes to haue the same facultie and dexteritie in changing her shape: so likewise Epicharmus.

Empusa planta, bos fit, atque vipera,
Lapisque musca, pulchra and illa femina:
Quicquid cupit vel denique ille conferat.


Empusa is made a plant, an oxe, a viper,
A stone, a flye, and a faire woman too:
What she desires, that she doth still resemble.

The Poets (in these changing of shapes, and turning themselues into so many sundry sorts of creatures) importing nothing else, but the wisedome of such persons who haue searcht into the hidden mysteries of Philosophy, and acquired the natures and properties of water, fire, hearbes, trees, and plants, beasts, birds, and serpents; in which being perfect, they may be (and not altogether vnproperlie) said to change themselues into the similitudes of so many creatures.


The daughters of PHORCIS.
THis Phorcis, whom the Latines call Phorcus, was the sonne of Terra and Pontus, the Earth and the Sea, as Hesiod in his Theogonia makes him: But Varro will haue him to be the issue of Neptune, and the Nymph Thosea. He had besides those daughters begot one Ceto, the Phorcidae, namelie, the Gorgons; and Thoosa, who lay with Neptune and brought forth the Ciclops Poliphemus, as Homer witnesseth. He is cald also the father of the serpent that kept the Hesperides, by Hesiod. But I will forbeare the rest, to speake something of his daughter Medusa.
Medusa. She for her lust and immoderate appetite to inchastitie, incurred the ire of the gods, being so impudent, as to suffer the imbraces of Neptune in the Temple of Minerua. There were diuers of that name, one the daughter of Priam, another of Sthenelus and Nicippe. Pausanias in Corinthiacis calls her the daughter of Phorbus; others, of a sea monster, which I take to be Phorcus before mentioned. Minerua, for the prophanation of her Temple being grieuouslie incenst, thought to punish her in those haires which a little before were so wondrous pleasing to Neptune, and turned them into hissing and crawling snakes; giuing her this power, that whosoeuer gased vpon her face, should be in the instant conuerted into stone. Isacius is of opinion, that that was not the cause of her calamitie, but relates it another way; That Medusa was of Pisidia, and the fairest of all women, who glorying in her feature, but especiallie the beautie of her haire, dared to contend with Pallas; which arrogant impudencie the goddesse heinouslie taking, her haire (in which she so ambitiouslie gloried) she changed into filthie and terrible snakes, and then gaue her that killing look before mentioned; but pittying at length so generall a mischiefe, incident to mortall men by that meanes, she sent Perseus the sonne of Iupiter and Danae

(or rather as some will haue it, he was imployed by Polydectes, king of the Seriphians) to cut off her head: who hauing before receiued a hooked skeyne called Harpe, from Mercury, and a shield from Pallas, came to the fenne called Tritonides, amongst whose inhabitants she exercised her mischiefe; and first approaching Pephredo and Aenio, two of the Phorcidae and of the Gorgonian sisterhood, who were old and wrinckled croanes from their natiuitie, they had betwixt them but one eye and one tooth, which they did vse by turnes; and when they went abroad, or when they had no occasion to imploy them, layde them vp in a casket, for so Ascilus relates. He borrowed of them that eye and tooth: neither of which he would restore till they had brought him to the nymphes with winged shooes, which taking from them, and being armed with the Helmet of Pluto, the sword of Mercury, and the mirrour of Pallas, he fled to Tartessus, a cittie of Iberiae where the Gorgons then inhabited; whose heads crawled with adders, whose teeth were like the tuskes of a boare, their hands of brasse, and their wings of gold; and there arriuing, found them asleepe, and spying her head in Mineruaes glasse, in which he still looked, it directed him so, that at one blow he cut it off, out of whose blood Pegasus sprung forth. The other two sisters, Sthumo and Aeuryale, awaking, and this seeing, with the lowde hissing of these innumerable snakes, made a noyse most dreadfull and horrible: From whence Pallas first deuised the pipe with many heads. The forme and shape of these Phorcidae, In Scuto. Hesiod elegantlie describes. Crisaor and Pegasus were begot of the blood dropping from Medusaes head, as Apollonius Rhodius writes in his building of Alexandria. The Gorgons were called Graee, as Zetzes explicates in his twenty two historie.Chil. 2. Menander in his booke de Misterijs, numbers Scilla amongst these Gorgons, and that they inhabited the Doracian Islands, scituate in the Aethiopick sea, which some call Gorgades, of whom they tooke the names of Gorgones. Nimphodorus in his third booke of Histories, and Theopompus in his seauenteenth, affirme their guirdles to bee of wreathed vipers: so likewise Polemo in his booke to Adaeus and Antigonus. The occasion of these fictions are next to be inquired after. By these Graee the daughters of Sea monsters is apprehended, Knowledge, and such Wisedome as is attained too by Experience. They are said to haue but one eye, which they vsed when they went abroad, because Prudence is not so altogether necessarie to those that stay within, and solely apply themselues to domesticke affaires; as to such as looke into the world, and search after difficulties. Of this Wisedome, or these Graee (not impertinentlie called the sisters of the Gorgons) is meant the pleasures and vaine blandishments of the world, with the dangers that appertaine to the life of man: from either of which, no man without the counsell of Wisedome can acquit himselfe: Therefore is Perseus said to ouercome the Gorgons, not without the Helmet of Pluto, the eye of the Graee, the sword of Mercury, and the mirror of Pallas; all which who shall vse aright, shall prooue himselfe to be Perseus, the friend and sonne of Iupiter.


SCILLA and CHARIBDIS.
A Cusilaus and Appollonius, both nominate Scilla to be the daugther of Phorcia and Hecate:Char. in Cathen. but Homer, that her mothers name was Crataeis. Chariclides calls her the issue of Phorbantes and Hecate: Stesichorus, of Lamia: Tymeus tearmes her the daughter of the flood Cratus.Histor. lib. 21. Pausanias in Atticis, and Strabo

in lib. 8. agree that this Scilla was the daughter of Nysus, King of the Megarenses, who surprised with the loue of King Mynos, stole from her fathers head that purple locke in which consisted the safetie of his owne life and kingdome. The Athenians hauing inuaded his dominion, and ceised many of his townes, and wasted the greatest part of his countrey by their fierce and bloody incursions, they at length besieged him in the cittie Nysaea. Some are of opinion that Nisus incensed with the foulenes of that treason, caused her to be cast into the sea, where she was turned into a sea-monster. Pausanias auers, that she was neither changed into a bird, nor a monster of the sea, nor betrayde her father, nor was marryed to Nisus, as he had before promist her; but that hauing surprised Nisaea, he caused her to be precipitated into the sea, whose body tost too and fro by the waues of the Ocean, till it was transported as farre as the Promontorie called Scylaea, where her bodie lay so long vpon the continent vnburyed, till it was deuoured by the sea-fowles: this gaue place to that fable in Ouid:
Filia purpureum Nisi furata capillum,Puppe cadens nauis facta refertur auis.
'Tis said, the daughter hauing stolne her fathers purple Haire,Falls from the hin-decke of the ship, and thence sores through the Aire.
Zenodorus saith, that she was hanged at the stearne of Minos his ship, and so dragged through the waters till she dyed: and that Scylla the daughter of Phorcus was a damsell of imcomparable beautie, and vitiated by Neptune, which knowne to Amphitrite, she cast such an inuenomous confection into the fountaine where she accustomed to bath her selfe, that it cast her into such a madnesse that she drowned her selfe. Of his mind is Miro Prianaeus in his first booke Rerum Messanicarum. Others imagine, that she had mutuall consocietie with Glaucus the sea god, which Circe (who was before inamoured of him) vnderstanding, she sprinkled the well wherein she vse to laue her selfe with such venomous iuice, that from her wast downewards she was translated into diuers monstrous shapes; which as Zenodotus Cyrenaeus saith, was the occasion of the fable commented vpon her. Isacius thus describes her deformitie; She had six heads, the one of a canker-worme, the other of a dogge, a third of a Lyon, a fourth of a Gorgon, a fift of a whirle-poole or a whale, the sixt of a woman. Homer in his Odissaees describes her with six heads, and twelue feet, euery head hauing three order of teeth. Virgill in Sileno saith, that all ships were wrackt and deuoured by those dugges that grew beneath her nauell.
Charibdis. She was likewise a most deuouring woman, who hauing stolne many oxen from Hercules, which he before had taken from Gerion, was by Iupiter stroke with a thunderbolt, and so transformed into that monster of the sea; others contest, that she was slayne by Hercules, and after so transhapt: of these diuers are diuerslie opinionated. Strabo saith, that Homer imagined the vehement flux and reflux of that sea about the concaues of those rockes made so terrible a noyse, that therefore the Poets fabulated, that in her sides, and about her interiour parts were the barkings of dogs continuallie heard. Isacius writes, that Scilla is a proeminent promontorie ouer against Rhegium in Sicilie, hanging ouer the sea, vnder which are many huge and massie stones hollowed by the billowes, in whose concauities many sea-monsters inhabit, and when there is shipping in those parts amongst those rockes and shelues, they

are either swallowed by Charibdis or Scylla. Charibdis being scituate directlie against Messana, and Scilla against Rhegium: they are therefore said to be women, because a far off these promontories appeare as it were in a feminine shape, what fleete soeuer by the tides and tempests was forc'd vpon Charibdis, were there shipwrackt, and such as by Charibdis were tost on the rocks of Scilla were there swallowed. In which fable is included the nature of Vertue and Vice. No man but in the progresse of his life sailes betwixt these two quickfands: if he incline to one hand more than the other, he is either swallowed by Scilla, or deuoured by Charibdis. What else doth this signifie, but that which Aristotle in his Aethicks illustrates, Vertue, which is the medium betwixt two extreames? both which are to be auoided, and the middle, wherein is safetie to be imbraced: for mans life is nothing else but a continuall nauigation betwixt diuers molestations of one hand, and tempting and vnlawfull pleasures on the other; both which are comprehended in these Syrtes, or places of certaine destruction. For Scilla is so called a spoliando, or repando; of spoyling or grieuing; And Charibdis of sucking vp and swallowing; betwixt which two dangerous, and almost ineuitable gulfes, a vertuous and pious man shall in the greatest stormes and tempests (neither inclining to the right, nor the left) securelie, and with great safetie attaine vnto his wished harbour. Moreouer, where Scilla is said to be transhapt into this monster, by Circe, being so faire and beautifull a creature, What is it but to demonstrate vnto vs, that all such as digresse from reason, and the true institution of good life and manners, doe withall put on a bestiall and brutish shape, since Circe imports nothing els than a wanton tillation, inciting vs to immoderate and vnlawfull lusts and pleasures: and so much I guesse was intended by the Poets in these fables of Scilla and Charibdis.



The Goddesses of the Hills, Woods, Groues, and Trees.
Hydriades, Nimphs belonging to the riuers and wells.IT is commemorated by Plato, in certaine of his verses, that the Hydriades and Hamadriades much delighted in the musick of Pan, who was the god of sheapheards, and that they vsed to daunce about him; the first beginning of the harmony which came from the pipe being inuented by him and made from his loue the nymph Syrinx, by Ladon changed into a reed, the manner was thus as Ouid manifests:Lib. 1. Metam.
Syrinx one of Diana's traine,The tale of Pan and SyrinxChacing with her ore the plaine:Arm'd alike with shafe and bowe,Each from other would you know?Which is which cannot be told,Saue ones was horne the t'other gold.Pan he sees, himselfe makes fine:In his cap he prickes a pine,Now growes carelesse of his heard,Sits by brookes to pr^^e his beard,Meetes her and hath mind to w^^,Much be speakes, but more would doo.Still his profers, she denies,He pursues, and Syrinx flies.Past her kness her coat vp flew,Pan would faine see something newe,By the legge and knee he guest('t seemes) the beautie of the rest:Wings it adds vnto his pace,Now the goale he hath in chase.She addes further to his speed,Now it is no more than neede,Almost caught, Alas (she cries)Some chast god my shape disguise.A Riuer of Arcadia compassing in the Fenne where the reeds first grew.Ladon heares, and girtes her round,Spies a reede to make sweete sound,Such is Syrinx: wondering PanPuts it to his pipe anon:Syrinx thou art mine he sayd,So of her his first pipe made.
Isaciu^ saith that the nymph Eccho was beloued of him, and that by her hee had a daughter called Iringes, she that to Medea brought the loue potion which she presented to Iason: but of Pan and Syrinx Ouid thus speakes,
Panaquae cam preusam sibi iam Syringa put^retCorpore pro nymphae calamos tennisse palustres.Pan (flying Syrinx) when he thoughtTo haue catcht about the wast,Steed of the nymphes faire bodie, heThe fennie reeds imbrac't.
Which reedes being shaken by the winde, making a kinde of melodie, of these he made his first pipe, which he called after her name. Of the Satyres, Silaeni, Fauni, and Siluani, memorable things haue beene recorded, but all being masculine, they belong not to this historie in hand: therefore I purposely omit them and and proceed to our Terrene goddesses, and of them briefely.

OREADES.
THese because they were bread vpon the Hills and Mountaines were sayd to haue a dominion and diuine gouernement ouer them. Strabo calls them the daughters of Phoroneus and Hecataea, but Horace in his Iliades, will haue them the issue of Iupiter and Oristrade: some hold them to be but fiue in number, but Virgill numbers them to bee many, and companions with Diana in her hunting.

--Quam mille secutae
Hinc atque hinc glomerantur Oreades.

Viz. Such as attend Diana ouer the banks of Eurora, and ouer the mountains of Cinthus, a thousand of the Oreades in her companie heare and there shining: M^asaea Patarentis hath bequeathed to memorie, that these were the first that obserued

absteined from eating flesh, contenting themselues with Chesnuttes and Akornes and the fruits of trees. One of them, called Melissa, first found and tasted honie in Pelloponesus, with whose tast the Greekes were so pleased that they call all Bees Melissae, after her name: From hence it came that in the sacreds of Ceres and in all nations the Priests deriued their names from her. These nymphes were supposed to haue the charge of hills and mountaines, and sometimes of such wild beasts as they pursued in the companie of Diana: but the protection of priuate heards or domesticke flockes was not conferd vpon them; so religious were the people of old, that neither publicke place, nor priuate, was destitute of some peculiar and diuine power: so likewise euery element, hearbe, roote, and tree, or whatsoeuer symple was vsefull and medicinable, or obnoxious and hurtfull to the life of man. Those of the mountaines were Oreades or Orestiades.


The Driades and Hamadriades.
THe Dryades had predominance ouer the woods and groaues, as Pomona ouer the orchards and gardens. The Hamadriades were the genij of euerie particular tree; and as Calimachus in a Hymne to Delos witnesseth of them, they begin with their first plantation, grow with them, and consume and perish as they rot and wither: their number is not agreed vpon. Pausonias in Phocicis calls one of them Tythorera; in Arcadicis, a second, Erato; and a third, Phigalia. Claudianus in la^dibus Stiliconis, reckons them seauen. Charon Lampsacenus produceth one Rhaecus, who in the countrey of Assyria hauing a goodlie faire oake, whose earth shrinking form the roote, and being ready to fall; as he was propping and supporting the tree, and supplieng the decayed mould about it, the nymph or genius of that tree, which was to perish with it, appeared to him, and after thankes for so great a courtesie, bid him demand of her whatsoeuer, and it should be graunted, since by the repayring of that plant she was still to liue: He taken with her beautie, demanded libertie freelie to imbrace hir to his owne fill and appetite, to which she instantlie yeelded. Appollonius in his Argonaut. tells of the father of one Paraebius, who going to cut downe an antient faire oake that had stood many yeares, a nymph in like manner appeared to him, humblie petitioning, that he would spare the tree for her sake, since the age of it, and her, and the liues of both, were limited alike: which he refusing, so enraged the other of her fellowes, that many afflictions befell both himselfe and his posteritie. Mnesimachus saith that they are called Dryades, because in the oakes their liues are included; and Hamadriades, because they are borne with them; and Isacius the interpreter of Appollo, because they perish with them. I will conclude these with one tale recited by Charon Lampsacenus: Archus (saith he) the sonne of Iupiter and Calisto, being chacing in the forrests, incountred one of the Hamadriades, who told him how neere she was to ruine, in regard that the riuer running by had eaten away the earth from the root of such a goodly oake (to which she pointed) and that by sauing that, he should preserue her: at her intreatie, he turned the streame another way, and supplyed the roote with earth; for which this nymph, whose name was Prospetia, granted him her free imbraces: of whom he begot Philatus and Aphidantes. Whether these relations were true or false, is not much to bee disputed on; if false, they were for no other causes deuised, but

by the superstition of the people of antient daies, who left nothing vnmeditated that might stirre vp men to the adoration of the diuine powers, since in euerie thing they demonstrated a deitie. If they were spoken as truths, I rather beleeue them to bee the meere illusions of diuells and spirits themselues, than the genij of plants and trees, that made such apparitions.



Of the Goddesses Infernall.
IT lies with much conuenience in our way to make discourse of Pluto, the third brother of Saturne; of the riuer Acheron, and the properties thereof; Of Styx, a flood terrible to the gods themselues, and by which they vse to sweare; of Cocitus, of Caron, of Cerberus, of the three infernall judges, Minos, Aeacus, and Rhadamant, of Tartarus, with diuers others out of all which many excellent fables, pleasant to reade, and profitable to make both morrall and diuine vse of, might bee collected: but I skip them of purpose, since I am inioyned to it by promise, for but women onely I haue now to deale with: It therefore thus followes.

Of the Parcae.
OF Proserpina we haue treated alreadie amongst the supernall goddesses aboue, and therefore must necessarily spare her here amongst these below. The Parcae (or fatall goddesses) are three, Clotho, Lachesis, and Atropos. Ceselius Vindex he giues them three other names, Nona, Decima, and Morta; and cites this verse of Liuius, a most antient Poet,
Quando dies venit quam praesata morta est.When the day commeth that Morta hath presaged.
Some calls them the daughters of Demogorgon: others (as Cicero) of Herebus, and Nox, Hell and Night; by another name, they are called Fata, the Fates, as Seneca,
Multa ad Fata venere suum dum fata timeant.
As much to say, Many come to their death whilst they feare it. They are sayd moreouer to measure the life of man with a spindle and thread which they spinne from their distaffe; from which they are called Lanificae by the Poets,
Lanificas nulli tres exorare puellasContigit: obseruant quem statuere diem.The three wol-weauing sisters none can prayTo change their time, they fix a constant day.
They are sayd to be inexorable, and by no praiers or intreates to be moued to alter the limit of the fixed time, or prorogue the life of man one minute after the date bee expired which was proposed at our birthes; therefore Seneca:
Nulli iusso cessare licet:Nulli scriptum proferre diem.
The Poets thus distinguish their offices: one begins the life of man, and pluckes the towe from the distaffe; the second, makes the thread, and continues

it; the third cuts it off and so ends it. The first is Clotho, whom Statius calls Ferrea, or hard hearted; Seneca, Grandaena, or extreamely aged; Pontanus, Improba, and Sedula, obstinate and yet carefull and dilligent. The second, Lachesis, called by Ouid, Dura, hard; by Marciall, Inuida, enuious; by Claudian, Ferrea, obdure and rude. The third Attropos, of whom Statius,
--Hos ferrea, neuerat annosAtropos--
Some number Illithia amongst the Parcae.
Plutarch speaking of the face that is visible within the Orbe of the Moone, sayth some are of opinion that the soules of men are resolued into the Moone, as their bodies into the Earth: Aliquanto post tempore eas quoque animas in se recepit Luna atquae composuit. 1. After some time the Moone receiues into her selfe those soules which she had before framed, restoring their mindes before lost: (for they are all in a dreame, like the soule of Endimion) and by coadiuting with the Seminarie and vitall powers of the Sunne, makes them as new soules. The Tetra, that is the number of Foure supplying the bodie: for she giues nothing after death, who receiues towards generation. The Sunne takes nothing from, but receiues againe the mind which he giues; the Moone both receiues and giues, and composeth or makes, and diuides; when shee makes, she is called Lucina; when shee deuides, Diana. So of the three Parcae, Atropos is placed about the Sunne, as the beginning of this new birth; Clotho is carried about the Sunne, to collect and mingle; Lachesis the last, her office is vpon the Earth: but these are riddles rather to trouble the braine than profit the vnderstanding. Parcae the mother of these three sisters, is said to bee the daughter of Necessitie: doubtles the Ethick writers held these to bee most powerfull goddesses, because all things borne, or that had subsistance, were thought to bee vnder their iurisdiction and power, and therefore they were imagined by some to bee the daughters of Iupiter and Themis, because (as the Pithagorians taught) Ioue gaue to euerie one a bodie and forme suitable to the merits or misdeeds of their former life; or else because the diuine Wisedome allotted to euerie soule rewards or punishments, as their good deedes or badde deserued, the cause of which diuision the antient writers not truely vnderstanding, appropriated all to Fate, and the Parcae.


FVRIAE or the EVMEMIDES.
THose whom the Poets call Furiae, Virgill tearmes the daughters of Night and Acheron. Therefore Galtreus in his twelfth booke de Alexand. calls them by a fit Epithite, Noctiginae,
Ego si dea sum, qua nulla potentior, interNoctigenus, si me vestram bene nost is alumnam?If I a goddesse be, of whomAmongst the night-borne, noneMore potent is, it's well you knewMee for your nurce alone.
By the same law Mantuan calls them Achecontiginae, as borne of Acheron: they are called by Lucan amongst the infernals, Canes, dogges:
--Stigiasquae Canes, in luce superna, Destiluana.In the vpper light, I will forsake the Stigian dogges;

meaning the sisters. Amongst mortalls they are called Furiae, because they stirre vp and spur on rage and malice in the hearts of men. They are called also Eumenides by an Antiphrasis, in a contrarie sence, for Eumenis signifieth Benevolens or well wishing, therefore Ouid,
Eumenides tenuere faces de funere raptas.
Their temples and foreheads, in steede of haire are sayd to crawle with snakes and serpents, as witnesseth Catullus, Statius, Mantuanus, in Appollon. and others. By Virgill they are called Dirae.

Vltricesque sedent in Limine dirae.

Lactantius in his sixt booke de Vero Cul^u writes after this manner: There be three affections or passions, which precipitate men into all violent and facinerous actions, therefore Poets calls them Furies: Ire, which couets reuenge; Couetousnesse, which desires riches; and Lust, whose itching appetite is after all vnlawfull pleasure. The first of these Furies is called Alecto, discouered by Virgill, where he tearmes her Luctifica, as making strife, and contention: The second is Tesiphone or Tisiphone, the daughter of Acheron, whom Ouid thus deliniates,
Nec mora Tesiphone madefactam sanguine sumit,Importuna facem, fluidoque cruore madentem:Induitur pallam tortoquae incingiter angue.Egrediturquae domo, luctus comitatur cuntem.Et pauor, and terror, trepidoque insaniae vultu.Importunate Tesiphone, without delay makes speedAnd snatcheth vp a smoking brand, which burning seemes to bleed,A garment on her backe she throwesAll gore, about her wastA gyrdle of a wreathed snake,In curl'd knots she makes fast.So foorth she goes; sad Mourning sheAttends her at the gate:Vpon her steps, grim Terror, Feare,And troubled Madnesse waite.
Claudian in his booke of the praises of Stilico, calls the third daughter of Acheron and Night, Megaera: so likewise Mantuan de Calam temporum, lib. 2. The sacreds that were made to these, were by such as hauing escaped any dangerous desease, or pestilent sickenesse, had bin spared by the Fates; and their sacrifices were onely done with a sad silence. The priests were called Hesichidae, of a Heroe called Hesicho, to whom, before the solemnitie, a Ramme was still offered, as Polemo witnesseth in that worke he writ to Eratosthenes: It was held a prophanation (saith he) for any of the meaner sort of people to haue accesse to these ceremonies, onely to these Hesichides, whose familie was onely acceptable to these seuere goddesses, and in all their oblations had the principall prime place and precedence. Their chappell is neere to Cidonium by the Nine ports. All such as sacrificed to them, were in blacke vestures; and they were alwaies celebrated in the night season, as it is manifest by Apollonius.

Indutam obscuram per noctem vestibus atris
By night their sable habits they put on.

To them was slaine and offered a cole-blacke ewe, and great with young

readie to yeane: neither was there any wine vsed in their sacrifices, which were called Nephalia. Now because no man should haue hope to hide and conceale his owne guilt and wickednes, to the three seuere judges of Hell, were giuen these three ministers; which some cal by the name of Erinnae, which signifies the prickes and stings of Conscience (the parents of which they were borne, importing so much) for there is no greater torture or deeper piercing, than a mans owne sentence against himselfe. And (compendiously to shut vp all) the antient writers would by these signifie vnto vs, That to a good and just man only, all things are safe; and that innocencie and integritie alone, make men feareles and constant against all the mutabilities of fortune, since the like torments of Mind, and troubles of Conscience still attend on all such as are impure and dishonest. Thus hauing past ouer the goddesses Coelestial, Marine, and Infernal, the goddesses Selectae, Terrestrial, and others; least my discourse might grow too tedious by appearing dull and heauie, and besides, in regard that my purpose is aimed at many, or most of that sexe, of what estate and condition soeuer, to make my worke more succinct and compendious, and to spare you some reading, and my selfe more labour, I will deliuer you a multiplicitie of histories and tales in few, namely, in a short Epitome giue you the arguments of all the Fables in Ouids Metamorphosis, which for your better content I shall expresse to you in verse, and with that conclude my first booke called Clio.




An abstract of all the Fables in the fifteene bookes of Ouids Metamorphosis, as they follow in the Poem.
CHaos into foure elements deuided,
Lib. 1.Each one into their seuerall place is guided.
And for their sundrie creatures, Roomth prepare,
Th'inhabitants of th'Earth, Sea, Heauens, and Aire.
Of earth and water man is first begot,
And the foure ages next succeede by lot.
Gold, Siluer next, third Brasse, the fourth of yron:
In last of which, the Giants seed inuiron
The spatious earth, and are become the head
Of Nations: of their spilt blood man's bred.
This wicked generation, Ioue (instated
In high Olimpus, hauing first translated
Lycaon to the shape of woolfe) destroies
In a deepe deluge. Pirrha sole inioyes
The earth, with her Deucalion: these at last,
By seuerall stones behind their shoulders cast,
Repaire mans generation: other creatures,
From heate and moysture breed their seuerall features.
'Mongst these, the serpent Python is begot.
Him, with an arrow, bright Apollo shot;
In memorie of which, Pithaean playes
Are celebrated, euen to Caesars daies.
Yet was no Lawrell knowne on earth to be,
Till Daphne was transform'd into that tree.
Her father growne disconsolate and sad,
The floods (that of his sorrow notice had)
Come to his comfort: Inachus alone.
To Poeneus (Daphnes father) tells his name:
Whose beauteous daughter Io (heauen knowes how)
Ioue, after, Rape, transformes into a cowe.
Argus that had a hundred eyes, her kept,
Whom Mercury so charmed, that he slept:
And after Syrinx transformation hard,
His sleepie head, he from his shoulders par'd.
His hundred eyes, whose sights begin to waine,
Iuno dispos'd into her peacocks traine.
Io restor'd vnto her first shape, beares
Young Epaphus; who being growne to yeares,
To Phaeton obiects, That he was bred
Of mortall straine, and not diuinelie spred.
Th'aspiring lad, his mother Climen' leaues:Lib. 2.
And of his father Phoebus he receiues
An ominous boone: he, for three dayes, hath wonne
The guidance of the chariot of the sunne:
By which, the vniuersall gloabe is fir'd,
Ioues thunder strikes the lad that so aspir'd;
And as a token of that generall wrack,
The sun-burnt Aethiops, haue since then bin black.
Now whilst the sisters of young Phaeton,
With Cignus for his death Lament and mone,
The Fates (that all our mortall actions skanne)
Change these to trees, and him into a swanne.
Now Ioue surueighs the vniuerse, restor'd
To pristine beautie: saw, and seeing ador'd
The bright Calisto, whom he made a rape,
And vitiated in Dianaes shape.
For which, the wrathfull Iuno changeth cheare,
And in her rage, transhapes her to a Beare;
Whom as young Archus chaceth 'ore the playne,
(Her sonne) and with his arrow had nigh slayne,
Ioue by his power determinates their iarres,
Changing both mother and the sonne to starres.
And now th'inraged Iuno hauing long
Complain'd to old Oceanus her wrong,
Is borne to heauen vpon her peacocks traine,
Stucke with the eyes of Argus lately slaine.
Next must the Crow her snow-white hew forgo,
For she despis'd the shape of Cornix, who
Tells her owne transformation: hauing mourn'd
For faire Nictimine to'a night crow turn'd;
She notwithstanding, to Apollo prates,
And how Coronis plaid him false, relates.
Wrathfull Apollo hauing rashly slaine
His beautious loue, turnes to the Crow againe,
Condemnes his babling, and in deepe despight,
To cole-blacke feathers turnes his siluer white.
Of her and Phaebus, Esculapius came,
Whose fortunes whil'st Ocirrhoe doth proclaime;
The gods (that of propheticke spells haue care)
Transmute her to th'equinall shape of Mare.
Apollo, that but late the Sunnes coach steard,
Leauing the heauens to keepe Admetus heard,
His oxen straie: Battus to Hermes lies,
Whose faith the god in double habit tries:
And finding him, his falsenesse, he so hated,
That to a Tutch-stone Battus is translated.
Thence to the Attick Regions hauing past,
King Cecrops daughter he inioyes at last,
Herse the faire, whose enuious sister hight
Aglaurus; her, the god for her despight
Turnes into stone. Great Ioue, Europa spies,
And for her loue he leaues th'Olimpicke skies.
Commanding Mercurie, whom Maia boare,
To driue Aegenors cattell to the shoare.
Thither Europa comes, sweete flowers to cull,
Her, Ioue transports to Creete in shape of Bull.
Lib. 3.Cadmus her brother, by Aegenor charg'd
To see his sister by some meanes inlarg'd,
In his long search a monsterous Dragon slew;
From whose sowne teeth, men redie armed grew:
With these, he founded Thebes; after, laments
Actaeons fall, borne to such strange euents,
Who by Diana to a Hart transform'd,
Was woorried by his hounds. Then Cadmus storm'd
At his neere kinsmans death. This, Iuno ioyes,
Who in her hate faire Semele destroies;
The shape of her nurse Beroe she assumes,
By whose bad counsell, Semele presumes
To aske her owne death. Now some few daies after,
Ioue with his Queen dispos'd to mirth and laughter,
Dispute of Venus, and desire to find,
Which sex to pleasure should be most inclin'd.
Tiresius (who before both sexes prou'd)
Iudgeth the cause on Ioues side. Iuno mou'd,
Depriues him sight: to recompence his eyes,
Ioue fils him with the spirit of prophesies.
His augurie Narcissus first made good,
Who 'gainst all womens loues opposed stood;
Mongst whom the faire nymph Eccho by her sorrow
Lost all saue voice, which she from voice doth borrow:
He, pining with selfe-loue, was the same hower
(Loosing his forme) transhap't into a flower.
Pentheus, the sage Tiresius doth deri'd,
Though he before the truth had prophesied:
For when god Bacchus rights were celebrated,
One of his Priests (who had before related
Of saylers turn'd to fishes) he keepes bound,
Receiuing from the Bachides many a wound.
This makes the wine gods Orgyes of more fame,
Alcathoe with her sisters mock the same.Lib. 4.
And at their distaffes many tales they tell,
First, what vnto the blacked Moores befell:
Of Phaebus to Eurinome transuerst,
By which all lets and troubles are disperst,
That he may freely with Leucothoe lie,
For which the iealous Clytie seemes to die;
But turnes into a Turnsole: they relate
Hermophraditus next (by wonderous fate)
And Salmacis, both in one bodie mixt.
This done, the sisters in their madnesse fixt,
Conuert to batts, their spindles change to Vines,
Their webbes to leaues, made by the god of wines.
At which whil'st Agaue reioic't, her glee
Is turn'd to discontent, for she may see
Ino and Athamas of great renowne,
Run headlong to ^rock and thence leape downe,
These being made sea-gods; whil'st the Theban dames
Lament their new change, and inuoke their names,
Amid'st their sorrows and sad funerall mones,
Part are made birds, and part are turn'd to stones.
Cadmus with these calamities distrest,
Leaues Thebes, and in Illiria he seekes rest.
Where with his wife debating mid'st the brakes
They soone may see each other turn'd to snakes.
Alone Acrifius still remaines instated,
Of all that Bacchus and his Oryges hated.
Perseus his graund-child, of faire Danae bred,
With crooked harpe cuts off Gorgones head.
Whose purple drops as to the earth they fall
Turne into serpents and before him crawle.
Atlas he changeth into a mountaine hye,
And all those shackles that Andronia tie,
Are into stones conuerted: many a bold guest
Intends to interrupt his bridall feast.
Where Phineus, Pretus, and their furious band
Are chang'd to Marble, and before him stand.
Pallas (till now the noble Perseus guide)Lib. 5.
Leaues him, and through the aire doth gently glide
To Helicon, there doth the goddesse meane
To view the famous Well cal'd Hippocrene.
The nine-Muse sisters of the Pyrens tell,
And what to the Pyerides befell.
How they contending with the Muses were
Transformd to Pyes, still chattering euery where.
Lib. 6.By whose example Pallas soone puts on
A Beldams shape, transports her selfe anon
To Ariachne, who with her compares,
And hauing after strife, wrought sundry chares,
Pallas transhapes her to a spider, leauing
Her antient Art, to take delight in weauing.
This mooues not Niobe, who late had lost
Her children, and in diuerse turmoyles tost,
Is chang'd to stone. Now when the people knew
This portent, they the memorie renew
Of the base Lysian rustickes turnd to Frogges,
And by Diana doom'd to liue in bogges.
They Marsias likewise can remember still,
Who ranks his musicke with Apolloes quill:
But he that 'gainst the gods, sought praise to winne,
In this contention lost both lawd, and skinne.
When all the neighbouring citties came to cheere
Distressed Thebes, the Athenians absent were;
And to their sorrowes can no comfort bring,
Being at home awde by a tyrant king.
Tereus, who the faire Philomel' deflowring,
Turnes to a Lapwing, in the ayre still towring,
As Philomel' into a Nightingale,
And Progne to a Swallow. This sad tale
Vnto Pandion told, he dyes with griefe:
In whose sad king dome next succeedes as chiefe,
Ericteus: Orithea the faire
His daughter, Boreas to his kingdome bare.
Of her, he Calain and Zethus got:
Amongst the Argonauts these tooke their lot.
There Iason the whit^ teeth off serpents sew,
Of which, men arm'd in compleat harnesse grew.
The waking dragon made to sleepe: the Fleece
Of gold from Phasis after brought to Greece.
Medea he beares thence; She by her art
Lib. 7.Makes young, old Aeson, promising to impart
Like good to Peleus; to his daughters showing,
From a decrepit Ram, a young lambe growing:
But slew him by her fraud. Transported thence,
She with Aegeus makes her residence:
Against whom Minos wars, hauing collected
Men from all places, by his skill directed:
As some from Paros, which long time before,
Arne betrayd, for which she euer w^re
The shape of Daw. King Aeacus supplyes
With Mirmidons, that did from pismires rise,
King Minos: Cephalus these forces led,
Who seeing to adulterat his owne bed,
Preuailes with Procris: whil'st his dogges in chace
Of a wild fox, both in the selfe same place
Are chang'd to stone^ Minos, Alchathoe woone.
Nisus and Scilla are in shape foredoone,
He to a Hawke, she to a Larke is shifted,Lib. 8.
And through the aire with their light feather lifted.
Thence he returnes to Creete, all sad and dull,
Where liu'd the Minotaure halfe Man halfe Bull;
Him Theseus slew, and after doth beguile
Faire Ariadne left in Naxos Isle.
With her god Bacchus enters amorous warres,
And placeth on her head a crowne of starres.
Young Icarus with his old father flies,
And downe into the sea drops from the skies.
His death, whil'st Daedalus laments: his sees
The Partridge new transformed. Now by degrees
Theseus winnes fame, scarce spoken of before,
Being cal'd to hunt the Calidonian Boore;
Which Meleager slew, and died by th'hand
Of his owne mother, in the fatall brand.
His sisters with loud shreekes his death proclaime,
Being all chang'd into Birds called Meleagrides. birds that beare his name.
He visits Achelous in his way,
And all these Islands that but th'other day
Were Nymphes and: Naides which appeared true,
Since the like transformation Lelex knew,
In Baucis and Philemon, whom he sees
Growing before him in the shape of trees.
Their cottage made a Temple for their sakes,
The village where they dwelt, all standing lakes.
Achelous addes to these the transformations
Of Proteus and of Mestra, with the fashions
That he himselfe appeared in, when he prou'd
His strength 'gainst Hercules: both deerely lou'd
Faire Deianeira; who hauing vnderstood
Her husbands scapes, dipt in the Centaures blood
A fatall shirt. Alcides doth expire,Lib. 9.
Being after made a starre: Lychas her squire,
Is sixt a sea-rocke: whil'st Alcmena hyes
To Iole, and as they two deuise,
She tells her of Galantis, before made
A monstrous Weasill: th'other showes the gl^de,
In which at that time shee might growing see
Her elder sister, now growne to a tree.
To them comes Iolaus, in the way
(Made young by Hebe^) Ioue himselfe can say
And instance Aeacus, this to be true,
From him Miletus fled, and thence withdrew
Himselfe to Asia, from whom descended
Caunus, and Biblis, whose not loue extended
To her owne brother (as the stories tell)
And weeping, was desolu'd into a well.
This had appear'd more strange, were it not knowne
Young Iphis on her marriage day was growne
To be a compl^at man; these nuptialls saw
Hymen: and thence he doth himselfe withdraw
Lib. 10.To Orpheus spousalls, but his bright robes di'd
In funerall blacke: Euridice the bride
Expires vpon her marriage day, being stung
In th' anckle by a snake, when Orpheus sung
His various transformations to the Lyre,
The trees to heare him from all parts desire,
Amongst whom came the Cypresse and the Vine,
The one clasp's Cyparissus in her twine,
The other Atis; euerie Thrasian fro,
That in his death had hand, besides them grow,
Lib. 11.And are made trees. Bacchus departs from Thrace,
And because Midas gaue Silenus place,
With entertainments due, to quittance this,
He guerdons Midas with his golden wish:
Who after wearied with his rauishing dreames,
Was made to wash him in Pactolus streames.
They since that time their golden tincture keepe
Still glistring when the Sunne shines on the deepe.
Pans musicke and Apollos, Midas heares,
And by false sentence gaines him Asses eares.
Phoebus (this done) an humane shape puts on,
And build's Troyes wals, to be excel'd by none.
This cittie, great Alcides hauing rac't:
With Pirams Hesion. sister, he the valor grac't
Of Aiax Telamon, who in these bralls
Was first set foot vpon the Dardan walls.
Peleus wedds Thetis, though against her will,
For though she by her godhead had the skill
To shift in sundrie shapes, yet was comprest,
And Peleus lodg'd vpon her yuorie brest.
To Ceix he past thence (one of his blood)
Where he part saw and partly vnderstood
Dedalion take on him a goshawkes shape,
And Woolfe made stone, that flying thought to scape.
Soone after this, Alcinoe in her bed
Dreaming she saw her lord shipwrecks and dead,
And from the shore his liuelesse bodie floting,
Both were made birds; which some spectators noting,
Straight call to mind, how Esacus the sonne of Priam. Aesacus before
Was chang'd into a Sea-gull: him deplore,
Priam, and all his sonnes as lost and dead,
Excepting Paris, who to Greece was sped,
And brought thence Hellen: him the Greek^s pursue
At Aulis Gulfe they anchor: where in view
Of the whole fleet, a Dragon they espie
Obdur'd to stone. To Troy-ward thence they hye,
Where Cygnus, on whose skinne no steele could bite,
Was by the great Achilles bruis'd in fight:
And at the instant made a siluer Swan,
So Coenis once a woman, now a man,
Was after likewise to a bird conuerted.
This tale'mongst others Nestor had inserted.
Periclimenes change to her repeates.
Neptune meane time the other gods intreates
About Achilles death, being much offended
At his late losse: he dead, Aiax contendedLib. 12.
With slye Vlysses, for his armes and shield:
Aiax disgrac't expires, and in the field:
Where his blood dropt a purple Hicinth grew,
In memorie that Aiax, Aiax slew.
Troy sact by th' Argiues, Hecuba the Queene
Turnes to a she dogge, keeping still her spleene:
Her sad distaster all the gods lament,
Aurora sheddes most teares, still discontent
For Memnons death. Aeneas leauing Troy
To Anius comes, a prince depriu'd all ioy,
Because his daughters were made house-doues, sad,
That he of them no greater comfort had.
Thence past he diuers shores and sundrie nations,
With wonders fil'd, and various transformations.
Till piercing Italy (yet free from scar)
With the bold Turnus he beginnes new war.
He sends to importune Diomedes ayd
By Venulus: whose fellowes were all madeLib. 13.
Light feathered birds: th'imbassador deni'd,
And back returning by a riuers side
Spies a wilde Oliue, which before had bin
A louely sheapheard, but now chang'd for sinne.
Aeneas shippes are in the hauen burn'd,
But pitied by the gods, to sea-nymphes turn'd;
Ardea to a bird more strange than these,
Himselfe into a god cal'd Indiges.
Him, other kings succeed, and 'mongst the rest
Liu'd vnder Proca (that faire nymph who best
Can skill of Gardens) vnto whom resorted
The fresh Vertumnus, and Pomona courted:
He in an old wiues shape to her relates
The tale of Anaxarites, how the fates
For her obdurenesse turn'd her into stone.
Pomona listning (and they both alone)
He to his youthfull shape againe retires,
And in the Garden quensht his amorous fires.
In processe vnder Numitor the king,
Where carst cold waters slid, now warme bathes spring.
Him Romulus succeeding, is created
The god Quirinus, and his wife instated
The goddesse Ora'. Him Numa next insues
Who of the birth of Croton asking newes:
He chanc't on pebles, who in all mens sight
Once being blacke, were chang'd to perfect white.
He likewise heard Pythagoras declame
All the transhapes beneath the heauenlie steame.
Aegaeria next king Numaes death deploring,
Not comforted at all with thy restoring^
Hippolitus, nor yet to heare thee tell
Thy change; she wept her selfe into a well.
Nor is this to be wondred, since we see
Thy Lance (oh Romulus) a flourishing tree.
And Cyppus to weare hornes: (hauing gone so far)
We end with Iulius Caesar made a starre.






Explicit lib. primus. Inscripus CLIO







THE SECOND BOOKE inscribed EVTERPE.

Of the Muses, the Sybells, the Vestalls, the Prophetesses, the Hesperides, the Graces, etc.
THE bodies of all reasonable creatures (as Ficinus saith) are naturallie pregnant, as hauing in them the seedes of issue, so likewise is the mind; both, still procreating and bringing forth: as we see at such a time the heire appeares; after, the teeth breake forth of the gummes; at such an age, the beard growes vpon the chinne, and in time alters and changes colour; and still the naturall faculties are in action. If then the body be so fertill, how much more is the nobler part of man, the Soule and the Mind, plentifullie furnisht with these seedes, that long for production? as the instinct of manners, of arts, of disciplines, and such like, which are generated in the breast, and in their fit and due time haue their seasonable birth. For no sooner are we past the cradle, but we begin to affect few things good, honest, or profitable: but none at that age acquires after things vnknown. It is therefore a consequent, that there is borne with vs and bread in vs, certain notions of those outward things, the forms of which we apprehend, and their practise study to imitate. This euerie man, if he will but obserue, may by experience find in himselfe. For if we recollect our selues to apprehend any probleme or mysticall doubt, which is not within the compasse of our present capacitie; after deepe consideration and mature deliberation, all the barres and rubbes of our fantasie and sences being remooued, we retyre our selues into a more priuate and inward contemplation, and then most subtillie reasoning with our selues, we shall by degrees perceiue the clowd to vanish, and the truth appeare in full glorie and splendour. Therefore, when we present our selues vnto schoole-masters: the braine fashioneth in it selfe many Ideas, without rule or example, which like a rank and well manur'd field, hath in it the seedes and grounds of many fruitfull sciences; these if a skilfull man take in hand, bring oft times a croppe aboue expectation. Thus much Plato exprest in many places, but in his Theage most plainelie, No man (saith he) hath of me learnt any thing, though from me, many a one hath gone the more learned. And as Socrates saith, Me t^m exhortan^e tum bono demone suggerente, By my exhortations, and the good

Angels suggestion. With this short preparation, we come now to the Muses, of these innate seeds, the glorius and euer-during fruit. Hesiod pronounces them to be the daughters of Iupiter and Memorie, in his Theogonia. From hence it seemes, the men of Gnydos had a custome to select sixtie graue and vnderstanding men, out of the prime of the nobilitie,Plutarch in Graecis petit. and to commit vnto them the affaires of the Common-wealth, and such they called Amnemodes, or remembrancers. Alcmaeon and some few others, call them the daughters of Earth and Heauen. Pindarus in one of his Hymnes thus speakes to one of them, Incipe vero Coeli filia. Aristarcus and Mimnerca (if we may beleeue Eustathius) determine, that the Muses were before Iupiter, interpreting the word Musa, the knowledge of the soule, which is a thing no lesse diuine than the soule it selfe. To him Homer assents, calling it, The celeritie of knowledge. Plato in Cratilo deriues it from diligent search and inquisition, to whom Pharnutus in his booke intituled, Of the nature of the gods, subscribes. Of the same opinion is Suidas. They are therefore (saith he) deriued from Inquirie, being the originalls and causes of all sciences and disciplines: others, as Cassiodorus, because they conteine in them a conueniencie and concordance of arts: or (to conclude) as Diodorus writes, They were therefore called Musae, because they comprehend the art of modulation or tuning, with a consent or agreeing of all other disciplines. Diuers authors much differ about their number, Varro, as Seruius witnesseth of him, allowes onelie three, Ina, which is bred by the motion of the water; a second, begot by the sprinkling of the ayer; a third, meerelie arising from the sound of the voyce. Augustine speakes of a cittie, which Gyraldus names Sicion, the primates of which, of three seuerall famous worke-men bespake three effigies or images of the Muses, to bestow as a gift vpon the Temple of Apollo; and which of them could expresse the greatest art and most exquisite workemanship, he to be the best payd for his paines. It so hapned, that their three labours were equallie beautifull, and so esteemed, in so much that all the nine pieces pleasing generallie, they were all bought and dedicated to the Temple. To euery of which, the Poet Hesiod after gaue a seuerall Embleme or Motto: Not (saith he) because Iupiter had begot nine Muses, but that three artificers had forged three apeece: and therefore the number of three; because it is easie to obserue, that euerie sound which begets any materiall thing concerning musicke, is tripartite by nature: either it proceedes from the voyce simplie, as to those that sing without an instrument; or with the breath, as the Trumpet, Cornet, or Sackbut; or by the stroakes, as the Lute, Harpe or Gitterne. The names of these statue-makers, Augustine saith, were Cephisodotus, Strongilio, and Olimpiosthines. Pausonias relates, that in times of old there were acknowledged no more than three, (by Oto and Ephialtes the sonnes of Aloeus) cald Meditation, Memorie, and Song or Musicke. Archestratus the Poet, affirmes as much; as also, that these two were the first that offered diuine sacrifice to the Muses, and imposed these names vpon them in Hellicon. Some authours will approue but two; others will make them vp foure, for the excellencie of the number, which the Pythagorists held to be so sacred, that by that (as Plutarch replyes) they vsed to sweare, Per quaternionem sacrum, qui animae nostrae tradi^ naturam aeternam, etc. By the holy number of foure, which lends to the soule an eternall nature, etc. Some haue raysed them to fiue; others to seauen; Pierius Macedo, he increased their number to nine. Some are of opinion, that the names of the nine daughters of Pierius were imposed vpon the Muses: these are character'd by Hesiod in his Theogonia. Lucan in his third dialogue of the supernall gods, calls the Muses

virgines, and such as are contented with their natiue colour and beautie: he likewise tearmes them invulnerable, as not to be toucht or wounded with the wanton darts of Cupid. They were crowned diuerse wayes by diuerse nations: some bestow Coronets of the palme-tree vpon them, some-lawrell, others chaplets of roses: to which Sapho seemes to allude, most elegantlie taunting an vnlearned woman,
--Mortua IacebisNec enim hortulum habes rosarum ex Pi^ria,--Thou shalt lye deadWithout Pierian roses 'bout thy head.
Cornutus in a booke intituled De natura Deorum, saith, that there were first onelie three, according to that number which is attributed to the deitie, as the most simple and perfect of all others. Those that made foure, as Cicero, or fiue, had reference to the auncient instruments of musicke then in vse, and which yeelded no more seuerall sounds. Those that approoued seauen, to the seauen liberall arts alluded the seauen Muses. But there are nine receiued and allowed amongst vs, and that for diuerse reasons; as first because the number of nine is held to be vertuall and perfect; being an euen foure, arising from a first odde; and then odlie to an odde: it is likewise deuided and distinguished into three equall oddes, then it consists of Triangulors, etc. Besides Mnemosi^e, who is said to be the mother of the Muses, her name consists of nine letters. Fulgentius saith, that the nine Muses, with their brother Apollo, import nothing else than the tenne modulations of mans voyce, therefore is Apolloes harpe represented with ten strings: so in the Scripture we reade of the Decachord or Psalterie: others moralise it to be the foure former teeth, against which the tongue striketh: the two lips which are the Cymbals or Instruments to fashion the words: the tongue and the string of the tongue: the pallate, whose concauitie begets a sound: the wind-pipe which is the passage of the breath; and the lungs, which like a paire of bellowes, giues and takes backe the ayre or spirit. Virgill of the Muses writes thus:
Clio gesta canens transact is tempora reddit,Melpomene tragico proclamat maesta boat^.Comica lasciuo gaudet sermone Thalia,Dulciloqui calamos Euterpe flatibus vrget.Terpsichore affectus Cytharis mouet, imperat, auget,Plectra gerens Erato saltat pede, carmine, vultu.Carmina Calliope libris heroica mandat.Vrania poli motus scrutatur and Astra:Signat cuncta man^ loquiturque Polimnia gestu,Mentis Apolliniae vis has mouet vndique Musas,In medio residens complectitur omnia Phebus.Clio past acts to after ages sings,Melpomine, with tragicke buskin, sheIn bellowing breath proclaimes disasterous things.Comick Thalia affects wanton lieTo speake and write. The eloquent mans quillEuterpe vndertaketh to inspireWith her learn'd breath. Terpsichore is stillBusied about the musicke of the Lyre,Th'affections to command, to mooue, and sway.But Erato a Rebeck beares, and knowesTo tread to it: of Verse she can the way,And how to frame the gesture. Number flowes,In straynes Heroick, from Calliop's penne;Which she to bookes commits. The starres and spheares,Vrania searcheth, and instructeth menIn their true motion. Polihimnia stearesAction and language, by her hand directed,Which by her helpe, an orator much graceth.By Phoebus thus the Muses liue protected,He in the midest, the Nine about him placeth.
It may now lastly bee demaunded by those that are studious of antiquities, Why the Vertues, the Disciplines, the Muses, the Deuisers and Patrons of all good arts, with diuers of the like nature, should rather bee comprehended vnder the faeminine sexe, by the names of Virgins and women, as also their pictures drawne to the portraitures of damosells, than either by masculine nomination, or according to the effigies of men; the rather since not onely the Ethnickes and Morrall men, but euen Christians and Theologists themselues, in all their bookes and writings which they commit to posteritie continue them vnder the same gender? for who is ignorant that Sophia, which signifies Wisdome, was not from the beginning, and before the world; who is sayd to be the mother of the three Theologicall Vertues, Faith, Hope, and Charitie, and these represented as Women? why should the seuen liberall Arts, bee exprest in Womens shapes? why the nine Muses bee the daughters of Iupiter; as all writers agree? Why is Wisdome called the Daughter of the highest, and not rather the Sonne, as witnesseth the booke of Wisdome? why Pallas, otherwise called Minerua, not the Sonne, but the Daughter of Ioue, (of whose braine she was borne?) and why the most curious and diligent inquisiters into these curiosities figure the liberal Arts and Disciplines like women and not rather like men? or by what reason the Muses should be personated rather like Damosells than young men, strenuous and excelling in masculine Vertue? To all these obiections, it is briefely answered by Lilius Gregorius, as likewise by Cornutus whom some cal Pharnutus; That by the symbole or semblance of such women, much science is begot, and besides much fruit ariseth from the judgment of the soule: besides it was a custome of old for Virgins to play and daunce in companies, which excellently fitted the coupling and sisterhood of the sciences: these coherences are called by Martianus Capella, Ciclicae; from whence Vitruuius grounded his Euciclium: besides, the Greekes Euciclopaedia is frequent with Plinie, Plutarch and the rest: likewise in Beroaldus commentaries vpon the Golden Asse, he adds this one thing worthie obseruation, to the great honour and commendation of the feminine sex: the foure parts of the world haue their denominations from women. Asia was so called of the nymph Asia, from whom and Iaphethus, Prometheus descended; Europe, of Europa the daughter of Aegenor; Lybia, which is Africa, of Lybia the daughter of Epaphus; in like manner America (since discouered) beareth the like female figure: which (as Beroaldus saith) if the women of our age did fully apprehend and truely vnderstand, how insolently would they boast of their worth and dignitie? how would they glorie in vaine boasts and ostentations, how much vncontinuall

chidings would they vpbrayde their husbands, still casting in their dishes their owne vetues and goodnesse; still commemorating and vrging, that women beare the names of all the foure parts of the diuided world; that wisedome and the theological vertues are personated vnder the sex of women; that the Arts, the Disciplines, the Muses, the Graces, and almost whatsoeuer is good, are deciphered both by the names and in the persons of women: therefore (I feare) this had beene better kept as secret as mysteries in Sanctuaries, and not to haue beene published to them in their owne mothers tongue, in which they are so nimble and voluble; least calling a Counsell about this argument, it may adde to their insolencies, who haue too great an opinion of their owne worths alreadie.
I will onelie speake brieflie from what places they tooke their generall denominations, and so proceede to euery particular person: They were called Pierides, of the mountaine Pieris, or as some will haue it of Picrius, who had nine daughters: Likewise Camoenae a Canendo, of singing; Heleconiades of the fountaine called Helicon, that flowed from a mountaine in Boetia; Pernassides, of the hill Pernassus, scituate in the Region of Phocis; Aonides, of the Aonian mountaine; Pegasides, from a spring or well so called, first discouered by the hooffe of Pegasus, the horse of Perseus; Cithereides, of Citheron, a hill neere to Thebes; Libethrides, from a fountaine in Magnesia; Pimplaeades, from a place in Macedonia; Ilisstades, from a flood by Athens; Thespiades, from the Thespians; Ligyae, of a people of Larissina, who ayded Xerxes against the Greekes; Castalides, of the fountaine so called; Corycides, of a hill, or rather a caue amongst the Delphians; Pat^ides, of a well in Macedonia; Olimpiades, of the mount Olimpus; Ardalides, of Ardalus the sonne of Vulcan: of these you may further reade in Varro, Herodotus, Terentianus, Plutarchus, Pompeius, Pausonias, Solinus, Seruius, Macrobius, Sidonius, Placiades, Lilius, Gregorius, Picus Mirandula, and others.

CLIO.
HEsiodus in his Theogonia saith, that Clio is the daughter of Iupiter and Memoria, and is the eldest of those Muses which he was nine nights a getting: she is called Clio, apo tou kleno, which is Laudo, to praise: or of apo to^ cleous, for glorie which learned men acquire; or that glorie which is conferred on eminent and great men, by the encomiasticks of Poets, so saith Diodorus: But Placidus deriues the Etimologie of her name from the cogitation and inuestigation of arts and sciences. Some say, that she hath the preheminence and gouernment ouer histories, as Apollonius in his Commentaries relates (and therefore at this time I am to inuocate her ayde and assistance in the prosecutition and perfecting of this worke in hand.) She is moreouer taken for the mother of Or Ialemus. Hyalemus and Hymenaeus, the god of marriage; who are therefore called the sonnes of Clio, because of their knowledge in Historie, for so Iohannes Gramm^ticus is of opinion: the first, the Author of sad and mourning Madrigalls: the other of pleasant and ioyfull Epithalamions and nuptiall songs: the first in melancholie Elegeicks: The last, in loftie Iambicks. Apollodorus in his first booke of the Originall of the gods, saith, that Clio was besotted with the loue of Pierius, the sonne of Magne^is: (by the incensed wrath of Venus, because she reprooued her for too much dotage on Adonis) and that by Pierius, she had the boy Hyacinthus: But that it is she by whom all men are accited and spur'd

on to the purchase of honour and glorie, whence else came that magnanimous and bold enterprise of Hercules in that great Centauromachia against the sons of Ixion? to call to combat all the rebustious pyrats at sea, and robbers and spoylers on earth? Tyrants and euill doers to tame? and horrid and dreadfull labours to ouercome? the invulnerable Lyon of Cytharon to teare in pieces? The many headed monster Hydra to suffocate and strangle? the Eremanthian boare to slaughter, and the golden horned hart to ouercome? The rauenous Stimphalides to repell? and all the monsters and terrours of the earth in single monomachy to ouercome? but to attaine to the Apex and heigth of fame and glorie, What mooued Theseus (the second Hercules) to remooue the rocks, and plucke thence and beare away the inchanted sword? the Minotaure to kill? the tedious way to Athens to trauell? the streights and passages in his iourney to cleere and free? Corineta, with his owne proper mace to ruin? Pitiocamptes Sinis, the sonne of Polypones, to oppresse? and many other enterprises of no lesse danger to acquire and accomplish? What incouraged the Captaines and Generalls of the Graecian and Roman Empire to such noble atchieuements, saue onelie the spurre of glorie to immortalise their names to all perpetuitie? So did his Poetrie illustrate Homer; his eloquence, Demosthenes; and his integritie, Aristydes. In like manner, others by other meanes haue celebrated their names to posteritie, to whom this Encomium may bee iustlie giuen, Such as haue vertue in prise and estimation, they tread the illustrious path: for euery mans proper action doth nobilitate his owne name. Such therefore as desire to be eternised, it behooues them auspiciously to begin with some act either of consequence or danger. For so saith Pindarus in his sixt Hymne Olimp. In the beginning of an enterprise a couragious and an vndaunted countenance is behoouefull. For vertues are senselesse of dangers. And Hesiod saith,
Virtutem posuere dij sudore parandum,The gods haue plac't vertue, not to be arriued too without sweat and trauell.
But it is next to be inquired what the ancient Poets chiefly intimated in this Nymph Clio: She is called the daughter of Iupiter, and signifies Glorie. If it be lawfull therefore to acquire glorie, and to leaue the memorie of your noble actions to posteritie, farre be it we should seeke the daughter but from the father, or court her without his consent: who from the memorie and contemplation of a deed well done, deriues to vs a fame, in no age not to be celebrated. She is called Prima cogitation, i. The first thought of seeking knowledge: and because no mans meditations are about that by which he hath not a purpose to inlarge the dignitie of his owne name, therefore she is called the first of the Muses. Plutarch in his Simposaicon, diuides the nine Muses into two halfes: the one to gouerne and haue dominion ouer pastimes and pleasures, least any man should foolishlie and vnaduised fall vpon actions dishonest or vncomelie, stirring him vp with songs, dances, and sweet sounding instruments, to vertuous exercises; and reteining and keeping him backe from lusts, both vnlawfull and pernitious: the other diuision incourages vs, to actions difficult, to affaires serious and of import; and these are Clio, Calliope, and Thalia: for all things ought to be done in that Symmetria and due proportion of mediocritie, that in our sports we slide not into lusts, and in things serious westumble not at the morositie and peeuishnesse of age. She had two sonnes, Ialmus and Himenaeus, men of two sundry lots and conditions; the one in no place, but where there was ejulation and mourning; the other where there was euer sport, myrth, banquets, and nuptiall ioyes. And as Athenaeus obserues from

Aristophanes, In Luctu Ialmus, in nuptijs Himenaeus. Nothing els is apprehended by these two brothers of such contrarie dispositions, but that all such as seeke after glorie and the immortalitie of their names, are sometimes with crosse and sinister accidents oppressed, and sometimes with faire and prosperous successes incouraged and puffed vp; singing sometimes the ioyfull songs of Hymeneus, and forc'd at other times to be subiect to the sad and melancholie howlings of Ialmus. And so much of Clio.


EVTERPE.
EVery man hath his pleasures and delights, as well wise men as fooles: there is no man of so seuere a grauitie or austere a condition (no not Timon him selfe) whose nature is not mollified, and made more tractable with the delight of some one thing or other. One is much pleased with horses of good stomacke, another with dogges of excellent sent or swiftnesse, some with wealth, others with honour, and so of the rest; and thus we passe through the pilgrimage of a life full of infelicities and calamities, with the greater content and ease by pondering some such things in our minds, in which we take the greatest pleasure and comfort. Neither are the wise men without this alacritie, being sometimes extaside in the contemplation of things sublime and high. Plato in Philebis (saith he) As the imtemperat man takes pleasure, so doth the temperat man in his temperance; As the foole is delighted in his foolish opinions and vaine hopes, so is the wise man in his wisedome and constant purposes; but that their contents are different and of contrarie qualities, no man makes question. The wise man therefore and the vnwise haue both their pleasures, but so farre pre-excelling is the one, as the other is vile, abiect, and contemptible: for the one is gorged and surfetted with his delicacies, euen to loathing and vomit; the other, inebriated or rather quickned and inspired with the sprightly nectar of contemplation, flyes into the celcitude and maiestie of things inscrutable: neither conteines he himselfe within the narrow and straight empire of this vniuerse, but acquires things aboue capacitie, and transcending nature; for incited with the deepe studie of metaphysicall philosophy, he striues euen to trace the steps of the infinite maiestie, though it be confest that this ambition of his is both foolish and arrogant, yet is it daring, and noble, that not satisfied with the knowledge of humble and terrhene things, pierceth deeper, and aymeth higher, till it attaine that perfection of height, that the mind or vnderstanding being filled, may stoppe at the farthest, as there hauing fixt non vltra. But this small digression, being of Euterpe, which word implyes nothing els but true delectation or delight, I hope hath not beene much impertinent. Hesiod cals her the second Muse in order, and the daughter of Iupiter and Memorie. Neanthes in his booke intituled Rerum Graecarum, calls her the mother of Themistocles but Amphicrates in his tractat of illustrious men,Lib. 3. contraries that, and affirmes the strumpet Abrotonum to be his mother. Euterpe is called the goddesse of pleasantnes and iollitie, said to be delighted in all sorts of pipes and wind instruments, and to be both their inuentresse and guidresse; therefore it is not probable or credible, that Themistocles should be her sonne, when at a solemne banquet, as M. Tullius witnesseth, he refused the harpe, for which he was accused in that assemblie of rudenesse and discourtesie, or else of want of skill, which was a kind of aspertion in those dayes and places.Lib. Sherap. Galenus saith, that the Lyre or

harpe (the pipe of which Euterpe was the first deuiser) were held in great estimation and honour: these be his words, As in times of old to play vpon the harpe at meetings and banquets, or the like instruments, was held laudable and honest; so eyther to deny it, or haue no skill in it, was an opprobry and scandall. Lycurgus, though he instituted most hard and seuere lawes ouer the Lacedemonians, yet the practise of musicke he did both allow and highly commend, as a sollace by which the troublesome burden of labour and trauell might be the easilier transmitted. Fauius saith, that songs cheere the gally-slaue at his oare, and the pipe though not exquisitelie playd vpon, yet the modulation is comfortable to such as are ouertrauelled. The first vse of pipes amongst the Greekes was after certaine great victories atchieued, where they were in great opinion of themselues; but they were after relinquisht in Athens, either because they were held as inciters to wanton meetings, or because they raysed a kind of vncomelinesse and deformitie in the faces of such as playd vpon them. Of these pipes there were diuers kinds, That which was made of the Lote-tree, was called Plagiauton; that of the Box tree, Elimon; that of the Lawrell tree, Hippophorbon; Monantus was likewise made of the Lote-tree, and most vsed at nuptials, which was called also Pholingia. The pipe nam'd Libis, called by some Matroa, was that which was solelie attributed to the inuention of Euterpe, though some bestow it on the mother of the gods. The Tyrhenes vsed pipes of horne; the Thebanes made theirs of the shankebones of Hynd calfes; the Celtae, of reeds; the Islanders of the Ocean (as the Scithae, the Antropagi, and Armaspians) of the legge bones of Eagles and Vultures; the Aegyptians pipe called Polypthongos, is composed of the stalkes of Barlie. There be as seuerall sorts of this kind of instrument, as it is vsed amongst sundrie nations and places. Certaine it is, though her inuention was but poore and wretched at the beginning, yet it increased miraculouslie: for almost no nation but sung their songs, oades, ditties and hymnes, to seuerall sorts of wind instruments; but especiallie amongst the Germanes in Europe they were in the most frequent vse, from whom they had the name of Tybiae. The interpreters of Appollonius and Rhodius affirme that she first inuented the Mathemata, or disciplines: others, that she was much practised in Logicke. To speake in one word what the Poets materiallie intended by Euterpe,Lib. 9. Plutarch best expresseth in his Simposaicon, All attribute to Euterpe, the contemplation of the truth of nature, esteeming no delectations to bee more pure, or recreations more faire, than such as haue their birth from her. This therefore is the consequence and coherence betwixt Clio and Euterpe, according to Fulgentius: we first in Clio acquire sciences, and arts, and enterprises, and by them honour and glorie: that obtained, in Euterpe we find pleasure and delectations in all such things as wee sought and attained: which agree with Plutarchs words from Crysippus, I take something to my selfe which is appropriate to Euterpe, that she hath in her that which instructs men in ciuilitie and decencie. For Euterpe imports to vs nothing else, but the ioy and pleasure which we conceiue in following the Muses, and truely apprehending the mysteries of discipline and science. Therefore with Oppianus in his Halieuticis I conclude, Laboreum sequitur gaudium. i. Ioy still followes labour. And so much of Euterpe.



THALIA.
IT is a position, That the lawfull Platouicke banquet doth refresh both the body and the mind: such a one exprest Athenaeus in his Dipnosophistae; which signifies Cenaesapientum, A supper or feast of Wise men, which is a discourse at table, both of pleasure and profit; and of such is the Muse Thalia ladie and mistresse. For there is nothing that doth better delight the body, refresh the mind, or make cheerefull the countenance, than a banquet of that condition and purpose. Aristotle saith, That man is composed of a body (which is an earthie masse consisting of spirit humour) and of a mind which includes two things, namelie Sence and Reason, from which all honest pleasure doth arise and flow, if it be temperatelie and moderatelie gouerned. And Galen saith, That in a modest and well disposed banquet, all these occurre and meete: For who knowes not, but by such meanes the members are nourisht, the humours renewed, the spirit refresht, and the reason after a sort watered? By this we haue a cessation from labour, a retyrement from care; for the body, sollace; for the braine, incouragement. Take away the hillarities and mirth of feasting and banquetting; the nutriment of loue, the communitie of friendship, and the sollace of life, is by such a restraint opprest, and by degrees adnichilate: for the communion and societie of life, is the scope at which moderate banquets ayme, and not the lauish inuitation to healthing and intemperate drinking: which Plutarch in Symposiacis seemes to approoue in these words, speaking of the Muse Thalia: For that which belongs to surplusage of meate, and superfluitie of drinke, concernes not Thalia, who makes a man sociable in his banquets, who otherwise of his owne condition is churlish and froward. Therefore is Thalia deriued of Caliazein, which as the Greekes giue the etimologie is Conuenire, to meete according to appointment, well and contentedlie to please the pallat, and satisfie the appetite, and not to gormondise and exceede in surfet. Therefore the counsell of Varro is, that all such banquetters be either musicall or learned, and not to exceede the number of the Graces, or the Muses at most. From such a feast are to be excluded all such as are full of spleene, or prone to anger: but such whose affabilitie is smoth, and apt for the time and place, voyde of all loquacitie, and superfluous language, that rather sweeten than distast the company; let such be welcome guests to her table: but the gluttenous and fat dishes of Sardanapalus, let them be as hatefull as cates saust with poyson, and such belly gods appeare to thee as dogges and serpents. Fulgentius and Epicharmus Comicus saith, that this Muse is the most of all the rest fauourable and gracious to Poets, because they loue to meete familiarlie and fare daintilie, to expell sorrow as they would doe shame, and melancholie as they would doe madnesse: and this they doe with an Antipharmacum, composed of neat and briske wine, which doth smooth and enlighten a wrinkled and clowdie countenance; for Thalia will at no time suffer a Poet to droupe in spirit, or his fame to wither,Eclog. 6. as Virgill saith:
Nostra nec erubuit siluas habitare Thalia.Our Thalia blusht not to dwell euen in the woods amongst vs.
She is the third in ranke, who hath a denomination ofa Virescendo dallein, that is, Still springing and growing greene. Cornutus saith, That from that denomination she renewes and re-inspires the decayed life of a Poet: or else because at their free and jouiall meetings, she persuades them to friendlie and honest conuersation,

without brawles or riot; or lastly (as others will haue it) in regard the Poets fame once deseruedlie got, shall outlast time and liue with eternitie. Many bestow on her the inuention of the Comedie; some make her the first teacher of Agriculture; and others, to be the mother of Palephatus, who writ much concerning plantation and inoculating, besides fiue bookes Incredibilium, or things past beliefe. Therefore, the papers of Palephatus grew into an adage or prouerbe, because his bookes had no credit giuen vnto them. Much is spoken of him by Coelius in his Antiquae Lection:Lib. 30. cap. 34. But of her there is nothing left saue this to speake, That whosoeuer shall imbrace the Muses, shall purchase to themselues immortalitie. Therefore Pindarus in Olimpijs calls Poems, The purchases of diuine fame and glory immortall. Plutarch in Quest. 14. and in Symposiac, lib. 9. will haue Thalia, Calliope, and Clio to be conuersant in things serious, graue, and philosophicall; in diuine things to haue speculation; and lastlie to measure all things iustlie, and weigh them in an euen ballance equallie: He that can doe this, is not onelie worthy to be reckoned amongst the best of men, but to be numbered euen in the catalogue of the gods, of whose memorie no age shall euer be silent.


MELPOMENE.
BY sweete modulation, all things are mooued. Plato in his dialogue de Furore, calls her the daughter of Iupiter, and voyce of Appollo; nor without merit, if we but retire our selues and looke backe into the originall of things. Her name deriued from the Greeke dialect, importing Ca^ere, to sing; and Concentum facere, to make consent or concord: which includes the temperature and modulation of the whole world. For what is better moderated or kept within a more due proportion than melody: For as the many limbes and members of the body, though they haue diuers place and motion, and haue sundry gifts and offices, yet all their faculties are directed to one businesse, as hauing one scope and ayme: so the varietie that ariseth from diuers voyces or strings, all agree and meete to make one melody, which as Plutarch writes in his booke de Musica, signifies aMelos. member of the body. And that euery creature liuing is delighted with harmonie, Plato doth gather, because celestiall spirit from which the world first tooke life, had his first liuelie being and existence from musick. Strabo writes that the elephants are made gentle, by the voyce and the beating of the timbrell, or the tabor. And Plutarch in Symposiac, That many bruit beasts are much affected to, and delighted in musicke: Nam video, etc. For I see (saith he) creatures wanting reason are much pleased with harmony; as the Hart with the pipe, and the Dolphin with the harpe and voyce: Of which Pindarus and Virgill are manifest witnesses:
--Inter Delphinus Arion--
Which Arion, Plutarch in his Conuiuium thus elegantlie describes.

Quod mare nonnomit? quis nescit Ariona tell us?
Carmine currentes ille tenebat aquas,
Sepe sequens Agnam, etc.

Which I thus english.

What sea, what earth, doth not Arion know?
Whose verse could make the waters ebbe or flow;
His voyce hath cald the woolfe backe from pursuite
Of the mild lambe, and made his howlings mute.
Oft at his voyce, the sillie lambe hath staid,
Whilst on his life the fierce wolfe might haue praid.
Oft in one shade the hare and hound hath lyne,
Both listning to a musicke so diuine.
The Lionesse, and Ewe together are
Attentiue both: but neither fierce, nor iarre.
The prating crow to Pallas owle is ny,
And quarrels not: the doue, the hawke sits by.
Oft Cinthia hath he set thine heart on fire,
And made thee sweare, his, was thy brothers Lyre
All the Sicilian cities are at ones,
And Italy is rapt with thy Lyrick tones.
Bound homewards good Arion shipping takes,
With all the store his art, or musicke makes.
He feard to see the wind and waters rise;
But there more comfort than a shipbord lyes.
Behold the captaine with his sword in hand,
With all that guiltie crew at his command,
Inguirt him round: he (well nigh dead with feare)
Intreates them their rude violence to forbeare:
Or if so madlie they his death desire,
He first may take some comfort of his Lyre.
They grant him leaue, and smile at his delay:
He takes his chaplet of the still-greene Bay,
A chaplet which euen Phoebus might haue tryde,
Then don's a roabe in Tyrian purple dyde:
And as the swanne that dying sweetlie sings,
So he betakes him to his voyce and strings:
And from th'inuiron of these marine knaues,
Downe suddenlie he slips into the waues.
The crooked Dolphin takes him on her backe,
To saue Arion from the present wracke.
She swimmes, he sits and playes vpon his Lyre,
And payes with musicke the swift Dolphins hyre.

But to leaue to speake of vnreasonable creatures. In man there is a peculiar reason aboue the rest, by which his mind is made pliant and tractable to this modulation, for it insinuates into his bosome soonest. For none is of so rude and rough hewne a disposition, that yeelds not an attention to melodie, and is not captiuated and surprised with the rauishing sounds of Melpomene. In the monuments of antient writers there are obserued fiue seuerall sorts of songs:Fiue seuerall sorts of songs the first Suphronistiche, such were the songes that were vsed to bee relisht in the eares of Clitemnestra; and all such singers are called Sophronistai, according to the Greekes; the second were Encomiastice, Laudatory; in which the prayses of the most excellent men were celebrated; and such were soong by Achittas: the third, Drinetiche, or Cantus Lugubris, the mournefull song; the fourth, Orchematiche, or Saltatoria, the dauncing dyttie; the fifth, Pianiche, such as is in Homers Isliads, and is called Po^ean, or Po^an; such were Hymnes

to Apollo, not only in a plague time, that the Pest should cease, but for the cessation of warre, or any other present mischeife then immediat whatsoeuer. Melpomene is likewise the chiefe, and hath the prime precedencie in the Tragedie: as Virgill in the verse before remembred.
Melpomene, tragico, etc.
Therefore it was the custome in all the Tragedyes of old, to annexe to the end of euerie act, a Chorus, with some sad and mournfull song: and the neerer they grew to the catastrophe or conclusion, the songs were set to the more passionate tunes, and soong with the more sorrowfull accent, expressing an augmentation of griefe both in countenance and gesture. Some of the great Authors conferre vpon her the inuention of Rhetorick, of which opinion was Pharnutus, who doth etimologise Melpomene, from Molpe, which signifies the Sweetenesse of the voice: for one of the chiefest ornaments in an Orator is first Action, then a constancie in Voyce, Motion, and Gesture beseeming and comly. Most certaine it is, that all these things commented of Melpomene, either concerning the deriuation of her name, or her inuention of arts, meete in this one center (to which so many lines ayme) to signifie to vs a well spoken, learned, and eloguent man, from whose lipps issue all foecunditie and sweetenes: And that he may attaine to this elegancie which so much graceth an Orator, behooues him take counsell of M. Cicero, that is, to ioyne Wisdome with his Eloquence, and substance and matter to his pronuntiation and phrase; by which practise, he may proue to the Common-wealth a most necessarie and profitable member. Lastly Fulgentius teacheth, that by this Muse is meant a maid giuen to meditation: as first, Clio begets a will; secondly, Euterpe a desire to prosecute that which the will is bent vnto; thirdly, Thalia to be delighted in that which wee haue acquired; fourthly Melpomene, to meditate vpon that in which we are delighted. And so much for meditation, or the fourth of the Muses.


TERPSICHORE.
IN the fift place succeedes Terpsichore, whose name is deriued a (...). delecto, and (...), tripudium, that is, delighting in dauncing: This Muse hath no lesse reference to Musick than Melpomene her elder sister; the one gouerns the voice, and hath predominance ouer songs, the other ouer dauncing and measures. They are by the great writers much commended, who therefore make the Muse the inuentresse of them, being the daughter of Iupiter: the originall of dauncing they deriue from the high heauens, from the order of the starres and planets, from their motion, their going forward and returne backeward; which euen at the first creation began in an harmonaicall measure of the coelestiall bodies.
Of Daunces there be sundrie kindes; some tooke name from the song, and such was called Emmeleia, that was held to be Tragicall: a second, was called Cordax Comica, or a countrie daunce; of such Arriamnus in his Indian commentaries remembers vs: some bestow the inuention of such vpon the Satires, others affirme that Bacchus by his Orgyan leapings or daunces, brought the Tyrhenians, the Indians and Lidians, all warlike nations, to his subiection: Therefore those that were called Siccinastae, they conferre on him or some of his fellowes and adherents, though the Sicinni were the people of Creete, amongst whom that kind of measure was most celebrated. In what estimation

these were of old, may be easily imagined, when no sacrifice was offered at Delos, but daunces were the chiefe in all their superstitious ceremonies. The Brachmani, a people of India, morning and euening in their adoration of the Sunne, frequently vse them. Amongst the Aechiopians, the Thratians, the Aegyptians, the Scythians, their sacreds are not solemnised without them, as first instituted by Orpheus and Musaeus. Some daunc't in the honour of Mars. The Lacedemonians had them in continuall practise, so likewise the Thessalians: in so much that the most wise Socrates after hee was growne in yeares practised to daunce, and not only gaue such exercises an extraordinarie character of commendations, but numbered them amongst the best sciences. These daunces were not in custome without musicke, especially in their feastiualls and sacrifices; for the boyes or young men went in the first place, some playing vpon harps and pipes, and others selected for the daunces: whose custome was, as they tripped and skipped about the altar, they first proceeded so, that from the left hand they might incline to the right, to obserue the course of the Zodiacke; and againe from the right hand turne to the left, to imitate the motion of the Primum mobile. Pindarus calls Apollo, Orcheste, that is, Salcator, a dauncer. Plato in his first booke de Legam latione, sayth that the first ground of learning proceeded from the works of Apollo and the Muses; holding that man vntutered and ignorant that was not practised in the measures of the Muses, and him accomplisht and best instructed that could tread them with the best agilitie and cunning. By which it may be concluded, that these Choreae were begot by musicke, and fetcht from the very intrails of number vsed in verse (which some of Rithmus, call Rime) and from other Ethick obseruations: therfore some attribute to her the inuention of that which we call Humanitatis Disciplina, wihch signifies, The discipline of humanitie. By the sonne of Achelous shee had the Syrenes (though Fulgentius calls them the daughters of Caliope) and by Mars, Bistone, of whom the countrie is called Bistonia: shee is therefore rankt in the fift place, and sayd, Chorcis delectari, because it is a pleasure and delight to the Auditors, for the benefits they receiued by hearing the mysteries of learning and knowledge manifested and layd open vnto them: as if we should say Terpsichore, is a delight in instruction; or, to take a felicitie to be instructed. Fulgentius will haue Polimnia to take place before her, his reason is, because after inuention or much memorie (which is Polihimnia) it is then necessarie to judge and determine of that which was before deuised and inuented. Cornutus sayth that good men transmit the best and greatest part of their liues in delectation and ioy; or else that they bring pleasure and content to all such with whom they shall conuerse: of which delight this Muse is the patronesse. Others thinke she was so called, because she was so pleasing to the societie of the rest of her sisters: but whence soeuer shee had that name bestowed vpon her, it was neither idle nor vnmomentarie; the fable of this Muse thus much insinuating, That part of the Muses are intentiue onely vpon serious and sollid matters, as Philosophie, the Mathematicks, and the like: the rest vpon recreation, sports, and pastimes. By which the ancients would teach vs, That it is not possible, but hee that hath spent most of his age and studie vpon Calliope and Vrania, but shall in that knowledge be most ioyfull, and filled with all manner of delectation: which pleasure and content they signified by daunces, musick, and banquets.



ERATO.
IN Platos Sanctuaries it is left recorded, that Amor, which is loue, in Greeke called Erota, which is the name of the Muse of whom wee are now to speake (and by him called the voice of Venus) is knowne to be nothing else by such as truely vnderstand, than the desire of beautie; of which Plotinus makes a threefold distinction, it is either in the Mind, begot by vertue, and that is called Venustas, which may extend to a gracefull pleasantnes in speech, or delectable vtterance; or in the Bodie, of the lineaments and colour meeting in the greatest congruitie, and that is called Decus, which is comlinesse or a sweetenesse of proportion; the last is the concordance and pleasantnesse of sounds, which comprehends in it an excellent, though inuisible fairenesse or pulchritude.
This threefold beautie hath three sences subseruient or agreeing; The interior eye of the Mind; The sight of the Bodie; and the Eare, accommodated and apt for the entertaining of sounds. Banisht therefore from the integritie and perfection of Platos loue are all the inflamations of fierie lust, and titillations of vnlawfull pleasure. Euen Socrates, who by the Delphick Oracle was iudged the wisest of his time, profest himselfe a seruant of this loue. In Athens as oft as any sacreds were made to Pallas, so oft were they to the statue of Loue, which was placed in the same Temple. In the popular ceremonies, Loue was honoured of all men. The Lacedemonians (before they affronted or encountered the forteine enemie) made their oblations to Loue, as if hee had the power to giue them both safetie and victorie. The band or companie, which among the Thebans was called Sacred, consisted on Louers, and such as were beloued. They had besides, a schoole or an Accademie dedicated to Loue. Plato in Phedra, proclaimed Loue to bee a god, and miraculous both with gods and men, as it is in his Simposi. Loue is a great god, and wonderfull both to men and gods; and besides many other things, especially for his generation and birth.
Hesiod speaking in his Theogonia, sayth that Chaos was first made, then Earth and Hell next created, and immediately after them, Loue; this is to bee vnderstood in an allegoricall sence, and mysticall and obscured: for he doth not by Loue vnderstand the sonne of Venus, for how can he be borne when his mother was not yet come into the world. We must vnderstand another Loue more ancient, which is significant in the name of this Muse called Erato; therfore Hesiod defines him borne of Chaos and the Earth. Of the same opinion is Diuus Dionisius Arreopagita,Lib. de Diuinis nominibus. for thus he sayth, Loue, whether you tearme it diuine or angellicall or spirituall, liuely, according to creatures, or naturall; you must vnderstand an inherent and commixt vertue which doth insinuate or intice the superior things to the inferiour, which doth reconcile things equall amongst themselues; making them sociable, and equally communicating, and lastly doth pleasantly prouoke such things as are infinite, to be conuerted to matters more sublime and greatlier to be desired; that like things combustible added to fire alreadie kindled, may make them sparkle and burne afresh. Worthie hee is no doubt, who is commended of all men, not onely for the nobilitie of his birth, but the antiquitie of his house, as is obserued from Plato; but great must he needes be of force, to whose Empire both gods and men are subiected.
Hee is besides to bee wondred at for his shape and feature, because euerie

man admires that beautie which he best loues. Lastly, he is to be commended, and Encomiastickes to be sung in his praise, for the vtilitie and profit that ariseth from him. Therefore from those before vs, for his nobilitie: from these present with vs, for his magnitude and potencie: and from those that shall succeede and come afer vs, for the expected vtilitie, this Loue is to be held in great honour and adoration. But the opinion of Ouid doth no way assent with the words of Hesiod, who saith, Nunc Erato and tu nomen amoris habes; deriuing the sonne of Venus from the foresaid antiquitie; by which he would make him much more elder than his mother. But to speake according to the Greeks, it is deliuered vnto vs by them, that Erato was the mother of Thamira, she that was the first Inuentresse of the Amatorious poem (or loue verses.) The Arcadians will not allow Erato in the number of the Muses, onely they giue her the character of a prophetesse, who was married to Archas the sonne of Calisto begot by Iupiter: and that she was the first publisher of Pans Oracles.
Patroclus that commented vpon Hesiod conferres vpon her the inuention of Poesie; but the Poet himselfe sayth, that shee first deuised dauncing: as may appeare by that which I haue before interpreted.

Plectra gerens Erato saltat pede, carmine vultu.

Some of the Greeke authors allow her dauncing, others musicke. Pharnutus writes, that shee was so called from demanding and resoluing, which is (more plainely) from questions and answers, which two are much frequent amongst disputants. Fulgentius deriues her from the inuention of Similies, because that after Science and Memorie, is requisit that we deuise something resembling that which we haue learned. To conclude therefore: Erato is a certaine Loue borne by nature, which the wise men receiued from the gods. Or (to speake according to Ariopagita) a certaine institution by which Socrates, being eleuated, and (as it were) rap't into an higher element, soong and declared his diuine mysteries: before which time (as hee hath of himselfe deliuered) hee was altogether ignorant of things Superior or Inferior, Coelestiall or Infernall. Therefore with Erato I thus conclude, The force of Loue is in all creatures miraculous, but in man especially.


POLYMNIA.
THis Muse purchast to her self the famous and reuerend name of Mother, or one more condigne and excellent, and was of old held in great honor amongst Generalls, Princes, Optimates and Emperours. Her name importing nothing els but Memorie. Themistocles of Athens (as Tully affirmes) had learnt the names of all the cittizens.In Cant. Maior. Cyrus, with no lesse happy retention, hauing an infinite armie, yet knew euery one of his souldiers, and could call him by his proper name. Homer in his Isliads speakes the like of the Arch-duke Agamemnon, who commanded his brother Menelaus, from him to goe to euery particular souldiour in the campe, and by name to salute them. Nicias the Athenian, before he attempted that infortunate nauall battaile against the Syracusans, spake to all the captaines and masters of shippes, not onelie by their owne names, but the names of their fathers, and of their Tribes, exhorting and incouraging them to fight valiantlie; for this Thucidades writes of him, Againe, he called euerie ship-master by his owne and his fathers name, remembring the very tribes from whence they were descended. Many haue excelled in memorie, but

especially the Poet Symonides, of whom I haue thus read, That being inuited by one Scopa (a fortunate and rich man) to a great feast, where a multitude of his acquaintance, friends, and allies were then present, so that all the Tables in his large hall were furnished and thronged with guests, and euerie man had tooke his place, and hee amongst the rest; suddenly a hastie message was brought vnto him, That two young men attended without to speake with him vpon businesse of great vrgence and importance; he presently arose from his seat, but comming to the gate, saw no man: In this interim whilst hee expected them without, the whole structure with the roofe and battlements fell vpon those within and slew them all, not leauing one aliue: onely Symonides by this prodegie escaped. Now when the friends of those that perisht came to the place of slaughter, intending to giue their allies and acquaintance the due rightes of funerall, according to their degrees, but by reason of that confused massacre and multitude of persons there shattered almost to nothing no man could distinguish one from the other: Symonides by remembring in what place euerie man sate (notwithstanding that confusion) distinguisht the bodies and gaue to euerie one his friend and kinsman to giue vnto them their due rights of buriall according as their births or offices in the commonweale deserued. This aproues vnto vs, that order is a cheefe rule in memorie: which Cicero himselfe hath obserued.Lib. 16. Ammianus Marcellinus is of opinion that he strengthned and preserued his memorie with potions, extracted from the juice of diuerse drugges and simples. Most requisite and necessarie is Polyhimnia to all such as shall enter the chappell where the holie things of the Muses are kept. Whether the memorie come by nature or by art, or practise and exercise, who knowes not but all men are retentiue of such things as they are first instructed in, and that by nature: neuerthelesse it is to bee obserued, that children and old men, the first haue not their memories so perfect, the latter, not so full and strong; for being in continuall motion, the braines of the one not ripe, and of the other somewhat decayed, answere not to the vascitie or greatnesse of the bodie, the prime sences being opprest with an vnwieldie and vnprofitable burthen: in those likewise that are fat and full of thicke and grosse humors, the exact formes of things are not so easily dissigned or exprest. Plutarch in his booke of Oracles calls Memorie the Antistrophe is where betweene two things conioined that haue mutuall dependancie, there is a conuersion by course. Antistrophon to Diuination: for things past onely belong to Memorie, and things present are the obiects of the sences. Themistius sayth that the Southsayer deales onely in predictions. And Plato in his Philebus affirmes, That Memorie is neither sence, nor imagination, nor vnderstanding, but an habit or affection of these, with Time added, by which there is made an impression and a spectre or imaginarie fancie left in the soule. Lucian sayth, he that proposeth to himselfe to haue Polymnia propitious vnto him, endeauours to keepe all things in memorie. She is called also Polyhimnia by Horace, a multitudine cantus of the multiplicitie of songs, as Lambinus obserues in his Commentaries.Lib. 1. Carmen. Ouid giues them the same title, as Muretus writes vpon this verse:
Discencere Deae quarum Polyhimnia primaCaepit--
The goddesses were at oddes, of which Polyhimnia first began.
So Virgill:
Nam verum fateamna amat Polyhimnia verum.
--We must confesse it sooth,For Polyhimnia nothing loues but truth.
In many places, and by diuerse Authours, she is sometimes called Polymnia, of Memorie, and againe Polyhimnia of varietie in historie: In the commentarie vpon the Argonauts, she is said to be the mistresse of the Lyre, or harpe. Hesiod giues Geometrie to her, and other of the Greeke Poets, Gramer. Cassiodorus in varijs, intreating of the Comedie, makes her the first inuentresse of Mimick action: and Plutarch in Symposia. of Histories: For (saith he) She is the remembrancer of many. Polymnia therefore, or Polyhimnia, is called Multa memoria, because Memorie is most behoouefull to all such as practise the study of arts and disciplines.


De VRANIA.
FRom Polymnia I proceede to Vrania, and from Memorie we are drawne vp to Heauen: for the best remembrancers, as Pliny saith, comprehend the whole world or vniuerse, in which the heauens are included, and all the secrets therein, as much as by inuestigation can be attaind to, haue the full and perfect knowledge: for the most secret and hidden things, are contained in the Heauens aboue, and therefore such as are expert in them, cannot be ignorant of these lesse and more easie to be apprehended below: Plutarch of Vrania thus speakes: Plato (as by their steppes) hath trac'd all the gods, thinking to find out their faculties by their names. By the same reason we place one of the Muses in the Heauens, and about coelestiall things, which is Vrania: for that which is aboue hath no need of diuersitie of gouernment, hauing one vniuersall directresse, which is Nature: where therfore there be many errors, excesses, and transgresses, there the eight remaining are to be transmitted (and one particular Muse still reserued) one to correct this fault, and another that. Vrania therefore (according to Plutarch) hath predominance in things coelestiall, which by how much they are aboue things terrestriall in excellence, they are so much the more difficult. Some stretch the influence of the starres to Zoriasta's magicke, in which he was popularlie famous, nay more, his name by that art enobled: notwithstanding, the annalls testifie that he was subdued and slaine in battell by Ninus. Pompey the great was curiouslie addicted to these diuinations; yet his potencie fayl'd him, and he dyed a wretched death in Aegypt. Howbeit by these instances it is not to be inferred as the mysticallest and powerfull part of the Mathematicall desciplines. The inuentions of Manilius most indirectlie conferres it vpon Mercury. Plato in Epinomide, would haue all that contemplate Astrologie, to begin in their youth; such is the excellencie of the art, and the difficultie to attaine vnto it: for these be his words, Be not ignorant that Astrologie is a most wise secret: for it is necessarie, that the true Astronomer be not that man (according to Hesiod) that shall onelie consider the rising and setting of the starres, but rather, that hath a full inspection into the eight compasses, or circumferences, and how the seauen are turned by the first, and in what order euery starre mooues in his owne spheare or circle: in which he shall not find any thing which is not miraculous. If therefore the prayse of Astronomy be so great, What encomium then is Vrania worthy, who first illustrated the art? This onelie shal suffice, that by her is meant coelestiall Astrologie, so cald of the Heauen, for (as Pharnutus saith) The intire vniverse, the ancients cald by the name of Heauen. So by this meanes Vrania is acknowledged to be frequent in all sciences below, and speculations aboue whatsoeuer. Her Etimologie importing Sublimia spectantem, that is, Beholding things sublime and high. Of her Ouid thus:
Incipit Vrania fecere silentia cunctae,Et vox audiri, nulla, nisi illa potest.
Vrania first began to speake:The rest themselues prepar'd,To heare with silence, for but hers,No voyce could then be heard.
She is then receiued from the Heauen, either because all nations and languages beneath the firmament, haue some learned amongst them; or that such as are furnisht with knowledge, she seemes to attract and carry vpwards; or, to conclude, because glorie and wisedome eleuate and erect the mind to the contemplation of things heauenlie. Fulgentius saith, That some of the Greeke authours haue left written, that Linus was the son of Vrania: but it is elsewhere found that she was called Vrania of her father Vranus, otherwise stil'd Caelum, whom his sonne Saturne after dismembred. Xenophon in Sympos. remembers, that Venus was called Vrania, speaking also of Pandemius: of both their Temples and Altars, the sacrifices to Pandemius were called Radiouorgaraera; those to Venus, Agnotaera. Some (as Lactantius Placidas) call Heleneuae that menacing star, Vrania. In a word, that coelestiall Muse called Astrologia, or Vrania, intimates nothing else, than after mature iudgement, to deliberate what to speake, what to despise; to make election of what is vsefull and profitable, and to cast off what is friuolous and impertinent, is the adiunct of a mind coelestial, and a wisedome inculpable.Lib. 7. de repub. Most true therefore is the sentence of Plato, who tells vs that Vrania is she that first attracts the eyes of our mind to sublime things aboue, and if it were possible, would drawe our selues after.


CALLIOPE.
THere are two things in the mind chieflie predominant, Knowledge, and Disposition,Plat. in Gor. which as Plato saith, are in continuall and restlesse motion. Knowledge, which by the Sophists vnder a colour of truth, is abused, with things false and erroneous; and Disposition or Affection, which tempted by the popular Poets, vnder a bait of delight and pleasure swallowes the hooke of many perturbations and distractions: those Orators that are meerelie superficiall and not seene in the grounds of wisedome, corrupted; with idle and vaine reasons, they delude the knowledge, and with vnnecessarie curiosities precipitate the affection. From Sophists we must altogether beware, as pestiferous and infectious: from Poets and Orators, in some kinds, but not in all cases. Plato confineth Sophisters euery where and from all places, and Poets too, but not all; such onelie as comment false and scandalous tales of the gods; nor these from all places, but from the citties onelie, that is, from the societie of young men, and such as are ignorant, prone to perturbation, and not capable of the allegoricall sence included: admitting onely such as speake well of the gods, sing diuine Hymnes, and brauelie register the acts of noble and illustrious persons; Such is the practise that Calliope teacheth her Poets: which practise as Ficinus witnesseth, is nothing but the rapture of the soule, with a transmigration into the maiestie of the Muses. This Poesie rouseth vs from the sleepe of the body, to the awaking of the mind, from the darkenesse of ignorance to the light of knowledge, from death to life, and from dull obliuion

to a contemplation diuine and heauenlie: But where the wit failes, there is no helpe to be expected from the inuention, for it is not within the compasse of mans capacitie to compasse deepe and great matters in a moment, for all knowledge is inspired from aboue. And since Poetrie comes not by fortune, nor can be attained to by art, it must consequentlie be a gift from the gods and Muses. For when Plato names the god, he intends Appollo; when the Muses, he vnderstands the soules of the spheares: for Iupiter is the mind of the deitie, who extasies and illuminates Appollo, Appollo the Muses, the Muses the Poets, the Poets inspire their interpreters, the interpreters make impression in the Auditours. By diuerse Muses diuers soules are enlightned, as it is in Tymaeus, that sundry soules are attributed to sundry spheares. The Muse Calliope, is a voyce resulting or rebounding from the sound of the other spheares, and of the rest the most excellent,Lib. 2. Theog. who is not onely a friend of Poets, but the companion of Kings, as Hesiod saith:
Calliopeque and haec excellentissima est omnium,Haec enim and reges venerandos comitatur.
Hee makes her the mother of Orpheus, and to inspire him as Vrania did the Poet Musaeus; Clio, Homerus; Polyhimnia, Pyndarus; Erato, Sapho; Melpomene, Thamyras; Terpsichore, Hesiodus; Thalia, Virgilius; Euterpe, Pub. Ouidius. Thus the nine Muses, who haue reference and hold correspondence with the nine coelestiall sounds, make one harmonie and consent by inspiring nine illustrious Poets: Amongst them Calliope is held to be the most antient. Antient likewise is Poesie, whose inuention is giuen to Calliope, as to the Championesse that defends the standard of the Muses. Besides Orpheus, some say she had two other sons, Ialmus and Hymenaeus, of whom we spake before. Hymenaeus was beloued of Thamiras, who was the first Poetiser of vnchast venerie. She is also said to haue a sonne called Cymothon, by Oeagrus; some also make the Syres the daughters of Calliope, others of Melpomene: Venus (because Orpheus the sonne of Calliope discouered Adonis, whom she had deliuered to Proserpina to be six moneths concealed) gaue him to be lacerated and torne in pieces by the Thracian women. But now to search what was chieflie aymd at by the Poets in this Muse Calliope: It appeares that by her they apprehended the sweetnesse and modulation of song, as taking her denomination a bona voce, of a good and tunable cleere voice; therefore she is called Vox deae clamantis, The voyce of the calling goddesse; from which they gaue her the dominion ouer the persuasiue art of Rhetoricke and Poetrie. The generall tractat of the Muses, ayming onelie at this, That the first thing requisite, is to haue a will to knowledge and learning; the second, to be delighted in that will; the third, to be constant in that wee delight; the fourth, to attaine to that in which wee are constant; the fift, to commemorate that which we haue attained; the sixt, to make similitude and compare what we haue commemorated; the seauenth, to iudge of those likes which we haue made and compared; the eighth, to make elections of such things as thou hast iudged; the last, eloquentlie to speake, and facundiouslie to delate of that thing of which before thou hast made election. So much Fulgentius. And those no doubt that haue long and much exercised themselues in these disciplines, and haue beene the deuout adorers of the Muses, the daughters of Iupiter, and practised themselues as well in the gentler sciences as the hidden mysteries of Philosophie, shall not onelie by their endeauours attaine to the perfection of fame and glorie, but purchase to themselues incredible

ioy, pleasure, content, and delectation.
A word or two of the Muses in generall, and so conclude with them. They are held to be the soules of the Spheares: Vrania, of the starrie Heauen, and of that spheare which is called Aplanes; Polyhimnia, of Saturne; Terpsichore, of Iupiter; Clio, of Mars; Melpomene, of the Sonne; Erato, of Venus; Euterpe, of Mercury; Thalia, of Luna. These eight Muses are referred to the eight Tones of the spheares; from all which Calliope, not till now named amongst them, ariseth and is begot; these being neere to the body that is first mooued, which is said to be next to the seat of the supreame deitie, are said by Hesidus to daunce about the Altar of Iupiter. But because diuerse and sundry are the studies of these Muses, therefore by their influence the minds of mortall men are inspired with sundry and diuerse delectations, which (as the Pythagorians thinke) descend downe vpon them from these spheares. Those ouer whom the Moone hath predominance, participate of the nature of Thalia, and are therefore delighted with comick lasciuiousnesse and wantonnesse. Those whom the spheare of Saturne gouernes, or Polyhimnia, being of a drie and cold temperature, they are wondrous retentiue in the remembrance of things long past. For the dispositions of the mind, and constitutions of the body, haue a consonance to the nature of that planet vnder which they were borne: therefore some are delighted with one study, some another, according to the aspects of the planet. For example, if Mercury be in a good and pleasing aspect, he begets eloquence, facunditie, and elegancie of speech, besides skill and knowledge in many things, but especiallie in the Mathematicks: the same being in coniunction with Iupiter, they are bred Philosophers and Diuines: beeing ioyn'd with Mars in his happy aspect, it makes men skilfull Physitians and fortunate; but in his bad aspect, such as prooue vnskilfull, vnluckie, and sometimes theeues and robbers, which commonlie happens when he is scorcht with the planet of the Sunne. Being in coniunction with Venus, thence proceedes Musitians and Poets; ioyn'd with Luna, warie merchants, and diligent and thriftie husbands; with Saturne, it infuseth men with prediction and prophesie. But let this little serue to illustrate the rest, so from the Muses we come to the Sybells.



Of the SYBELLS.
Lib. 4.ISiodorus saith, that the word Sybilla is a name of place and office, and not of person: It is deriued of Syos, which signifies Deus, God; and Beele, as much as to say, Thought. So that Sybell comprehends a woman that had gods thought: For as a man that prophesieth, is called a Prophet, so a predicting woman is called a Sybill. Of their number the antient writers much differ. Aelianus in his booke De varia Historia thus speakes: There were foure Sybells, Erithraea, Samia, Aegyptia, and Sardinia. Others to these adde six more, to make the number tenne: amongst which are numbred Cymaea, and Iudaea, with the three Bachides, one of Greece, a second of Athens, a third of Arcadia. It seemes he had forgot to reckon the tenth.Lib. 2. cap. 22. Aretine in his booke De aquila volante, agrees with Isiodorus. In the Etimologye of the word, Tanto s^na quanto a dire mente d^uina,

He likewise numbers tenne, the first (saith he) was of Persia, the second of Libia, the third was named Delphita, being borne in the Island of Delphos, and neere to the Temple of Apollo, who prophesied of the warres of Troy; the fourth was called Omeria, and was of Italy; the fift Erythraea, and borne in Babylon; she composed a booke, which in the Greeke tongue was intituled Vasillogra; the sixt was called San^a, or rather Samia, as borne in the Isle Samos; the seauenth Cumana, of the cittie Cuma, whose sepulchre, as Isiodorus writes, is in Sicilie, she brought certaine bookes to Tarquinius Priscus, which spake of the Roman succession, and what should futurelie betide them, prescribing them the Ceremonies to be vsed in their sacrifices; the eight Ellespontiaca, who likewise prophecied of the warres of Troy; the ninth, Phrigia; the tenth and last, Alburnea, who prophecied many things concerning the Sauiour of the world.Lib. 1. cap. 7. And so farre Aretine. The opinion of Iohannes Wyerius in his booke De prastigijs Demonum, is to this purpose, That the diuell in the thea^re of this world might put a face of honestie vpon all those Tragedies which he aym'd to execute vpon mankind, he instituted his Enthusiastae and his Pythe^^ Oracles, which were in vse almost amongst all nations, in so much that their superstitions, and prophanations had crept in amongst the people of god: so that Moyses made a law that all such as repayred to these iugling sorcerists, should be stoned to death. Amongst these are counted some of the Sibells, though not all, as hirelings of the diuell, for the conseruation and confirmation of his kingdome: for out of their bookes the Romans were drawne into many lunacies and frenzies, as (besides many other) it is manifest in Zozimus, who recites many of their verses full of tradition, and superstitions meerelie vnlawfull, though the two Sibells Erythraea and Cumana in heroicke poems prophesied of Christ, and sung and declared his prayses: which as some coniecture, they did by the sight of the prophesies of Esaias and Dauid. These oracles lasted to the comming of our Sauiour, but then surceast through all the parts of the world. There were also a kind of sorcerists, which some call Le^^res; the word importing the spirits and ghosts of such as per^isht before their times, or abortiuelie, for from such they fathered their predictions and prophesies. Of this kind there were many in Germany (as Wyerius relates) who were of long continuance, and such were called Albae mulieres, or the white women, which in their moderne tongue, implies as much as the white Sybells: and this sort of people was ominous to women with child,The white Sibill^. and to infants sucking at their mothers breasts, and in their cradles: These, though in times of old they were most frequent and common, when the world attributed too much to the iugling illusions of the deuill; yet since the Sauiour of the world, and our onelie patron, hath supplanted him by the more pure and feruent preaching of the Gospell; these mockeries and fallacies, by which he cheated the vnlettered multitude of their faith, and god of his honour are meerelie adnichilated, in so much there is scarce left to posteritie the least memorie of their wicked traditions. Of such as these, it seems S. Hierom took especiall notice, when in an epistle writ to Paula vpon the death of Blesilla, he thus speakes, Quae causa est vt saepe Dimuli and Trimuli, and vbera lactantes, etc. i. What is the reason that children of two and three yeares of age, and such as sucke at the breast should be corrupted by deuils? The Ethnicks custome was to giue names to such, according to the diuersitie of their actions: there were some called Hecataea, as sent from Hecate: others by the Italians, Tolle^ae or Empedusae. But this may appeare a digression from our Sybills, therefore I thus proceede with

them.Cap 1. Petrus Crinitus in his twentieth booke De honesta disciplina, speaking of the Sybells, the Branchi, and the Delphick prophetesses, alleadges Gallius, Fir^^anus, Hieronimus, and other antient writers, extracting from their opinions which way and by what means these oracles were imagined to be possest with the spirit of diuination: These of that order (as Plato and Iamblicus, haue learnedlie related) either from the gods or spirits (say they) are inspired with that illumination, by which they discerne the fundamentall causes of things, and can presage and foresee such euents as shall succeede. Iamblic in his booke to Porphirius saith thus, The Sybell of Delphos two seuerall wayes conceiues the spirit by which shee prophesies, either by a soft breath, or else by fire proceeding from the mouth of a certain den or caue; before the entrance of which she seates her selfe vpon a three-footed, or foure-footed stoole of brasse, in which place the diuine power either by whispering in her care, or by some other infused blast inspired into her, giues her the facilitie of vttering her predictions. The Branchae sitting vpon an axeltree, held in her hand a wand consecrated to some deitie or other, and either washt her selfe in some sacred fountaine, or receiued some influence from the vapour of fire, and by this means were made repleate with diuine splendour. These Branchae deriue themselues from Branchus the sonne of Apollo, vpon whom his father bestowed the gift of diuination, to which Statius assents; so Strabo in these verses makes him a Priest of the Temple of Apollo.Mirandula in Himnu.

Phebus, from Branchus axeltree,
His Prophet did inspire:
Who with a thousand Ambages,
Hath set the world on fire.

Colephonius Zenophanes hath denyed, that there can be any diuination at all, but Democritus hath approoued it: of the same argument Chrysippus hath wri^ two bookes, one of Oracles, another of Dreames. Diogines Babilonius, publishe one De diuinatione, Antipater two, Possidonius fiue. Panaetius the scholler of Antipater doubted whether there were any beleefe at all to be giuen to that art or no. Cicero is of opinion, that it hath onelie power ouer such things as happen accidentallie or by chance. Of diuination there be two sorts, one of art, as by the entrails of beasts, or by casting of lots; the other of nature, as by dreames and visions: in both, the coniectures made by vaticinations, aime at more than they can accomplish, and intend further than they can proceede. Further, this art is by the Greekes called Mantices, that is, the knowledge of things to come; the first inuenters thereof were the Aegyptians and Chaldaeans, by their obseruations of the starres. The nations of the Cilici, the Pysidauri, and the inhabitants of Pamphilia neere vnto these, predicted by the singing and flights of birds. The Magi among the Persians had many assemblies of purpose onely to augurate and to diuine: but all such are condemned of ignorance and want of art, who presage meerely by concitation and rapture, without the helpe of reason and coniecture. Sagire signifies to perceiue acutely or sharpely; therefore they are called Sagaces that know much: he that is sayd Sagire, viz. to know, before things come to passe, is sayd Presagire that is to presage. It is called Diuination when it extends to a higher degree of prediction. But when by diuine instinct (as in the Sibells) the minde is as it were transported and extaside in rapture, it is then called Fur^r, or furie. Amongst the Ligurians, a people of Thrace, it was a^custome for their Priests

before they would dema^nd any thing from the Oracle, to glut and gorge themselues with superfluous excesse of wine: The Clarij contrarie to these in their superstitions, vsed to quaffe great quantitie of water. The Diuination that was made by water was called Hydromantia: That which was made by an Axe or Hatchet, was stiled Axinomantia: That which was made by a Skin in which water was moued too and fro (from whence a soft and gentle voice of presage was heard to breath) was called Le^^^omantia: That which did consist of certaine points and markes fixed in the Earth, Geomantia: That which was gathered from Figures and imaginarie shapes shining in the fire, Pyromantia: The Diuination by smoke was called Capnomantia: That which was deriued from skipping shadows in a mirror or glasse, seeming to leape this way or that, Capyromantia: That which was apprehended from Brasse, Aeromantia: That which was begot from a Siue, Coschinomantia: That which came by Lots, Cleromantia: That which was gathered from the Aspect or Countenance, Phisiognomia: The coniecture by the hands, Chiromantia: That which was collected from Hearbes, Batanomantia: That which was apprehended from a great bigbellied Vessell into which children were set to looke and tell what they spide therein, Gastromantia: It is called Augurium or Auguri, from Birds; and Extispicum, from the intrailes of Beasts. Phauorinus vpon Gellius sayth that he would haue no faith nor beleefe at all giuen vnto these Diuinations, arguing in this manner, Either (saith he) they must presage Prosperitie or Aduersitie, and bad or good fortune: If they promise good and faile vs, we are made miserable in our expectation; if prosperitie to come, though it happen in the processe of time, in the interim, time spent in hope of it seemes irksome and tedious; if they prognosticate Aduersities, and lie, yet are wee made wretched in our feares; if Miseries to come, and lie not, wee are first excruciated in our minds before we be once toucht by the hand of Fate, and by that means doubly suffer. Mart. Cappell. will allow but two Sybells, namely, Symachia and Herophila: yet our latter authors approue the number of twelue, of which though briefly we will speake in order.

SIBILLA PERSICA.
SHe was borne in Persia, and is said to be the most auntient of all the rest, and therefore she weares this character, Antiquissium vaticinantium: she is figured with her hand crossing her breast, her eyes sixt vpward, as one contemplating of diuine things, holding a booke in her hand open, as if she had bin latelie reading, and now meditated what she had read: shee prophesied of Christ in this manner, as likewise of the seauen ages.

From Adam vnto Noah (as well appeares)Age 1.
Were a thousand fiue hundred fiftie and six yeares,
To make vp the first age. And from the flood,Age 2.
Two hundred ninetie two, are vnderstood
To Abraham. From him, Israel to freeAge 3.
From Egypt, makes fiue hundred adding three.
Till of King Salomons Temple, the first stoneAge 4.
Be laid, iust yeares foure hundred eighty one.
Age 5.Fourteene and full foure hundred yeares there be
To Babylons distrest captiuitie.
Age 6.The sixt age from that bondage may be seene
To make vp iust six hundred and fourteene:
In which yeare, of a Virgin shall be borne
The Prince of peace, crownd with a wreath of Thorne,
Age 7.Him the seauenth age shall follow, and extend
Till the worlds frame dissolue, and Time see end.

Amalthaea and Marpesia are the names of Sybills, as Tybullus accounts them in his second booke.

Quicquid Amalthaea, quicquid Marpesia dixit,
Heriphile Phoebo grataque quod monuit.


What Amalthaea said, or speake
Marpesia was able:
Or what Heriphile forwarn'd,
To Phoebus acceptable.

Politianus reckons vp diuerse of the Phebaiedes, or Sybells, withall some men skilfull in diuination, in these verses,
--Quad and veteres prompsere SybillaCarmen Amalthaea, etc.
Which I thus interpret.

The antient Sybells did in numbers sing,
Amongst them Amalthaea, who did bring
The verse in vse. Marpesia, rich in fate:
Herophile next her, who doth translate
Her birth from Ida. Sabbe, of knowne skill.
Demo, and Phigo, with Phaennis quill,
Which writ all truth. Carmenta who was held
A matron still: with Manto that exceld.
Pythian, Phoemonoe, who thought it meet,
To make the proud verse stalke on longer feet.
Old Glaucus daughter in this art hath striu'd
To exceede the rest. Deiphoebe longe-li^'d
Marcia, and Bacis. Olle doth adorne
The trayne (iust vnder the Triones borne,)
Lychus most famous i^ the Attid land
Rankt; the Dodonia^ do^es with these must stand.

This Persian Sybell is of such long standing, that it seemes by antiquitie she hath lost her name, neither am I willing further to inquire of her than the writers of the former ages were desirous to leaue recorded to posteritie.



SYBILLA LIBICA.
SHe is by some called Phoemonoe,Plin. lib 20. and held to be the daughter of Apollo, sirnamed Prima. By all antient writers shee hath the honour to be the first that inuented the heroick verse: of her perticular actions much is not left recorded. It is reported of a Prefect whose gouerment was ouer Cilicia, that he gaue no credit at all to these Oracles, and to make proofe whether there was in them any thing worthie admiration, or beleefe, he inscribed a question which he sealed vp (his Aenigma was not known to any saue himself) this letter by one of his freed men whom he best loued and most trusted, hee sent to the Oracle, charging him not to open it till hee had receiued a direct answere to the demand included. The messenger hauing made his Orisons, offered sacrifice, and presented gifts according to the custome of the place, petitioned for an answere to his vnknowne request, and so layd him downe to sleepe by the altar: in the morning being throughly awake, he remembered himselfe of a vision that appeared vnto him; it seemed vnto him that he saw one of the Sybells standing before the altar, who onely spake to him this word, Nigrum, (a blacke) and so vanisht. With this satisfaction he returnes to his lord, and tells him euerie circumstance as it happened, withal, the short answer that he receiued by vision: when the gouernor, vnsealing the paper, discouered only these words written with his owne hand, Album tibi an Nigrum imolabo taurum. i. Shall I sacrifice vnto thee a white bull or a blacke? to which the answere was giuen, a blacke: this euer after better possest him of the Oracles. The first Oracle that was heard,The beginning of Oracles. was by certaine sheapheards, the chiefe of whom was called Coretas, these grasing their flockes in the place where the Temple now stands, heard a sound of certaine words vttered by Diuine instinct; of which at first they tooke small heede, as meerely neglecting them: but when by proofe they found all things to happen punctualy according to the prediction, they gaue a sacred reuerence to the place, which since hath enlarged the fame thereof through all the parts of the world. But concerning this Sybell, Libica her prophesies concerning Christ were somewhat to this purpose.

A King, a Priest, a Prophet, all these three
Shall meet in one: sacred Diuinitie
Shall be to flesh espous'd. Oh who can scan
This mysterie, vniting God with man!
When this rare birth into the world shall come,
Hee, the great god of Oracles strikes dombe.

Plutarch in his booke Oraculorum defunctione relates this historie: Aemilianus the Rhetoritian was the father of Epitherses, a doctor in Grammer, and a man of approued truth and fidelitie; he reports that in his trauell by sea towards Italie, hee happened into a ship laden with merchants goods, and full of passengers of diuers nations: In the euening, being iust against the Echinadae, they failed afore the wind till with an incertaine course they were driuen neere vnto Pa^is, Epitherses with manie of the other passengers being then awake, ^ voice was heard from the Island which (to the admiration of them all) called vpon the name of one Thamus: this Thamus was an Aegyptian, and his name

scarce knowne to any in the ship: twice he was cald, but aunswered not, but at the third summons breaking scilence, these wordes with a loude voice were vttered: Thamus, when thou arrinest at the Palodes, tell them there that the great ^an is dead. Epitherses reported that these words put them into an vniuersall feare: diuerse arguments being held amongst them, and it being long disputed, Whether it were necessarie that this command should be performed, or omitted? But Thamus thus resolued, that if the wind stood faire, he would not alter his course, but passe the Island, but otherwise he would deliuer the message according as he was inioyned. Comming neere the Palodes, their sayles were on the suddaine becalmed, for neither wind was felt to blow, nor tyde or water perceiued to mooue; whith he perceiuing, turned himselfe towards the Island, and made this lowd acclamation, The great god Pan is dead: which words were no sooner vttered, but a great intermixture of howling, yelling and mourning, was heard from the Island, to the infinite amasement of them all. This was done in the presence of so many witnesses, that the rumor thereof spread so farre as Rome, euen to the eares of Tyberius Caesar, by whom Thamus being sent for, he related the circumstance in the presence of the Emperour and many learned men: all which concluded, that this Pan before spoken of, was the same who was held to be the sonne of Mercury and Penelope. The truth is, and agreed vpon by all approoued authours, that at the birth of Christ, all Oracles ceased, and since that time were neuer heard to giue answer vnto any demand whatsoeuer. And thus I take leaue of the second Sybill Phoemonoe.


SYBILLA DELPHICA.
SHe was called Daphne, and said to be the daughter of the Prophet Tyresias: many of whose verses Homer is said to assume to himselfe, and make them his owne. She prophesied of the warres and destruction of Troy. Tyrasius was king of Thebes, who as some say was strucke blind, because he vnawares saw Diana naked, bathing her selfe in a fountaine. Of whom Ouid speakes in Metamorph.Lib. 3.

At pater omnipotens, etc.


Omnipotent Ioue did for his losse of eyes,
Inspire him with the spirit of Prophesies:
Things future to predict, which was (I guesse)
To make his plague seeme in his honour lesse.

Of him Statius likewise speakes in the second booke of his Thebaiedes. Some thinke Daphnis the neateheard, who was the first inuenter of the Bucolick verse, to be her brother;Lib. 10. he (as Sindus and Vollateranus both auerre) was strooke blind because he adulterated a woman in his drunkennesse; the circumstance is so set downe by Aelianus. He was the darling of Mercury, and no sooner borne, but laid out vnder a Lawrell tree; the kine which he fed, were said to be the sisters of the Sunne (for so Homer in his Odissaea relates.) In his flower of youth he was beloued of a beautifull nymph, who grew enamoured of him in Sicilia, with whom he made a couenant, That if euer he cast himselfe into the embraces of any second loue, he desired of the Fates that his eyes might for euer loose the benefit of the Sunne. Not long after, the Kings daughter fell in loue

with him whom, hee vitiated in the heat of his wine, and grew blind soone after. Some make him the inuentor of the Beucolicks, which others confer vpon Stesichorus Himeraeus. But touching Daphne, thus Palephatus in his fabulous Narrations speakes of her: Terra, or the Earth, fell in loue with the flood Ladon, of their mutuall compression Daphne was begot: of her Apollo grew inamoured and layd daylie siege to her chastitie, but shee not able to oppose his importunities, and willing to preserue her virginitie pure and without blemish, petitioned to her mother Earth, That she would againe receiue her (to conceale her from the Sunne) into her bosome, from whence shee at first proceeded: to whose request her mother condiscended, and kept her so long, till from her brest shee sprong out a Laurell tree, whom Phoebus notwithstanding courted,Lib. prim. but in vaine. The manner of her transportation Ouid with great elegancie relates in his Metamorph. Without this Laurell (as some thinke) the Tripos in Boetia (plac't neere the vaticinating caue) cannot be erected. All writers confirme a her Sybell and a Prophetesse, belonging to the Delphian Oracle, howsoeuer the Poets haue fabled. Her prophesie was to this purpose.

An Angell shall descend and say,
Thou blessed Marie haile;
Thou shalt conceiue, bring foorth, yet be
A Virgin without faile.
Three gifts the Chaldaeans to thy sonne
Shall tender, with much pietie,
Myrrhe to a Man, Gold to a King,
And Incense to a Deitie.



SIBILLA CVMAEA.
SHe was called Cimmeria, and was one of Apollo's Priests, borne in Cuma, a citie of Aeolia. Leonard Aretine in his booke de Aquila volante, calls her Omeria,Lib. 2.22. and would deriue her from Italie. Herodotus in his first booke hath left this historie recorded, That Pactias the Persian flying for refuge into the citie Cuma, hee was demaunded thence by Mazares the great generall; but the Cumaeans would not deliuer him vp without aduise from the Oracle. There was in those daies an antient and much adored altar, sacred to Apollo, to which the Aeolaes and the Ionians in all their hesitations repaired for counsell; it was scituate in the Milesian fields, neere to the port called Panormus: to this place were sent men both of birth and trust, to demand from the Cumaeans, Whether Pactias should bee deliuered vnto the Persians? who answered, Let him be surrendered vp: which when the men of Cuma heard, they with a ioynt sufferage concluded to send him thence, and to obey the Oracle. To which decree, Aristodicus the sonne of Heraclius violently opposed himselfe (a man amongst the rest at that time most illustrious) either not giuing credit at all to the answere, or distrusting their fidelitie that brought it: therefore hee himselfe with other of the prime citisens prepared themselues for a second expedition; these repairing to the Branchidae or Priests, of which this Cumaea

was one; Aristodicus humblie kneeling before the altar, thus bespake Apollo, Pactyas the Lidian (oh king, and god) to shunne a violent death, gaue himselfe into our patronage, the Persians redemaund him of the Cumaeans; we, though we feare not their forces, yet dare not surrender vp a suppliant to death, who hath tendred his safetie into our hands, till wee heare from thee what in this destraction is most fit to be done. To these words, the Priest as from Apollo returned this answere: Let Pactias be deliuered vp to the Persians. This done, Aristodicus it seemes not well pleased to betray the life of his friend, surueying the Temple round, he spyde where sparrows and other small birds had builded their neasts, who taking away their young was about to depart the Temple: when instantly was heard from the altar, the sound of a voice thus speaking; Oh thou most wicked of men, what arrogant boldnesse hath so far possest thee that thou presumest to take hence my suppliants, and such as I haue taken to my protection? at which words Aristodicus returning, made this free and bold answere, Doest thou (oh king) succour and protect thy suppliants, and commandest vs to betray the life of Pactias to the Persians?
Some haue cauelled with these Oracles that their verses haue bin harsh, and not in smoothnesse of stile or elegancie of phrase to be compared with those of Hesiod or Homer: to which may be answered, We are sicke with the disease of the Eare and the Eye; let vs not blame a Pythian Prophetesse because shee sings not so sweetly as Glauce the mynstrell, nor appears in her heire perfumed with pretious vnguents, and her selfe ietting in Tyrian purple; when the Sybel vtters her diuinations with a troubled braine, and a destracted countenance, her words harsh and vnpleasant, as not rellishing laughter, delight, or ornament; for such things are least pleasing to vs in shew that are most beneficiall to vs in proofe, Voluptatem enim, non admittit quod integrum and castum, That admits no pleasure which of it selfe is perfect and chast. Besides, these were answeres to be leasurely writ, not suddenly spoake; studied with long meditation, and not extemporall; it is probable, that they in sweetenesse and smoothnesse might equall if not exceede the facunditie of the former: neither is it the sound, the voice, the language, or the number or meeter of the god himselfe, but of a woman, and she too extaside in spirit, and rauisht with a diuine furor. These shall suffice for Sybilla Cumaea, I will only conclude with her Prophesie.

Th'antient of daies, shall then submit to time,
The maker yeild himselfe to new creation:
The deitie and Godhead most sublime,
Take shape of man, to ransome euerie nation:
Die, to make others liue, and euerie crime
Committed, from the round worlds first foundation,
Take on himselfe: as low as Hell descending
To winne man Heauen, vpon his grace depending.




SIBILLA SAMIA.
SHe is called Erophile, or Hierophile, taking the name of Samia from the Isle Samos where she was borne.She was deriued from Iupiter and Lamia the daughter of Neptune. Simon Grinaeus in his annotations vpon Iustin, thus saith, That this continent is likewise called Samothracia, because it buts so neere Thracia; in that place was Pythagoras the Philosopher borne, with one of the Sybells, stiled Samia. The Island is dedicated to Iuno, because as they beleeue, there Iuno was borne, brought vp, and espoused vnto Iupiter. Heraclides in Politijs saith, That it was first a sollitude or desert, onelie inhabited by wild beasts, amongst which were the Neides first seene in that wildernesse. It was once called Parthenia, after that Driuse; there Ancaeus raigned, of whom came the Prouerbe first, Multa cadunt inter, etc. Many things fall between the cup and the lip. In this Island haue bin seene white Swallowes, as great in body as a Partridge. In this place flourisht Aesop, where he first publisht his Fables; and Theagines Samius, after, the scholler of Euripides. Plut. in Quaest. Graecis, relates, that when any sacrifice was offered to Mercurius Charidota (which is as much as to say, Munificent) it was lawfull for any to steale and catch away each others garments: because that hauing by the command of the Oracle left their owne countrey, and were forced by shifting into Micale, there to liue by rapine and theft; that time being expired, and at their returne, by vanquishing their enemies, being possest of their owne inheritance, in remembrance of their former confinement, they haue obserued that custome. Of this Sybells particular actions, much hath not beene commended to posteritie: onely of her person, that such a one there was; and of her prophesie, which was thought to be this:
The world shall to six thousand yeares aspire,By water once, but then destroyd by fire:The first two thousand void: the next, the Law;The last two, vnder the Messias awe.And as repose by Sabbaoth is exprest,Sunne, Moone, and Starres, all things shall then haue rest.
It is likely, and may be coniectured, that she came to the light of Elias prophesies, for in the like manner he distributed the world, diuining of the continuance of mankind, and the change of times: the first two thousand yeares he called Tempus inane, which may be thus interpreted, because the many regions of the earth were not fullie inhabited, Babylon not yet built, and diuers spatious prouinces vndiscouered: or else because the polliticke estate of the Church was not yet visiblie established, and separated from other nations: For then were no Empires extant, which after were apparant in the Monarchies. Yet doubtlesse it is, that the first age was the golden and most flourishing; because the nature of man was then most potent and vigorous, as may appeare by their longeuitie, liuing so many hundred yeares: moreouer, it bred many wise old men, full of the diuine light, that spake of God, of the Creation, and were witnesse of the arts and sciences. The second times was numbered from the Circumcision to Christs comming in the flesh, and being borne of a Virgin; which conteiues little lesse than two thousand yeares, and that is vnder the

Lawe. The third Time, if it reach not to the full number to equall the former, it is for our sinnes, which are many and great, for which mankind shall be the sooner destroy'd, and Christ for his elect sake will hasten his iudgement.


SYBILLA CVMANA.
SHe was likewise called Amalthaea. Hyginus in his second booke speakes of Amalthaea,Cap. de Heniacho. that gaue sucke to Iupiter in his infancie; his historie he deriues from Parmenesius, and relates it thus: There was a certaine King of Creete called Mellisaeus, to whose daughters young Iupiter was sent to be nursed; but they wanting milke, brought vnto him a goat called by that name, which gaue him sucke. This goat was so fruitfull, that she euer brought forth two kids, and was then newlie eased of her burden, when Iupiter was brought thither to be fostred. In gratitude of which good done to him, he after translated her and her kids amongst the stars which Cleostratus Tenedius first obserued. Musaeus reports otherwise, That Athemides and Amalthaea were two nurses, to whom the charge of Iupiters infancie was committed, both beautifull Nymphes: Amalthaea hauing a goat whom she much loued,Lib. 1. and with whose milke she brought him vp. Palephatus in his fabulous narrations speakes of the Horne of Amalthaea, which Hercules still boare about him, which was of that vertue that it still supplyed him with all necessaries whatsoeuer: from which grew a Prouerbe, That all such as were supplyed without complaining of want, were said to haue the Horne of Amalthaea; the history is thus. Hercules trauelling through Boeotia to visit his nephew Iolaus, soiourned by the way for a season amongst the Thespians, where liued a woman of approued beautie and vertue, called Amalthaea; with whose feature Hercules being much delighted, he hosted there longer than his purpose, which Iolaus taking ill, Amalthaea out of a horne in which she had hoarded some quantitie of money, furnisht Hercules with all things needfull: which some strangers taking especiall notice of, they rumord it abroad, and from thence first grew the Prouerbe. But to returne to our Amalthaea Cumana: This was she by whose conduct Aeneas had free passage into hell, as Virgill expresseth at large in his sixt booke. She brought to Tarquinius Priscus those three bookes of Prophesies,Valer Max. lib. 8. cap. de Senc. of which two were burnt, and one preserued. By which computation comparing the time betwixt Aeneas and Tarquin, she could liue no lesse than fiue hundred yeares; nor is it altogether incredible, since when Liuia the daughter of Rutilius, Terentia of M. Cicero, and Clodia of Aulus, the first liued ninetie seauen yeares; the second, a hundred and thirtie; the third, a hundred and fifteene after the bearing of fifteene children. Gorgias Leontius (the tutor of Isocrates and many other learned men) in the hundred and seauenth yeare of his age, being asked, Why he desired to liue any longer? answered, Because he felt nothing in his body by which to accuse age. Herodotus, Pliny, Cicero, and others, speake of one Arganthonius Gaditanus, who raigned fourescore yeares, being sixtie yeares of age before he came to his crowne. Solynus and Ctesias with others, auerre, that amongst the Aethiopians a hundred and thirty yeares is but a common age, and many arriue vnto it. Hellanicus testates that the Epians, a people of Aetolia, attained to two hundred: whom Damiates exceedes, naming one Littorius that reached to three hundred: the like we reade of Nestor. I will conclude with Dondones, whom Pliny affirmes suruiued fiue hundred yeares, yet neuer stooped with age. More liberallie

speakes Zenophon, who bestowes on one of the Latin Kings eight hundred, and six hundred vpon his father: but I will forbeare further to speake of her age, and come to her Oracle.

Vnto the Assyrian Monarchy,Monarch. 1. we assigne
One thousand yeares, two hundred thirty nine.
When thirty six successions shall expire,
The last, his glories pompe shall It ended in Saraanap. who burnt himselfe, his concubines and iewells. end in fire.
Thence to the Meades it transmigrates, and they
Shall in nine full successions beare chiefe sway:
Three hundred yeares shall memorise their deeds,
Wanting iust eight.Monarch. 2. The Persian then succeedes
In th'vniuersall Empire: which must last
Fourteene Kings raigns, and then their sway be past
Ouer to Greece:Monarch. 3. but ere their light blow out,
Two hundred fiftie yeares shall come about,
Adding fiue moneths. The Monarchy now stands
Transferd on Macedonia:Monarch. 4. who commands
The world, but Alexander? by him is guided
The spatious earth, but in his death diuided
Amongst his captaines: Macedon one ceaseth,
Asia another, Syria best pleaseth
A third, Aegypt a fourth: thus lots are cast,
Two hundred eighty eight their pompe shall last,
And then expire. Great Rome shall then looke hye.
Whose proud towers from 7. hills shall bra^e the skye,
And ouerlooke the world. In those blest dayes,
Shall come a King of kings, and he shall raise
A new plantation: and though greater farre
Than all the Monarches that before him are,
In maiestie and power: yet in that day,
So meeke and humble, he shall daine to pay
Tribute to Caesar: yet thrice happy he,
That shall his subiect or his seruant be.

After the death of Alexander, the kingdome of Macedonia was successiuelie inioyed by fifteene Kings, and indured a hundred fiftie seauen yeares and eight moneths. Asia and Syria were gouerned by nineteene Kings, and lasted two hundred eightie nine yeares. Aegypt was possest by tenne Ptolomies, and lastlie by Cleopatra; and it continued two hundred eightie eight yeares. These Kingdoms fayling, the Romans gained the chiefe predominance. Of this Sybell S. Isiodore, Virgill, and Ouid writ more at large; she writ her Prophesie in leaues of trees, and then plac't them ouer the Altar, which when the wind mooued, or made to shake, they had no efficacie, but when they remained firme and without motion, they receiued their full power and vertue: therefore Dante the famous Italian Poet thus writes:
Come la neue al sole se distilla,Cosi, al vento nelle foglie leue,Si perdea la sententia de Sibille.
I cannot here pretermit Ouids expression of this Sybell: who when Aeneas (hauing receiued from her that great curtesie to enter hell, and to come safe thence, and for that would haue sacrificed to her, done her diuine adoration) she thus answered him.

Nec dea sum dixit, nec sacrifuris honore, etc.


I am no goddesse (goddesse sonne) 'tis true,
Nor are these diuine honours to me due:
I had beene such, and darknesse not haue seene,
Had I a prostitute to Phoebus beene.
For whilst he courts my loue, and day by day
Hopes with large gifts, mine honour to betray:
Aske what thou wilt, oh bright Cumaean maide,
It shall be granted thee, Apollo said.
I, willing that my dayes should euer last,
Prostrate vpon the earth, my selfe I cast,
And graspt as much dust as my hand could hold;
Let me then liue (said I) till I haue told
So many yeares, as there are bodies small
Lockt in this hand. The god could not recall,
Nor I vnsay; I had forgot in truth,
To insert in my rash boone, All, yeares of youth.
Euen that too, to haue yielded to his will,
I might haue had: but I am virgin still
Haue to this houre remaind, my happier dayes
Are all forespent, Decrepit age now layes
His weake hand on me, which I must endure
Long time to come: seauen ages I am sure
Are past, nor shall my thread of life be spuune
Vntill the number of these sands be runne.
The houre shall be, when this my body here,
Shall small or nothing to the sight appeare,
(This, time and age haue power to doe) and when
I shall not louelie seeme, as I did then:
Nay doubtlesse) Phoebus will himselfe deny
That e're he cast on me an amorous eye.
Saue by my voice, I shall no more be knowne,
But that the Fates haue left me as mine owne.

Ouid hath fabulated, that she was changed into a Voyce, the word Sybilla importing Vox. She prophesied much of the Roman warres, and the successe of their Empire.


SIBILLA HELLESPONTICA.
SHe hath the denomination of Marrinensis, and as most Authours affirme, deriues her selfe Ex agro Troiano, from Troy in Asia. She sung of the warres betwixt the Troians and the Greekes. I will be briefe with her, because I feare I haue beene too tedious in the former: her Prophesie of Christ, I

haue included in these few lines.

When Atlas shoulders shall support a starre,
Whose ponderous weight he neuer felt before,
The splendour of it shall direct from farre
Kings, and Wisemen, a new light to adore,
Peace in those dayes shall flourish, and stearne warre
Be banisht earth, lost mankind to restore.
Then shall the Easterne Monarches presents bring,
To one, a Priest, a Prophet, and a King.
And so much for Sybilla Hellespontica.



SYBILLA PHRIGIA.
SHe was called Vates Ancirrae, and as most will haue it, this was Cassandra the daughter of King Priamus and Hecuba: their femall issue are thus numbred, Cre^sa, Cassandra, Ilione, Laodice, Lycaste, Medesicastis, Polixena, Climene, Aristomache, Xenodice, Deimone, Metioche, Pisis, Cleodice, and Medusa. Amongst which, she onelie attained to the spirit of Prophesie, and predicted of the destruction of Troy; but her Augurie was neuer credited. Appollodorus, as also Higinus giues this reason: Appollo inflamed with her beautie, promist if she would prostitute herselfe to his pleasure, he would inspire her with the spirit of Diuination, which he accordinglie performed; but she failing in her promise to him, he in reuenge of that iniurie caused that her Prophesies, howsoeuer true, should neuer haue credit; which makes her in her diuination thus complaine:
The world to Troy I fitlie may compare,Erected first by Neptune, and the Sonne:These two, the aptest Heirogliphicks are,For water, and for fire. The buildings donne,Lao^edon, their right the gods denyes:For which, by water Troy was first destroid:So was the world for mans false periuries,In the great Deluge, where but eight inioydThe benefit of life. Troy happy wereIf it by water could forewarned be;So were the world^ but oh, too much I feare,In their like fatall ruin they agree.Troy must be burnt to ashes (woe the while)My mother in her wombe conceiu'd a brand,To giue it flame: he that shall many a mileTrauell by water, to bring fire to land.Lust is the fuell: Lust and other sinnes,Are the combustible stuffe, will bring to noughtThe worlds great fabricke, since from them beginsAll desolation, first to mankind brought.The world like Troy must burne: they both beforeSuffered by water, so they must by fire.We Prophesie these things: what can we more?But after our predictions, none inquire,Vnlesse in scorne. This doth Cassandra greeue,To speake all truth, when none will truth beleeue.
The better to illustrate this Oracle, know that Laomedon, about to build the walls of Troy, borrowed much coine of the Priests of Neptune and Phoebus to accomplish the worke, vpon promise of due payment when the walls were finished: But breaking his faith and denying restitution of those summes lent, the gods inraged at his periurie, Neptune brought vp his waues so high that he in a deluge vtterly destroied the citie; whilst Apollo by the scorching of his beames made the vpper countries barren. For the burning of Troy, it happened after the ten yeares siege; elaboratly described by Virgill in his Aeneidos, when Aenaeas discourses the whole desolation of the citie, to Dido: in which he speakes of the prince Chorebus to bee much inamoured of Cassandra, who rescued her when shee was dragd by the haire from Apollo's altar, and was slaine in the attempt. The death of Cassandra is thus reported by Hyginus in Fabulus: When the spoiles and prisoners of Troy were diuided amongst the Princes of Greece, Cassandra fell by lot to the archduke and generall Agamemnon, with whom he safely arriued in Mycene, of which place he was king and gouernour. But Clitemnestra, the daughter of Tindarus sister to Hellen and wife to Agamemnon, being before their landing possest by Oeaces (or as some call him Cethus) the brother of Palamides, that Cassandra was the prostitute of Agamemnon, and had supplanted her from his loue (which lie he had forged, to be reuenged of the Generall, for his brothers death before Troy:) Clitemnestra therefore surprised with iealosie, complotted with Aegistus the sonne of Thiestas, to murder them both the first night they lodged in the Pallace, which was accordingly performed; but Electra the daughter of Agamemnon, stole thence her brother Orestes, then but an infant (who else had perished with his father) and conueyed him to be safe kept to one Sihophius of Phocis, who had before bin married to Astichaea the sister of Agamemnon; he brought him vp to manhood, till Orestes found fit oportunitie to reuenge himselfe on the two Regicides, his mother and Aegistus.


SIBILLA EVROPAEA.
SHe is said to be Incertae patriae, as no man knowing from what perticular region to deriue her, and therefore is knowne by no perticular name, nor by the antient Historiographers numbred amongst the ten* only amongst the twelue she hath place, as may appeare by this her Prophesie,
When the great King of all the world shall haue,No place on Earth, by which he can be knowne:When he that comes all mortall men to saue,Shall find his owne life by the world orethrowne:When the most just, iniustice shall depraue,And the great judge be judged by his owne;Death when to death a death by death hath giuen,Then shall be op't the long shut gates of Heauen.


SIBILLA TIBVRLINA.
IT seemes she deriues her selfe from the riuer Tiber; she is otherwise called Albunaea, of the cittie Alba, (which was erected before Rome) as also Italica, and by some Alburnea. It is reported that the Romans (going about to deifie Augustus Caesar) demaunded aduise of this Sybill, who after three daies fast, standing before the altar, where the Emperour himselfe was then present, after many hidden words miraculously spoke concerning Christ, vpon the sudden Heauen opened, and Caesar saw a beautifull Virgin standing before the Altar, who held in her armes as louely an infant; at this apparition Caesar afrighted, fell on his face: at which instant was heard a voice as from Heauen, saying, This is the altar of the Sonne of God. In which place was after built a Temple dedicated to the Virgin Marie, and called Ara Caeli. i. The altar of Heauen. This Policronicon affirmes, and for the truth thereof citeth saint Augustine lib. 18. cap, 24. There is little more remembered of her life, sauing, that in her bookes she prophesied of the comming of the Sauiour of the world much after this manner:
Seuen wonders of the world haue bin proclaimed,But yet a greater than these are, not named.The Egyptians high Pyramides, who seem'd1 Wond.To meet the starres, a worke once much esteem'd.The Tower of Pharos. The miraculous wall2 Wond.That Babylon begyrt. The fourth, wee call3 Wond.Diana's Church in Ephesus; Fame sings4 Wond.'Thad fix and thirtie Pillers, built by kingsAs many. Next to these, Mausolus Tombe;5 Wond.Than which, the Earth supporteth on her wombeNo brauer structure. Next to these there wasThe huge Colossus that was cast in Brasse,6 Wond.Of height incredible, whom you may espye,Holding a lampe fiftie seauen cubits hye.Bestriding an huge riuer. The seuenth wonder,7 Wond.Was of great Ioue that strikes with trisulck thunder:His Statue caru'd in Yuorie, and contriu'dBy Phideas, the best workeman then suruiu'd.What at these trifles stands the world amaz'd?And hath on them with admiration gaz'd?Then wonder, when the troubled world t'appease,He shall descend, who made them that made these.
Of these Wonders briefly, to make her diuination the more plaine. Of these Pyramides there were diuerse,That 60000 men were 20 yeares in building. of which the greatest tooke vp eight acres of ground, parted into foure angles, each equally distant eight hundred eightie foot, and in heigth twentie fiue. A second, foure angles, euerie one containing by euen spaces seuen hundred thirtie and seuen foot. A third, comprehended three hundred sixtie three foote betwixt euerie angle. A fourth, errected by Rhodope the strumpet, the mistresse of Aesop, by the money which she got by her trade. Herodotus speakes of a Pyramis made by Cleopys king of Aegypt, of stones fetcht from Arabia, whose length was fiue furlongs, the breadth ten paces. He erected a second more magnificent, which was not finisht in twentie yeares, vpon which he spent so much treasure, that hee was forc't to prostitute his daughter, a most beautifull young virgin, to supply his owne necessitie. Pliny reports, that in this structure he impolyed so many workemen, that they eate him 1800 talents in onyons and garlicke. 2. The tower of Pharos, built by Ptolomaeus, in that Isle, which serued as a lanthorne to direct nauigators by sea in the night: he spent vpon it 5300 Talents: Sostrata was the Architectour, as appeares by the inscription of his name vpon the Cittadell. 3. The wals of Babylon were built by Semiramis, they were (as Hermodorus writes) in thicknesse fiftie cubits, in heighth two hundred, within the compasse of which were an hundred Ports, hauing brasen gates, that all moou'd vpon hinges; they were beautified with three hundred Turrets, and Chariots might meete vpon the toppe of them, and haue free passage without impediment. 4. The Temple of Diana, of which I haue spoken before, was in length 425 foote, in breadth 220: It was beautified with 127 Collumns. 5. The tombe of Mausolus, built by Artimesia queene of Caria, was in height 25 Cubits: it was compast with 36 collumns: it contained from the South to the North 33 foote, the whole compasse contained 1411; That part which lay towards the East, was perfected by Scopas; that which was towards the North, was ended by Briax; that towards the Meridian, by Tymothaus; that which butted vpon the West, by Leocares. 6. The Colossus of the Sun, which bestrid the riuer Rhodes (betwixt whose legges shippes without vailing their top sailes came into the harbour) was of that vastnesse, that a man with his spread armes could not compasse his thumbe, euery finger being as bigge as a common statue. After it had stood six and fiftie yeares it was emolisht by an earthquake. The Souldan of Aegypt hauing inuaded Rhodes, with the broken brasse thereof laded thence 900 cammells. The chiefe workeman was Chares Lindius, the scholler of Licippus. 7. The image of Iupiter, to which some equall the pallace of Cyrus king of the Meades, built by Memnon, the stones of which were simmented together with gold. But I leaue further to speake of these, and proceed to the next Sybill.



SIBILLA AEGYPTIA.
SHe was called Agrippa, not numbered amongst the tenne, but hath place amongst the twelue, she prophesied vpon the number of Three, and on this manner:
Sacred's the number Three (as Sybells tell)Betwixt three brothers, the Heauen, Sea, and Hell,Were cast by lot. The Earth, as all men writeIn their diuisions, is called Tripartite.Ioue, three waies striking, hath his Trisulc Thunder,Neptun's allowd his Trident, to keepe vnderThe mutinous waues. Three fatall sisters spinneOur thread of life. Three Iudges punish sinne.Euen monsters are described so. Gerion wearesThree heads: Grim Cerberus as many beares.Sphinx hath three shapes, of Bird, of Beast, of Maid,All three, in wings, in feete, in face, displaid.Chimaera is Triformd: the monstrous creatureScilla's of dogges, fish, and a womans feature.The Erynnaes, Harpyes, Gorgons, three-fold allThe Sybells As diuining three sundrie waies. Trifatidicae we call,Diuining from the Tripos. Orpheus Lyre,Sings, that 'twas made of water, earth, and fire.Three Charites, three Fates, three Syrens bee.Number the Muses, they are three times three.She's triple-Hecat's cald. Diana stilde,Triuia. The ground of Musicke was compildBut on three Chords at first, and still exprestBy voice, by hand, by breath. In the Meant naturall Philosophie. Phisicks restThree principles, God, World, and Creature fram'd.Creator, Parent, Issue, these are nam'dIn all production. Into Three we castMans age: two legges, next three, then foure at last.Phisitians three things to obserue are sure,First to preserue, preuent, and then to cure,Three gouernements are famous in Romes state,That of the Tribunes, and Triumuirate.Three sorts of people they distinguish can;The Senat, Souldior, and the common Man,In the taking height of starres, w'obserue these Three,First Distance, then the Forme, next Qualitie.But which of vs obserues that sacred Tryne,Three persons in one Godhead sole diuine.That indiuiduall essence who dares scan,Which is, shall be, and ere the world began,Was in eternitie? When of these Three,One of that most inscrutable Trinitie,The second person, Wisedome, shall intombeAll maiestie within a Virgins wombe.True Man, true God, still to that blest Trine linckt,True light shall shine, and false starres be extinct.


SIBILLA ERYTHRAEA.
SHe is the twelfth and last, borne in Babylon, of the Assirian nation, and daughter to Berosus a famous Astrologian. She writ in Greeke a booke called Vafillogra, which some interpret, Penalis scriptura, which as Eugenius in his Res de Sicilia testates, was transferred into Latin. She prophesied of all the Greekes that came to the siege of Troy, designed the places whence, and how long they should continue there. In those bookes she speakes of Homer, and that he should write of those wars partially, according to his affection and not truth. In the same volume she prophesied of Christ, after this manner:
The times by the great Oracle assignd,When God himselfe, in pittie of mankind,Shall from the Heau'n descend and be incarnate,Entring the world a lambe immaculate;And as himselfe, in wisedome, thinkes it meete,Walke in the earth on three and thirtie feet,And with six fingers: all his subiects then,Though a king mightie, shall be fishermen,In number twelue: with these, warre shalbe trideAgainst the diuell, world, and flesh; their pride,Humilitie shall quell, and the sharpe swordWith which they fight, shalbe the sacred Word,Establisht vpon Peter, which foundationOnce layd, shall be divulg'd to euerie nation.
The onely difficultie in this prophesie is Trentra tre piede, which signifies thirtie three yeares: and Mese dito, six fingers, intimating the time of six moneths. And thus I take leaue of the Sybells.




Of the Virgins VESTALLS.
FEnestella in his booke intituled de Sacerdotijs Romanis, proposeth Numa Pompilius to bee the first that deuised the forme of this Vestall adoration:Fenest. lib de Sacerdot. c. 6. though the first institution thereof was held to be so antient, that Aeneas transferred it from the Troians to the Albans; as Virgill witnesseth in these words:Virgill lib. 2. Eneid.
--Vestamque potentem.Aeternumque aditis adfert penetratibus ignem.
To this goddesse Vesta (whom some call the Earth, others the Mother of the gods) Fire perpetuallie burning, was consecrated: and to this obseruation and coustome, certaine virgins pickt out of the noblest families were chosen, as directors and chiefe ouerseers of that Order; by whose negligence if by chance at any time that sacred Fire was extinguished, thier iudgement was to bee beaten to death with strokes by the hand of the chiefe Priest or Flamin. Valerius Maximus reports that the same judgement was executed vpon the same negligence, by P. Licinius Crassus then in the high Priesthood. All such as were found guiltie of incest were condemned to bee buried aliue: nor was it lawfull (as Labeo Antistius writes) for any vnder six yeares, or aboue ten, to be admitted into that seruice; besides, she must not be the onely child of her father and mother, neither must shee haue a lisping or stammering tongue, bee deafe of her eares, nor marked with any blemish about her bodie; neither such an one whose parents, one or both, haue liued in seruitude, or haue bin conuersant in any base offices; neither such a one whose sister hath beene elected into the Priesthood: all these are excused from the seruice of Vesta: neither she who^e father is a Flamin, a South-sayer, or one of the Decemuirie in the sacrifices, or of the Septemuirate in the banquets. There is likewise a dispensation with the daughters of kings, and priests, as vncapable of this ministerie: neither can that mans child be admitted that hath not a knowne house and an abiding place in Italie, for so Capito atteius writes: so likewise the children of all such are restrained, as haue the number of Three, or more. By the edict of the Praetor, that no Virgin Vestall or Dialis which belongs to the sacrifices of Iupiter shall be compelled to any thing; these be the words of the Praetor by the mouth of the crier: Through all my iurisdiction I wil not vrge or force an oath from the Vestall Virgins, nor from the Flamin Dialis: in the chusing of the Vestall these things were obserued. There is a caution by the law called Lex P^pia, That by the approbation of the chiefe Priest, and by his special appointment, twenty virgins were selected out of the people: but this ordinance with many other were abrogated and abolisht by Time, in so much that it was sufficient, if any of free parents and honestlie descended, petitioned or made meanes to the high Priest, she might without more difficultie enter her oath, and be admitted into the sacred order; being receiued by him as one snatcht and taken violently from the hands of her enemies. The words he vsed were these, This vestall Priest, whom I enter into this holy office, according to the

institution of the best law, I receiue by the name of Amata, to make her intercessions for the Nobilitie and people of Rome. It was a custom to admit them all by the name of Amata, because she that was first chosen by king Numa was so called; and with these ceremonies shee was as it were hurried to the Temple of Vesta. In Labeons commentaries it is thus found recorded, The Vestall virgin is incapable to be made heire of any man or woman that dies intestate: her goods likewise after her death returne to the common treasurie. Pomponius Latus in his booke de Sacerdotijs, agrees with Fenestella, That Aeneas first brought the Vestal fire from Troy into Italy: and Lauinium being built, he there erected a Temple to her honour. After this, Ascanius consecrated another in a part of the hill Alba: beneath which, or at the foote thereof, was a thick groue, in which Mars vitiated Illia the mother of Romulus. These Ministers of Vesta were tied to an oath of perpetuall virginitie: for it was a custome amongst the Latines, to make choice of the most noble and chast virgins. After many yeres Romulus deuised all the chast ceremonies belonging to that Order: and as Varro declares to vs, created three score Priests to those publique seruises, selected by their Tribes and Families, but of the most noble and vnblemisht stocks amongst the Romans. The temple of Vesta is built round, and is scituat betwixt the Capitoll and the Pallace: in this is kept the perpetuall Fire; for the Etimologie of Vesta is nothing else, but purus ignis, i. pure Fire. Some are of opinion that in that Temple are kept the remenbrances of many both sacred and secret monuments, some strange and vnknowne euen to the Priests and Virgins. Some speake of two toonnes of no great quantitie, the one continually shut, the other open and emptie: some of the Virgins haue reported that the Palladium that fell from Heauen and was receiued into Troy, is there still to be seene. The first Virgins appointed by Numa, were foure, Gegania, Berenia, Camilla, Tarpeia,Gegania. Berenia. Camill. Terpeia. two others were added by Seruius Tullius. Their vowes of virginitie were vnalterable for thirtie yeares. In the first ten yeares, they were to learne the ceremonies, and to be as ministers and handmaides: in the rest she was to gouerne and instruct others; and the thirtie yeares expired, she had libertie (if she pleased) to marrie. If any of these Vestalls had wantonly offended, she was to bee chastised by the Priest: but such as were found incestuous, were punished after this manner, Being first bound she was laid vpon a beere, like a coarse alreadie deceased, and so carried through the midde Forum to the port or gate called Collina, for there betwixt two walls, is the graue of the vnchast Vestalls still apparant: there is a caue hollowed vnder the earth, the descent is with a ladder by the mouth, which is of no great widenesse; in this vault is a bed readie prepared, a light burning, with bread, milke, and oyle: these things being all made readie for the purpose, the delinquent is set downe, her bands loosed, and her head couered, the high Priest whispering certaine secret things in her eare, the other priests turning their faces from her, which is no sooner done, but shee is let downe into the cauerne, earth throwne vpon her, the graue filled, and shee stifled aliue; and that day on which this execution is done, there is a generall silence and sadnesse through the whole cittie.


OPPIA.
SHe was one of the Vestall virgins: who being taken in whordome, and the fact manifestlie prooued, she was conuented, conuicted, and had her doome to bee buryed aliue. Vpon whom Strozzafilius inscribed this Epitaph:
Vestalis virgo laesi damnata pudoris,Contegor hoc viuens Oppia sub tumulo.I Oppia, once a Vestall, thatFor sinne my iudgement haue:Condemn'd for lust, am liuing shutAnd couered in this graue.
Claudia.Claudia. There were two of that name, as Liuy in his 22 booke reports, who were addicted to the ceremonies of Vesta.
Fonteia was the sister of Marc. Fonteius,Fonteia. who being a Prefect or gouernour amongst the Galls, was accused before the Senat of iniustice and misgouernment, as transgressing the lawes and edicts of the Romans.
Marcia was a Vestall virgin,Marcia. and one that attended vpon the sacred ceremonies, she was condemned of incest, and (as Oppia was before her) buried aliue.
Minutia also a minister of Vestaes sacrifices,Minutia. who for her elegant feature, and extraordinarie beautie (and withall because the costlie ornaments with which she vsed to attire herselfe, exceeded the precise custome of her Order) she was brought within suspition of lust and inchastitie: for which being cal'd into question, and not able legallie to acquit her selfe, she was brought within the compasse of the law, and for her supposed offence, had both the sentence and execution due to the like delinquents.
Iustin in his 43 booke commemorates this historie: Aeneas, after many tedious trauells, landing in Italie, was by marrieng Lauinia the daughter of King Latinus, made partner with him in the Kingdome: for which marriage, warre was commenst betwixt them two of the one partie, and Turnus King of the Rutilians on the other. In which combustions, Turnus being slaine, and Latinus yeelding to Fate, Aenaeas both by the right of victorie and succession, became Lord of both the Kingdome and poeple: erecting a cittie called Lauinium, in remembrance of his wife Lauinia. In processe, he made warre against Mezentias, king of the Etruscians, whom hauing slaine, Ascanius the sonne of Aenaeas succeeded in the principalitie. Ascanius leauing Lauinium, built the cittie Alba; which for three hundred yeares space was the capitall cittie of that Kingdome. After many discents, the regall honours were conferred vpon Numitor and Amulius. These two Princes emulous of each others greatnesse, Amulius the younger, hauing opprest his brother Numitor, surprised also his sole daughter Rhaea,Rhaea Ve^^alis. who was immediate heire to her fathers honours and regall dignities: all which, he couetous to ingrosse to himselfe, and fearing withall, least from her issue might in time descend some one that might punish his insolencies, and reuenge her and her fathers iniuries, deuised with himselfe how to preuent both; and fearing least by putting her to death, he might incurre a generall hate amongst the people, in whose loue hee was not as yet fullie setled; he apprehended (as his safest course) to shadow her

vow of virginitie to be elected into the sacred seruice of Vesta. Being thus confin'd into the groaue celebrated to Mars, whether begot by Mars himselfe (as was then beleeued) or otherwise adulterouslie conceiued, it is vncertaine, but she was deliuered of two sonnes. This being knowne to Amulius, increased his feares, who commanded the infants to be cast foorth, and Rhaea to bee loaden with yrons, vnder whose seuere sentence expiring, she yeelded to Fate. The two children ready to perish, were miraculouslie nourced by a she wolfe, and after found by the shepheard Faustulus were by him brought vp and called Remus and Romulus: and so much of Rhaea. Tranquillus, and Cornelius Tacitus both of them remember one Rubria,Rubria. a Vestall virgin, who was forceably deflowred by Nero. Another, whose name was Pompilia,Pompilia. because by her inchastitie she prophaned the sacred orders of Vesta, was buryed aliue; the same death for the like offence suffered Cornelia.Cornelia. Floronea the Vestall was conuicted of whoredome,Floronea. but she to preuent one death, made choice of another: For taking to her selfe a braue Roman spirit, shee with her owne hands boldlie slew her selfe. Posthumia taxed for her two curious habit and gaudinesse in attire,Posthumia. (as much transcending the custome of that more strict Order) was suspected of Lust, and accited before the Senate, and there arraigned, she wittilie and noblie answered to whatsoeuer could be obiected against her; so that being found guiltlesse, she was absolued by the sentence of the high Priest or Archflammin. Sextilia sped not so well as this Posthumia,Sextilia. for she being suspected of inchastitie, and found culpable, suffered according to the law made for the punishment of the like offenders.Tutia. The like suffered Tutia the Vestall for her vnlawfull prostitution. Plutarch in Gracchis, in the Catalogue of these consecrated virgins, numbers Licinia.Lycinia. And Pliny relates, that when Clodius the Emperour was in opposition with his wife Messalina (that sinke of lust, and most incontinent of women) when their differences could be no wayes decided, Messalina sent to Vbidia (one of the most reuerent amongst the Vestalls) by whose mediation attonement was made betwixt her and the Emperour.Vbidia. The vestfall fire vpon a time going out, and it being imputed to their inchastitie,Aemilia. Aemilia with these words besought the goddesse; Oh Vesta, thou that art the protectour of this famous cittie Rome, as I haue truelie and chastlie, almost for thirtie yeares space, celebrated thy sacrifices, so either at this present crowne my puritie with fame, or before this multitude, brand my lust with infamy. These words were no sooner spoken, but casting her mantle vpon the Altar, the fire instantlie brake foorth, where before there was nothing in place saue cold embers; by which prodigie her innocent life was protected.Claudia. Claudia the Vestall was of no lesse remarkeable chastitie, who when a barke laden with the sacreds of the goddesse stucke fast in the riuer Tyber, and by no human strength could be loosed from the sand: she thus openlie protested before the people, If (quoth she) o goddesse, I haue hitherto kept my chastitie vndefiled, vouchsafe these may follow me: when fastning a cord to the stearne of the ship, she without any difficultie drew it along the riuer.Tuscia. Tuscia likewise suspected of incontinence, by the like wonder gaue testimonie of her innocence, who inuocating Vesta in these words: If (saith she) o mother of the gods, I haue offered thy sacrifices with chast and vndefiled hands, grant that with this sieue I may take vp water from the riuer Tyber, and without shedding the least droppe beare it vnto thy Altar: which when she had obtained and accordinglie performed, with lowd acclamations of the multitude, she was absolued, and her austere life euerafter held in reuerence. The attributes of Modestie and Temperance are

greater ornaments to a woman than gold or iewells; and because all perfections cannot be in one woman at one time, this Modestie is that which supplyes all things that are wanting. It is a dower to her that hath no portion, not onelie an ornament to deformitie, but in blacknesse it impresses a kind of beautie; it illustrates the ignobilitie of birth, supplying all those defects wherein fortune hath beene scanting. And so much shall suffice for the Vestalls.



Of the Prophetesses.
COncerning these Prophetesses, I will onely make a briefe catalogue of some few, whom the antient writers haue made most eminent. We reade of Hyrtia the daughter of Sesostris king of Aegypt, most skilfull in diuination, who to her father foretold his Amplitude and Monarchy. Volatteranus in Georg. writes of one Labissa, a diuining woman, that was eminent for many predictions in Bohemia, whom succeeded her daughter Craco, as well in skill, as in fame. Plutarch in Mario speakes of one Martha, whom Marcius most honourablie circumducted in a horse-litter, and at her appointment celebrated many sacrifices: her the senate with a generall suffrage for her approued skill in augurie, rewarded with libertie, making her a free woman of the cittie. Polyxo is the name of one of the Phebaiedes; of whom Val. Flaccus in his Argonauts thus writes:
Tunc etiam vates Phoebo delecta Polixo.
Where he calls her a Prophetesse beloued of Phoebus. Sosipatra, a woman by nation a Lydian, and the wife of Aedesius the Sophist, was possest with that diuining spirit and true coniecture of future things that in their times accordinglie happened, that she was said to be educated and instructed by the gods themselues. Of the like approbation was Spurina, who as Tranquillus testates, forewarned Caesar to beware of the Ides of March, who in the same day was murdered in the Capitoll, of which he bid him beware. Martianus Capella speakes of one Symachia, and calls her one of the Sybells; and of tenne by all authours granted, will allow but two; namelie, Herophile Troiana the daughter of Marmensis, and Symachia the issue of Hippotensis, who was borne in Erythraea, and prophesied in Cuma. Theano and Eucyppa, the daughters of one Scedasus, sung many oraculous cautions to the people of Sparta, yet could they not predict their owne disaster; for after they were forciblie defloured by the young men of the same cittie, and slaine, and their bodies cast into a well; their father after long search finding them, confounded with the sight of so sad a spectacle, vpon the fight thereof slew himselfe. Caelius writes of a woman borne in his countrey, called Iacoba, out of whose bellie vncleane spirits made acclamations of future things to come; of which one of them called himselfe Cincinnatulus, who gaue maruellous answers to such as demanded of him, but spake as oft falselie as truelie. Of better knowledge (as it seemes) was Appollonius of Tyana, a cittie in Greece, who told one Cylix, a man giuen to all voluptuousnesse, That before three dayes were expyred he should be slaine; which accordinglie happened. He vsed to protest, that he spake nothing

without the counsell of the gods and direction of the spirit that attended him: he professed the knowledge of all languages and tongues, to haue insight into the thoughts of men, to discourse any thing punctuallie that had past, and diuine as truelie of any thing to come; he was moreouer an exact interpreter of dreames: his life is compendiouslie set downe by Vollaterranus. Parialla liued in the age of Cleomines, and was called the championesse of all the Delphian prophetesses. Now how the diuell should come to the foreknowledge of things to come, it shall be held no vnnecessarie digression briefly to inquire. These spirits being of a thinne substance (by their tenuitie, subtiltie, and incredible celeritie, moreouer by the quicknesse of their apprehensions, in which they farre excell the slownesse and dulnesse of all earthlie bodies) by the diuine permission, vnderstand and deliuer many things which appeare to vs miraculous:Cap. 28. Therefore S. Augustine in his booke De Spiritu and Anima, saith, That by reason of their antiquitie, and benefit of the length of time (as hauing continued from the beginning of the world) they haue gathered to themselees that absolute and vnmatchable experience, of which man (by reason of the breuitie of his age) is no way capable, by which meanes, some of their actions seeme the more admirable: some things they fashion out of the holy Scriptures themselues, as hauing them all at their fingers ends, and oft times predict such things as they themselues haue purpose to act; by this meanes tempting and seducing mankind. Therefore Plato in Epinomide, attributes vnto them,Lib. 4. acutenesse of witte, retentiue memorie, and admirable knowledge. Clemens in Recog. saith, That these spirits therefore know more, and much more perfectlie, as not being burdened or dulled with the grosse weight of the body.Cap. 22. Tertullian in his Apologie against the nations thus argues: All spirits are winged, and therefore are euery where in an instant; the spatious earth and all the corners thereof, are to them but as one place, and whatsoeuer is therein done, they can as easily know as suddenlie declare: by this means they make themselues the authours of many things; and so they are indeed of mischiefes often, of good things neuer. The Croesians and the Pirhians make it most apparant with what deceiuing cunning he hath shadowed the ambiguities of his Oracles. No question but the diuell by the infallible prophesies of Esay and Daniell (both which had liuelie and expresselie deliniated the young man Alexander) knew that this Alexander by subduing Darius, should enioy all Asia, and transferre the Monarchy from the Babylonians to the Graecians. The Prince therefore comming to the Delphian Oracle, and of the Prophetesse demanding the successe that should follow his intended expeditions, shee of long time made him no answer; but he not so satisfied, by intreaties, menacies, and all manner of importunities, at length wrested from her these few words, Inuictus eris Alexander, Oh Alexander, thou shalt be inuincible: which words, had they fayled in the successe of his warres, yet had a shadow of truth, in that his vrgence ouercame the silence of the Oracle. After, traiecting his army against the Persians, diuers prodigies appeared; at his entrance into Asia, the statue of Orpheus was seene to sweat; in his conflict with Darius, an Eagle was still visibly, seene soaring and houering ouer his head, and as it were menacing the enemie: these were, no question, the mockeries of the diuell, to auert the opinions of such as gaue not much credit to the superstitions of these vaine Auguries, and to the firmer establishment of his own kingdome. He knew before out of the Prophesies of Esay,Esa. 23. That Tyrus should be destroyed by the Macedonians, for so saith the Prophet: The burden of Tyrus: howle ye ships

of Tarshish, for it is destroyed^ so that there is no house: none shall come from the land of Chittim, it is reuealed vnto them. This land Cethim, many hold to be Macedonia, for after that dialect the Macedonians are called by Homer. Others by Cethim,Ioseph. lib. 1. Aitiquit. interpret the land of the Cyprians. Now when after the defeate and vtter subuersion of Darius, Alexander had inuested his army before Tyrus, the diuell by oracle forewarned one of the prime cittisens, That Appollo would instantlie forsake the Cittie: that the euent answering the prediction, might the more firmelie establish the confidence setled vpon these false idols. To this purpose makes that of the Pithian damsell in the Acts of the Apostles, thus saith the text;Act. 16.16. And it came to passe, as we went to prayer, a certaine maide hauing a spirit of diuination met vs, which gate her maister much vantage with diuining: she followed Paul and vs, and cryed: saying, These men are the seruants of the most high God, which shew vnto you the way of saluation; and thus did she many dayes. Here we see the diuell confesseth the truth, but not with th'intent to mooue the people to giue beleefe to his doctrines: For that appeares by the sequele. For when Paul grieued, turned about, and said to the spirit, I command thee in the name of Iesus that thou come out of her, and he came out the same houre. For instantlie followes the innate malice of the diuell; for when her maisters saw the hope of their gaine was gone, they caught Paul and Silas, and drew them into the market place vnto the Magistrates, etc. The diuell prosecuting his hate against them, euen to false accusations, beating with rods, and imprisonment. This argument I will end with one historicall discourse.Cap. 15. Iohannes Wyerius in his first booke, De praest. Demon. tells vs, that vpon a time mention being made of Hector and Achilles before the Emperour Maximilian in his imperiall pallace, one of his chiefe nobilitie, and a prime counseller of Sate amongst the rest began to speake most affectionatlie in their praise, extolling their actions, strength, and vallour, in that high measure, that the Emperour was most desirous (if it were possible) to behold them in their true effigies and portrature. A Magitian at the same time liued about the court, who boasted so much of his skill, that he profest himselfe able to accomplish the desires of the Emperour, and that without danger or preiudice to any: this comming to the eares of the Emperour, he was sent for, and commanded to shew some testimonie of his art. The Magitian, in hope of reward, and promise of silence, free from all interruption, vndertakes it, and moreouer to secure the spectators from danger: when placing the Emperour in his regall throne, he cast about the same a wide and spacious circle, that done, he mumbles certaine vnknowne words to himselfe, which he seemed to reade out of a small booke of characters, which hee drewe out of his pocket. This was no sooner done, but Hector beates at the doore with such violence, that at the terrour of the stroakes, the whole pallace seemed to tremble: the doore being opened, Hector enters armed Cap a pe in a helmet plumed, his target vpon his arme, and in his right hand a long mightie speare, headed with brasse: who thus accountred, with terrible and flaming eyes lookes round about the roome; his stature much larger than any that hath liued in our latter dayes. At another doore, first knockes, then enters Achilles, with the like maiesticke gate, compleatlie armed, with an austeare and menacing brow, beholding Hector, shaking and charging his speare against him, as if he instantlie purposed to inuade him. These two, after honour done vnto Caesar, hauing gone on, and returned backe three times, vpon the instant vanisht. This act being past, next enters on the stage king Dauid, his head crowned with a rich diademe, and adorned with all kinglie magnificence, playing

vpon his harpe, but his aspect more plaucible and his countenance more amiable than the former: he likewise three seuerall times past by the Emperour, still sitting in his throane, but without any reuerence done to his person at all, and so likewise vanisht. The Magitian being asked by the Emperour, Why, of the rest, Dauid had onelie denyed to doe him honour? he presentlie answered, That all kingdomes to the kingdome of Dauid must submit themselues, because Christ himselfe came of his stocke and linage. Thus we see how the diuell is neuer without scripture in his mouth, though blasphemie and execration in his heart. Besides these kind of Diuiners, there are such as are called Sortiligae, and these predict by lots, and that after sundrie manners, of which I will instance one onelie: They make a round circle, and diuide it into foure and twentie equall distances, according to the number of the Greeke alphabet, euery space hauing the character of one of these letters, vpon which they put a graine of wheat or barlie; then is put forth a Cocke kept for the purpose, and by those graines that he picks vp from the letters, they make their coniectures. Valens the Emperour much perplexed in his mind about the succession in the Empire, retyred himselfe to this kind of Augurie: when the letters and the graines being placed as is aforesaid, the vaticinating Cocke (called Alectiomanticus) was turned out, who pickt vp the graines, and made bare these fiue letters, THEOD: by which was signified Theodosius, who after succeeded. Other predictions were gathered out of the sentences of the Poets: but especiallie out of Homer of the Greekes,Iliad. 9. and Virgill for the Latines. Socrates being in prison, out of a verse in Homer told to Aeschinus, That he should not outliue the third day. Alexander Senerus thus meaning to calculate what should futurelie betyde him, happened vpon this verse in Virgill:
Aen^id. 6.Tu regere imperio populos, Romane memento.
And after some few yeares hee attained to the Empire. Claudius the Emperour acquiring his owne fate the like way, happened vpon that in his sixt booke of his Aeneid:
Tertia dum Latio regnantem viderit Aestas.
Neither did hee raigne aboue two yeares. The same Claudi^s inquiring after his brothers fortunes, he light vpon that verse, which after Gordianus Iunior chanced vpon,
Ostend^nt terris hunc tantum fata.
This Gordianus was slaine within seauenteene dayes after hee had taken vpon him the emperiall purple. Claudius Secundus, predecessour to th^ Emperour Aurelian, inquiring of the successe of his posteritie, had the lot of this verse in Virgill:
Aeneid. lib. 1.His ego, nec metas rerum, nec nomina pono.
Whose progenie lasted for a long time after. Of this kind there were infinite, which I purposelie pretermit. The Pithian woman that sate stradling with her legges vpon the Tripos, receiued the vncleane spirit at the immodest parts of her body, from whence she was likewise heard to deliuer such answers as were demanded of her, with a strange furor and rapture; her heire scattered about her eares, and foaming at the mouth, she deliuered her franticke oracles. Methodius against Origen writ a booke of these mad diuinors, as Sophranius ^aith. Others there were, cal'd Ventriloquae (so nam'd by S. Augustin) because they were heard to speake from their wombs and bellies. Tertul. a great authour, affirmes that he hath seene such women, that from their immodest parts (sitting) haue vttered such kind of oracles, answering in that maner to questions demanded.

To conclude with these, Caelius Lodo^icus that liued in the memorie of our fathers, in his eight booke Antiquit. hath left recorded,Lect cap. 10. that he hath seene such a woman in Rhodigium, a cittie of Italie, from whose secret parts such a voice was often heard, which though small and weake, yet was altogether intelligible: that which she vttered was strange to the hearers; but in future things her words were ful of vanitie and leasings. To speake of Fortune-tellers, Gypsies, Wisewomen, and such as pretend to tell of things lost (a profession too much suffered, as most frequently abusiue in this age) would but fill much paper, and giue small or no content at all to the Reader, I will therefore shut vp all their imposturous lies in one short and knowne truth?A Cunning woman. A cunning woman that not long since liued about this cittie (whom I for feare for some reasons to name) pretended great skill not onely in Palmestrie, to tell maides how manie husbands they should hauc; and young men, what wiues, and how manie children legittimate, or bastards, with such like ridiculous and illusiue coniectures; but besides this Art, she professed the knowledge of things lost, and to returne any stolne goods to the true owner: growing by this so popular, that she grew not onely in fame but in wealth, and of great opinion amongst the vulger. It happened that in a certaine house a siluer spoone being lost, and some of the familie aboue the rest suspected about the felonie, two of the seruants knowing themselues innocent, to cleere themselues, and finde out the priuate thiefe, made a stocke betwixt them of ten groats (for that was her fee) and verie early in the morning repaired to this cunning womans house, because they would be sure both to take her within, and find her at leasure. They happened to come iust at the time when she her selfe opening the street doore, the first thing she cast her eye vpon was, that some beastly fellow or other had egregiously playd the slouen iust before the threashold of her doore, at which being exceedingly mooued, she in her anger thus said, Did I but know or could I find out what rascall hath done this, I would bee reuenged on him though it cost me twentie nobles. One of the seruing men somewhat wiser than his fellow, hearing this, pluckt him by the elbow and thus whispers to him, Thou hearest her talke of twentie nobles, but by my consent we will euen backe againe, and saue our ten groats. The other demanding the reason; Marrie (saith he) she that cannot tell who hath done that abuse at her doore, I will neuer beleeue that she can tell vs the partie that hath stolne the spoone. I would wish that all would take caution from this seruant.


The HESPERIDES.
THey were the daughters of Hesperus the brother of Atlas, or as some thinke of Atlas himselfe, of which number is Eubulus. Chaeretra^es deriues them from Phorcus and Cetus. Their names were Aegle, Areth^sa, and Hesperthusa. These kept certaine pleasant and delectable gardens, not farre from Lyx^s a towne of M^^ricania in the farthest part of Aethiopia towards the West; where all the countrie was scorched with the heat of the Sunne, and the place almost inhabitable

for the multitude of serpents. These Gardens were not farre distant from Meroe, and the redde Sea, where liued the Serpent that kept the golden Apples, whom Hercules after slew. The keeper of this Dragon was called Ladon, the sonne of Typhon and Echidna, whom Apollonius takes to be the Dragon himselfe:Lib. 4. these Virgins inhabited the remotest parts of the Earth, the same where Atlas is said to support the Heauens, as Dionisius signifies to vs, in his booke de Situ orbis.

Sustinet hic Atlas Caelum, sic fata iubebunt
Vltimus Hesperidum locus est, in margine terrae
Hic Capite and manibus fert vasti pondera mundi:
Here Atlas doth support the Heauen, for so
The Fates command; th'Hesperid's giue it name
In the Earth's vtmost margent, he we know
Beares with his head and hands the worlds vast frame.

The fame is, the mountaine Atlas hath round incompast or hedged in this Orchard or Garden, because Themis had prophesied to him, That in processe of time the sonne of Iupiter should breake through his pale and beare away his golden apples; which after proued true in Hercules. These Apples, Agretus in rebus Libicis explaineth them to be sheep, and because kept by a rude and churlish sheap-heard were sayd to be guarded by a Dragon.Lib. 1^. But Pherecides, where he commemorates the nuptialls of Iuno, affirmes that the earth next to the sea in the furthest West, brings apples of the colour of gold; whose opinion Lucan follows. With three of these apples was Atlanta the daughter of Scocneus vanquisht, which Venus gaue to Hippomines when shee was proposed the reward to the victor, and death to him that was ouercome: but more plainely to reduce these fables to historie, It is probable, that there were two brothers famous and renowned in these prouinces, Hespereus and Atlas, that were possest of sheepe beautifull and faire, whose fleeces were yellow and of the colour of gold. Hesperus hauing a daughter called Hesperia, conferd her on his brother Atlas, of this Hesperia the region was called Hesperitis. By her, Atlas had six daughters, and therfore they had a double denomination, from him Atlaintides; from her Hesperides. Their beauties being rumord far off, it came to the eares of Busiris, who desirous of so rich a prey, sent certaine pirats and robbers with a strict commaund, by some stratageme, or else by force to steale them thence, and so to transport them within the compasse of his dominions. These Damosells sporting themselues in the garden, were by these spies and outliers surprised and borne thence which hapned iust about the time that Hercules combatted Antaeus: these Virgins being shipt away, the pirats went on shore to repose themselues with their prey vpon the beach; of which Hercules hauing notice (who had heard before of the rape) he sallied vpon them and slew them all to one man, returning the Virgins safe to their father, for which he receiued not only a present of those sheepe (the reward of so great a benefit but many other curtesies; amongst other things he instructed him in Astronomie, and to distinguish of the stars: which knowledge Hercules first bringing into Greece he was therefore sayd to ease Atlas, and in his stead to support heauen vpon his shoulders. So the Hesperides are called the daughters of Hesperus, which signifies the Euening. And they are sayd to haue gardens in the Occident which bringeth foorth golen Apples, by reason the colour of the starres are like

gold, and their orbes round as apples, neither rise they but in the West because instantly after the setting of the Sunne the Starres appeare, which by reason of his splendor are concealed and obscured all the day time: the Dragon, some thinke it to be the signe-bearig Circle; others a riuer that by many windings and serpentlike indents incompast the Orchard. And so much for the explanation of the Hesperides.

PLEIADES, or HYADES.
OVid in his first booke de Fastis leaues remembred, how Atlas tooke to wife Pleione the daughter of Oceanus and Thetis, by whom hee receiued seuen daughters: these, when Orion (with their mother) had for the space of fiue yeares together prosecuted onely to vitiate and deflower them, they all iointly petitioned to the gods, That they might bee rescued from all violence; whose prayers Iupiter hearing, and withall commiserating their distresse, hee changed the seuen sisters into seuen starres, whose names Aratus in Astronomicis thus recites,
-- Septemillae esse feruntur.Quamuis sint oculis hominum sex obuia signa.Alcione, Meropeque, Electraque, diua CelaenoTaigete, Sterope, preclaro Lumine Maia.--Seuen starres th'are held to bee,Though wee with our weake eyes but six can seeCelaeno, Electra, Alcyone, Merope,Clerre-sighted Maia, Taygete, Sterope.
All these starres are plac't in the head of the Bull, two in his eares, two in his eyes, two in his nosthrills, and one in the middle of his forehead where the haire curles and turnes vp. Some reckoned the daughters of Atlas to the number of twelue, and that Hyas was their brother, who being stung to death by a serpent, fiue of his sisters tooke his death so grieuously that they dyed with sorrow; of whom Iupiter tooke such pittie that he translated them into so many starres, which still beare their brothers name, and are called Hyades. Hesiod thus giues vs their names, Phoeola, Coronis, Cleia, Phoeo, and Eudora,
Quas nimphas, Hyades mortales nomine dicunt.
Others nominate them after this manner, Ambrocia, Coronis, Eudora, Dione, Aesila, and Polyxo: Others haue added to these, Thiene and Proitele, which they haue beleeued to be the Nourses of Bacchus: as also Dodoninas so called of Dodonus the sonne of Europa, but write them as descended from other parents, whence some held them for the daughters of Erecheus, others of Cadmus: some would haue Calypso to be the daughter of Atlas. Neither is their number free from controuersie; for Thales Milesius holds them but two, the one Australis, the other Borealis. Euripides in his Tragedie de Phaetonte addes a third. Achaeus makes them foure, and Euripides six: some thinke them called Hyades because they were the Nurses of Bacchus, who is also called Hyes, of which opinion Euphorion is.

Hyaecornuto Dionisio Iratae.

Others thinke them to haue tooke name of the Raine, because their rising

still pretends shewers in the Spring. Besides, these are the most certaine signes of weather which the Nauigators at sea gather from the rising of these Starres, as Euripides in Ione most perspicuously demonstrates. These Pleiades and Hyades are therefore called the daughters of Atlas, because Atlas signifies Axis mundi, i. the axeltree of the world. The Collumnes of Atlas are the North and the Meridian or South poles, on which the Heauen is thought to be supported. Now the axeltree first made, the Starres were next created: Some thinke them the issue of Atlas. Libicus who being a most skilfull Astronomer, called his daughters by the names of the starres, thereby to eternise their memorie, as diuerse others haue done the like. Amongst whom was Conon, who liu'd in the time of Ptolomaus, who called his Com^, and Berenices. Proclus in his Coment. vpon Hesiodus his workes and daies, writes that these Pleiades are all diuine, and their starres the soules of the Planets; as Celaeno is the soule of Saturne; Sterope, of the sphere of Iupiter; Merope, of Mars; Elect^ra, of Apollo or the Sunne; Alcione, of Venus, Maia, of Mercury; and Taigete, of the Moone. Of whome some haue had congresse with their owne Planets, and some with other of the gods. Which Ouid in his fourth booke Fastor hath with much elegancie related:
Pleiades Incipiunt humeros releuare paternos.
The wandring Pleiades gadding abroad,Begin to ease their father of his Load.Who though in number Seuen, all shining bright,Yet onely six of them appeare in sight.Twice three of these, themselues haue prostrate castInto the gods imbraces: Mars clings fastTo Sterope; Alcione the faire,And sweete Celaeno, Neptunes darlings are.Maia, Electra, and Taigete, threeOf that bright sister-hood Ioues wantons be:But Merope (the seuenth) of minde more base,Stoopt lower, to a Merope was the prostitute of Sisiphu^. mortall mans imbrace.The thought of which fact she doth so detest,She since neare shewd her face amongst the rest.
And so much for the Pleiades and Hiades shall suffice.



Of the GRACES.
THese whom the Latines call Gratiae or Graces, the Greekes call Charites. Hesiod calls them the daughters of Iupiter and Eurinome, these called Oceanus father. Orpheus in an hymne soong to the praise of these sisters, calls them the daughters of Eunomea and Iupiter. Antilemachus deriues them from Aegles and the Sunne, others from Antinoe and Iupiter: as they differ in

their brith, so they doe in their names and number: some allow but two, and name them Clita and Pha^na. Pausonias in Boeticis stiles them Auxo and Hegemone. Some number Suadela amongst the Graces. But all those ancient writers that are best receiued and most authentically approued, conclude them to bee three; their names Euphrosine, Aglaia, and Thalia: of whom Hesiod in his Theogonia:
Tres sibi, and Eurynome Charites parit edita magno,Oceano, etc.
Eurinome of the Greeke Ocian borne,(A nimph excelling both in shape and face)Brought foorth the three faire Charites, to adorneIoues issue: Faire Euphrosine the first Grace,Aglaia, and Thalia etc.
They are neuer seperated but alwayes put together, whensoeuer they are remembered by the antient Poets. The yonger sister Aglaia is sayd to bee the wife of Vulcan, and all iointly the handmaides and attendants of Venus. Concerning their habits, there hath beene some difference, because some haue presented them naked and without any garments at all: which difference Pausonius hath reconciled,In Boeticis. who witnesseth that the Graces were set foorth as obiects, either by the Grauers, the Painters, or the Poets; of which number were Pythagoras, Parius, Bupalus, Appelles, and others: but in habits fashioned in a modest decencie, their haire faire, long, and comely; therefore Homer in his hymne to Apollo calls them Pulcricemae, or faire haired. Horace hee setteth them out with gyrdles, which are neuer worne without other garments. It is therefore apparant that the ancient writers allowed them robes and vestures, either because it was a great immodestie to present women vnclothed, or else to keepe them from the violence of the winters cold, by which their tempers are much distasted, howsoeuer since they haue fallen into the hands of latter writers who haue robbed them of these habits, with which they were apparelled by the former: for which robberie they are said, as ashamed of their nakednesse, to haue exiled themselues from the Earth. The first of all mortall men that erected a Temple to the Graces was Eteocles a king ouer the Orchomaenians;Lib. 9. for as Strabo writes, amongst them was the fountaine called Acidalia, in which these three sisters vsed to bathe themselues. Plato aduised Xenocrates, being a good man and of honest conuersation, but of austere life and condition, that he would sacrifice to the Graces. And Plutarch in his Coniugall precepts, sayth, That a chast and modest woman in her societie and conuersation towards her husband, needes the helpe of the Graces, that (as Metrodorus was wont to say) she may leade her life with him so sweetly, that her boldnesse be to him no distast, nor bashfulnesse any burden; for by all such as affect their husbands, neatnesse and cleanlinesse in the house and at boord, with pleasing and smooth language at bed, are by no meanes to be neglected: for coursenesse of manners in the one, makes her appeare harsh; and frowradnesse in the other,Lib 4. vnpleasant. Herodotus, relates that the flood Cynips glydes along by a hill dedicated to the Graces, distant from the sea two hundred furlongs, which hill is onely woodie and full of trees, and all the rest of the land of Libia desolate and barren; neere to which hill a people called Gnidani inhabit, whose wiues vse to weare strings about their garments made

of small thongs of leather, and so many sundrie men as they haue carnall societie withall, so many knots they tye vpon these strings, she that can shew the most, being the most respected and honoured amongst the rest, as aboue the others beloued. But now to find out what by these Graces was first intended; They are called the daughters of Iupiter and Eurinome, which implies nothing els than the fertilitie of the fields, and the abundance of fruits: all which plentie ariseth from the benefit of peace, signified in this word Eunomia. For where law and equitie haue predominance, there violence, oppressions, robberies, and direptions are exiled, the fields smile, the houses flourish, the Temples of the gods are both repaired and honoured, and all places filled with splendour and ornament. Neither are these the sole blessings of Eurinome, or Eunomia, or of Autonoe (by which is meant Prudentia, Wisedome) without the helpe of Iupiter, which includes the Diuine clemencie, by which the aire and the earth are both reconciled vnto vs, the one in his temperature, the other in increase. They are called the children of the Sunne and Aegles, as knowing the Sunne to be the chiefe planet in the gouernance of the elements, without whose heat and incouragement, no hearbe or plant can attaine to any ripenesse and perfection. They are tearmd, conioynd and vnseparable sisters, by reason of the threefold profit arising from agriculture; the first from the fields, the second from the trees, the third from the creatures: nor are their names vnfitlie conferred vpon them. Thalia, is a pleasant budding or burgening; Aglaia, is splendour; and Euphrasine, gl^dnesse. All these commodious delights arising to the lord of the soyle, by his industrious tillage and manuring the earth. And therefore is Aglaia called the wife of Vulcan, because there is a refulgence arising from all arts whatsoeuer. Others haue preferred Pasithaea in the place of Aglaia, in that she signifies heards, flocks, or such cattell as belong to tillage: out of whose labours or increase, there groweth pleasure or profit. They are nominated the goddesses of Benefits and good Turnes: the reason is, in regard that without the fertilitie of the earth, no man can be liberall or munificent, nor rich, which is the foundation of all bountie. They are vpheld to be virgins, because the most honest and conscionable vsurie is bred from the earth, without sallerie or brokage; at the first demonstrated vnto vs by the antient Poets, habited and well apparrelled, vnlesse iniurie, oppression, and vsurie, in these latter times leaue them despoyled and naked.

HORAE, or the Houres.
OF the parents, or names of the Houres, there is small doubt or none at all, since all the Poets from the first to the last agree, that they were the daughters of Iupiter and Themis: amongst whom was Hesiod in his Theog. in these words,
Inde Themim rursus ducit sibi quae parit Horas,Eunomiamque Dicensque, etc.
By marrieng Themis, he begat the Houres,Eunomia, Dyrce, and Irene faire.And flourishing still, these sisters haue the powersTo ripen all mens actions by their care.
Orpheus not onelie assents with him in their names, but addes also, That they

were borne in the Spring time. Pausonias in Boetic. introduceth other name^ and forreine from these; one he calls Carpo, another Thalote, of the third he conceales the name.Fas^or. lib. 1. ^^b. de Sypacus. lib. 5. Ouid calls them, the porters to the gates of heauen. They are deciphered, to haue soft feete, to be the most slow paced of all the goddesses, yet euer to pruduce some thing new; for so Theocritus rep^^ts of them. Homer in his Isliads tells vs, that they are not onelie placed to keepe the gates of heauen, but haue power at their pleasure ouer faire or foule weathers, calling it an open skie when the ayre is faire and cleare, and a shut heauen when the welkin is darke and cloudie, as may appeare in these words:
Sponte sores Coeli patuerunt, etc.
The gates of Heauen did of themselues stand wide,Those which the virgin howers are set to keepe(As their great charge.) The Poles they likewise guide,With all the vpper Regions. From the deepe,The showers exhal'd they store: and when they please,The borrowed rayne pay backe into the Seas.
They are called Horae of the Greeke word, which signifies Custodire, or to keepe; and therefore said to be the guardians of heauens gates, as hauing power to admit of our deuotions, and giue them accesse vnto the gods, or otherwise if they be not faithfull and sincere, to exclude them at their pleasures: hauing moreouer alwayes beene, and still continue great fauourers and prosperers of all such as are laborious and studious. They are called the daughters of Iupiter and Themis, because as the Graces import nothing els but the hilaritie and gladnesse that ariseth from the increase of the earth, so these Houres signifie the fruit it selfe; for the Greeke word Carpo, is Fructus: properlie then they are said to be the attendants of the Graces, as the Graces are still the handmaids of Venus, for the fruits of the earth are the increase, as that plenty still followes delight: and therefore they all equipage together, as being by the Poets neuer separate. Besides, the names of the Howers are thus properlie Englisht, Law, Iustice, and Peace. The abundance of all things is the companion of Vertue, and Honestie: but Scarcitie and Death are the pages to Irreligion and Impietie: for there is not a cleerer mirrour in which may truelier be discerned the malice or gratitude of men towards the gods, and consequentlie of their punishment and pitie towards men, than in the alterations of the Seasons; which, the antient writers the better to signifie vnto vs, made the Houres the Porters to heauen gates, and gaue them power ouer the clouds, both in the mustering of them, or dispersing them. And so much for the Houres.


AVRORA, or the Morning.
HEsiodus in Theog. tearmes her the daughter of Hyperion and the nymph Thya, and sister to the Sunne and Moone. Others deriue her from Tytan and Terra, they call her the way-leader to the Sunne; as Lucifer the day-starre is stil'd her henshman or vsher: for so saith Orpheus in an hymne to Aurora. Homer in an hymne to Venus, allowes her roseat fingers, a red or ruddie colour, and to be drawne in a golden chariot. Virgill sometimes allowes her foure horses, sometimes but two, and those of a red colour. Theocritus describes them white or gray,Lib. 6. Theoc. in ^yla. according to the colour of the morning. Lycopheon in Alexandra,

brings her in, mounted vpon Pegasus. Pausonias in Laconic. writes that she was doatinglie besotted of the faire young man Cephalus, as likewise of Orion, in which Homer agrees with him. Apollodorus makes her the mother of the winds,Odiss. lib. 5. and the starres: Hesiod is of the same opinion, that by prostrating her selfe to her brother Astraeas, the sonne of Hyperion and Thia, she brought forth Argestre, Zephyrus, Boreas, and Notus, with a daughter called Iadama. She was marryed to Tythonus, the sonne of Laomedon and brother to King Priam, but by diuers mothers, Priam being the sonne of Leucippe, Tython of Strimo, or as others inuert it of Rhaeo, daughter to the flood Scamander. It is commemorated by the Poets, that this Aurora begged for her husband Tython, Immortalitie, which was granted her by the gods. But forgetting in her petition to insert that withall, he should not grow old; in processe, he grew to that extremitie of decrepit age, that liuing to be twice a child, he was swath'd and cradled. Tython had two sonnes by Aurora, Memnon and Aemathaeon, of whom she tooke the name Aemathia.In reb. Phocen. Pausonias calls Memnon the king of Aethiopia, and from thence, or rather (as some more approoued will haue it) from Susis, a cittie in Persia, he came to the warres of Troy; for he, before that expedition had subdued and subiugated all the nations neere or adiacent to the riuer Choaspes. Strabo relates that in the cittie of Abidus, not far from Ptolomais in Aegypt, he had a magnificent pallace all built of stone,Lib. 16. than which the Easterne world affoorded not a more miraculous structure; in which there was a labyrinth of the same stone, and erected by the selfe-same worke-master, which was called after his name Memnonium. He died in a single Monomachia valiantlie by the hand of Achilles, in a battaile fought betwixt the Greekes and the Troians. In the place where he was slaine, a fountaine presentlie issued, which yearelie as that day flowed nothing but blood, which Calaber commemorates: his sepulcher was in Paltus in Syria^ neere to the riuer Bada, for so saith the Poet Symonides. Some haue held argument, that Aurora made suit to Iupiter, that when Memnons body was committed to the funerall fire, he would transhape him into a bird, which accordinglie happened, as his Metamorph. most liuelie expresseth it in these words:
Memnonis orba mei, venio qui fortia frustra, etc.
Depriu'd of my sweete Memnon, who in vaineTooke Armes for his deere vnkle: and now slaineBy great Achilles in his prime of yeares(For so you gods would haue it) Loe, appearesBefore thy throane, oh Ioue (thou chiefe and rectorOf all the gods, their patron and protector)A weeping mother: begging, to assureHonors to him, by which my wounds to cure.To this great Ioue assents. The funerall fireIs kindled, the bright sparks towards heau'n aspire,And like so many starres, they make repayreThrough the thicke smoake which clouds and dulls the ayre,Darkning the cleere day, as when damps and foggesExhal'd from riuers, or from marish bogges,Before the sunne hath power: In such a myst,Vp flye the obscur'd sparkes, till they subsistAboue, all in one body: which assumesFirst shape, then face, next collour, from the fumes.Thus from that Pyle the Metnnian bird first springs,Fire gaue it life, and lightnesse lent it wings.
It is said that many of these birds, which still beare the name, were seene to arise from his ashes, which diuiding themselues into diuers squadrons, fought so long amongst themselues, till they fell dead into the fire, sacrificing their owne liues to his obitts. But Theocritus in his Epitaph vpon Bion, speakes of none but Memnon onely, who himselfe was changed into a bird, and was seene to flye about and soare ouer his owne funerall fires. Lucian in Philopseudo, speakes of a prodigie, or rather a miracle, which was most frequent where his statue was erected in the Temple of Serapis; no sooner did the rising sunne begin to shine vpon his monument, and seem'd to touch it, but his statue yeelded a most sweet and melodious sound, but when he tooke his leaue to rest himselfe in the West, as if it mourned the Sunnes departure, it breathed an harmony so sadlie passionate, that oft times it drew teares from the hearers: which was thus interpreted, That he still reioyced at his mothers approach and presence, but lamented her departure and absence. Cornelius Tacitus, and S^idas, both report the same, as likewise Zetzes, Chil. histor. 64. But to returne to his mother Aurora, she was still held to be the sweetest, the most delightfull and welcome of all to the nymphs and goddesses, not to man onelie, but to all other creatures, beasts, and plants. Orpheus in one of his hymnes affirmes no lesse:
By thee o goddesse mankind is made glad,Thy gracious presence cheares such as be sad.Since Memnons death, in teares thou risest still,And from thine eyes thick shewers of dew-drops spill,Through all the spatious earth: which to thy grace,The mornings sunne still kisses from thy face.By thee his glorious pallace is much graced,By thee, the pitchy night to Laethe chaced:All sleepie mankind to their sport thou wakest,And sleepie slumbers from their eyelids shakest.Thy beautie to behold or heare thy voyce,Serpents and men, beasts, birds, and all reioyce.The very Marine Frye thy presence craues,And to behold thee, dance vpon the waues.
And these things are the most remarkeable which haue beene fabulouslie obserued of Aurora, who is therefore supposed to be the daughter of Hyperion and Thia, because by the diuine bountie Light proceedeth from the Sunne, to illumine the earth and all the inhabitants thereof; for there is no benefit eyther of pleasure or profit that can accrue to vs, which flowes not from their immediate grace and goodnes. She is said to haue a ruddy colour, because she appeares as if she came blushing from the pallace of the Sunne. And for that cause they describe her with roseat fingers, a high complexion, a golden seat, and red steedes to draw her charriot, to answer and correspond to the liuerie which the Sunne giues, his being all of the like colour. For the swiftnesse of her motion, she is allowed a charriot, and such as conferre white steedes vpon

her, deriue not their hew from the gray vapours that arise from the earth, but rather from the cleere and perspicuous splendour of the light it selfe. Those that of this fable would make a historie, say that Tythonus marryed a wife out of the Easterne countries, by whom he had the fore-named children, and after liued to that age that he grew not onelie decrepit and bed-rid of his limbs, but doating and childish of his braine. From hence ariseth the fable, That Aurora was inamoured of him, by reason of the temperature of those Orientall climates, to be possest of which pleasant places she purchast for him Immortalitie. And where some fable that he was turned to a grashopper, it signifies nothing els but the loquacitie of age, ambitiouslie groaning in the often repetition of things past, glorying in times of old, and despising those latter in respect of them; such a one did Homer personate in Nestor. The marke at which all these arrowes are aim'd in this fable, is to persuade men by wisedome patientlie to vndergoe all the chances and changes incident to vs, both in time and nature; since death by the bountie of the gods is granted to man as a rest and cessation from all calamities and troubles. For when Aurora had beg'd immortalitie for Tython, he feeling the infirmities and defects of age, became himself a suppliant to the gods, That they would be to him so gracious as to giue him leaue to sleepe with his fathers, accounting it much better and happier to dye once, and be at rest, than to bee continuallie afflicted with the troubles and difficulties of a wearie and despised life.


NOX, or, the Night.
AFter morning past, the Sunne gone about, and the day spent, comes Night; neither was she in meane honour amongst the antient Poets, who taught her to be the first, and long before all other nymphs or goddesses, as possessing all places, and all things, hauing in her owne dispose and gouernment that deformed and vnshapen matter, called Chaos, ouer which she raigned Emperesse before the gods themselues had any existence or being: notwithstanding, some contend to make her the daughter of this Chaos, as Hesiod and others:
Inde Chao, est Erebus, Nox, and tenebros a creati.
From Chaos, Erebus, and the Night tenebrousWere both created--
And because so borne, she was called The most antient: the reason is approoued, For before the masse was opened, the matter of which to make things distinguished, and the world it selfe created, there could nothing be which might be properlie called Night: therefore Aratus in Astronomac. stiles her Nox antiqua; and Orpheus in one of his hymnes, The mother of gods and men, as both hauing their birth from her. She is drawne in a charriot, with starres waiting vpon her wheeles, and vshering her, as Theocritus left recorded:
--Salueteque NoctisSydera quae Canthis tacite praecurritis alta:
--Hayle all you starres so bright,Softlie forerunning the round wheeles of Night.
She is habited in sable garments, for so all writers agree, her head bound vp in a blacke vayle, whom the starres attend behind her charriot, as well as

before: for so Euripides in Ione testates:
Inuita nigris vestibus currum in silitNox: Astra sunt deum secuta protinus.
Night in blacke vesture mounts into her carre;Behind, the starres attend her, but not farre.
Virgill giues her two horses to her charriot:Lib. 5. therefore Appollonius in this third book describing the Night comming, saith, Nox iniecit equis iuga, The night vpon her horses cast her yoake. But this maner of the nights progresse is later than in the time of Homer, for in his dayes she was allowed neither charriot nor horses, they onelie deciphered her with wings, like Cupid or Victorie. Some introduce her at the departure of the day to rise out of the sea, as Virgill in his Aeneids,Lib. 2.
Vertitur interea Coelum: and ruit Oceano Nox:Inuoluens vmbramagna Terramque polumque.
The Heauen meane time is turn'd, the NightLeapes from the sea in hast,In darke and pitchy cloudes: the EarthAnd Poles inuoluing fast.
Her whom Virgill brings from the sea, Euripedes inuocates as comming from Erebus, in these words, Verenda, Verenda, Nox ex Erebo veni, Oh reuerent, reuerent Night, ascend from Erebus. Orpheus relates, that she sends day to the regions below, and againe chaseth her thence, in her owne person bringing them darknesse.
Quae Lucem pellis sub terr as, rarsus and ipsaTartara nigra petis--.
Below the earth thou driuest Light,And then againe thou bring'st them Night.
In all her sacrifices,Lib. 2. de dijs. a cocke was still kild and offered, as a creature much opposed against silence: for so Theagines hath left recorded. Night had many children: Euripides in his Hercules Furens calls one of hir daughters Rabies, her name importing outragious Madnesse; a second daughter of hers was called Rixa, which is Brawling and Scolding; a third Inuidia, or Enuy, for so saith Hesiod in his workes and dayes:Operib and dieb but in his Theogonia, he makes mention of others, whom he calls her sonnes in these verses:
Nox peperit Fatumque malum, parcamque nigrantem,Et mortem, and somnum, diuersaque somnis: natos,Hos perperit nulli deanox connicta marito.
Night, euill Fate brought forth, blacke Parca bred,With Death, and Sleepe, and diuers Dreames beside:Of all these Sonnes she was deliuered,And yet the goddesse neuer husband tride.
Cicero in his third booke De natura Deorum, hauing numbred all the children of Night, deriues them also from their father Erebu^, as may appeare in these words: Quod si ita est, etc. If it be so (saith hee) those that are the Parents of heauen should likewise be reckoned in the number of the gods Aether and Dies,

i. Ayre, and Day, with their brothers and sisters; by the antient Geneologists thus nominated, Amor, Dolus, Metus, Labor, Invidentia, Fatum, Senectus, Mors, Tenebrae, Miseria, Querela, Gratia, Fraus, Pertinatia, Parcae, Hesperides, Somnia: that is, Loue, Deceite, Feare, Labour, Enuie, Fate, ould Age, Death, Darknesse, Miserie, Complaint, Fauour, Frawde, the Parcae, and the Hesperides. All which are by some imagined to be the children of Nox and Erebus; I will only speake a little of two of these as they now lie in my way, and that verie briefly too, and (because it may perchance be late before I haue doone with them) I will conclude with Night. Death and Sleepe are brother and sister, and both the children of Night. Aristo calls Somnus, a seuere exacter from mankind, who as it were violently snatcheth away the halfe part of our age to bestow on Sleepe, and therfore by Orpheus he is called the brother of L^the, which insinuates Forgetfulnesse, which he most elegantlie expresseth in his hymne to Sleepe,
So mi^e beatorum rex, and rex summe virorum,Quem fugiunt curia, etc.
Sleepe of the blest man King, and King of men;Whom cares still flie, and rest imbraceth then.Of mischiefes, the sole solace and best friend,To giue them due repose, and comfort lend,Who putting on the shape of Death, doest giue(Onely by that) all creatures meanes to liue.Sleepe, thou hast but two sisters, and these are,Death and Obliuion, both which shorten care.
Lib. 11.Ouid in his Metamorphos. for his so many benefits conferred vpon Mortalls, placeth him in the catalogue of the gods. The house of Sleepe the same Poet hath ingeniously described, vpon whom hee conferres a thousand children, or rather, a number not to be numbered; nominating onely three, Morpheus, Icelus, and Phantasus: for sleepe, if it be moderately vsed, is of all mortall things the sweetest, best and most profitable, to whom all creatures whatsoeuer are subiect, therefore not improperly by Orpheus tearmed the king of men and gods.Lib. 2. Homer in his Illiades, makes an elegant expression, to show how wretched their conditions are aboue other men, that are in high and eminent place and office and haue predominance ouer the greatest affaires, which hee thus introduceth, by making all both gods and men asleepe at once, sauing Iupiter; which Iuno seeing, shee with great bribes and rewards corrupts Somnus, that hee would amongst the rest charme the eyes of Iupiter; which hee attempting, and the other perceiuing, the inraged god, feeling Sleepe to steale vpon him vnawares, cast him headlong from heauen into the sea; where hee had doubtlesse for euer perisht, had not Night snacht vp her sonne, and in her darknesse hid him from the wrath of Iupiter. But had he beeene destroyed, Sleepe had bin exiled the Earth, and so all creatures depriued of their quotidian rest. From hence likewise may be collected, how wretched those sleeping gods are, when Iupiter the onely wise, and potent, is euer awake, to see, prouide, foresee, and gouerne, by his infinite prouidence both men and creatures.
The citie of Sleep, Lucian^^ in his second booke Verarum Historiarum, though fabulously, yet hath facundiously described: This cittie (sayth he) is scituate in ^ most spatious and silent plaine, yet round incompast with tall and spreading

trees, amongst whose leaues the wind onely whispers, but neuer robustiously blowes. There Poppy growes aboundantly, Mandragora, and all such plants hearbes and simples as haue the innate vertue to procure and prouoke sleepe. There are multitudes of Battes which flie continually this way and that, and betwixt one tree and another, great store of Night-rauens, Owles, and Screechowles: no bird that is ashamed of day but is here frequently to be found. But neither the crowing Cocke, the chattering Pie, the quacking Duck, the gagling Goose, nor any other fowle, either of song or clamor can thither haue accesse. Fast by this citie glydes a riuer with a slow silent pace, making a murmure, but no noyse, rather to rocke and lull asleepe than to waken; the water is thicke and soft like oyle, the floods name is Lethe, whom others call Nictyporus, it flowes from two fountaine heads, both hid and obscured in places to no man knowne, the one is called Pannychius, the other Negretas. This citie hath two ports or gates, one of home composed with miraculous workemanship, in which as in a table are expressed all such true dreames as exercise the fantasies of men in their depth of rest: The other is made of the most purest and most white yuorie, in which are carued all sorts of dreames, but these as it were artificially shaddowed by the pensell, but none fully drawne and exprest to the life. Within this cities walls is a magnificent and spatious structure, called the Temple of Nigh^, which with all superstitious ceremonies is religiously honored: there is a second instituted to the goddesse Apales, and a third to Alethia, in both which there are Oracles. The sole inhabitants of this place are an infinite companie, but not a cittisen in shape or fauour one like another, some are leane, lancke, and little, with crooked legges, and hutch-backes, rather like monsters than men; others are comely, well featured, tall and proper, with cheerefull faces, and promising lookes; some are of a froward and terrible aspect, as if they threatned mischiefe and disaster; others portly, gallant, and regally habited: and whosoeuer shall enter the gates of this cittie, some domesticke dreame or other continually will encounter him and giue him a familiar and friendly salute, in the shape of some one of these formerly rehearsed, relating to him, some sad things, some pleasant things, to minister content or distast: somtimes they whisper truthes, but that sildome, for the greatest part of that multitude are lying and deceitfull, because for the most part they speake one thing and intend another: and thus far Lucianus of the house of Sleepe. I had once occasion to write my selfe in this manner:
Neare to the darke Cimerians lies a caue,Beneath the foote of a declining hill,Deepe in the earthes warme intrailes, like a graue,Where charming Silence makes all husht and still:Hither did neuer piercing Sunne beame craueAdmittance; nor the voice of hunter shrillFieres through the crannies of this concaue deepe,Where stands the dull and leaden house of Sleepe.Here the thicke vapoures from the earth exhaild,Myst^ all the place about: a doubtfull light,(...) twixt night and day (when (...) is faild,And the other not yet perfect) dulls the sight.No w^^efull dogg^, o^ clamorous cooke hath raildVpon the drowsie Morne, earely to dightThe Sunnes steedes. Here, the bird that fa^'d of old,Romes Capitoll, is neuer heard to scould.The brawlling Crane, nor yet the prating Crowe,Or tatling Parret, to desturbe the eare:No bestowing Bull, swift Hart, or Asse more flow,Is heard to bray: wee haue all silence here.Only a murmuring riuer (which doth flowFrom Lethe) with his streames 'mongst peables cleereLulls the dull sence to soft and feathered rest,Charming the cares and sorrowes in the brest.Before the gate the drowsie Poppie springs,With thousand plants and simples without number;Not one, but to the braine a numnesse brings,In^iting all the powers of man to slumber:Whose milkie iuice, the Night on her blacke wingsBeares, t'wart the earth, and scatters. Who dares cumberThis vniuersall whistnesse; where none come,But Taciturnitie, and Silence d^mbe?Vpon the doore no ratling hammers strokeIs heard without, to startle those within,No creeking hinge, by which soft sleepe is broke.Than to speake loude, ther's held no greater sinne.Midst a vast roome, a bed Hewd out of Oke,(That had of late some antient relique bin,Fring'd with thick dust and lasie cobwebs) stands,Not in an age once stird with carefull hands.Vpon this easie couch, with curtaines hungOf duskie coloured silke, you may behouldThe god of Sleepe in carelesse fashion flung,Stretching his drousie limbes, whom now's so boldTo iogge or stirre: where snortings are heard sung:They are pincht to softer breath. Some dreame of gold,Of Trifles some: his court here Morpheus keepes,Which no man sooner enters than be sleepes.
And this description begins to make me drowsie alreadie. But least speaking too much of sleepe, I may be taxed, and so taken napping my selfe, I leaue the brother fast sleeping to find out the sister who to the worlds end shall euer be waking.In Elia^is. Death is sayd to be educated by her mother Night. Pausanias puts vs in mind that in a Temple amongst the Elaeans, there was a woman pourtraied, leading two sleepy children, that in her right hand White, that in her left hand Blacke, both with crooked legges and mishapen feet; the inscription vpon the one was Sleepe, vpon the other Death, the woman that cherisht them, Night. This Death of all the powers that are, is most impartiall and implacable, and because by no prayers nor intercessions shee is to bee mooued, therefore there are no altars nor temples nor sacrifices celebrated to her honour^ her impartialitie and implacabilitie Orpheus hath signified in one of his hymnes,
Nec prece, muneribus, nec tu placabilis vllis.
She is attyred in a sable garment spotted with starres. The wise men of the

former ages extold her with miraculous praises, calling her the port and onely secure harbor or rest: she frees the bodie from a thousand paines and diseases, deliuers the subiect from the crueltie of the tyrant, and makes the begger equall with his prince. She to all good men is acceptable and welcome, only dreadfull to the wicked, who haue a presage and feare of punishments to come. Alcid^^^us writ an excellent booke in the praise of Death, hauing a large and copious argument: in which he stroue to expresse with what an equall sufferance and modest patience she was to be entertained. Of the same argument writes Plutarch in Consolator: for life is nothing els but a light lent vs by the Creator of all mankind, which if it be redemanded of vs, ought no more grudgingly to be paid back, than comming to a friends house to bee merrie in the morning, and hauing feasted there all the day, to returne to our home at night; or to pay back what wee borrow, to the owner: For there is no iniurie done to vs, if God demaunde that back at our hands which hee hath before but lent vs. Now from the daughter to come backe to the mother, and know what is allegorically meant by Night. These pests and mischeifes before commemorated are therfore sayd to be her sonnes and daughters, because the ignorance and mallice of man (which is indeed the night of the mind) is the parent and nurse of all calamities incident to vs: yet may some of their violences by wisedome be mitigated, though not frustrated of their ends, namely Age, Loue, Fate, Death, and the like; who though they be in perpetuall motion, their speed may bee slackned though not stayd, and their pace slowed though not quite stopt. She was called the most Antient, because before the Heauens and the Sunne were created there was no light extant; which is said to proceede from the lower parts of the earth, in regard that the Sunne compassing the world, when he lights the Antipodes with his beames, the earth shadowes them from vs, which shaddow is nothing else than Night. She is called the mother of all, as being before the birth of any thing. The word Nox is deriued a Nocendo, of hurting or harming; the reason is, as some Phisitions hold opinion, because the corrupt humors of the night are infectious and dangerous, especially to men any way diseased; of which there is continuall experience in all such as haue either woundes, or aches, or agues, or feauers, or the like, to all such weakenesses or imperfections, the humors of the Night are still most hurtfull and obnoxious. And so much breifly what morally can be gathered by that which hath bin fabulously commented of Night.
That Sleepe could not fasten on the eyes of Iupiter, it is intended, not to bee conuenient for him that hath the charge and protection of the whole Vniuerse, to whose care and foresight the administration and guidance of all things are committed, should so much as slumber or wincke at all; neither doth the diuine Nature need any rest to repaire and comfort his troubled spirits, when he is not capable of either labour or discommoditie. And Lethe is called the sister of Somnus, in regard that by our naturall repose, wee for the time forget all paine, anguish, or trouble. Because he comes to many creatures, and at the same time, he is said to be winged; in regard the humor of the Night encreaseth the vapours of the stomach, ascending to the higher parts of the body, which after by the frigiditie of the braine, descend againe lower and more coole, by which Sleepe is begot; hee is therefore not vnproperly called, the sonne of Night: which Night calls me now to rest, with the finishing of this second booke, called EVTERPE.


Explicit Lib. 2.



THE THIRD BOOKE of Women, inscribed THALIA. Treating of Illustrious Queenes, Famous Wiues, Mothers, Daughters, etc. Containing the Histories of sundry Noble Ladies.
GOrgias held opinion, that Women were not to be honored according to their forme, but their fame; preferring actuall vertue before superficial beautie: to incorage which in their sex, funerall orations were allowed by the Roman Lawes to be celebrated for all such as had beene either presidents of a good and commendable life, or otherwise illustrious for any noble or eminent action. And therefore (least the matrons or virgins in Rome, the one should diuert from her stayed grauitie, or the other from her virgins professed integritie) the vse of Wine was not knowne amongst them; for that woman was taxed with immodestie, whose breath was knowne to smell of the grape. Pliny in his naturall historie, saith, That Cato was of opinion,Lib. 14. That the vse of kissing first began betwixt kinsman and kinswoman,How kissing first came vp. howsoeuer neere allide or farre off, onelie by that to know whether their wiues, daughters, or neeces, had tasted any wine: to this Iuuenall seemes to allude in these verses:
Paucae adeo cereris vittas contingere dignaQuarum non time at pater oscula.
As if the father were iealous of his daughters continence, if by kissing her, he perceiued she had drunke wine. But kissing and drinking both are now growne (it seemes) to a greater custome amongst vs than in those dayes with the Romans: nor am I so austeare to forbid the vse of either, both which though the one in surfets, the other in adulteries, may be abused by the vicious; yet contrarilie at customarie meetings, and laudable banquets, they by the nobly disposed, and such whose hearts are fixt vpon honour, may be vsed with much modestie and continence. But the purpose of my tractate, is to exemplifie, not to instruct; to shew you presidents of vertue from others, not to fashion any new imaginarie forme from my selfe; and that setting so many statues of honour before your eyes, of Beautie, Noblenesse, Magnanimitie, Bountie, Curtesie,

Modestie, Temperance, and whatsoeuer else in goodnes can be included, each heroick and well disposed Ladie, or woman lower degreed and vnder^qualified, may out of all, or some of these at least, apprehend some one thing or other worthie imitation; that as the best of Painters, to ^^law one exqui^it Ve^us, had set before him a hundred choise and selected beauties, all naked, to take from one an eye, another a lippe, a third a smile, a fourth a hand, and from each of them that speciall lineament in which she most excelled; so hauing in these papers as many vertues exposed to your view, as the Painter had beauties, and all left as naked to your eies, you may make like vse of it: draw from one a noble disposition, bountie, and curtesie, the ornaments of great Ladies; from others, temperance, sobrietie, and gouernement, things best beseeming matrons; the married wiues, coniugall loue and sinceritie; the virgins chast life and puritie; and euerie of you fashion her selfe as complete a woman for vertue, as Apelles made vp the purtraiture of his goddesse, for beautie. I need not speake much of the worth of your sex, since no man (I thinke) that remembers hee had a mother but honours it; the renowne of which, ^ome by their vertues haue as much nobilitated, as others by their vitious actions haue studied to disgrace: of both which, though my promise binde me to speake in their course, yet you Ladies in this treatise (as you most worthily deserue) haue the precedence and prioritie of place. What man was euer knowne to be eminent, whom woman in some manner hath not equalled? Come to Fortitude, as there was an Hercules and a Theseus; so there was a Menalippe and an Hippolite to encounter them: who as they conquered not, so they were not vanquished. Come to limning or drawing of Pictures, as there was a Zeusis, a Timanthes, an Androcides, and a Parhasius; so the world yeelded a Timarete, the daughter of Micaon; an Irene, the daughter and scholler of Cratinus; an Anistarite, the issue and puple of Nearchus; a Lala Cizizena, and a Martia, M. Varronis to boote: to them, in that art no whit inferiour. In Poetrie compare the Lyrickes of Sapho with Anacreons, and Corinnaes with Pindarus, and it shall be easily made manifest that Sapho in all points paraleld the first, and Corinna, in fiue seuerall contentions for the palme, preceded the last. But the similitude or discrepance of men and womens vertues conferd together, can be made no better apparant (as Plutarch saith) than by comparing Life with Life, and Action with Action, by which we shall see they haue almost one and the same effigies: For oppose the magnificence of Sesostris against that of Semiramis; tha craft and subtlety of Seruius Tullius against Tanaquills; the magnanimitie of Brutus against Porceaees; compare Pelopidas with Timoclea; and which shall yeeld to the other preheminence? especially if wee exactly consider the end at which the vertue it selfe doth ayme: for diuerse vertues haue diuers colours laid vpon them, according to the temperature of body, or the disposition of the mind. Achilles was valiant one way, and Aiax another, yet both their indeuours intended to one Fortitude; the Prudence of Nestor vnlike that of Vlysses, yet both wise men; Cato and Agesilaus were both vpright men, yet executed justice two sundrie waies; Irene loued one way, Alceste another, yet both endeeredly affected their husbands; so likewise Cornelia and Olimpias were differently magnanimious, yet either of them attained to that height of honour to which their heroick mindes aspired. But to come to our former comparison from which I haue somewhat digrest; in what greater vertue can either sex expresse themselues, than in true coniugall loue? Cicero de Diuinatione, and Plinie in lib. 1. cap. 16. report of Tiberius Gracchus,Tiber. Grach. That finding two snakes in his house, male and

female, hee consulted with a south-sayer concerning the prodegie; who told him as a consequence infallible, That if hee slew the male, swift death should surprise himselfe, but if hee killed the female, himselfe should escape death, and his wife in (...) like manner perish, but to one of them that fate must necessarily happen. He therefore preferring the safetie of his wife before his owne health, caused the male to be instantly cut in peeces, and the female let goe, beholding with his owne eyes his owne instant destruction in the death of the serpent. Therefore it was disputed, whether Cornelia were more happie in inioying such a husband, or made more wretched in loosing him? An admirable and rare president in man, and a husband; which I can easily instance in woman, and a wife: for as there is nothing more diuelish and deadly than a malitious and ill disposed woman, so there is on the contrarie, nothing more wholesome and comfortable to man than one prouident, gentle, and well addicted; for as she that is good and honest, will vpon iust necessitie lay downe her life for her husbands health and safetie, so the other will as willingly prostitute hers for his distruction and ruin. Therefore a wife by how much neerer she is to vs in the strict bond both of diuine and humane lawes, by so much either the sweetenesse of her behauiour tasts the pleasanter, or the harshnesse of her crabbed condition, relishes more bitter; for she is euer either a perpetuall refuge, or a continuall torment: she of whom I intend to speake is none such as the last,Alceste. her historie I thus receiue in briefe. Admetus a king of Greece, demanded Alce^te in marriage, whose father had publisht an edict, That none should inioy her saue such a one as could reconcile two wild beasts of contrarie cruelties and natures opposit, to drawe without iarring together in his Chariot. This Admetus hearing, he petitioned to Apollo and Hercules, who commiserating his suit, the one brought him a Lion, the other a Beare, both made tame and gentle to his hand: who presenting them to the father of Alceste, and hauing yoaked them and made them drawe according to the Edict, receiued her as his bride, and departed with her thence into his owne countrie of Thessaly. Not long after Admetus falling into a great infirmitie of sicknesse, and consulting with the Oracle about his health, answere was returned, That he must necessarily leaue the world vnlesse he could procure some friend, kinsman, courtier, or other, who by sacrificing their owne liues to his loue, might ransome his, and by no other meanes his health to be restored. This motion being made to many both neere and deere to him (who no doubt had promised more, with purpose to performe lesse) in conclusion it was refused by all; which comming to the eare of Alceste, she gaue her selfe vp to a most willing death, to redeeme the health and life of her husband, and with her owne hands slew her selfe. Now tell me (o you Satyrists against the sex of women, that call them fraile, inconstant, weake, and timerous) in which of these two did manly courage, noble resolution, or coniugall loue most shine? in him that by suffering death to steale vpon him yeelded himselfe to the necessitie of fate, or in her who like a bold Virago with an vnmatchable resolution with her owne hand extracted that blood from her chast brest, with which shee writ herselfe a character of honour, to outlast all antiquitie? In these things then you see, they may justly claime an equall competence with men, but in many things a iust prioritie, as in noursing and bringing vp their children, in mannaging the affaires of the house, and care of all domestick businesse, in prouiding vs Diet, Linnen for the backe and bed, in sewing, weauing, and in spinning: for who cannot imagine how ill great Hercules did become the distaffe? But I will cease further to

speake in their praise, least I be taxed of palpable flatterie, and some may lay on mean aspertion, That either I lou'd that sex wondrous well in my youth, or perhaps now begin to dote on them in my age. And since I last spake of that conioyned loue that ought to be betwixt man and wife, I will produce an Epigram taken from Ausonius to that purpose, the inscription is as followeth.
Ad Vxorem.Liue as we haue liu'd, still to each other new,And vse those names we did when we first knew:Let the same smiles within our cheekes be red,The same sports thought on we first vs'd in bed.Let the day neuer come to see the change,That either Time, or Age, shall make vs strange:But as we first met, let vs euer be,I, thy young man, and thou a girle to me:To others, though I seeme like Nestor old,And thou more yeares hast, than Sibilla Cu^ Cumana told:Times snow we will not see, though it appeares,Tis good to know our age, not count our yeares.
Such I must confesse, Husbands ought to be to their Wiues, and wiues to their husbands, but they are seldome found in these dayes, as may appeare by a short tale that I will tell you.Of three gentlemen and their wiues. Three gentlemen being late at supper in a tauerne, euerie man in curtesie made offer to pay the reckoning, at length a motion was made amongst them, that because it equallie concerned them all, to put it to fortune and cast the dice; so that committing it to chance, the other should be no wayes beholding to him for his charges. To this two of them assented, but the third presuming much vpon the loue of his wife, was willing to put it to another venture, both to saue his purse, and expresse to his friends the gentle disposition of a woman to her husband, whose welcome home was still as constant at midnight as at mid-day: he therefore made a second motion, that to decide the controuersie, euerie man should instantly make hast home by turnes, as they lay neerest in their way, and he that did not that thing instantly which his wife badde, the whole charge of the reckoning should be imposed vpon him, and not to part companie till they see this done: vpon which they concluded. They went to the next house, the gentleman first knockt at his owne doore, and he was let in, the rest followed, but the husband onelie shewing himselfe, found his wife in the kitchin; how now wife (saith he) what hast thou rese^ued for my supper? She churlishlie replyed, here is nothing but the porridge the dogge hath lapt in, you had best sup vp them: this was sport to the other two, and he not willing both to be charged and laught at, and so doublie punisht, did as she bad, and so away they went all three to the house of the second. His wife was in bed, how now sweet heart where are you (saith he) here sweet husband (she answered againe) and I pray you come to bed quicklie: who hastilie put off his cloathes, went to bed, and as speedilie rose againe to see what would become of the third. To his lodging they went (and this was he that presuming on his wiues gentlenesse drew the rest to the motion) being entred, he askt the maid for her mistresse, who told him she was newlie gone to her chamber, vp the staires runnes he, the gentlewoman askt who is

there? 'tis I sweet wife saith he, and for hast stumbled at the vppermost step: You had best breake your necke downe the staires saith she. At which words he pawsing a little, Nay on my word not so quoth he, rather than do that, I will euen backe againe with my friends to the Tauerne and pay the reckoning. But leauing this, which by some may bee consured to bee little better than trifling, I thus breake off my introduction, and proceede to matter more serious, beginning with a briefe summary or catalogue of the names of some famous Queen^s, Mothers and Daughters, many of which we shall haue occasion to handle more at large in the processe of our Treatise.

Of Queenes Illustrious.
SEmiramis was Queene of the Assyrians, Camilla of the Volscians, Nicaul^ (whom some call Saba) of the Aethiopians, Athalia of the Hebrewes, Thomiris of the Scithians, Hesther of the Persians, Cleopatra of the Aegyptians, Zenobia of the Palmyriens, Amalasuntha of the Gothes; of these wee shall speake more at large,Wherfore the Hunnes were first called Lombards or Longbeards. as they fall in course. Theolinda of the Longobards or Lombards succeedes. This nation dwelt first in Pannonia, and were gouerned by the king Albinus: now the reason why they were first so called, was this. In the time that Iustinus sirnamed the Lesse, wore the imperiall purple, Narses the Eunuch had fought vnder him many braue and victorious battells against the Gothes, who had vsurped the greatest part of Italie, from whence he expeld them, slew their king, and freed the whole countrey from many outrages. Notwithstanding his great good seruice, he was calumniated to the Emperour, and so hated by the Emperesse Sophia, that she sent him word, That she would make him lay by his sword and armour, and with a distaffe spinne wooll amongst her maides: to which message he returned answer, That hee would make such a thread to put into her loome, that all the weauers in the Empire should scarce make good cloath on. Vpon this ground he sent to Albinus king of the Hunnes, who then inhabited Pannonia, asking him, Why hee would dwell in the barren continent of Pannonia, when the most fertile countrey of Italie lay open to his inuasion? Albinus apprehending this incouragement from Narses, in the yeare six hundred threescore and eight, made his first incursion into the Emperours confines, who sent certaine spyes to discouer the forces of Albinus; of which he hauing intelligence, caused all the women to vntye their haire and fasten it about their chinnes, thereby to seeme men, and make the number of his army appeare the greater. The spyes obseruing them, wondred amongst themselues, and askt what strange people these were with the Long beards? and from hence their names were first deriued, which hath since beene remarkeable in the most pleasant and fertill climate of all Italy, from them called Lombardie. Others say, that when they went to fight against the Vandales, There was a man that had the spirit of Prophesie, whom they besought to pray for them and their good successe in the battaile; now when the Prophet went to his orisons, the queene had placed her selfe and hir women iust against the window where he prayd, with their heire disposed as aforesaid; and iust as he ended his deuotions, they opened their casements and appeared to him, who presentlie said to himselfe, what be these Long-beards? to whom the queene replyed, To these Long-beards then whom thou hast named, let the victorie happen, thus saith the history. Rhodegondis was queene of

France,Why women in France are disabled from bearing Soueraigntie. but after her not any. Now some may demand the reason why the Salicke law was first made, by which all women were made incapable of succession in the principalities, which (as Plicronicon relates) was this; The crowne lineallie descending to a Princesse of the blood, whom for modesties sake hee forbeares to name, or at least their owne Chronicles are loath to publish; this Lady hauing many Princelie sutors, neglected them all, and fell in loue with a Butcher of Paris, whom she priuatelie sent for, and as secretlie married: since when, all of that sex were by an irreuocable decree disabled of all soueraigntie. Cassiope was the famous Queene of Aethiopia; Harpalice, of the Amazons; Hyppolite, of Magnesia; Teuca, of the Illyrians, etc. Of these in their places. Amongst whom let me not be so vnnaturall to her merit,The memory of Queene Elizabeth. or so ingratefull to my countrey (thrice blest and diuinelie happie in her most fortunate raigne) as not to remember that euer to be celebrated Princesse, Elizabeth of late memory, Queene of England: She that was a Saba for her wisedome, an Harpalice for her magnanimitie (witnesse the Campe at Tilburie) a Cleopatra for her bountie, a Camilla for her chastitie, an Amalasuntha for her temperance, a Zenobia for her learning and skill in language; of whose omniscience, pantarite, and goodnesse, all men heretofore haue spoke too little, no man hereafter can write too much: sacred be still her memorie to vs on earth, as her blessed soule liues euer glorified in heauen.Q. Anne. Her succeeded (though not in her absolute Monarchy, yet a Princesse of vnspotted fame, incomparable clemencie, vnmatchable goodnesse, and most remarkable vertue) Queene Anne, whom all degrees honored, all nations loued, and no tongue was euer heard to asperse with the least callumnie: who in her too short eminence heere amongst vs, was knowne to be the step of dignitie to many, but detriment to none; in whom all were glad, by whom none had euer the least cause of sorrow, vnlesse in the lamented losse of so graue and gratious a princesse. And for my owne part (gentle and curteous reader) let me borrow so much of thy patience, that I may vpon this so iust and good occasion, remember a long neglected dutie, by inserting in this place a few funerall teares vpon her hearse.




A Funerall Oade vpon the death of ANNA PANARETA.

NOw Hymen change thy saffron weedes
To roabe and habit sable:
For ioyfull thoughts, vse funerall deedes
Since nothing's firme or stable;
This (alas) we
May read and see,
As in a mappe or printed table.


It was not at the time of yeare
Birds bid the Spring god-morrow,
Nor when we from the Summer cleare
Her warmth and pleasures borrow.
Nor when full fields
Ripe Autumne yeelds,
That we are thus inuolu'd in sorrow.


But when the barren earth denyes
Fruits to the reapers mowing:
When Meteors muster in the skyes
And no faire fruits are growing.
When winter cold,
Dry, seare, and old,
His frozen fingers or'e the fire sits blowing.


When the Sunne scants vs of his heat,
And Phoebe tempests threateth:
When Boreas blustring in his seat,
His frozen pineons beateth;
And as a King
Aboue the Spring,
The fresh and timely budds defeateth.


In this great barrennesse were we
Our plenty made to smother:
But what might this rare iewell be?
A Saint, a Queene, a Mother,
An Hester faire,
A Iudith rare;
These dead, oh point me out another!


Saue Debora, that's likewise dead,
Fam'd for her countries freeing:
But shall we henceforth see or reade
Of such another being.
Oh what a dearth
Is now on earth
That heare none liues with these agreeing.


Saba was wise, so was our Queene,
For beautie others famed,
Some for their vertue crown'd haue beene,
And in large legends named.
Who liuing shall
Contend in all
With her (alas) shall be but shamed.


But since our prayses at their best,
Shorten so farre her merit,
Leaue her to her eternall rest,
A glorious Sainted spirit:
For aye to sing
Vnto heauens King
Thanks, for these ioyes she doth inherit.



Yet, 'tis a duty that we owe
To giue our griefe expression,
The greater that our sorrowes grow,
It shewes the lesse transgression,
A losse like this
Tis not a misse
That we then leaue to all succession.


Skyes mourne her death in stormie cloudes,
Seas weepe for her in brine:
Thou earth that now her frailtie shroudes,
Lament though she be thine;
Onely reioyce
Heauen with lowd voyce,
That you are now become her shrine.


For this appear'd the Blazing starre,
Yet fresh in our memory,
That Christendome both neere and farre
Might tell it as a story.
Great Ioue it sent
With an intent
Onely to get her to her glory.





In this Catalogue of Queenes,The Lady Elizabeth. hauing so late remembred the mother, how can I forget the daughter? she to whom I must giue that attribut which all soldiers bestow vpon her, The Queene of women, and the best of Queenes, whose magnanimitie in war, and gentlenes in peace, resolution in the one, and generous affabilitie in the other, haue so sweet a correspondence, that when the Canon roared lowd at the gates, and the bullet forced a passage euen through the Pallace where she lodged, was no more daunted in courage nor dismayd in countenance, than when the gentle and soft musicke melodiouslie sounded at the celebration of her espousalls. Sacred (oh Princely Lady) for euer be your memorie, and fortunate and happy your hopefull posteritie; may your wombe prooue a bed of souldiours, and your breasts the nursserie of Kings, may the sonnes victories redeeme the losses of the father, and the daughters surmount the fertilitie of their mother: may your future fortunes be answerable to your former vertues, that as you haue the earnest prayers of all good men, so you may haue the successe of their wishes: which millions that neuer yet saw you desire, but all that vnderstand you, know you worthilie deserue. And to conclude, that as you are the last of these in this my Catalogue by order, posterity may reckon you the first amongst the Illustrious by merit.


Of diuers Ladies famous for their Modestie.
OH thou Chastitie and puritie of life, thou that art the ornament as well of man, as woman, from whence shall I inuoke thee? thou diddest first helpe to kindle the sacred fires of Vesta, where virginitie was made Religion: Thou that was wont to frequent the chambers of great Ladies with

sinnelesse and vndefiled hands make the beds of the cittie Matrons, and to be obsequious about the Pallats strowed in the countrey cottages, where shall I find thee now to direct this my pen in her large and vnbounded progresse? or to tutour me so farre, that I may know what on this argument thou thy selfe wouldest haue done? Liuie, Florus, Plutarch, and others, speaking of the wonder of the Roman chastitie, Lucresse,Lucresse. accuse fortune, or nature of error, for placing such a manlie heart in the breast of a woman; who being adulterated by Sextus Tarquinius, after she had sent to her friends, and to them complained her iniuries, because she would not liue a by-word to Rome, nor preserue a despoiled body for so noble a husbands embraces, with a knife which she had hid vnder her garment for the same purpose, in presence of them all slew her selfe: which was after, the cause that the Tyrannicall monarchy of Rome was transferd into a Consular dignitie. Armenia,Armenia. the wife of Tygranes, hauing beene with her husband at a sumptuous banquet made by King Cyrus in his Pallace Royall, when euery one extold the maiestie, and applauded the goodlinesse of the Kings person; at length Tygranes askt his queene what her opinion was of his magnitude and person: She answered, I can say nothing sir, for all the time of the feast mine eyes were stedfastle ^ixt vpon you my deare husband; for what other mens beauties are,Cornelia. it becoms not a married wife to inquire. Cornelia the wife of Aemilius Paulus, when a great lady of Campania came to her house, and opening a rich casket (as the custome of women is to be friendly one with another) shee shewed her gold rings, rich stones and iewels, and causing her chests to be opened, exposed to her view great varietie of costly and pretious garments: which done, she intreated Cornelia to doe her the like curtesie, and to shew her what iewels and ornaments she had stored to beautifie her selfe, which hearing, she protracted the time with discourse till her children came from schoole, and causing them to be brought before her, turned vnto the Lady, and thus said, These be my iewells, my riches, and delights, nor with any gayer ornaments desire I to be beautified.

Filij bonae indolis, parentum lauta supellex.

Viz. No domesticke necessaries better grace a house, than children wittie and well disposed. Many haue bin of that continence, they haue imitated the Turtle, who hauing once lost her mate, will euer mourne, but neuer enter into the fellowship of another. Therefore Ania Romana,Ania. a woman of a noble familie, hauing buryed her first husband-in her youth, when her friends and kindred continuallie layd open the sollitude of widdowhood, the comfort of societie, and all things that might persuade her to a second marriage; she answered, It was a motion, to which she would by no meanes assent: for (saith she) should I happen vpon a good man, such as my first husband was, I would not liue in that perpetuall feare I should bee in, least I should loose him; but if otherwise, Why should I hazard my selfe vpon one so badde, that am so late punisht with the losse of one so good. It is reported of Portia Minor,P^ortia Min. the daughter of Cato, That when a woman who had marryed a second husband, was for many vertues much commended in her presence; Peace (saith she) That woman can neither bee happy, well manner'd, nor truely modest, that will a second time marry. But I hold her in this to be too censorious; yet the most antient Romans onelie conferred on her the Crowne of modestie and continence, that was contented with one matrimonie, as making expression of their vncorrupted sinceritie in their continewed widdowhood. Especiallie such were most discommended to make choice of a second husband, who had children left them by the first, resembling

their father. To which Virgill in the fourth booke of his Aeneid. seemes elegantly to allude, Dido thus complaining of the absence of Aenaeas:
--Siqua mihi de te suscepta fuissetAnte fugam soboles -- etc.Had I by thee but any issue hadBefore thy flight; some pretie wanton lad,That I might call Aeneas, and to playAnd pra^e to me to dri^e these thoughts away:And from whose smiling countenance I might gatherA true presentment of the absent father;I should not then my wretched selfe esteeme,So altogether lost^^^ I now seeme.
Plutarch much commends the widdowhood of Cornelia,Cornelia. the illustrious mother of the Gracchi; whose care, hauing nobly prouided for her children and familie after the death of her husband: she exprest her selfe euery way so absolute a matron, that Tiberius Gracchus (of whom we spake before) was not ill counselled by the gods, by preseruing her life, to prostrate his owne: for she denied to marry with king Ptolomeus, and when he would haue imparted to her a diadem and a scepter, she refused to be stiled a queene, to keepe the honour of a chast widdow. Of the like puritie was Valeria,Valeria. the sister Messalar: who being demaunded by her kindred and deerest freinds, why (her first husband dead) she made not choice of a second? answered, that she found her husband Seruius to liue with her still: accounting him aliue to her whom shee had euer in remembrance: A singular and remarkeable sentence, proceeding from a most excellent matron, intimating how the sacred vnitie in wedlock ought to be dignified, namely with the affections of the mind, not the vaine pleasures of the body. This was proued in the daughter of Democion the Athenian,Democion Filia. who being a virgin, and hearing that Leosthenes, to whom she was contracted, was slaine in the Lemnian wars, and not willing to suruiue him, killed her selfe: but before her death, thus reasoning with her selfe; Though I haue a bodie vntoucht, yet if I should fall into the imbraces of another, I should but haue deceiued the second, because I am still married to the first in my heart. Not of their minds was Popilia the daughter of Marcus,Popilia. who to one that wondered what should be the reason why all feminine beasts, neuer admitted the act of generation but in their time, and when they couet issue, and woman at all times desires the companie of man? thus answered, the reason is onely this, Because they are beasts.


The wife of FVLVIVS.
THis Fuluius the familiar and indeered friend of Augustus Caesar, heard him priuatly complaine of the great solitude that was then in his house, since two of his grand-children by his daughter were taken away by death, and the onely third that remained, was (for some calumnies publisht against the Emperour) now in exile, so that he should bee forced to abandon his owne blood,He was called Posthumus. and constitute a sonne in law, and a stranger, to succeed in the Imperiall purple; and therefore he had many motions in himselfe, and sometimes a purpose to recall the yong mans banishment, and to restore him to his fauour

and former grace in the court. This Fuluius hearing, went home, and vpon promise of secresie told it to his wife: shee could not containe her selfe, but makes what speede she can, and tells this good newes to the Empresse Liuia; Liuia she speeds to Augustus, and briefly expostulates with him about the banishment of her grand-child, and what reason he had not to restore him to his former honors? and why he would preferre a stranger before his own blood? with many such like vpbraidings. The next morning Fuluius comming (as his custome was) into the Presence, and saluting the Emperour, Augustus cast an austere looke vpon him, and shaking his head sayd onely thus, You haue a close brest Fuluius; by this, he perceiuing his wife had published abroad what he had told her in secret, posts home with what speede hee can, and calling his wife before him, o woman (sayth he) Augustus knowes that I haue reuealed his secret, therefore I haue a resolution to liue no longer: to whom she replied, Neither is that death you threaten to your selfe without merite, who hauing liued with me so long, and knowne my weakenesse and loquacitie, had not the discretion to preuent this danger to which you haue drawne your selfe by tempting my frailetie; but since you will needs die, it shall be my honour to precead you in death: which she had no sooner spoke, but snacht out his sword and with it slew her selfe. A noble resolution in an heathen Ladie, to punish her husbands disgrace and her owne ouersight with voluntarie death; and a notable example to all women that shall succeede her, to be more charie in keeping their husbands secrets: all which I would wish to follow the counsell of the comick Poet Philippides, who when king Lysimachus called him vnto him and vsing him with all curtesie spake thus, What of the things that are within or without me shall I impart vnto thee, o Phillippides? he thus answered, Euen what thou pleasest oh king, so thou still reseruest to thy selfe thy counsells. This puts me in mind of king Seleucus Callinicus, who hauing lost a battaile against the Galatians, and his whole armie being quite subuerted and disperced, casting away his crowne and and all regall ornaments, was forced to flie onely attended with two or three seruants; and wandering long through many deserts and by-pathes, as fearing to be discouered, and growing faint with hunger, he came to a certaine ruinate cottage, where he de^ired bread and water: the maister of the house not onely affoorded him that, but whatsoeuer else the place could yeeld or the suddennesse of the time prouide, with a large welcome. In the interim of dinner, fixing his eyes vpon Seleucus face he knew him to be the king, and not able to containe his owne ioyes nor conceale the kings dssimulation, after dinner the king being redie to take horse, and bidding his host farewell, hee replied againe, And farewell o king Seleucus: who finding himselfe discouered, reached him his hand as to imbrace him, beckning to one of his followers who at the instant at one blow strooke off his head, so that as Homer:
Sic caput estque loquentis ad huc cum puluere mistum.
These were the fruits of vnseasonable babling; for this fellow, had he kept his tongue till the king had beene restored to his former dignities, might haue receiued large rewardes for his hospitallitie, who su^ered an vnexpected death for his loquacitie.

Aretaphila.
ARetaphila Cyrenaea, is deseruedly numbered amongst the heroick Ladies, she liued in the time of Mithredates, and was the daughter of Aeglatur, and the wife of Phedimus: a woman of excellent Vertue, exquisit Beautie,

singular Wisedome, and in the managing of common-welthes businesse and ciuill affaires ingeniously expert: this Ladie the common calamities of her countrie made eminent, for Nicocaentes the tyrant, hauing vsurped the principallitie ouer the Cirenaeans, amongst many other of his inhumane butcheries, slew Menalippus the Priest of Apollo, and assumed to himselfe the sacred office and dignitie. In the number of these noble citisens, hee caused Phedimus the husband of Aretaphila to be iniuriously put to death, and married her against her will: who as well distrest with her priuate discontents as suffering in the publique calamitie, meditated a remedie for both, and by aduise of some of her neerest allies attempted to poyson the king; but the proiect being discouered, was preuented: and vpon that ground Calbia mother to Nicocrates, a woman of an implacable spirit, and prone to any thing wherin there might be blood and slaughter, first condemned her to insufferable torture, and next to violent death: but the tyrant her sonne in regard of the extraordinarie loue he bore vnto her, being the more relenting and humane of the two, was pleased to put her cause first to examination, and after to censure. In which triall shee answered boldly and with great courage in the defence of her owne innocence: but being by manifest proofes conuicted, in so much that her purpose could not be denied, she then descended so low as to excuse herselfe, alleaging that (indeed) apprehending the greatnesse of his person, and that she was in degree no better to him than an handmaide; and fearing least some other more accomplisht beautie might steppe betwixt him and her to insinnuate into his fauour and grace, shee therefore had prepared an amatorious confection, minding only to continue his loue, not to betray his life; and if her womanish weakenesse had in any kind (through ignorance) transgrest the bounds of loyaltie, she submitted her selfe to his royall clemencie, whose approoued judgement shee made no doubt, knew how to distinguish betwixt folly and malice. Notwithstanding these smooth euasions, Nicocrates fully possest of the truth, gaue her vp into the hands of his mother to be tormented, who (as shee is before charractered) being a harsh and mercilesse woman, left nothing vnattempted that torture could deuise, to wrest from her a capitoll confession: but Aretaphila with wonderous patience and constancie induring whatsoeuer the beldame could inflict vpon her, Calbia grew as wearie in punishing, as she in suffering, insomuch that Nicocrates was in some sort persuaded of her innocencie, and commanded her release, seeming sorrowfull for the torments she had indured, so that his former loue conquering his suspition, he began to studie a new reconcilement, and excusing his too much credulousnesse renewed his antient familiaritie and custome. But she not forgetting her former rackes and strapadoes, now began to meditate vpon his death another way: she had a daughter of exquisite feature, and the tyrant had a brother called Leander, a wildeheaded yong man and apt for any innouation or hair-braind attempt, shee wrought so far with her, and so inwardly with him, that by the consent of the king a match was concluded betwixt them. All these things falling out according to her wishes, her daughter (by the mothers instigation) wrought so farre vpon his rashnesse in priuate, and the mother gaue him such incouragement withall, that putting him in hope to inioy the soueraignetie to himselfe, they persuaded him to supplant his brother: This tooke such prosperous effect, that he suborned a seruant of his called Daphries, who attending his opportunitie, slew the tyrant. Aretaphila not with this contented, whose reuenge aymed to extirpat the whole familie of the tyrant, and whose goodnesse, to free

her countrie from all seruitude, instigated the citisens against Learchus for the murder of her king and second husband, drawing him into the compasse of that publike hate, that he was forced to flie as a traitour and a fratricide: neither was she satisfied whilst he yet liued, therefore by her wit and policie, and the industrie of one Anabas, hee was at length subtlely surprised; by which the citie receiued her pristine libertie and freedome. For which the people would haue done her diuine honours, as to a goddesse, which shee vtterly refused. They next proceeded to justice vpon the delinquents, where Calbia was iudged to the fire and burnt a liue, and Leander to be sowed in a sacke and so cast into the Sea, both which executions were accordingly performed. The people then once againe assembled and prostrated themselues before her, ioyntly beseeching her either to take vpon her the primacie and chiefe gouernment, or at least to be a gracious assistant to the magistrates and princes, with her directions and counsell: both which shee vtterly refused, betaking herselfe to a solitarie and retired life, spending the rest of her age in spinning, weauing, and the like womanish chares, amongst her handmaides.
Pieria.Many of the Iones by reason of a discord that fell betwixt them and the sonnes of Neleus, were forced to leaue the cittie Miletum, where they before inhabited, and were driuen to plant a new collonie in Minus, betwixt which cities there was perpetuall jarre and enmitie; in so much that from a priuat quarrell it grew to a publike warre, yet not in that violence but that vpon some certaine feastiuall daies there was free recourse betwixt the citisens of the one and the other, to be present at the sacred solemnities. There was amongst these of the cittie of Minus, one of a noble familie whose name was Pythes, his wife was called Iapigia, and his daughter Pyeria: He, when the great feast celebrated to Diana, called Nelaim (of the opposit familie) was kept, sent thither his wife and daughter, intreating the Milesians to suffer them to participate of their solemnities, which was granted: at which enterview, Phrigius, the chiefe of the sonnes of Neleus a man most potent in the cittie, grew inamoured on Pyeria; and in courting her, desired her to demaund what curtesie soeuer the cittie or his power could yeeld and it should be instantly granted: to which she answered, That nothing could be more acceptable vnto her than that the Iones might haue more often and peaceable recourse into their cittie. By which he apprehended that shee desired no more than a cessasion of armes, and that peace might be established betwixt the two citties: which by their marriage was accordingly effected, and Pyeria euer after honoured for the motion. In so much that it grew to a prouerbe, All the Milesian women desiring to bee no better beloued of their husbands than Pyeria was of her Phrigius.
Aspasia.Aspasia being the daughter of Hermotimus Phocencis (her mother dying of her in childbirth) was by her fathers care brought vp, though meanelie, yet modestlie: and growing towards vnderstanding, shee had many dreames as presages of her future fortunes; namelie, that succeeding times should affoord her a husband faire, good, and rich. In this interim she was troubled with an vnseemelie swelling of the chinne, so great, that it grew almost to a deformitie, being a sorrow to the father, and almost a heart-breake to the daughter. Hermotimus carefull of her health, presents her malady to the Physition; who was willing to vndertake the patient, but withall proposed too great a summe for the cure: the one replying, The demand is aboue my strength; the other answered, Then is the cure aboue my skil, and so departed. This discouragement

from a Tumor without, grew to a Corsiue within: as much tormented with the despaire of her recouerie as the violence of the disease. In this anxietie of thoughts and agonie of paine being much perplexed, she gaue her selfe to all abstinence and forbare to eate; till on a time a gentle slumber stealing vpon her, there appeared to her a Turtle, which was instantlie transhapt into a woman most beautifull, who drawing more neere, bids her take courage, and be of comfort, and forgettting the Physitions with all their drugges, vnguents, and emplasters, onely to apply to the place then grieued, rose leaues dryed to powder, and not to doubt of her present recouerie; and hauing thus said, vpon the instant vanisht. Aspasia awaking, and by this vision much comforted, applyed to her face such things as she was taught; in short time all swelling was taken away, and she restored to her pristine beautie, with such an addition of comelinesse, that those with whom she before was held but equall, she in the eyes of all men might now claime ouer them a iust precedence: for she is thus described, Her haire somewhat yellow, and from the temples naturallie curling, her eyes bigge and cleere, her nose somewhat (but most becomminglie) hooked, her eares short, her skinne white and soft, her cheekes seeming to lodge the sweet blushes of the rose (for which cause the Phocenses cald her from an infant Milto) her lippes red, her teeth than snow more white, her feet without all fault, her voyce so sweet and rauishing, that when she spake, she would put you in mind of what you haue read of the Syrens. From all effeminate curiosities she studied to alienate her selfe, these being commonlie the superfluities of wealth and abundance, she being but of humble fortunes, and descended from meane parentage. It happened this Aspasia was by a Persian souldiour taken from her father (as all their citties in those dayes were subiect to the like oppressions) and presented vnto Cyrus the sonne of Darius and Parasatides, but much against her owne will, or the liking of her father: thus presented to him in the company of other of the most choice virgins, she was commended aboue them all, both for the modestie of her countenance, the ciuilitie of her carriage, and an irreproouable beautie without all staine or blemish; and that which heightned the loue of all men towards her, shee was of singular wisedome: for which Cyrus afterward often admitted her into his counsells, and so oft as he was swayd by her aduise, his disseignes neuer fayled their wished successe. The first time she stood before the King was at supper time, which ended, and Cyrus after the Persian manner willing to take his cuppes somewhat lauishly, in middest of their healthing there were presented before him foure Grecian damosells, with Aspasia the Phocensian making vp the number; the other three being richly adorned, whose friends had set their baire out in curles, beautified their heades with jewells, and polisht their faces and bodies with sweete odours and vnguents; besides they had instructions how to behaue themselues towards the king, how to insinuate into his fauour, not to moue backe when he came forward, nor make squemish of any curtesie he should offer, but freely to recompence kisse for kisse, being fully instructed in the amatorious precepts belonging to such a businesse. But on the contrarie, Aspasia would not present her selfe in any curious or gay vesture, nor suffer any roabe of honour or state to be put vpon her, neither would she wash or bath her selfe: but in sadnesse and sorrow she muoakt all the Graecian and Eleutherian gods to her assistance, still calling vpon her fathers name, accounting those vnusuall ornaments and superfluous garments, rather the markes of seruit^de than honor; and scarce with stripes could she be forced to appeare in

any kind, rather a strumpet than a chast and vnblemisht virgin: The others comming before Cyrus, smiled vsing many immodest and lasciuious gestures; she onely with her eyes deiected, and manifest blushes in her cheekes, by her teares expressed an extraordinarie bashfulnesse. The king commanding them to sit downe in his presence, the rest boldly contended who should place herselfe next him; but this Phocean damosell at first seemed not to heare, nor without the robustious vsage of that souldier who first surprised her, could be wonne to sit downe. The king beginning to dallie with them, and playing with their cheekes, neckes, and brests, the rest willingly suffered him; shee onely strooke his hand aside, and if hee offered but to touch her in the least part, she presently cried out, and told him he should not do it vnpunished. The king much delighted with this vnexpected coynesse, since at euerie offer of his shee fled his embraces (which was against the custome of the Persians) hee more ardently fixt his affection vpon her, and turning to the souldier who first presented them, thus sayd, This Phocean onely thou hast brought me chast and vncorrupted, the rest both in beautie and behauiour are impostures: and from thencefoorth she was solicited and beloued of the king aboue all others with whom he had before or after conuerst with, and from that time a mutuall affection grew betwixt them, so great, that it increased as farre as the modest and absolute confirmation of marriage, conformable to the custom of the Graecians. In so much that the loue of the king to Aspasia was not rumoured in Ionia solely, but through all the spatious prouinces of Greece, euen Peloponesus was filled with the bruit therof, to the glorie of the great King; who after his familiar acquaintance with her, was neuer knowne to haue vsed the companie of any other woman. And now began the vision of Aspasia (concerning the Doue) to be much spoken of, and of the goddesse that appeared to her, to whom she dedicated (after) a goodly statue, called the image of Venus, beautified with many rich jewells; withall, the picture of a Doue, to which she made daylie supplications, sacrifices, and oblations, still imploring the fauour of the goddesse. To her father Hermotimus shee sent many rich and vnualued presents, making him of a subiect almost vnparraleld for wealth, vsing in the processe of her life (as witnesse, as well the Persian as Graecian Ladies) a wonderous modestie and continence. Hormus, sometimes of Thessaly, was sent from Scopa the junior, who was of Scicily, with an admirable rich Iewell to Cyrus for a present. Who hauing shewed it to many, all wondering at the cost and workemanship, and prowd of so rich a gemme: presently after dinner repaired to the chamber of Aspasia, and finding her asleepe, cast himselfe vpon the bed by her without disturbing her rest: who waking and espying the king so neer, began to embrace him according to her accustomed manner, who presently taking the jewell from the casket, showed it to her vsing these wordes, This I bestow on thee as a gift worthie the daughter or mother of an Emperour, which I charge thee to weare for my sake in a carkanet about thy neck. To whom she wisely and consideratly answered, And how dare I be the possessor of so great a treasure, which rather becomes the maiestie and estate of your mother Parasatides? therefore I intreat you send it to her, for I without this ornament can present you with a neck sufficiently beautifull. The king much pleased with her answer, daily and howerly more and more increased his loue towards her, and what she said and did, sent in a letter to his mother, with the iewell inclosed. For which she was not only much graced and fauored by the Princesse, but after by Cirus rewarded with many rich gifts, of value inestimable,

all which she modestlie sent backe with this message; These things, o king, may be vsefull to thee that hast the charge of such infinites of men, when my greatest riches is to be solely beloued of thee: with these and the like, she tyed the King in inseparable bonds of affection towards her. For without all competitorship, in the beauty of face, feature of body, integritie of life, and noblenesse of mind, she was aboue all those of her time admirable. But after Cyrus being slaine in battaile by his brother, and his whole army: ouerthrowne, she likewise fell into the hands of the enemy: whom the king Artaxerxes with singular care and diligence caused to be sought, and brought before him, as one whose name and vertues he held in great respect and estimation; and being presented before him bound, hee grew wondrous angry, commanding all such to prison as were the authours of her least durance: withall commanding a costlie and magnificent roabe to bee cast about her, which she with many teares and much sorrow refused, till shee was compeld to it by the king, still taking to heart and lamenting the death of Cyrus. But thus adorned, according to the Persian state, shee appeared in the eyes of all men the fairest of women, especiallie in the kings, much surprised with her extraordinary beautie, still persuading her to race out the memorie of Cyrus dead, and in his roome to admit of Artaxerxes liuing; which slowly and at length though late, he obtained, respecting her aboue all other his wiues and concubines. Soone after, his Eunuch Teridates dyed, more than a child, and scarce full man, the most beautifull youth in Asia, and of the king the most beloued; who so much lamented his death, that all the principalities and nations vnder him seemed to participate of his griefe; yet none that durst be so bold as to come into his presence, or minister to him any words of comfort. Three dayes being past in these lamentations and sorrowes, Aspasia in a funerall habit, and with her eyes fixt vpon the earth, appeared before the king; who no sooner espyed her, but demanded the cause of her comming: To comfort thee (said she) o king, if thou beest so pleased, else to returne to the place of sorrow from whence I came. At which seeming to reioyce, the king intreated her to her chamber whether he would presentlie repaire, to whom she obeyed. And hauing put on a roabe of the Eunuches, so much bewayled, and in that casting her selfe vpon her bed, she gaue the king such content, that he commanded her till the dayes of mourning were past, neuer to appeare to him but in that habit; she more preuailing with him than all his Princes, wiues, subiects, and seruants about him, still liuing in his most especiall grace and fauour. And so farre Aelianus.
The Matrons of Lacedemon,The women of Lacedemon. in all battailes fought against the common enemy, as many of their husbands sonnes or allyes as they found slaine, they vsed to search what wounds they had about them; if the greater number were in the face or breast, with great ioy and solemnitie they bore them to bee intombed in the monuments of their ancestours; but if on the contrary those on their backs exceeded the number of the former, surprised with shame and sorrow, they eyther left them to the common buriall, or gaue them such priuate interment, as if they wisht their memories to haue perisht with their bodies. This historie Aelianus in his twelfth booke records.
This discourse for the rarenesse of it,Odatis. I hold not impertinent to insert amongst the women most illustrious. Chares Mitylenus in his tenth booke of Histories thus writes.Athenaus in Dipsonoph. lib. 13. cap. 12. Zariadres the yonger brother of Hystaspes, both of them being so naturallie beautifull, that they were said to be the sonnes of Adonis and

Venus. The elder raigned in the lower parts of Media, the Iunior kept his principalitie in the higher countrey, as farre as the riuer Ta^ais: not many leagues distant from thence, there liued the king Homartes, who had one onely daughter cald Odatis, whom as diuers Authours affirme, seemed in a dreame to haue seene this Zariadres, and of his person to be much inamoured. The like in a vision happening to him, in so much that he was ardentlie affected to her whome as yet he had neuer seene. This Odatis was the fairest Princesse in that time liuing in Asia, and Zariadres no whit to her inferiour, who sent to the king Homartes to demand her in marriage; he would by no meanes yeeld to the motion, because not hauing any male issue he was loath to transferre the succession of his kingdome vpon a stranger, purposing rather to bestow her on some Prince of his countrey, though a subiect. Not long after he caused to be assembled all the friends, kinsmen, Nobilitie, and Gentrie of his land, inuiting them to his daughters marriage, but not yet knowing or hauing determined in himselfe on whom to conferre her. His subiects thus assembled, hee inuited them all to a solemne and high feast, whither hauing called his daughter^ in the hearing of all his guests he thus bespake her: We are now (o Princely daughter) to celebrate thy nuptialls, take therfore this golden bowle filled with rich Greekish wine, and hauing throughlie and aduisedlie perused all this noble companie, to whom thou shall daine first to drinke, he is vndoubtedlie thy husband. She hauing viewed and reuiewed them all, and none pleasing like that person presented to her in her dreame, she demanded of her father some few daies respight, which granted, she sent word to Zariadres, how her affaires stood concerning her marriage, and withall much desiring his speedy presence. He being in his army neere to Tanais, and hearing this newes, secretlie conueyed himselfe out of his tent, and without any seruant or attendant sauing his chariotter, came priuatelie into the Cittie of Homartes, hauing in wondrous short space runne 8000 furlongs; this done, he disposed both of his charriot, and driuer, and withall putting himselfe into a Scythians habit, hee came to the place where this marriage was to be celebrated, and thronging in amongst the rest, he beheld the beautifull Odatis sad in countenance, and tempering her draught with a slow and vnwilling hand: to whom approaching more neerer, he thus whispered, Behold Odatis thy dearest Zariadres for whom thou didst latelie send, ready to doe thee all seruice. She casting an aduised eye vpon him, and perceiuing him to be a stranger beautifull, and in all semblance so like the person of whom she had dreamt; in a great extasie of ioy dranke to him, and gaue him the cup: and whilst the rest were, amased at the nouell, hee snatcht her vp and carryed her where his charriot stood ready, and so transported her into Media. This their loue was so famous amongst the barbarous people, that the history was portraied in all their Pallaces and Temples, nay euen in their priuate houses; many of the Nobilitie in memorie of her, calling their daughters by the name of Odatis.
AristomacheDionisius the Tyrant banisht Dion out of Sicily, taking into his owne custody the exyles wife Aristomache, and her daughter: but after, at the great intercession of one of his seruants,Aesian. lib. 2. Polycrates, (a man by him much affected) he compelled the Lady (who stil lamented the absence of her Lord) vnto a second marriage with this Polycrates, who was by nation of Syracusa. But Dion hauing gathered fresh forces, and expelling Dionisius from Syracusa vnto the Locrenses: Ar^^e his sister, meeting him and congratulating his famous victorie, made intercession for Aristomache, who with great shame had sequestred her selfe from

the presence of her first husband, not daring to looke him in the face, howsoeuer her second nuptialls were made by force and compulsion: But the necessitie of the cause, the wondrous submission and modest excuse of Aristomache, together with the mediation of Arete, so much preuayled with Dion, (all confirming hir innocence) that he receiued his wife and daughter into his familie, still continuing their former loue and societie.
Hippo,Hippo. a woman of Greece, trauelling by sea with her husband, and being surprised by Pyrats, finding the chiefe of them to be inamoured of her beautie; rather than yeeld to his lustfull desires, she voluntarilie threw her selfe into the sea, and was drowned, leauing behind her a remarkable president of chastitie: her body was driuen vpon Ericheon, or (as some will haue it) the Erythean shore: in memorie of whom a sacred monument was raysed, which was many yeares after yeerely celebrated with many condigne honours. Valer. Max. lib. 7. cap. 1.
Chiomara,Chiomara. of whom Li^ius, Frontinus, Florus, and others haue written, was the wife of Orgiantes Regulus, and borne in Galatia; Plutarch calls her Oriagontes, it is thus related of her:Plin. de viris Illustr. cap. 55. Val. Max. lib. 7. cap. 1. The army and the forces of the Gallogrecians being part of them defeated, and the rest taken captiue by Ca. Manlius then consull, neere to the mount Olimpus, this Chiomara the wife of Regulus, a woman of most knowne modestie and chastitie, being first taken, and after committed to the custody of a Roman Centurion, was forceably by him adulterated. A commandement comming from the Consull, that all the treasure of which the Lady was possest should be confiscate to the Centurion, onely her selfe with that ransome to bee returned safe and vntoucht to her husband: she presently promist the captaine to bring him to a place where all his desires should be satisfied. He of a couetous disposition, with all celeritie hasted with her to the discouerie of this Magazin, where she before had placed a company of Gallogrecians her countrey men, and in their language commanded them to fall vpon him and kill him: which done she cut off his head and presented it to her husband, and kneeling to him, both expressed the nature of her iniury, and the manner of her reuenge. The censures of the Consull Manilius and her husband Regulus both assented in this, That she was of a courage vnmatchable, for though her body was brought vnder the subiection of an enemy, neither her mind could be conquered, nor her chastitie made captiue.
An antient woman amongst the Syracusans,Valer. Maxim. lib. 6. cap. 2. when all the subiects of Dionysius, with many execrations cursed and openlie inueighed against his insufferable cruelties; she onely was obserued morning and euening to sollicite the gods for his long life and happinesse: which comming to the eare of the king, he caused her to be called before him, and demanded of her the cause, Why amongst all his oppressed subiects who dayly wisht his ruin, she alone inuoakt the gods for his health and preseruation? to whom with an vndaunted resolution she thus answered, That which I doe (o King) is not without due premeditation, and grounded both vpon reason and iudgement, for we were before opprest with a tyrant whose gouernment was very grieuous vnto vs; after him succeeded another farre more burdensome and cruell than the former, for whose destruction I amongst the rest besought the powers aboue; now you being by succession the third, and more bloody and inhumane than the former, I therefore with great deuotion pray for your continuance, least when you be taken from vs, the diuell himselfe take vpon him the scepter, and succeede you in your principalitie. The Tyrant though toucht to the quicke,

yet in regard of her age, and fearelesse libertie of her language, suffered her to depart vnpunisht.
Tertia Aemilia.This Tertia Aemilia, a famous Roman Lady, was the wife of the first Affricanus, the mother of Cornelia, mother to Caius and Titus Gracchus. She was of such gentlenesse and patience, that knowing her husband to be familiar with one of her handmaides, yet she dissembled it, least hee that had conquered a third part of the world, should haue the imputation of any such lightnesse laid vpon him; being so farre from reuenge, that her husband being dead shee gaue her bondwoman manumission, and marryed her richly to a free'd man of her owne.
Turia.Turia was the wife of Quint. Lucretius, who when her husband was proscribed by the Triumuirate,Val. Max. lib. 6. cap. 7. and therefore instantlie to depart into exile (onely trusting the secresie of her chambermaid) she hid her husband in her house betwixt two chambers, where no search could discouer him, where to her great perill she kept him long without any preiudice or danger; expressing therein her singular faith and loyaltie, that when the rest that were confined into countreyes remote, were exposed to the labour of the body and discontent of the mind, he alone vnder his owne roofe and in his owne chamber, liued safe in the bosome of his wife, so remarkably louing and constant.
Sulpitia.Sulpitia being strictlie kept by her mother Iulia, least she should follow her husband Lentulus Crustellio into banishment, who by the Triumuirate was confined into Sicily,Plin. lib. 4. notwithstanding, putting on the habit of a seruant, past through their guards and watches, and attended only with two hand-maids, and as many men-seruants, by secret flight came to the place whether he was proscribed, leauing all the pleasures and choice delicates of Rome to participate with the miseries of a husband.Plin. Nat. Hist lib. 7. cap. 35. Pliny writes of another Sulpitia a famous Roman Lady (daughter to Paterculus, and wife to Quint. Fuluius Flaccus,) she when the Senat and Decemuirat, by inspection into the books of Sibill, had decreed that an image should be dedicated to Venus Verticordia, by which the minds both of virgins and matrons might be the more alienated from libidinous affections, and reduced to the strict rules of modestie and shamefastnes, when to the dedication of this worke out of the whole cittie a hundred of the most chast matrons were to be selected; and then out of these hundred, tenne supposed to be pure aboue the rest; and out of these tenne, one to be preferred; this Sulpitia carryed the suffrage from all, for vertue, modestie, and incomparable chastitie.
Iulia^This Iulia was the daughter of Caius Caesar, and wife of Pompeius Magnus: after the battaile of Pharsalia,Pl^^. in Pomp. seeing the garment of her husband brought home sprinkled with his blood (and not yet knowing of his death) the obiect so affrighted her, that instantlie at the sight thereof she sunke downe to the earth, and in the extremitie of that passion was with much paine and anguish deliuered of that burden in her wombe, which no sooner parted from her, but in that agony she expired.
Portia.Portia, the wife of Brutus and daughter of Cato, whose noble resolution, and coniugall loue to her husband, all future ages may admire; for hearing that in the battaile at Philippi he was vanquisht and slaine,Valer. Max. lib. 4. cap. 6. when all weapons and instruments of death were strictlie kept from her, shee feared not with her womanish spirit to imitate (if not exceed) the resolution of her father in his death, for by swallowing hot burning coales she expired. Herein onely they differ, that he by a common, she by an vnheard of death were extinct.
Horestilla was the wife of Marcus Plautius,Horestilla. who by the commandement of the Senat, hauing the charge of threescore shippes to passe into Asia, his wife so entirely was deuoted to his loue,Valerius Max. Cap. de amore con^ugat. that she shipt her selfe with him, exposing her selfe to the dangers of the sea, but not able through her weaknesse to endure the casualties appending on so harsh a iourney (as the distemperature of weather, and such like) in the cittie Tarentum fell sicke and dyed. Plautius willing to shew himselfe a husband worthy such a wife, when her body was brought to the funerall fire, betwixt the ceremonies of annoynting her body and taking his leaue with a parting kisse, fell suddenlie vpon his naked sword and so slew himselfe: which his friends seeing and lamenting, they tooke him as he was apparrelled, without so much as stripping his body, and ioyning it to the corse of his wife (and adding more combustible matter to the fire) burnt them both together. Ouer the vrne that couered their ashes, the Tarentines erected a famous sepulcher, which they called The two louers. By Plautius and Horestilla it may appeare, that where the greatest and most honest loue is setled betwixt man and wife, it is oft times more happy to be ioyned in death than to be separated in life.
Artimesia,Artimesia. Q. of Caria, so much hououred the remembrance of her husband Mausolus,Herod. lib. 8. Strab. lib. 13. being dead, that after meditation, and deliberat counsell which way she might best decorate his hearse, and withall to expresse to perpetuitie her vnmatchable loue; she caused to be erected ouer him a tombe so magnificent, that for the cost and state it was not doubted to bee worthily reckoned amongst the nine wonders. But what doe I speake of so rich a structure, when she her selfe became the liuing sepulcher of her dead husband, by their testimonies who haue recorded, that she preserued his bones, and hauing beaten them to powder, mingled their dust with her wine in remembrance of him, euery morning and euening. Cicer. Tusc. lib. 3. and Plin. lib. 36. cap. 5.
Of womans fortitude and magnanimitie,Harmonia. I will adde one admirable president in two virgins of Syracusa,Val. Max. lib. 3. equallie resolute: when by the intestine sedition and ciuill warres in Syracusa, the stocke and familie of Gelo (in these combustions) was quite extirpt and rooted out, euen to his onely daughter Harmonia, and all the seditious weapons of the enemy now drawne and aym'd at her bosome: her nurse pittying her threatned ruin, made choice of a young virgin like to her in fauour, and of equall stature, and attyring her in the habit and ornaments of a Princesse, offered her to the points of their yet bloody weapons; this damsell was of that constancy and noble resolution, that notwithstanding she saw imminent death before her, was not affrighted with the terror thereof, nor would reueale her name, or tell of what condition she was. Which Harmonia seeing and admiring at her loyaltie and faith, she cald out to the murderers, and discouering her selfe to preserue her handmayd, offred her owne naked breast to the slaughter, telling them she was present whom they sought for: so that a couered fallacie to the one, and open truth to the other, in both an admirable and vndanted constancie, was the cause of their deaths.
This Hormisda was a great and mighty man amongst the Persians,The wife of Hormisda. and of one of the most noblest families amongst them, as Zozimus, Marcellinus and others commemorate. He being confinde vnto a certaine mountaine and fettered, was there kept with a strict guard of Persians, who against the lawes of the kingdome had purpose to inuest his younger brother in the state imperiall.Petr. Cri^itus. Lib. 18. cap. 1. It happened, that in the time of his confinement, his wife (the remembrance of whose name it is pitty time hath abolisht and not left it to posteritie) thus deuised

for his enlargement: she sent to him a fish as a present, of an extraordinary bignesse, in whose belly she had hid an yron file and other like engines fit for his purpose, committing it to the charge of one of her most faithfull eunukes, desiring her husband by his mouth, not to haue the fish cut vp in the presence of any, onely to make happy vse of such things as he found inclosed therein. To his keepers the better to hide her stratagem, she sent Camells laden with sundry kind of meats, and seuerall wines. Hormisda apprehending the plot, gaue it a bold and resolute performance, for hauing first fil'd off his yrons, he changed his habit with that of his eunukes, and taking the aduantage of their feasting and healthing, past safe through them all, and by study and pollicy of his wife came after to the possession of his right, which his younger brother had vsurped.
Quint. Curt. lib. ^.Alexander the great, amongst his many other conquests, hauing besieged the great cittie Halicarnassus, and by reason of opposition made against him, leueld it with the ground. He entred Caria, where Ada then raigned Queene,Q Ada. who being before opprest by Orontobas (imployd by Darius) was almost quite beaten out of her kingdome: hauing at that time no more of all her large dominions left her sauing Alynda the most defenced cittie, into which shee had retyred her selfe for safetie. She hearing of Alexanders approach, gaue him a royall meeting, and submitted her selfe, her subiects and cittie into his power, withall adopting him by the name of sonne. The king neither despising her liberalitie nor the name, gaue her backe the cittie entyre as it was, and made her keeper and gouernesse thereof, who soone after recouering all those citties Darius by inuasion had vsurped from her (in gratitude of her former curtesie) reduced her countrey and people to their pristine estate, and stablisht her in her former Empire.
Zenocrita.This Zenocrita was borne in Cuma, whose father was at that time, amongst many other oppressed citisens,Plutarch de Virtat. Mulier. in exile: Her the bloodie tyrant Aristodemus was much inamoured of, but not dayning so much as to court her or to persuade her to his loue, hee imagined in the pride of his heart, that the damosell would thinke it grace and honour sufficient to her, to be seene in his companie, and onely for that cause to bee held blest and fortunate, of all such as should so behold her: But farre other cogitations troubled her more noble mind, being tormented in soule to leade such an vnchast life, though with a prince, who neuer had motioned contract or promised her marriage; her apprehensions were rather how to purchase her countries freedome and rid the earth of a tyrant. About the same time that shee was busied in these and the like imaginations, it happened Aristodemus would needs compasse in a certaine spatious peece of ground with a broad and deepe ditch, not that it was any way necessarie or profitable, but only to vex and wearie the citisens with extraordinarie paines and insufferable labours, for to euerie man was so much ground limitted as daily taske, which whosoeuer in the least kind neglected, he was fined in a great mulct, either in purse or person. It happened she being abroad to take the ayre neer to the place where the citisens were hard at work, that Aristodemus with his traine came thither also, to ouerlooke his laborers; who after some faults found, and other directions giuen, left the place, and in his returne past by where Zenocrita was then standing, she spying him come towards her, made him a low obeisance, and withall couered her face with her apron. The tyrant being gone, the yong men in the way of jeasting and sport, and seeming a little to touch her in chastitie, demanded the reason, why to all

other men her face was bare and free, onely to him vailed? (intimating that something had past betwixt them which might discouer her blushes) to whom she made this plaine and serious answere, I did it to him as an honor, because amongst all the Cumani there is but one onely man, and that is Aristodemus. These words touching them all to the quicke, it imprest in the mindes of the more generous, a true feeling of their basenesse and slauerie, with a shame thereof, and withall an apprehension of the recouerie of their pristine liberties: which perceiuing, shee thus proceeded, I had rather to purchase my fathers repeale from exile, to play the labourer, and beare burdens as you doe; than liue with the tryant in all the surfetting riots and delicacies on the earth: and so left them, These last words gaue confirmation to what they had before scarce apprehended; which afte^ brought the embrions of their thoughts vnto a timely and full-borne action; For with the prince Timotoles they conspired against Aristodemus, and Zenocrita had made their entrance free, at such time as hee was secure, and his guard negligent, when with great ease and small danger they rusht vpon him and slew him. Thus by her meanes her countrie recouered their antient liberties and honours. But when great and magnificent gifts were presented her for this good seruice, she refused them all, onely making one request vnto the people. That it might be lawfull for her to take the bodie of Aristodemus and giue it a solemne and royall buriall: to which they did not onely with great willingnesse condiscend, but they instituted her the Priest of Ceres, supporting it to bee an honour no lesse acceptable to the goddesse than worthily becomming her.
This Pythes liued in the time of Xerxes,The wife of Phythes. who had to wife a noble and wise Ladie, whose temperance and humanitie shall outliue posteritie: Hee in his countrey finding a Mine of gold, from whence hee had gathered by the industrie of his subiects an infinite masse of treasure, which hee vsed with no moderation, for all his studie, industrie, and imployment both of his subiects and seruants, were in this Mine, either in digging Ore, or drawing it vp, or fining and refining it; all other actions, labours, affaires, and businesses quite neglected, many hauing died in the Mine, and many readie to perish for want of food by reason the earth lay neglected. The women came to make a petitionarie complaint to the wife of Pythes, who vnderstanding their greefes, with faire language returned them backe somewhat pacified though not altogether satisfied, yet putting them in good hope that their griefes should shortly be redressed. They thus dismist, she sent for all the goldsmiths that were knowne to bee exquisit workemen, and sequestring them into a remote place of the house, where she had fitted them with forges, and all things necessarie for the purpose, she commanded them to mold and cast all kinde of fruits, as Apples, Citrons, Mellons, and such like, with whose tast her husband was most delighted, and to fashion them all of gold. Pythes comming from his Mine with a good stomacke, as soone as he had seated himselfe, called to eat: his Ladie serued him in a golden table, but with no meate that could be eaten, but euerie dish composed of sollid gold. Being at the first delighted with this banquet (as pleased that art should so imitate nature) after being much delighted with the obiect, he demanded meate againe, and calling for such a dish, and such a dish, as his appetite was best inclined to: but shee still whatsoeuer was brought to the table, caused it to be all of gold: he still growing more hungrie, and verie angry withall, she made him this modest and effectuall answere, Oh sir, consider with your selfe, of these and such like dishes, you haue prouided for your selfe and your

subiects plentie, but of other viands no plentie at all; we haue store of artificiall, but the vse of naturall things hath vtterly forsaken vs: no man tills, plowes, sowes, or manurs the fieldes; plantation, or hope to reape from the earth, is now forgot, onely we studie for things vnprofitable, and (as you see) vnnecessarie, to please the eye and not the palate, the fancie and not the stomacke, such indeede as to your subiects bring sorrow but no satisfaction, great molestation but no meate at all to suffise the necessities of nature. This short but pithy speech tooke such impression in Pythes, that though he would not altogether desist from his Mines, yet vpon her vrgence, he onely peculiarised to himselfe a fift part of the people, and the rest were imployed in agriculture, and tillage, planting, and such things most vsefull for mans sustenance. This Pythes after many disasters (as rich men are sildome without some or other) as the death of his children, who all came to violent and vnexpected deaths, by the meanes of Xerxes; he fell into a wonderous deepe melancoly, for hee hated life, and yet was loath to die, and like a foolish rich man (as this age affoords many) griefe still would haue killed him, had not the thought of his wealth still recouered him; therefore he proposed this farewell, betwixt the wearinesse of life and the tediousnesse of death: There was in the cittie a great heape of gold, by which a riuer softly glyded, which was called Pythopolite, within the midst of this great magazin he had prouided himselfe a sepulcre, and had so turned the channell, that the water might come iust to the brinke of the shore where his monument was readie prepared. The worke being finished, he committed the sole gouernement of the state and empire to his wife, with this charge, That none should dare to approch his tombe, but daily to send him such a quantitie of victualls in a boat by the riuer; and when they found the meat vntoucht, to forbeare to send any more, for they should then imagine him dead. And such was the couetous mans end in the middest of his treasure. His wife after, mannaged the state wth great wisedome and pollicie, and to the generall good of the subiect.


The wife of Nausimines.
HErodotus reports of one of the sonnes of Craesus, that he was borne dumbe and neuer spake word from his birth, being in all things els compleat, of an able body, and a spirit vndanted: to supply which defect he vsed all means possible that art or humane skill could deuise, but all failing, as his last refuge, he consulted with the Oracle, which returned him this answer:
Lyde genus, rex multorum, etc.
Thou of the Lydian off-spring, and the kingOf many nations; if such be thy careTo know this secret, and effect that thing,Which diuine worke, no mortall can, or dare:Be thus resolu'd, His tongue shall accent giue,When saue by it, thou canst no longer liue.
Craesus being besieged in Sardis, and the cittie taken (as first entered by one Mardus Hyreades) a Persia^ that had disguised himself, of purpose to murder Crasus in his pallace: who insinuating into his presence, and now lifting vp his hand to strike the fatall blow, the king (by reason of his present distresse) not apprehending the danger, which his son comming in at the instant and espying, the strings of his tongue were vnloosed on the sudden, and he cryed out, Oh man

spare the king Craesus, and from that time forward his imprisoned voice was euer at libertie.Val. Max. li. 1. More disastrous was that which besell the wife of Na^simenes the Athenian, who happening by chance vpon the place where she found her sons and daughters mixt together in the horrible action incest, shee was suddenly strooke with that horror and extasie, that neither able to punish the fact, nor reprooue the heinousnesse of the sinne, shee was strucke mute and domb^: Her children punisht their owne offence with voluntarie death, and shee was depriued the vse of speech all her life time after.


Cyane and Medullina.
DOsithaeus in his booke Rerum sicularum commemorates this historie Cyanippus Syracusanus sacrificing to the gods,Lib. 3. amongst all others he had neglected the celebrations of Bacchus; at which the god incenst, and to reuenge himself of the iniurie, punished him with drunkennes when at a high feast he found him pleasantlie disposed, being otherwise in his owne condition of a knowne abstinence: the heate of his wine wrought with such violence vpon him, that meeting by accident his owne daughter, Cyane, in a darke and remote place, (and ignorant who she was) hee forcibly defloured her; in which wrestling together she wrong the ring off from his finger, hoping by that in time to find out the adulterer. This ring she gaue her nurse in keeping: not long after a pest raigning in the cittie, the Oracle being consulted with returned this answere, That vnlesse the incestuous person were sacrificed to the gods that haue the charge of punishing these horrible vices, the plague should still continue amongst them. The people being as much to seeke as before, in regard that the person aymed at, was to them altogether vnknowne. Cyane truely apprehending the intent of the Oracle, tooke her father by the reuerend lockes, and dragging him to the temple, slew him there before the altar; which she intended for the common good: but to expiate her owne sinne in killing her father she fell vpon the same sword, and in her death mingled her blood with his.
Aristides writes a historie to the like effect. In the celebrations of Bacchus feasts, Arnutius (who was likewise a man of knowne temperance from his birth) was for the like contempt, alike punished, by the god of Healths. This Roman touched with the like distemperature, in the darke vitiated by force his daughter Medullina; she also by his ring knowing the incestuous, be thought a greater mischiefe, for hauing a second time besotted him in the dregges of the grape, and crowning him with Vine leaues like a Bacchinall, slew him at the altar. Excuse me Reader, I illustrat not these as they are parrasides, but as without respect of time, person, or place, they thought no reuenge great ynough to be inflicted on the corrupters of their virginities.


Erixo.
ARchelaus the Tyrant vsing many tyrannies vpon the Cyraeneans ouer whom hee vsurped, (but more by the euill instigation of one Laarchus, whom he had entertained as his familiar friend and counsellor) was at length supplanted by this Laarchus whom he most trusted, and as some thinke, poysoned. Archelaus left behind him a sonne after his grandfathers name Battus Falix, called Battus: who because he was weake of body, and lame of his feet, his mother Erixo (in whose guardianship he was) was by that meanes held in more respect and reuerence, being a woman of approoued humanitie and goodnes. L^archus, notwithstanding she had the loue and hearts of all the cittisens, yet

he inioyed the power, and by the helpe of his mercenarie souldiers, vsurped the dominion ouer all. But apprehending in himselfe that his tyrannie could not last long without better supporture, he sent to this chast dowager to treat with her of marriage, proposing to her as a maine article, to make her sonne Battus copartner with him in his regencie. About this motion shee consulted with her brothers, pretending a seeming consent. They debated with Laarchus (but somewhat protractedly) about the matter, in which interim, shee priuately sent to the vsurper one of her damosells with a message, That notwithstanding her brothers (as vnwilling the match should goe forward) had made needlesse delaies, yet her purpose was so fixt vpon the motion, especially since it concerned the generall good, that she wholly submitted herselfe to his seruice, in so much that if it pleased him to vouchsafe to come priuatly in the night, she would yeeld her honor intirely vp into his hand: vpon which beginning a good successe would doubtles follow, for then in vaine her brothers and kindred should oppose themselues against that to which the publike good, occasion, place, opportunitie, and all things necessarie inuited them. This message was plausible to Laarchus, who apprehended at once the imbraces of a beautious lady, a principalitie, and a countinuance therof. Briefly, the night was betwixt them appointed, and hee in regard of her honour to come priuatly and vnattended; all which she reueal'd to her eldest brother Poliarchus, making him solely of her counsell: who at the time of their appointed meeting hid himselfe in his sisters chamber. Laarchus comes singly according to promise, and is admitted by Erixo: and in the midst of his hopes, ready to cast himselfe into her imbraces, is transpierst and slain, and his body cast ouer the walls, Battus proclaimed Prince, and pristine libertie restored to the long opprest Cyraenians. This Poliarchus did in reuenge of Archilaus death, husband to his chast sister Erixo. There were then about the cittie many soldiers belonging to Amasis king of Aegipt, by whose assistance Laarchus had bin long terrible to the people, these complained to the king, accusing Poliarchus and Erixo of the murder of Laarchus. But as he was about to inuade the Cyraenians, his mother happily died, and so hindered that expedition. Polyarchus and Erixo notwithstanding purposed a voluntarie iournie into Aegipt, to purge themselues of all accusations commenced against them: in which iourney Critola, a woman of great reuerence and very aged (as hauing beene the wife of Battus Felix) would needs accompanie them. These appearing before Amasis, so well pleaded their owne cause, that their iniuries appeared to him much to surmount their reuenge: so that imbrasing Erixo, he commended her fortitude and temperance, and with princely gifts sent them back into their owne countrie.


A Woman of the cittie Pergamus.
MIthridates king of Pontus hauing diuerse waies opprest the Galatians, as by sending to the citie by way of inuitation to Pergamus, for diuerse of the chiefe citisens, and then vniustly detaining them. This wrought such an impression to supplant the tirant, in the hart of Toredorix Tetrarch of Tosipporus, that he made a combination wherein many noble gentlemen of qualitie were ingaged, all which had vowed the tyrants death. Their plot being discouered and they in the attempt surprised, were all commaunded to death: in the midst of the execution Mithridates remembred a beautiful yong man of extraordinarie shape and feature, that was one in the conspiracie; but half despairing whether hee were yet aliue, hee sent in hast, that if the hang man had not done

his office vpon him, to reprieue him to his mercie. This yong mans name was Bepolitanu^, whose turne being come, and he presenting himselfe to the block, it happened at that time hee had on a rich and pretious garment of purple embrothered with gold, of which the executioner being greedie, and carefull to keepe it from blood, thereby to make the better sale of it, he spent so much time in disposing his head this way and that way, not for the prisoners ease, but for his own aduantage, till the messengers appeared from the king and called aloude to make stay of iustice: by which meanes Bepolitanus his garment was as much beneficiall to his life as the kings mercie, and couetousnesse that hath beene the destruction of many, was the meanes of his vnexpected safety. The executioner in his greedinesse making good the old english Adage, All couet all loose. To leaue circumstances and come to the matter. The bodie of Toredorix was cast out, and by the kings edict denied all rights of buriall, with a grieuious penaltie imposed vpon any such as should contradict the kings writ. This notwithstanding, dismaid not a faire Pergamaean damosell (with whom Toredorix had beene in familiaritie) to accomplish the vowed office of a louer and a friend, who in the night watched the opportunitie to take thence the bodie and bestow on it a faire interment: but being taken by the souldiers in the performance of this last memorable dutie, and brought before the tyrant; either her beautie so much mooued him, or her teares so farre preuailed with him, as that his bodie was not onely left freely to her dispose, but to recompence her loue and loyaltie, shee had a faire and competent dower allotted her out of the lands and goods of the trespassor.


Stratonica.
OF Stratonica, Galatia may boast, as breeding a Ladie scarce matchable before her time or since, in her condition, she being the wife of king Deiotarus, and barren: and knowing how desiro^s her husband was to haue issue from his owne loynes to succeede in the kingdome, sollicited him, and that with great importance, to select some beautifull Ladie whom he best fancied, and by her to raise his posteritie: which the king (ouercome with so vnexpected a curtesie, and therefore vnwilling to wrong her bed) refusing, she of her owne accord, out of many captiue virgins chused one who seemed to excell all the rest in feature and modestie, and suiting her in all respects like a princesse, presented her to the king as a jewell to be receiued from her hand. This Virgins name was Electra, by whom Deiotarus had faire and fortunate issue; to whom Stratonica was a second mother, and sawe them educated with as much magnificence and state as if they had beene borne of her bodie, and shee giuen them sucke from her owne brests. Her example is memorable, but since her time by few (that I can reade of) immitated.


Valeria and Cloelia.
TArquinus Superbus being expulsed the kingdome, because his sonne Sextus had stuprated the faire Lucretia, wife to Collatine, to reobtaine his principalitie hee insinuated vnto his aide Porsenna king of the Tuscans. These with an infinite armie besieged Rome, insomuch that the cittisens were not onely wearied with long warre, but opprest with famine; therefore knowing Porsenna, as well in warre as peace to be a prince eminent both for justice and humanitie, they made choise of him to arbitrate and determine all controuersies betwixt Tarquine and them. This motion being offered by the Romanes,

Tarquine refused to stand to any such comprimise, not allowing Pors^^^^ a lawfull iudge in regard of their late league commensed. This, Porsen^^ not well relishing, treated with the Romans about a peace, conditionally that they should restore backe certaine lands before taken from the Etruscians, and of them put him in peaceable possession, and till this were performed to send him tenne young men, and as many virgins of the noblest families for hostage: which was accordinglie done, and he dismist his armie. These virgins walking by the riuer side which parted the campe and cittie, (for though he had sent away the greatest part of his armie, he had not yet raised his tents) two of the chiefe, the one Cloelia, the other Valeria, daughter to the Consull Publicola, persuaded the rest, and by persuading so farre preuailed, that they were all resolued to passe the riuer: when stripping themselues naked, and holding (as well as they conuenientlie could) their cloathes aboue their heads, they ventured ouer that vnknowne passage full of whirlepooles and where there was no stedfast footing; and what by wading and swimming, to all mens wonders got safe to shore, and presented themselues to their fathers and friends: who though they admired their boldnesse and commended their resolutions, yet disallowing the Act it selfe (as those that in their faith and honour would not be outbid by any) they sent them backe to king Porsenna, and submitted their rashnesse to be punisht at his pleasure. These virgins being presented before him, he demanded of them, Which she was that first animated and incouraged the rest to so rash and dangerous an enterprise? when Cloelia beckning to the rest to keepe silence, tooke all the iniurie, contempt, or whatsoeuer they pleafed to call it, vpon her selfe, protesting the rest innocent, and she of what would be obiected the sole authour. Porsenna obseruing, and withall admiring her vndanted courage, caused presently a horse furnished with rich trappings to be brought^ which he gaue to Cloelia in recompence of her magnanimous attempt, sending them all in his regall curtesie back to their friends and parents^ Vpon this horse giuen to Cloelia by Porsenna, some haue grounded that she first past the riuer on horsebacke, sounding the way for the rest; which others deny, onely that the king thought to gratifie her manly courage with the meede of a souldier. Her statue on horsebacke is erected in Via sacra: This some confer vpon Cloelia, others on Valeria.


Olympias.
ALexander hauing caused himselfe to be called the sonne of Iupiter, writ to his mother in this maneer, King Alexander the sonne of Iupiter Hamon to his mother Olimpias sends health: to whom with great modestie she thus rescribed, Deare sonne as you loue me, insteed of doing me honour, proclaime not my dishonour, neither accuse me before Iuno; besides, it is a great aspertion you cast vpon nice to make me a strumpet, though to Iupiter himselfe. A great moderation in a woman, who for no swelling title or vaine ostentation could be woon to loose the honour to be called a Loyall and chast wife.


Troades.
PlutarchAMongst those frighted Troians that fled from the fearfull ruins of subuerted Troy, some by the violence of outragious tempests were driuen vpon the coasts of Italy, where landing at certaine ports neere to the riuer Tygris, they made vp into the countrey, the better to acquaint themselues with the conditions of those places. In which interim, the women began to apprehend

that they had better farre to take vp an abiding place in any land, than againe to commit themselues to the mercilesse furie of the seas: Wherefore with one ioynt consent, they agreed to make that their fixed habitation, seeing all hope of their former losses at Troy were vtterly desperate. Hauing thus conspired together, with all possible expedition they burnt the shippes (in this exploit, one Roma is reported to be chiefe) which being done, they ran to meet their husbands (making to their Nauie to quench it) fearing their anger for their rash enterprise; some of them embracing their husbands, others their friends and acquaintance they tempred their amorous kisses with such persuasiue Rhetoricke, that soone allayd the angry tempest of their husbands furie. From these (as some haue writ) the custome of kissing at salutations, by the Roman women to their kinsmen, first tooke Originall. The Troianes now tyed by necessitie, and likewise finding the inbahitants so louing and curteous, they much applauded this deede of the women, and dwelt there with the Latines.


The Phocides.
AFter an implacable war betwixt the Thessalians and the Phocenses, which had long lasted with much slaughter on both sides; those of Thessaly (bringing their army through the Locrenses) inuaded the men of Phocis on all sides, making a decree to kill all that were of age, and the women and children to beare away captiue. Diaphantes the sonne of Bathillius with his two colleagues then gouerning the cittie: he persuaded the besieged boldlie and valiantlie to issue out and giue the enemy battaile, but with this caution, That all their wiues, daughters, and children, euen to one soule should be brought into a place circled and compast in with all manner of dry wood and matter combustible, and the dores by which they entered to be shut after them, and so guarded; and if the day were lost and they perisht in battaile, the pile to bee kindled, and all their bodies to be burned at once. This being not onely proposed bu^ confirmed, by the men; the resolution of the women was demaunded, who all with one vnanimous consent applauded the decree, not one amongst them hauing will to suruiue her husband, sonne, or father, to fall into the captiuitie of a fierce and bloody enemy. This concluded, the Phocenses issue and encounter the enemy, and fought against them a noble and victorious battaile, in which they returned conquerors. The Edict made, they called Aponaea,Aponaea. as signifying, A bold action, arising from a desperate foundation. On the day that battaile was fought and so remarkable a victory atchieued, they yearely celebrate a feast to Minerua, which they call Elaphebolia.


The Women of Chios.
IN Chios, a gentleman of a noble familie riding through the cittie with his contracted Lady, in a charriot, as the custome was then amongst them: king Hippasus being a familiar friend of the bride groomes, meeting him in the streetes, with no pretence of iniurie, but rather as a testimony of their former familiaritie, leapt vp into the charriot betwixt them: which act beeing mistaken by the Cittisens, he was violentlie assaulted and cruellie murdered in their furie. Not long after, their affaires on all sides succeeding but ill, they perceiued they had incurd the anger of the gods, and therefore sent to consult with the Oracle: who returned them this answer, That nothing could expiate the Butchery of Hippasus till all the Regicides were to one man exild the cittie. But when all of them confest themselues guiltie of the fact, the god imposed

on them all an equall doome of banishment: so that as well the murderers themselues as the abettors and accessaries (howsoever many and mighty) were forced to transport themselues with their wiues and families into Leuconia; where they had not long soiourned, but growing distastfull to the Leuconians, as fearing their power, who began to increase both in wealth and number, they were commanded by such a day to depart the cittie, and bound by oath to beare nothing forth the gates, sauing a coat close girt to them, and a loose mantle or cloake ouer them. The Chij distrusting their owne strength (as no way able to affront them in power and number) were forced to submit themselues to the present necessitie, binding themselues by oath to obserue the couenants before rehearsed. The day comming on, and the women seeing their sons and husbands thus meanly accoutred, demanded of them, Why vnarmed they would passe by the face of a publicke enemy? They excused themselues by the strictnesse of the oath inioyned them: to whom the women with a ioint acclamation thus replyed, Shew your selues worthy the nation from whence you are deriued, and guirt your armes about you: if they exact from you the strict conditions of an oath, answer them thus, That to a souldiour and a man magnanimous, his Speare is in stead of his cloake, and his Target in place of the garment which he should buckle about him. To whose counsell they assented, and at their departure appearing so stronglie arm'd, and their countenances menacing and daring, It strooke such a terrour into the hearts of the Leuconians, that as men amased, they suffered them peaceablie to depart with honour, who but by the noble and braue counsell of their women, had left the place with shame and infamy. As noble an act worthy memorie was not long after done by the women of Chios, what time Philip the son of Demetrius opposed the cittie, who published a proud and barbarous Edict to insinuate the slaues of the cittie to his aide, promising them not onely free manumission but to marry them to their mistresses and possesse them of their masters fortunes: which kindled such an vnquenchable wrath in the ladies and matrons of the cittie, that fired with rage and disdaine, they together with their seruants assisting them, with incredible faith and honesty maintained the breaches, defended the walls, guarded the ports, casting stones, darts, fighting, exhorting and incouraging one another, euen to the beating of the enemies backe, raysing their shamefull siege, and pursuing them flying with their weapons, till Philips army was quite discomfited. In all this troublous warre (notwithstanding the proclamation) not one seruant amongst so many had the least suspition, much lesse aspersion cast vpon his fidelitie.


Persides.
CYrus hauing alienated the Persians from King Astiages, was ouercome in battaile, his souldiers flying towards the cittie for refuge, in so much that the enemy was ready to enter with them: the women this seeing, issued from the gates, and holding vp their cloathes as high as their breasts met them running and said, Whether flye you, oh you cowards and basest of men, haue you any hope to hide your selues in these places from whence you came? Which obiect cast such a shamefull blush vpon them, that renewing the battaile, the conquerors were defeated, and they obtained a glorious victorie: In memorie of which, Cyrus made a law, That what Persian King should euer after approach that cittie, so often as he entred it, should bestow on euery woman a peece of gold. It is said of Occhus his successour,Base auarice in a king. a couetous King, that he often past by it and compast it, but

would neuer enter the gates, onely to spare his purse, and to defraud the women of their reward. But euer-renowned Alexander visited the cittie twice, according to the custome, bestowing on euery woman one piece, and vpon all such as were with child two pieces, to shew himselfe as royally bountifull as the other was penuriously sparing.


Celtae.
THese be a people of France betweene the riuers Graumna and Sequana, who dissenting amongst themselues, fell into an intestine and implacable ciuill warre. After many bloody conflicts, being ready once more to ioyne battaile, the women presented themselues betwixt their armies, and with such smooth Oratory and persuasiue arguments layd open the miseries of warre, with the aboundant commodity arising from peace and amitie, that they not onely reconciled all hostilitie for the present, but betwixt all the citties and chiefe families confirmed an indissoluble league of friendship, which continued many yeares after. Since which time, either in forreine differences, or domesticke quarrells, as well in warre, as peace, their counsell is euer demanded, and for the most part followed. Therefore in the league which this people made with Hanniball, it is thus written; If the Celtae haue any thing worthy taxation to obiect against the Carthaginians, let it be disputed by the generalls and Praefects in Spaine; If the Carthaginians find any thing iustlie to reprooue the Celtae, the matter shall be discust and arbitrated by their women.


Melitae.
THis people growing to that multitude, that the citties in which they inhabited could neither conuenientlie containe their number, nor supply them with victuall sufficient, sought the plantation of a Collony elsewhere, vnder the command of a beautifull young man called Nymphaeus. These falling vpon the coast of Caria, were no sooner landed to discouer the countrey, but by a mighty tempest, their ships were either swallowed in the sea, or scattered and disperst. The Carians who then inhabited the cittie Cryassa, either commiserating their distresse, or fearing that boldnesse their necessities might inforce them too, were pleased to allot them part of their land, and suffer them peaceablie to dwell amongst them: But finding them in a short space to increase both in wealth and power, they consulted amongst themselues by what meanes to destroy them and vtterly extirpe their memorie: this stratagem was agreed vpon to be performed at a banquet. It happened that one of the Carian damsells cald Caphana, a Lady of a noble familie, grew much enamoured of this Nimphaeus, and loath that the least detriment should happen to her best respected friend, especiallie loath to see him perish, she opened to him the full purpose of the cittie, wishing him to vse all meanes of preuention. When therefore the Cryassences came to inuite them to the feast, Nimphaeus answered them that it was not the custome of the Graecians to assemble vnto any such feasts, without the company of their women: which the Carians hearing, intreated them likewise to grace the solemnitie with their presence. This done, Nymphaeus relates the whole circumstance to the Melians his countreymen, intreating them to beare him company to the feast, all ciuilly habited, and without weapons, onely that euery woman should weare a sword beneath her kirtle and sit close by her husband. About the midst of the banquet when the Carians were ready to giue the watchword, the Graecians perceiuing that

the instant (for the pretended execution) drew on, all the women opening their garments at once, shewed their concealed weapons, which their hudbands snatching from their sides, assaulted the barbarous Carians, and slew them all to one man: by which preuention, they possest themselues both of the countrey, and cittie. But relinquishing that, they built another which they called the new Cryassa, and in which they planted themselues. Caphaena was marryed to Nymphaeus, hauing honours done to her worthy her noble fidelitie. One thing in this historie is worthy especiall admiration, namely, Secresie, to be kept amongst so many women.


Tyrrhenae.
THe Tyrrhenians were by the Spartans opprest and cast into prison, where they were prouidentlie kept and guarded, purposing to question them for their liues. The wiues of the captiues this hearing, came to the prison doores and with humble prayers and infinite teares, besought those that had the charge of them, that by their visitation they might administer some small comfort to their husbands: which after much importunitie granted, they were admitted, where suddenlie they caused their husbands to change habits with them, which they did, and so were let forth in stead of the women; they arming themselues against all the spight and furie of the Spartanes. The men that had escaped repaired to Taygeta, entering league with the Heilotes: by which confederacie the Spartans somewhat affrighted, by intercessours concluded a peace with them, conditionally that taking backe their imprisoned women, they should be furnished with ships and coine to seeke new fortunes elswhere; they therefore made a brotherhood betwixt them and the Lacedemonians. Of which Collony two brothers, Pollis and Crataida of the cittie of Lacedemon were made gouernours. Part of them made residence in Melo, the rest with Pollis sailed into Creete, and hauing asked counsell of the Oracle, answer was returned them, That in the place where they should leaue their goddesse, and loose part of their anchor, they should find a period of their trauells, and vpon that continent make their aboad, plant their collony, and erect a cittie. In processe, arriuing in a part of Creete called Cheronesus (a place halfe inuironed with water (or almost an Island) a sudden feare surprised them, in so much that hasting to get backe to the nauie, they left behind them the image of Diana which they had receiued from their ancestors, by Brauron first brought into Lemnos, and borne by them a ship-bord in all their nauigation. The feare being past ouer, and the tumult appeased, they weighed anchor to make from shoare: but Pollis perceiuing a great part of his anchor missing, and left in the rockes, hee remembred the Oracle, and causing his people to land againe, hee made his plantation in that countrey, and after many battailes in which he preuailed against the inhabitants, he subdued Lictium with diuers other citties, of which he had prosperous and peaceable possession.



Examples of Modestie and Magnanimitie.
THe Phocenses opprest by the tyrants of Delphos, in that commenced warre which was called Bellum sacrum, in which the Thebans were ingaged; it happened that the Bacchinalls (who were women that were vsually drunke in the celebrations of the feasts of Bacchus, and were called

Thiades) extasied in their deuine furor (for so they tearmed it) in their nightly wandering lost their way,Thyades. and erred so farre, that vnwittingly they happened vpon the cittie of Amphissa, and wearied as they were, cast themselues dispersedly abroad in the market place, there to repose themselues till they came to their better sences. The Amphissesian matrons, fearing least any outrage of offence might be done vnto them (by reason there were at that time many forraine souldiers who were in league with the Phocenses) themselues in person watched these Bacchides till morning, guarding and gyrting them round, least any thing vnseemely might be spied amongst them, and only with a reuerent silence attended them till they awaked: but finding them in their better temper, ministered vnto them all such necessaries as the cittie yeelded, and sent them (though the wiues of their enemies) in the charge and safe conduct of their owne husbands peaceably home to their owne cities. Comparable to their Modestie was the Magnanimitie of Megisto,Megisto. an eminent Ladie of the citie Elis. Aristotemus the tyrant hauing (by the power of Antigonus) vsurped the Franchises and Liberties of that cittie, oppressed the people with infinite calamities; amongst which, that of Philodemus was not the least, who hauing a beautifull daughter called Micca,Micca. when Lacinus one of the Captaines of Aristotemus in the heate of wine and lust, would forceably haue rauished her, and the poore innocent Virgin fled for refuge into the armes of her father, he there most inhumanly transpierced her, mixing the teares of the reuerend old man with the blood of his daughter. The horridnes of this nothing moued the tyrant, but (that if greater could possiblie be deuised) he gaue countenance euen to such mischeifes, causing many of the prime cittisens to be slaine, and to the number of eight hundred banished. But fearing in regard of their number, hee might be in time by them subuerted: he made proclamation, That all such women that had a desire to visit their absent husbands, should with such gold and treasure as they could conueniently carrie (with their children) haue peaceable passage from the cittie into Aetolia, where many or the most of their exiled friends then soiourned. Many of the women incouraged by this edict, being to that purpose assembled, and with such goods as they had, departed the citie, he sent after them his horse men, who not onely rifled them, but stampt their children beneath their horses feete, where many of the infants perished, and so in confused heaps hurried them backe into the towne, bearing the spoile into the Tyrants treasurie. These outrages were the least of many which I purposely omit. There liued at that time an antient noble man in the cittie, called Hellanicus, who entred into a combination with the exiles, about the suppressing of the Tyrant, and by reason of his yeares was neither by him feared nor suspected: by the incouragement of this Hellanicus, the confined citisens assembled themselues into a citie most conuenient for their deseigne cald Amimona, to whom many of their allies and friends (copartners in the publique calamitie) resorted Aristotemus somwhat affrighted with this new faction, repaired to a place of publike assembly, whether he had caused all the chiefe matrons to be before called, and there in a premitated oration, stuft with many threats aud menaces, protested to inflict vpon them rackes, tortures, and lingring deaths, vnlesse by speedie letters they did not onely persuade but preuaile with their husbands, instantly to abandon the place they had fortified. To whom Megisto the wife of Tymoleon (a Ladie amongst the rest most respected, not daigning the tyrant the least honour, or so much as rising to doe him reuerence but sitting) with a bold and vndaunted courage, thus speake.
Weart thou a

true spirited man, as nothing lesse appeares in thee, thou wouldest not threaten women in this base kind to betray their husbands, but wouldest rather haue negotiated with them, who haue entire power and command ouer vs, and that in smoother and more deceitfull language than such by which thou hast hetherto beguiled vs. But if thy cowardise and despairation compell thee to this exigent, as thinking by our meanes to complot their ruines, thou art in that hope destitute of all comfort: let that day neuer be callendred, to memorise them among men so void of councell and discretion, that by sparing the liues of their wiues and children, they should betray the sacred libertie of their countrie: for the mischiefe is not so great to loose vs altogether, whom they haue alredy wanted so long, as the good and profit that must necessarily accrue by redeemimg the citties from thy insolencie and tyrannie. These words were no sooner vttered, but Aristotemus distracted with rage and furie, commanded her young sonne to be sought and brought, whom hee purposed to massacre before the mothers face:
and whil'st his lictors and serieants were inquiring for him amongst others that were then busied about their childish sports, she spying him, or her own accord called him to her with these words,
Come hether to me, o my sonne, and now in thy childhood before thou hast apprehension or passionate feeling of tyrrannie, be freed both from the terror and burden therof; for mine own part, I had rather see thee innocently dying, than basely and ignobly seruing.
The Tyrant at her last speech more inraged than the former, drew out his sword with purpose to haue slaine her, when Cylo one of his familiar friends (but indeede a cheefe man in the confederacie with Hellanicus) staid his hand, and by gentle words so tempered his spleene, that he departed thence without any act of murder, yet purpose of a future reuenge. Vpon a day as hee was sporting vpon the bed with his wife vntill dinner was prepared and disposed vpon the table, it happened that an Eagle soring aboue the Pallace, let fall a great stone vpon the battlements iust ouer the bed where the king then lay, and alighting there, made such a fearefull and prodigious noyse that it not onely amased the king within, but was wonderfull to all that beheld it without. The Augurers were sent for to know what omen should succeede: they flatter the tyrant, and promise nothing but what is good and prosperous. Hellanicus the same night in his dreame immagined his sonne appeared to him (which sonne was by Aristotemus before murdered with his brother) who spoke to him to this effect, O father arise, is this a time to sleepe when the whole gouernement of the cittie must depend on you to morrow? With this dreame incouraged, he comforted his adherents, all attending the opportunitie of reuenge. Aristotemus meane time hearing that Craterus was marched as farre as Olimpius with a great armie, leauied for his safetie and supporture, grew so bold vpon the rumor of so great a power, that without his guard, accompanied with Cylo onely, he aduentured into the market place: whom Hellanicus meeting by chance, and almost extasied to see him so weakely attended; with both his hands aduanced, and with an audable and cleere voice he made this clamour, Where be you, you good and long oppessed countriemen? a braue Theatre is this for so noble a contention as our libertie, being seated in the middest of our countrie, and centre of our cittie. This Cylo inuaded the next man to the king and slew him. Thrasibulus and Lampides assaulted the tyrant, who fled to the temple of Iupiter, where they fell vpon him and killed him; then dragging his bodie into the market place proclaimed their libertie. The women issued out of their houses with ioy and clamour, embracing their husbands,

fathers, and friends, with loude and glad acclamations; thence in multitudes they made concourse to the pallace. The tyrants wife to preuent their furie made fast her doore, and in her priuat chamber strangled her selfe. Aristotemus had two beautifull yong virgins to his daughters, both marriagable, these they were about to dragge into the streetes with purpose to destroy them, but first to excrutiate them with all disgraces and contumacies. Which Megisto seeing, with her best oratorie appeased their present furie, proposing to them how shamefull a thing it were for a noble and free state, to immitate the insolencies of a bloodie and inhumane tyrannie: libertie therfore was granted the yong damosells (at her intercession) to retire themselues into their chambers, and to make choise of what death best suited with their present feares. Myro the elder sister vnloosing from her wast a silken gyrdle,Myro. fastened it about her owne necke, and with a smiling and cheerefull looke thus comforted the younger: My sweete and deere sister, I more commiserat thy fate than lament mine owne: yet immitate (I intreat thee) my constancie in death, least any abiect thing or vnworthie may be obiected against vs vnagreeable with our blood and qualitie. To whom the younger replyed, That nothing could appeare more terrible to her than to behold her die; therefore besought her, by the affinitie of sisterhood, to be the first that should make vse of that gyrdle, and dying before her to leaue to her an example of resolution and patience. Myro to her made answere, I neuer denied thee any thing sweete soule in life, neither will I oppose thee in this thy last request at thy death: and for thy sake will I indure that which is more greeuouous to mee than mine owne death, namely to see thee die. When accommodating all things for the present execution, shee no sooner saw her dead, but she gentlely layd her out and with great modestie couered her. Then she besought Megisto on her knees, to haue a care of them in their deaths, that nothing immodest or vncomely might bee done to their bodies: which graunted, she not only with courage, but seeming ioy, vnderwent her last fate, till she expired: nor was there any spectator there present, to whom the memorie of the tyrant was neuer so hatefull, from whose eyes and hearts this obiect did not extract teares and pittie.
In Megisto is exprest the Magnanimitie of spirit, but in these following, I will illustrate Fortitude in action. The Turkes busied in the siege of some townes in Catharo, Vluzales and Carocossa (two of no meane place and eminence among them) wrought so farre with the great Admirall, that he deliuered into their charge the managing of threescore gallies, with munition and men in number competent, to make incursions into the bordering Islands then vnder the state of Venice. These two Turkish captaines land their forces before Curzala, a citie that giues name to the countrie, with purpose to inuest themselues before it: which Antonius Contarinus (then gouernour of the cittie) vnderstanding, like a timerous and fearefull coward, taking the aduantage of the night, fled with his souldiors thence, not leauing the ^owne any way defensible; which the cittisens vnderstanding, all or the most followed after. The towne thus left to the weake guard of some twenty men, and about fourescore women, the Turks giue them a bold and fierce assault: when these braue viragoes chusing rather to dye like souldiers than like their husbands runne like cowards; some maintaine the Ports, others defend the walls, and with that noble resolution, that what with fire, stones, scalding water, and such like muniments then readiest at hand, so opposed the assailants, that many of the Turks in that conflict were slaine, and all repulst, retyring themselues with purpose (some rest giuen to the souldiours) to salute them with a fresh alarum. But fortune was so fauourable

to these Amazonian spirits, that a mighty tempest from the North so tost and distrest the Turks gallyes, that they were forced to abandon the Island with dishonour, leauing to the besieged, a memory worthy to outliue all posteritie.

Of Dido, Cesara, Gumilda, and Ethelburga.
OF Dido queene of Carthage, all Authours agree to haue falne by the sword, and to haue died by her owne bold and resolute hand; but about the cause that mooued her thereto diuerse differ. Ausonius is of opinion, That her husband Sychaeus being dead, shee did it to preserue her viduall chastitie, and so free hir selfe from the importunities of Hyarbus king of Getulia: of his mind is Marullus, and of these Remnius, or as some will haue it Priscianus in the Geography of Dionisius writing De scitu orbis, i. the Scituation of the world: Contrary to these is the Prince of Poets (he whom Scalliger cals Poeta noster) Pub. Virgilius, who ascribes her death to an impatience of griefe conceiued at the vnkind departure of Aeneas; which though it carry no great probabilitie of truth, yet all the Latin Poets for the most part (in honour of the authour) haue iustified his opinion: as Ouid in his third booke De fastis, his Epistles Metamorph. and others workes; so likewise Angelus Polytianus in his Manto, with diuers others. Iustine in his eighteenth booke of Hystor. speaking of the first erecting of Carthage saith,The building of Carthage. That where they began to digge with purpose to lay the first foundation, they found the head of an Oxe: by which it was predicted that the cittie should be futurelie fertill and commodious, but withall full of labour and subiect to perpetuall seruitude: therefore they made choice of another peece of earth, where in turning vp the mould, they chanced vpon the head of a horse, by which it was presaged their collony should in time grow to be a warlike nation fortunate and victorious. In what manner she dyed, I referre you to Virgill, and will speake a word or two of her sister Anna, the daughter of Belus. She, after the death of her sister, forsaking of the cittie of Carthage then inuested with siege by Hyarbus, fled to Battus king the Island Melita, but making no long soiourne there, she put againe to sea and fell vpon the coast of Laurentum, where being well knowne by Aeneas, she was nobly receiued, but not without suspition of too much familiaritie betwixt them: in so much that iealousie possessing Lauinia the wife of Aeneas, she conceiued an irreconcilable hatred against Anna, in so much that fearing her threatned displeasure she cast her selfe headlong into the riuer Numicus, and was there drowned; for so Ouid reports in his booke de Fastis. But touching the illustrious Queene Dido, vnder her statue were these verses or the like engrauen in a Greeke character, interpreted into Latine by Ausonius, and by me in the sacred memorie of so eminent a queene thus englisht:
I am that Dido, looke vpon me well,And what my life was, let my visage tell:'Tis faire and smooth, what wrinckle can you findIn this plaine Table, to expresse a mindSo sordid, and corrupt? Why then so vneuenAnd blacke a soule should to a face be giuenThat promiseth all vertue? Virgill, whereBegott'st thou those ill thoughts, that brand me hereWith lust and incest? Neuer (I protest)Was that Aenaeas, whom thou calst the bestOf men, in Lybia: Neuer saw I landOne Troian on the Carthaginian strand.Because Sychaeus (my first husband) dead,To keepe my sacred vowes to him, I fledTh'imbraces of Hyarbus; am I madeA prostitute to nothing, to a shade:He came in armes to force me, and compellMe a chast widdow, to another hell,A second marriage: 'Tis the gods aduise,No woman can be chast that marryeth twice.To auoide that sinne, I slew my selfe; o whyCouldst thou (o Maro) then comment a lye,With lust to brand my memory? When heauen knowes,To saue mine honour I my life did lose.Giue faith to History, you that Readers are,Before this fabling Poesie, since that farTranscends the bounds of truth: for Poets canMake the high gods much more corrupt than man.
So much touching queene Dido, and as farre as probabilitie can, to acquit her of all incontinence. One Paulus an historiographer in his fifth booke remembers vs of Cesara,Cesara. a queene of Persia, who hauing some light of the Gospell, trauelled as farre as Constantinople in Greece to be further instructed, onely attended by a few priuat followers: who being satisfied in all the fundamentall points of her faith, she with her small traine was christened. The Persian Sophy hauing notice thereof, sent embassadours to the Emperour, to know the reason why he deteined his queene, wishing him to returne her safe vpon such easie sommons. Cesara being in presence when this embassie was deliuered, desired the Emperour that she might giue them their answer, which granted; Returne (said she) my humble duty and vassaladge to my Lord the King, and tell him withall, That vnlesse he receiue my faith, and renouncing his false Idolls beleeue in the onely true God, he can claime no interest at all in me. The messenger dispatcht, and this short answer returned to the Sophy, he leuied an army of forty thousand men, and comming into Greece, the Emperour and he came vnto a peacefull enterview: at which, by the mediation of this royall and religious Empresse, the Sophy with all his princes and souldiers there present, receiued the Christian faith, and after the interchange of many Princely and magnificicent gifts, returned with his wife into his own countrey. Another noble history I thinke not amisse to be here inserted, which is recorded by one Willielmus de reg. lib. 20. Gunnilda the daughter of Canutus and Emma,Gunnilda. who being accused of adultery by her husband Henry the Emperour, who to iustifie his accusation had prouided a champion, in stature a giant, and for his presence and potencie much feared; she notwithstanding relying vpon God and her owne innocence put her life vpon the valour of a priuat young gentleman of England, who^ she brought with her to the same purpose. These Champions adventuring their liues, fought a braue and resolute combat, but in the end the victory inclined to the Empresse: her aduerse champion being vanquished, confest his treasons, and she was noblie acquit: but after, by no intreaties or intercessions

made by the Emperour or others, shee could bee wonne vnto his embraces, but abiuring his bed, and vowing an austere and sequestred life, she retired her selfe into a Monasterie. Three royall presidents of three v^matchable queenes, the first for Magnanimitie, the second for Religion and deuotion, and the last for Chastitie. To these I will yet adde another. Willielmus de Regibus, in his first booke writes that king Iue betooke his kingdom of the West-Saxons to his cosin Ethelardus, and vndertooke a pilgrimage to Rome: the occasion of his iournie was this, The queene Ethelbnrga had often counselled her husband the king to forsake the pride and riches of the world, and to haue a respect to his soules health, especially now in the latter dayes of his life; but not able to preuaile with him, she bethought her selfe of a queint stratagem: after they had left their royal pallace where they had but latly feasted in all pompe, pleasure and delicacies, and remoued into another house, she caused him to whose charge the place from whence they departed was committed, to take downe all the hangings, make foule and and filthy euerie roome and chamber, nay in the verie place where the king had but the other day sported with his queene, was lodged a sow and pigges, with all the loathsomenesse that could be deuised: this done according to her commaund, she by a wile, inticed the king to the place thus strangely disguised. The king wondering at this sudden change stood amased, to whom she thus spoke, I pray you my Lord where be now these rich hangings and curtaines, either for state or ornament? Where is all the glyttering pompe a^d rich array, tending to nothing else saue gluttonie and luxurie? Alas how suddenly are they all vanished? Shall not (my Lord) this beautie of ours so fade, and this fraile flesh euen so fall a way? This with other her words to the like purpose, tooke such impression in the kings brest, that he resigned his kingdome to his Nephew, and betooke himselfe to a religous and Monasticke life, after his vowed pilgrimage. The queene Ethelburga went to the Abbey at Berking, in which place her sister had beene before Abbesse, and there spent the remainder of her life in deuotion and penitence.


Polycrita.
THere arose great warres betweene the Milesians and Naxians, kindled by the adultrate practise of the wife of Hypsicreon a Milesian, who violating her coniugall vowes, by throwing her selfe into the lustfull imbraces of Promedon, a Naxian, then her guest, and fearing the iust anger of her husband, and withall the punishment due to her adultrate sinne, fled with him into Naxos: from whence being againe demanded, but denied, this priuate wrong turned to a publique ruin: for deuouring warre accompained with many calamities preyed vpon both their countries. But as this Beacon was first fired by a womans lewdnesse, so was it at last extinguished by a womans vertue: Diognetus who had the command of those Erythraeans which came in ayde of the Milesians, had committed to his custodie a certaine strong hold, scituated against the citie Naxos: who hauing taken from the Naxians a prize of women and free virgins, he was deepely stroke in loue with one Polycrata, whom he led with him not as a captiue, but as his wife. It chanced that the Miletians celebrated a generall festiuall day, Polycrita besought Diognetus to make her so far indebted to his fauour, as to suffer her to send her brothers part of those iuncates then at the table, which willingly he granted: she secretly writ vpon the leaden table of the marchpane what shee had proiected, withall charging the bearer to intreat her brothers not to let any participate therof saue themselues:

when they had heard the writing, which contained thus much in effect, Take hold vpon the opportunitie which occasion thrusts into your hands: this night you may seise the Castle, for the enemie will lie downe in wine, and sleepe in a presumptious securitie. They shew it to the chiefe commanders of Naxos, who vniting themselues, giue the affrighted and vnweaponed Miletians a sudden and vnexpected assault, and hauing slaughtred many, possesse themselues of the castle: But by Polycritas intercessiue intreaties, surprised Diognetus scapes with life. And for this noble exploit of hers, the glad citisens running to meete her with shoutes and acclamations, euery one bearing in his hand a Garland to receiue her with those wreathes of honor; Polycrita was so farre extaside, that her sudden ioy vshered a sudden death, for as she stood amased at the gate, she instantly fell downe exanimated: in which gate she was buried, and her sepulchre called The tombe of Enuie, because it is supposed that Fortune grew so enuious of her merits, that thus she robd her of her life, that so she might cheat her of her deserued honors. And thus much speakes the histories of the Naxians. Aristotle affirmes Polycrita was no captiue, but onely that Diognetus hauing seene her, hee grew so far enamoured of her, that to enioy her he proferred her any thing that was in his power to giue. She promises to yeeld to his desire, if he will grant her the fruition of one boone, which when hee had confirmed to her by oath, shee demanded Delium to be surrendred vp (for the castle was so called.) Diognetus being so much inchanted with her beautie, and moreouer bound by the religion of his vow, deliuered vp to her and the cittisens the castle Delium.



Of Queenes and other Ladies for diuers vertues memorable.
WEe reade of diuerse other women for diuerse noble actions Illustrious. Dominica the wife of the Emperour Valens,Dominica when the Gothes had threatned the vtter subuersion of Constantinople, by her wisedome and descretion mediated with the enemie and was the sole means of the safetie both of the people and citie. Sex. Aurelius reports of Pompeia Plautina,Pompeia Plautina. when hir husband Iulian the Emperor, had with intollerable exactions oppressed the people, insomuch that their discontents were readie to breake out into rebellion; this vertuous princesse so farre temporised with the Emperour, that by her meanes they were released from all exactions and tributes. Diaconus makes mention of Placidia the sister and wife of Honorius,Placidia. who (in the yeare 412 when Ataulphus king of the Gothes presented himselfe with an inuincible armie before the walls of Rome, threatning vtterly to subuert the cittie and after rebuild it againe, and in steede of Rome to call it Gothia) so wrought with the barbarous king by persuasions and promises, that she turned his pride to pitie, and his immanitie to mercie, so that he departed thence without any assault made against the cittie, or the least spoile done vnto the countrey. Vollateranus speakes of Inguldis the sister of Childebert,Inguldis. who being marryed to Hermogillus, sonne to Lemigildus king of the Gothes, persuaded her husband (then an infidell) to bee a true and constant professour of the Christian faith. The like we reade of Cleotilda,Cleotilda. queene of France, who did the like good worke vpon her husband Clodoncus the sonne of Childericke. Nor hath our owne nation beene barreine of good examples,Helena. since Helena the mother of Constantine may in that kind claime equalitie, if not precedencie before any. As Rome affoorded

a Volumnia, mother to Martius Cariolanus; so England yeelded as eminent a Ladie in all points, the mother to Brennus and Belinus. The first, when her sonne had worthilie deserued of his countrie, euen to the attaining of all militarie honours, and as an addition to the rest, for his braue seruice against the cittie of Coriolorus, had the denomination of Coriolanus bestowed vpon him by the publique sufferage of the Senat: yet notwithstanding for all his merites and vnmatchable exploits, by which he purchased to himselfe the honor to be called Pater Patriae, yet after, by the ingratefull multitude (who were euer emulous of any mans deserued greatnesse) hee was not onely degraded from all his titles of dignitie, but had the doome of euerlasting banishment denounced against him; in reuenge of which ingratitude, hauing raised an armie and inuaded the townes of the Roman empire, readie to inuest himselfe before the quaking and affrighted cittie, when they had first sent to him (to make their attonement) their priests, who by reason of their sacred offices were held in much reuerence, next their Augurers and South-sayers, then the Aeditiae which were the keepers of their Temples, and last their prophets; but none of these preuailing, as their last refuge, the Roman matrons presented themselues before Volumnia the mother of Martius, humblie intreating her to make intercession betwixt her sons rage and the imminent calamitie. This reuerent Ladie mooued with their teares and acclamations, accompanied with Virgilia the wife of Coriolanus and many other noble matrons and damosells, hauing before promised to plead in their behalfes as farre as a miserable mother could claime interest in an iniured sonne; repaired to his tent, and casting themselues downe at his feete, humblie besought him of compassion: the feare exprest in their faces and the sorrow in their habits, cast vpon the enemy a sudden reuerence and silence, when Volumnia with such feeling accents and moouing Oratorie mixed with teares, besought the peace of the cittie, that they made a reuerent impression in the heart of Coriolanus: who supporting his mother, and aduancing his wife from the earth, brake out into this extasie, Vicistis, You haue ouercome me. Thus by these excellent women, all combustions of warre were appeased, a threatned misery preuented, and a generall and safe peace setled in the Commonweale. Of no lesse remarke, was the wife of Mulmutius Dunwallo, the sonne to Cloten duke of Cornwall, who as Fabian remembers of him, hauing in great peace and tranquilitie gouerned the kingdome for the space of fortie yeres, and was after buried in a place by him before erected, cald the This some thinke to be Pauls church, others Blackwell hall. Temple of peace; leauing the land equally deuided betwixt his two sonnes, Belinus and Brennus: to Belinus the elder was allotted England, Wales, and Cornewall; vnto Brennus all the North parts beyond Humber: who being a young man and desirous of honour, not content with the principalitie appointed him, commenced against Belinus a fearefull war. But as the two brothers were readie to ioyne battaile, the mother presented herselfe betwixt the armies, exposing her bodie to their opposit weapons, shewing the breasts that gaue them sucke, and with noble admonitions and motherlie persuasions so molified the hearts of the incensed princes, that all ciuill and seditious warre layd aside, they entered a friendly and brotherly league; which was so established in the reuerent vertues of the mother, that it was neuer after violated in all their life times after. With what condigne honours is queene Marcia's memorie worthie to be celebrated?Mercia. who being the wife to Guinthelinus king of Britaine (the sonne of Gurgunscius) was in those daies of that excellent learning and knowledge, that she deuised many profitable

and wholsome lawes to the benefit of the Common-wealth, which were much esteemed amongst the Brittaines, and carefully obserued, being cald after her name, The Mercean laws, many ages insuing. But being loath to instance too many to one purpose, least I should rather seeme tedious than delightfull to the reader, I will adde onely one English lady in another kind memorable, and worthy for her goodnes an euerlasting character. There was a noble man of England created Earle of Couentrie, this man was so austere to the citisens, that he had iniuriously wrested from them all their ancient franchises and priuiledges, insomuch that by his oppressions and insufferable exactions, the cittie was much decaied, the people disabled in their power, and weakened in their fortunes: These petitioned to the Countesse, a noble and well disposed lady,A ladie of Couentrie. to mediate for them to the Earle, That their customes and former liberties might be restored. The lady vndertakes their suit, and with much importunitie solicited her lord in their behalfe; but he being of a haughtie and insolent disposition, stil persisted immoueable: but she commiserating their estate, as daily mooued with their complaints, without cessation still sollicited for them, and with such vrgence, that he had neither peace at boord nor quiet in bed; he at length as much wearied with her importunitie, as she tired with their petitions, she wrested from him this churlish and indeffinite answer, Cease Lady further to persuade me, for I protest, and that with an vnaltered resolution, that there is but one onely meanes by which their franchises are to be recouered, which if thou wilt vndertake, (as I presume thou wilt not) I will surrender them vp intirely, if not, I will continue them in the same estate that I now hold them. The lady gently demaunding what imposition he would inioine her, he thus replied, Thou shalt strippe thy selfe starke naked, and mounted on horseback, at mid-day ride in that manner through the citie, from one gate to another, and by this exployt only their desire and thy suit is to be granted. The modest lady after some little pause, promised her lord that for their generall good she would doe it. This being sealed by an oath from him, and a vow from her, she acquainted the cittisens with her purpose, and appointed a day in which she commanded them to locke all their doores and shut in their windowes, and not to leaue any small cranny open towards the street, nor suffer any liuing thing to be abroad. This being faithfully and punctually performed by them, shee as effectually accomplished her promise, and rid in that manner with no more touch of immodestie, than when shee shifted her smocke in her priuat chamber. Some may say, Yet what might the people apprehend in their conceits, to thinke vpon a naked Ladie so mounted? I answere, They could not more immodestlie conceiue of her, than a man that sees any beautiful woman wel habited, many do in his libidinous immaginations, by comprehending euerie naked lineament before she put on her apparrell. Of this noble Ladie there is in the citie both monument and memorie vnto this day.
In speaking of so many chast, worthie and eminent Ladies, I wonder how the name of Cuckold came to be so frequent amongst vs:Of the name Cuckold. might it be held no ridiculous digression, I would tell you an old tale to that purpose, which though I dare not warrant it for truth, I am willing to make it yours as freely as it was made mine. I speake not of the woman, that when her husband came home to her in hast, and brought newes there was a new edict come out, that all Cuckolds should be cast into the riuer; presently asked him, why he did not learne to swimme: nor of her that when her good-man came to her in like manner with acclamation, and sayd, Wotte you what wife, such a woman (naming one of his neighbours) is found to be false, and hee branded for a notorious

cuckold: answered, Lord husband you are such another man. But my discourse is at this present of a disputation in hell, what this thing Cuckold should be, or what kind of creature; since all sortes of people of what estate or degree soeuer, examined by Lucifer, or any of the three infernall judges, denied themselues to bee the same. It was therefore agreed amongst them, to send vp some of the most ingenious diuells amongst them, by surueying the Earth, to discouer this strange vnknown creature: and if it were possible to bring him thither aliue, to make them spectators of an obiect they so much desired to see. With this commission away goes the diuell, showes himselfe vpon the earth, and taking the shape of a gallant thrusts himselfe into the societie of all kind of people: hee comes to the countrey man, askes if he bee a Cuckold, who answers he knowes not what it meanes. The cittisen denies himselfe to be the man. The souldier with oaths outfaceth the name. The lawyer will arrest any man vpon an action of slaunder that shall call him by that name. The courtier (indeed) confesseth himselfe to be a Cuckold-maker, but to be a Cuckold he can indure by no means. In so much that the poore diuell, altogether disappointed of his purpose was readie to retire againe to his black house of darkenesse: as he was meditating with himselfe to the same purpose, hee happened into an Ordnarie, where a cittisen being at game amongst many gentlemen, the dyce so fauoured him, that he got a great hand, blew vp two or three gallants, and so gaue ouer play; which one aboue the rest taking not well, importuned him still to hold him game, which the other absolutly denying, the gallant told him, A Cuckold he found him, and so would leaue him, and with that language he bad him farewell. This the diuell hearing, grew ioyfull in himselfe, thus intimating; I haue found him at length whom I so long haue sought, this is my prise, and shall be my purchase. He presently prouides himselfe of a large bagge able to containe so great a burden, and desiring the cittisen more familier acquaintance (to cut off circumstance) drew him out of the towne to take a turne or two in the fieldes. Together they walke, and comming to a remote place, the diuell discouering himselfe, appeares vnto him in a rough blacke haired shape, and tels him to what purpose he was come, and to what place hee was inioyned to beare him: therefore wished him patiently and quietly to creepe into his bagge. The man at these words amased, began to struggle with the diuell, who layde violent hands vpon him. It hapned that neere to this wrestling place a poore labouring man was digging of grauell, there lay by the edge of the pit a lustie mastiffe (that had bin a beare-dogge) to keepe the poore mans hat and jerkin, whil'st he was at worke below: this dogge seeing the man and the diuell contend, tooke (it seemes) the fiend, by reason of his rough skinne, to be a beast of the game; vp skippes he to take the diuell by the throat, who presently lets goe his hold to secure himselfe from the dogge, and away he flyes. The citisen by this meanes secured from the present danger, and willing to be gratefull to his preseruer, comes to the labourer and bargaines for the mastiffe; the price is made, and both parties agreed. It is to be presupposed, that the diuell in this feare, had left (for hast) his bagge behind him, and fled out of sight: which the cittisen apprehending, and being emboldned with so valiant a second, thinkes to put a new tricke vpon his aduersary; for he imagines that (tenne to one) hee will come backe againe for his bagge, therefore he intreates the poore man to helpe him to put the dogge into the sacke, and tye the mouth of it fast with the strings. All is done and they retyre themselues apart, when iust as they imagined, out

comes the diuel peaking from the place where he lay hid to see if the coast was cleere, and casting his eyes timerously about him, as fearing the like assault, he came softlie treading to the place where hee had left his sacke, and gently feeling, findes somewhat to stirre therein: vpon which he presently imagines that it was the supposed cuckold, who for feare had crept into the same; and being wondrous iocund with this conceit, snatcheth him vp vpon his backe, and with his glad purchase sinkes himselfe down among the infernalls. His returne was rumord in hell, and a sinod cald, in which Lucifer seated himselfe in his wonted state with all his princes, iudges, and officers about him, all in great expectation of the obiect so much desired: the messenger is summond, who appeares before them with his bagge at his backe, or rather vpon his necke; he is commanded to discouer this strange creature so often spoken of, but till then in that place not seene; the sackes mouth is opened, out flyes the mastiffe amongst them, who seeing so many ougly creatures together, thought (it seemes) he had beene amongst the beares in Paris garden: but spying Lucifer to be the greatest and most ill-fauoured amongst them, first leapes vp into his face, and after flyes at whomsoeuer stood next him. The diuels are disperst, euery one runnes and makes what shift he can for himselfe, the sessions is dissolued, the bench and bale-docke cleered, and all in generall so affrighted, that euer since that accident the very name hath beene so terrible amongst them, as they had rather entertaine into their darke and sad dominions tenne thousand of their wiues, then any one man who beares the least character of a cuckold. But hauing done with this sporting, I proceede to what is more serious.


Of Women remarkeable for their loue to their Husbands.
IT is reported of the wiues of Wynbergen, a free place in Germany, that the towne being taken in an assault by the Emperour, and by reason the cittisens in so valiantlie defending their liues and honours, had beene the ouerthrow of the greatest part of his army; the Emperour grew so inplacable, that he purposed (though mercy to the women) yet vpon the men a bloody reuenge. Composition being granted and articles drawne for the surrender of the towne, it was lawfull for the matrons and virgins (by the Emperours edict) to carry out, of their owne necessaries, a burden of what they best liked. The Emperour (not dreaming but that they would load themselues with their iewels and coyne, rich garments and such like) might perceiue them issuing from the Ports, with euery wife her husband vpon her backe, and euery virgin and damsell her father or brother: to expresse as much loue in preseruing their liues then, as the men had before, valour in defending their liberties. This noble example of coniugall loue and pietie tooke such impression in the heart of Caesar, that in recompence of their noble charitie, hee not onely suffered them to depart peaceably with their first burdens, but granted euerie one a second, to make choice of what best pleased them amongst all the treasure and wealth of the cittie. Michael Lord Montaigne in his Essayes speakes onely of three women for the like vertue memorable; the first perceiuing her husband to labour of a disease incurable, and euery day more and more to languish, persuaded him resolutelie to kill himselfe, and with one blow to be ridde of a

lingring torment; but finding him to be somewhat faint-hearted, she thus put courage into him by her owne noble example: I (quoth she) whose sorrow for thee in thy sicknesse, hath in some sort paraleld thy torment, am willing by one death both to giue date vnto that which hath (for thy loue) afflicted me, and thy violent and vnmedicinable torture. So after many persuasiue motiues to incourage his fainting resolution, she intended to dye with him in her armes: and to that purpose, least her hold by accident or affright should vnloose, she with a cord bound fast their bodies together, and taking him in her louing imbraces from an high window which ouerlooked part of the sea, cast themselues both headlong into the water. As pious an affection shewed that renowned matron Arria (vulgarlie called Arria mater,Arria mater. because she had a daughter of the name) shee seeing her husband Poetus condemned, and willing that hee should expire by his owne hand rather than the stroake of the common hangman, persuaded him to a Roman resolution; but finding him somewhat daunted with the present sight of death, she snatcht vp a sword with which she transpierst her selfe, and then plucking it from her bosome presented it vnto her husband onely with these few and last words, Poete non dolet, Hold Poetus it hath done mee no harme, and so fell downe and dyed: of whom Martial in his first booke of Epigrams hath left this memory,
Casta suo gladium cum traderet Aria Poeto,Quem dedit visceribus traxerat illa suis,Si qua fides vulnus quod feci, non dolet inquitSed quod ^u facies, hoc mihi Poete dolet.
When Aria did to Poetus giue that steele,Which she before from her owne breast had tane;Trust me (saith she) no smart at all I feele,My onely wound's to thinke vpon thy paine.
The third was Pompeia Paulina,Pompeia Paulina. the wife of Seneca, who when by the tyrranous command of Nero, she saw the sentence of death denounced against her husband (though she was then young and in the best of her yeares, and he aged and stooping) notwithstanding so pure was her affectionat zeale towards him, that as soone as she perceiued him to bleed, caused her owne vaine to be opened, so to accompany him in death; few such presidents this our age affordeth. Yet I haue lately seene a discourse,Rathean Herpin. intituled, A true narration of Rathean Herpin, who about the time that Spinola with the Bauarians first entred the Pallatinate, finding her husband Christopher Thaeon, apoplext in all his limbes and members, with an inuincible constancie, at seuerall iournies bore him vpon hir backe the space of 1300 English miles to a Bath for his recouerie. These and the like presidents of nuptiall pietie make me wonder, why so many Satyrists assume to themselues such an vnbridled libertie to inueigh without all limitation against their Sex. I happened not long since to steale vpon one of these censorious fellowes, and found him writing after this manner:
I wonder our forefathers durst their liuesHazzard in dayes past with such choise of wiues,And (as we reade) to venture on so many:Me thinkes he hath enow that hath not any.Sure either women were more perfect then,Or greater patience doth possesse vs men,Or it belongs to them since Eu's first curse,That (as the world) their Sex growes worse and worse.But who can teach me, Why the fairer, stillThey are more false? good Oedipus thy skill,Or Sphinx thine to resolue me, lay some groundFor my instruction: good, the like is foundMongst birds and serpents; did you neuer seeA milke white swan (in colour like to theeThat wast my mistresse once) as white, as faire,Her downie breasts to touch as soft, as rare;Yet these deepe waters that in torrents meete,Can neuer wash the blackenesse from her feete.Who euer saw a Dragon richly cladIn golden skales, but that within he hadHis gorge stuft full of Venome? I beholdThe woman, and me thinkes a cup of goldStands brim'd before me; whence should I but sip,I should my fate, and death, tast from thy lip.But henceforth Ile beware thee, since I knowThat vnder the more spreading Misceltow,The greater Mandrake thrines, whose shrieke presagesOr ruin, or disaster. Who ingagesHimselfe to beautie, he shall find dependantsContempt, Disdaine, and Scorne; with their attendants,Inconstancie, and Falshood: in their traineWaite Loosenesse and Intemperance. But in vaineBefore the blind we glorious obiects bring;Lend armour to the lame, or counsell singTo them will find no eares: be't then approou'd,,None euer faire, that hath sincerely lou'd.If beautifull, she's proud: if rich, then scorneShe thinks becomes her best. But 'ware the horneThou man if she be crost once: bright, or blacke,Well shap't, or ougly, doth she fortunes lacke,Or be she great in means, haunts she the Cour^,Citty, or Countrey; They all loue the sport.
Further he was proceeding, when I stayd his penne, and so stopt the torrent of his poeticall rapture, and laid before him so many noble histories of glorious and illustrious women, some already in this tractate, and others hereafter to be remembred; that he forsooke his late apostacy, confest his errour, and apprehended a new beleefe, professing himselfe futurely to bee a constant champion of their honours and vertues. The like impression I wish they may make in the hearts of all such whose poems haue been too lauishly bold, and still persist in the like peeuish obstinacie. Now if any man taxe me, Why I haue not equally suited my bookes in length? to excuse my selfe I will tell them a short tale, and so conclude, this being the third in number. A gentleman of a suspected wit, amongst many other crotchets that came often into his braine, hauing a new suit to be made, sent to his taylor to giue him directions about the fashion, charging him aboue all things not to forget to make one sleeue longer

than another, because he would haue a garbe peculiar to himselfe: the taylor loath to offend so good a customer, brings home his doublet made iust according to his direction. The Fantasticke gentleman the first thing hee doth measures the sleeues, and finding their inequalitie, in great chollor calls to his taylor, and to him thus saith, What a blockhead art thou? did not I charge thee to make the one sleeue longer than the other? and see if (like a botcherly fellow as thou art) thou hast not quite mistooke and made the one sleeue shorter than the other. Gentle Reader this is easie to apply.

Explicit lib. tertius. Inscriptus THALIA.







THE FOVRTH BOOKE inscribed MELPOMENE. Of Women incestuous, of Adulteresses, and such as haue come by strange deaths.
NEuer did my hand more compulsiuely direct my penne, nor my penne with lesse willingnesse blot paper, than at this present, being forced in this tractat to lay open the frailties of this Sex, before so much commended. But this is my encouragement to proceede, because I can produce nothing out of History to the disgrace of the bad and vicious, which addes not to the honour of the good and vertuous. Were none foule, what benefit were it to be faire? and if none deformed, what grace could it be to be well featured? There were no honour to be ascribed to modestie, but that we see the dishonour of immodestie depending; nor to the temperate, but that we dayly find the inconueniences inherent to ryot and excesse. Besides, were all alike faire, what prayse were it to be beautifull? or if all alike chast, what admiration could be attributed to so rare a Vertue? As we see in the trying of mettalls there is the gold and the drosse; in the progresse of time, there is day and night, comprehending light, and darknes; in the creation of man, there is the immortall soule and the corruptible flesh. And as it hath pleased the diuine prouidence to prouide a heauen and a hell, the one to crowne the vertuous, the other to condemne the wicked: so there is a necessitie of number to people both, nor are the torments of the one more feelingly apprehended than in contemplating the ioyes and felicities of the other. Amongst artificers, vessells are made some for honour, some for dishonour; in all estates there are the noble and the base; amongst Princes, the good king and the tyrant; amongst subiects, the true liegeman and the traytour; in schooles, the learned and the ignorant; amongst magistrates, the wise and the foolish; if one be bountifull, another is auaritious and griping; if one pious and religious, others atheisticall and prophane: neither is the vilenesse of the one any aspertion or blemish to the other, but rather as a foyle to set it off with more lustre and beautie. Those therefore that are before presented, are to imitate: the rest that in this next booke succeede, to beware and shunne. For who so foolish, that seeing shelues and sands on the one side, and safe harbour on the other, will forsake

the part of securitie, willingly to swallow himselfe vp in the quick-sands: therefore I wish you all to striue, that the beautie of your mindes may still exceede that of your bodies; because the first apprehends a noble diuinitie, the last is subiect to all frailtie: and as the higher powers haue bestowed on you fairenesse aboue man, to equall that excellencie of iudgement and wisedome in which man claimes iustly a prioritie before you, so it is both behoouefull and becomming your Sex, that your outward perfections should altogether aime at the inward pulchritude of the mind; since the first is accidentall and casuall, the last stable and permanent. Besides, if beautie bee once branded with impudence or inchastitie, it makes that which in it selfe is both laudable and desired, reiected and altogether despised. For vertue once violated, brings infamy and dishonour, not onely to the person offending, but contaminates the whole progenie; nay more, lookes backe euen to the iniured ashes of the ancestours, bee they neuer so noble: for the mind, as the body, in the act of adulterie being both corrupted, makes the action infamous and dishonourable, dispersing the poyson of the sinne euen amongst those from whom she deriues her birth; as if with her earthly being they had giuen her therewith her corruptions, and the first occasion of this her infamie. It extends likewise to the posteritie which shall arise from so corrupt a seed, generated from vnlawfull and adulterate copulation. How chary then ought a faire woman to be, to strengthen her bodily beautie with that of the mind? Of what small continuance it is, and how nature hath disposed of your age, you should consider: the beautie of your Cradle you cannot apprehend, nor of your Childhood, and therfore in it you can neither take pride nor delight, or if you could, it is not yet perfect. When you grow ripe for marriage, and that it beginnes to attract you sutors and seruants, it growes to budde, and is then commonly in the blossome, when you haue made choice of a husband: as you begin to be the fruitfull mother of children, so one by one the leaues fade and fall away. Alas, how swiftlie doth Age with wrinkles steale vpon you, and then where is that admiration it before attracted? neither is that small season free from the blastings of disease and canker wormes of sicknesse, able to make the fairest amongst you to looke aged in her youth. Then may the choicest of you with beautifull Lais, who when she saw the Lillies in her brow faded, and the Roses in her chekes withered, the Diamonds in her eyes loose their lustre, and the Rubies in her lippes their colour (as being now growne in yeares) in these words giue vp your looking-glasses backe to Venus.
Nunc mihi nullus in ho^ vsus, quia cernere talemQualis sum, nolo, qualis eram, nequeo.
Now there's no vse of thee at all,Because I haue no willTo see what I am now: and whatI was, I cannot still.
If then this rare ornament be of such small permanens, euen in the best, How much then is it to bee vnderprised, when it is contaminated and spotted with lust and vnlawfull prostitution? since it is a maxime, That things common are so farre from begetting appetite and affection, that they rather engender the seedes of contempt and hatred: for how should any thing festered and corrupt, please the eye? or that which is rotten and vnsound, giue content vnto the

pallat? But to returne to my first appollogie: needfull it is that to the Tragicke Muse Melpomone, I should suit Tragicall historie, wherein if any women be personated for Incontinence, Intemperance, Adulterie, Incest, or any such vile and abhominable action; shee hath in that disgraced herselfe, not her Sex, as stretching no further than the delinquent. If any man object and say they are bad presidents, to him I answere, they are examples of horror to be eschewed, not immitated, which in their owne natures beget a loathing, not liking: and for placing them next to and so neere to the women Illustrious I will excuse my selfe in this short Epigram.

A skilfull Painter hauing lim'd a face
Surpassing faire, of admirable feature,
Sets by the same, to giue it the more grace,
The pourtrait of some foule deformed creature.
No doubt, as much Art in the last is showne
As in the first, albeit that pleaseth most:
How euer to the workeman 'tis well knowne
They both to him are of like care and cost.
Tis so with me, I haue set before you many
Braue Ladies, of them all to take full view,
Pleasing toth' eye (not of these peeces any
Whome a more willing workeman euer drew)
Should these appeare rough hew'd or of bad fauour
And whose aspect cannot so well content you,
Perhapes the next of more delight may sauour,
And grinding other colours, I'le present you
A smoother peece, and limne (if I be able)
A fairer face in a more curious table.


Of Women incestuous, and first of Q. Semiramis.
IT is questioned by some authors, concerning this potent and mightie Queen, Whether she be more renowned for her braue and magnanimous exploits, or notorious for her ignoble and infamous actions? some willing that for her vertues sake, her vices should be vtterly buried in obliuion; others in regard of what was bad in her, that nothing good or commendable might of her to posteritie be remembred. I purpose to giue you a tast of both. Some say she was called Semiram^is, of the birds named The name of Birdes common in that country Semiramides, by which it is sayd she was fostered in her infancie: but that bearing no show of truth, others deriue her denomination from Samir, which in the Hebrew and the Syrian dialect imports as much as Adamant; because her noble and braue atchieuements attracted the heartes of that barbarous rude nation to her admiration and loue, as the Adamant drawes yron. Plutarch in libro Amator. saith, she was a damosell of Syria and concubine to the king of that countrey, with whose loue Ninus being after besotted, tooke her to his wife; of whom shee had that predominance, that though before he had conquered all the Easterne parts, subiugated his neighbour kings, and subdued Zoroastes monarch of the Bactrians (he that was the first inuentor of the Art magicke, that deuised the

principles of Astrologie, and found out the true motions of the starres) notwithstanding she so farre preuailed with him, that for one day she might fit in the royall throne, and for that space haue the regall jurisdiction in her full power, with intire command ouer the whole Empire. In the morning of her soueraigntie, she imposed vpon the subiects such modest and milde iniunctions, that ere noone shee had insinuated into their bosomes so farre, that shee found them so plyable and conformable to her desires, that shee presumed there was nothing so difficult and impossible which for her sake they would not boldly and resolutely vndertake. Vpon this presumption, she stretched her vsurpation so farre, that she commaunded them to lay hands vpon the king her husband before night, and committing him to prison, caused him within few daies to be put to death. She had by Ninus one sonne called Ninus junior, who should haue succeeded his father, that for fiftie two yeares space had swaied the Babylonian Empire: but whether in her owne ambition desirous of the principalitie, or finding her sonne too effeminate to be lord ouer so great a people, and vncertaine withall, whether so many men, and of so many sundrie nations would submit themselues to the soueraigntie of a woman, all these suppositions being doubtfull, certaine it is that in the steade of the mother of Ninus, shee assumed the person of Ninus hir sonne, changing her womans shape into the habit of a mans; for they were of one stature, proportioned in lineaments alike, semblant in voice, and in all accomplements difficultly to be distinguished, in somuch that neuer mother and child could haue more true resemblance: hauing therefore luld her sonne in all effeminacie, and attired him in her queenelike vesture, the better to shadow her owne proportion she suited her selfe in long garments, and commanded all her subiects to do the like; which habit hath bin amongst the Assirians, Bactrians, and Babylonians in vse euen to this day. Vpon her head she wore a Turbant or Myter, such as none but kings vsed to adorne their heads with: so that in the beginning, she was known for no other than the prince, in whose name she accomplisht many notable and noble atchieuements, at whose amplitude, Enuie and Emulation stood amased, confessing her in all her attempts supereminent: neither did her heroick actions any way derrogate from the honour of the Empire, but rather adde to the splendor thereof admiration, in regard a woman had not onely excelled all of her Sex in valour,Herod. lib. 1. but might claime a iust prioritie ouer men. She built the mightie cittie Babylon,These walls the Queene Nicocris who after some yeares succeeded her, made much more stately, exceeding her in all her structures. and the stately walls reckoned amongst the seuen wonders. She not onely conquered all Aethiopia and made that kingdome to her state tributarie, but inuaded India, being the first that durst attempt it; and sauing her, none since but Alexander, who was the second and the last. Thus farre Iustine, out of the historie of Trogus Pompeius. Berosus affirmes as much, These be his words: Nemo vnquam huic feminae comparandus est virorum, tanta in eius vita scribuntur cum ad vituperationem, tum maxime ad laudem. i. No man was euer to be compared with this woman, such great things haue beene written of her, partly to her disgrace, but chiefely to her praise. He proceedes further: She was the fourth that raigned in Assiria (for so it is approued) Nimrod was the first, being father to Belus, and grand-father to Ninus, which Ninus was the first that made warre vpon his neighbours and vsurped their dominions, in whom began to cease the Golden world: whom his widdow Queen succeeded, counterfetting the shape of man. She was after slaine by her sonne Ninus the second of that name, who as Eusebius writes, after her death swaid the scepter thirtie and eight yeares. One memorable thing is recorded of her by Diodorus Siculus, lib. 3. as also by

Vitruuius, This queene being making her selfe readie in her pallace royall, when the one part of her haire was bound vp, and the other halfe hung loose vpon her shoulders, suddenly newes was brought her, That the cittisens of Babylon were reuolted, and all or the most of them in mutinie and vprore. She presently posted into the citie, and what with her presence and persuasion, attonde the discord, and before she had leasure to put her disordered curles in forme, reconciled the hearts of that innumerable people to her obedience: for which her statue was erected in the cittie, being pourtraied halfe readie halfe vnreadie, in memorie of that noble and magnanimous aduenture. Some thing of the best that was in her though not all, you haue heard, the worst is to come, Iuba apud Pli. relates that she immitated the fashions of men, neglecting the habit of her own Sex, and in her latter yeares grew to that deboisht effeminacie and for^id lust, that shee did not onely admit but allure and compell into her goatish embraces many of her souldiers, without respect of their degrees or places, so they were well featured, able and lustie of performance, whom when they had wasted their bodies vpon her, shee caused to be most cruelly murdered. Shee was slaine by her owne sonne, because shee most incestuously sought his bed: but, which of all the rest is most prodigious and abhominable, she is reported to haue had companie with a horse on whom shee vnnaturally doted. But these things whether related for truth or recorded of malice, I am altogether ignorant, and therefore leaue it to censure. Herodotus, Plutarch, and others writ that she caused these words to be inscribed vpon her Tombe. Quicunque rex pecunijs indiget aperto monumento, quod voluerit accipiat, that is, What king soeuer hath neede of coyne, search this mo^ument, and he shall find what he desires. This when king Darius had read, thinking some Magazin of treasure had beene there included, he caused the Tombe-stone to be remooued; where he found vpon the other side thereof these words ingrauen, Misi rex auarus esses and pecuniae insatiabilis mortuorum monumenta, non vi^lasses, i. Haddest thou not been an auaritious king and insasiable of Coyne thou wouldest not haue ransacked the graue of the dead. Thus, as Franciscus Patritius Pontifex saith, the excellent Ladie in her death taunted the gripple auarice of the liuing. That the monuments of the dead are no way to be violated or defaced, Sertorius hath taught vs, who hauing subdued the cittie Tigenna scituate in the countrey of Maurusia, in which a noble sepulchre was, which the inhabitants sayd belonged to Antaus (which was the gyant slaine by Hercules:) when the greatnes of the graue exceeded all beleefe, Sertorius caused it to be ruined, and there digged vp a bodie (as Plutarch witnesseth) of seuentie cubits in length: which beholding and wondering at, hee caused it to be repaired with greater beautie than before, least by deminishing that,Tagenna a woman of seuent^e cubits high. he might haue ruined a great part of his owne honour. Some thinke it was the bodie of Tagenna the wife of Antaeus, whom Hercules prostituted after the death of her husband: of her he begot Siphax, who after erected that cittie, and in memorie of his mother called it by her name.

Pasiphae.
THis Ladie, though I cannot fitly introduce her within the number of the incestuous, yet for that horrid act which the Poets haue reported of her, I shall not impertinently place her next to Semiramis. Appollodorus Gramatticus in his booke de Deorum origine (as Benedictus Aegius Spoletinus interprets him) thus sets downe her historie: Ninus king of Creet espoused Pasiphae, daughter of the Sunne and Perseis, or (as Asclepiades calls her) Creta, the daughter of Aterius,

she had by him foure sonnes, Cretaeus, Deucalion, Glaucus, and Androgeus, and as many daughters, Hecate, Xenodice, Ariadne, and Phaedra. This Minos peaceably to inioy his kingdome, had promised to offer such a Bull to Neptune: but hauing obtained his desires, hee sent that Bull before markt out, backe to the heard, and caused another of lesse value to bee sacrificed: at which Neptune inraged, knew not with what greater punishment to afflict him for the breach of his faith, than to make his wife most preposterously and against nature to dote on that beast which he had so carefully preserued. She therefore confederated with Dedalus, a great Artsmaster (one that for murder had fled from Athens, and with his sonne Icarus there secured himselfe) hee deuised by his mischieuous skill, a wodden cow, hollowed within with such artificiall conuayance, that the Queene inclosed, had satisfaction of her desires to the glutting of her libidinons appetite. Of this congression she conceiued and brought forth a sonne called Asterion, or (as the most will haue it) Minotaurus, shaped with a Bulls head and a mans body. About this monstrous issue, Minos consulted with the Oracle: which aduised him to shut him in a Labyrinth, and there see him safelie brought vp and kept. This Labyrinth (the first that euer was) was built by Dedalus, beeing a house so intricated with windings and turnings this way and that way, now forward, then backward, that it was scarce possible for any that entered therein to finde the direct way backe: thus farre Apollodorus.Lib. 1. But Palephatus in his Fabulous narrations reduceth all these commented circumstances within the compasse of meere impossibilitie; and thus deliuers the truth concerning Pasiphae. Minos being afflicted with a disease in his secret parts, with which he had beene long grieued, was at length by Crides who belonged to Pandion, cured. In the interim of this his defect and weakenesse, the queene cast an adulterat eye vpon a faire young man called Taurus whom (Seruius saith) was the scribe or secretary to the king; shee prostituting her selfe to his imbraces, when the full time was expired shee produced her issue: Which Minos seeing, and taking a true supputation of the time, comparing the birth with his discontinuance from her bed (by reason of his disease) apprehended the adulterie; notwithstanding hee was vnwilling to kill the bastard, because it had a resemblance to the rest of his children, though an impression of the fathers face, by which the adulterer might easily bee knowne. Minos therefore to conceale his owne discontents, and as much as in him lay to hide his wiues shame, whom he endeeredly affected, caused the infant to be carryed into a remote mountaine, and there by the Kings heardsmen to be fostered. But growing towards manhood, he likewise grew intractable and disobedient to those to whose charge he was committed. The king therefore confinde him into a deepe caue digd in a rocke of purpose, not to curbe his fierce and cruell disposition, but rather incourage it; for whosoeuer at any time hee feared, or whatsoeuer he was that had offended him, he sent him to this Minotaure on some impertinent message or other, by whom hee was cruelly butchered. The caue was called Labyrinthus, and therfore described with so many intricate blind Meanders, in regard of the difficultie of his returne with life who was seene to enter there. Therefore when Theseus came to Minos, hee sent him to be deuoured by this Minotaure: of which Ariadne hauing notice, being enamoured of Theseus, she sent him a sword by which he slew the monstrous Homicyde; and that was the clew so often remembred by the Poets which guirded Theseus out of the Labyrinth.



Canace, Canusia, Valeria Tusculana.
MAcareus and Canace were brother and sister, the sonne and daughter to Aeolus king of the winds (for so the Poets feigned him, because the clouds and mists rising from the seauen Aeolian Islands, of which he was king, alwaies pretended great gusts and tempests) hee is reported to be the sonne of Iupiter and Alceste, daughter to Hyppotes the Tyrian, of whom he had the denomination of Hippotides. This Macareus and Canace, hauing most leaudly and incestuously loued one another, couering their bedding and boosoming vnder the vnsuspected pretext of consanguinitie and neerenesse in blood: It could no longer be conceald by reason Canace at length brought forth a sonne, which as she would secretly haue conueyed out of the court by the hands of her trustie nurse, who had beene before acquainted with all their wicked proceedings; the infant by crying betrayed it selfe to the grand-father, who searching the nurse, examining the matter, finding the incest, and miserably distracted with the horridnesse of the fact: instantly in the heat of his incensed anger, caused the innocent infant to be cut in pecces, and limbe by limbe cast to the dogges, and before his face deuoured. This Macareus hearing, tooke sanctuarie in the Temple of Apollo: but Canace by reason of her greenenes and weake estate, not able to make escape, and shunne the violence of her fathers threatned furie: he sent her a sword, and withall commanded her to punish her self according to the nature of the fact. Which she receiuing writ a passionate letter to her brother, in which she first besought him to haue a care of his safety, and next to cause the bones of the slaughtered infant to be gathered together, and put into an vrne with hers: this hauing done, with the sword sent her by her father she transpierst her selfe,Canusia. and so expired. The like we reade of Canusia, daughter of Papirius Volucris, who being found with child by Papirius Romanus her own naturall brother, when the heinousnesse of the fact came to the knowledge of the father, he sent to either of them a sharpe sword; with which they as resolutely slew themselues, as they had before rashly offended. The like successe of her incestuous affection had Valeria Tusculana,Valer. Tus. who as Plutarch relates, by the counsell of one of her handmaids comming priuately in the night into the armes of her father, and the deede after made knowne to Valerius, he in detestation of the act slew her with his owne hand.


Iulia, the Empresse.
THese abhominable sinnes that haue beene punisht in inferiour persons, haue in great ones beene countenanced. Sextus Aurelius and Aelius Spartianus both testifie, That Antonius Caracalla Emperour, doting vpon his stepmother Iulia was often heard to say in her presence, I would if it were lawfull; at length apprehending his purpose, to these his words she made this reply: What you list to doe (...) Emperour) you may make lawfull, Princes haue power to make lawes, but are not (...) to keepe any: by which words imboldned, he tooke her to his bed, whose sonne Ge^a but a while before he had caused to be slaine. Herodotus remembers vs of one Opaea the stepmother to Scithes king of the Scythians,Opaea. who likewise tooke her to his bed and made her his queene.Berenices. So Berenices the sister of Ptolomaus Euergetes was made partner both of his bed and kingdome.Arsinoe. Arsinoe the sister of Ptolomaeus Philodelphus became his concubine. The like did Herod Antipas vnto Herodias the wife of his brother Philip.Herodias. We reade also of one Leucon, who slew his brother Oxilochus king of Pontus for the loue of his wife whom

he after marryed. Faustina the sister of Marcus Antonius Emperour,Faustina. became her brothers paramour; on whom he begat Lucilla,Lucilla. whom he after gaue in marriage to his brother L. Antonius. Theodoricus king of the Frenchmen marryed the daughter of his owne brother, whom he before had slaine. And Pontanus remembers vs of one Iohannes Ariminensis who espoused his owne sister. Phillip the brother of Alphonsus the tenth king of Spaine, forcibly married Christiana,Christiana. daughter to the king of Dacia his owne brothers wife, all Christianitie and Religion set apart. Volaterranus remembers vs of one Stratonice,Stratonice. who being deuilishly doted on by Antiochus Soter king of Syria, his owne father at his importunitie gaue her vp into his sonnes incestuous embraces. Virgill in his tenth booke speakes of Casperia,Casperia. stepmother to Anchemolus the sonne of Rhatus king of the Marhubians, who was by him adulterated. These prodigious acts haue beene incouraged by kings, drawing their presidents from Iupiter, who vitiated Ceres, and marryed his sister Iuno: when in my opinion, the industrie of the Poets in illustrating the escapes of Iupiter and the other gods, was aymed at no other end than to manifest vnto all men, That such deities were not worthy adoration that were callumnised with so many whoredomes, adulteries, and incests.


The sisters of Cambises.
THese might seeme fearfull enough before related, but I will giue you a short tast of some more abhominable: I haue shewed the examples of Lust, but these following are besides lust polluted with vnheard of tyranny. Herodotus in his third booke speaking at large of the life and acts of Cambyses the great Persian king, and sonne of Cyrus, relates, that hauing shewed his puissance abroad in Aegipt, Greece, and other places, to the terror of the greatest of the world: he caused his innocent brother Smerdis to be secretly made away by the hand of his most trusted Praxaspes. The next inhumanitie which he purposd to exemplifie vnto the world, was the death of his sister, who followed him in his Campe to Aegipt, and back againe: being not only his sister by parents, but his wife also. The manner how she came to be his queene was as followeth; Before his time, it was not lawfull, but punishable amongst the Persians, to marry into that proximitie of blood: but Cambyses surprised with the loue of his sister, and hauing resolued by what meanes soeuer to make her his wife, yet to colour his purpose, he sent for those honorable persons who were stiled the kings Iudges, being selected men for their wisedomes, and of great place and qualitie, as those that inioy their offices Durante vita, vnlesse some capitall crime bee prooued against them; besides, they are the expounders of the lawes, and to their causes all matters of doubt and controuersie are referred. These being co^uented, the king demanded of them, Whether they had any one law amongst so many, which licenst a man (that had a will so to doe) to contract matrimony with his sister? to whom the Iudges thus ingeniously answered: We haue indeed no law which giues licence for a brother to marry with a sister, but we haue found a law (oh Soueraigne) which warrants the king of Persia to doe whatsoeuer liketh him best. Thus they without abrogation of the Persian lawes soothed the kings humour, and preserued their owne honours aud liues, who had they crost him in the least of his disseignes had all vndoubtedly perisht: This hee made the ground for the marriage of the first, and not long after hee aduentured vpon the second. The younger of these two who attended him into Aegypt he slew, whose death as that of her brother Smerdis is doubtfully reported. The Graecians

write that two whelps, one of a Lyon, the other of a Dog, were brought before Cambises to fight and try maisteries, at which fight the young Lady was present: but the Lyon hauing victorie ouer the Dog, another of the same litter broke his chain, and taking his brothers part, they two had superioritie ouer the Lyon. Cambises at this fight taking great delight, shee then sitting next him, vpon the sudden fell a weeping: this the king obseruing, demaunded the occasion of her teares, she answered it was at that obiect to see one brother so willing to helpe the other, and therefore she wept to remember her brothers death, and knew no man then liuing that was ready to reuenge it; and for this cause (say the Greekes) she was doom'd to death by Cambises. The Aegyptians report it another way: That she sitting with her brother at table, out of a sallet dish tooke a lettice, and pluckt off leafe by leafe, and shewing it to her husband, asked him, Whether a whole letice or one so despoiled shewed the better? who answered, a whole one: then (said shee) behold how this lettice now vnleaued looketh, euen so hast thou disfigured and made naked the house of king Cyrus. With which words he was so incensed, that he kickt and spurnd her (then being great with child) with that violence that she miscarryed in her child-birth and dyed ere she was deliuered: and these were the murderous effects of his detestable incest.


Of Lyuia Horestilla, Lollia Paulina, Cesonia, etc.
IT is reported the Emperour Caligula, that he had not onely illegall and incestuous conuerse with his three naturall sisters, but that bee after caused them before his face to be prostituted by his ministers and seruants, thereby to bring them within the compasse of the Aemilian Law and conuict them of adultery. He vitiated Liuia Horestilla,Liuia Horestilla. the wife of C. Pisonnius, and Lollia Paulina,Lollia Paul. whom he caused to be diuorced from her husband C. Memnius, both whose beds within lesse than two yeares he repudiated, withall interdicting them the companie and societie of man for euer. Caesonia he loued more affectionatly,Caesonia. insomuch that to his familiar friends (as boasting of her beautie) he would often shew her naked. To adde vnto his insufferable luxuries, he defloured one of the vestall virgins. Neither was the Emperour Commodus much behind him in diuelish and brutish effeminacies,Commodus born the same day that Caligula v^tiated the Vestall virgin. for he likewise strumpeted his owne sisters, and would wittingly and willingy see his mistresses and concubines abused before his face, by such of his fauorites as hee most graced: hee kept not at anie time lesse than to the number of three hundred, for so Lampridius hath left recorded. Gordianus iunior (who was competitor with his father in the Empire) kept two and twentie concubines,Capitolin. by each of which he had three or foure children at the least, therefore by some called the Priamus of his age, but by others in dirision the Priapus. The emperour Proculus tooke in battaile a hundred Sarmatian virgins, and boasted of himselfe that he had got them all with child in lesse than fifteene dayes: this Vopiscus reportes, and Sabellicus. But a great wonder is that which Iohannes Picus Mirandula relates of Hercules, as that hee lay with fiftie daughters of Lycomedes in one night and got them all with child with forty nine boyes, onely fayling in the last for that prooued a guirle.


Iocasta.
APollodorus Atheniensis in his third booke De deoroum Origine records this history: After the death of Amphion king of Thebes, Laius succeeded, who tooke to wife the daughter of Menocoeas called Iocasta, or (as others write) Epicasta.

This Laius being warned by the Oracle, that if of her he begat a sonne, he should prooue a Patricide and be the death of his father; notwithstanding, forgetting himselfe in the distemperature of wine, he lay with her; the same night she conceiued, and in processe brought forth a male issue, whom the king caused to be cast out into the mountaine Cytheron, thinking by that meanes to preuent the predicted destinie. Polybus the heardsman to the king of Corinth finding this infant, bore it home to his wife Periboea who nourced and brought it vp as her owne, and causing the swelling of the feet (with which the child was then troubled) to be cured, they grounded his name from that disease, and called him Oedipus. This infant as he increased in yeares, so hee did in all the perfections of nature as well in the accomplishments of the mind as the body; insomuch that as well in capacitie and volubilitie of speech, as in all actiue and generous exercises, he was excellent aboue all of his age, his vertues beeing generally enuied by such as could not equall them, they thought to disgrace him in something, and gaue him the contemptible name of counterfeit and bastard: this made him curiously inquisitiue of his supposed mother, and she not able in that point to resolue him, hee made a iourney to Delphos, to consult with the Oracle: about the true knowledge of his birth and parents, which forewarned him from returning into his countrey, because he was destinied not onely to be the deathsman of his father, but to adde misery vnto mischiefe, he was likewise borne to be incestuous with his mother. Which to preuent: and still supposing himselfe to be the sonne of Polybus and Peribaea, he forbore to returne to Corinth, and hyring a charriot, tooke the way towards Phocis. It happened that in a strait and narrow passage meeting with his father Laius and Polyphontes his charioter, they contended for the way, but neither willing to giue place, from words they fell to blowes: in which contention, Polyphontes kild one of the horses that drew the charriot of Oedipus: at which inraged, he drew his sword, and first slew Polyphontes, and next Laius who seconded his seruant, and thence tooke his ready way towards Thebes. Damasistratus king of the Plataeenses finding the body of Laius caused it to be honorably interred. In this interim Creon the sonne of Menecoeus in this vacancie whilest there was yet no king, inuades Thebes, and after much slaughter possesseth himselfe of the kingdome. Iuno, to vexe them the more sent thither the monster Sphinx, borne of Echidna and Tiphon; she had the face of a woman, the wings of a fowle, and the breast feete and tayle of a lyon: she hauing learned certaine problemes and Aenigmaes of the muses, disposed her selfe in the mountaine Phycaeus, The riddle which she proposed to the Thebans was this, What creature is that which hath one distinguishable voyce,The riddle of Sphinx. that first walkes vpon foure, next two, and lastly vpon three feet, and the more legges it hath, is the lesse able to walke? The strict conditions of this monster were these, that so often as he demanded the solution of this question, till it was punctually resolued, he had power to chuse out any of the people where he best liked, whom hee presently deuoured: but they had this comfort from the Oracle, That this Aenigma should be no sooner opened, and reconciled with truth, but they should bee freed from this misery and the monster himselfe should be destroyed. The last that was deuoured was Aemon son to king Creon, who fearing least the like sad fate might extend it selfe to the rest of his issue, caused proclamation to bee made, That whosoeuer could expound this riddle should marry Iocasta the wife of the dead king Laius, and be peaceably inuested in the kingdome: this no sooner came to the eares of Oedipus, but he vndertooke it and resolued it thus: This creature

(saith he) is Man, who of all other hath onely a distinct voice, he is borne fourefooted, as in his infancy crawling vpon his feet and hands, who growing stronger erects himselfe and walkes vpon two onely, but growing decrepit and old, he is fitly said to mooue vpon three, as vsing the helpe of his staffe. This solution was no sooner published, but Sphinx cast her selfe headlong from the top of that high Promontory, and so perisht; and Oedipus by marrying the queene, was with a generall suffrage instated in the kingdome. He begot of her two sonnes, and two daughters, Eteocles and Polinices, Ismene and Antigone (though some write that Oedipus had these children by Eurigenia the daughter of Hiperphantes.) These former circumstances after some yeares, no sooner came to light, but Iocasta in despaire strangled her selfe; Oedipus hauing torne out his eyes was by the people expulsed Thebes, cursing at his departure his children for suffering him to vndergoe that iniurie: his daughter Antigone lead him as farre as to Colonus a place in Attica, where there is a groue celebrated to the Eumenides, and there rem^ined, till he was remooued thence by Theseus, and soone after dyed. And these are the best fruits that can grow from so abhominable a roote. Of the miserable end of his incestuous issue, he that would be further satisfied, let him reade Sophocles, Apollodorus, and others. Of him Tyresius thus prophesied:
--Neque hic laetabiturCasibus and euentis suis: nam factus, etc.
No comfort in his fortunes he shall find,He now sees cleerely, must at length be blind,And begge, that's now a rich man, who shall strayThrough forreine countreyes, for his doubtfull wayStill groaping with his staffe. The brother, hee,And father of his children (both) shall be:His mothers sonne, and husband: first strike deadHis father, and adulterate next his bed.


Crithaeis.
SHe was wife to one Phaemius a schoolemaster,Plutarch de Homero. and mother to Homer prince of the Greek Poets. Ephorus of Cuma, in a book intituled the Cumaean Negotiation, leaues her storie thus related: Atelles, Maeones, and Dius, three brothers, were borne in Cuma; Dius being much indebted was forced to remoue thence into Ascra a village of Boetia, and there of his wife Picemeda hee begot Hesiodus. Atelles in his owne countrey dying a naturall death, committed the pupillage of his daughter Crithaeis, to his brother Meones: but comming to ripe growth, she being by him vitiated, and proouing with child, both fearing the punishment due to such an offence, she was conferred vpon Phaemius, to whom she was soone after married: and walking one day out of the cittie to bath her selfe in the riuer Miletus, shee was by the flood side deliuered of young Homer, and of the name thereof called him Melesigines. But after loosing his sight hee was called Homer, for such of the Cumaeans and Ionians are called Omouroi. Aristotle he writes contrarie to Ephorus, that what time Neleus the sonne of Codrus was President in Ionia of the Collonie there then newly planted,De re Poet. ^i. 3. a beautifull Virgin of this nation was forced and deflowred by one of the Genius's which vsed to daunce with the Muses, who after remooued to a place called Aegina, and meeting with certaine forragers and robbers that made

sundrie incursions into the countrie, shee was by them surprised and brought to Smyrna, who presented her to Meonides a companion to the king of the Lydians; hee at the first sight inamoured of her beautie tooke her to wife, who after sporting herselfe by the bankes of Miletus brought foorth Homer, and instantly expired. And since we haue had occasion to speake of his mother, let it not seeme altogether impertinent to proceede a little of the sonne: who by reason of his being hurried in his childhood from one place to another, and ignorant both of his countrey and parents, went to the Oracle to be resolued concerning them both, as also, his future fortunes; who returned him this doubtfull answere,
Faelix and miser ad sortem es quia natus vtramque,Perquiris patriam, matris tibi non patris extat, etc.
Happie, and wretched, both must be thy fate,That of thy Countrey doost desire to hea^^;Knowne is thy mothers Cl'ime, thy fathers notAn Island in the Sea, to Creet not neer,Nor yet farre off, in which thou shalt expire,When boyes a riddle shall to thee propose,Whose darke Aenigma thou canst not acquire.A double Fate thy life hath, thou shalt looseThine eyes: yet shall thy loftie Muse ascend,And in thy death, thou life haue without end.
In his latter daies he was present at Thebes at their great feast called Saturnalia, and from thence comming to Ius and sitting on a stone by the waterport, there landed some fishermen, whom Homer asked what they had taken, but they hauing got nothing that day, but for want of other worke onely lousing themselues, thus merilie answered him:
Non capta afferimus: fuerant quae capta relictis.
We bring with vs those that we could not find,But all that we could catch we left behind.
Meaning, that all such vermine as they could catch they cast away, but what they could not take they brought along. Which riddle when Homer could not vnfold, it is sayd that for verie griefe hee ended his life. This vnmatchable Poet whom no man regarded in his life, yet when his workes were better considered of after his death, hee had that honour that seuen famous citties contended about the place of his birth, euerie one of them appropriating it vnto themselues: Pindarus the Poet makes question whether he were of Chius or Smyrna; Simonides affirmes him to be of Chius; Antimachus and Nicander of Colophon; Aristotle the Philosopher to bee of Ius; Ephorus the Historiographer that hee was of Cuma. Some haue beene of opinion that he was borne in Salamine, a cittie of Cipria; others, amongst the Argiues; Aristarchus and Dyonisius Thrax deriue him from Athens, etc. But I may haue occasion to speake of him in a larger worke intituled The liues of all the Poets Moderne and Forreigne, to which worke (if it come once againe into my hands) I shall refer you, concluding him with this short Epitaph:
An Epitaph vpon Homer prince of Poets.In Colophon some thinke thee (Homer) borne,Some in faire Smyrna, some in Ius Isle,Some with thy byrth rich Chius would adorne,Others say, Cuma first on thee did smile.The Argiues lay claime to thee, and a^erThou art their countrie-man, Aemus a Hil in Thessaly where some say Homar was borne. Aemus saies no.Strong Salamine sayth thou tookest life from her.But Athens thou to her thy Muse dost owe,(As there first breathing.) Speake, how then shall IDetermine of thy countrie by my skill,When Oracles would neuer? I will trie,And Homer (wilt thou giue me leaue) I willThe spations Earth then for thy countrie chuse,No mortall for thy mother, but a Muse.
Doris the sister of Nereus the Sea-god, was by him stuprated: of whome he begot the Nimphes called Nereides; Ouid in his sixt booke Metamorph. telleth vs of Philomela daughter to Pandion king of Athens, who was forced by Tereus king of Thrace, the son of Mars and the Nimph Bistonides, though he had before married her owne deere and naturall sister Progne: the lamentable effects of which incest, is by the same author elegantly and at large described: as likewise Beblis the daughter of Miletus and Cyane, who after she had sought the imbraces of her brother Caumus, slew her selfe. Mirrha daughter to Cyniras king of the Cyprians, lay with her father, and by him had the beautifull child Adonis. Europa the mother, and Pelopeia the daughter, were both corrupted by Thyestes. Hypermestra inioyed the companie of her brother, for whom shee had long languished. Menephron most barbarously frequented the bedde of his mother; against whom Ouid in his Metamorph. and Quintianus in his Cleopol. bitterly inueigh. Domitius Calderinus puts vs in mind of the Concubine of Amintor, who was inioied by his sonne Phaenix. Rhodope the daughter of Hemon, was married to her father, which the gods willing to punish, they were (as the Poets feigne) changed into the mountaines which still beare their names. Caeleus reportes of one Policaste, the mother of Perdix a hunts-man, who was by him incestuously loued, and after inioyed. Lucan in his eight booke affirmes, that Cleopatra was polluted by her own brother, with whom she communicated her selfe as to a husband. Nictimine was comprest by her father Nictus, king of Aethiopia. Martiall in his twelfe booke writing to Fabulla, accuseth one Themison of incest with his sister. Pliny lib. 28. cap. 2. speakes of two of the Vestalls, Thusia and Copronda, both conuicted of incest; the one buried aliue, the other strangled. Publius Claudius was accused by M. Cicero of incest with his three sisters. Sextus Aurelius writes, that Agrippina the daughter of Germanicus had two children by her brother Claudius Caesar; Cornelius Tacitus sayth that she often communicated her body with her owne sonne Nero, in his cups and heat of wine: he after commanded her wombe to be ripped vp, that he might see the place where he had lien so long before his byrth; and most deseruedly was it inflicted vpon the brutish mother, though vnnaturally imposed by the inhuman sonne. A^silaena is worthily reprooued by Catullus for yeelding vp her body

to the wanton imbraces of her vncle, by whom shee had children Gidica the wife of Pomonius Laurentinus, doted on her sonne Cominus euen to incest, but by him refused, she stangled her selfe. The like did Phedra being dispised by her sonne Hippolitus. Dosithaeus apud Plutarch speakes of Nugeria the wife of Hebius, who contemned by her sonne in law Firmus, prosecuted him with such violent and inueterate hate, that she first solicited her owne sonnes to his murder; but they abhorring the vilenesse of the fact, she watcht him sleeping, and so slew him. Iohn Maletesta deprehending his wife in the armes of his brother Paulus Maletesta, transpierst them both with his sword in the incestious action. Cleopatra daughter to Dardanus king of the Scithyans, and wife to Phinaeus, was forced by her two sonnes in law: for which fact their father caused their eyes to be plucked out. Plutarch reports of Atossa, that shee was doted on by Artaxerxes, insomuch that after hee had long kept her as his strumpet, against the lawes of Persia and of Greece, to both which he violently opposed himselfe, he made her his queene. Curtius writes of one Sisimithres a Persian soldier, that had two children by his mother. Diogenian also speaking of Secundus the Philosopher saith, that he (vnawars to them both) committed incest with his mother, which after being made knowne to them, she astonished with the horror of the fact immediately slew her selfe, and he, what with the sorrow for her death and brutishnesse of the deed, vowed neuer after to speake word, which he constantly performed to the last minute of his life. Manlius in his common places reportes from the mouth of D. Martin Luther,A strange Incest. that this accident happened in Erphurst in Germanie: There was (saith he) a maid of an honest familie that was seruant to a rich widdow, who had a sonne that had many times importuned the gyrle to leaudnesse, insomuch that shee had no other way to auoide his continuall suggestions, but by acquainting the mother with the dissolut courses of the sonne. The widdow considering with herselfe which was the best course to chide his libidinous purpose and diuert him from that leaud course, plotted with the maid to giue him a seeming consent, and to appoint him a place and time in the night, of meeting, at which he should haue the fruition of what he so long had sued for: shee herselfe intending to supplie the place of her seruant, to schoole her son, and so preuent any inconuenience that might futurely happen. The maid did according to her appointment, the sonne with great ioy keepes his houre, so did the mother, who came thither on purpose to reforme her sonne; but he being hot and too forward in the action, and she ouercome, either by the inticements of the diuell, the weakenesse of her Sex, or both, gaue herselfe vp to Incestuous prostitution, the young man knowing no otherwise but that hee had inioyed the maid. Of this wicked and abhominable congression, a woman child was begot of whom the mother (to saue her reputation) was secretly deliuered, and put it out priuately to nourse, but at the age of seuen yeares tooke it home. When this child grew to yeares, the most infortunate sonne fell in loue with his sister, and daughter, and made her his vnhappie wife: what shall I thinke of this detestable sinne, which euen beasts themselues abhor? of which I will giue you present instance.Lib. 9. cap. 47. Incest abhominable in beasts. Aristotle in his historie Annimal. who was a diligent searcher into all naturall things, affirmes that a Cammell being blinded by his keeper, was brought to horse his damme, but in the action, the cloth falling from his eyes and he perceiuing what he had done, presently seised vpon his keeper and slew him, in detestation of the act he had committed, and to reuenge himselfe vpon him that had betraied him to the deed. The like the same author

reports of a horse belonging to a king of Scythia, who could by no meanes be brought to couer his damme, but being in the same fashion beguiled, and the cloath falling away, and perceiuing what hee had done, neuer left bounding, flinging and galloping, till comming vnto an high rocke, hee from thence cast himselfe headlong into the sea. If then this sinne be so hatefull in bruite beasts and vnreasonable creatures, how much more ought it to be auoided in men and women, and which is more, Christians?


Cyborea, the mother of Iudas Iscariot.
THis that I now speake of is remembred by Ranulphus, Monke of Chester, Ierome, and others. There was a man in Ierusalem by name Reuben, of the Tribe of Isachar, his wife was called Cyborea: The first night of their marriage the woman dreamed that she was conceiued of a sonne who should bee a traytour to the Prince of his owne people: she told it to her husband, at which they were both sad and pensiue. The child being borne, and they not willing to haue it slaine, and yet loath to haue it prooue such a monster to his owne nation, they in a small boat cast it to sea to try a desperate fortune, this vessell was driuen vpon an Island called Iscariot, where the Queene of that place had then no child. This babe being found, she purposed to make it her owne, and put it to be nobly nurced and educated, calling his name Iudas, and Iscariot of the Island where he was taken vp. But not long after, shee was conceiued of a sonne, who prouing a noble and hopefull gentleman, Iudas (whose fauour in court began to wane, and his hope of inheritance, which but late flourisht now quite to wither) he plotted against his life and priuately slew him: but fearing least the murder might in time bee discouered, and hee compeld to suffer according to the nature of the fact, hee fled thence to Ierusalem, where he got into the seruice of Pontius Pilatus, and found meanes to be protected by him, being then in the cittie deputie gouernour for the Romans. Iudas (because their dispositions were much of one condition) grew into his especiall familiaritie and fauour. The Pallace of Pilot hauing a faire bay window, whose prospect was into Reubens Orchard, he had a great appetite to eate of some of those ripe apples which shewed so yellow and faire against the sunne. This Iudas vnderstanding, promist him to fetch him some of that fruit, and mounting ouer the orchard wall, he was met by his father, who rebuking him for the iniurie, Iudas with a stone beat out his braines, and vnseene of any, conueyed himselfe backe. Reubens death was smothered, and the murderer not knowne. Cyborea being a rich widdow, Pylate made a match betwixt her and his seruant Iudas, who being marryed to his mother was now possest of his owne fathers inheritance. Not long this incestuous couple had liued together, but Cyborea being vpon a time wondrous sad and melancholy, and Iudas demanding the cause, she began to relate to him her many misfortunes; First, of her dreame, then of her sonne in what manner he was put to sea, then how she lost her husband being slaine, and the murderer not found; and lastly, how by the authoritie of Pilat she was now compeld to match against her will, who had protested to her selfe a lasting widdowhood. By these circumstances, Iudas most assuredly knew that he had slaine his father, and had marryed his mother; which acknowledging to her, she persuaded him to repent him of these great euills, and to become a Disciple of Iesus, who was then an eminent Prophet amongst the Iewes. It shall not be amisse to speake a word or two of Pilate. It is said that a king whose name was Tyrus begat him on a Millers daughter, Pyla,Pyla. whose

father was called Atus, who from his mother and grandfather was called Pylatus, at foure yeares of age he was brought to his father, who by his lawfull wife had a prince iust of the same age. These were brought vp together in all noble exercises, in which the prince hauing still the best, Pylat awaited his opportunitie and slew him; loath was the king to punish him with death least he should leaue himselfe altogether Issulesse, therefore hee sent him an hostage to Rome, for the payment of certaine tribute which was yearly to be tendred into the Roman treasurie. Liuing there as hostage, he assotiated himselfe with the son to the king of France, who lay pledge in Rome about the like occasion, and in a priuate quarrell was also slaine by Pylat. The Romans finding him of an austere brow and bloodie disposition, made him gouernour of the Island called Pontus: the people were irregular and barbarous, whom by his seueritie he reduced to all ciuill obedience, for which good seruice he was remooued to Ierusalem, bearing the name of Pontius from that Island; there hee gaue sentence against the Sauiour of the world. Tiberius Caesar being then Emperour was sicke of a grieuous maladie, who hearing that in Ierusalem was a Prophet who with a word healed all infirmities whatsoeuer, hee sent one Volutianus to Herod, to send him this man; but Christ was before condemned and crucified.Veronica. There Volutianus acquainted himselfe with one Veronica a noble Ladie of the Iewes, who went with him to Rome and carried with her the lynnen cloth which still bore the impresse and likenesse of Christs visage, vpon which the Emperour no sooner looked but he was immediately healed. The Emperour then vnderstanding the death of this innocent and just man, caused Pylat to be brought to Rome, who being called before Caesar (the historie saith) he had at that time vpon him the roabe of our Sauiour, which was called Tunica Insutilis, a garment without seame, which whilest it was about him, nothing could be obiected against him to his least dammage or disgrace; this was three times prooued, and he still came off vnaccused, but when by the aduise of this Veronica and other Christians, the garment was tooke off, he was then accused for causing guiltlesse men to be slaine, for erecting statues of strange nations in the Temple, against the ordinances of the Iewes; that with mony wrested and extorted from the holie treasures, hee had made a water-conduit to his owne house; that he kept the Vestiments and sacred roabes of the Priests in his owne house, and would not deliuer them for the seruice of the Temple without mercenarie hire: of these and other things being conuicted, he was sent to prison, where borrowing a knife to pare an apple he slew himselfe, his bodie after was fastned to a great stone and cast into the riuer Tiber.



Of Adulteresses.
FRom the Incestuous, I proceede to the Adulteresses. Aulus Gellius in his first booke de Mortibus Atticis cites these words out of Varroes Menippea,Cap. 17. The errours (sayth he) and vices of the wife are either to be corrected, or indured; he that chastiseth her makes her the more conformable, he that suffers her, makes himselfe the better by it: thus interpreting

Varroes meaning, That husbands ought to reproue the vices of their wiues, but if they bee peruerse and intractable, his patience (though it preuaile not with them) yet much benefits himselfe: yet are not their insolencies any way to be incouraged, because it is a dutie exacted from all men, to haue a respect to the honour of their houses and families: Besides, such as will not be reformed by counsell are by the Lawes to be punished. Caesar sued a diuorse from his wife because she was but suspected of adulterie, though no manifest guilt could be prooued against her, Lysias the famous Orator declaimed against his wife in a publike oration, because he was iealous of her spouse-breach. But much is that inhumane rashnesse to bee auoided, by which men haue vndertooke to be their owne justicers, and haue mingled the pollution of their bdes with the blood of the delinquents, Cato Censorius reckons such in the number of common executioners, and counts them little better than bloodie hangmen; For (saith he) impious and abhominable it is for any man to pollute his hands in such vnnaturall murder, hee may with as much justice violate the ordinances of the common-weale, or with as great integritie prophane the sacreds of the gods. Sufficient it is that we haue laws to punish, the judges to examine and sentence all such transgressors. Nero the most barbarous of princes after that by kicking and spurning he had slain his wife Poppaea in his anger, though he was altogether composed of mischief, yet when he recollected himselfe and truely considered the vildnesse of the fact, he not onely with great sorrow bewailed her death, to make what amends he could to the dead bodie before outraged, but hee would not suffer her coarse to bee burned in the Roman fires, but caused a funerall pile of all sweet and oderiferous woods (fetcht from the furthest parts of the world) to bee erected, sending vp her smoke as insence offered vnto the gods, and after caused her ashes in a golden vrne to be conserued in the famous sepulchre of the Iulian familie: Neither is this discourse aimed to persuade men to too much remisnes in wincking at, and sleeping out the adulteries of their wiues. A most shamefull thing it was in Antonius, the best of the Caesars to extoll his wife Faustina for the best of women,Faustina the wife of Claudius. and most temperate of wiues, when it was most palpably knowne to all men, how in Caieta she commonly prostituted her selfe to Players and Minstrells. L. Sylla that was surnamed Happie, was in this most infortunat, because his easie nature was persuaded that his wife Metella was the chastest of matrons, when her knowne loosenesse and notorious incontinence was ballated vp and downe the cittie. Disgracefull it was in Philip king of Macedon, who hauing conquered diuers nations, and subdued many kingdomes, yet could not gouerne one wife at home: who though he had manifest probabilitie of her loosenesse and riots, yet suffered with all patience her insufferable insolencies, and being violently thrust out of her bed-chamber by her, and her maides, dissembled the iniurie to his friends, excusing the wrong and seeming to laugh at the iniurie. In like manner Clodius the Emperour excused his wife Messalina, being taken in adulterie: this libertie grew to boldnesse, and that boldnesse to such a height of impudencie, that from that time forward she tooke pride to commit those luxuries in publike, which at first she not without blushes aduentured on in priuat. It is related of her, that before the faces of her handmaides and seruants, she dissolutely (I might say brutishly) cast her selfe into the imbraces of one S^lius; not content with secret inchastitie vnlesse she had a multitude to witnesse her abhominable congression: of whom the most excellent of the Satyrists thus speakes,
Quid priuata domus, quid fecerit Hippia curasRespice riuales diuorum, Claudius audiQuae tulerit--
Doost thou take care whats done at home,Or Hippia doost thou feare?Behold the riualls of the gods,What Claudius, he doth beare.
The sacred institution of marriage, was not onely for procreation, but that man should make choice of a woman, and a woman to make election of a husband, as companions and comforters one of another as well in aduersitie as prosperitie. Aristotle conferres the cares and businesses that lie abroad, vpon the husband, but the domesticke actions within doores, he assignes to the wife; for he holds it as inconuenient and vncomely for the wife to busie herselfe about any publike affaires, as for the man to play the cotqueane at home.
Lib. 4.Marriage (as Franciscus Patricius sayth) becomes the ciuile man, to which though hee be not compelled by necessitie, yet it makes the passage of life more pleasing and delightfull, not ordained for the satisfying of lust, but the propagation of issue. Aelius Verus one of the Roman Emperours, a man giuen to all voluptuousnesse, when his wife complained vnto him of his extrauagancies, as neuer satisfied with change of mistresses and concubines, hee thus answered her, Suffer me o wife, to exercise my delights vpon other women, for the word Wife is a name of dignitie and honour, not of wantonnesse and pleasure. The punishment of a woman taken in adulterie (as Plutarch in his Quest. Grec. relates) was amongst the Cumaeans after this manner:The punishment of Adulterie. Shee was brought into the market-place, and set upon a stone in the publique view of all the people; when shee had certaine houres sat there as a spectacle of scorne, shee was mounted vpon an Asse and led through all the streetes of the cittie, and then brought backe againe and placed vpon the same stone, euer after reputed notorious and infamous and had the name of Onobatis, i. riding vpon an Asse, and the stone on which she was seated, held as polluted and abhominable. Aelianus in his twelfe booke, thus sets downe the punishment of an adulterer amongst the Cretans: He was first brought before the judgement seate, and being conuicted, hee was crowned with wooll to denote his effeminacie, fined with an extraordinarie mulct, held infamous amongst the people, and made vncapable of office or dignitie in the common-weale. Amongst the Parthians, no sinne was more seuerely punished than adulterie. Carondas made a decree. That no cittisen or matron should be taxed in the commodie vnles it were for Adulterie or vaine curiositie. Plutarch remembers two young men of Syracusa that were familiar friends,De reip. Gereui. pr^ceptis. the one hauing occasion to trauell abroad about his necessarie occasions, left his wife in the charge of his bosome companion whom he most trusted, who broke his faith and vitiated the woman in his friends absence; hee returning and finding the iniurie done him, concealed his reuenge for a season, till he found the opportunitie to strumpet the others wife, which was the cause of a bloodie and intestine warre almost to the ruin of the whole cittie. The like combustion was kindled betwixt Pardalus and Tirhenus vpon semblant occasion. Lyuie in the tenth booke of his Decades relates that Q. Fabius Gurges sonne to the Consull, amerced the matrons of Rome for their adulteries, and extracted from them so much coine at one time, as builded the famous

Temple of Venus neere to the great Circus. So much of the same in generall, now I come to a more particular suruey of the persons.

Of many great Ladies branded with Adultery amongst the Romans: and first of Posthumia.
THis Posthumia was the wife of Seruius Sulpitius, as Lollia the wife of Aulus Gabinus, Tertullia of Marcus Crassus, Mutia the wife of C. Pompeius, Seruitia the mother of Marcus Brutus, Iulia the daughter of Seruitia, and the third wife of Marcus Crassus, Furies Maura the Queene of King Bogades, Cleopatra of Aegypt and after beloued of Marcus Antonius, one of the Triumuirat: all these Queenes and noble Matrons is Iulius Caesar saide to haue adulterated. Liuia the wife of Augustus Caesar was by him first strumpeted, and beeing great with child, to recompence her wrong, hee hastened the marriage. This was obiected to him in an oration by Antonius. Tertullia, Drusilla, Saluia Scribonia, Tilisconia: with all these noble matrons he is said to haue commerse. Likewise with a great Senators wife, whose name is not remembred, Augustus being at a publique banquet in his owne pallace,An impudent whoredome. withdrew himselfe from the table in the publique view, and before the cloth was taken vp brought her back againe, and seated her in her owne place with her haire ruffled, her cheekes blushing, and her eyes troubled.Messalina. Messalina the wife of Claudius Tiberius, first priuatly, then publiquely prostituted her selfe to many, insomuch that custome grew to that habit, that such as she affected, and either for modesties sake or feare durst not enter into her imbraces, by some stratagem or other she caused to be murdred (as Claudian saith:) her insatiat desires yet stretched further, making choice of the most noble virgins and matrons of Rome, whom she either persuaded or compelled to be companions with her in her adulteries. She frequented common brothel-houses, trying the abilities of many choice and able young men by turnes, from whence (it is said of her) she returned wearied but not satisfied: if any man refused her imbraces, her reuenge stretched not only to him, but vnto all his familie. And to crowne her libidinous actions, it is proued of her that in the act of lust she contended with a mercenarie and common strumpet, which in that kind should haue the prioritie, and that the empresse in the 25 action became victor. Of hir, Pliny, Iuuinall, and Sex. Aurelius speakes more at large: a strange patience it was in an emperour to suffer this.A countrey fellow and his mistresse. I rather commend that penurious fellow, who hauing married a young wife, and keeping her short both in libertie and diet, she cast her eyes vpon a plaine countrie fellow, one of her seruants, and in short time grew with child: the old churle mistrusting his owne weaknesse, beeing as much indebted to his bellie as to his seruants for their wages (for his parsimonie made him ingaged to both) and now fearing a further charge would come vpon him, he got a warrant to bring them both before a justice. They being conuented, and he hauing made his case knowne, the gentlewoman being asked vpon diuers interogatiues, modestly excused her selfe, but not so cleanly but that the complaint sounded in some sort iust, and the case apparant. The countrie fellow was next called in question, to whom the justice with an austere countinance thus spake, Syrra, syrra, resolue me truly (saith he) and it shal be the better for thee, Hast thou got this woman with child yea or no? to whom the plaine fellow thus bluntly answered, Yes sir I think I haue: how (quoth

the justice) thou impudent and bawdie knaue, shew me what reason thou hadst to get thy mistresse with child: to whom the fellow replied, I haue serued my master (a verie hard man) so many yeares and I neuer got any thing else in his seruice. How this businesse was compounded I know not certainly, onely of this I am assured, that our English women are more curtious of their bodies than bloodie of their minds. Such was not Roman Fabia,Fabia. who as Plutarch in his Paralells relates, was the wife of Fabius Fabricanus, and gaue her selfe vp to a young gentleman of Rome called Petronius Valentianus, by whose councell she after slew her husband, that they might the more freely inioy their luxuries. Salust and Valerius Maximus both report of Aurelia Oristilla, who suffered her selfe to be corrupted by Catelyn (against whom Cicero made many eloquent orations) who the freelier to enioy her bed, caused her sonne to be poisoned. Comparable to Fabia,Thimen. sauing in murder, was Thimen the wife of king Agis, who forsaking the lawfull bed of her husband suffered her selfe to be vitiated by Alcibiades of Athens.Neuina. Martiall in his Epigrams writes of one Neuina, who going chast to the bath returned thence an adulteresse: of her thus speaking,
Incidit in Flammam, veneremque secula relictoConiuge: Penelope venit, abatque Helena.
Which is thus Englisht.
She fell in fire, and followed lust,Her husband quite reiected,She thither came Penelope chastWent Hellen thence detected.
Paula, Thelesina, Proculina, Lectoria, Gellia, all these are by some authors branded for the like inchastities.


An Egyptian Lady.
A yong cittisens wife.I Haue heard of a young cittisen, who hauing marryed a pretty wanton lasse (and as yong folke loue to be dallying one with another) set her vpon his knee, and sporting with her, and pointing one of his fingers at her face, now my little rogue (saith hee) I could put out one of thine eyes: to whom with her two longest fingers stretched forth right, and ayming at him in the like fashion, she thus answered: If with one finger thou put out one of mine eyes, with these two I will put out both yours. This was but wantonnesse betwixt them, and appeared better in their action, than in my expression: and though I speake of a blind King, hee lost not his eyes that way. Herodotus relates that after the death of Sesostris king of Aegypt, his sonne Pherones succeeded in the kingdome, who not long after his attaining to the principalitie was depriued of his sight: The reason whereof some yeeld to bee this, Thinking to passe the riuer Nilus, either by inundations, or the force of the winds, the waters were driuen so farre backe, that they were flowed eighteene cubites aboue their woonted compasse, at which the king inraged, shot an arrow into the riuer as if he would haue wounded the channell. Whether the gods tooke this in contempt, or the Genius of the riuer was inraged, is vncertaine: but most sure it is, that not long after hee lost all the vse of sight, and in that darknesse remained for the space of tenne yeares. After which time (in great melancholly) expired, hee receiued this comfort from the Oracle,

which was then in the cittie Butis, That if hee washt his eyes in the vrine of a woman who had beene marryed a full twelue moneth, and in that time had in no wayes falsified in her owne desires, nor derogated from the honour of her husband, he should then assuredlie receiue his sight. At which newes beeing much reioyced, and presuming both of certaine and sudden cure, he first sent for his wife and queene, and made proofe of her pure distillation, but all in vaine; he sent next for all the great Ladies of the Court, and one after one washt his eyes in their water, but still they smarted the more, yet hee saw no whit the better; but at length when hee was almost in despaire, he happened vpon one pure and chast lady,A strange cure. by whose vertue his sight was restored and he plainely cured: who after hee had better considered with himselfe, caused his wife withall those Ladies (sauing she onely by whose temperance and chastitie hee had reobtaind the benefite of the Sunne) to bee assembled into one cittie^ pretending there to feast them honourably for ioy of his late recouerie. Who were no sooner assembled at the place called Rubra Gleba, apparrelled in all their best iewells and chiefest ornaments, but commaunding the cittie gates to be shut vpon them, caused the cittie to be set on fire, and sacrificed all these adulteresses as in one funerall pile, reseruing onely that Lady of whose loyaltie the Oracle had giuen sufficient testimony, whom he made the partaker of his bed and kingdome. I wish there were not so many in these times, whose waters if they were truely cast by the doctors, would not rather by their pollution put out the eyes quite, than with their cleerenesse and purity minister to them any helpe at all.


Laodice.
IVstine in his 37 booke of History, speakes of this Laodice, the wife and ^ister to Mithridates king of Pontus: After whose many victories, as hauing ouerthrowne the Scythians and put them to flight, those who had before defeated Zopyron, a great captaine of Alexanders army, which consisted of thirtie thousand of his best souldiours, the same that ouercame Cyrus in battaile with an armie of two hundred thousand, with those that had affronted and beaten king Philip in many oppositions, being fortunately and with great happines stil attended, by which he more and more flourisht in power, and increased in maiestie. In this height of fortune, as neuer hauing knowne any disaster, hauing bestowed some time in managing the affaires of Pontus, and next such places as he occupyed in Macedonia; he priuately then retyred himselfe into Asia, where he tooke view of the scituation of those defensed citties, and this without the iealousie or suspition of any. From thence he remooued himselfe into Bythinia, proposing in his owne imaginations as if hee were already Lord of all. After this long retirement hee came into his owne kingdome, where by reason of his absence, it was rumoured and giuen out for truth that he was dead. At his arriuall he first gaue a louing and friendly visitation to his wife and sister Laodice, who had not long before in that vacancie brought him a young sonne. But in this great ioy and solemnitie made for his welcome, hee was in great danger of poyson:An vnnatural wife. for Laodice supposing (it seemes) Mithridates to be dead as it before had beene reported (and therefore safe enough) had prostituted her selfe to diuers of her seruants and subiects: and now fearing the discouerie of her adulterie, shee thought to shaddow a mightie fault with a greater mischiefe, and therefore prouided this poysoned draught for his welcome:

But the king hauing intelligence thereof by one of her handmaides who deceiued her in her trust, expiated the treason with the bloods of all the conspirators. I reade of another Laodice the wife of Ariarythres the king of Cappadocia, who hauing six hopefull sonnes by her husband, poysoned fiue of them, after she had before giuen him his last infectious draught; the youngest was miraculously preserued from the like fate, who after her decease (for the people punisht her crueltie with death) succeeded in the kingdome. It is disputed in the greeke Commentaries, by what reason or remedy affection once so diuelishly setled in the brest or heart of a woman, may bee altered or remooued; or by what confection adulterous appetite, once lodged and kindled in the bosome, may bee extinguished. The Magitians haue deliuered it to bee a thing possible; so likewise Cadmus Milesius, who amongst other monuments of history writ certaine tractates concerning the abolishing of loue (for so it is remembred by Suidas iu his collections.) And therefore I would inuite all women of corrupted breasts to the reading of this briefe discourse following. A remarkeable example was that of Faustina,Faustina wife to Marcus Philosophus: a noble and illustrious Lady, who though she were the daughter of Antonius Pius the Emperour, and wife to Marcus Philosophus, notwithstanding her fathers maiestie, and her husbands honor, was so besotted vpon a Gladiator or common fencer, that her affection was almost growne to frensie: for which strange disease, as strange a remedie was deuised. The Emperour perceiuing this distraction still to grow more and more vpon his daughter, consulted with the Chaldaeans and Mathematicians in so desperat a case what was best to bee done: after long consideration it was concluded amongst them, that there was but onely one way left open to her recouerie, and that was, to cause the fencer to be slaine; which done, to giue her a full cuppe of his luke-warme blood, which hauing drunke off, to goe instantlie to bed to her husband. This was accordingly done, and she cured of her contagious disease. That night was (as they said) begot Antoninus Commodus,The birth of Commodus. who after succeeded in the Empire, who in his gouernment did so afflict the Commonweale and trouble the Theatre with fensing and prises, and many other bloody butcheries, that he much better deserued the name of Gladiator than Emperour. This that I haue related Iulius Capitolinus writes to Caesar Dioclesianus. Were all our dissolute matrons to be cured by the like Phisicke, there would (no question) be amongst men lesse offendors, and among women fewer patients that complained of sicke stomackes.


Phaedima.
CAmbises hauing before vnnaturally slaine his brother Smerdis, by the hands of his best trusted friend Praxaspes: but after the death of the king (for the horridnes of the fact) the Regicide not daring to auouch the deed to the people, least it might preiudice his owne safetie: One Smerdis a Magician (whose eares Cambises had before caused to be cut off) tooke this aduantage to aspire to the kingdome:A notable Imposter. and beeing somewhat like in fauour to the murdered Prince, (who was by the souldiours generally beleeued to liue) it purchast him so many abettors (such as were deluded with his impostures) that he was generally saluted and crowned Emperour. This was done whilest the greatest part of the Nobilitie were absent, and none since, admitted into the pallace, much lesse into the presence, least the Magitian might bee vnviserded, and the deceit made palpable. The greater feares and doubts still inuironing the Princes, because Praxaspes not daring to iustifie the murder, kept it still lockt in his own

breast. The Magitian in this interim was not onely possest of all the Kings Pallaces and Treasures, but he inioyed all his wiues and concubines; amongst which was a beautifull Lady called Phaedima, the daughter of Otanes, a man of great power amongst the Persians.Phaedima. This Lady first (of all the rest) most indeered to Cambyses, and now since to the counterfeit Smerdis, Otanes apprehends to bee the first instrument, by which to discouer the truth: He therefore by a secret messenger sends to his daughter, to know by whom she nightly lay, whether with Smerdis the sonne of Cyrus, or with some other: to whom she answered that it was altogether vnknowne to her who was her bedfellow, because shee yet had neither seene Smerdis the sonne of Cyrus, nor that man (whatsoeuer he was) into whose imbraces she was commanded. He then sent her word, that if she her selfe could not come to the sight of him, to demaund of Atossa the daughter of Cyrus, and brother to Smerdis; who doubtlesse could decipher him in euery true lineament. To which the daughter returnes him, That she was separated both from the societie and sight of Atossa, for this man whatsoeuer he is, as soone as hee had possest himselfe of the Empire, commanded all the women into seuerall lodgings, neither could they haue any discourse or intercourse at all together. This answer made Otanes the more and more suspitious, and desirous with any danger to finde out the truth, he aduentured a third message to Phaedima to this purpose: It behooues you (o daughter) being descended from noble ancestours, to vndergoe any hazzard, especially at the request of your father, when it aimes at the generall good of the common-weale and kingdome; if that imposter bee not Smerdis the brother of Cambises (as I much feare) it becoms him neither to prostitute and defile your body, nor to mocke and abuse the whole estate of Persia vnpunished: therefore I charge you as you tender my loue, your owne honour, and the Empires weale, that the next night when you are called vnto his bed, you watch the time when he is soundliest asleepe, and then with your fingers gently feele both the sides of his head; if thou perceiuest him to haue both his eares, presume then thou lodgest by the side of Smerdis the sonne of Cyrus, but if on the contrary thou findest his eares wanting, then thou lyest in the bosome of Smerdis that base Magitian. To this she replyed by letter, Though I truely apprehend the danger, should I be taken seeking of such things as hee perhaps knowes wanting (which can be no lesse than death) yet for your loue and the common good, I will vndergoe the perill: and with this briefe answer gaue satisfaction to her father. But greater content he receiued from her, when hauing discouered and layd open whatsoeuer her father suspected, she sent him a faithfull relation of euery circumstance.Deceit discouered. These things discouered by Phaedima, Otanes makes a coniuration amongst the Princes, all vowing the supplantation of this vsurper: who in the interim, the more to confirme the people in their errour, he sent to Praxaspes, promising him honours and treasures, but to pronounce him once more before the people to bee the true and legitimate heire. This charge Praxaspes vndertakes, the multitude from all parts of the cittie were by the Magi assembled, and he mounted vnto the toppe of an high Turret the better to be heard, silence being made and attention prepared, Praxaspes begins his oration, in which hee remembers all the noble acts of Cyrus, with the dignitie of his blood and progenie: and passing ouer Cambises to come to speake of his brother Smerdis (contrary to the expectation of the Magitian) with teares began to commemorate the death of the Prince, murdered and made away by his infortunate hand. Then told them whom in his stead they

had voyced into the Sacred Empire; namely a groome and one of low and base descent, one that for cousenages and forgeries had lost his eares, a Magitian, a Coniurer, one that had long deluded them with his diuelish sorceries, a slaue not worthy at all to liue, much lesse to raigne and gouerne so noble a people: and as a further confirmation, that dying men speake true, these words were no sooner ended, but he casts himselfe off from the toppe of the Turret, and slew himselfe. After this, the Pallace was assaulted by the Princesse, the imposter slaine, and all his adherents put to massacre: Of the sequel of the history, the succession of Darius, etc. you may further reade in Herodotus. But concerning Phaedima, onely for whose sake I haue introduced the rest, I know not whether I haue indirectly brought her into this catalogue, because she was so noble a meanes of so notable a discouerie: yet considering she was one of the wiues of Cambises, and he being dead, so suddenly changing her affection to another; and after being inioyed by him (of what condition soeuer) to betray him; all these circumstances considered, I giue hir free liberty to bee ranked amongst the rest.


Begum, Queene of Persia.
ABdilcherai, a braue and valiant Prince of Tartaria, taken prisoner by Emirhamze Mirize eldest sonne to the king of Persia, in a battaile betwixt the Persians and Tartarians, was sent to the king into Casbia; where his captiuity in regard of his birth and valour was so easie, that hee rather seemed a denison than a forreiner, a Prince of the blood than a captiue: hee not long soiourned there,Adulterie. but he insinuated himselfe into the loue of the Queene Begum wife to the then king of Persia, who spent their time together in such publike daliance (not able to containe themselues within the bounds of any lawfull modestie) that their familiaritie grew almost into a by-word, as farre as his iust taxation, the Queenes dishonour, and the kings scorne; insomuch that both court and cittie made them not onely their argument of discourse but theame of table talke. Yet in all this banding of their disreputation, and the kings infamy, nothing euer came within the compasse of his eare knowledge or suspition: insomuch that seeing him to be so wel a featured gentleman, knowing the Tartar to bee so braue a souldiour, and approouing him to bee so compleate a courtier; and withall acknowledging from what high lignage he was descended (as boasting himselfe to bee the brother of the great Tartar Chan: The king of Persia therefore determined to marry him to his daughter, hoping by that meanes to vnite such a league, and confirme such an animitie betwixt the Tartarian Precopenses and himselfe, that they might not onely deny all ayde and assistance to Amurath the third of that name, and then the sixt Emperour of the Turks; but also, if need were, or should any future discontent arise, oppose him in hostilitie. But this politicke purpose of the kings arriuing almost at the wished period, seemed so distastfull to the Sultans of Casbia, that they first attempted by arguments and reasons to diuert the king from this intended match: but finding themselues no wayes likelie to preuaile, to make the king see with what errours he was maskt, and with what sorceries deluded, They diligently awayted when in the absence of the king, the Tartar and the queene Begum kept their accustomed appointment; of which the Sultans hauing notice, they entered that part of the Pallace, brake ope the doores, and rushed into the Queenes bed-chamber, where finding Abdilcherai in suspitious conference with the Queene, they slew him with their Sables, and after cutting

off his priuie parts, most barbarously thrust them into his mouth, and after (as some report) slew the queene. Though this historie show great remisnes in the king, most sure I am it was too presumptiue an insolence in the subiect.
To this Persian queene,The wife of Otho the 3. I will ioyne the wife of Otho the third Emperour of that name. This lustfull ladie (as Polycronicon makes mention) was of somewhat a contrarie disposition with the former: For neglecting the pride and gallantrie of the court, she cast her eyes vpon an homely husbandman; better supplied, it seemes, with the lineaments of nature than the ornaments of art, but with an honestie of minde exceeding both: for when this libidinous lady could by no tempting allurements abroad, nor fitting opportunitie sorted in priuate insinuate with him, either to violate his allegeance to his prince, or corrupt his owne vertue; her former affection turned vnto such rage and malice, that she caused him to be accused of a capitall crime, conuicted, and executed. But the plaine honest man knowing her spleene and his own innocencie, he called his wife to him at the instant when his head was to be cut off: and besought her as she euer tendered his former loue (which towards her he had kept inuiolate) to meditate vpon some course or other by which his guiltlesse and vnmerited death might be made manifest to the world: which she with much sorrow and many teares hauing promised, hee gently submitted to his fate, and his bodie was deliuered to the charge of his widdow. Within few dayes after, the Emperour kept a day solemne, in which his custome was, being mounted vpon his royall Throne, to examine the causes of the fatherlesse and widdows, and to search wherein they were oppressed, and by whom, and in person to doe them justice. Among the rest came this iniured widdow and brings her husbands head in her hand, humblie kneeling before the Emperors throne, demaunding of him, What that inhumane wretch deserued, who had caused an innocent man to be put to death? to whom the Emperour replyed, Produce that man before the judgement seat, and as I am royall hee shall assuredly loose his head. To whom she answered, Thou art that man (o Emperour) for by thy power and authoritie this murder was committed; and for an infallible testimonie that this poore husband of mine perished in his innocence, commaund red hot yrons to be brought into this place, ouer which if I passe barefooted and without any damage, presume he was then as much iniured in his death, as I am now made miserable in his losse. The yrons being brought, and her owne innocence, together with her husbands being made both apparant, the Emperour before all his nobilitie submitted himselfe to her own sentence. But at the intercession of the Bishop, the woman limitted him certaine daies in which he might find out the murder, he first demanded ten daies, after eight, then seuen, and last six, in wich time by inquirie and curious examinations, he found his wife to be the sole delinquent:Noble Iustice. for which she was brought to the barre, sentenced, and after burned. This done, Otho to recompence the woman for the losse of her husband, gaue her foure Castles and Townes in the Bishopricke of Beynensis, which still beare name according to the limit of those daies: First the Tenth, second the Eight, third the Seuenth, fourth the Sixt.


Olimpias.
OThas of Persia, hauing defeated Nectenabus king of Aegypt and expelled him from his kingdome; he the better to secure himselfe from the Sophyes tyrannie, shaued his head and disguising himselfe, with all such

jewells as he could conueniently carrie about him, conueyed himselfe into Macedonia: the authors of this historie are Vincentius and Treuisa. There (as they say) he liued as a Chaldaean or Cabalist, where by his Negromancie and art Magick, he wrought himselfe so deepely into the brest of Olimpias, that taking the opportunitie whilest Philip was abroad in his forreine expeditions,The byrth of Alexander. hee lay with her in the shape of Iupiter Hammon, and begot Alexander the Great. After the Queenes conception, many fowles vsed to flie about Philip when hee was busied in his warres; amongst others, there was a Henne that as he sate in his tent, flew vp into his lap and there layd an egge, which done she cackling flew away: The king rising vp hastily, cast it vpon the ground and brake it, when suddenly a young Dragon was seene to leape out of the shell, and creeping round about it and making offer to enter therein againe, died ere it had quite compassed it. The king at this prodigie being startled, called all his Astrologers together, dem^unding of one Antiphon the noblest artist amongst them, What the omen might be of that wonder? who answered him, That his wife Olimpias was great with a sonne, whose conquests should fill the world with astonishment, ayming to compasse the whole vniuerse, but should dye before he could reduce it into one intire Monarchie; the Dragon being the embleme of a royall conquerour, and the round ouall circumference, the symboll of the world. With this answere Phillip was satisfied. When the time came of Olimpias her trauell, there were earth-quakes, lightnings, and thunders, as if the last dissolution had beene then present, when were seene ^wo Eagles pearched vpon the top of the Pallace, presaging the two great Empires of Europe and Asia. Young Alexander being growne towards manhood, it happened that walking abroad with Nectenabus, in the presence of his father Philip, the young prince requested the Astrologian to instruct him in his art. To whom Nectenabus answered, that with all willingnes he would; and comming neere a deepe pit, Alexander thrust the Magitian headlong into that discent, by which sudden fall hee was wounded to death: yet Nectenabus calling to the prince, demanded for what cause he had done him such outrage? Who answered, I did it by reason of thy art, for ignoble it were in a prince to studie those vaine sciences, by which men will vndertake to predict other mens fates, when they haue not the skill to preuent their owne. To whom Nectenabus answered, Yes Alexander I calculated mine owne destinie, by which I knew I should bee slaine by mine owne natural son. To whom the prince in derision thus speake, Base Negromancer, how canst thou bee my father, seeing that to the mightie king Philip here present, I owe all filiall dutie and obedience? to whom Nectenabus rehearsed all the circumstances (before related) from the beginning, and as he concluded his speech so ended his life. How the husband vpon this information behaued himselfe towards his wife, or the sonne to his mother, I am not certaine, this I presume, it was a kind of needfull pollicie in both, the one to conceale his Cuckoldrie, the other his Bastardie: so much of Olimpias concerning the byrth of her son Alexander. I will proceede a little further to speake of her remarkable death, being as maiestically glorious as the processe of her life was in many passages thereof worthily infamous.Lib. 14. Iustine in his historie relates thus, Olimpias the wife of Philip and mother of Alexan^^r the Great, comming from Epirus vnto Macedonia, was followed by Aeacida^ king of the Molossians, but finding herselfe to be prohibited that countrey, By Euridice and king Ari^^aeus. whether annimated by the memorie of her husband, incouraged with the greatnesse of her sonne, or mooued with the nature of the affront and iniurie, as shee

receiued it, I am not certain, but she assembled vnto her all the forces of Macedonia, by whose power and her command, they were both slaine. About seuen yeares after Alexander was possest of the Kingdom: neither did Olimpias raigne long after, for when the murders of many princes had been by her committed, rather after an effeminate than regall manner, it conuerted the fauour of the multitude into an vnreconcilable hatred, which fearing, and withall hauing intelligence of the approch of Cassander (now altogether distrusting the fidelitie of her owne countriemen) shee with her sonnes wife Roxana, and her nephew young Hercules, retired into a cittie called Picthium, or Pictua; in this almost forsaken societie were Deidamia daughter to king Aeacidas, Thessalonice, her owne daughter in law, famous in her father king Philips memorie, with diuers other princely Matrons, a small traine attending vpon them rather for show and state, than either vse or profit. These things being in order related to Cassander, he with all speede possible hastens towards the cittie Pictua, and inuests himselfe before it, compassing the place with an inuincible siege. Olimpias being now oppressed both with sword and famine, besides all the inconueniencies depending vpon a long and tedious warre, treated vpon conditions, in which her safe conduct, with her traines, being comprehended, she was willing to submit her selfe into the hands of the conqueror: at whose mercie, whilest her wauering fortunes yet stood, Cassander conuents the whole multitude, and in a publike oration desires to be counselled by them how to dispose of the queene; hauing before subborned the parents of such whose children she had caused to be murdered, who in sad and funerall habits, should accuse the crueltie and inhumanitie of Olimpias. Their teares made such a passionate impression in the breasts of the Macedonians, that with loude acclamations they doomed her to present slaughter, most vnnaturally forgetting that both by Philip her husband, and Alexander her sonne, their liues and fortunes were not onely safe amongst their neighbour nations, but they were also possessed of forreine Empire and riches from prouinces till their times scarce heard of, but altogether vnknowne. Now the queene perceiuing armed men make towards her and approch her to the same purpose, both with resolution and obstinacie, shee, attired in a princely and maiesticke habit, and leaning in state vpon the shoulders of two of her most beautifull handmaides, gaue them a willing and vndaunted meeting: which the souldiers seeing and calling to mind her former state, beholding her present maiestie, and not forgetting her royall offspring illustrated with the names of so many successiue kings, they stood still amased, without offering her any further violence: till others sent thether by the command of Cassander, through pierced her with their weapons, which she incountered with such constancie, that shee neither offered to euade their swords, auoid their woundes, or expresse the least feare by any effeminat clamour, but after the maner of the most bold and valiant men, submitted her selfe to death,The death of Olimpias. in her last expiration expressing the inuincible spirit of her son Alexander; in which she likewise showed a singular modestie, for with her disheueled haire shee shaddowed her face least in the struggling betwixt life and death it might appeare vnseemely; and with her garments couered her legges and feete^ least any thing about her might be found vncomely. After this, Cassander tooke to wife Thessalonice the daughter to king Aridaeus, causing the sonne of Alexander with his mother Roxane, to bee kept prisoners in a Tower called Amphipolitana.



Romilda.
ABout the time that the Hunnes came first into Italie and expelled the Longobards, they layd siege to the cittie Anguilaea, and in a hot assault hauing slaine the duke Gysulphus, his wife (the dutchesse Romilda) making the Towne defensible, brauely and resolutely maintained it against the enemie. But as Cacana king of the Anes approched neer vnto the walls, incouraging his souldiers to hang vp their scaling ladders and enter; Romilda at the same time looking from a Cittadel, cast her eie vpon the king, who as he seemed vnto her, with wonderous dexteritie behaued himselfe, and with an extraordinarie grace became his armes. This liking grew into an ardencie of loue, for shee that at first but allowed of his presence, now was affected to his person: in so much that in the most fierce assaults, though within the danger of their crosse-bows and slings, she thought her selfe secure, so she had the king her obiect. This fire was alreadie kindled in her brest, which nothing could qualifie, in so much that impatient of all delay, shee sent vnto her publike enemie priuate messengers, That if it pleased the king (being as she vnderstood a batchilor) to accept her as his bride, she would without further opposition surrender vp the towne peaceably into his hands: these conditions are first debated, next concluded, and lastly confirmed by oath on both sides. The towne is yeelded vp, and Cacana according to his promise takes Romilda to wife, but first he makes spoyle of the towne, kills manie, and leads the rest captiue. The first night he bedded with his new reconciled bride, but in the morning abandoned her vtterly, commanding twelue Hunnes, and those of the basest of his souldiers, one after another to prostitute her by turnes: that done, hee caused a sharpe stake to bee placed in the middle of the field,A miserable death. and pitched her naked bodie vpon the top thereof, which entering through the same made a miserable end of her life, at which sight the tyrant laughing said, Such a husband best becomes so mercilesse an harlot. This was the bloodie and miserable end (as Polycronicon saith) of Romilda. But better it happened to her two beautifull and chast daughters, who fearing the outrage of the lustfull and intemperat souldiors tooke putrified flesh of chickens and colts,A rare example of chastitie. and hid it raw betwixt their breasts: the souldiors approaching them, tooke them to be diseased, as not able to come neere them by reason of the smell; by which meanes they preserued their honours for the present, and they for their vertues sake were after bestowed vpon gentlemen of noble qualitie. The same Authour puts me in mind of another Adulteresse, who to her guilt of inchastitie added the bloody sin of murder. Our moderne Chroniclers remember vs of one Ethelburga,Ethelburga. daughter to king Offa, and wife to Brithricus king of the West-Saxons, who aiming at nothing so much as her own libidinous delights, that she might the more freely and securely inioy them, by many sundry treasons conspired the death of her husband: but hauing made many attempts, and not preuailing in any, the diuell (to whom she was a constant votaresse) so farre preuailed with her, that she neuer gaue ouer her damnable purpose till she had not onely dispatcht him of life by poyson, but was the death also of a noble young gentleman the chiefe fauourite of the king, and one whom in all his disseignes he most trusted. These mischiefes done, and fearing to be questioned about them, because she had incurd a generall suspition, she packt vp her choicest iewells, and with a trustie squire of hers, one that had beene an agent in all her former brothelries, fled into France, where by her counterfeit teares and womanish dissimulations, she so farre insinuated into

the kings breast, that the wrinckles of all suggestions were cleared, and shee freely admitted into the kings court, and by degrees into his especiall fauour: so rich were her iewells, so gorgeous her attire, so tempting her beautie being now in her prime, and withall so cunning and deceitfull her behauiour; that all these agreeing together, not onely bated the hearts of the courtiers, but attracting the eyes of the great Maiestie it selfe, in so much, that the king sporting with her in a great Bay window, the prince his son then standing by him, he merrily demanded of her, If she were instantly to make election of a husband, whether she would chuse him or his sonne? to whom shee rashly answered, That of the two she would make choice of his son. The king at this somwhat mooued and obseruing in her a lightnesse of behauiour, which his blind affection would not suffer him before to looke into, thus replied, Haddest thou made election of mee, I had possest thee of my sonne; but in chusing him, thou shalt inioy neither. So turning from her, commaunded her to be stripped out of her jewells and gay ornaments, and presently to be shriuen and sent to a monasterie: where she had not long beene cloystred, but to her owne infamie, and the disgrace of the religious house, she was deprehended in the dissolute imbraces of a wanton and leaude fellow, for which she was turned out of the cloyster and after died in great pouertie and miserie. In memorie of whom there was a law established amongst the West-Saxons, which disabled all the kings wiues after her, either to be dignified with the name of queene, or vpon any occasion to fit with him in his regall throne: yet this woman, though she died poorely, yet died (as it is said) penitently, therefore me thinkes I heare her leaue this or the like memorie behind her.




An Epitaph vpon Ethelburga Queene of the West-Saxons.
I was, I am not; smild, that since did weepe;
Labour'd, that rest; I wak't, that now must sleepe:
I playde, I plaie not; sung, that now am still;
Sawe, that am blind; I would, that haue no will.
I fed that, which feedes wormes; I stood, I fell:
I ^ad God saue you, that now bid farewell.
I felt, I feele not; followed, was pursude:
I war'd, haue peace; I conquer'd, am subdude.
I moou'd, want motion; I was stiffe, that bow
Belowe the earth; then something, nothing now.
I catcht, am caught; I trauel'd, here I lie;
Liu'd in the world; that to the world now dye.




This melancholly it is not amisse to season with a little mirth.A merrie accident. In some other countrie it was, for I presume ours affoards none such, but a common housewife there was, who making no conscience of spouse-breach or to vitiate her lawfull sheets, had interteined into her societie a swaggering companion, such a one as amongst vs we commonly call a Roring boy. This lad of mettall, who sildome went with fewer weapons about him than were able to set vp againe a trade-falne cutler, had (to maintaine his mistresses expenses and his owne riots) committed a robberie, and likewise done a murder, and being apprehended for the fact, iudged, condemned, and (according to the law in that case prouided) hanged in chaines: the gybbet was set neere to the common

hie-way, aud some mile distant from the cittie where this sweete gentlewoman with her husband then inhabited, who because in regard of the common fame that went vpon them, she durst neither giue her Loue visitation in prison, bee at his arraignement, or publike execution, her purpose was (as affection that breedes madnesse, may easilie beget boldnesse) vnknowne to her husband or any other neighbour, to walke in the melancholly euening and to take her last leaue of him at the gallows. Imagine the night came on and she on her iourney. It happened at the same time a traueller beeing a footeman whose iourny was intended towards the towne, as purposing to lodge there that night^ but being alone, and darkenesse ouertaking him, he grew doubtfull of the way and fearefull of robbing, therefore hee retired himselfe out of the road and lay close vnder the gybbet^ still listning if any passenger went by to direct him in the way, or secure him by his companie: as he was in this deepe meditation, the woman arriues at the place, and not able to containe her passion breaks out into this extasie, And must I needes then goe home againe without thee? at which words the trauellor starting vp in hast, No by no meanes (quoth hee) I shall bee glad of your company; and with what speed hee can makes towards her: away runnes the woman, thinking her sweet heart had leapt downe from the gibbet and followed her, after speedes the man as loath to be destitute of companie, still crying, Stay for me, Stay for me: but the faster he called, the faster she ran, feare added to both their hast, downe they tumbled often, but as quickly they were vp againe, still she fled, still hee pursued. But contrary was the issue of their feares, for she neuer looked backe till she came to her owne house, where finding the doores open and her husband set at supper, for hast tumbled him and his stoole downe one way, and the table and meat another: hee rising with much adoe, askt what the pox she ayled, and if she brought the diuel in with her at her taile? long it was ere she could make him any answer or come to her right sences: how she excused it I knew not, the traueller when he found himselfe neere the cittie, and saw light, slackned his pace, and went quietlie to his Inne, whether they euer met after to reconcile their mistake or no I know not, neither is it much pertinent to inquire.


A Moderne History of an Adulteresse.
Aeli^n. lib. 7.THe king of Scythia obseruing a man to goe still naked (whereas the coldnesse of the clime enforceth them to inquire after sables, furres, and the warmest garments can be found) in a violent and continued snow, meeting him, demanded of him whether he were not cold? Of whom the fellow asked another question, Whether his forehead were cold or not? The king answered it was not: neither can I be cold (o king replide he) where custome hath made me all forehead: this may aptly allude to many as well in these our dayes as the former, in whom sinne hath begot such a habit, that where it once possesseth it selfe, it compells all the other powers and affections of the body and mind to become ministers and vassailes: for sinne wheresoeuer it doth vsurpe, doth tyrannise, and as we see the dyer when he would staine white cloath and put it into another hew doth it with a small mixture, being nothing comparable either in weight or quantitie to the stuffe he would haue changed; so bee the mind neuer so chast, or the body of neuer so white and vnblemisht a puritie: yet if the diuell once come to put in his ingredients, with great facilitie and easinesse he will change the whole peece into his owne colour and complexion, and of this we haue both daily and lamentable experience: and therefore

custome is called a second nature: for alas how easilie wee see boldnesse grow to impudence, and satietie into surfet. This puts mee in mind of seauen short questions asked of the seauen wise men of Greece, and by them as briefely answered:
What's the best thing in man? The mind that's pure.Bia^ Prianaeus.What's worst? A man within himselfe vnsure.Piltacua Mitilaenus.Who's rich? He that nought couets. What's he poore?Cleobulus Liudius.The couetous man that starues amids his store.PerianderWomans chiefe beautie what? Chast life is such.Corinthius.Who's chast? She onely whom no fame dares tuch.Solo^ Athenien.Who's wise? The man that can, but acts no ill.Chilon Lacedemon.The foole? That cannot, but intends it still.Thales Milesius.
They that can containe themselues within these few prescriptions, may vndoubtedly store vp a good name to themselues, and honour to their posteritie: But what the neglect of these may grow vnto, I will in some sort illustrate vnto you in a moderne Historie lately happening,A true discourse. and in mine owne knowledge. An antient gentleman, as well growne in reputation, as yeares, and in those parts where he liued hauing purchased to himselfe a generall respect for both, marryed a beautifull young gentlewoman of good parts and parentage: But hauing no issue by her, he selected vnto his acquaintance a noble young gentleman, one that had trauelled France, Italy, Spaine, and had beene at the Sepulchre: making that happy vse of his trauell, that he was able to discourse properly and without affectation either of the scituation of citties, or the conditions and customes of people; and in one word to giue him his owne deserued character, there was nothing in him wanting that might become a perfect and a compleat gentleman. This young mans father was a great friend and familiar neighbour to this old man before spoken of, who had obserued his modestie and curteous behauior euen from his infancie, and therefore was the more affected to his discourse and company: his affection grew so farre that he purposed to make him a peece of his heire. Whilest they continued in this familiaritie (and the young man still frequented the house) there grew great acquaintance betwixt him and the gentlewoman: No maruell, for they had bin play-fellowes and schoole fellowes, and by reason of their paritie in yeares, vsed though an honest, yet a kind of suspected familiaritie; insomuch that it grew to a calumnie, till passing from one man to another, it ariued at length to the eares of the young mans father, who sorted opportunitie to talke with his sonne, demaunding of him how that fire was kindled from whence this smoke grew: who, notwithstanding many protestations of his owne innocence, in which he derogated nothing from truth, was charged by his father (to auoid all rumor and aspertion) to forbeare the occasion and absent himselfe from the house, and this he imposed him vpon his blessing. To this the young man with great modestie assented; as vnwilling to contradict his fathers counsell as to increase that iniurious suspition concerning the gentlewomans honour, which was vndeseruedly called in question. It is to be vnderstood, that many friendly and modest courtesies had past betwixt this young couple, in so much that hauing all libertie granted both of societie and discourse, hee prest her vpon a time so farre, to know if it should please God to call away her husband (being verie old and by the course of nature not likely to liue long) how

she purposed to dispose of her selfe. To whom she protested, that though she wisht her aged husband all long life and happinesse, yet if it pleased the higher powers to lay the crosse of widdowhood vpon her, she would if so hee pleased, conferre vpon him her youth, her fortunes, and whatsoeuer shee was endowed with, before any other man liuing, if it pleased him to accept of them, and this she bound with an oath: This the gentleman (betwixt honouring and louing her) could not chuse but take wondrous kindly at her hands, and vowed to her the like. The conditions on both sides were accepted, onely as shee had bound her selfe by one oath, she imposed vpon him another, namely, that till that time of her widdowhood, he should neither associate him priuately, conuerse nor contract matrimonie with any woman whatsoeuer. These things thus accorded betwixt them, yet the fathers coniurations so farre persuaded with the sonnes obedience, that notwithstanding many vrgent and important messages from the good old man the husband (who wondered what distast might breed his sudden discontinuance, as suspecting nothing from either) he still excused his absence and forbore the house. It happened that some month after riding to a market towne not farre off equally distant betwixt his owne fathers house and the old gentlemans, to giue a meeting to some gentlemen of the countrey, by chance he happened vpon a chambermaide that belonged to his betrothed mistresse, whom he well knew; he saluted her and she him, and after some complement past betwixt them, he asking how euery body did at home, and she on the other side wondering at his strangenes, telling him how long he had beene expected, and how much desired of all the house: these things ouer, he intreated her to drinke a cup of wine, which the maide willingly accepted. They being alone and falling into discourse of many old passages well knowne to them both, the young man began to speake how much he respected her mistresse, and how dearely tendered her honour: she on the other side began a cleane contrarie discourse, as that for his own part she knew him to be a noble gentleman and well parted, one whom her old master affected aboue all men; proceeding, that she was not altogether ignorant what familiarities had past betwixt him and her mistresse, who onely bore him faire outwardly and in shew, when another inioyed both her heart and body inwarldly and in act, and that vpon her owne knowledge; and to confirme her accusation, nominated the man (who was his neerest and most familiar friend.) At this report the gentleman was startled, but better considering with himselfe, told her he thankt her for her loue, but could by no meanes beleeue her relation; first by reason he knew her ladies breeding, and was confirmed in her knowne modestie and vertue, as hauing himselfe made tryall of both to the vttermost, hauing time, place, and opportunitie, all things that might beget temptation. Lastly, for his friend, in all their continuall and daily conuersation he neuer perceiued either familiar discourse, wanton behauiour, or so much as the least glance of eye to passe suspitiously betwixt them. To which she answered, it was so much the more cunningly carryed; for her owne part she had but done the office of a friend, and so left him, but in a thousand strange cogitations: yet loue persuading aboue iealousie, he began againe to itterate and call to mind, with what an outward integritie shee had still borne her selfe towards him, and with a puritie by no womans art to be dissembled. Next he bethought himselfe, that perhaps the maid might bee falne in loue with him, and by this calumny might seeke to diuert him from the affection of her mis^^esse; or else she had taken some priuat displeasure against her, and

by this meanes thought to reuenge her selfe. In the middest of these apprehensions, or rather distractions came another letter from the husband, complaining of his absence, wondring at the cause, and vrgently desiring his company, though neuer so priuate, where hee would reconcile himselfe touching any vnkindnesses that might bee conceiued, and withall resolue him what hee should trust to concerning some part of his lands. The gentleman still remembring his fathers charge, yet thought a little to dispense with it, and writ backe word (knowing euery part of the house by reason of his long frequenting it) That if he pleased to leaue his garden doore open at such a time of the night, hee would accept of such prouision as hee found, and be merry with him for an houre or two, and giue good reason for his vnwilling discontinuance; but thus prouided, that neither wife, friend, nor seruant (sauing that one whom hee trusted with his message) might bee acquainted with his comming in or going out. This was concluded, the time of night appointed, and euery thing accordingly prouided: They met, the old man gaue him kind and freely entertainment, seeming ouerioyed with his companie, and demaunding the reason of his so great strangenesse; Hee answered, that notwithstanding his owne innocence, and his wiues approoued Temperance, yet bad tongues had beene busie to their reproach, measuring them by their owne corrupt intents, and therefore to auoyde all imputation whatsoeuer, his study was by taking away the cause to preuent the effect: his reason was approoued, and the old man satisfied concerning both their integrities. Time calls the old man to his bedde, and the young gentleman is left to his rest, purposing to bee gone early in the morning before any of the houshold should bee awake and stirring. Beeing now alone and not able to sleepe in regard of a thousand distracted fancies that were pondering in his minde and braine: hee arose from his bedde, and walking vp and downe the chamber, after some meditation, as of her beautie, her vowes, her protestation, her oathes, all pleading together in the behalfe of her innocencie so farre preuailed with him, That considering hee was now in the same house, and that by reason of the old mans age they very often lay asunder, that hee was acquainted with euery stayrecase, and knew the ready way to her chamber; Loue conquering all suspition, hee purposed once more to visite the place where hee had (but euer honestly) sate with her at all houres, and where their intended marriage was by their interchange of oathes at first confirmed. With this purpose stealing softly vp the stayres, and listening at the doore before hee would presume to knocke, hee might heare a soft whispering, which sometimes growing lowder, hee might plainely distinguish two voyces (hers, and that gentlemans his supposed friend, whom the maide had before nominated) where hee might euidently vnderstand more than protestations passe betwixt them, namely the mechall sinne it selfe. At this beeing beyond thought ex^aside, scarce knowing how to conteine himselfe for the present, hee remembred him of his sword in his chamber, whether hee went instanly with intent to returne, and breaking open the doore to transpierce them both in the adulterate act: but better iudgement guiding him, considering what murder was, and the basenesse to become a personall executioner, withall remembring her beautie, their often meetings, kisses, and imbraces; his heart became too tender to destroy that goodly frame, in which nature had shewed her best of a^t, though the diuell his

worst of enuy. Therefore hee instantly made himselfe ready, left the place, and without the knowledge of any man or discouering to any what had past, returned to his fathers: where pondering at full with himselfe, the nature of his abuse (beeing beyond example) the strictnesse of his oath, beeing not onely debarred from marriage, but as it were banished from the societie of women; that shee onely reserued him as a stale or shadow, whilest another carryed away the substance; that shee kept her selfe to bee his wife, and anothers whore; and that from all these no safe euasion could bee deuised to come off towards her like a gentleman, or towards God like a Christian; all these iniuries ioyntly considered, droue him into a suddaine melancholie, that melancholie into a doubtfull sicknesse, and that sicknesse into a dangerous distraction, in so much that his life was much feared, and hee with great difficultie recouered: but by the helpe of good Physitions being cured, and the counsell of his best friends comforted; he at length gathered strength, and prepared himselfe for a second trauell, with purpose neuer more to reuisite his countrey where such an vnnaturall monster was bred. But before his departure, the old man hearing what he intended, sent for him to his house to take of him an vnwilling leaue: at the importunitie of his owne father he was forced to accompany him thither, where hee must of necessitie take another view of his betrothed mistresse and his treacherous friend. Dinner being past with his much impatience, it was generally imputed to his loath to depart; when his sadnesse was meerely grounded vpon her impudence. Parting growing on, she singles him for a farewell, weeping in his bosome, wringing him by the hand, beseeching him to haue a care of his safetie, but especially of his vow and promise; all which proceeded from such a counterfeit passion, as hee almost began to question, what in his owne notion hee knew to bee infallible. But in stead of reply hee deliuered her a letter, which hee intreated her to vouchsafe to peruse in his absence, in which his minde was fully signified. Imagine them with the rest of the companie diuided, euery one wishing the gentleman good speede and safe returne: when shee retyring her selfe, opens the letter, wherein was layd open euery passage concerning her lust, what hee himselfe personally had heard and knowne, the place where, the time when, the very words whispered, with euery vndeniable circumstance, and these exprest with such passionate efficacie, in which hee laboured to make knowne his iniuries, and her treacheries (the sole occasions of his voluntarie exile;) all these (I say) were so feelingly set downe, that they strooke her to the heart, insomuch that shee fell into a present frenzie, and dispairingly soone after dyed. Which newes came to the gentleman before hee had past Grauesend, by which hee vnderstood himselfe to be quite released of all his intricate oathes and promises: whose noble disposition the old gentleman vnderstanding, instated him in a great part of his land, which he inioyes to this day, and in my opinion, not altogether vndeseruedly.
The wife of Gengulphu^.A homely tale I am next to tell you, were it of one of our owne countrey-women I would conceale it, but since it concernes a French woman, out it shall to the full, the rather for the authoritie of the Author who affirmes it. In the time that king Aethelwold raigned in Mercia, and Stephanus Paulus was Pope, one Gengulphus a good and deuoute man liued in Burgoigne, It is sayde that hee bought a well in France, and at his prayers it sunke

there, and rose againe in Burgoigne. But the greater miracle is behind (for therby hangs a tale.) This man sued a diuorce, and was separated from his wife, (vpon whom the story vouchsafes no name) she confederated with a clerk (who was the Adulterer) to take away his life: he being dead (as Policronicon testates) there were many miracles seene about his graue. This being told to his wife sitting at a banquet, and being in all her iollitie, shee fell into a loud laughter, and thus said, When my husband Gengulphus doth any such miracles, then doe you all take notice that my Taile shall sing. These words (as my authour saith) were no sooner vttered, but instantly there was heard from vnder her a filthy foule noyse, and so oft as she spake so often it was heard, and that continued vntill her dying day.
The history of Italy remembers vs of one Isabella the wife of Luchinus,Isabella. a Viscount, who was the strumpet of Vgolinus Gonsaga Prince of Mantua, as also of Vittoria Corumbona,Cornabona. who slew her husband to enioy the Duke Brachiano. Friga was the wife of Othimus king of the Danes;Friga. and as Saxo Grammaticus affirmes, prostituted her body to one of her seruants. So Babtista Egnatius informes vs of the Emperesse Zoe,Zoe. who slew Romanus Argiropilus, that she might freelier inioy the company of Michael Paphlagon, who after succeeded in the Empire. Lewis, seneshall of Normandy taking his wife in adulterie, (named Carlotta with Iohannes Lauerinus,Carlotta. slew them both in the act. Gregory Turonensis nominates one Deuteria,Denteria. a beautifull French Lady, who was adulterated by king Theobert: as Agrippina the mother of Nero was corrupted by the Emperour Domitian. Macrobius speakes of one Iulia a Greekish woman who beeing suspected of adulterie by the great Orator Demosthenes;Iulia Greca. his seruant. Aesopus who was conscious of all their meetings, could neither by faire meanes be wonne, nor torments compeld to betray hers or his masters secrets, till Demosthenes himselfe made of it a voluntarie confession. Blondus, Martinus, Platina, Robert Barnes, and others, writ of Maude the Dutchesse of Lorrein, who was after wife to a second husband. Aooron, Marquesse of Esten, from whom she was diuorced by Pope Hildebrand, betwixt whom and her it is said there were Furtiuae Complexus, i. Imbraces by stealth: she was after called the daughter of S. Peter, because in her last testament she bequeathed to the Church of Rome a great part of Hetruria, which is called vnto this day the Patrimonie of S. Peter. Tre^isa reports that in the time when Marcus Commodus was Emperour, hee sent into Aegypt one Philippus as president ouer a Prouince, then in the iurisdiction of the Romans. This Philippus had a beautifull daughter called Eugenia,Eugenia. who being wholy deuoted to the Christian faith, but not daring to professe it, because of her father who protested all rigor to those of that Sect, shee disguised her selfe in mans habit, stealing from her fathers house, and made such meanes that she was baptised by the name of Eugenius, and after became a Monke. In processe the old Abbot being dead, she had so well demeand her selfe in the Monasterie, that she had the voice to be made Abbot in his stead; Being possest of the place, a leaud and an adulterous woman called Malentia,Malentia. by all allurements possible would haue tempted Eugenius to lust, but not preuailing, shee with loud acclamations pretending the other would haue forced her against her will, caused her to be apprehended and brought before the Iudge, which was the President Philip the father to Eugenia, who being an enemy to all of Religious Orders, was easily induced to giue beleef to any accusations commenst against them, and punisht euen sleight faults with the extreamest seueritie. Eugenius is accused, the circumstances examined, and carry great shew of

truth; The Iudge is ready to proceede to sentence, when Eugenia falling vpon her knees discloseth her selfe to her father, and humbly intreated his pardon. To whom (notwithstanding her disguise) her face is easily knowne, his fellow Monkes stands amased, Malentia the accuser confounded, but all in generall wonder-strooke, till Philippus raising his faire daughter from the earth, embraceth her louingly, as extaside with her recouerie beyond all expectation; for whose sake he after renounced all his false heathen gods, and was christened with his whole houshold and family. Thus the wickednesse of one woman turned to the blessednesse and profit of many.


Elfritha.
RAnulphus Monke of Chester tells this storie: King Edgar (sayth he) being in his youth much addicted to the loue of faire women, had intelligence that one Elfritha daughter to Orgarus,Elfritha. was for face, feature, and accomplishments of nature, far surpassing all the Virgins of her time; in so much that hee not onely greatly desired to see her, but purposed that if her beautie were any way answerable to that which fame had blazoned her to be, to make her his Queene. This secret apprehension hee communicated to one Earle Ethelwold, a noble gentleman, in his great fauour and best acquainted with his priuacies, commanding him to make a iourney to the Earle of Deuonshire her father, and there to take of her a free and full surueigh, and finding her answerable to the publique rumor, not onely to demand her of the Earle Orgarus, but to bring her along with her father royally attended like the bride of a king, to partake with him all regall honours. This iourney Ethelwold with great willingnesse vndertakes, without disclosing to any the secrets of his message: and comming to the place where the damosell with her father then soiourned, he was noblie entertained, as a fellow peere, and an especiall fauourit to the king. No sooner came the Ladie in presence, but Ethelwold began to conceiue that report had beene too niggardly in her praise, for hee had not in his lifetime seene a Ladie of so incomparable a feature, to whom all the Court-beauties appeared scarce good Christall to that vnmatchable Diamond. What cannot loue worke in the heart of man, when such a beautie is his obiect? it makes the sonne forget his father, and the father not remember that hee hath a sonne, but either hath made the others bed incestuous: It hath subiected citties, and depopulated countries, made the subiect forget his allegeance to his soueraigne, and the soueraigne most vnnaturall and inhumane to his subiect, as may appeare by this historie. This Earle surprised with the loue of this Ladie, hath either quite forgot the message he was sent about, or else is not pleased to remember it. Not speaking of the king at all, but counterfeiting some occasions into that countrey, and as if he had happened vpon that place by accident, or come to giue him visitation in noble courtesie; at supper finds discourse concerning the Ladie, and at length preuailed so farre with the old earle that they were contracted that night, and the next morning married. After some few daies soiourne there, the kings impositions inforced him to take an vnwilling farewell of his new married bride, onely at parting he earnestly intreated them for diuerse reasons which much imported him, to keepe the marriage as secret as possibly might bee, and so posted backe to the Court. He was no sooner arriued, but the king was busily inquisitiue concerning the beautie of the Ladie, how tall, how straight, of what haire, what complection, whether her lookes were cheerfull or sad, her behauiour sober or suspitious.

To all which he answered in few, she was indeed a Ladie, and that was her best, an Earles daughter and therfore flattered, for what in a priuat woman is commendable, is in such excellent; and what in the former praise worthie, in the latter rare and admirable: but for this Ladie Elfritha she was a course homesponne peece of flesh, whose nobilitie and dower might make her capable of beeing wife to some honest Iustice of peace, or Sherife of the shire, but not becomming the bed of any of the nobilitie (vnlesse some one whose estate was decayd;) indeed a meer Rooke, and most vnworthie the eye of the princely Eagle. With this answere the king was satisfied, and for the present disposed his affection elsewhere, immagining these prayses might be diuulged abroad as well in scorne of her person as otherwise, so for some few weekes it rested: in which interim Ethelwold was oft mist in the court^ and discontinued his wonted seruice, no man could scant tell or informe the king how he disposed himselfe, and still when he came to present his seruice he would excuse his absence with some infirmitie or other, which was the reason of his inforced retirement: besides, hee was often obserued to intreate leaue to recreat himselfe in the countrey, and take the benefit of the fresh ayre, as commodious for his health, in all which libertie hee past his limits. This bred some iealosie in the king, and the rather because the fame of this Ladies vnmatched beautie more and more increased. Therefore to bee more punctually informed of the truth, he sent another priuat messenger, who brought him intelligence how all things stood, with the certeintie of euerie accident how it befell. The king not knowing how to disgest such an iniurie from a subiect, smothered his grieuance for a space, and at length caused the gests to bee drawne, for hee purposed a progresse into the West. Ethelwold yet nothing suspecting, was the formost man to attend the king vpon his iourney: but when they came almost to Excester, he began to mistrust the kings purpose, the rather because hee sent to the Earle Orgarus that at such a time hee meant to feast with him. Now must Ethelwold bestirre himselfe, or instantly hazard the kings high displeasure: he therefore posts in the night to his wife and to his father in law, reports the truth of euerie circumstance from the beginning, how he was sent by the king, and to what purpose, how her beautie had so inflamed him that he was compelled by violence of affection to deceiue the kings trust; and lastly, to secure his owne life, which for the loue of her he had hazarded, he was forced to disparage her feature, dissemble her worth, and disgrace her beautie: and therefore besought her, as she tendered his safetie being her husband, either not to appeare before the king at all, or if she were called for and so compelled, to bee seene in that fashion as he had described her to his soueraign, namely with a smodged face, counterfeit haire, vncomely habit, and in her behauiour to put on such a garbe of folly as might rather breed loathing than any liking in his maiestie. The first of his speech she heard with patience, but when he came to deliuer to her how he had disparaged her beautie, and to the king too; nay more, would haue her derrogate from her owne worth, and be accessarie to the blasting of that beautie which nature had made so admirable, this her womanish spleene could hardly disgest: yet she soothed him vp with faire and promising language, and told him she would better consider of it, and so dismist him in part satisfied. In the morning he presented himselfe early to attend the king, who was that day to bee entertained by the earle his father in law. All things were noblie prouided, and Edgar royally receiued and set to dinner (some write that Ethel^old had caused a kitchin maid to put on his wiues habit, and sit at the kings

Table, but I find no such matter remembered in my Author) the truth is, the king about the middest of dinner cald for the Earle Orgarus and demanded of him whether he had a wife or no, if he had, why he might not haue her companie, knowing it was a generall obseruation in England, that without the wiues entertainement there could be no true and heartie welcome? The earle replied, that at that time he was an vnhappie widdower: he then demaunded, whether he had any children to continue his posteritie? to which he answered, heauen had onely blest him with one daughter a plaine damosell, yet the sole hope of his future memorie. The king was then importunate to see her, and commanded her to be instantly brought vnto his presence; which put Ethelwold into a strange agonie, yet still hoping she had done as hee had late inioyned her, when shee (contrarie to his expectation) came in apparelled like a bride, in rich and costly vestures, her golden haire fairely kembed and part hanging downe in artificiall curles, her head stoocke with jewells, and about her neck a chaine of diamonds, which gaue a wonderous addition to that beautie which naked of it selfe without any ornament was not to bee paraleld; a contrarie effect it wrought in the king and her husband. To Edgar she seemed some goddesse, at least a miracle in nature; to Ethelwold (in regard of his feare) a furie, or what worse hee could compare her to. O fraile woman, in this one vanitie to appeare beautifull in the eyes of a king, thou hast committed two heinous and grieuous sinnes, Adulterie, and Murder, for accordingly it so fell out. Edgar was as much surprised with her loue, as incensed with hate against her lord, both which for the present he dissembled, neither smiling on the one, nor frowning on the other. In the afternoone the king would needes hunt the stagge in the forrest of Werwelly, since called Hoore-wood: In the chace, by the appointment of Edgar, Earle Ethelwold was strooke through the bodie with an arrow and so slaine, the king after made Elfritha his bride and queene. The Earle had a base sonne then present at the death of his father, of whom the king asked how hee liked that manner of hunting, to whom he answered, Royall sir, what seemeth good to you shal be to me no way offensiue: from that time forward he was euer gratious with the king. And Elfritha thinking to make attonement with heauen for the murder of her husband, or rather (as Ranulphus saith) for causing Edward (to whom she was step-mother) to be slaine, that her owne sonne Egelredus might raigne, builded an Abbie for Nunnes at Worwell, where she was after buried.


Gunnora.
IN the time that Agapitus was Pope, Lewis king of Fraunce, the sonne of Charles, caused William Longa Spata the second duke of Normandie to bee treacherously slaine: this William was sonne to Rollo. The Lords of Normandie with this murder much insenced, watched their aduantage, and surprised the king in Rhothemage, where they committed him to safe custodie, till he had promised and sworne to yeeld vp Normandie to Richard sonne and immediate heire to William the late murdered duke, and moreouer in what place soeuer the king and the yong duke should haue meeting to conferre, that Richard should weare his sword, but king Lewis neither to haue sword nor knife about him. This Richard being yong, was called Richard the Old; he had besides another attribute giuen him, which was, Richard without Feare, because he was neuer known to be dismayde at any thing; but a third aboue these was, that he pretended to be wonderous religious. He was duke two and fiftie

yeares, and tooke a Ladie to his bed from Denmarke, whose name was Gunnora, by whom he had fiue sonnes and two daughters, the eldest of which was married to Etheldredus king of England, her name was Emma,Emma. and shee was called the flower of Normandie. Concerning this bold, yet religious duke, it is reported by Marianus, lib. 2. Henricus, Ranulphus, and others, that besides many other testimonies of his sanctitie, this one made him most eminent, A Monke of Andoenus in Rothomage a town in Normandie, going one night to meete with his sweet heart, his way lay ouer a bridge, and vnder that bridge was a deepe foord or riuer,A strange Tale. it so happened, that mistaking his footing, hee fell into the water and there was drowned. He was no sooner dead but there came to carrie away his soule, an Angell and a Fiend, these two contended about it, the one would haue it, so would the other, great was the controuersie betwixt them; at length they concluded to put the case to duke Richard, and both to stand to his arbitrement: much pleading there was on both sides, at length the duke gaue sentence, That the soule should be restored againe to the bodie, and be placed againe vpon that bridge from whence he had falne, and if then he would offer to goe from thence to his sweet heart, the diuell should take him; but if otherwise, he (because he was a Church-man) should be still in the Angels protection. This was done, and the Monke left his way to the woman, and fled to the church, as to a sanctuarie, whether the duke went the next day and found the Monkes clothes still wet, and told the Abbot euerie circumstance as it fell out; therefore the Monke was shriuen, did penance, was absolued and reconciled. This I haue read, which I persuade no man to beleeue. This duke liued with the faire Gunnora long time dishonestly and without marriage, had by her those children aforesaid, but at length by the persuasion of the nobilitie, and intercession of the cleargie, he tooke her to wife. The first night after the marriage when the duke came to her bed, she turned her backe towards him, which she had neuer done till that time: at which hee maruelling, demaunded of her the reason why she did so. To whom she answered, before I was your strumpet, and therfore as a seruant was tide to doe your pleasure in althings, but now I am your wife, and made part of your selfe, therefore henceforth I claime with you an equall soueraigntie, and will doe what mee list, bearing my selfe now like a princesse, not like a prostitute. This I am easily induced to beleeue, for how soone do honoures change manners. Iuuenall in his sixt Satire speaking of marriage thus sayth,
Semper habet lites aeternaque iurgia lectus, etc.
The marriage bed is sildome without strife.And mutuall chidinges: hee that takes a wife,Bargaines for mightie trouble, and small rest,Sleepe growes a stranger then, whilest in her brestShe lodgeth Passion, Selfe-will, Anger, Feare,And from her eyes drops many a feigned teare? etc.
Somewhat to this purpose spake Terentius in his Adelphis.
Duxi vxorem, quam ibi non miseriam vidi, etc.
I made choice of a wife, with iudgement sound,What miserie haue I not therein found?Children are borne, they proue my second care,They should be comforts, that my corsiues are.For her and them, I studie to prouide,And to that purpose, all my times's applyde:To keepe her pleas'd, and raise their poore estate,And what's my meede for all, but scorne and hate?
And so much for Gunnora. It seemes the Emperor Valentinianus was neither well read in Iuuenall nor Terrens, He, when his wife commended vnto him the beautie of the Ladie Iustina,Iustina. tooke her to his bed, and for her sake made a law, That it should be lawfull for any man to marrie two wiues. It is read of Herod the Great that he had nine wiues, and was diuorsed from them all, only for the loue of Mariamnes neice to Hircanus,Mariamnes for whose sake he caused himselfe to bee circumcised, and turned to the faith of the Iewes: he begot on her Alexander and Aristobulus; on Dosides,Dosides. Antipater; on Metheta, Archelaus; on Cleopatra, Philip and Herodes Antipas (he that was afterward called Tetrarch,Metheta. one of the foure princes:Cleopatra.) Aristobulus that was Herodes sonne begotten on Beronica the daughter of his own Aunt called Saloma;Beronica. he begot the great Agrippa, Aristobulus, and Herod that was strooke by the Angell:Saloma. also on the aforesaid Beronica hee begot two daughters, Mariamnes, and Herodias who was after Philips wife,Herodias. that was Vncle to Aristobulus: neuerthelesse whilest Philip was yet aliue Herodias became wife to his brother Herod. At length there fell debate betwixt her, Mariamnes, and Saloma Herods sister. Herod by the instigation of Saloma slew Hyrcanus the Priest, and after Ionathas the brother of Mariamnes, who against the law hee had caused to be consecrated Priest at the age of seuenteene yeares. After that he caused Mariamnes to bee put to death, with the husband of his sister Saloma, pretending that Hyrcanus and Ihonathas had adulterated his sister. After these murders, Herod grew madde for the loue of Mariamnes, who was held to bee the fairest Ladie then liuing, and innocently put to death. He then tooke againe his wife Dosides and her sonne Antipater to fauour, sending Alexander and Aristobulus the sons of Mariamnes to Rome to be instructed in the best litterature, whom after hee caused to be slaine. And these were the fruites of Adulterous and Incestuous marriages.



Of Women that haue come by strange Deaths.
THere are many kinds of deaths, I will include them all within two heades, Violent, and Voluntarie: the Violent is, when either it comes accidentally, or when we would liue and cannot: the Voluntarie is, when we may liue and will not; and in this wee may include the blesseddest of all deaths, Martyrdome. I will begin with the first, and because gold is a mettall that all degrees, callings, trades, mysteries, and professions, of either Sex, especially acquire after: I will therefore first exemplifie them that haue dyed golden deaths.

Of the Mistresse of Brennus. Of Tarpeia, and Acco a Roman Matron.
OF Midas the rich king, and of his golden wish I presume you are not ignorant, and therefore in vaine it were to insist vpon his historie^ my businesse is at this time with women. Brennus an Englishman, and the yonger brother to

Belinus, both sonnes of Donwallo) was by reason of composition with his brother, with whom hee had beene competitor in the kingdome, disposed into France, and leading an armie of the Galls, inuaded forreine countries, as Germanie, Italie, sacking Rome, and piercing Greece: In so much that his glorie stretched so farre, that the French Croniclers would take him quite from vs, and called him Rex Gallorum, witnesse Plutarch in his seuenteenth Paralel. This Brennus spoyling and wasting Asia, came to besiege Ephesus, where falling in loue with a wanton of that cittie, he grew so inward with her, that vpon promise of reward shee vowed to deliuer the cittie into his hands: the conditions were that he being possest of the Towne, should deliuer into her safe custodie, as many jewells, rings, and as much treasure as should counteruaile so great a benefit: to which he assented. The towne deliuered, and he being victor, shee attended her reward;The reward of Couetousnesse. when Brennus commanded all his souldiers from the first to the last, to cast what gold or siluer or iewells they had got in the spoyle of the cittie, into her lap; which amounted to such an infinite masse, that with the weight thereof she was suffocated and prest to death. This Clitiphon deliuers in his first booke Rerum Gallicar. to answere which, Aristides Melesius in Italicis speakes of Tarpeia,Tarpeia. a noble Virgin or at least nobly descended, and one of the keepers of the Capitoll: she in the warre betwixt the Sabines and the Romans, couenanted with king Tatius, then the publike enemie, to giue him safe accesse into the mountaine Tarpeia, so hee would for a reward but possese her of all the gold and iewells which his souldiers the Sabines had then about them. This shee performing, they were likewise willing to keepe their promise, but withall loathing the couetousnesse of the woman, threw so much of the spoyle and treasure vpon her, that they buried her in their riches, and she expired amiddest a huge Magozin. But remarkable aboue these is the old woman Acco or Acca,Acco, who hauing done an extraordinarie courtesie for the cittie of Rome^ they knew not better how to requite her than knowing her auaritious disposition, to giue her free libertie to goe into the common treasurie and take thence as much gold as she could carrie. The wretched woman ouerioyed with this donatiue, entered the place to make her packe or burden, which was either so little she would not beare, or so great she could not carrie, and swetting and striuing beneath the burden, so expired. The like though somthing a more violent death, died the Emperour Galba, who in his life time being insatiate of gold, as being couetous aboue all the Emperours before him, they powred moulten gold downe his throat, to confirme in him that old Adage, Qu^lis vita, finis ita. The like was read of the rich Roman Crassus.


Of such as haue died in child-byrth.
THough of these be infinites, and dayly seene amongst vs, yet it is not altogether amisse to speake someting though neuer so little, which may ha^e reference to antiquitie.Tulluota. Volaterranus remembers vs of Tulliota the daughter of Marcus Cicero, who being first placed with Dolobella, and after with Piso Crassipides, died in child-bed.Iunia. Claudilla. The like Suetonius puts vs in minde of Iunia Claudilla who was daughter to the most noble Marcus Sillanus, and wife to the Emperor Caius Calligula who died after the same manner. Higinus in his two hundred threescore and fourth Fable tells this tale: In the old time sayth he, there were no midwiues at all, and for that cause many women in their modestie, rather suffered themselues to perish for want of helpe, than that any man should bee seene or knowne to come about them. Aboue all, the Athenians were most

curious that no seruant or woman should learne the art of Chyrurgerie. There was a damosell of that cittie, that was verie industrious in the search of such mysteries, whose name was Agnodice,Agnodice. but wanting meanes to attaine vnto that necessarie skill, she caused her haire to be shorne, and putting on the habit of a yong man, got her selfe into the seruice of one Heirophilus a Phisitian, and by her industrie and studie hauing attained to the deapth of his skill and the height of her own desires, vpon a time hearing where a noble ladie was in child-birth, in the middest of her painfull throwes, she offered her selfe to her helpe, whom the modest Ladie (mistaking her Sex) would by no persuasion suffer to come neere her, till she was forced to strip her selfe before the women, and to giue euident signes of her woman-hood. After which shee had accesse to many, proouing so fortunate, that she grew verie famous. In so much that being enuied by the colledge of the Phisitians, shee was complained on to the Ariopagitae, or the nobilitie of the Senat: such in whose power it was to censure and determine of all causes and controuersies. Agnodice thus conuented, they pleaded against her youth and boldnesse, accusing her rather a corrupter of their chastities, than any way a curer of their infirmities: blaming the matrons, as counterfeiting weakenesse, onely of purpose to haue the companie and familiaritie of a loose and intemperate yong man. They prest their accusations so farre, that the Iudges were readie to proceede to sentence against her^ when shee opening her brest before the Senat, gaue manifest testimonie that she was no other than a woman: at this the Phisitians the more incenst made the fact the more henious, in regard that being a woman, she durst enter into the search of that knowledge, of which their Sex by the law was not capable. The cause being once more readie to goe against her, the noblest matrons of the cittie assembled themselues before the Senat, and plainely told them, they were rather enemies than husbands, who went about to punish her, that of all their Sex had beene most studious for their generall health and safetie. Their importancie so farre preuailed, after the circumstances were truely considered, that the first decree was quite abrogated, and free libertie granted to women to imploy themselues in those necessarie offices, without the presence of men. So that Athens was the first cittie of Greece, that freely admitted of Mid-wiues by the meanes of this damosell Agnodice.


Of Women that suffered Martyrdome.
Corona.ANd of these in briefe. Corona was a religious woman who suffered martyrdome vnder the tyrannie of Antonius the Emperour, Her death was after this manner, she was tyde by the armes and legges betwixt two trees, whose stiffe branches were forced and bowed downe for the purpose, the bowes being slackned and let loose, her bodie was tost into the ayre, and so cruelly diss^uered limbe from limbe. Anatholia a Virgin, by the seuere commaund of Faustinianus the President, was transpierst with a sword. Felicula (as Plutarch witnesseth) when by no persuasion or threats, promises or torments, she could be forced to renounce the Christian Faith, by the command of Flaccus Comes shee was commanded to be shut vp in a Iakes, and there stifled to death. Murita had likewise the honour of a Martyr, who being banished by Elphedorus a certaine Arrian, opprest with cold and hunger, most miseraby died. Hyrene the Virgin, because shee would not abiure her faith and religion, was by Sisimmius shot through with an arrow. The like death suffered the martyr Christiana vnder Iulian the Apostata. Paulina a Roman Virgin, and daughter to the Prefect

Artemius was with her mother Candida stoned to death by the commaund of the tyrant Dioclesian. Agatho virgo Catanensis was strangled in prison, by the command of the Cons^ll Quintianus. Theodora, a Virgin of Antioch, was beheaded by the tyrannie of Dioclesian. Iulia Countes of Eulalia, suffered the same death vnder the President Diaconus. Margaritu a maide and a martyr, had her head cut off by Olibrius. Zo^ the wife of Nicostratus, was nayled vnto a crosse and so ended her life, partly with the torture of the gybbet, and partly with the smoke (that the executioner made at the foot of the gallowes) suffocated. Iulia Carthagensis, because she would not bow to Idolls and adore the false heathen gods, but was a constant professor of the true Christian faith, was martyred after the selfe same manner. Emerita the sister of Lucius king of England (who had the honour to be called the first Christian king of this countrie) shee suffered for the Faith by fire. Alexandria was the wife of Dacianus the President, who being conuerted to the Faith by blessed saint George, was therefore by the bloodie murderer her husbands owne hands strangled. Maximianus the sonne of Dioclesian, with his owne hands likewise slew his naturall sister Artemia, because that forsaking all Idolatrie, shee prooued a conuertite to the true Christian Faith. Flauia Domicilla, a noble Ladie of Rome, was banished into the Isle Pontia in the fifteenth yeare of the raigne of Domitian, for no other reason but that shee constantly professed her selfe to bee a Christian. These two following suffered persecution vnder Antonius Verus in France: Blondina who is sayd to wearie her tormentors, patiently induring more than they could malitiously inflict, in so much that before shee fainted, they confessed themselues ouercome, she readie still to suffer and beare, when they had not blows to giue, for as oft as she spake these words, I am a Christian, neither haue I committed any euill, she seemed to the spectators of her martyrdome, to bee so refreshed and comforted from aboue, that she felt no paine or anguish in the middest of her torture, and in that patience she continued without alteration euen to the last gaspe. Biblis, one that before through her womanish weakenesse had fainted for feare of torments, comming to see her with others executed, was so strengthened to behold their constancie, that as it were awakened out of her former dreame, and comparing those temporall punishments (which lasted but a moment) with the eternall paines of Hell fire, gaue vp her selfe freely for the Gospels sake. Dionisius in an Epistle to Fabius Bishop of Antioch, reckons vp those that suffered martyrdome vnder Decius the Emperour. Quinta, a faithfull woman, was by the Infidels brought into a Temple of their Idolls, vnto which because she denied diuine adoration, they bound her hand and foot, and most inhumanly dragged her along the streets vpon the sharpe stones; but when that could not preuaile with her, they beat her head and sides, and bruised them against Mill-stones, that done, shee was pitiously scourged, and lastly, bloodily executed. The same Lictors layd hands on Appolonia a Virgin, but something grounded in yeares, and because she spake boldly in the defence of her Faith, first with barbarous crueltie they beat out her teeth, then without the ^ittie they prepared a huge pile, threatning to burne her instantly vnlesse shee would renounce her Christianitie, but shee seeming to pause a little, as if she meant better to consider of the matter, (when thy least suspected) leapt suddenly into the fire and was there consumed to ashes. Ammomarion a holy Virgin, after the suffering of many torments vnder the same tyrant, gaue vp her life an acceptable sacrifice for the Gospell. Mercuria a vertuous Woman, and one Dionisia a fruitfull and child-bearing Martyr, after they were questioned

about their faith, and in all arguments boldly opposed the iudges, were first rackt and tortured till they were past all sence of feeling, that done, they caused them to be executed. Theodosia was a virgin of Tyrus;Theodosia. about the age of eighteene years, she comming to visite certaine prisoners at Cesaria who were called to the barre, and because they stood stedfastly in the defence of the Gospell, prepared themselues to heare the most welcome sentence of death pronounced against them: which Theodosia seeing, gently saluted them, comforted them, and persuaded them to continue in their constancie, withall humbly desired them to remember her deuoutly in their prayers, which she knew would be acceptable to him for whose loue they so freelie offered vp their liues. The officers this hearing, dragd her before the President, who at first despising her youth, began to talke with her as to a child, but finding her answers modest and weightie, began further to argue with her: but seeing himselfe vnable to hold argument as being conuinced in all things, hee grew into such a malitious rage, that he first caused her to be scourged before his face, euen till the flesh gaue way to discouer the bones; but this not preuailing, hee commanded her instantly to be dragged from thence, and from an high place to be cast headlong into the sea. I will conclude this discourse of Martyrs with one of our owne moderne stories: Our english chronicles report that Maximus the Emperour hauing held long warre with one Conon Meridock a resolute and bold Brittaine, hauing in many bloody conflicts sped diuersly, sometimes the victory inclining to one side, and then to another, but in conclusion to the losse of both; their hostilitie was by mediation at length attoned, and a firme peace establisht betwixt them: that done, Maximus made warre vpon the Galls, and inuading a Prouince then called America (but since Little Brittaine) he wonne it by the sword, and after surrendered it to Conon to hold it for euer as of the Kings of great Brittaine. This Conon Meridock was a Welch-man, and from hence it may bee, That all that nation assume to themselues the name of Brittons.How Welch-men come to be called Brittons. This eminent captaine being onely furnisht with souldiours for the present warres, but wanting women to maintaine future issue, to him was sent S. Vrsula with eleauen thousand virgins to bee espoused to Conon and his knights. But being met at sea by the the Pagan pyrats, because they would neither change their faith nor prostitute themselues to their barbarous and beastly lusts, they were all by these inhuman wretches cut to peeces and cast ouer board, and therefore in mine opinion not vnworthily reckoned amongst the Martyrs. From these I will proceede to others.


Aristoclaea.
OF all the deaths that I haue read of, this of Aristoclaea me thinkes exceedes example: with which howsoeuer her body was tormented, her soule could not be greeeued,Plutarch in Amator. narrat. for neuer woman dyed such a louing death. Plutarch in his Amatorious narrations hath thus deliuered it: Aliartes is a cittie of Boetia, in which was borne a virgin so beautified and adorned with all the gifts and perfections of nature, as she seemed vnparaleld through Greece; her name was Aristoclaea, the sole daughter of Theophanes. To her there were many sutors, but three especially of the noblest families of the cittie, Strato, Orchomenius, and Calisthenes Aliartius: Of these Strato being the richest, he seemed the most inde^red to her in affection, for he had first seene her at Lebedaea bathing her selfe in the fountaine Hercyne, from whence hauing a basket vpon her arme, which she was to vse in the sacrifice to Iupiter, he tooke a full view of her in her way

to the Temple: yet Calisthenes he fed himselfe with the greater hopes, because he was of more proximitie and neerer to the virgin in allians: betwixt these two Orchomenius stood as a man indifferent. Her father Theophanes vpon their importunities doubtfull, and not yet hauing determined on which to conferre his daughter, as fearing Stratoes potencie who in wealth and nobilitie equalled if not anteceded the best in the cittie, he therefore put it off to one Trophonius to be decided: but Strato most confident in his owne opinion and strength tooke the power to her disposing from Trophonius and gaue it vp freely into her owne will. The damsell in a confluence of all her kindred and friends gathered for that purpose, and in the sight of her suitors, was publikely demaunded, of which of them she made choice? who answered, of Calisthenes. Strato taking this in an irreconcilable disgrace, and in the greatnesse of his spirit not able to disgest an iniurie (as he tooke it) of that nature, dissembling his spleene, and some two dayes after meeting with Theophanes and Calisthenes, hee gaue them a friendly and an vnsuspected salutation, desiring still a continuance of their antient loue and friendship; that since what many couet one can but enioy, he could content himselfe with his owne lot, howsoeuer desiring that their amitie might remaine perfect and vnchanged: these words came so seemingly from the heart, that they with great ioy did not only entertain his loue and voluntarie reconcilement, but in all curtesie gaue him a solemne inuitation to the wedding, which he as complementally entertained; and vpon these tearmes they parted. Strato subornes a crew of such as he might best trust, and addes them to the number of his seruants, these hee ambushes in diuers places selected for his purpose, but all to be ready at a watch-word. Calisthenes bringing Aristoclaea towards the fountaine called Cisso^ssa, there to performe the first Sacreds belonging to marriage, according to the custome of her auncetors; Strato with his faction ariseth, and with his owne hands ceiseth vpon the virgin; on the other side Calisthenes hee catcheth the fastest hold he can to keepe her; Strato and his pull one way, Calisthenes and his another: thus both contending in the heat of their affection, but not regarding her safetie whom they did affect, she as it were set vpon the racke of loue, pluckt almost to peeces, betwixt them both expired. Which seeing Calisthenes, hee was suddenlie lost, neither could any man euer after tell what became of him, whether he punisht himselfe by some extraordinarie death or betooke himselfe to voluntarie exile. Strato openly before his owne people transpierst himselfe, and fell downe dead vpon the body of Aristoclaea. Of no such death dyed Democrita, whose history next ensueth.
Alcippus the Lacedemonian had two daughters by his wife Democrita.Democrita. He hauing with great iustice and integritie managed the affaires of the weale publike, more for the common good than any peculiar gaine or profit of his own, was affronted by an opposite faction which emulated his goodnesse: and being brought before the Ephori, it was deliuered to them in a scandalous and lying oration, how and by what meanes Alcippus intended to abrogate and adnichilate their lawes: for which he was confind from Spatta, neither could his wife and daughters (who willingly offered themselues to attend vpon his aduersity) be suffered to associate him, but they were deteined by the power and command of the publike magistrate. Moreouer an edict was made, That neyther the wife was capable of inheritance, nor the daughter of dower out of their fathers goods, notwithstanding they had many sutors of such noble gentlemen as loued them for their fathers virtues. It was likewise by the enemy most

enuiously suggested to the Senat, that the two Ladies might be debard from marriage; their reason was, that Democrita was heard often to wish, and withall to presage that she should see children borne of her daughters who would in time reuenge the wrongs of their grandfather. This being granted, and shee euery way circumscribed both in her selfe, her husband, and issue, euery way confind; she expected a publike solemnitie, in which according to the custome, the women of the cittie with the virgins, houshold seruants, and infants had meeting, but the matrons and wiues of the nobilitie kept their night-festiuall in a conclaue or parlor by themselues. Then she guirt her selfe with a sword, and with her two daughters secretlie conueyd her selfe into the Temple, attending the time when all the matrons were most busie about the ceremonies and mysteries in the conclaue: then hauing made fast the doores and shut vp the passages, and heaped together a great quantitie of billets with other things combustible, prouided for the purpose, but especially all that sweete wood that was ready for the sacrifice of that solemnitie she set all on fire: which the men hastening to quench in multitudes, she before them all with a constancie vndaunted, first slew her daughters, and after her selfe, making the ruins of this Temple their last funerall fire. The Lacedemonians hauing now nothing left of Alcippus against which to rage, they caused the bodies of Democrita and her daughters to be cast out of the confines of Sparta. For this ingratitude, it is said by some, that great earth-quake happened which had almost ouerturned the cittie of Lacedemon: from Democrita I come to Phillis.
Demophr^^ the sonne of Theseus and Phadra, the halfe brother of Hippolitus, returning from the warres of Troy towards his countrey, by tempests and contrarie winds being driuen vpon the coast of Thrace, was gently receiued and affectionately entertained by Phillis,Phillis. daughter to Lycurgus and Crust^^ena then king and queene of that countrey, and not onely to the freedome of all generous hospitalitie, but to the libertie and accesse vnto her bed. He had not long soiourned there, but he had certaine tydings of the death of Muestham, who, after his father Theseus was expulsed Athens had vsurped the principalitie: pleased therefore with the newes of innouation, and surprised with the ambition of succession, he pretending much domesticke businesse, with other negotiations pertaining to the publike gouernment, after his faith pawned to Phillis that his returne should be within a moneth, hee got leaue for his countrey: therefore hauing calked and moored his ships, making them seruiceable for the sea, he set saile towards Athens, where arriued, he grew altogether vnmindfull of his promised faith or indented returne. Foure moneths being past and not hearing from him by word or writing, she sent him an Epistle in which she complaines his absence, then persuades him to call to mind her more than common curtesies, to keepe his faith ingaged to her, and their former contract to make good by marriage; the least of which if he refused to accomplish, her violated honour she would recompence with some cruell and violent death: which she accordingly did, for knowing her selfe to bee despised and vtterly cast off, she in her fathers Pallace hung her selfe. From Phillis I proceede to Deia^eira.
I^piter begat Hercules of Alcmena, in the shape of her husband Amphitrio, ioyning three nights in one; whom Euristius king of Micena (at the vrgence of his stepmother Iuno) imployd in all hazardous and fearefull aduentures, not that thereby he might gaine the greater honour, but by such meanes sooner perish: but his spirit was so great, and his strength to eminent, that from foorth all

these swallowing dangers he still plunged a victor: amongst these difficulties was that combat against Achelous, a Flood in Aetolia (who transhapt himselfe into sundry figures for the loue of Deianeira daughter to Oeneus and Althaea king and queene of Calidon,Deianeira. and sister to Meleager) he, whom no monsters nor earthly powers could tame, by the conquest of Achelous wonne Deianeira for his bride. But he whom all tyrants and terrours were subiect to, submitted himselfe to effeminacie, and the too much dotage vpon women: for when Euritus king of Oechalia had denied him his daughter Iole (before promist him) the citty taken and the king slaine he tooke her freely into his embraces; with whose loue he was so blinded, that at her imperious command hee layd by his clubbe and Lions skinne (the trophyes of his former victories) and, which was most vnseemely for so great a conquerour, put on a womanish habit and blusht not with a distaffe in his hand to spinne amongst her damsells. In briefe, what slauerie and seruitude soeuer he had before suffered vnder the tyranny of Omphale queene of Lydia, of whom he had begot Lamus, he indured from her: which Deianeira hearing, in a letter she layes open to him all his former noble acts and victories, that by comparing them with his present deboishtnesse, it the better might incourage him to returne to the first, and deterre him from the last. But hauing receiued newes of Hercules calamitie, by reason of the poisoned shirt sent him by her seruant Lychas dipt in the blood of the Centaure Nessus, in which she thought there had beene the vertue to reuoke him from all new loues, and establish him in his first (for so Nessus had persuaded hir, when in her transwaftage ouer the flood Euenus he was slaine by the arrow of Hercules dipt in the poyson of Lerna) when she I say heard of the death of her husband, and that (though vnwillingly) it happened by her meanes, shee dyed by a voluntarie wound giuen by her owne hand. Not such was that which followes. The Ionians through all their Prouince being punisht with a most fearfull and horrible pest,Iohannes Wyerius, lib. 1. in so much that it almost swept the cittie and countrey, and had it longer continued would haue left their places and habitatious desolate, they therefore demanded of the Oracle a remedie for so great a mischiefe, which returnd them this answer, That the plague should neuer cease till the young man Menalippus and the faire Cometho were slaine and offered in sacrifice to Dianae Tryclaria (and the reason was,Cometho. because hee had strumpeted her in her Temple.) And notwithstanding their deaths, vnlesse euery yeare at the same season a perfectly featured youth and a virgin of exquisite-beautie (to expiate their transgression) were likewise offered vpon the same altar, the plague should still continue: which was accordingly done, and Menalyppus and the faire Cometho were the first dish that was serued vp to this bloody feast. The same author speakes of the daughter of Aristodemus in this manner: The Messenians and the Lacedemonians hauing continued a long and tedious warre,The daughters of Aristodemus. to the great depopulation of both their nations, those of Missene sent to know the euent of the Oracle at Delphos, and to which partie the victorie would at length incline. Answer is returned, That they shall bee conquerors, and the Lacedemonians haue the worst: but vpon this condition, To chuse out of the family of the Aepitidarians a virgin pure and vnblemisht, and this damsel to sacrifice to Iupiter. This Aristodemus hearing (a Prince and one of the noblest of the familie of the Aepitidarians) willing to gratifie his countrey, chused out his onely daughter for immolation and sacrifice: which a noble youth of that nation hearing, surprised both with loue and pittie; loue in hope to inioy her, and pitty, as grieuing she should bee so dismembred; he thought rather

to make shipwracke of her honour than her life, since the one might bee by an after-truth restored, but the other by no earthly mediation recouered. And to this purpose presents himselfe before the altar, openly attesting that she was by him with child, and therefore not onely an vnlawfull but abhominable offering in the eyes of Iupiter. No sooner was this charitable slander pronounced by the young man, but the father more inraged at the losse of her honour now, than before commiserating her death, being full of wrath he vsurpes the office of the priest, and with his sword hewes the poore innocent Lady to peeces. But not many nights after this bloody execution, the Idaea of his daughter bleeding, and with all her wounds about her, presented it selfe to him in his trouble and distracted sleepe: with which being strangely mooued, he conueighed himselfe to the tombe where his daughter lay buried, and there with the same sword slew himselfe.
Pheretrina.Herodotus in Euterpe speakes of one Pheretrina queene of the Baccaeans, a woman of a most inhumane crueltie, she was for her tyranny strooke by the hand of heauen, her liuing body eaten with wormes and lice, and in that languishing misery gaue vp the ghost. Propert. in his third book speaks of one Dyrce,Dyrce. who much grieued that her husband Lycus was surprised with the loue of one Antiopa caused her to be bound to the horns of a mad bull;Antiopa. but her two sonnes Zethus and Amphion comming instantly at the noyse of her lowd acclamation, they released her from the present danger, and in reuenge of the iniurie offered to their mother, fastned Dyrce to the same place, who after much affright, and many pittifull and deadly wounds,Consinge. expired. Consinge was the queene of Bithinia, and wife to Nicomedes, whose gesture and behauiour appearing too wanton and libidinous in the eyes of her husband, hee caused her to be woorried by his owne dogges.Pyrene. Plin. lib. 7. Pyrene the daughter to Bebrix was comprest by Hercules in the mountaines that diuide Italy from Spaine, she was after torne in pieces by wild beasts, they were cald of her Montes Pyreneae. i. The Pyrenean mountaines. Antipater Tarcenses apud Vollateran. speakes of one Gatis,Gatis. a queene of Syria, who was cast aliue into a moate amongst fishes, and by them deuoured; she was likewise called Atergatis.Atergatis. Sygambis was the mother of Darius king of Persia,Sygambes. as Quintus Curtius in his fourth booke relates, she dyed vpon a vowed abstinence for being taken prisoner by Alexander, yet nobly vsed by him, whether tyred with the continuall labour of her iourney, or more afflicted with the disease of the mind it is not certaine: but falling betwixt the armes of her two daughters (after fiue dayes abstinence from meate, drinke, and light) she expired. Semele the mother of Bacchus,Semele. a Theban Lady, and of the royall race of Cadmus perisht by thunder. Pliny in his second booke writes of one Martia great with child who was strooke with thunder,Martia. but the infant in her wombe strooke dead onely, shee her selfe not suffering any other hurt or dammage: in which place he remembers one Marcus Herennius, a Decurion, who in a bright and cleare day when there appeared in the sky no signe of storme or tempest, was slaine by a thunderclappe. Pausanius apud Vollateran. saith that Helena after the death of her husband Menelaus,Helena. being banished into Rhodes by Megapenthus and Nicostratus the sonnes of Orestes,Polyzo. came for rescue to Polyzo the wife of Pleopolemus, who being iealous of too much familiaritie betwixt her and her husband, caused her to be strangled in a bath: others write of her, that growing old, and seeing her haires growne gray, that face growne wythered whose lustre had beene the death of so many hundered thousands; shee caused her glasse to be broken, and in despaire strangled herselfe. The like Caelius

lib. 6. cap. 15. remembers vs of one Acco,,Acco. a proude woman in her youth and growne decrepid through age, finding her brow to be furrowed, and the fresh colour in her checkes quite decayed, grew with the conceit thereof into a strange frenzie: some write that she vsed to talke familiarly to her owne image in the Mirhor, sometimes smile vpon it, then againe menace it, promise to it, or slatter it, as it came into her fancie: in the end with meere apprehension that she was growne old, and her beautie faded, shee fell into a languishing and so died. Iocasta the incestuous mother to Aeteocles and Polynices,Iocasta. beholding her two sonnes perish by mutuall wounds, strooke with the terrour of a deede so facinorous, instantly slew her selfe. So Bisaltia a mayd,Bisaltia. dispised by Calphurnius Crassus, into whose hands she had betraide the life of her father, and freedome of her countrie fell vpon a sword and so perished. Zoe the Emperesse,Zoe. with her husband Constantius Monachus, both about one time died of the Pestilence. Gregorius Turonensis writes of one Austrigilda a famous Queene,Austrigilda who died of a disease called Disenteria, which is a flux or wringing of the bowells. Of the same griefe died Sausones, sonne to Chilperick. Serena the wife of Dioclesian,Serena. for verie griefe that so much Martyres blood was spilt by her husbands remorseles tyrannie,Glausinda. fell into a feauer and so died. Glausinda daughter to the king of the Gothes and wife to Athanagildus was slaine by Chilperick, the sonne of Clotharius, at the instigation of his strumpet Fredegunda,Freiegunda. so saith Volateranus. Sextus Aurelius writes, that the Emperour Constantius, sonne to Constantius and Helena, caused his wife Fausta (by whose instigation he had slaine his sonne Crispus) to die in an hot scalding bath.Fausta, Lysides al Melissa. Herodotus speakes of Lysides otherwise called Melissa the wife of Periander, who at the suggestion of a strumpet caused her to be slaine, which makes Sabellicus amongst others to wonder, why for that deede onely he should be numbered amongst the seuen wise men of Greece. Marcus Cecilius in his seuen and twentieth booke vpon Pliny accuseth Calphurnius Bestia for poysoning his wiues, sleeping. Plinie in his fourteenth booke, nominates one Egnacius Melentinus who slew his wife for no other cause but that shee had drunke wine,Auctoclea. and was acquited of the murder by Romulus. Auctoclea the daughter of Sinon and wife of Laertes king of Ithaca when by a false messenger she heard her sonne Vlysses was slaine at the siege of Troy, suddenly fell downe and died. The mother of Antista seeing her daughter forsaken by Pompey the great,Antista. and Aemilia receiued in her stead,Perimela. ouercome with griefe slew her selfe. Perimele a damosell, was vitiated by Achelous, which her father Hyppodomus tooke in such indignation, that from an high promontorie he cast her headlong downe into the Sea.Lymone. Hyppomanes a prince of Athens, deprehending his daughter Lymone in adulterie, shut her vp in a place with a fierce and cruell horse, but left no kind of food for one or the other, in so much that the horse opprest with hunger deuoured her, hence came that Adage fathered vpon Diogineanus, More cruell than Hyppomanes.Deuteria. Gregorius Turonensis remembers one Deuteria fearing least her yong daughter, now grown ripe and marriageable, who might bee deflowred by the king Theodebertus, cast her headlong into the riuer that runs by the citie Viridunum,Leucothoe. where she was drowned. Orchamus finding his daughter Leucothoe to be vitiated by Appollo caused her to be buryed aliue.Lucilla. Lucilla the daughter of Marcus Antonius and Fausta, as Herodian reports, was slaine by the hand of her brother Commodus,Lychione. against whom she had before made a coniuration. Lychione the daughter of Dedalion, because she durst compare hirself, with Diana was by the goddesse wounded to death with an arrow; at the celebration of whose exequies when her body was to be burnt, her father likewise cast himselfe into

the fire. Hylonome the shee Centaur, seeing her husband Cillarius slaine in the battaile betwixt the Centaurs and the Lapithes, fell vpon his sword and so expired. Anmianus, and Marcellus lib. 16. haue left recorded, that Mithridates king of Pontus being ouercome in battaile by Pompey, committed his daughter Dyraptis,Dyraptis. to the safe custodie of the Eunuch Menophilus to bee kept in a strong Cittadell called Syntiarium, which when Manutius Priscus had straitly besieged, and the Eunuch perceiued the defenders of the Castle dismaide and readie to submit themselues and giue vp the fort; hee drew out his sword and slew her, rather than she should be made a captiue to the Roman Generall. Sextus Aurelius writes of the Empresse of Sabina the wife of Adrian,Sabina. who hauing suffered from him many grosse and seruile iniuries, gaue her selfe vp to a voluntarie death, when shee considered shee had supported so inhumane a tyrant, and such a contagious pest to the common weale. Pontus de Fortuna, speakes of a Virgin amongst the Salattines called Neaera,Neaera. who greeuing that a yong man to whom shee was betrothed, had forsaken her and made choice of another, caused her vaines to be opened, and bled to death.Cleopatra. Cleopatra after the death of Anthony, least shee should bee presented as a captiue, to grace the triumphs of Augustus, gaue her arme to the byting of an Aspe, of which shee died; for in that manner was her picture presented in Rome, of whom Propertius lib. 3. thus speakes,
Brachia spectaui sacris admorsa colubris.
Neaera and CharmioneNeaera and Charmione, were the two handmaides of Cleopatra, These (as Plutarch and others report of them) would by no persuasion suruiue their queen and misteresse, who perceiuing (as they were gasping betwixt life and death) the crowne to be falne from the temples of their dead Ladie, raised themselues from the Earth with the small strength they had left, and placed it right againe on her fore-head, that shee might the better become her death; which they had no sooner done, but they both instantly fell downe and breathed their last; an argument of an vnmatchable zeale to the princesse their Ladie. Monima Miletia and Veronica Chia were the wiues of Mithridates,Monima Milesia Veronica Chya. who vnderstanding of his tragicall fall and miserable end, gaue vp their liues into the hands of the Eunuch Bochides. Monima first hanged her selfe, but the weight of her bodie breaking the cord, she grew somewhat recouered, and fell into this acclamation, O execrable power of a diadem, whose command euen in this small sad seruice I cannot vse: which words were no sooner spoke, but she offered her throate to the sword of the Eunuch, who instantly dispatched her both of life and torment. Veronica dranke off a chalice of wine tempered with poyson, which dispersing into her vaines and keeping her in a languishing torment, her death was likewise hastned by the Eunuch Bochides. A strange madnesse possest the Virgins of Milesia:The Milesian Virgins. these, as Aelianus and others haue writ, gaue themseues vp to voluntarie deaths, many or the most strangling themselues, this grew so common amongst them that scarce one day past in which some one or other of them were not found dead in their chambers. To remedie which mischiefe the Senators of the citie made a decree, That what maide soeuer should after that time lay violent hands vpon her selfe, the body so found dead, should be stript naked, and in publike view dragd through the streetes, freely exposed to the eyes of all men: The impression of which shame more preuailing than the terrour of death, none was euer after knowne to commit the like outrage vpon themselues.Phaedra. Phaedra the steppe-mother to Hyppolitus her son in law, and wife of Theseus, when shee could not corrupt the

yong man her son in law, to make incestuous the bed of his father, despairing, hung her selfe: yet before her death she writ certain letters in which she accused Hippolitus to his father of incest, which after prooued the speedie cause of his death. Amongst many strange deaths,Two mothers. these of two mothers are not the least remarkable: most strange it is that sudden ioy should haue as much power to suffocate the spirits, as the power of lightning. The rumor of the great slaughter at the Lake of Thrasimenes being published, one woman when beyond all hope she met her sonne at the cittie gate safely returned from the generall defeates, cast herselfe into his armes, where in that extasie of ioy shee instantly expired. Another hearing her sonne was slaine in the battaile, after much sorrow for his death, sitting in her owne house and spying him vnexpectedly comming towards her safe and in health, she was so ouercome with sudden ioy, that not able to rise and giue him meeting, she died as she sate in her chaire. Most strange it is that ioy should make speedier way to death than sorrow: these mothers Zoe remembered by Valerius Maximus lib. 9. cap. 12. So much I hope shall suffice for women that haue died strange deaths, for I had rather heare of many to liue well, than that any one should die ill. I onely intreate patience of the curteous Reader, that as I haue begun this booke in sadnesse, so he will giue me leaue to conclude it in jest. Some no doubt (though not iustly) will taxe me for my too much intermixtion of historie, and say there bee many things inserted, not pertinent to my proiect in hand, which might better haue beene left out than put in: They in my conceit doe but dally with me, and put such a tricke vpon me as gentleman did vpon a countrey hosteler. My Tale is but homely,The Hostelers Tale. but it hath a significant Morrall. This traueller often vsing to a thorowfare Inne, was much annoyed by reason that betwixt his chamber and the stable, where he commonly vsed to see his horse drest and meated, there lay great heapes of ^ullen^ dounge in (...) way, which much offended him, and being willing either to be rid of th^^ inconuenience, or punish him that might remedie it, hee tooke occasion to aske the hosteler what dounghill that was which was so offensiue. Hee answered him, his master kept great store of pullen about the house, and that was all Hennes doung. Hennes doung saith the gentleman, I haue a peece of land at home I would it were all there, if thou canst helpe me to any quantitie of it (being sure that it is such) I will giue thee twentie shillings a loade for as much as thou canst prouide, and fetch it away with mine owne carriage. The fellow hearing this, promised within a moneth to furnish him with twentie loade at least at the same price. The match was made, and the gentleman after breakefast tooke horse and departed. The hosteler bespeakes all such soyle as the Towne could affoord, or the next Villages by, and made such a huge heape as annoyed the whole yard (knowing the gentleman to haue beene euer a man of his word) who came according to the time appointed. The hosteler is glad to see him, and tells him he hath prouided him of his commoditie, and withall brings him to the place where it lay like a lays^all. The gentleman seemes wondrous glad of this new merchandise, and drawes out certaine peeces out of his pocket, as if he meant to giue him present payment, but withall asked him, Art thou sure all this is Hens-doung? vpon my life it is saith the hosteler, expecting still to finger the gold. But (replyde the gentleman) art thou sure there is no cockes doung amonst it? o lord yes (saith the hosteler) how can it be else? why then quoth the gentleman I pray thee make thy best of it good friend, for if there be the least cockes doung amongst it, it will doe me no pleasure, I will not giue

thee three farthings for it all. Thus was the hosteler, notwithstanding his former cost, forced to remooue all that muckhill, and make the yard cleane at his owne charge, with much addition of mockerie and laughter. If for a little quantitie of cockes doung you cauell at all the rest here included, the better judgements I hope will impute it, as to my simplicitie, so to your ouer curiositie. Another maine thing is to be feared, wherein I must of force incurre the censure of some or other, namely, Why amongst prophane histories I haue inserted Martyres, and to confirme their truth haue brought Authors that haue beene held superstitious? I answere to all in generall, I haue onely specified such things as I haue read, and for mine owne opinion I keepe it reserued. But because I now come to a conclusion, I will end this booke thus briefly, in regard that women die, and so many die, and that they die at all, I will giue you a womans reason why it is so, Because they can liue no longer.


Explicit lib. quartus. Inscriptus MELPOMENE.







THE FIFTH BOOKE inscribed TERPSICHORE. Intreating of Amazons: and other Women famous either for Valour, or for Beautie.
A Question may be demanded, Why vnder the Muse Terpsichore, I personate the Bold and the Beautifull, the Warrelike and the Faire, she being the Muse to whom measures and daunces are solely peculiar, as being of them the onely and first inuentresse? I answer, (and I hope not impertinently) that considering euery circumstance, I know not how to commend them to a more fit Mecaenas or Patron: for of what doth all your martiall discipline consist; but vpon time, number, measure, distance, and order? and all these in Choreis, Tripudijs (i. daunces) especially are obserued. In daunces we keepe time to the musicke; so in marching or drilling, our eares are attentiue to the voice of the captaine or generall. In the figures of the one, and files of the other, number is necessarily obserued, so is measure, distance, and order, for in these they haue an equall correspondence. Now concerning faire women, whom in all Maskes at the Court, Cittie, or elsewere, doe your gallants picke out, but the virgins or Ladies most beautifull? nay euen at Wakes or weddings in the countrie, the fairest lasse is continually called out to daunce, be it but to the harpe, taber, or bag-pipe. Amongst the souldiers were celebrated the Pirhick daunce in armour, first instituted by king Pyrrhus of Epire; so likewise the Matachine or sword daunce: what measures haue beene deuised for the exercise of faire Ladies, Custome deriued from all Antiquitie still makes frequent amongst vs. It was vsed amongst the Iewes, witnes Herodias, and is still continued in Spaine, Fraunce, and England. A second doubt is, whether the magnanimous, or the exquisitly featured, whether Fortitude, or Pulcritude, ought to haue precedence and first place. It is a maxime amongst the Phisitions, Plus necat gula, quam gladius, i. surfets haue beene the destruction of more men than the sword: so I am of opinion, That beautie hath beene the ruine of more citties, the depopulation of more kingdomes, and destruction of more men than the sword. But in this place, since the courage of the mind, and excellence of forme, contend for the vpper hand, I take it from Feature, to bestow it on Magnanimitie and spirit, since the deeds

of the one liue to all posteritie, but the frailtie of the other is subiect to euery small infirmitie: Therefore Ouid in his booke dearte Amandi thus writes,
Forma bonum fragile est, quantumque accedit ad annosFit minor, and Grada carpitur ipse suo, etc.
Form's fraile good: as time runnes on, it wasts,And the more spends it selfe, the more it hasts.Nor alwayes can the purple violet smell,Or Lillies bloome, in whitenesse that excell.The fragrant rose whose beautie we desire,The leaues once falne, shewes but a naked brire.O thou most faire, white heires come on apace,And wrinckled furrowes which shall plow thy face.
So likewise Petronius Arbiter in one of his Satyres.

Quod solum formae decus est, cecidere Capillae.


The onely beautie of her shape (her haire)
Fell from her head, her beautie to impaire.
Summer succeedes the Spring, her Autumne chaceth,
And them sad Winter with his snow disgraceth.
Deceitfull Nature, all these youthfull ioyes
Thou gau'st vs first, thou art the first destroyes.

Now the fruits and effects of this fraile beautie, especially where a faire face meeteth with a corrupted mind, I will next shew you by historie. Achab by the persuasion of his faire wife IesabellIesabell. was the death of many of the Prophets of the Lord. Dalila was the confusion of Sampson the Strong.Dalila. Strange women brought Salomon the Wise to Idolatrie, and to forget God. Ioram, a king of Israell, at the instigation of Athalia committed many horrible outrages.Athalia. Helena'sHelena. beautie was the occasion of that infinite slaughter betwixt the Greekes and Troians. Pelops succeeding in the kingdome of Phrygia made warre vpon Oenomaus the father of Hyppodamia, because being surprised with her beautie, she was denyde him in marriage. Another Hyppodamia,Hippodam. the wife of Perithous, was the occasion of that great Centauromachia, or battai^e betwixt the Centaures and the Lapithes;Ischomach. for which Propertius calls her Ischomache of the greeke word Isco, which signifieth Habeo, and Mache Pugna: his words are these,
Qualis and Iscomache Lapithae genus Heroinae,Centauris medio grata rapina mero.
Such as Iscomache that was,Of the Lapythaean line,She whom the Centaures would haue raptAmidst their cups of wine.
Aspasia.Pericles for his loue to Aspasia made warre against the Samians. For Chrisaeis the daughter of Chrises (Priest to Apollo,Chrysaeis. vitiated by Agamemnon) a plague was sent amongst the Greekish host, which ceased not till she was returned backe to her father: for so writes Tortellius. Lauiniaes beautie,Lauinia. the daughter of King Latinus and the Queene Amata, was cause of the combustion betwixt Turnus and Aeneas: so saith Pontanus, lib. 4. de Stellis. Lysimachus the sonne of Agathocles poysoned his owne sonne Agathocles, by whose fortunate hand he had receiued

the honour and benefit of many glorious victories, at the instigation of his wife Arsinoe,Arsinoe. the sister of Ptolo^teus. Vollateran. Iphis a youth of exquisite feature, strangled himselfe, because he was despised by the faire, but cruell Anaxarite.Anaxarite. Archil^^us king of Macedon was slaine by a young man called Crateua, because hauing first promised him his faire daughter, he after bestowed her vpon another. The Poet Archilocus called Iambographus, because Lycambes denyde him his daughter in marriage, writes against him such bitter Iambicks, that hee despaired and hanged himselfe, therefore Ouid thus writes:
Post modo si perges, in te mihi liber IambusTincta Licambaeo sangui^e tela dabit.
If thou pursu'st me still, my bookeIust vengeance shall implore,And in Lambickes weapons yeeldDipt in Lycambes gore.
Iustine in his 27 booke relates, That Seleneus Callinicus king of Syria, for exiling Berenice his steppe-mother,Berenice. sister to Ptolomaeus, was by the same Ptolomaeus inuaded and prosecuted by armes. Deiphebus after the death of Paris, hauing marryed Hellen, to which infortunate match her beautie had inuited him, was by her treacherie not onely murdered, but his body hackt and mangled, being almost made one vniuersall wound. Tortellius reports of one Euander the nephew of Pallas king of the Arcadians,Nicostrate. at the persuasion of his mother Nicostrate slew his owne father. Orestes the sonne of Agamemum slew Pyrrhus the sonne of Achilles, being surprised with the beautie of Hermione daughter to Menal^us:Hermione. and Helena Pteleras king of the Thebans was slaine by king Craeon, being betrayde by his owne Polydices.Polidices. Cleopatra was the cause of that bloody warre betwixt Ptolomaeus Philopaser, and her owne father Alexander king of Syria. Idas and Lyncaeus the sons of Aphareus and Arbarne fought a great battaile neere to Sparta about the two faire daughters of Leucippus, Phebe and Ilaira,Plebe. Ilaira. against Castor and Pollux, both which were slaine in that battaile, and perisht not by shipwracke as some write in the pursuite of Paris by sea, for the rape of their sister Hellen, Liuie lib. 36. writes of Antiochus, who warring against Rome, was so taken with the beautie of a Chalcidonian damsell, that neglecting all warlike discipline to spend his time in dalliance with his wanton, hee became a shamefull and dishonourable prey to the enemy.Octauia. Octauia the sister of Augustus being repudiated by Anthony, was the occasion of a ciuill and intestine war. The Poet Lucretius growing mad for the loue of a faire damsell, dranke poyson and so dyed.Tullia. Tullia incited Tarquinius Superbus to kill her owne father Seruius Tullius. MartiaMarcia. the strumpet caused Autonius Commodus the Emperour (whose Concubine she was) to bee slaine by a souldiour with whom shee had many times had lustfull congression. Tytus Corrancanus being sent on embassie to Teuca queene of the Illyrians,Teuca. because hee spake to her freelie and boldlie, she caused him to be put to death, against the lawes of kingdomes and nations: Liuius and Florus. Vollateranus writes of one Rhodoricus king of the Gothes, who because he stuprated the daughter of Iulianus who was Prefect in the Prouince of Tingitana, the father of the rauisht virgin brought in the Moores and raised a warre, which before it was ended, was the death of seauen hundred thousand men, Chilpericus the sonne of Clotharius was slaine by the instigation of his wife Fridegunda in his returne from hunting.Fridegund. Luchinus a Count of Italy warred vpon Vgolinus Gonzaga, because hee had adulterated his faire wife

Isabella. Vollateran. Otratus king of Bohemia accused of sloath and cowardise by his wife Margarita for entering league with Rodulphus Caesar,Margarita. raised warre betwixt them, in which her husband was defeated. Gandulphus the Martyr for but counselling his wife to a more chast and temperate life, was murdered betwixt her and the adulterer. Of warres and many other mischiefes, of which faire women haue beene the originall, Ouid elegantly deliuers in 2 Eleg. thus concluding:
Vidi ego pro ^iuea pugnantes coni^ge taurosSpectatrix animos, ipsa innenca dabat.
For a white heyfer I haue seene bulls sight,Both gathering rage and courage from her sight.
At the building of Rome, Romulus to people the cittie and get wiues for his souldiers, caused them to rauish the Sabine women and damsells: for which warre grew betwixt the two nations. Of which Proper. lib. 2.

Cur exempla petam Gracum? Tu criminis au^h^r
Nutribus duro Romule lacte lupae, etc.


What neede I from the Greekes examples aske?
Thou Romulus by a fell she-wolfe nurst
To rape the Sabines mad'st thy souldiers taske,
Rape, Rome still loues, because thou taughtst it first.

Since then the forme (at best) so soone fades, and that beautie hath beene the cause of so much blood-shed, Why should women be so proud of that which rated at the highest, is no better than an excellent euill, or a wretched wonder; that had beginning, therefore subiect to end; created from earth, and therefore consequently transitorie? but on the contrary, since the vertues of the mind solely acquire after fame and glory, conquer obliuion and suruiue enuie, and Phenix-like recouer fresh youth from forgotten ashes: To such I yeeld the first place, and so begin with the Amazons.

Of the Amazons.
ANd first of their countrey. Cappadocia is a land that breedeth goodly and braue horses, it hath on the East side Armenia, on the West Asia the lesse, on the North Amazonia, on the South Mount Taurus, by which lyeth Sicilia and Isauria, as farre as the Cilicke sea that stretcheth towards the Island of Cyprus. The lesse Asia (cald Asia minor) ioyneth to Cappadocia, and is closed in with the great sea, for it hath on the North the mouth and sea that is cald Euxinus, on the West Propontides, on the South the Aegyptian sea. This lesse Asia conteineth many prouinces and lands, on the North side Bythinia butting vpon the sea against Thracia, and is called Phrygia the greater. The chiefe cittie of Bythinia is Nicomedia. Galathia takes name of the Galls that assisted the king of Bythinia in his warres, and therefore had that Prouince giuen them to inhabit, It was first called Gallograecia, as being a people mixt of the Galls and Graecians, but now they be cald Galathians, and these are they to whom Saint Paul writ his Epistles Ad Galates. The third part of Asia minor is called Phrygia, and tooke name of Phrygia daughter to Europa the daughter of Aegenor: that Phrygia was likewise called Dardania of Dardanus the sonne of Iupiter; It hath on the East side Lydia, and on the West the sea Hellespontus, so called of Helles the sister of Phrixus, who was

there drowned. Lydia is on the East side of East Phrygia, there sometimes raigned the rich king Craesus. There were two brethren kings of that countrey, the one cald Liddus, the other Tyrhenus: but the land being too little for both, they cast lots which should abide there, and which should seeke abroad to plant a Collony else-where; which lot fell to the younger, Tyrhenus: Hee toucht vpon a land then cald Galia, which after he caused to be named Tyrhia, of him also the sea Tyrhenus tooke denomination, as the land of Lydia of his brother Lyddus. Of Lydia, the chiefe cittie is Smyrna, to which cittie S. Iohn the Euangelist writeth in his Apocal. The chiefe riuer of that countrey is Pactolus, which as the Poets fable hath golden sands. The fift part of Asia Minor is called Pamphilia, and Isauria, the chiefe cittie is Seleucia, built by king Seleucus Antiochus; neere to that is Scilicia, and containeth Lycia, which is called likewise Licaonia, in which are the two noble citties Lystris and Derbe, spoken of in Actib. Apostol. By these citties they sayle out of Syria into Italy: but the chiefe of all these citties is Tharsis, downewards towards the Amasonian sea, and that land is part in Asia, and part scituate in Europe. Now touching the Originall of the Amasons, and why they were first so called, diuerse authours haue diuersly writ.Lib. 1. cap. de Amazonib. Palaephatus in his fabulous narrations saith, The Amasons were not women, but certaine barbarous men who vsed to weare long garments and loose, reaching below their ankles after the manner of the Thracian women, who shaued their chinnes, and wore the haires of their head long but couered with miters: These Amasons were a warrelike people, and did many braue and remarkeable deedes of armes. But there is no likelihood (saith hee) that such should bee women, because of that nation there is at this day no memorie: but this was but his opinion. Trogus Pompeius, from whom Iustine extracts his history, thus speaks of their origenall: Scythia towards the East, is of one side imbraced by the sea, on the other part hem'd in by the Ryphaean mountaines, the longitude and latitude thereof lyes open to Asia and the riuer Tanais: These Scythians haue no portions of land amongst them which any man can call his owne,The custome of the Scythians. they manure no fields, they build no houses, ignorant both of Agriculture and Architecture, their riches are their heards and their cattle, they delight in vnfrequented solitudes and inhabitable desarts, when they remooue from one place to another, they carry their wiues along with them in charriots and waggons, these are couered with leather and skinnes of beasts, to shroud them from summers shewers, and defend themselues from winters tempests; they know no houses els, and for no others care. Iustice is maintained by the modestie of their manners, not by the seueritie of their lawes: There is no offence so grieuous to them as theft, because their flockes lie open without folds or sheepe coates; Gold and siluer they despise as much as other nations couet it, esteeming it rather an vnusefull burden than a profitable merchandise: Their food is for the most part milke and hony, the benefite of wooll or cloath is to them altogether vnknowne, though the climate oppresse them with continuall cold, their habit is furres and the skinnes of beasts; their continence teacheth them that iustice, That they couet nothing but what is their owne: for where there is desire of riches, there must necessarily be vsurie and oppression. Were the like moderation and abstinence vsed amongst all nations, warre and surfet would not (as they now doe) destroy more than age or nature. Admirable it is, that custome in them should attaine to as much true morall humanitie as the wise men of Greece haue reached to by the learning of arts, or study of Philosophy; and that vntaught Barbarians should excell

them that professe to tutor others in manners; more eminent farre in their ignorance of Vice,The braue acts of the Scythians. than the others in their knowledge of Vertue. Three times these Scythians attempted the Empire of Asia, in all their expeditions remaining vnfoild, at least vnconquered. Darius king of Persia they put to shamefull flight. Cyrus with a supposed inuincible armie they slew in the field. Zopyrus the great captaine of Alexander, they victoriously defeated. Of the Romans they onely heard their power, but neuer felt their strength. The Parthian and Bactrian Empire they establisht. A nation in labours vnwearied, in dangers vndismaied, not seeking to get what they cared not to loose, in all their victories preferring the glory before the spoile. The first that made warre against this nation was Vexores king of Aegypt, who by his Embassadours sent them word to prepare themselues for defence: by whom they returned to the king this answer, We wonder that the captaine of so rich a people will wage war against vs that are knowne so poore, considering the successe of warre is doubtfull; and howsoeuer the euent prooue, the reward of the victorie is nothing, but the dammage arising from the fight, manifest. Their answer went before, which their resolution as suddenlie and swiftlie pursued after, for their army and their answer almost arriued together, whose celeritie in march,A base flight. and resolution in purpose, when Vexores vnderstood, he forsooke his tents and all prouision for warre, and betooke himselfe to a base and dishonourable flight. They pursued him to the Aegyptian fennes, but by reason of the marishes and vncertaine ground, their further passage was prohibited. Retyring thence they ouerranne Asia, and subdued it vnder their predominance, imposing on the Nations a small tribute, rather in acknowledgement of the title, than to be gainers by the victory, the enemy rather suffering disgrace than oppression: fifteene yeares they continued in Asia, rather to settle the estate than to extort from the inhabitants. From thence they were called by the wickednesse of their wiues, from whom they receiued word, That vnlesse they instantly repayred home, they would seeke issue from the neighbour nations, for they would not suffer the posteritie of the antient Scythians to bee in the women extinct. Asia was for many yeares tributarie to the Scythians; Trogus and Iustine say for a thousand and fiue hundred yeares, which ended in Ninus king of Assyria: In this interim, two princely youthes among the Scythians, Plinos and Scolopitus, being by the optimates and chiefe of the people expulst from their families, drew to their societie a mightie confluence and inuaded Cappadocia, planting themselues neere to the riuer Thermedon: and being by conquest possest of the Prouince of Themisciria, there hauing for many yeares made spoyle of the neighbour nations by the conspiracie of the multitude who were opprest with their insolencies, they were betraide and slaine. Their wiues, by reason of their exile halfe in despaire,The first beginning of the Amasons. boldly tooke armes, and first retyring themselues and making their owne confines defensible, after grew to the resolution to inuade others. Besides they disdained to marry with their neighbours, calling it rather a seruitude than Wedlock. A singular example to all ages. Thus they augmented their seigniories and establisht their common-weale without the counsell or assistance of men, whose fellowship they began now altogether to despise: and to communicate their losse, to make the widdowes of equall fortune with the wiues, they slew all the men that yet remained amongst them, and after reuenged the deaths of their husbands formerlie slaine, vpon the bordering people that conspired against them. At length by warre hauing setled peace, least their posteritie and memory should perish, they had mutuall congression

with their neighbour nations: The men children they slew, the female they nourced and brought vp, not in sowing and spinning, but in hunting and practise off armes and horsemanship; and that they better might vse their launces and with the more ease, at seauen yeares of age they seared or rather burnt of their right breasts,Whence the name of Amasons was deriued. of which they tooke the name of Amasons, as much as to say Vnimammae, or Vrimammae, i. those with one breast, or with a burnt breast. There were of them two queenes that ioyntly held the soueraigntie, Marthesia and Lampedo;Marthesia. Lampedo. these diuided their people into two armies, and being growne potent both in power and riches they went to warre by turnes, the one gouerning at home whilest the other forraged abroad; and least there should want honour and authoritie to their successes, they proclaimed themselues to be deriued from Mars: in so much that hauing subdued the greater part of Aeurope, they made incursions into Asia, and there subdued many fortresses and castles, where hauing built Ephesus with many other citties, part of their army they sent home with rich and golden spoyles, the rest that remained to maintaine the Empire of Asia, were all with the queene Marthesia (or as some write, Marpesia) defeated and slaine. In whose place of soueraigntie her daughter Orythia succeeded,Orythia. who besides her singular valour and fortunate successe in warre, was no lesse admired for her constant vowe of virginitie, which to her death she kept inuiolate. The bruite of their glorious and inuincible acts reaching as farre as Greece, Hercules with a noble assembly of the most Heroicke youthes furnisht nine ships, with purpose to make proofe of their valor: two of foure sisters at that time had the principalitie, Antiope and Orythia: Orythia was then imployde in forreine expeditions. Now when Hercules with the young Heroes landed vpon the Amasonian continent, the queene Antiope, not iealous of the least hostility, stood then with many of her ladies vnarmed on the shore, who being suddainly assaulted by the Graecians were easily put to rout, and they obtained an easie victorie; in this conflict many were slaine, and diuers taken, amongst whom were the two sisters of Antiope,Menalippe. Menalippe surprised by Hercules, and Hyppolite by Theseus,Hyppolite. hee subdude her by armes, but was captiuated by her beautie, who after tooke her to his wife, and of her begot Hyppolitus. Of her Seneca in Agamemnon thus speakes:
Vidit Hyppolite ferox pectore emedio rapiSpolium and sagittas.
The bold Hyppolite did see that dayHer breast despoyld and her shafts tane away.
Of Menalippe, Virgill thus:
Threicean sexto spolianit Amazona Baltheo.
Hauing relation to the golden belt of Thermedon, which was numbered the sixt of Hercules his twelue labours, He receiued that honour, and she her libertie. Orythia being then abroad and hearing of these outrages and dishonours done at home, that warre had beene commenced against her sister, and Theseus prince of Athens borne thence Hyppolite, whom she held to be no better than a rauishor; impatient of these iniuries, shee conuented all her forces and incited them to reuenge, inferring, that in vaine they bore Empire in Europe and Asia if their dominions lay open to the spoyles and rapines of the Grecians. Hauing incouraged and persuaded her owne people to this expedition, she next demanded ayd of Sagillus king of the Scythians, to him acknowledging herselfe

to be descended from that nation, showes the necessitie of that warre, and the honour of so braue a victorie: hoping that for the glorie of the Scythian nation his men would not come behind her women in so iust an enterprise, the successe of which was vndoubtedly spoyle for the present, and fame for euer. Sagillus with these motiues incouraged, sent his sonne Penaxagoras with a great armie of horsemen to ayd Orithea in this warre: but by reason of a discention that fell in the campe, the prince of Scythia withdrew all his auxiliarie forces and with them retired into his countrey, by reason of which defect the Amazons were defeated by the Grecians, yet many of them after this battaile recouered their countries. After this Orythea succeeded Penthisilaea,Penthisilaea shee that in the ayd of Priam (or as some say, for the loue of Hector) came to the siege of Troy with a thousand Ladies, where after many deeds of chiualrie by her performed she was slaine by the hands of Achilles, or as the most will haue it, by Neoptolimus: shee was the first that euer fought with Pollaxe, or wore a Target made like an halfe Moone, therefore she is by the Poets called Peltigera and Securigera, as bearing a Target, or bearing a Poleaxe: Therefore Ouid in his Epistle of Phaedra,
Prima securigeras inter virtute puellas.
And Virgill in his first booke of Aeneid.

Ducit Amazonidum lunatis Agmina peltis
Penthisilaea fureus medijsque in millibus ardet.
Penthisilaea mad, leades foorth
Her Amazonian traine,
Arm'd with their Mooned shieldes, and fights
Mid'st thousands on the plaine.

These Amazons indured till the time of Alexander; and though Isiodorus Eth. 14. saith that Alexander the Great quite subuerted their nation, yet Trogus, Iustine, Q. Curtius and others, are of a contrarie opinion, and affirme that when Alexander sent his Embassadors to demand of them tribute, otherwise his purpose was to inuade their territories:Minithra or Thalestris. their queene Minithra (or as some writers terme her, Thalestris) returned him answer after this manner: It is great wonder of thy small iudgement, o king, that thou hast a desire to wage warre against women; if thou being so great a conqueror shouldest be vanquished by vs, all thy former honours were blemished, and thou perpetually branded with shame and infamie; but if our gods being angerie with vs, should deliuer vs vp into thy mercie, what addition is it to thine honor, to haue had the masterie ouer weake women? King Alexander (it is sayd) was pleased with this answere, granting them freedome, and sayd, Women ought to be courted with faire words and flatterie, and not with rough steele and hostil^tie. After this she sent to the king desiring to haue his companie, as longing to haue issue by him to succeed the father in magnanimitie and vertue, to which hee assented. Some write, she stayd with him in wonderous familiaritie fourteene dayes: but Trogus in his second booke sayth fortie dayes, and when she found her selfe with child by him, tooke her leaue and departed into her owne countrey. Virgill amongst these Amazonians numbers Harpalice,Harpalice. Aenid. lib. 1.

--Vel qualis equos Therissa fatigat
Harpalice--
Such as the Thracian Harpalice was
That horses tired--

Valerius Flaccus lib. 6. speakes of one Harpe.Harpe.

--Qua pelta vacat iamque ibat in Harpea
Hee aym'd at Harpe where her shield lay void.

These Amazons were by the Scythians called Aeorpata, which is as much as Viricidae, or man-killers. For Aeor signifies Vir, a man, and Pata, Occidere, to kill. Their habits and manners Curtius thus describes lib. 5. de gestis Alexandri. Their garments couer not their bodies round; their right side is still bare towards their brest; their vpper roabe which is buckled or buttoned aboue, descends no lower than the knee; one of their brests they reserue safe and vntouched, with which they giue sucke to their infants; the right brest they burne off, that with the more facilitie they may draw a Bowe, thrill a Dart, or charge a Launce. Stephanus Byzantius writes, that they are called by the Greekes Sauropatidae, because they are said to feede vpon Lysards, which in their language they call Saurae. Herodotus writes of them many things needlesse here to insert, onely one is worth the obseruation: To incourage their valour, and that there should be no coward amongst them,A law among the Amazons they haue a law, That no Virgin shall be capable of a husband, or enter into familiar congresse with man, before she hath brought from the field, the head of an enemie slaine with her owne hand; which hath beene the cause that so many of them haue died old wrinkled beldames, that neuer knew what belonged to the interchange of carnall societie. Of other Scythian women that had a purpose, it seemes, in some kind to immitate these Amazons, it is thus remembred by Strabo and others: The warlike Scythians in their third Asian expedition, being absent from their wiues the space of seuen yeares, they supposing their husbands rather to haue beene defeated and lost, than deteined with the tedioufnesse of so long and lingring a warre, married themselues to their slaues and seruants, such as were onely left at home to keepe their heards, flockes, and other cattell. The Scythians after the expiration of their warre, returning into their countrie were opposed by their owne vassalls, and repelled from their territories as strangers and inuaders, and not such as came to repossesse their owne wiues and fields: after many skermishes and conflicts, the victorie still remaining doubtfull and incertaine, the Scythians were aduised to change their manner of fight, and because their opposition was against the basest of slaues, not the noblest of enemies, therefore to suit their weapons according to the persons, and laying by the noble armes of a souldier, to encounter them not with weapons but with whips, not with steele but with scourges and other like instruments of the terrors of base and seruile feare. This counsell was generally approoued and followed, so that the next time their slaues affronted them in battaile, they met them with the commanding lookes of maisters, not of equall enemies, and shaking these whips and scourges, with the sight therof their seruants were so terrified that instantly they betooke themselues to seruile and ignoble flight, conquering them as slaues whom they could scarce oppose as enemies, all such of them as they tooke they put to tortures and death. Their wiues knowing themselues guiltie both of adulterie to their beds, and treason to their liues, some slew themselues with the sword, others strangled themselues with the halter, all in conclusion brauely and resolutely with selfe hands finished their owne liues, leauing their husbands lustie widdowers, with free libertie to make choice of honester wiues. After this accident the Scythians had peace euen to the time of king Lanthinus. Higinus addes

vnto the number of those Amazons these following, Ociale, Dioxippe, Iphinome, Xanthe, Hypothoe, Orthrepte or Otrere, Antioche, Laomache, Glauce, Agaue, Theseis, Climene, and Polidora. Calaber besides these reckons vp twelue, but by diuerse and doubtfull names. Of the name of these Amazons, Ouid writes in the latter end of his second booke de Arte amandi, hauing writ his two first bookes wherein he hath ingeniously proposed all the wayes, plots, and stratagems by which men may captiuate women to their wishes and attract them to their desires, as if he had done his worke as worthily as wittingly (which indeede he hath) he thus insultingly concludes.

Me vatem celebrate viri, mihi dicite laudes,
Cantetur toto nomen in orbe meum, etc.


Call me your Poet, crowne my head with Bayes,
And let the whole world descant on my praise.
I gaue you armes, god Vulcan gaue no more
To Thetis sonne: conquer as he (before)
And he that shall his Amazon subdue,
Strooke with the darts he from my quiuer drew,
Vpon his warlike spoyles thus let him write,
,,Naso my master taught me first to fight.
Behold yong Wenches likewise trace my skill,
They are the next charge of my labouring quill.

In his third booke as hauing prepared and armed men against vnarmed women, he proposeth to them the like precepts and instruction, with all the defensible weapons needfull against the ambushes and inticements of men, and thus begins:
Arma dedi Danais, in Amazonas arma sup^rsunt,Quae tibi dem and turbae Penthisilaea tuae,
The Greekes I haue giuen armes to, who now standReady to incounter the Amasonian band.Others within mine armorie remaineFor thee Penthisilaea and thy traine:Goe equally acco^tred to the warre,And let such conquour as most fauoured areOf Carine, Venus. Dione, and the Cupid. Boy that flyesRound'bout the world still hood-winckt of his eyes.It were no iustice to arme men in steele'Gainst naked women, bare from head to heele,Oh too much oddes there were in combat then,And so to conquour a great shame for men.
And so much of the Amasons, I now proceede to other Magnanimous and braue spirited virgins.


Of warlike Women, and those of Masculine vertue.
I Know not better how to expresse the boldnes of women, than by shewing you the feare of men, nor can I more plainly illustrat the valor of one sex than by putting you in mind of the cowardise of the other. It is well obserued of an Italian (who writes himselfe of Lucca) concerning the passion of Feare,Of Feares. of which there are three sorts commendable; the first is naturall feare, by which

we auoid the iniuries of men, preuent the inconuenience of postelent sickenes, with such like casualties, and arme our selues against want, dearth, and necessitie. The second is ciuile Feare, wherein we feare to transgresse the law or incurre penaltie, are timorous to doe ill because it is ill, when we dare not depraue whats good or derrogate from our own reputation. The third is a more supernatural Feare, in which by our loue towards God and our neighbour, we feare to offend the higher Maiestie, and next that, feare the terror of eternall death and damnation; by the first we preserue our bodies, by the second our honours, by the last our soules. But those other abiects the feares I purpose heare to exemplifie,Examples of Feare. onely such as proceed from Effeminacie and Cowardise. It is read of Pysander of Greece, that being aliue, he feared least his soule had alreadie forsaken his bodie. Likewise, of one Artemon who was of that hare-hearted disposition, that he mooued not abroad without Targets of brasse borne ouer him like cannopies, least any thing should fall from aloft and beate out his braines; or if he rid, it was in a horse-litter seeled and crosse-bard with gads of steele and plates of yron, for which hee was called Peripharetes. Sabellicus writes that Cassander so feared Alexander, that long time after his death comming to Delphos to behold the goodly statues there errected, at the verie sight of his old maisters effigies, hee fell into such a timerous feauer, that his verie bones daunced in his skinne, and longtime it was ere they could constantly settle themselues in their owne places. This was that Cassander who had caused Olimpias the mother of Alexander to be so cruelly butchered. It is related of St. Valleir duke of Valentinois in Fraunce, that being condemned ^o death for not disclosing the treasons of the duke of Burbon, iust at the instant when the executioner should haue strooke off his head, the king sent him his gratious pardon, but all in vaine, the feare of the blow before it came, had dispatched him of life. Hereof hath growne a prouerbe, to any man that hath a strong apprehension of feare, they will say hee hath La fieure de saint Vallier, i. the feauer of Saint Vallier. Another thing is recorded, of a fellow that was so affraid of the name of Hercules, that he hid himselfe in caues and rockes, though he knew not of any quarrell betwixt them, at length, stealing from the obscure cauerne where he had denned himselfe, to see if the coast were cleere, casting his eye by chance on the one side and espying Hercules who came that way by chance, his life blood sinking into his heeles, he shooke them a little and died in that feauer. I could recite terrors and vaine feares which haue arise from nothing, that haue terrified whole citties of Grecians, armies of Romans, and multitudes of other nations, but these particulars shall suffice, for my purpose is not too farre to effeminate men, nor too much to embolden women: since the most valiant man that is, is timerous ynough, and the modestest woman that is may bee made sufficiently bold.Debora. But to the purpose in hand: Debora a warlike woman was a Prophetesse and iudged Israell; by whose counsell and courage, they were not onely freed from the inroads and incursions of the neighbour nations, but many times returned from the field with rich spoyles and glorious conquests: of her you may reade more at large in the Iudges. Ianus was an antient king of Italy, hee entertained king Saturne when by his sonne Iupiter he was chased out of Creet: Because he was a prouident and wise prince, the Romans pictured him with two faces, and receiued him into the number of their gods, they attributed to him the beginning and end of things, celberating to his honour the first moneth Ianuarie, which tooke the denomination of Ianus from his name, one face looked vpon the yeare to come, the

other looked backe on the yeare past; in his right hand hee had a golden key which opened the Temple of Peace, in his left, a staffe which hee strooke vpon a stone, from whence a spring of water seemed to issue out; he is thus described by Albricus the Philosopher in his booke de Deorum Imaginibus. This Ianus left behind him a beautifull faire daughter, whose name was Helerna,Helerna. shee sucded her father in his kingdome, which was scituate by the riuer Tiber, and was a woman of Masculine spirit and vertue: shee raigned ouer men without the counsell or assistance of men, she subdued nations by her valour, and conquered Princes by her beautie, of whom may bee truely spoken as Propertius lib. 2. writes of the queene Penthisilaea:
Ausaferox ab equo quondam oppugnare sagittis, etc.
Penthisilea from her steede,When her high courage rose,Durst with her shafts and warlike darts,The Darnish fleete oppose:No sooner was her beauer vp,And golden caske laid by:But whom by force she could not take,She captiu'd with her eye.

Camilla and others.
THis Camilla was queene of the Volscians, who euen in her cradle gaue manifest tokens of her future vertue and valour, for in her infancie shee was neither swathed in soft cloathing, nor wrapt in silken mantle, not attended by a tender nurse, nor fed with curious dainties or farre fetcht delicats, but fostered by her father Metabus with the milke of hinds and wild goates,Metabus. her court was a forrest, and her pallace a darke and obscure caue. Hauing somewhat outgrowne her infancy, she tooke no pleasure in rattles, puppets, or timbrells, in which children for the most part delight, neither did she inure her hands to sowing, spinning, or any such like womanish chares: her cloathing was the skinnes of wild beasts, her exercise hunting, her practise shooting, her armes the bow and quiuer, her drinke the fountaine water, and her foode venison. To this absteinous life shee added the strict vow of chastitie. At length warre being commenst betwixt Turnus and Aeneas, she adhered to the Rutilian faxion, and to those warres brought a regiment of braue and gallant horse, which she in person commanded. Her magnanimitie Virgill in the latter end of his seauenth booke thus sets downe,
Hos superaduenit, volsca de gente Camilla,Agmea agens equitum and florentes are cateruas.
To their supply Camilla came,The gallant Volscian Lasse,Who brauely did command the horseWith troupes that shin'd in brasse.
Of the like condition was Maria Puteolana,Maria Puteolana. so called of Puteolum a cittie of Campania, she was of a warlike condition and an inuincible courage, and flourisht in the age of Francis Petrarch: she is described to bee most patient of labour, and vntyred with trauell, moderate in diet, but altogether abstinent from wine, sparing of words, neuer boasting, but alwayes daring: The needle,

the wheele, and the distaffe shee vtterly abiured; horse, armour, the bow, the speare, and the target, aboue all other delights shee embraced; shee vsed to walke whole nights without the least sleepe, and trauell whole dayes together without rest; if necessitie at any time compelled her eyes to winke, or her bodie to lie downe, the earth was her bed, and her shield her pillow; she abandoned the societie of women, her continuall conuersation was with captaines and commanders, which though it carried a face of boldnesse and (as some tearme it) impudencie, yet it is apparant to all men in what a soueraigne respect she held her chastitie and honour, which shee maintained without the least blemish vnspotted vnto the end; from ribauld talke or discourse that tended to immodestie she refrained, all affected habit that sauoured of pride, or might be imputed to lightnesse she detested; she was onely adicted to chiualrie, to be accounted valiant and vertuous that was her honourable ayme, and such her memorable end. Bona was a ladie of Lombardie,Bona Longabarba. and was sirnamed Longabarba, and not impertinently ranked with these, shee was a woman warrior, and liued in the yeare of grace 1568, shee was the wife of Brunorius Parmensis a worthie and renowned souldier, her virgin youth was continually exercised in hunting and the chase, she attended her husband in all his hostile expeditions, not as a partner of his pleasures but a companion in his dangers, she kept not the cittie when he was in the campe, nor lodged in tent when he lay in the field, nor crept she more close to him in bed than shee stood fast by him in battaile; after many great seruices performed, and glorious victories atchiued, he fell into the displeasure of Alexander king of Sicilie, who cast him into prison; but this noble Ladie Bona, good both in name and conditions, neuer left solliciting the Emperour and other Christian princes both by petitions and friends, till she had purchased him a safe and honourable release. The next Virago that comes in place is Atalanta,Atalanta. Apollodorus Atheniensis lib. 3. de deorum origine, thus compiles her historie: Of Lycurgus and Cleophile (or as some will haue it, Eurinome) were borne Ancaeus, Epochus, Amphidamus, and Idaeus; of Amphidamus, Melamian a sonne and Antimalie a daughter, whom Euristhaeus married: of Iasus and Clymene the daughter of Mimia, was Atalanta borne, whose father desirous of masculine issue, cast her out to a desperate fortune, whom a she beare finding, fed her with her milke, till certaine huntsmen coursing that way, and chancing vpon so sweete and beautifull an infant, tooke her home, and sawe her fairely and liberally educated. She being growne to mature age, notwithstanding she was solicited by many suitors, tooke vpon her the strict vowe of Virginitie, and arming her selfe after the manner of Diana, solely deuoted her selfe to hunting and the chace; and increasing in beautie as she did in yeares, she was ambushed by two Centaures Rhaecus and Hyllaeus, who insidiating her virgin chastitie, shee with two shafts transpierst them and left them dead in the place. The next heroick action which made her famous, she came with all the noble youthes of Greece to the hunting of the Calidonian boare, and was the first that drew blood of the beast in the presence of Mele^ger prince of Aetolia, and all the other braue Heroes, of whom Putanus lib. 3. de Stellis thus speakes:
Qualis in Aetolum campis Meleagria virgo,Strauit aprum, etc,
As did the Meleagrian guirle,Who in the Aetolian plaine,Layd flat the foaming boare, and wasThe formost of the traineThat gaue him bold incounter, andAs ignorant of feare,Noct her sharpe arrow, and the stringPluct close vp to her eare:The first that day in field that bloodFrom the sterne monster drew:Bearing the honour, spoyle, and palme,From all that princely crew.
Of the loue of Meleager to her, and of his death, I either haue or shall find occasion to speake elsewhere. Her next achiuement by which she purchased her selfe honour, was her contention in the sports of Peleus. It shall not bee amisse to tell you what these sports or pastimes were, They were the twelue in number that were celebrated amongst the Greekes, Acastus the sonne of Peleus instituted them in honour of his father. Zethaes the sonne of Aquilo ouercame in that which was called Dolichodromus, which signifies a race of twelue furlongs. Calais his brother had the best in the Diantus, which was a race of two furlongs. Castor the sonne of Iupiter was victor in the Stadium, which was a place of running or exercise as wel for men as horse; the word signifies a furlong or a measure of ground;Three sorts of Furlongs. there be of them three sorts, one of Italie containing 615 feete, which amounteth to 125 paces; the second is called Olimpicum, which exsists of 600 feete, which is an hundred and twentie paces; the third Pythicum, conteining 1000 feete, which comes to 200 paces. About these Stadia, Plinie and Diodorus differ: in the discription of Sicily, eight of these furlongs make an Italian mile, conteining 1000 paces, and euerie pace fiue feete. Pollux carried away the prise called Cestus, which signifies a marriage belt or gyrdle which the husband vsed to tye about the wast of his bride, and vnloose the first night of their wedding. Telamon the sonne of Aiax had the praise in Disco, or casting the bullet or the stone. Peleus in wrestling. Meleager the sonne of Oereus in casting of the dart. Cignus the sonne of Mars, slew Pilus the sonne of Diodatus. Bellerophon was the most eminent for riding the horse. And Iolaus the sonne of Iphicles, for mannaging the chariot. Hercules ouercame in many things, but Atalanta in al. Not long after this comming, to the knowledge of her parents, and being by them persuaded to marrie; to preuent the loathed embraces of a husband, trusting to her owne incomparable swiftnesse, she deuised a race, in which she proposed her selfe the prise of the victor, but the vanquished were mulcted with the losse of their heads: after the slaughter of many princes, Melanion (before spoken of) inflamed with her loue, receiued of Venus three golden apples, which he let fall one after another in the swiftnesse of their course, she by stooping to take them vp slackened her speed, and by loosing the race became his prise and bride. Some write that they ran in chariots and armed, trusting to the swiftnesse of their steeds, not the verocitie of their owne feet. The manner of their running is elegantly described in Ouid, of which I will guie you present expression. Hesiod, Naso, and others will not allow Atalanta to be the daughter of Iasus, but Schoeneus; Euripides deriues her from Menalus, making her the bride of Hyppomanes the sonne of Megaraeus, grand-child of Neptune, not of Melamion. The manner of their course is thus set downe, Metamorph. lib. 10.


Signa tubae dederuns, etc.


The signalls giuen, whilest both prepared standThe race of Hippomenes and Atlanta.
Now, on they goe: their heeles but kisse the sand
And leaue no print behind, you would suppose
They might passe seas, and yet their nimble toes
Not mingle with the billowes: or extend
Their course ore ripe eares, yet the stalks not bend.
On all sides the young men (spectators) cry,
Well runne Hippomenes (who seemes to flye
More swiftly than their voyces) if thy meed
Be worth thy toyle, now, now, tis time to speede.
Clamour and shoutes incourage both: her pace
She sometimes slackes to looke backe on his face,
His labour made it liuely on the way,
Which forc't her oft when she might passe him, stay;
She outstrippes him tho, but halfe against her will,
And feeles his dry breath on her lockes play still,
Which her speede cast behind. The course is long,
He seemes to faint, and she appeares more strong.
The bold Neptunian Heroe from his hand
One of those golden apples on the strand
Before her bowles; she stoopes amaz'd, and wonne
With th'riches of the iewell, is out-runne,
Stooping to take it vp: he now gets ground,
Whilst lowd appla^siue shoutes the people sound:
At which, her slacknesse she redeemes, and time
Lost in that small delay, she as a crime
Now in her speed corrects, and like the wind
Flyes towards the goale, and leaues the youth behind.
Againe he drops another, and againe
She for the second stoopes, whilst hee amaine
Striues for the start, and gets it; but her pace
She still maintaines, being formost in the race.
The last part of the course lyes plaine before.
He now begins faire Venus to implore,
And the third fruit pluckt from the golden tree,
He further casts, yet where she needes must see
The apple shine, 'twas throwne out of the way,
The ground vneuen, to mooue the more delay:
The warlike lasse though tempted with the show,
Doubts in her selfe to take it vp or no.
Venus persuades in fauour of her knight,
And made it weightie, which before seemd light:
Which as from th'earth she labours to diuide,
He gaines the goale and her for his faire bride.

It is said by Palephatus, Appollodorus, Ouid, and others, That for their ingratitude to Venus, he was turned into a Lion, and she into a Lionesse. The probabilitie is, that being in the chace they retyred themselues into a caue which proued

to be a denne of Lions, where they were torne to pieces and deuoured. They being mist by the people, who after saw two Lions issue from that place, the rumour grew that they were transform'd into beasts of that shape. This Atlanta had by Me^amion or Hyppomanes, or as some write by Mars, Parthenopaeus, who after made warre vpon the Thebans.



Of other warlike Ladies.
Candaces.ABout Meroe raigned the queene Candaces, and had principalitie ouer the Aethiopians, a woman of a mightie spirit, who in all her conquests in person led her people to the field, amongst whom she obtained that dignitie and honour, that as amongst the kings of Aegypt from the first of that name that was renowned and beloued, they were for many successions cald Pharaoes, and after Ptolomyes, and since the time of Iulius all the Roman Emperours haue in memory of him taken vpon them the sirname of Caesar; so for many yeares after her decease, the queenes of Aethiopia were cald Candaces. The women of Lacena imitated the men in all things,Lacena. in schooles, in hunting, and in armes. These in the warre commenst against the Messenians, aduentured equally in the battaile with their husbands: by whose assistance they purchased a noble victorie. It is reported of Valasca,Valasca. a queene of the Bohemians, that hauing made a coniuration with the women of her countrey to take away all the prerogatiue and iurisdiction from the men, she instructing them in Militarie exercises, leuied an armie of her owne sex, with which they met their husbands and ouerthrew them, by which meanes they attained the soueraigne principalitie, and (as the Amasons had before times done) for many yeares space mannaged all affaires as well for offence as defence, without the helpe or counsel of men.Bellouacae. The women of Bellouaca being long and fearfully besieged by Charles the great, duke of Burgundie, most resolutely defended the walls, tumbling the assailants from their scaling ladders into the ditches, to the euerlasting honour of their Sex,Lesbia. and the reproach of the enemy. Lesbia a virgin beeing besieged by the Turkes, hazarded her selfe to discouer their workes and mines, and when the cittisens were deliberating to surrender vp the towne to the mercilesse enemy, shee opposed their purpose, and presented her selfe vpon the walls to the violence of their arrowes and engines, by whose onely valour and encouragement the citie was preserued, and the assailants repulst with dishonor. Amalasuntha queeene of the Gothes,Amalasuntha. kept her principalitie neere to Rauenna, and as Volaterran hath left recorded, by the helpe of Theodotus (whom she made competitor in the Empire) shee expeld from Italy the Burgonians, Almaines and Ligurians. Teuca the wife of Argon tooke vpon her the soueraigntie,Teuca. shee was queene of the Illyrians, a warlikenation, whom she wisely gouerned, by whose valour and fortitude she not only opposed the violence of the Romans, but obtained from them many noble victories. Hasbites was a warlike Virago,Hasbites. and lead armies into the field, of her Siluius lib. 1. thus speakes:
Haec ignara viri, vacuoque assu^ta cubiliVenatu, and siluis, primos defenderat as ^nnos, etc.
She knew not man, but in a single bedVpon an emptie pillow cast her head,Her youth she spent in hunting, to th'alar^eOf the shrill bugle: on her sin^wy armeShe wore no Osier basket, would not knowOr teach the fingers how to spinne or sow:To trace Dictinna she did most desire,And in swift course the long breath'd stagge to tyre, etc.
The same author, lib. 2. speakes of one Tiburna Saguntina,Tiburna Saguntina. the wife of one Marhus, a braue and bold female warrior. Zenobia queene of the Palmyrians,Zenobia. after the death of her husband Odenatus tooke vpon her the imperiall regencie, and made tributarie the kingdome of Syria; neither feared shee to take armes against the Emperour Aurelianus, by whom she was ouercome and led in triumph: but when it was obiected to Caesar as a dishonour and reproach, that he had triumpht ouer a woman; he answered, It was no disgrace at all, being ouer such a woman as excelled most men in Masculine vertue. Of whom Pontanus thus speakes:
Qualis and Aethiopum quondam sitientibus aruisIn fuluum regina gregem, etc.--
As did the Aethiopian queeneIn the dry fields of old,Incounter with the yellow heardswhose rough haires shin'd like gold,Opposing the sterne Lions pawAlone and without ayde:To see whom wrestle, men aloofestood quaking and afraid,Such 'tweene two warlike hosts appearesThis Amasonian Queene,Zenobia, with her strong bow arm'dAnd furnisht with shafts keene.
Hypsicrataea the wife of Mithridates was still present with him in battaile,Hipsicrataea. and left him in no danger, cutting her haire short least it should offend her when she put on her beauer.Artimesia. Artimesia queene of Caria after the death of her husband was admired through Greece, who not onely in a nauall expedition ouercame the inuading Rhodians, but pursued them euen vnto their owne coasts, and tooke possession of the Island, amidst whose ruines she caused her owne glorious statue to be erected; of whom Herodotus thus writes: I cannot wonder sufficiently at this warlike queene Artimesia, who vnforced and vncompeld followed the expedition of Xerxes against Greece, out of her owne manly courage and excellencie of spirit. She was the daughter of Lydamus, her father was of Halicarnassus, her mother of Creete: shee furnished fiue shippes of her owne charge with Halicarnassaeans, Coeans, Nisirians, and Calidnians, in the great sea fight neere Salamine, to behold which battaile Xerxes had retired himselfe and stood but as a spectator. Iustine, lib. 2. saith, There was to bee seene in Xerxes womanish feare; in Artimesia, manly audacitie: for shee demeaned herselfe in that battaile to the admiration of all men; of whose ships the king taking especiall notice, but not knowing to whom they belonged, nor in whose management they then were; one spake to the king and said, Great Lord behold you not how brauely the queene Artimesia beares her selfe this day^ the king would not at first beleeue that such resolution could bee in that Sex: at

length when (notwithstanding her braue seruice) hee perceiued his nauie beaten and put to flight, he sighing thus said, All my men this day haue shewed themselues women, and there is but one woman amongst them and she onely hath shewed herselfe a man. Many of the most illustrious persons dyed that day, as also of the Meades, amongst whom was the great captaine Aria Begnes the sonne of Darius and brother of Xerxes. Cleopatra queene of Aegypt,Cleopatra. the daughter of Dionisius Auletes, after the death of Iulius Caesar hauing taken Antonius in the bewitching snares of her beautie, shee was not contented with the kingdomes of Aegypt, Syria, and Arabia, but she was ambitious to soueraignise ouer the Roman Empire; in which though she fayled, it shewed as inuincible a spirit in the attempt, as shee exprest an vnmatched courage in the manner of her voluntary death. Cyrus the Persian inuading the Messagets and Scythians, of which Tomyris then raigned queene;Tomyris. she sent against him her onely sonne Spargapises with a puissant army to beat him back againe beyond the riuer Araxes, which he had late with a mightie host traiected. But the young man not inured to the stratagems and policies of warre, suffered his souldiours in the height of wine and surfets to be inuaded, his tents rifled, his army defeated, and himselfe taken prisoner by Cyrus. To whom the queene sent to this purpose, Thou hast surprised my sonne by fraud not strength, by deceit, not warre, be now counselled by me, Returne me the Prince, and with the honour to haue vanguisht the third part of my people (vnpunished) depart out of my countrey: which if thou dost not, I vow by the Sunne (the Lord and God to which the Messagets giue due adoration) that I will quench thy thirst, beest thou neuer so much insatiate of blood. This message being deliuered to Cyrus, he regarded it not,Resolution in a Prince. but held it as the vaine boast of a franticke woman. But Spargapises the sonne of Tomyris being awaked from the drowsinesse of wine, and perceiuing into what mischiefe he was falne, intreated Cyrus he might be released from his bonds, to which the Persian granted; who no sooner found his legges vnbound, and his hands at libertie, but he instantly catcht hold of a weapon, with which he slew himselfe. The queene hauing intelligence of the death of her sonne, and withall that Cyrus gaue no heed to her admonition, collected a puissant armie of purpose to giue him battaile, who inticed him by a counterfeit flight into certaine straits of her countrey, where hauing ambusht her men, she fell vpon the Persians and made of them an infinite slaughter, to the defeating of their whole host. In this strange and bloody execution, Cyrus himselfe fell, whose body Tomyris caused to be searcht for, and being found, filled a vessell with blood, into which commanding his head to be throwne, shee thus insultingly spake,Satiate sanguine quem ^^ti^^ie. Of human blood in thy life thou weart insatiate, and now in thy death thou mayst drinke thy fill. The fashions of the Messagets are after this manner described by Herodotus:A description of the Messagets. Their habit and their food is according to the Scythians, they fight as well on horsebacke as on foot, being expert in both; they are both archers and lanciers, in all their weapons armour or caparisons, vsing gold and brasse, in the heads of their speares, their quiuers, their daggers, and other armour, they were brasse; but whatsoeuer belongs to the head, or to the belt, is of the purest gold; the breast-plates of their horses and what belongs to their trappings and caparisons are buckled and studded with brasse, but that which appertaines to the headstall or raines is of gold: of yron and siluer they haue small vse or none (as being rare in their countrey) but gold and brasse they haue in aboundance. Euery man marrieth a wife, but not to his owne peculiar vse, for they keepe them in common, for what the Greeks in this kind remember of the Scythians they do not; it is customable onely amongst the Messagets,

if any man haue an appetite to a woman, he onely hangs his quiuer vpon the next bough, and prostitutes her in publike without taxation or shame. There is no limit proposed to terminate their liues; when any growes old, his neighbours about him make a generall meeting, and with great ceremony (after the manner of a sacrifice) cause him to be slain, with other cattell in number according to his degree, with whose flesh boyld together they make a banquet, counting him to dye in the most blessed estate that is so slaine and eaten: such as dye o^ consumption or disease they eate not, but bury in the earth, accounting all such infortunate that suffered not immolation, and whose flesh was not feasted with. They neither sow nor reape, but liue vpon their cattaile and fish, of which the riuer Araxes yeelds them plenty, they drinke milke and honor the Sun: and to the gods whom they most feare, they sacrifice such foure^footed beasts as they hold most fearful: and so much for the customs of the Message^s. Now least it might appeare almost against nature that amongst so many fighting women there should be no scolding at all, let it not be taken amisse if I put you in mind of two or three shrowes by the way, and so returne againe to my former argument.

Zantippe and Mirho.
HEieronimo writ a booke against Iouinian, in which hee copiously discourses of the praise of Virginitie, reckoning a cattalogue of diuerse famous and renowned in that kind amongst sunderie nations,Petr. Crinit. lib. 1. cap. 11. besides the discommodities and inconueniences of scolding and contentious wiues: and amongst other husbands much troubled in that kind, hee speakes of Socrates, who hauing two curst queanes and both at once (for the law of Athens did allow duplicitie of wiues) could indure their scouldings and contumacies with such constancie and patience; for hauing Zantippe and and Mirho the daughters of Aristides, the house was neuer without brawling and vprore. One Euthidemus comming from the wrastling place, and Socrates meeting him by chance, compelled him home to supper: and being sate at board and in sad and serious discourse, Zantippe spake many bitter and railing words of disgrace and contumelie against her husband; but he nothing mooued therewith, nor making her the least answer, she tipped vp the Table and flung downe all that was vpon it. But when Euthidemus being therewith much mooued, arose to be gone and instantly depart, Why what harme is there (quoth Socrates) did not the same thing chance at your house when I dined with you the last day, when a cackling henne cast downe such things as were vpon the bord, yet we your guests notwithstanding left not your house vnmannerly. Another time in the open market, she snatching his cloake from his backe, the standers by persuaded him to beat her: but he replyde, So whilst she and I be tugging together, you may stand by laughing, and cry, o well done Zantippe, o well done Socrates. Another time shee with her much loquacitie had made him wearie of the house, therfore he sat him downe vpon a bench before the street doore; but she at his patience beeing the more impatient, and much more angry because she was notable to mooue in him the least anger, she mounts vp into a garret window, and from thence pours a full pispot vpon his head: such as came by, extreamely mooued, as much in derision of his person, as at the suddennesse of the action; he tooke vp a laughter as high and loud as the best, expressing no more anger than in these words, Nay I thought verily in my mind and could easily iudge by the weather, that after so great a thunder wee must necessarily haue raine. Aulus Gellius writes,Aulus Gel. that Alcibiades demanding why he

would keepe two such scolding queanes in his house and at once, who neuer ceased brawling, when either of them both were sufficient to put any man of the gentlest temperance quite beyond his patience? hee thus answered him: These women (o Alcibiades) teach me at home that sufferance which I ought to practise when I am abroad, for being (as you see I am) well exercised and broken with the factions of these two, I shall be the more gentle to deale withall in the societie of other men: and so much for Zantippe and Socrates. But since I am falne into a discourse of Shrowes, let it not seeme much impertinent to insert what mine owne opinion was, when a gentleman demanded of me the difference betwixt a Shrow and a Sheepe. I considering with my selfe that there was so many of the one partie and so few of the other, thought it the most generous to take the weaker side: and therefore because some speake too much for themselues, and the modesty of the others will not giue them boldnesse to say what is sufficient, I thus determined in their behalfe.

Whats hee can teach me by their seeming show,
Whethers the best to chuse, a Sheepe, or Shrow?
A sheepe.A Sheepe, whats that? A beast of gentle kind,
Harmles in nature, and of modest minde,
(If mind may be in beasts) she's of voice low,
Affraid of the least clamour: when the Shrow,
A shrow.In calmes makes tempests, and to all mens wonder,
Speakes in the fairest weather, fire, and thunder.
Whats he thats wise, and would in warm'th compare
To th'English wooll, the Barbarie lions haire?
Th'Hircanian Tygars, or the Musco Beares,
The Spanish Iennets trapt in all his geares,
The Lapland Hart, or the swift Finlands Dow,
The Arabian Panther (spo^^ed for the show?)
Doth not the Indian Dromodarie want
Her riches? or the ioyntlesse Elephant?
Or can the Italian Fox, or German Bore,
The Danish Elke, or Cammell, boast her store?
Who that loues warm'th, and would desire to pull
The Irish Woolfe and leaue the English wooll?
When as the first would ayme to teare thy throat,
The latter gently cloath thee in her coat.
Yet were it best a modest medium keepe,
Chuse neither compleate Shrow, nor perfect Sheepe,
I would haue my wife neither tongue-tide quite
Nor yet all tounge; so much as could accit^
To affability and amorous prate,
So much I'd haue her vse, and more I hate.
But with a voyce like Steutors should she raile,
Or like Xantippe skould, and when words fayle,
Bee sulleine, dogged, po^t and lowre, and whine,
Or chide, or be still dombe; if such were mine,
From her I'd wish my selfe remote as farre,
As such from vertue and true goodnesse are.
She of the two extreames, if you demand
With which I would be troubled, vnderstand,
I'd take the gentler beast, the h^rmelesse Sheepe,
Whose calmenes would not fright me from my sleepe,
Or make the downe within my bed appeare
Like knotted flockes, or curles of a rough Beare,
Or the sof^ holland sheetes for rest prepar'd,
Feele in my nightly wallowing course and hard,
Or the smooth pillow on the which my head
I turne and tosse, seeme as if stuft with lead.
These can the furie Shrow doe; when the tother,
Her amorous silken selfe, will seeme to smother
In my warme besome, cling to me as fast
As Salmacis, two in one bodie plac't,
Whisper into mine eare soft ^u^es of loue,
And be the sphere in which I sole may mooue,
Shrinke me ^n smooth embracements, her white arme
Skarffe 'bout my necke, whil'st euery words a charme,
And euerie touch a motiue to desire,
To kindle in my brest inchanted fire,
Vpon whose smooth brow cannot ^it a frowne,
She can make flints seeme feathers, bare boords downe.

I will now trouble thy patience gentle Reader,A tricke of an English skold. with a discourse that hath in it more mirth than murther, and more sport than spight, and yet a touch of both. A mad fellow newly married, had onely one yong child by his wife, of some quarter old, whom he deerely and tenderly loued, as being his first; but he was much giuen to good fellowship, and shee altogether addicted to sparing and good huswiferie: still when he vsed to come merrie from the tauerne, where he had beene frollicke with his boone companions, she being as sparing of his purse as prodigall of her tongue (for she was little better than a skold) would often vpbraide him with his expences, that what hee wasted at the Tauerne, were better bestowed at home, that he spent both his mony and time, and that being so often drunke, it was preiudiciall both to his bodie and estate, with many such matron-like exhortations: but alwaies concluding her admonitions with a vow, That if euer he came home againe in that pickle, shee would (happen what could come) fling the child into the moat (for the house was moated about.) It hapned about some two daies after, that he reuelling till late in the euening in a cold frostie winters night, and she hauing intelligence by her scouts where he was then drinking, and making no question but he would come home flustred; she commanded her maide to conueigh the infant to the further part of the house, and to wrap the cat in the blankets and put it in the cradle and there to sit and rocke it; presently home comes the husband, shee falls to her old lesson and beginnes to quarrell with him, and he with her: Ill words begot worse, and much leaud language there was betwixt them, when the woman on the sudden stepping to the cradle (hauing spyde her aduantage) I haue long sayth she threatned a mischiefe, and that reuenge I cannot worke on thee, come dogs come diuells I will inflict vpon the brat in the cradle; and instantly snatching it vp in her armes, ran with it to the moate side and flung it into the middle of the water:A pretie reuenge. which the poore affrighted man following her and seeing, leauing to pursue her, and crying, saue the child, o saue the child, in

that bitter cold night leapt vp to the elbowes in water, and waded till hee brought out the mantell, and with much paine comming to the shore, and still crying alas my poore child, opened the cloathes; at length the frighted cat crying mewe, being at libertie leapt from betwixt his armes and ran away: the husband was both amased and vexed, the woman laught at her reuenge, and retyred her selfe: and the poore man was glad to reconcile the difference before she would yeeld to allow him either fire or dry linnen. Considering this, me thinkes it was not amisse answered of a gentleman, who being persuaded by a friend of his not to marry with such a gentlewoman to whom hee was a suitor, his reasons alleadged were, because she had no quicke and voluble tongue, neither was she of any fine witte or capacitie: to whom he instantly replyde, I desire to haue a woman to bee my wife that shall haue no more tongue to answer mee to a question than yea, or nay; or to haue more wit than to distinguish her husbands bed from another mans.
Another woman hauing a husband who customably came drunke home, and shrinking from his stoole or chaire would oft fall vpon the floore and there lie along: and stil when she cald him to bed, he would answer her, Let me alone, the tenement is mine owne, and I may lye where I list, so long as I pay rent for the house. Some few nights after comming home in the like tune, and sitting asleepe in a chaire before the chimney, his wife being gone to bed, presently the man falls into the fire: the maide cryes out to her Mistresse, Oh mistresse, my master is falne and lyes in the fire, euen in the midst of all the fire; shee lay still and turning her on the other side, sayd, so long as hee payes rent for the house, he may lye where he please. But to more serious businesse, for I haue now done sporting.



Of English Viragoes. And of Ioan de Pucil.
GuendolyneOF Guendoline the wife of king Locrine, and daughter to Corinaeus duke of Cornwall, I shall take more occasion to speake at large in the discourse of the beautifull Estreld. Elphleda was sister to king Edward before the conquest sirnamed the fourth,Elphleda. she was wife to Etheldredus duke of Mercia, who assisted her husband in the restoring of the citie of Chester, after it had beene destroyed and demolished by the Danes, encompassing it with new walls: he was generall to the king in all his expeditions against the Danes, in the last battaile that he fought against them at a place cald Toten Hall. Toten Hall in Staffordshire, hee gaue them a mightie auerthrow, but a greater at Wooddensfield where were slaine two kings, two Earles, and of the souldiours many thousands which were of the Danes of Northumberland. In this battaile were the king and Elphleda both present. Soone after this victorie Etheldredus dyed, and she gouerned many yeres after him in all Mercia or middle England, except in the two cities of London and Oxford, which the king her brother reserued to himself. She builded many cities and townes, and repayred others, as Thatarne Brimsbury, the bridge vpon Seuerne, Tamwoorth, Liechfield, Stafford, Warwicke, Shrewsbury, Watrisbury, Edisbury in the Forrest besides Chester, which is since vttery defaced and destroied. Also shee built a cittie and a castle in the North part of Mercia, which then was cald Runcofan, and after Runcorn. Thus farre Ranulphus. William de regib. with others giue her this noble character, This Lady hauing once assayde the throwes of childbirth, would neuer after bee drawne to haue any carnall societie with her husband, alleaging that it was not sitting or seemely for a woman of her degree being a princesse, a kings

daughter, and a kings sister, to inure herselfe to such wanton embraces, wherof should ensue so great paine and sorrow. She tamed the Welchmen, and in many conflicts chased the Danes: after whose death the king tooke the prouince of Mercia intirely into his owne hand, disinherited her daughter Elswina,Elswina. whom he led with him into West-Saxon. Henricus lib. 5. hath left this Epitaph as a memoriall ouer her Tombe:
Oh Elphlede mightie both in strength and mind,The dread of men, and victoresse of thy kind.Nature hath done as much as nature can,To make thee maide, but goodnesse makes the man:Yet pittie thou should'st change ought saue thy name,Thou art so good a woman: and thy fameIn that growes greater, and more worthie, whenThy feminine valour much out-shineth when.Great Caesars acts thy noble deeds excell,So sleepe in peace, Virago maide farewell.
Much to this purpose hath Treuisa expressed these verses in old English. Maud the daughter of Henrie the first, was married to Henrie the fourth Emperour of that name,Maude. after the death of her husband she bore the title of Maud the Empresse: her father in his life time swore all the nobilitie to her succession, but he being dead many fell from their oathes of alleagence, adhering to Stephan Earle of Bulleine, who by the sisters side was neaphue to the deseased king. He notwithstanding he had before sworne to her homage, caused himselfe to be crowned at London vpon a Saint Stephens day, by William Archbishop of Canturburie, one that had before past his oath of alleagence to the Emperesse. Much combustion there was in England in those dayes betwixt Maude and Stephan, and many battails fought, in which the successe was doubtfull, the victorie sometimes inclining to the one, and againe to the other, the circumstances rather would become a large Chronicle than a short tractat: I will therefore come to that which sorts best with my present purpose. This lady tooke the king in battaile, and kept him prisoner at Bristoll from Candlemas day to Hollyrood day in haruest: for which victorie the people came against her with procession, which was approoued by the Popes legate. From Bristoll she came to Winchester, thence to Wilton, to Oxford, to Reding and Saint Albons, all the people acknowledging her their queene and soueraigne, excepting the Kentishmen onely: shee came thence to London to settle the estate of the land, whether came the wife of king Stephan for her husbands deliuerie, vpon condition that Stephan should surrender the kingdome vp entirely into her hands, and betake himselfe euer after to a sequestred and religious life: But to this motion the Emperesse would by no meanes assent, the Cittisens likewise intreated her that they might vse the fauourable lawes of S. Edward, and not those strict and seuere statutes and ordinances deuised and established by King Henry her father; neither to this would the bold-spirited Lady agree. For which the people began to withdraw their affections from her, and purposed to haue surprised her, of which she hauing notice, left all her houshold pro^ision and furniture, and secretly conueighed her selfe to Oxford, where she attended her forces, who were by this time dispersed and diuided. But taking with her her Vncle Dauid king of Scots, shee came before Winchester, laying a strong siege to the bishops tower, with was defended by the brother of king

Stephan.Another English Virago. But now obserue another female Warrior: The wife of the imprisoned King being denyed his freedome, now takes both spirit and armes, and associated with one William Iperus, came with such a thundring terror to rayse the siege, that the hardie Empresse (to giue way to her present furie) was from strength forced to flye to stratageme: for finding her powers too weake to withstand the incensed Queene, she counterfeited her selfe dead, and as a Corse caused her bodie to be conueyed to the citie of Glocester, and by this meanes escaped. But Robert her brother was there taken prisoner, and committed to safe custodie. Then the Queene imployed herselfe on the one part for the release of her husband, and the Empresse on the other, for the enfranchisement of her brother: at length, after long debating of the businesse, it was determined by the Mediators on both sides, that Stephan should be restored to the Kingdome, and Duke Robert to his Lordship and Earledome; and both, as they had disturbed the peace of the Land, so now to establish it. To this the Earle would not assent: so that all that yeere there was nothing but spoyle, manslaughter, direptions, and all manner of violence, robbing of the rich, and oppression of the poore. The King vpon Holy-Rood day was released, and besieged the Empresse in the citie of Oxford, from Michaelmas day to mid-Winter: where, being oppressed with famine, she tooke the aduantage of the Frost and Snow; and attyring her selfe all in white, escaped ouer the Fennes, and came to the castle of Wallingford. And so much shall suffice to expresse the magnanimitie and warlike dispositions of two noble and heroicke English Ladies. A French Ladie comes now in my way, of whom I will giue you a short character.
Ioane de Are, or de Pucil.In the minoritie of Henry the sixt, when France (which was once in his entire possession) was there gouerned by our English Regents, the famous duke of Bedford, and others; Charles the Dolphin, styled after by the name of Charles the seuenth (being a Lord wihout land, yet at that time maintaining what hostilitie he was able) whilest the English forraged through France at their will, and commanded in all places at their owne pleasure (the French in vtter despaire of shaking off the English yoake) there arose in those desperate times, one Ioane Are, the daughter of Iames Are and his wife Isabel, borne in Damprin. This Iames was by profession a Shepheard, and none of the richest. Ioane (whom the French afterwards called Ioane de Pucil) whilest she was a yong maid and kept her fathers sheepe, would report to diuerse, That our blessed Ladie, S. Agnes, and S. Katherine, had appeared vnto her, and told her, That by her meanes France should regayne her pristine libertie, and cast off the yoke of English seruitude. This comming to the eare of one Peter Bradicourt, an eminent captaine then belonging to Charles the Dolphin, hee vsed meanes that she should be sent to haue conference with his maister, who soiourned then in Chynon, in his lowest of deiection and despaire of hope, supplie, or comfort. In her iourney thither, shee came to a towne called Faire-boys, where taking vp her Inne (a place which shee had neuer before seene) shee desired a souldier to goe to a secret by-corner, where was a heape of old yron, and from thence to bring her a Sword. The souldier went according to her direction, and searching the place, amidst a great quantitie of old tongs, shouels, hand-yrons, and broken horse-shooes, found a faire bright sword with fiue Flower-delyces vpon either side engrauen: This Sword (with which she after committed many slaughters vpon the English) shee gyrt to her, and so proceeded to Chynon to giue the Dolphin meeting. Being there arriued, Charles concealed

himselfe amongst many others, whilest she was brought into a faire long gallerie, where he had appointed another to take his place and to assume his person: she looking vpon him gaue him neither respect nor reue^ence, but sought out Charles among all the other in that assemblie, and pickt him from amongst the rest; to whom making a low obeysance, she told him, that to him only was her businesse. The Dolphin at this was amased, the rather because she had neuer before seene him, and was somewhat comforted, by reason that she shewed cheare and alacritie in her countenance: they had together long and priuat conference; and shortly after she had an armie giuen to bee disposed and ^irected by her. Shee then bespake her selfe armour, Cap a Pe, bearing a white Ensigne displaide before her, in which was pourtrayde the picture of the Sauiour of the world, with a flower-de-lyce in his hand; and so marched to Orleance. Her first exploit was fortunately to raise the siege and releeue the towne. From thence shee passed to Reames, tooke the cittie and caused the Dolphin there to proclaime himselfe king, and take vpon him the crowne of France. She after tooke Iargueux a strong towne, and in it the Earle of Suffolke with many other braue English gentlemen. She fought the great battaile of Pathay with good successe, in which were taken prisoners the lord Talb^^ (the skourge and terror of the French nation) the lord Seales, the lord Hungerf^rd, with many others both of name and qualitie: she tooke in Benueele, Mehun, Trois, and diuers other townes of great import and consequence; at length in a camisado or skirmish, she was taken prisoner by sir Iohn of Entenburch, a Burgonian captaine, and sent to Roan. The French Cronicles affirme that the morning before she was surprised, she tooke the sacrament, and comming from Church told to diuerse that were about her, that she was betraide, her life sold, and should shortly after be deliuered vp vnto a violent death, For sir Iohn gaue a great sum of money to betray her. The English comming to inuest themselues before Mondidier, Ioan was aduised to issue out by Ela^ie and skirmish with them; who was no sooner out, but he shut the gates vpon her: being taken, she was sent to Peter Bishop of Beuoise, who condemned her to the fire for a sorceresse, which iudgement was accordingly executed vpon her in Roane, in the market place. Twentie six yeares after, Charles the king for a great summe of money procured an annichilation of the first sentence from the Pope, in which she was proclaimed a Virago inspired with diuine instinct: in memorie of whose vertuous life and vniust death, he caused a faire crosse to ^ee erected iust in the place where her bodie was burned. I returne againe to the English.Emma. Fabian and Harding speake of Emma sister to the Norman duke called Richard, who for her extraordinarie beautie was called, The flower of Normandie, she was married to Ethelred king of England. By her heroicke spirit and masculine instigation, the king sent to all parts of the kingdome secret and strict commissions, That vpon a certaine day and hour assigned, all those Danes which had vsurped in the land, and vsed great crueltie, should be slaughtered; which at her behest and the kings commaund was accordingly performed, which though it after prooued ominous, and was the cause of much miserie and mischiefe, yet it shewed in her a noble and notable resolution. Of queene Margaret the wife of Henrie the sixt,Queene Margaret. her courage, resolution, and magnanimitie, to speake at large, would aske a Volume rather than a compendious discourse, to which I am strictly tyed. And therefore whosoeuer is de^irous to be further instructed in the successe of those many battailes fought against the house of Yorke, in which she was personally present, I referre them

to our English Chronicles, that are not sparing in commending her more than womanish spirit, to euerlasting memorie. With her therefore I conclude my female Martiallists: And now me thinkes I am come where I would be, and that is amongst you aire Fones.


Of Faire Women.
IT is reported of a king, that for many yeeres had no issue, and desirous to haue an heire of his owne bloud and begetting to succeed in the Throne, vpon his earnest supplication to the diuine powers, he was blessed with a faire sonne, both of beautie and hope. And now being possest of what he so much desired, his second care was to see him so educated that hee might haue as much comfort of him in his growth, as hope in his infancie: hee therefore sent abroad to find out the most cunning Astrologians to calculate of his natiuitie, that if the starres were any way maleuolent to him at his birth, he might by instruction and good education (as farre as was possible) preuent any disaster that the Planets had before threatened. A meeting to that purpose being appointed, and the Philosophers and learned men from all parts assembled: after much consultation it was concluded amongst them, That if the infant saw Sunne or Moone at any time within the space of ten yeeres, hee should most assuredly be depriued the benefit of sight all his life time after. With this their definitiue conclusion, the father wondrously perplexed, was rather willing to vse any faire meanes of preuention, than any way to tempt the crosse influence of the starres: Hee therefore caused a Cell or Caue to be cut out of a deepe Rocke, and conueying thither all things necessarie for his education, hee was kept there in the charge of a learned tutor who well instructed him in the Theorie of all those Arts which best suited his apprehension. The time of ten yeeres being expired, and the feare of that ominous calculation past ouer, the day was appointed when his purpose was to publish his sonne to the world, and to shew him the Sunne and Moone, of which he had often heard and till then neuer saw entire; and to present vnto his view all such creatures of which he had beene told, and read, but could distinguish none of them but by heare-say. They brought before him a Horse, a Dogge, a Lion, with many other beasts of seuerall kindes, of which he onely looked, but seemed in them to take small pleasure. They shewed him Siluer, Gold, Plate, and Iewels; in these likewise hee appeared to take small delight or none, as not knowing to what purpose they were vsefull: yet with a kind of dull discontent, he demanded their names, and so past them ouer. At length the king commanded certaine beautifull virgins, gorgeously attyred, to be brought into his presence: which the Prince no sooner saw, but as recollecting his spirits, with a kind of alacritie and change of cheare, he earnestly demanded, What kind of creatures they were, how bred, how named, and to what vse created? To whom his tutor ieastingly replyed, These be called Deuills, of which I oft haue told you, and they are the great tempters of mankind. Then his father demanded of him, To which of all these things he had beheld, he stood affected best, and to whose societie hee was most enclined! who presently answered; O Father, I onely desire to be attended by these Deuils. Such is the attractiue power of beautie: which women cannot fully appropriate to themselues, since it is eminent in

all other creatures. Who wonders not at the beautie of the Sunne, the glorie of the Moone, and the splendor of the starres? the brightnesse of the morning, and the faire shutting in of the euening? Come to the flowers, and plants; what artificiall colour can be compared to the leaues of the Marigold, the Purple of the Violet, the curious mixture of the Gillyflower, or the whitenesse of the Lilly; to which, Salomon in all his glorie was not to be equalled? You that are prowd of your haire, behold the feathers of the Iay, or Parrat, with the admirable varietie of the Feasant and Peacock: What Rose in the cheeke can counteruaile the Rose of the garden? or what azure veine in the temples, the blew flower of the field? Come to outward habit, or ornament; what woman doth better become the richest attyre (though fetcht from the farthest parts of the world) than the Panther his staynes, and the Leopard his pleasing and delightfull spots? Are not the Fishes as beautifull in their siluer-shining skales, and the terrible Dragon as glorious in his golden armour, as women apparrelled in cloth of Bodkin, or Tissue? What is she that exceeds the Doue or Swan in whitenesse, or the Pyne or Cedar in straitnesse? Let me heare her voyce, that can compare with the Nightingale in sweetnesse; or behold that eye, that can looke vpon the Sunne with the Eagles. Why should you faire ones then be prowd of any thing, that are by other creatures exceeded in all things? Besides, e^en the choysest beautie amongst you being once enioyed, is the lesse esteemed; Souldiers hauing vanquisht their enemies, hang vp their armes; Sea-men that haue attayned their harbour, fold vp their sayles. The choysest dainties are loathsome to such as haue filled their stomacks, and Wine is a burthen to him that hath satiated his thirst: Nobilitie of birth is a thing honorable, but you are not beholding to your selues for it, but your ancestors: Riches and Plentie are excellent, but they are the gifts of Fortune, therefore subiect to change and casualtie: Prayse and Honor is venerable, but withall vnstable: Health is precious, but subiect to sicknesse and infirmitie: Strength an excellent gift and blessing, but neither free from age, nor disease: Beautie is admirable aboue all, and yet subiect to all: onely Learning, Knowledge, Art, and Vertue, are aboue the enuie of change, or mallice of Fortune. Neither are you women solely beautifull: We reade in Martial, lib. 1. of a boy called Achillas, of admirable feature; of Acanthus, whom the gods at his death, in memorie of his exquisite forme, changed into a flower, that still beares his name. Amongst the Romans, Scipio (surnamed Demetrius) and amongst the Greekes, Alcibiades carryed the Palme from women; who (as Plutarch in his life reports of him) was not onely wondered at in his youth, but admired in his age, his grace and comelinesse still growing with him.

Formosum pastor Coridon ardebat Alexim:


The shepheard Coridon doted on the faire Alexis.

Saxo Gramaticus speakes of Alphus the sonne of Gygarus, whose haires exceeded the brightnesse of Siluer. Amaratus was changed into a sweet-smelling flower after his death. Calentius speakes of Amphim^don thus:
Formosum Phiale prius arserat Amphimedonta,Amphimedon Phiales maxima cura fu^t:
Phiale was enamored of Amphimedon the faire,Amphimedon of Phiale became the greatest care.

Antinous Bithinieus, was a youth of that admirable beautie and feature, that Adrian the Emperour was enamoured of him, in whose memorie he erected a Temple in Mantinea, and built a cittie by the riuer Nilus, he caused his effigies to be stamped vpon his owne coine, therefore Hieronimus (as Vollaterranus reports) calls him the Emperour Adrians concubine. Asterius was the sonne of Ceres, a yong man of a singular forme, but altogether abstenious from the loue of women, whom Ouid in Ilium remembres. Astur is celebrated by Virgil:
--Sequitur pulcherimus AsturAstur equo fidens and versicoloribus armis.
The fairest Astur follows next in field,Astur that trusts vnto his horse ans particoloured shield.
Atis the Phrigian youth was for his fairenesse beloued of the mother of the gods. Virgill speakes of Auentinus in these words:
Victoresque ostentat equos satus Hercule pulcroPulcher Auentinus--
Faire Auentinus he that of faire Hercules was borneBoasts of his conquering steedes--
Batillus was the fauourite or sweet-heart of Anacreon the Poet, of whom Pontan^s de Stellis:
--Amatum a vate BatillumPictum oculis fuscumque coma roseumque labellis,
--The Poet of Batillus was enamoured,With painted eyes, browne haire, and lips like Roses red.
(By the way). Sure there was a great dearth of beautie in those dayes amongst women when boyes and catamites were so doted on by men. Bellerephon was not onely affected by Sthenobaea the wife of Pretus,Sthenoboea. king of the Argiues, but doted on by Venus. Of Castor and Pollux the two faire Tindarides, Ouid. lib. 6. thus writes:
At gemini nondum Coelestia sidera fratresAmbo, conspic^i, niue candidioribus ambo,Vectabantur equis--
The two twinne brothers, not as yet accounted'Mongst the coelestiall starres, conspicuous b^thVpon two steeds whiter than snow were mounted etc.
The yong boy Cestus, Martiall thus commends.

Quanta tua est probitus etc.


How great thy honesty? thy fame as rare,
(Oh sweete child Cestus) thou that may'st compar^,
With Theseus sonne, did bright Diana see
Thee naked once, inamoured she would be
And tyce thee to some pleasant ^iuers brim,
There strip her selfe and teach thee how to swim.

Democles an Athenian youth was of that pulchritude, that he was called by all men Pulcher Democles, and (that which seldome meets with beautie) of that rare temperance, that when king Demetrius plucked him to haue made him a prostitute to his vnlawfull and beastly lusts; to shun his embraces, he leaped into a caldron of seething hot liquor, and there drowned himselfe: Plutarch in Demetrio. Diadumenus the cup-bearer to Augustus was of that admirable feature, that in the contention which was made at Elis he carried the palme both from men and women: Volateran. For no other cause was Ganimede sayd to fill Nectar to Iupiter than for his eligancie of forme. Galetes was a youth of that excellent feature and so indeered to Ptolomaeus, that when diuerse malefactors (and for great crimes) were led to execution, onely at his entreatie hee spared their liues. Hypoclides the sonne of Thysander as Herodotus relates, was excellent aboue all the Athenians for wealth and beautie. Of Hyas the sonne of Atlas and Aethra, Ouid 5. de Fast.

Nondum stabat Atlas humeros oneratus Olimpo,
Cum satus est forma, conspiciendus Hias.


Olimpas weight did not as yet
Great Atlas backe adorne,
When as the louely Hyas of
Conspicuous shape was borne.

Hylas the sonne of Hyadamus, was not onely indeered to Hercules, but doted on by the nymphs called Driades. Iulus the sonne of Aeneas and Creusa, was taken for Cupid the sonne of Venus. Iuuencus was the minion of Catullus, as Lygurinus was to Horace; so likewise Lycus, of whom he thus speakes:
Et Lycum nigris oculis nigroqueCrine decorum.
Lycus rare,Both for his blacke eyes and his blacke sleeke haire.
Some thing more freely he speakes of the Pulchritude of Nearchus in Carm. and his Odes. Of Nireus the sonne of Caropus and Alaga, Homer speakes at large: as Horace likewise in Carm. and Epedo. Tibullus commends his Marathis Maximinus, that his head being mangled and bloodie, yet notwithstanding in death it looked admirable. Marcellus the sonne of Caphisus and Lyriope, was so faire that the nymphes were surprised with his beautie. Endimion was beloued of the Moone, Val Flaccus lib. 8.

Latmius Aestiua residet venator in vmbra.
Dignus amore Deae--


The Latmian swaine sits in the Summer shade,
Worthie the loue of that coelestiall maide.

In Ephestion was that maiesticall beautie, that the wife of king Darius saluted him for Alexander: for his exqusite forme hee was especially beloued of Alexander. Virgill commends the shape of Eurialus the sonne of Nisus. So Nysus king of the Megarenses was sayd to haue haires of gold they were of such splendor. Statius commends Parthenopaus the sonne of Meleager and Atalanta, or as some write of Mars and Menalipp^. Caelius, Ouid, and others, celebrate Phaon the beloued of Sappho the Poetesse, for the fairest of the world. Phedrus

Fliensis who was the familiar of Socrates and Plato, was for exquisite shape compelled to be prostituted by the baud his maister. Of Pyramus Ouid thus speakes, Metamorph. lib. 4.

Pyramus and Thisbe Iuuenem Pulcherimus alter.


Yong Pyramus and Thisbe, he
Of all the yong men fairest,
And she of all the Easterne world,
Of louelie gyrles the rarest, etc.

Spurinae was a youth of such an alluring beautie, that when he could neither reserue himselfe from suit of men, or importunities of women, hee deformed his owne beautie with scratches and wounds to preserue his owne chastitie, Valer. Max. de Verecundis. Magnes Smyrnaeus was the most beautifull of his age, and so acceptable to Gyges king of Lydia, that when his parents cut off his delicate and faire haire (somewhat to take off the kings affection) the king was so incensed that for that cause alone he made warre against the Magnesians, Pauson. apud Volater. The Poet Musaeus celebrates the rare forme of Leander, a youth of Abidos and beloued of Hero: As Virgill doth the like of Lausus the son of Mezentius, Aeneid. lib. 7. Herodotus speaking of Xerxes sayth that he had in his armie sixtie eight miriades of men, yet amongst them all hee was the beautifullest of face, and tallest of stature. I could reckon vp others, as Pelops, Idas, Iason, Artaxerxes, Cyrus, Troilus, Patroclus, Hymene, the least of them a prince, the minion to a king, or the deerely beloued of some queene or goddesse. This is onely to put you in mind and women, That though you haue ingrossed a great portion of beautie, yet you are not possest of all, since not onely men, but diuerse other creatures share with you; neither haue I introduced these to derogate any thing from your worths, onely to abate some of that ambition or selfeloue which is commonly attendant vpon beautie: One thing for your grace I haue read in the Spanish Cronicle of an exquisit ladie (the like I did neuer of any excellent man) Queene Isabell the wife of Henrie sirnamed the Humble, being attyring her selfe in her window, against which the Sunne shined somewhat hot, it is crediblie reported, that the beames of the Sunne set her curled lockes on fire: some held it as a prodigie, others alluded it to her miraculous beautie, some thought that one pane or other in the window was of the nature of a burning glasse and that was the cause, others imputed it to certain oyles and sweet vnguents, with which the Queens and great ladies vse to dresse their haire: howsoeuer, if their Cronicle speake truth, most certaine it is, that her lust made greater combustion in the land, than the Sunne had power to commit vpon her haire. I haue one thing more to instance to your grace, and so I will conclude my discourse. An Embassador being to be entertained in the court of queen Elizabeth (where the greatest state was still obserued) he first passed through a lane of the guard in their rich coats, next through the gentlemen pentioners, and so through all the greater officers, the Lords, Ea^les, and Counsell: The Queene sat then in state at the vpper end of a long gallerie, which when the Embassador should enter, the great Ladies of either side richly attired were placed, through the middest of whom as he passed along, he as amased at the stare, or admiring at their beauties, cast his eye first on one side, then on the other, and that not without some pause, as if hee had beene to take a particular surueigh of all their features, but by degrees comming

vp towards the Queene, who fat like Diana amongst her nymphs, or Ariadne in her crowne of starres, instated aboue the lesser lights, to giue him entertainement: and obseruing his eyes still to wander, she thus bespake him, Auerte occulos ne videas vanitatem: i. Turne away your eyes least you behold vanitie: to whom hee suddenly replyde, Imo potius mirabilia opera Dei, i. Nay rather the wonderfull workes of God. Since then you are such, rather let your vertuous actions beautifie, than your vitious deeds any way disgrace his so great and glorious workemanship.


Of Faire Women.
OF these, Herodica shall haue the first place.Herodica. Niceus in his booke de Rebus Arcad. relates, That one Cypselus purposing to rayse a new Colonie, erected a faire and goodly citie in a spacious Playne bordering vpon the riuer Alphaeus, to which place multitudes of the Parrhasians came to inhabite. At the same time was a Groue and an Altar celebrated (with much pompe and solemnitie) to Elusina Ceres, with an annuall feast: at this publike meeting was a contention, Which of all the women was censured to be the fairest? The first that had the prioritie and Palme for beautie bestowed vpon her, was Herodica, the wife of Cypselus. Zenophon apud Coelium, lib. 7. cap. 53. speakes of Panthaea,Panthaea. the wife of Abraditus, a nobleman of Persia, whom Cyrus (hauing defeated the armie of the Assyrians, and spoyled their tents) tooke captiue; Abraditus at that time being absent, as not long before employed vpon an Embassie to the Bactrians, in which interim, Panthaea was in the custodie of a nobleman of Media, called Araspes, who affirmed of her to the king with great admiration of her feature and beautie, That in all Asia her like was not to be seene, or found. Paulus Diaconus writes of Theodole,Theodole. a Roman Ladie, of that admirable splendour, that shee attracted the eyes of all men that but glanced that way, to dwell vpon her with wonder: her haire was bright, and yellow, which when she pleased to vnloose and let fall about her shoulders, it couered her from the crowne to the heele. A large description he makes of her perfections, howsoeuer most certaine it is, that the king Cambeoles was extreamely entangled in the snares of her beautie. Saxo Gramaticus in his Danish historie, commemorates one Suabilda,Suabilda. a Queene, in all the lineaments both of bodie and face to be of that rare pulchritude, that being doomed vnto a wretched and miserable death, and bound with thongs of leather, to be trod vpon by the hoofes of wild horses; her beautie struck such an impression euen in those vnreasonable creatures, that they could not be forced with their rude feet to leaue the least character of violence vpon limbes so faire and exquisitely fashioned. The same Author remembers vs of Seritha and Signis,Seritha.Signis. the first a virgin of incomparable splendor, to whom one Otharus was a robustious suitor; the other was the daughter of one Sygarus, who paralleld the first, and was importunately sollicited by Hyldegislaeus Teutonicus. Bryseis was so faire,Briseis. that she endeered vnto her loue the noblest of the Greekes, Achilles; who though she was but his damosell, or handmaid, yet he was enamored of her aboue all his other women: of whom Horace,
Prius InsolentemSerua Bryseis niueo coloreMouit Achillem:
His maid Bryseis, with her colour white,Insolent Achilles mooued to delight.
Of her, Ouid likewise speakes, lib. 2. de Arte Amandi:
Fecit vt in capta Lyrneside magnus AchillesCum premeret mollem lassus ab hoste torum.
This, great Achilles of his Loue desired,When with the slaughter of his enemies tyred,He doff'd his Cushes, and vnarm'd his head,To tumble with her on a soft day-bed:It did reioyce Bryseis to embraceHis bruised armes, and kisse his bloud-stain'd face.Those hands which he so often did imbrewIn bloud of warlike Troians, whom he slew,Were now imploy'd to tickle, touch, and feele,And shake a Lance, that had no point of steele.
Thargelia Milesia.Thargelia Milesia was of that excellent aspect, that as Hyppias the Sophist testifies of her, shee was marryed by course to foureteene seuerall husbands (for so he writes in a Treatise entituled De inscripta Congregatione:) in which, besides her character of beautie, he giues her a worthie attribute for her wisedome, in these words,Anutis. Perpulcra and sapiens. Anutis was the wife of a noble person called Bogazus, and sister to Xerxes by the fathers side. Shee as Dinon writes (in his Persicke historie, in the chapter entituled De prima Coordinatione) in these words, Haec vt pulcherrima fuit omnium mulierum, quae fuerant in Asia, etc. Shee (saith hee) as shee was the fairest of all women in Asia, so of them all shee was the most intemperate. Timosa,Timosa. as Philarchus in his Lib. 19. contends, was the mistresse of Oxiartes, who in the accomplishments of nature anteceded all of her age: shee was, for her beautie, thought worthie to be sent as a present from the king of Aegypt to the most excellent queene of king Statyra, but rather for a wonder of nature, than a president of chastitie. Theopompus in his fiftie sixth booke of Historie records, That Zenopithia,Zenopithia. the mother of Lysandrides, was the fairest of all the women in Peloponnesus. Shee, with her sister Chryse, were slaine by the Lacedemonians, at the time when Agesilaus (in an vprore and mutinous sedition raysed) gaue command, That Lysandrides as his publike enemie should be banished from Lacedemon. Patica Cipria was borne in Cyprus:Patica Cipria. Philarchus remembers her in his tenth booke of Historie. Shee attending vpon Olympias, the mother of Alexander, was demanded in marriage by one Mo^imus, the sonne of Pythioa. But the Queene obseruing her to be of more beautie in face, than temperance in carriage; O vnhappie man (said shee) that chusest a wife by the eye,Violentilla. not by counsaile; by her beautie, and not behauior. Violentilla was the wife of the Poet Stella: shee for all accomplishments was much celebrated by Statius; of her, Lib. 1. Syll. he thus speakes:
--At tu pulcherrima forma,Italidum tandem casto possessa marito:
Thou of our Latium Dames the fair'st and best,Of thy chast husband art at length possest.
Agarista.Agarista, as Herodotus calls her, was the daughter of Clisthenes the Syconian: shee was of that vnexpressable forme, that her beautie attracted suitors from all parts of Greece, amongst whom, Hypocledes the sonne of Tisander is numbred.

From Italie came Smyndrides, Sibarites, Syritanus, and Damnasus. From the coast of Ionia, Amphimnestrus, Epidamnius, Aetolus, and Meges. From Peloponnesus Leocides, Amianthus, Archas, Heleus, Laphanes and Phidon, son to the king of the Argiues. From Attica, Megacles the son of Al^menon. From Etruria, Lysanius. From Thessalie Diacrides, and Cranomius. From Molossus Alcon, in number 20. These came into Greece to expresse themselues in many noble contentions, because Clistthines the son of Aristonius and father of Agarista had made proclamation, that he only should inioy the Virgin, who could best expresse himself in noble action and valour. Hyppodamia was daughter to Oenemaus king of Aelis,Hyppodamia. and of such attractiue beautie, that she likewise drew many princely suitors to her fathers court, though to the most certain danger of their liues. Caelius writes that Marmax was the first that contended with her in the charriot race, and failing in his course was slaine by the tyrant; the Mares with which hee ran (as some write) were called Parthenia and Eripha, whose throats Oenemaus caused to be cut and after buried. After him perished in the same manner Alcathus, the son of Parthaon. Eurialus, Eurimacus, Crotalus, Acrius of Lacedemon, Capetus, Licurgus, Lasius, Chalcodas, Tricolonus, Aristomachus, Prias, Pelagus, Aeolius, Chromius, and Eritheus the son of Leucon. Amongst these are numbered Merimnes, Hypotous, Pelops, Opontius, Acaruan, Eurilachus, Antomedon, Lasius, Chalcon, Tric^ronus Alcathus, Aristomachus, and Croc^lus. Sisigambis as Q. Curtius relates,Sisigambis. was inferiour to no ladie that liued in her age, yet notwithstandig, Alexander the Great hauing ouercome her husband Darius in battaile, was of that continence, that he onely attempted not to violate her chastitie, but became her guardian, and protected her from all the iniuries that might haue beene done to a captiue. Plutarch writes of a Roman Ladie called Praecia,Praecia. of that excellent shape and admired feature, as she indeered Cethegus vnto her so farre, that he enterprised no dissigne or managed any affiaire without the aduise and approbation of the beautifull Pra^cia. So precious likewise was the faire Roxana in the eies of Alexander,Roxana. that hauing subdued all the Easterne kingdomes, and being Lord of the world; yet from being the daughter of a mercinarie souldier, and a Barbarian, he tooke her into his bosome, and crowned her with the Imperiall Diademe. Aegina,Aegina. the daughter of Aesopus, king of Boetia, for her excellent pulchritude was beloued of Iupiter; of whom Ouid,
Aureus in Danaen, Aesopida luseritignis:
In Gold faire Danae had her full desire,But with th'Aesopian Girle he play'd in fire.
So likewise Antiopa,Antiopa. the daughter of Nycteis and wife of Lycus king of Thebes, was for the rarenesse of her forme comprest by him, of whom hee begot Zethus and Amphion. O what a power is in this beautie? It made the Cyclops Poliphemus turne Poet; who (as Ouid in his Lib. 13.) thus writes in the prayse of his mistresse Galataea:Galataea.
Candidior folio niuei Galataea ligustri, etc.
Oh Galataea, thou art whiter farreThan leaues of Lillies: not greene Medowes areMore flourishing, thy stature doth appeareStraighter than th'Elmes; than Glasse thou art more cleare:More wanton than the young Kid, and more lightThan those loose shells the billowes haue made whiteStill tumbled with the waues: more grace th'hast wonne,Than is in Summers shade, or Winters Sunne,Louelyer than is the Apple, when his sideTurnes yellow; than the Plane tree, of more pride;Transparenter than I sicles, that meetWith rising Phoebus; than ripe Grapes, more sweet:Thou art of all choyse things the generall Theame,Soft as Swannes plumes, and faire as clow^ed Creame.
Therefore you Faire ones, the more choyse your beautie is, you ought of it to be more charie: the sweeter the flower is, the sooner it looseth the smell; the fairer the colour, it the sooner fades; and the purer the bloud, the apter to take putrifaction. Take heed then, least by vnlawfull prostitution you marre that by which in outward appearance you come neerest to your Maker, who as he is the Summum bonum, so he is the soueraigne and onely perfect beautie. A Tyrant hauing studied many fearefull and terrible deaths, to inflict vpon such as his mallice would punish; when he thought none grieuous enough, at length (as his master-peece of Tyrannie) he deuised to bind the liuing to the bodie of the dead, that the stench and corruption of the one might stifle and suffocate the other. In what greater torment then is that man, who shall marry a faire false one, that shall bed with sinne and bosome diseases? The dead bodie to which the liuing is bound, as the bloud dryes and the flesh consumes, so doth the loathsomenesse of the smell, till in time it wast to ashes, and so to participate of the same earth from whence it came: but your catching and infectious loathsomenesse, from lust growes to leprosie, still encreasing in you, to the impairing of his health and the impouerishing his estate, consuming his purse and contaminating his person. O miserable man, whom thy rash choyse shall cause to die of this wretched consumption. But this is but a caueat or admonition by the way: I proceed now with historie.

The faire Mistresse of Pisistratus.
Pisistrati amica.PHilarchus speakes of a beautifull woman (on whom he hath vouchsafed no name) who first brought Pisistratus from a priuate man to a gouernment Monarchicall. She tooke vpon her the name and habit of Pallas, as paralleld with her both in state and beautie, being thought by the people in all accomplishments to resemble the goddesse: she is said to haue dealt Scepters, and to haue made sale of Crownes, distributing them where she pleased, and to whom shee affected. Pisistratus after gaue her to his sonne in marriage, who was called Hypparchus; for so Clidemus in his eight booke, intituled Redditionum, leaues recorded in these words: He gaue vnto his sonne Hypparchus a woman, by whom he was ouercome, who was a Pallas for her State, and for Wisedom might be called the daughter of Socrates: and where beautie and counsaile meet, there cannot chuse but be a sweet concordance and harmonie. It shall not be amisse in the next place briefely to discouer vnto you, what places haue beene the most eminent for the breeding of the rarest beauties, and which by the antient Authors haue beene most celebrated.
Lib. 3.Hesiodus in his Melampodia nominates the citie Chalcides in Euboea, to breed the choysest beauties, as that the most exquisite women are there borne. Of the same opinion with him is Theophrastus: but Nymphodorus in his Nauigation and Trauailes through Asia, affirmes, That the most incomparable features

aboue all other places whatsoeuer, are bred in Tenedos, an Isle belonging to Troy. Dionisius Leuctricus hath left recorded, That for many yeeres continuance there was an annuall contention of Beautie held amongst the Elians in the citie of Elis, and that she that proued Victoresse, was honored with the Armes consecrated to Pallas. Others in other places, as Mysilus in his historicall Paradoxes hath left remembred, were crowned with wreathes of Myrtle. In other places, as Theophrastus writes, there were meetings and solemnities kept to censure women for their temperance and good huswiferie, as among the Barbarians; but for the forme and feature, they were most frequent amongst the inhabitants of Tenedos and Lesbos. Heraclius Lembus writes, That in Sparta with great admiration and reuerence they obserue the fairest man or woman, and commonly the Spartane beauties are the most illustrious. Therefore of the king Archidamus it is left registred, That being to make choyse of a queene, when one singularly beautifull, but of small dower, and another wondrous rich but extraordinarie deformed, were placed before him, he cast his eye vpon the goods of Fortune, and neglecting the treasures of Nature, preferred bondage before beautie: For which, the Ephori (which in Athens were the same officers that the Tribunes were in Rome) called him to account, and put him to an extraordinarie great mulct, saying, This man in steed of soueraignes would beget subiects, and for princes leaue peasants to succeede and raigne ouer vs. Euripides saith, That beautie hath the first place in the claime of Empire: therefore those that in Homer were admirers of Helens beautie, spake to this purpose:
Indignum nihil est Troes fortes and AchiuosTempore tam longo perpessos esse labores;Ob talem vxorem cui praestantissima foema,Nil mortale refert superisque simillima diuis.
The Greekes and Troians who can say were base?So long and so great Labours to endureFor such a wife, whose most excelling faceShewes nothing mortall, but all God-like pure.
This made the Spartans (the place from whence Helen was rauished) as the greatest courtesie to entertaine a stranger,Athenae. lib. 13. cap. 7. to shew vnto them their Virgins naked. A custome they had likewise in the Isle of Chios in certaine times of the yeere, after the same manner, to behold the yong men and maides in publike wrastle together.


Nitetis.
CAmbyses hearing that the Aegyptian women did much differ from other nations in manners and behauiour,Athenae. lib. 13. cap. 4. especially from the custome of the Persians, sent to Amasa king of the Aegyptians, to demaund his onely daughter in marriage. The King something troubled at this Embassie, as fearing he would rather keepe his daughter as a Concubine, than giue her the right of her birth and to honour her with the titles of a Queene and Bride, he deuised this pollicie to delude Cambyses, and still to conserue her chastitie: hee had there in his Court a young Ladie, called Nitetis, the daughter of Aprias an Aegyptian, whom because he had beene defeated in a battaile against the Cyrenaeans, Amasa had caused to be slaine. This Nitetis being the prime and choyse beautie of the Court, in all her lineaments so exquisite, that hee presumed shee would not

only content but much delight the king: he instructed her how to take vpon her the name of his daughter, and in euerie circumstance and complement how to demeane her selfe, so with a princely traine accommodates her for the iourney. Being arriued in Persia, she was royally entertained by the king, her behauiour and beautie more pleasing him than any of his choise damosells selected out of his many prouinces: in so much that he hastned the marriage, which was with no small pompe, according to the manner of the Persians. Nitetis lying in the kings bosome, and knowing how much she was indeered to him, as now not casting his eye or affection vpon any other, began to call to remembrance her fathers death, and what a plaine and smooth way lay open to her to be reuenged on him that slew him; and forgetting the honors she had receiued by Amasaes meanes, in preferring her to be quenne of Persia; not rating that good, equal with the ill she receiued in the shedding of her fathers blood: she opened to Cambises all the whole imposture, withall importuned him to reuenge the death of her father Aprias. The king as much pleased with her plaine and seeming simplicitie, as incensed with so great an iniurie done to him by Amasa, as well to reuenge her father, as his owne wrongs, with an inuincible armie inuaded Aegypt. Dinon in his booke of the Persian Historie, and Lynceas Naucratica in his Aegyptian Historie, they agree that Nitetis was sent to Cyrus, and that by him shee was the mother of Cambyses, and that after the death of Cyrus the Armie with which he went against Amasa and inuaded Aegypt; was to reuenge the wrongs of a mother, and not a wife.


Bersane.
Lib. 3.Lib. 6. and 8.SHe (as Curtius and Gellius both assent) was the widdow of one Damascus, of that singular aspect that Alexander the great became enamoured of her aboue all other, so that when neither the rare beautie of Darius his wife and daughters could tempt him, nor the whorish blandishments of Thais and others corrupt him (indeede where his modestie and temperance is preferred before many other princes, almost all) yet with her he was intangled. For those that write of him affirme, that he was neuer knowne to enter into the familiar embraces of any saue his owne wife and this Bersane; whom he made one of the Queenes women.
Berseba.It is not to be questioned, but that Berseba shee was a goodly faire woman, and of extraordinarie feature, which pierced so deepe into the brest of that most wise king and prophet Dauid, that all religion and sanctitie set apart, he for her loue committed the two most heinous and horrible sinnes of adulterie and murder, for he caused her husband Vriah to be slaine, and after married her, a great blemish to his former holinesse, of whom Strozza Pater thus writes:
Ille sacri vates operis Iesseia proles,Praefecit populo quem Deus ipse suo,Bersabeae captus forma--
The Psalmist borne of the Iesseian Line,The famous Author of that worke Diuine,Whom God made Ruler o're his people, heDotes on the feature of faire Bersabe.
Lycaste, one of the daughters of Priam, was faire aboue measure, insomuch that Polydamus the sonne of Anthenor, whom hee begot of Theano the sister of

Hecuba, of a Concubine made her his wife. There was another Lycaste that we reade of, who for her perfection in all degrees of comelinesse, had the name of Venus bestowed vpon her.


The wife of Candaules.
THis Candaules,Herodotus in Clio. whom the Grecians call Myrsilus, was king of the Sardians, and descended from Alcaeus the sonne of Hercules; hauing a wife whom he affectionately loued,Plat. 2. de Repub. and therefore iudging her to be the fairest of women, could not containe his pleasures, but comming to one Gyges, the sonne of Dascylus (a seruant of his, to whom hee vouchsafed his greatest familiaritie) hee to him extolls the beautie of his wife aboue measure; and because (sayth hee) I would haue thee truly know that she is no otherwise than I haue reported her, and that mens eares naturally are more incredulous than their eyes, I will deuise a meanes that thou shalt see her naked. To whom Gyges replyde, O royall sir, What words be these? you speake that which rather sauours of a man distract, than well counsailed and aduised; women that put off their garments, with them put off their modestie: therefore it was well determined and pro^ided by our fathers, wherein they proposed vnto vs honest rules and examples, among which this was one, That euerie man should haue inspection into his owne, and guide himselfe by that compasse. I verily beleeue she is matchlesse aboue all other women, and deseruedly to merit that character you haue giuen her; but withall I beseech you, that you will not persuade me to any thing which is not lawfull. At these words the king seemed to be displeased, and replyde: Be confident, o Gyges, and neyther distrust me in so persuading thee, nor my wife, who is altogether ignorant of what I intend, since from neyther of vs any damage or detriment, no not so much as the least displeasure can arise: for first I haue deuised, that she shall not know nor once suspect that thou hast beheld her; for I will order it, that thou shalt be secretly conueyed into the chamber, and (vnseene) behold euerie passage of her making vnreadie and comming to bed: Now when thou hast freely surueyed her in euerie part and lineament, and spyest her backe towards thee, conuey thy selfe out of the roome; onely in this be carefull, that at thy remoouing shee cast no eye vpon thee: This done, the next morning giue me thy free and true censure. Gyges that could by no meanes auoid his importunitie, was prepared against the time. The king according to his accustomed houre, conueyes himselfe into his c^a^ber, and so to bed: the queene soone after entring, despoyles her selfe of all (...) vesture and ornaments, euen to her nakednesse, all which Gyges was spectator of, who no sooner spyed her backe turned to goe towards bed, but Gyges ships from the place where he was hid; which was not so cunningly done, but he was espyed by the queene: shee demanding the reason of it from her husband, and ^^^^ertifying the truth (but with what modestie he could excusing it) she neyther seemed to be angry, nor altogether well pleased, but in her silence meditated reuenge (for amongst the Lydians, and almost all those barbarous nations, it is held great inciuilitie and immodestie to behold a man, much more a woman, naked.) The next morning, by such seruants as she best trusted, she caused Gyges to be sent for, who (misdoubting nothing that had past, as one that had many times free accesse vnto her) instantly came; she causing her seruants to withdraw themselues, thus bespake him:
Two wayes are proposed thee, o Gyges, and one of them instantly and without least premeditation to make choyse of; Eyther thou must kill Candaules, and that done, be possest of me,

and with me the Crowne of Lydia, or instantly dye; for thy doome is alreadie determined of, because thou shalt know that in all things it is not conuenient to obey the king, or search into that which thou oughtest not to know: There is now a necessitie, that eyther hee that counsailed thee to this must perish, or thou that obeyedst him against all Law or Iustice, to behold me (against reason or modestie) naked.
Gyges at these words was first wonderously amazed, but after recollecting himselfe, entreated her not to compell him to so hard an exigent, as to the choyse of eyther. But finding that necessitie, that he must be forced to one or the other, to kill the king, or to be slaine by others; he rather made choyse to suruiue, and let the other perish, and thus answered her: Since (generous Ladie) you vrge me to an enterprise so much opposite to my milder nature and disposition, propose some safe course how this may be done. Euen (sayth she) in the selfe-same place where he deuised this mischiefe against himselfe (namely, his bed-chamber) where to thee I was first discouered. Therefore prouiding all things necessarie for so determinate a purpose, and the night comming on, Gyges (who knew no euasion, but to kill his maister or dye himselfe) awaited his best aduantage, and hauing notice when Candaules was asleepe, followed the queene into her chamber, and with a Ponyard (by her prouided for the purpose) stabbed him to the heart, by which hee attayned both the queene and kingdome. Of this historie, Archilochus Parius makes mention in his Iambicks, who liued about the same time; affirming, That Gyges was by the Oracle of Delphos confirmed in the kingdome, after the Faction of the Heraclides had opposed his soueraigntie.


Rowan and Estrilda.
Stowe.ROwan was a maid of wonderfull beautie and pleasantnesse, daughter to Hengest, a captaine of the Saxons. Of this Ladie, Vortiger (then king) grew so enamored, that for her sake hee was diuorced from his wife, by whom hee had three sonnes; for which deed, the greatest part of the Brittaines forsooke him: therefore hee (by the instigation of Rowan) still caused more and more Saxons to be sent for, vnder pretence to keepe the Land in subiection. But the Brittaines considering the dayly repayre of the Saxons, came to the King, and told him the danger that might ensue; entreating him whilest it wa^ yet time, and to preuent a future miserie, to expell them the Land. But all in ^aine, for Vortiger was so besotted in the beautie of his faire wife (by whose counsaile he was altogether swayed) that he would in no wise listen to the counsaile of his subiects. Wherefore they with one vnited consent depriued him of his Crowne and dignitie, making Vortimerus his eldest sonne king in his stead. Who was no sooner crowned,Harding. but with all expedition he raysed an armie, and pursued the Saxons, and in foure maine battailes, besides conflicts and skirmishes, became victorious ouer them. The Saxons and their insolencies thus sup^^est, and the king now gouerning the Land in peace (after he had reigned seu^^ yeeres) was by this Rowan (in reuenge of the disgrace done to her king, deposed, and her countreymen disgraced) most trecherously poysoned.
Estrilda.Locrin, the eldest sonne of Brute, chased the Hunnes which inuaded the realme of England, and so hotely pursued them, that many of them (with their king) were drowned in a riuer which parteth England, and Scotland; and after the name of the king of the Hunnes (who there perished) the riuer is to this day called Humbar.Harding in Fabian. This king Locrin had to wife ^^^^doline, a daughter of Cori^eus duke of Cornwall, by whom he had a sonne cal^^d Mad^n: He kept also a Paramour,

called the beautifull Ladie Estrilda; by whom hee had a daughter called Sabrina. Locrine after the death of Corineus, of whom he stood in awe, diuorsed himselfe from his lawfull wife, and tooke to his embraces his faire concubine: mooued with this iniurie Guendoline retired herselfe into Cornewall, where she gathered a great power, fought with her husband, slew him in battaile, and after caused him to be buried in Troy-nouant. That done, she caused the faire Estrilda with her daughter Sabrina to be drowned in a riuer, that which parts England and Wales, which still beares the name of the yong Virgin, and is called Seuerne. These her dessignes accomplished, for so much as Madun her yong sonne was but in his pupillage, and not of capacitie or age to gouerne the Land; by the common sufferage of all the Brittons, she was made Protectoresse and Ladie Regent of the kingdome, which to the comfort of the subiects and the weale of the kingdome, she discreetly gouerned for the space of fifteene yeares; and therefore her memorie might fitly haue beene rancked amongst the most Illustrious women. Her sonne comming to age and yeares of discretion, shee to him resigned the Scepter.


The Faire ladie of Norwich.
ANd now because wee traffique altogether with Historie, it shall not bee amisse sometimes to mingle Seria Iocis, as shall appeare by this discourse which I haue often heard related. A knight both of same and memorie, and whose name is still vpon record, beeing eminent and of note with Henrie the fift, as personally with him in all the warres in France; after the king had both conquered and quieted the Land, this noble Englishman retyred himselfe into his countrey. He had a Ladie that was of such beautie that she attracted the eyes of all beholders, with no common admiration, in briefe I cannot speake of her feature sufficiently, as being farre beyond the compasse of my penne, and therefore I put her into the number of my Faire ones. This ladie with her husband residing in the cittie of Norwich, He, after so many troubles and torments, purposed a more sequestred life, and (next the solace he had in the beautie and vertues of his wife) to take a course meerely contemplatiue: and thought, out of the aboundance of his wealth, to doe some pious deeds for the good of his soule: hee therefore erected in the cittie and neere to the place where his house stood, a goodly Church at his owne charge, and betwixt them a Religous house that entertained twelue Friers and an Abbot, allowing them demeanes competent for so small a brother-hood. In this couent there were two, Frier Iohn and Frier Richard; these were still at continuall enmitie, and especiall notice taken of it amongst the rest, which by no mediation could be truely reconciled: but omitting that, it was custome of the knight and his ladie dayly to rise to morning Mattins, and she being affable and courteous to all, it bred a strange inciuile boldnesse in Frier Iohn, for she neuer came through the cloyster, but he was still with duckes and cringes attending her, which she (suspecting nothing) simply with modest smiles returned thankes to him againe: which grew so palpable in the Frier, that as farre as they durst it was whispered in the couent. Briefly, after these incouragements (as he constered them) it bred in him that impudencie, that he presumed to write a letter to her, in which he layde open a great deale of more than necessarie loue. This letter with great difficultie came to her hand; at which the ladie astonished, as not dreaming

that such leaudnesse should come from one that professed chastitie, and not knowing whether it might be a tricke complotted by her husband to make triall of her chastitie: howsoeuer, least her honour should be any way called in question, shee thought it her best and safest course to show the letter to her husband; of which he had no sooner tooke a view, but he began to repent him of his former charitie, in regard of their so great ingratitude. But there yet wants reuenge for so great a wrong, the knight concealing his rage, causes an answere of this letter to be drawne, to which he commanded her to set to her hand; the contents to this effect, That she was greatly compassionate of his loue, and that such a night her husband being to ride towards London, hee should be admitted, lodged, and entertained according to his owne desires. This letter was sealed, closely sent, receiued by the Frier with ioye vnspeakable: against the night he prouides him cleane linnen, a perfumed nightcap, and other necessaries; he keepes his time, obserues the place, is closely admitted, and by herselfe without witnesse, and so conueighed into a close chamber. Which hee was no sooner entered, but in comes the knight with his man, and in great furie, without giuing him the least time either to call for helpe to the house or to heauen, strangled the poore Frier and left him dead vpon the ground. The deede was no sooner done, and his rage somewhat appeased, but he began to enter into consideration of the foulenesse of the fact and heinousnesse of the murder, withall the strict penaltie of the law due for such an offence, which would be no lesse than forfeiture of life and estate; and now hee beginnes better to ponder with himselfe how to preuent the last, which may giue him further leasure to repent the first. After diuerse and sundrie proiects cast betwixt him and his man, it came into his minde, by some meanes or other to haue his bodie conueyed backe into the Monasterie, which being diuided from his house onely with a bricke-wall, might be done without any great difficultie: this was no sooner motioned, but instantly his man remembers him of a ladder in the backyeard fit for the purpose; briefly, they both lay hand to the bodie, and the man with the Frier on his backe mounts the ladder, and sits with him astride vpon the wall, then drawing vp the ladder to the contrarie side, descends with him downe into the Monasterie, where spying the house of office, hee set him vpon the same as vpright as he could, there leaues him and conueyes himselfe againe ouer the wall, but for hast forgetting the ladder, and so deliuers to his master how and where hee and bestowed the Frier: at which being better comforted they betooke themselues both to their rest. All this being concealed, as well from the Ladie as the rest of the houshold, who were in their depth of sleepe. It happened at the same instant, that Frier Richard being much troubled with a loosnesse in his bodie, had occasion to rise in the night, and beeing somewhat hastily and vnhandsomely taken, makes what speede he can to the house of office, but by the light of the Moone discerning some one before him, whilest he could and was able, hee conteined himselfe, but finding there was no remedie, he first called and then intreated to come away; but hearing no bodie answere, he imagined it to be done on purpose, the rather because approaching the place somewhat neerer, he might plainely perceiue it was Frier Iohn, his old aduersarie, who the louder he called seemed the lesse to listen; loath hee was to play the slouen in the yard, the rather because the whole couent had taken notice of a cold he had late got, and how it then wrought with him: therefore thinking this counterfeit

dea^^enesse to be done of purpose and spight, to make him ashamed of himselfe, he snatcht vp a Brick-bat to be reuenged, and hitting his aduersarie full vpon the breast, downe tumbles Fryer Iohn, without life or motion: which hee seeing, thought at first to rayse him vp; but after many proofes finding him to be stone dead, verily beleeues that hee had slaine him. What shall hee now doe? The gates are fast locked, and flye he cannot: but as suddaine extremities impresse in men as suddaine shifts, so hee espying the Ladder, presently apprehends what had beene whispered of Fryer Iohns loue to the knights ladie: and lifting him vpon his shoulders, by the helpe of the same Ladder, carryes him into the porch of the knights hall, and there sets him, and so closely conueyes himselfe backe into the Monasterie the same way hee came, not so much as suspected of any. In the interim, whilest this was done, the knight being perplexed and troubled in conscience, could by no meanes sleepe, but calls vp his man, and bids him goe listen about the walls of the Monasterie, if he can heare any noyse or vprore about the murther. Foorth goes hee from his maisters chamber, and hauing past the length of the hall, purposing to goe through the yard, findes Fryer Iohn sitting vpright in the porch; hee starting at the sight, runnes backe affrighted, and almost distracted, and (scarce able to speake) brings this newes to his maister: who no lesse astonished, could not beleeue it to be so (but rather his mans fantasie) till himselfe went downe and became eye-witnesse of the strange obiect. Then wonderously despayring, he intimates within himselfe, that murther is one of the crying sinnes, and such a one as cannot be concealed: yet recollecting his spirits, he purposeth to make tryall of a desperat aduenture, and put the discouerie thereof to accident: hee remembers an old stallion, that had beene a horse of seruice, then in his stable, one of those he had vsed in the French warres, and withall, a rustie Armor hanging in his Armorie; he commands both instantly to be brought, with strong new cords, a case of rustie Pistolls, and a Launce. The horse is sadled and caparrison'd, the Armor put vpon the Fryer, and hee fast bound in the seat, the Launce tyed to his wrist, and the lower end put into the rest, his head-peece clasped on, and his Beauer vp; the skirts of his grey gowne serue for Bases: and thus accoutred, like a knight compleately armed Cap a pe, they purpose to turne him out of the gates, hee and his horse, without any Page or Esquire, to trie a new aduenture. Whilest these things were thus in fitting, Fryer Richard in the Monasterie no lesse perplext in conscience than the knight, about the murther, casting all doubts, and still dreading the strictnesse of the Law, summons all his wits about him to preuent the worst; at length sets vp his rest, that it is his best and safest way to flye: he remembers withall, that there was belonging to the Fryerie a Mare, imployed to carry corne to and fro from the mill (which was some halfe a mile from the Monasterie) being somewhat fat, and therefore misdoubting his owne footmanship, hee thinkes it the safer course to trust to foure legges than to two, hee therefore calls vp the Baker that had the charge of the beast, and tells him, hee vnderstands there was Meale that morning to be fetcht from the Mill, which was grinded by that time; therefore if he would let him haue the Mar^, he would (it being now night) saue him that labour, and bring it back before morning. The fellow willing to spare so much paines, caused the backe gate to be opened. The Fryer gets vp, and rides out of the Monasterie gate,

iust at the instant when the knight and his man had turned out the Fryer on horseback to seeke his fortune, the horse presently sents the mare, and after her he gallops. Fryer Richard looking back amazed to haue an armed knight pursue him, and by the Moone-light perceiuing the Fryer armed (for hee might discerne his face partly by the Moone, and partly by the breaking of the day, his Beauer being vp) away flyes hee, and takes through the streets; after him (or rather the mare) speedes the horse. Great noyse was in the citie; insomuch, that many awaking out of their sleepes and morning rests, from their windowes looked out. At length it was Fryer Richards ill fate to take into a turne-againe-lane, that had no passage through; there Fryer Iohn ouertakes him: the horse mounts the mare, and with his violent motion the rotten and rustie armour makes a terrible noyse; Fryer Richards burthened conscience clamours out aloud for helpe, and withall cryes, Guiltie of the murther: at the noyse of murther the people being amazed, run out of their beds into the streetes. They apprehend miracles, and hee confesseth wonders; but withall, that barbarous and inhumane fact, to murther one of his Couent: the grudge that was betwixt them is knowne, and the apparant iustice of heauen the rather beleeued. Fryer Iohn is dismounted, and sent to his graue, Fryer Richard to prison; hee is arraigned, and in processe, by his owne confession condemned. But before the execution, the knight knowing his owne guiltie conscience, posts instantly to the king, makes his voluntarie confession, and hath his life and goods (for his former good seruice) pardoned him, Fryer Richard is released, and the accident remaines still recorded.


Of Callirhoe, daughter to Boetius.
Plut. Amat. Narration.I Now returne to more serious antiquitie: Phocus Boetius, was borne in the cittie Glisantes and had a daughter called Callirhoe, of such incomparable feature and beautie mixed, and withall so inherent a modestie and vertue, all meeting in one center to make a perfect and compleate creature, that thirtie of the noble youths of Boetia were suitors to her at once, and euery one sollicited her for marriage; but Phocus fearing their importunities, and by inclining to one, to hazard the displeasures of all the rest, delayde them for his consent: but they still more and more vrging him, he desired but respite till hee sent to Delphos, there to demaund the aduise of the Oracle, how to dispose of his daughter; but they taking this his pretended delay in ill part, all inraged, with an vnanimous consent set violently vpon him and his houshould: in which conflict Phocus was slaine. It happened that in the middest of this tumult the Virgin escaped and fled into the countrey, whom the suitors no sooner missed, but they with all expedition pursued her; it so fell out (for such was her good fortune) that she light vpon some countrie people that were remoouing their corne from the field into the barne (for it was then haruest) whom she humbly besought, to bee her protectors from rape and the preseruers of her virginitie: they hauing commiseration of her youth and beautie (both which are preuailing orators) hid her amongst the sheaues, by which the pursuers were disappointed of their purpose, and being at a losse, ouer-run the game they chaced. Amongst these honest and simple people shee liued for a time retired and vnknowne, till the solempnitie of a great feast day, which the Boetians called Pamboeotia, at which there was customably a mightie confluence of people of all sortes and degrees from the highest to the lowest. To this feast she came,

which was then celebrated in the cittie Coranea, and prostrating her selfe before the altar of Itonia Minerua, in the face of that great congregation, complained of the murder of her father, capitulating all their insolencies and her owne iniuries; which she did with such feeling words and passionate teares, that shee not onely attracted the eyes of euerie one to behold, but mooued the hearts of all to pittie; which perceiuing, and how the multitude was affected towards her, shee gaue to euerie of the murderers a particuler nomination, both of the families from whence they came, and the places where they had then their residence. The rioters this hearing, and finding how the people were annimated and incenst against them, they fled to Orchomenus, but were not there admitted but excluded from foorth the gates; from thence they fled to Hippota (a small cittie neere Hellicon scituate betwixt the Thebans and the Corineans) and were there receiued. To them the Thebans sent, that these murderers and rauishers might bee surrendered vp to their justice. But being denied, they with other Boetians made an expedition against them; of which forces, Phaedus then Pretor amongst the Thebans, was made captaine: the cittie Hippota was brauely besieged and assaulted, so likewise as resolutely defended; but number preuailing they were compelled to yeeld themselues, with their citie. The murderers now surprised, they were condemned to be stoned to death, and had the execution of their iudgement: the rest of the Hippotences were brought vnder bondage and made slaues, their walls and houses demolished to the earth, their fields and possessions being equally distributed betwixt the Thebans and the Corineans. It is said that the same night before the surrender of the city, that a voice was often heard to call aloude from Helicon, Adsum Adsum, i. I am heare, I am heare; which the thirtie suitors affirmed to be the voice of Pho^^s; as likewise the same day of their executions, and at the instant when they were stoned, saffron was seene to distill out of a monument which was erected in the cittie Glisantes. Phaedus being newly returned from the fight, a messenger brought him newes of a yong daughter that day borne, whom for omens sake he caused to be called Nicostrate.


The Wiues of Cabbas and of Phaillus.
A Preposterous thing,Plutarch. in Amatorio. and almost against nature (at least humanitie and good manners) it is that I reade of these two, who after the example of Domitian and Commodus, those monsters of nature, haue not onely made their strumpets, but their owne wiues (eyther for seruile feare, or abhominable lucre) prostitutes to other men. This Cabbas, a Roman (worthie for euer to be branded with base Wittoldrie) had a Ladie to his wife of incomparable beautie, insomuch, that all men beholding her, apprehended what happinesse he was possest of aboue others. The report of her rare accomplishments, amongst many, attracted Mecenas (then a great fauourite of the Emperour Augustus) to inuite himselfe to his house, where he was nobly feasted. Mecenas being of a corrupt and licentious disposition, and much taken with her beautie, could not containe himselfe; but he must needs be toying with her, vsing action of plaine Incontinence in the presence of her husband^ who perceiuing what he went about, and the seruants (it seemes) for modestie hauing withdrawne themselues from forth the chamber (the Table ^ot yet being taken away) Cabbas (to giue Me^enas the freer libertie) ca^ts himselfe vpon the bed, and counter^eits sleepe. Whilest this ill-managed

businesse was in hand, one of the seruants listning at the doore, and hearing no noyse, but all quiet, with soft steps enters the chamber, to steale away a flaggon pot that stood full of wine vpon the Table: Which Cabbas espying, casts vp his head, and thus softly said to him; Thou rascall, Doest thou not know that I sleepe onely to Mecenas? A basenesse better becomming some Ieaster, or Buffoon, than the noble name of a Roman.
In the citie of Argis grew a contention betwixt Nicostratus and Phaillus, about the management of the Common-weale, Philip of Macedon, the father of Alexander, comming then that way; Phaillus hauing a beautifull young wife (one esteemed for the verie Paragon of the citie) and knowing the disposition of the king to be addicted to all voluptuousnesse (and that such choyse beauties, and to be so easily come by, could not lightly escape his hands) presently apprehends, that the prostitution of his wife might be a present Ladder for him to climbe to the principalitie, and haue the entire gouernment of the citie: Which Nicostratus suspecting, and many times walking before his gates (to obserue the passage of the house within) hee might perceiue Phaillus fitting his wiues feet with rich embrodered Pantofles, iewels about her hayre, rings on her fingers, bracelets about her wrists, and carkanets vpon her arme, in a Macedonian vesture, and a couering vpon her in the manner of a Hat, which was onely lawfull for the kings themselues to weare: And in this manner habited like one of the kings pages, but so disguised that she was scarce knowne of any; he submitted her to the king. There are too many in our age, that by as base steps would mount to honor; I could wish all such to carrie the like brand to posteritie.
Chloris.Chloris was the daughter of Amphion, and the wife of Neleus the sonne of Hyppocoon, as fruitfull as beautifull, for she brought twelue sonnes ^o her husband; of which, ten with their father were slaine by Hercules, in the expugnation of Pylus; the eleuenth, called Periclemenes, was transformed into an Eagle, and by that meanes escaped with life; the twelfth was Nestor, who was at that time in Ilos: Hee, by the benefit of Apollo, liued three hundred yeeres, for all the daies that were taken from his father and brothers by their vntimely death, Phoebus conferred vpon him, and that was the reason of his longeuitie.Aethra. Aethra, the daughter of Pytheus, was of that attractiue feature, that Neptune and Aegeus (both) lay with her in the Temple of Minerua: but Neptune disclayming her issue, bestowed it on Aegeus; who leauing her in Troezene, and departing for Athens, left his sword beneath a huge stone, enioyning Aethra, That when his sonne was able to remooue the stone, and take thence his sword, she should then send him to him, that by such a token he might acknowledge him his sonne. Theseus was borne, and comming to yeeres, she acquainted him with his fathers imposition; who remooued the stone, and tooke thence the sword, with which hee slew all the theeues and robbers that interposed him in his way to Athens.Danae. Danae the daughter of Acrisius and Aganippe, had this fate assigned her by the Oracle, That the child shee bore should be the death of her father Acrisius: which hee vnderstanding, shut her in a Brazen Tower, restrayning her from the societie of men: but Iupiter enamoured of her rare feature, descended vpon her in a shewer of Gold, of which congression Perseus was begot; whom Acrisius caused with his mother to be sent to sea in a mast-lesse boat; which touching vpon the Island Seriphus, was found by a fisher-man, called Dyctis; who presents the desolate Ladie, with her sonne, to king Polyd^ct^s. He surprised

with her beautie, marryed her, and caused her sonne Perseus to be educated in the Temple of Minerua, and after made attonement betwixt them and Acrisius. But Polydectes dying, at the funerall games celebrated at his death, in casting of a mightie, stone (being one of the exercises then vsed) Perseus (whose hand fayled him) cast it vnawares vpon the head of Acrisius, and slew him, against his owne purpose making good the will of the Oracle. Acrisius being buried, Perseus succeeded his grandfather in the citie Argos.
Helena was first rauished by Theseus,Helena. and afterwards by Paris: shee had these suitors, Antiochus, Ascalaphus, Aiax Oeleus, Antimachus, Aeoeus, Blanirus, Agapenor, Aiax Telamonius, Clyrius, Cyanaeus, Patroclus, Diomedes, Penelaeus, Phaemius, Nyraeus, Polypates, Elephenor, Fumetus, Stenelus, Tlepolemus, Protesilaus, Podalyrius, Euripilus, Idomenaeus, Teliotes, Tallius, Polyxenus, Protus, Menestaeus, Machaon, Thoas, Vlysses, Philippus, Meriones, Meges, Philoctetes, Laeonteus, Talpius, Prothous: but she was possest by Menelaus.
A^ge was the faire daughter of Aleus,Auge. and comprest by Hercules, and deliuered of her sonne in the mountaine Parthenius: at the same time, Atalanta the daughter of Iasius, exposed her sonne begot by Meleager, vnto the same place; these children being found by the shepheards, they called the sonne of Hercules Telephus, because he was nursed by a Hart which fed him with her milke; they called the sonne of Meleager, Parthenopaeus, of the mountaine. Auge fearing her fathers displeasure, fled into Moesia to king Teuthrus, who for her beauties sake (hauing himselfe no children) adopted her his heire. These following are the fiftie faire daughters of Danaeus,The daughters of Danaeus. with the fiftie sonnes of Aegiptus, whom the first night of their marriage they slew: Idea killed Antimachus; Philomela, Pantheus; Seilla, Proteus; Philomone, Pl^xippus; Euippe, Agenor; Demoditas, Chrysippus; Hyale, Perius; Trite, Enceladus; Damone, Amintor; Hyp^thoe, Obrimus; Mirmidone, Mineus; Euridice, Canthus; Cleo, Asterius; Arcania, Xanthus; Cleopatra, Metalces; Philea, Phylinas; Hyparite, Protheon; Chrysothemis, Asterides; Pyraule, Athamas: her name is lost that slew Armoasbus; Gla^cippe, Ni^uius; Demophile, Pamphilus; Antodice, Clytus; Polyxena, Egiptus; Hecabe, Driantes; Achemantes, Echominus; Arsalte, Ephialtes; Monuste, Euristhanes; Amimone, Medamus; Helice, Euideus; Amoeme, Polidector; Polybe, Iltonomus; Helicta, Cassus; Electra, Hyperantus; Eubule, Demarchus; D^plidice, Pugones; Hero, Andromachus; Europone, Atlites; Pyrantis, Plexippus; Critomedia, Antipaphus; Pyrene, Dalychus; Eupheno, Hyperbius; Themistagora, Podasimus, Palaeno, Ariston; It^^, A^tilochus; Erate, Endemon; Hypern^nestra was the onely Ladie that in that great slaughter spared her husband Lyncaeus. What should I speake of Antigona, the sister of Polinices; Electra, the daughter of Clytemnestra; Hermione of Helen, Polyxena of Hecuba, Iphigenia of Agamemnon; Erigone, Merope, Proserpina, Amimone, Oenone, Calisto; Alope, the daughter of Cercyon, and Theophane of Bysaltis, both stuprated by Neptune; Th^onoe and Zeutippe, the daughters of Thestor; Chi^ne, otherwise called Philonide, the daughter of Dedalion; Coramis, the daughter of Phlegia, adulterated by Apollo; Nictimine, comprest by her father Epopeus? The very Index or Catalogue of whose names onely, without their histories, would aske a Volume. For their number, I will referre you to Ouid, in his first booke de Arte amandi:
Gargarae quot segetes, etc.
Thicke as ripe eares in the Gargarian fields,As many greene boughes as Methimna yeelds,Fish, Fowle, or Starres, in Sea, Ayre, Heauen; there beeSo many prettie wenches (Rome) in thee.AenasVenus. mother is still lou'd and fear'dIn that great citie, which her sonne first rear'd.If onely in young girles thou do'st reioyce,There's scarce one house but it affoords thee choyse:If in new-marryed wiues; but walke the street,And in one day thou shalt with thousands meet:Or if in riper yeeres; but looke before,Where ere thou go'st, thou shalt find Matrons store.
If then one citie, and at one time, could affoord such multiplicitie, of all ages, and degrees; how many, by that computation, may we reckon from the beginning, amongst all the nations of the world? I doubt not then, but this draught of water, fetcht from so vast a Fountaine, may at least coole the pallate, if not quench the thirst of the insatiat Reader.


Manto.
ZEbalia a man whose byrth ranked him in the file of nobilitie, beeing imployed vpon seruice in the Turkish warres, brought with him his most estimated and greatest treasure, his deerest spouse stiled Manto. But he dying in the crimson bed of honour, the sinister hand of warre gaue her into the captiuitie of Bassa Ionuses; who beholding with admiration a creature of so diuine a feature, was (though her conqueror) taken captiue by her beautie: who hauing put her vertue to the Test, found it to paralell, if not out-shine her forme. Wherefore being couetous to engrosse so rich a bootie to himselfe, he tooke her to wife, bestowing on her a more honorable respect than on his other wiues and concubines, and she likewise endeuored to meet his affection with an answerable obseruance and obedience. This feruent and mutuall loue continued long inuiolate betwixt them; insomuch, that they were no lesse honoured for their eminence of state, than remarkable for their coniugall affection: but that cursed fiend Iealousie enuying at their admired sympathie, straight vsurpes the throne of reason, and sits a predominant tyrant in his fantastike braine; for he grew so strangely iealous, that he thought some one or other to corriuall him, but yet knew not whom to taint with any iust suspition, nay hee would confesse that he had not catcht the least sparke of loosenesse from her that might thus fire this beacon of distraction in him. Briefly, his wife as beautifull in minde as feature, wearied with his daily peeuish humors, and seeing all her studies aymed at his sole content, were entertained with neglect and insolent scorne; she resolued to leaue him, and secretly to flie into her natiue countrey: to further which, she vnlockes this her secret intent, to an Eunuch of the Bassaes, giuing him withall certaine letters to deliuer to some friends of hers, whom she purposed to vse as agents in the furtherance of her escape: but he proouing treacherous in the trust committed to his charge, betrayde her to her husband, showing her letters as testimonies to his allegations. The Bassa at this discouerie swolne big with rage, called her before him, whom in his disperate furie he immediately stabbed with his dagger, thus with the cause of iealousie taking away the effect. But this bloodie deed somewhat loosened him in the peoples hearts, where he before grew deepely and fast rooted: nor did

he out-run Vengance, for at the last her leaden feet ouertooke him, and in this manner. Selymus the first, at his departure from Caire, his souldiers whom he there lefe in garrison made suit vnto his highnes, That in consideration of the great labours they had alreadie vndergone, together with the many dangers they were hourely in expectation of, that their wages might be inlarged; which he granted, and withall gaue this Bassa Ionuses the charge to see the performance thereof. At last the pay-day came, but their hopes proouing abortiue, the souldiers mutined: to coniure downe which spirit of insurrection, messengers are dispatched to the Emperour, to certifie him of the neglectiue abuse of his royall word, and feare of sedition: this newes ouertooke him at Larissa in Iudea. Selymus inraged at this relation, sends for Bassa Ionuses and examines the cause of his neglect in such and so weightie a charge? Ionuses somewhat abashed, as beeing conscious (yet withall highspirited) gaue the Emperour a peremptorie answer; at which being mightily incenced, hee commanded his head to be cut off, which was forthwith done: and thus iustice suffered not innocent Manto to die vnreuenged.


The wife of Agetus the Lacedemonian.
HErodotus, Lib. 6. thus writes of this Ladie, the daughter of Alcydes the Spartan, first wife of Agetus, and after to the king Ariston. She, of the most deformed infant, became the excellentest amongst women. Her nurse to whose keeping she was giuen (for the parents were asham'd of their Issue) went with her euerie day to the Temple of Helena, which stands in Therapne (neere to the Church of Apollo) and kneeling before the Altar, besought the goddesse to commiserate the child, and free her from her natiue vglinesse and loathsome deformitie. Vpon a time returning from the Temple, a woman appeared to her of a venerable aspect, and desired to see what she carryed so tenderly in her armes: the nurse told her it was an infant, but such an one as shee was loth to shew, and therefore desired to be excused, the rather, because she was enioyned by the parents not to expose it to the sight of any. The more the nurse put her off with euasions, the more importunate the strange woman was to behold it. At length preuayling, shee gently with her hand stroaked the face of the child, and kissing it, thus said: Goe nurse, and beare her home to her parents, who shall in time become the most beautifull of the Spartan Ladyes. From that time forward, her deformitie began to fall away, and a sweet grace and delightfull comelynesse to grow as well in face as euerie other lineament. Comming to marriage estate, she was sollicited by many, but onely possest by Agetus: yet after, by the craft of Ariston, shee was diuorced from Agetus, and conferred vpon him. Dion in Augusto speakes of Terentia,Terentia Mecenatis. the wife of Mecaenas, to be of that rare feature, that she dared to contend with Lyuia, the wife of Augustus Caesar, who was held to be the most amiable and exquisite Ladie of those dayes. Of Terentia the daughter of Cicero,Terentia Ciceronis. I haue thus read: Titus the sonne of Milo, and Appius the sonne of Clodius were as remarkable for their noble friendship, as their fathers notorious for their irreconcilable hatred. Titus was for his fathers sake welcome to Cicero, but Appius much hated, in regard of enmitie betwixt him and his father Clodius, for Cicero was of Miloes faction. Titus had long and dearely loued the faire Terentia, but vnderstanding that his friend Appius was likewise exceedingly inamoured of her, hee left his owne suit, and earnestly sollicited the ladie in his behalfe, who was easily

persuaded to the motion, hauing long before cast an affectionate eye vpon Appius, but durst make no expression thereof, much fearing the displeasure of her father. Titus so well managed the businesse for his friend that hee brought him priuily into the house of Cicero, where the two louers had mutuall conference: her father comming home by accident, and finding them together, in the heate of his impatience excluded him, and lockt her vp in safe and close custodie. Which the poore Ladie tooke so to heart, that shee fell into an extreame feauer and languishing daily, her father (now when it was too late) desired to know what he might doe to minister vnto her the least comfort: shee onely besought him that before her death, shee might take her last and louing leaue of Appius; who was instantly sent for: at his sudden comming in, shee was extaside with his sight and expired in his embraces; which the noble youth perceiuing, hee drew out a short dagger which hee then wore about him, and in the presence of her father and his owne deere friend slew himselfe. A more comicall conclusion hath that which I shall next tell you.
A Vicars daughter.An old Vicar in the countrey hauing a wonderous faire wench to his daughter, it happened that a young scholler, that for want of meanes had left the Vniuersitie, was preferred to the seruing of a Cure somewhat neere him; by which hee had opportunitie to woo the maid, and after had the parents consent to marrie her. It happened not long after, this young man had a Parsonage bestowed vpon him by his patron; the father and the sonne meeting vpon a time at a market towne, with diuers gentlemen of the countrey, being at dinner, amongst other discourse cauelling about an argument, they fell into controuersie which should bee the better man; many rough words passed, in so much that the gentlemen were forced to come betwixt them and keepe the peace. The old man he stood vpon his grauitie and the name of father; the young man pleaded, That in regard he was a Parson, and the other but a Vicar, that he was the better of the two. This raised the vprore afresh, which the gentlemen had much adoe to appease: at length the young man demaunded audience but for a few words, in which (sayth he) if I doe not conuince him, and make it plaine and palpable before you all, that I am the worthier of the two, for name place and antiquitie, I will yeeld him prioritie and precedence for euer after. The words of Name and Antiquitie, the old man heard with much impatience; at length audience being granted, and silence obtained: Now yong knaue (sayth the old Vicar) what canst thou say for thy selfe? I onely desire (answered the young man) to be resolued in one question: propound i^ say^h the other, Marrie thus (sayth he) When the world was distroyed in the generall deluge, all saue eight Parsons, tell me, Where were the Vicars then? The old man was blanke, the gentlemen smiled, and the young man carried it; so that euer after the sonne tooke place of the father, and the faire daughter of the mother. I will onely remember you of a faire young gentlewoman, a countrey woman of mine, and so conclude with my Faire ones.
A faire wittie Wench.A gallant newly come to his lands, became a suitor to a proper young Virgin, her fathers onely child and heire: Hee hauing had conference with her father, conditions on both sides were debated, the match concluded, and the day of marriage appointed: the father and the sonne in law riding abroad one morning to take the ayre, the antient gentleman was mounted on an easie paced Mare which he kept his owne saddle, this beast the young

gallant was so enamored of, that hee offered to buy her at any rate, though neuer so vnreasonable: but the old man entreated him to hold him excused, because the beast was easie and gentle, fitting his age, and being disfurnished of her hee knew not how to come by the like, therefore his resolution was, neyther to depart from her for loue nor money. The gentleman grew so obstinate to haue her, and the other so selfe-will'd to keepe her, that at length the sonne in law told him plainely, That if hee would not sell him his Mare, he would not marrie his daughter. The father at this grew into choller, and told him, If he respected his child no better, but set her so slight, he bad him come when he sent for him, and vpon these short tearmes they parted. A fortnight passed in this discontent; at length the young gallant better aduising with himselfe, and the gentlewomans beautie still sticking in his stomacke, he began to recant his former obstinacie, and purposely tooke horse to renew old acquaintance and giue her fresh visitation: and comming something neere the house, it was the young gentlewomans fortune to spye him from a bay window, who instantly steps downe to the gate, meaning her selfe to play the porter. Three or foure times hee knockes at the gate, but no bodie answered; at length hee rapt so loud, that shee opened the wicket, and asked him, Who he was, and what he would haue? He seeing it was she, smilingly answered; It is I, sweet-heart, doe you not know me? Not I indeed, replyed she, for to my remembrance I neuer saw you before: To whom he againe answered, I am such a man, and by these and these tokens I can put you in mind, that you cannot chuse but know me. Oh, I crie you mercie; it is true indeed (saith shee) I now very well remember you, You are hee that came a wooing to my fathers Mare: so clapt to the gate, and left him, and neuer after would giue him the least entertainment.



Of Women Deformed.
IT is remembered of the Poet Hypponax (by Plinie, Lib. 36. cap. 5.) to be of that vnhappie shape, vnseemely presence, and vncomely countenance, so deformed both in face and feature, that he became a generall scorne to all: insomuch, that two famous Painters, Bubulus and Anterinus, drawing his picture, and setting it out to sale, had pensill'd him in such ridiculous and vnfashionable manner, that the Table begot laughter from all such as passed by and beheld it. Which Hypponax hearing, hee so persecuted the poore Painters, in his bitter Iambicks, and inuectiue Satyres, that despayring, they hanged themselues. Then blame me not, if I be sparing in ripping vp the deformities of women, least they prosecute me as seuerely with their rayling tongues, as the Poet did the Painters with his Satyricall penne. It is an argument therefore that I desire to be briefe in.
Athenaeus, Lib. 9. tells vs, That Anacharsis the Philosopher sitting at a Banquet with his wife (who was a wondrous blacke and hard-fauoured woman) one of the guests that sat with him at the Table being in his cups, could not contayne himselfe, but said aloud; O Anacharsis, you haue marryed a wife deformed enough: to whom the Philosopher (with great modestie) replyed; I haue indeed: but Boy (sayth he, calling to one that attended on

the Cup-board) Fill the gentleman more Wine, and shee will then appeare to him sufficiently beautifull; more taunting his intemperance, than hee her deformitie. As Ouid speakes of the Night, so may it be said of Wine:
Nocte latent menda--
The Night hides faults, the Midnight houre is blind,And no mis-shap'd deformitie can find.
Vetustina.Martial, Lib. 3. describes one Vetustina: Shee hath (sayth hee) onely three teeth, and three hayres, the breast of a Grasse-hopper, the legge of an Ant, the belly of a Spider, a rough and rugged brow; her mouth in smyling, shewed like the Crocodiles; her voyce in singing, like the Frogges, and Gnats; her face like the Owles, and her sauour like the Goates, with other such like offensiue imperfections. The same Author, Lib. 1. speakes of Philenis:Philenis.
Oculo Phile^is semper altero plorat,Quo fiat istud quaeris modo? Lusea est.
Philenis seemes with one eye still to mone;Would'st thou the reason know? she hath but one.
I see no cause why any man should mocke such imperfections as come by nature: therefore I commend the answer of a gentlewoman, who being followed by a gallant at the heeles, and seeing her to be of an vpright and straight bodie, slender wasted, and cleane legged, hee commended her in his thoughts for an exceeding proper and well-limb'd woman; who mending his pace to ouertake her, and spying her masked, entreated her in courtesie to vnpinne her maske, with purpose to kisse her; but seeing her face to be swartie, and somewhat wrinckled, and not according to his expectation answering to the other parts of her bodie: Mistresse (saith he) I had purposed to haue begged a kisse of you, had I liked you before as well as I did behind. Then Sir (quoth shee) so please you, you haue leaue to kisse me where you best like. The Persians affect such as haue hooked noses (those the Greekes call Gripos) and such they hold to beautifie the face best,Plut. in Apoth. because Cyrus (to which nation, no kings memorie was euer dearer) had his nose so fashioned. There are of those, two kinds; one, which in the discent from the brow, instantly riseth in the fashion of a Crowes byll,Caelius, lib. 24. cap. 26. Antiq. Lect. and such (sayth Aristotle) is a marke of Impudence; the second hath his bending separate from the brow, and the swelling in the middle part of the nose like a Hawkes byll, and those are the markes of Courage and Beautie, and such we tearme a Hawkes nose, or a Roman nose. I know not which of these it was the wench had, of whom Sir Thomas Moore compiled his Epigram, which was after this manner:
A louely Lasse, that had a Roman nose,Meeting with Tyndarus, he would haue kist her:But when he should haue met her at the close,I would (quoth he) but cannot kisse you (sister)For had not your egregious long Nose bin,I would haue kiss'd your lips, and not your thin.The poore wench blusht, and burnt with secret ire,Which set her changing colour all on flame,And saith to him; To furnish your desire,Since that you faine would kisse, and craue the same;Because my Nose no more shall let your will,Kisse where is none, there freely take your fill.
Thus you see euen the greatest schollers, and grauest men, will sometimes make sport with the Muses. Many other things there are, which blast the brightest beauties, making women loathed where they haue beene most liked; their number is infinite: Amongst many, I will giue you a taste of one, borrowed from an Elegie in Ouid (which beares Title, Ad Amicam) to his Mistresse, that demaunded hyre for her prostitution.

As faire as she that made two husbands iarre,
Raysing 'twixt Troy and Greece a Ten-yeeres warre;
As bright as feathered Laeda, great Ioues rape,
She that was chang'd into a Swan-like shape;
As faire as Amimone, euen so bright
Were you my Mistresse. That which Poets write
Of metamorphos'd Ioue, how ost Loue chang'd him,
And from his owne celestiall shape estrang'd him,
To an Eagle, or a Bull; I fear'd least hee
Would likewise from high heauen descend on thee.
I am not iealous now, my feare is vanisht,
And the hot ardor of Affection banisht,
My fire is cool'd, Reason re'assumes his place.
And now me thinkes thou hast not thine owne face.
Do'st thou demand why I am chang'd? Behold,
The cause Ile tell thee, thou didst aske me gold;
Thou look'st that for my pleasure I should pay,
And that alone doth fright me still away.
Whil'st thou wert simple, and in all things kind,
I, with thy sweet proportion, lik'd thy mind:
Thou now art cunning growne; what hath that gayn'd?
Thy bodies beautie by thy mind is stayn'd, etc.

And after proceedes thus:
Looke on the beasts that in the medowes stray,Shall women beare more sauage minds than they?What gifts doe Kane from the rude Bulls enforce?What price demands the Mare of the proud Horse?Or of the Ram, the Ewe? they'le comple twice,Before they once debate vpon a price.Women alone haue learnt to bargaine well,Their pleasures borne with them, alone they sell;Alone they prize the night, and at a rateChaffer themselues to strangers: O vile state.Alone for mutuall pastime, Coyne they craue,And ere they sport, aske first, What shall I haue?That which delighteth both, to which both run,And but by ioint assistance is not done,The pleasures which we both on euen-hand try,Why should one partie sell, the other buy?Why should the sweetes which we alike sustaine,To me be double tosse, thee double gaine?That which comes freely, much by that we set;Thou giu'st it me, and I am still in debt.The loue that's hyr'd, is plainely sold and bought,Thou hast thy price, and then I owe thee nought.Then, o you Faire-ones, all such thoughts expell,What Nature freely giues you, spare to sell:Let not your bodies to base vse be lent,,,Goods leaudly got, are euer loosely spent, etc.
And with this gentle admonition, I take leaue as well of the Faire, as the Deformed.

Explicit Liber Quintus, Inscriptus TERPSICHORE.







THE SIXT BOOKE, Inscribed ERATO: Treating of Chast Women, and of Women Wantons.
ERATO signifies Loue; of which, there are but two kinds, that is, the loue of Vertue, or of Vice: then vnder what Muse could I more properly patronize the Chast, and the Wanton? But me thinkes I heare some of our Critickes murmure and say, Whither doth this man purpose to wander, that hath lost his way and gone too farre alreadie? Hee might doe well to breake off here, and leaue it to some other heads, eyther more ingeniously wittie, or more grauely serious. To such, I make the same answere that Bishop Bonner did once to Henry the eight. The king of England, and Francis the first of that name, king of France, being at oddes, Henry was much incensed, and appointed Bishop Bonner (his Embassadour) to debate with him sharpely about the designes then in hand: who hauing accommodated all things fitting for the journey, came to take his leaue of the king his maister, who vttered many bitter and disdainefull words against Francis, all tending to his opprobrie and dishonour; And in these tearmes (sayth hee) deliuer vnto him thy Embassie. To whom Bonner replyed; If it please your Maiestie, if I should giue him such harsh and despightfull language, and in his owne Court too, he can doe no lesse than take off my head. Thy head (answered the king) If hee doe, it is no matter: but tell him further, If hee dares to cut off thy head, ten thousand of his subiects heads shall be sent after it. To whom Bonner (after some small deliberation) againe replyed: But I am doubtfull (my Liege) whether any of these ten thousand heads will fit my shoulders; in that short answere as well taxing the kings rash furie, as prouident for his owne safetie. With which the king somewhat satisfied, and better considering with himselfe, deliuered vnto him a more calme and milder Embassie. So, though those heads may fauour both of more Iudgement and Reading, I am doubtfull whether they could more naturally sute with my owne method, and stile, though neuer so meane or barbarous: Therefore, Deo

adiuvante and Erato assistente,Plutarch. in Lacon. Apotheg. I proceede: The Spartans had a custome in their solemne feasts, to haue a song of three parts, sung by three seuerall Chorusses, The first was of weake old men, The second of yong able men, The third of Boyes and pretie growne children. The old men began with this verse:
Olim iuuentutem, nos strenuam egimus.
We haue beene Strong, that now Decrepit are.
To whom the yong men in a second quire answered:
Sortes sumus nos, fac si vis periculum.
Wee are both Yong, and Strong, prooue vs who dare.
To them in a third tone the children ecchoed:
Nos erimus his prestantiores plurimo.
With these in Youth and Strength wee shall compare.
To this three-fold age, I compare the triplicitie of the Muses. The first three books are by this, alredie spent in your iudgements: The second three, of which this is the last, are the pyth and strength of my present worke in hand; to which the three succeeding (though yet in their infancie) I shall striue to paralell, if not exceed the rest. And first of Chastitie. It is reported of a woman of Lacena, that a great man sending her rich gifts to corrupt her chastitie, she returned him this answere, Whilest I was a Virgin, I was taught to obey my father, which I accordingly did; and being a wife, to submit my selfe to my husbands will; if then you desire any courtesie at my hands, get first his consent and you shall after vnderstand my further pleasure. Plutarch. in Lacon. Institut. relates, that diuerse of these Lacenaean Virgins were taken captiues and sold in open market; one of them beeing cheapened, was demaunded what she knew? she answered, To be faithfull. Another being asked if he should buy her, whether she would proue chast? answered, Whether he bought her or no, she would be chast howsoeuer: her maister after seeking to corrupt her, she slew herselfe, vttering these her last words, See what a treasure thou hast lost, that knewest not my worth whilest thou wast possessed of me. There haue beene many men that haue left vnto women strict rules of Chastitie by their examples. Saint Augustine being asked why hee would not suffer his owne sister to dwell in the house with him? answered, Because such as may conuerse with her are not my sisters; intimating, that all such as would auoid the sinne ought to shun temptation: for he was wont to say, It is not good to looke vpon a woman, it is worse to conuerse with her, but worst of all to touch her. Therfore these sences of ours that are most subiect to danger, ought most to be supprest and bridled, Marul. lib. 4. Capit. 7. and Sabin. lib. 5. Hierome reports of the Abbot Hylarian, That when hee found any vnchast cogitations arise in his brest, hee would beate himselfe vpon the bosome, as if with blowes and buffets hee would expell them thence (and thus sayd) I will tame thee o Asse, that thou shalt no more kick and spurne against me with thy heeles, I will not henceforth feed thee with Barley but chaffe, I will abate thy wantonnesse with hunger and thirst, I will loade thy backe with grieuous burdens,

I will inure thee to the Sommers heate and the Winters cold. After which time he vsed the spare dyet of rootes and the iuice of hearbes; and these onely when necessitie compelled him to eate: Hee inioyned himselfe (the time of prayer excepted) to strict and continuall labour, to increase his appetite, but not augment his dyet. Therfore Hierom against Lust prescribes these three souereigne remedies; fast, prayer, and hard labour: The examples are innumerable, as well amongst Ethnick men as Christians. Alexander supping with Antipadres, there was brought to the table and set iust against the king, a wonderous beautifull woman, as excellent in voice as in face, both tempting so farre that Alexander began suddenly to be surprised with her loue,Plut Apotheg. Reg. and demaunded of Antipadres, If she were a woman whom he any way affected. To whom he answered, That she was indeered to him aboue all other creatures liuing. Then thou foole (replyde the king) cause her inst^ntly to rise and be conueyed hence from the banquet. How farre then was this temperate Prince from adulterating another mans wife, that was affraid to doe his host the least iniurie in his strumpet? Therefore Iulianus the Emperour hauing tooke the cittie Nalaca, wherein were many women of rare and extraordinarie feature, was so farre from corrupting their vertues that he commanded, not any of them should be suffered to come in his presence. Calius lib. 7. cap. 27.Fulgos. lib. 4. cap. 3. tells vs that so great was the chastitie of the Paduan women in times past, that not any of them walked out of their doores but with their faces couered. Therefore Caius Salpitius Gallus sued a diuorse against his wife, because she was met bare-browed in the streetes, against whom he thus pleaded, Thou art onely to be gouerned and guided by the lawes of mine eyes, thy beautie is to be approoued by them, and to please them alone thou oughtest to adorne thy selfe: but to desire to seeme faire in the eyes of strangers,Erasmus lib. 6. Apotheg. incurres the imputation both of suspition and trespasse. What should wee thinke then of that fantastique attyre and gawdie ornaments so much in vse now adayes, which as well in youth as age, rather seeme openly to professe lust than inwardly to protect chastitie. Of these curiosities in vaine and vnnecessarie attire, Plautus in Pen^lo thus speakes,
Negotij sibi qui vole^ vim parare, nauem and mulieremHec duo sibi comparato, and
He that is idle and would businesse haue,Let him of these two things himselfe prouide,A Woman, and a Ship; no two things craneMore care, or cost, to suite the one for pride,Th'other for tackles: they are both like fire,For still the more they haue they more desire.And this I speake by proofe, from morne to noone,Their labour and their trauells haue none end,To wash, to r^b, to wipe, and when that's done,To striue (whore nothing is am^sse) to mend:To polish, and expolish, pain^, and staine,Vnguents to daube, and then wipe out againe, etc.
Now what generall censures these fantasticke garbes and meere importunities incurre, if any demaund, I answere, What lesse than weakenesse of

the braine or loosenesse of life: This iest following though it be old, yet me thinkes it is pittie it should dye vnremembered. A gentleman meeting in the streets with a braue gallant wench and richly accommodated, seeing her walke with her brests bare almost downe to the middle: laying his hand vpon them, demaunded of her in her eare, whether that flesh were to bee sold, who skornefully answered, No, to whom he modestly replyed, Then let me aduise you to shut vp your shop-windowes. I will end this monitorie counsell with an Epigram out of Ausonius, which beares title of two sisters of vnlike conditions:
Delia nos miramur, and est mirabile qoud tamDissimiles estis, etc.
Wee wonder Delia, and it strange appeares,Thou and thy sister haue such censure past;Though knowne a whore, the habit's chast she woaresThou (saue thy habit) nothing whorish hast:Though than chast life, she hath chast habit sought,Her Manners her, thy Habit makes thee nought.
In memorie of Virgin chastitie, I will cite you one historie out of Marullus, lib. 4. cap. 8.Aegiptae. The monument of Aegiptae (the daughter of Edgar king of England, a professed Virgin in her life time) beeing opened after shee had many yeares lyen in the graue, all her bodie was turned into dust sauing her wombe and bowells; and they were as fresh and faire without any corruption, as at the first day of her interment. Those that stood by wondering at the obiect, one Clerke amongst the rest broke foorth into these tearmes: Wonder not to see the rest of the bodie to taste of putrifaction, and the wombe still sound and perfect, which neuer was contaminated with the least stayne or blemish of lust. Of her, Bishop Danstan thus speakes: Worthie is her remembrance to be honoured vpon Earth, whose chast life is celebrated amongst the Saints in Heauen. O great reward, due to Virgin chastitie, by which such felicitie is attayned, that their soules are not onely glorified in Heauen, but their bodies are not subiect to corruption on earth. But because the Theame I am next to speake of, is of Virgins, giue me leaue to begin with the best that euer was since the beginning, for Beautie, Chastitie, and Sanctitie; nor shall it be amisse to speake a word or two concerning her Genealogie.
MARY, the Mother of CHRIST, was the daughter of Ioachim, of the Tribe of Iuda; her mothers name was Anna, the daughter of Isachar, of the Tribe of Leui. Here (as S. Hierome obserues) is to be noted, That Anna and Emeria were two sisters: of Emeria came Elizabeth, the mother of Iohn Baptist: also Anna was first marryed to Ioachim,Ranulphus. and had by him Mary, the mother of Christ; and was after espoused to Cleophas, by whom she had Mary Cleophe, who was marryed to Alphaeus. From them two came Iames the lesse (surnamed Alphaeus) Symon Can^^^aus, Iudas Thaddaus, and Ioseph, otherwise called Barsabas. Eusebius in his Ecclesiasticall Historie, Lib. 2. cap. 2. sayth, That Iames the lesse was called the Brother of our Lord, because hee was the brother of Ioseph, the husband of Mary: but his opinion is not altogether authenticall. Also Anna was espoused to Salome, and had by him Mary Salome, after marryed to Zebedeus, and had by him I^mes the greater,

and Iohn the Euangelist. Ioseph, the husband of Mary, was the brother of Cleophas.Marian. lib. 2. It is also obserued, That in the one and fortieth yeere of the reigne of Augustus Caesar, in the seuenth moneth (which is September) in the eleuenth day of the Moone (which is the foure and twentieth day of the moneth) on a Thursday, Iohn Baptist was conceiued; and two hundred threescore and fifteene dayes after, on a Fryday, was borne: So that he was the fore-runner of Christ, both in his Conception, his Birth, his Baptisme, his Preaching, and his Death. A woman goeth with child two hundred threescore and sixteene dayes (for so long, by computation, was Christ in the wombe of the blessed Virgin) though all women goe not so long with child, as S. Augustine obserues, Lib. 4. de Ciuitate Dei, cap. 5. So that Christ was longer in the wombe by a day, and more, than S. Iohn Baptist. Iohn also was borne when the dayes began to shorten and wane; and Christ, when the dayes began to waxe long. Concerning these Antiquities, I conclude with a sentence of S. Augustines: Against Reason (sayth hee) no sober man will dispute; against the Scripture, no Christian man contest; and against the Church, no religious man oppose. And so I proceed to the Historie.

Of MARY, the Blessed Virgin.
LEt it not be held vnnecessarie,Iohan. Wyerus de Lamijs, lib. 3. Suidas. or appeare out of course, amongst these Virgins to insert a historie memorable for the ^arenesse thereof to all posteritie, Iohannes Wyerius in his booke intituled de Prestigijs demonum, hath collected it out of Suidas. In the time that I^stinianu^ was Emperour, there was a prince amongst the Iewes whose name was Theodosius, He hauing great acquaintance and familiaritie with one Philipp^s a Christian, a bancker, or one that dealt in the exchange of money (for hee was called Philippus Argentarius) this Philip did often sollicite and exhort him to leaue his Iudaisme and be a conuertite, and turne to the Christian religion: to whom he aunswered, Indeed he must ingeniosly confesse, he made no question but that Iesus whom the Christians adored, was the same Messias of whom the holie Prophets foretold, yet he could not bee persuaded to relinquish the honours and profits that he had amongst his owne nation, and giue himselfe vp to a name which they knew not, or at least would not acknowledge: yet that he beleeued so of Christ, he was not onely persuaded by the Oracles of the holie Prophets, but he found it approoued by a certaine mysterie, namely a writing most charily still kept amongst the Iewes, in a place most safe and secret, where their choise records with the especiallest care and trust are reserued; which was of this nature: It was a custome amongst the Iewish nation, at what time, the holie Temple was yet standing in Ierusalem, to haue continually the number of twentie two chiefe and selected Priests, (iust so many as there bee letters in the Hebrew language, or bookes of the old Testamen^) and so often as any one of these was taken away by death, immediately another was elected to succeed in his place; and being chosen (in a booke kept in the treasurie for that onely purpose) expressely to write downe his owne name, and the names of both his parents, with the dayes punctually set downe of the decease of the one and the succession of the other. Now in the time that Christ was conuers^nt in Iudaea, and yet had not shewed himself to the world, nor preached the Word openly to the people,

it happened that one of the Priests of the foresaid number dyed, neyther after many voyces and sundrie nominations was any agreed vpon, or thought fit to be ascribed into his place. At length was propounded IESVS, the sonne of the Carpenter Io^eph (for so they tearmed him) a man though young, yet for the sanctitie of his life, his behauiour, and doctrine, aboue all the rest commended. This suffrage standing, as hauing generall approbation from all, it was thought conuenient to send for his mother (for his father Ioseph was late dead) into the Consistorie, onely to know their names, and to register them in the aforesaid booke.
She therefore being called, and diligently questioned of her sonne and his father, thus answered, That indeed she was the mother of IESVS, and brought him into the world; of which, those women are testates, that were present at his birth, but that he had no father from Earth: in which if they desired to be further instructed, shee could make it plainely appeare: For being a Virgin, and then in Galilee, the Angell of God (sayth shee) entred the house where I was, and appearing vnto me (not sleeping, but thus as I am, awake) he told me, That by the Holy-Ghost I should conceiue, and bring foorth a sonne, and commanded me that I should call his name IESVS: Therefore beeing then a Virgin, by that Vision I conceiued, I brought foorth IESVS, and I still remaine a Virgin vnto this day.
When the Priests heard this, they appointed faithfull and trustie Midwiues, with all diligence and care to make proofe whether Mary were a Virgin or no: they finding the truth most apparant and not to be contradicted, deliuered vp to the Priests, That shee was a Virgin, pure and immaculate. Then they sent for those women that were knowne to be at her deliuerie, and were witnesses of the Infants comming into the world; all which did attest and iustifie, That shee was the mother of the same IESVS. With these things the Priests amazed and astonished, they presently entreated Mary, that shee would freely professe vnto them what his Parents were, that their names (according to custome) might be registred amongst the others. To whom the blessed Virgin thus answered:
Certaine I am, that I brought him into the world, but know no father that he hath from the Earth; but by the Angell it was told me, That hee was the Sonne of GOD: Hee therefore is the Sonne of GOD, and me. This the Priests vnderstanding, they called for the Booke; which being layd open before them, they caused these words to be inscribed: Vpon such a day deceased such a Priest, borne of such and such Parents; in whose place, by the common and vnite suffrage of vs all, is elected Priest, IESVS, the Sonne of the liuing GOD, and the Virgin MARY.
And this Booke Theodosius affirmed (by the especiall diligence of the most noble amongst the Iewes, and the chiefe Princes) was reserued from the great sacke and destruction of the citie, and Temple, and was transferred into the citie of Tiberias, and there kept a long time after. S^idas testifies, That hee hath heard this discourse from honest men, who deliuered it to him word by word, as they themselues haue heard it from the mouth of Philippus Argentarius. This most blessed and pure Virgin Mary, the mother of our Lord and Sauiour, was borne of the holy Matron S. Anne, in the yeere of the World 3948, and in the yeere before Christ, fifteene. Of him, Cla^dian thus elegantly writes ^n one of his Epigrams:
Proles vera Dei, ^unctisque antiquior AnnisN^^c geni^^s, qui semper er as--
True Sonne of God, older than Time, that hastThy byrth but now, yet from beginning wast,Author of Light, and Light before all other,Oh thou that art the parent of thy mother,And by thine equall-aged father sentFrom Heauen vnto this terrhene continent.Whose word was made Flesh, and constrain'd to dwellIn the straight prison of a Virgins cell,And in a narrow angle to remaine,Whose power, no limit can, no place conteine;Who being borne, did'st now begin to seeAll these great workes created first by thee:The worke and workeman of thy selfe, not skorningT^obey those wearie houres of Eu'n and Morning,Of which th'art Lord, and tell each minute ore,Made by thy Wisdome, for mans vse before.And took'st on thee our shape, onely to showTo vs, that God we did (till then) not know, etc.

Petronilla.
WHen Peter the Apostle, had by his Faith cured all infirmities and diseases, and in all places, yet he suffered his daughter Petronilla to bee grieuously afflicted with a Feauor; and being demanded, why hee that had cured others did not helpe her; he answered, Because hee knew her sickenesse to be most behoofefull for her soules health, for the weaker she was in bodie, she was so much the stronger in Faith, setling her cogitations on the ioyes of Heauen, and not the pleasures of the world, desiring of God that she might rather die a chast Virgin, than to be the wife of the Consull Flaccus, by whom she was at that time most earnestly sollicited: whose prayer was heard, for she dyed of that sicknesse, and the Consull was preuented of his purpose, who had long insidiated her chastitie. Marull. lib. 4. cap. 8. The like we reade of Hillarius Pictauiensis Episcopus, who hauing long trained vp his daughter Appia in chastitie and sanctitie of life,Appia. fearing least time might alter her vowes, and tempt her with the vaine pleasures of the world, hee besought the giuer of all graces, that hee might rather with ioy follow her to her graue, than with sorrow to her marriage bed; which was accordingly granted,Eustochium as the same Author testifies. Eustochium the daughter of Paula a noble matron of Rome, is celebrated by Saint Hierom for the onely president of Virginall chastitie.Tora. Tora the virgin was of that chast and austere life, that hauing tooke a vow and once entered her profession, shee neuer put on her backe any new garment,Maria Aegipt. or so much as changed her shooes. Maria Aegyptiaca, liued the life of an Hermit in the sollitude of an vnfrequented desart: some write of her that as often as she was seene to pray, shee seemed to be lifted vp from the Earth into the Ayre the heigth of a cubit.Columba. Columba a Virgin of Perusina, is reported to be of that chastitie and abstinence, that she neuer tasted any other food than the bare fruits of the Earth, from the yeares of her discretion till the houre of her death.Amata. Amata was a professed Virgin, who in fortie yeares space neuer set foot ouer the threshold of that Cloyster wherein she had confined her selfe, in which time she neuer tasted

food saue bread and roots.Sara. Sara liued in the time of Theodosius the elder, she made a Vow, neuer to lodge beneath any roofe; but inhabiting the banke of a certaine riuer, remoued not from that place in threescore yeeres. The like is read of Syluia,Syluia. a Virgin, the daughter of Ruffinus, a Prefect or Ruler in Alexandria, who betooke her selfe to sollitude for the space of threescore yeeres, in which time she neuer washt any part of her bodie saue her hands, nor reposed her selfe vpon any bed sa^e the ground. It is reported by Edward Hall,S. Ebbe. Iohn Leisland, Iohn Sleyden, and others, of S. Ebbe, Abbesse of Collingham, That to preserue her owne and her sisters Chastities, and keepe their Vowes inuiolate (because they would seeme odible to the Danes, who had done many outrages both against Law and Religion, and then tyrannized in the Land) shee cut off her owne nose, and vpper lippe, and persuaded all the other Nunnes to doe the like: for which act, the Danes burnt the Abbey,Ildegunda. with all the Sister-hood. Fulgos. Lib. 4. cap. 3. speakes of Ildegunda, a German Virgin, borne in Nassau; who after many temptations, to which shee feared her beautie might subiect her, in the yeere 1128 shee changed her habit, and got to be entertained in a Priorie neere vnto Wormes, called Schuna beu Heim: in which she liued long by the name of Ioseph, in singular continence and modestie, still conuersing amongst the learnedest and best approued schollers, euen till the time of her death: neyther was she then knowne to be a woman, till comming to wash her bodie, her Sex was discouered. In the same Monasterie,Euphrosyna. and amongst that Couent, liued Euphrosyna, a Virgin of Alexandria,Marina. by the name of Smaragdus: as also one Marina, who called her selfe Marinus,Gunzonis. both dissembling their Sex. Gunzonis, daughter to the duke of Arboa, was possessed by an euill spirit; but after, by the prayers of holy men being recouered, she vowed perpetuall Virginitie. And after being demanded in marriage by Sigebertus, king of the Frenchmen, she was deliuered vnto him by her father: who debating with her concerning his present purpose, she humbly desired to be excused by his Maiestie, in regard she had alreadie past a pre-contract: The king demanding, To whom? she answered, She was a betrothed Spouse to her Redeemer: At which the king being startled, forbore to compell her any further, but suffered her to take vpon her a religious life; shee preferring her Virgin Chastitie before the state and title of a Queene. And these shall suffice for Religious Virgins; I now proceed to others, that grounded their vertue on meere moralitie.
Baldraca.Baldraca was a Virgin, but of meane parentage and of a deiected fortune: yet to her neuer-dying honor, and president to all ages to come (notwithstanding she was not able to supply her selfe with things needfull and necessarie, eyther for sustenance or ornament) neyther by threats or menaces, promises of worldly honors, or promotion, shee could not be tempted to prostitute her selfe to the Emperour Otho. Saxo Gramaticus writes of Serytha,Serytha. the daughter of Synaldus king of the Danes, to be of that modestie, that when the fame of her beautie had attracted a confluence of many suitors to the Court of her father, yet she could neuer be woon eyther to conuerse with,Tara. or so much as to looke vpon any of them. Tara was a French Ladie, of a noble and illustrious Familie; shee liued in the time of Heraclius: who when her father Hagerticus and her mother Leodegunda would haue compeld her to marrie, she fell into that excesse of weeping, that with the extraordinarie flux of teares she grew blind soone after.Dula. Dula was a Virgin famous for her Chastitie, who chose rather to be slaine by the hand of a Souldior,

than to be despoyled of her Virginitie.Statyra. Roxana. Statyra and Roxana were the sisters of Mithridates king of Pontus, who for the space of fortie yeeres had kept their Vow of Virginitie inuiolate; these hearing the sad fate of their brother, and fearing to be rauished by the enemie (at least, to fall into their captiuitie) by taking of poyson, finished both their dayes and sorrowes. Plutarch writes of one Roxana, drowned in a Well by Statyra. It is reported of an Hetrurian Damosell (taken by a Souldior) who to preserue her Virginitie,Etrusca Virgo. leapt off from the bridge Ancisa into the riuer Arnus: of whom, Benedictus Varchius hath left this memorie in one of his Epigrams:
Perd^ret nitactum ne Virgo Etrusca pudoremIn rapidas sese praecipitanit aquas, etc.
Th' Hetrurian Girle, her Honor still to keepe,Precipitates her selfe into the Deepe;And from the bottome three times being castVp into th'ayre, as loth that one so chastShould there be swallow'd, she as oft sinkes downeHer modest face, her martyrdome to crowne,And shame the lustfull world. What shall we sayOf the chast Eucrece, famous to this day?She for one death, is call'd the Romans pride;To saue her Fame, this Tuscan three times di'de.
Bernardus Scandeonus, Lib. 3. Classe 34. Histor. Pat^ninae, writes, That when Maximilian the Emperour made spoyle of the Paduan territories, diuerse of the countrey people leauing the villages emptie, fled into the citie; amongst whom, was one Isabella,Isabella. a Damosell of Rauenna, who being seized on by some of the Venetian souldiors that then had the charge of the citie, and surprized with her beautie, drew her aside, with purpose to haue dishonored her: but finding no other meanes to shun the violence of their lust, shee from the bridge cast her selfe headlong into the riuer Medoacus, where shee was drowned: and afterwards, her bodie being drawne out of the riuer, was buryed vnder a banke, without any other ceremonie belonging to a Funerall. Martia,Martia. the daughter of Varro, was of that admirable continence and chastitie, that being most excellent in the Art of Painting, shee not onely alienated and restrayned her Pensill from limning any thing that might appeare obscene, or shew the least immodestie, but shee was neuer knowne to delineate or draw the face of a man,Lala Cizizena. Rauis. in Officin. The like is reported of Lala Cizizena, alike excellent in Painting, and as remarkable for her Virgin Chastitie. Britonia,Britonia. a beautifull maid of Crete (giuing her selfe wholly to Hunting, and the Chase) to shun the importunities of king Minos (who layd traynes to vitiate her) threw her selfe into a riuer, and was drowned. Daphne,Daphne. the daughter of Amiela, retyred her selfe both from walled cities, and all publike societie, and was at length entertained into the fellowship of Diana, frequenting the Laconian fields and Peloponnesian mountaines. Of her, Leucippus the sonne of Oenemaus was enamored; who hauing attempted diuerse wayes to compasse his will, but not preuayling in any, he bethought himselfe what course Iupiter tooke to stuprate Calisto, the daughter of Lycaon; and attyring himselfe in the habite of a female Huntresse, was entertayned by Diana, and admitted into their number:

where he grew familiar with all, and especially endeared to Daphne; insomuch, that shee thought no houre spent well without him. Of which acquaintance Apollo being iealous (in regard they had such conuenience of time, place, and opportunitie) he put his owne dearely beloued Daphne in mind, to entice Leucippus to a riuer, where Diana with all their nymphes intended to bathe themselues: Whither when they came, the Virgins disrobed themselues, euen to nakednesse; and being all stript to their skinnes, but finding Leucippus onely to mooue delayes, they pluckt off his garments by force, and so discouered him to be of the contrarie Sex: at which Diana enraged, commanded all her Virgins to take vp their Bowes and Quiuers, and so they shot him to death with their Arrowes. This is recorded by Parthen. de Amator. Theodor. Flaietes in Eleg. and Philarchus, lib. 15.



Of Chast Wiues.
Rhodogune.AN excellent president of Chastitie was that in Rhodogune, the daughter of Darius; who caused her Nurse to be slaine, because her husband being dead, she persuaded her to a second marriage. A more admirable remarke of Nuptiall Chastitie it was of the Wiues of the Theutonicks, remembred by Hieron. in his Epistle to Gerontia; whose husbands being slaine, and they taken captiue by Marius, humbly besought him on their knees, that they might be sent to the Vestalls in Rome, as a present; protesting, they would be equally with them, still from the societie of men, and professe perpetuall Chastitie: but their request being denyed by the Consull Marius, the next night following all of them with an vnite consent strangled themselues. Theoxena was famous for her Chastitie,Theoxena. who being enuironed at Sea by the Nauie of Philip king of Macedon, seeing her husband throwne ouer-boord, leapt after him to follow him in death; not onely to expresse her loue to her husband, but her skorne to stand to the mercie of the Conqueror. Baptista Pius, Lib. 2. Elegiar. speakes of Tyro,Tyro. a woman of Thessalia, who (her husband being dead) could by no counsaile of friends, or persuasion of kindred, be woon to suruiue him. Plutarch in Pompeio speaking of Hypsicrataea,Hypsicrataea sayth shee was so endearedly affected to her husband king Mithridates, that for his loue she made a voluntarie change of her most becomming womanish shape and habit, into a mans: for cutting her hayre, she accustomed her selfe to the practise of Horse and Armes, that shee might with the more facilitie endure the labours and dangers of the warres. Her husband being subdued by Cn. Pompeius, and his Armie quite dissipate and ouercome, shee followed him (flying) through many barbarous Nations, where her life and safetie were in hourely hazard; and these shee enterprised with a mind vndaunted, and a bodie vnwearyed, her faith and loyaltie in all his extremities being to him no small sollace and comfort: for though an Exile (being still in the societie of his Queene and bed-fellow) he imagined himselfe (in what place soeuer he reposed) to haue beene in his owne pallace, and amongst his household gods.

Of Penelope.
THe beautie of Penelope attracted a number of suitors, who from diuerse countreyes came to adulterate the bed of Vlysses. From Dulichim

came two and fiftie, from Samos foure and twentie, from Xacynthus twentie, from Ithaca two and twentie; of which, these are nominated by Homer: Antinous, Eurinous, Eurimachus, Leocritus, Neso, Pysander, Hesippus, Agatus, Leocles, Ampinomus, Demotholomaeus, Medo^ a common Cryer, Euphemus a Minstrell, and Irus a Begger; all which, Vlysses (at his returne from his twentie yeeres trauailes) slew in his owne house. Some of these, Ouids Penelope reckons vp in these verses:
Dulichij, Samijque, and quos ^^lit alia Xacinthus, etc.
Dulichium, Samos, and Xaci^^hus Hill,Throng me with troopes of want^n s^itors still:What should I speake to thee of Medon fell?Of Polibus, or of Pysander tell?What of Antinous giddie head deplore,Couetous Eurimachus, and other^ more?These in thine absence cannot be withstood,But still thou feed'st them with thy wealth and blood.The Begger Irus, and Melanthius too,The Heardsman, etc.
And since we are in the historie of Penolope,Homer lib. 1. Odiss. It shall not be amisse to delate it a little further out of Homer: who in his first booke intituled Odissaea, of Phaemius the Harper speakes to this purpose:
Phaemius the Haerper to the b^^rd in^ited,Where the bold suitors bid the^sel^es to feast^A dolefull song to a sad tune recited:Of th' Argiue fleete in their returne distrest,And cast in sundrie exiles: on what coastSuch men miscarie, where such Princes perish,Vpon what rockes and shelues such ships were ^ost:Him, wil'st Penelopes bold suitors cherish,The discontented Queene, with Prayres, and Teares,Wills him desist: the Harper soone forbeares.
But to leape from the first, to the seuenteenth booke, and to omit all Vlysses trauells and aduentures till his meeting with his sonne Telemachus, who brought him into his owne court in the disguise of a begger, to see what reuells were kept there in his absence: Known only to his sonne and his friend Eumaeus, and not yet to Penelope.

Iam Caelum roseis rutilat Tritonia bigi^.Odiss. lib. 17. Perioch.



Telemacus vnto the Queen relates
The processe of his long peregrination:
Eumaeus brings Vlisses 'mongst those States
That sought his bed; where they in courtly fashion
Were sat at a rich banquet with his wife,
There he begg's meat. Antinous 'mongst the rest,
Threats with iniurious words to c^ise his life,
But the milde queene inuites him as her guest.
Vlysses for that time forbeares their sight,
But s^nds the queene word he will come at night.



Odyss. lib. 18.Irus adest populi per mendicabula notus.


In his owne Pallace whilest Vlysses craues
Their Charitie, Irus (that was indeed
One of that ranke, and begg'd 'mongst ragged slaues)
Boldly thrasts in, amongst the rest to feed:
From words these grow to blowes; the suitors they
Encourage both parts to maintaine the ^ray:


Proposing him that shall (...), for prise
The intrailes of a Goa^. Vlysses hee
Proues victor in his beggers base disguise,
And (halfe-dead) Irus of the place doth free:
For which hee's guerd^^'d, as the Queenes request,
With a rich Gift from many vnbid guest.


Odyss. lib. 19.At parte interiore d^mus sacratus Vlysses.


Vlysses with Telemachus conspires
The death of all those suitors, both deuising
How to release the Queene to her de^ires,
And free the Pallace from their tyrannizing:
And that they neither may offend, nor stand,
Compl^t by night, their weapons how to steale.
Now by Eumaeus to the Queenes faire hand
Her Lord is brought (who will (...) y^^ reueale
Himselfe to her) but sayth he is of Cre^^e.
To whom her husband once had beene a guest.
They part; the Queene commands to wash his feet,
(And for that night betakes her to her rest.)
That taske Euriclia takes (his Nurse before)
She a knowne skarre vpon his flesh espyes,
On Mount Pernassus giuen him by a Bore.
It was no sooner seeme, but out she cryes,
Vlysses, Are you come? Being thus descri'de,
Hee prayes, and bribes, that she his name will hide.


Perioch. 20. Odyss.--Iamque proces genua amplexus ^rabat Vlysses.


The guest at banquet, Eresippus casts
To hit Vlysses, but he mist his ayme.
(After some Healths, both time and banquet wasts)
When to the place Theoclemenus came,
Expert in Diuination, who fore-spake
At Table to them all, their imminent ruine;
But at his words they strange deri^ions make,
Abusing all that speake of things ensuing;
They mocke the high Powers, and contemme the Fates,
And thrust at length the Prophet forth the gates.


Perioch. 21.Vnto Eumaeus and Philetius too,
In whom he trusts, the Prince himselfe makes (...),
And what that night he had intent to doe:
And how to make safe seisure of his owne,
(Which craft must doe) he calls for that strong Bow,
In which, what time he woo'd his beautious Bride,
All that were Riualls, must their vigors show,
Yet he atchieu'd what many suitors tri'de:
This was propos'd a second marriage-prise.
And now the selfe-same Bow before them brought,
All proue their strengths (saue he in his disguise)
But (much vnable) they preuayled nought.
The Bow the sonne vnto his father gaue:
Which they (deriding) no way would admit,
That such a needie and penurious slaue
(It being a Kings) should once lay hand on it;
The rather, they being in their prime of yeares,
And he so aged: yet he needes must try.
And now his antient potencie appeares;
They shame to see it done, and they stand by.


Squalentes Humeris habitus reiecit Vlysses.Perioch. 22.


Vlysses drawes the string vp to his eare,
The keene shaft flyes, and sterne Antinous pierces:
At this, the boldest stand amaz'd, and feare,
Whilest he enrag'd, strewes all the roome with Hearses.
The Pallace gates are shut, no man can flye;
Eumaeus and Telemachus proceed,
With bold Philetius, and aloud they crye,
Kill all, spare none, for now the bold'st must bleed.
The harmelesse Phemius, that but came in sport,
(Skilfull in th'Harpe) their ruthlesse furies spare;
And Medon, that did ne're offend the Court,
Or'gainst Penelope the least thing dare;
But sterne Melanthius, one of her owne Traine,
That did the suitors in their riots cherish,
He by their swords, amongst the rest, is slaine:
Twelue strumpets likewise in their furies perish.


Chalcidicum gressu nutrix superabat anili.Perioch. 23.


From sleepe Euriclia soone awak'd the Queene,
Relating all that had that night beene done,
What valour in her husband she had seene,
And what in her iust seruants, and her sonne^
In her distraction to beleeue, or no.
(By this) Vlysses to the Queenes faire bed
Approacheth, whom at first she did not know;
Till by some tokens hee's acknowledge,
Receiu'd, and lodg'd: he makes a full Narration
Of his Warres, Trauailes, Acts, and Nauigation.


And so much, the better to illustrate the Historie of Penelope.
Euadne.Capanaeus being dead, at the celebration of his funeralls, his wife Euadne cast her selfe into the flames, of whom Martiall:
Arserit Euadne flammis iniect a mariti.
Laodamia.Of no lesse fame was Laodamia, her husband Protesi^ans (vnder whose iurisdiction were Antron, Philaca, and Larissa, citties of Tessalie) was the first Greeke that was slaine in the siege of Troy, and (some write) by the hand of Hector: which sad newes when his wife vnderstood, to comfort her sorrow, shee onely desired of the gods to see his ghost or shadow; which she supposing to be granted her, in the imagination thereof she expired. Of no lesse memories is Panthaea the wife of Abratidas a noble Persian,Panthaea. who no sooner heard that her husband was slaine in battaile, but with a poynard stabbed ner selfe to the heart, and so dyed. Sophronia Romana,Sophronia. by some called Christiana, by others Lucretia; when she could no longer put off the importunities of the prince Decius, hauing before befought the consent of her husband, slew her selfe. As great on honour to her familie was Antonia,Antonia. who in the prime and flourishing time of her beautie, hauing buried her husband, to preuent the temptation od suitors, married her selfe to the strictnesse of one chamber, to which her yonger sister being a vowed Virgin had confined her selfe; thus in one bed the heat of youth in the one was extinct, and the sollitude of widowhood wasted in the other. Q. Curtius lib. 1. remembers vs of one Timoclea a Ladie of Thebes,Timoclea. who being forcibly adulterated by a prince amongst the Thracians, dessembled for a time both her hate and purpose; not long after shee insinuated with him, and told him she would conduct him to a place in which was hid much treasure; of which he being couetous, she brought him to the brincke of a deepe Well beeing in a remote place of the house, to which he presenting himselfe and bending his bodies downewards, to satisfie his expectation concerning the treasure, she apprehending that aduantage, thrust him headlong into the Well, and casting huge stones after him, reuenged her selfe vpon the Rauisher. Brasilla Dyrrachina a prime Ladie,Brasilla Dyrrachina as Ludouic. Vi^es lib. 1. de Instit. Tem. Christian relates being taken prisoner, and seeing an immediat shipwracke of her chastitie threatned by her cruell victor: shee couenanted with him, that if hee would but reprieue her honor for the present, she would giue him an hearbe, with whose iuice if he would annointe any part of his bodie it should preserue it wound-free. The souldier accepts of the condition; she from a neighbour garden plucking vp the weede that came next to hand, with the sap or moysture thereof annoyntes her owne necke and throat, bidding him to draw out his sword and make triall of her selfe, whether shee kept not with him faithfull couenant. The souldier giuing credit to her words, in regard of her constancie and courage, with one strong blow dispatched her of life: o resolute and noble Ladie saith Nicephorus li. 7. c. 15. to prefer death before the losse of her honour. Francis Sforza prince of Mediolanum, being Generall of the Florentine armie,A woman of Casanoua. hauing taken the cittie Casanoua, certaine souldiers brought before him a most beautifull captiue, who with great vocifiration called out, Bring me to your prince, Bring mee to your chiefe Generall. The souldiers mooued with her earnest clamour, brought her before him, who demaunded of the woman, Why she was so importunate to be conducted into his presence? to whom she answered, For no other reason, but to submit her selfe wholly to his pleasure; conditionally hee would secure

her from the iniurie of the souldiers; to which hee willingly assented, and seeing her of such exquisite feature and so tempting a presence, he purposed to make vse of her liberall and free profer that night, therefore hee commaunded a bed to be made readie, in which she was lodged, thether he presently repaires, and being vnclothed casts himselfe by her naked side; but reaching his arme to embrace her, her eyes beeing full of teares and her heart of sorrow, shee humbly besought him before hee touched her bodie, but to graunt her the hearing of a few words; at which the prince making a sudden pause: shee poynting with her finger to the picture of the blessed Virgin (for Sforza was neuer without that or the like in his bed-chamber) she intreated him, euen for the remembrance he bore to the person whom that Table presented, for the honour due to her Sonne and his Sauiour, and for the dignitie of his goodnesse, and for the sacred memorie of his noble auncestors, not to infringe her matrimoniall Vow, nor violate her coniugall Chastitie, but deliuer her backe an vnspotted wife to her vnfortunate husband, who was then a prisoner amongst many other wretched captiues. Her words tooke such impression in the noble General, that notwithstanding her tempting beautie (the motiues to inchastitie) his present opportunitie, and absolute power ouer her as she was his vassall and prisoner, yet to show his miraculous temperance, hee preferred the name of a chast and continent prince, before the imputation of a tyrant or an adulterer; and instantly leapt out of the bed, and left her to her modest and more quiet rest. In the morning he sent for her husband, to whom (after a great character of her Chastitie giuen) he deliuered her, not onely freeing them both without ransome^ but from his owne coffers bountifully rewarding her vertue: in the subduing of his owne affections gaining more honour than in the conquest of so great a cittie. In this act not onely imitating but exceeding Scipio: For that incomparable Ladie that was presented vnto him,She was the contract^d bride to the prince In^i^ilis. was of high linage and of princely parentage, besides he liued in a free cittie, and to haue dishonoured her, he had not onely incurred censure, but being then in a forrein nation purchased to himselfe the name of tyrant, and hazarded a new reuoult of the people: but that was nothing to oppose prince Sforza in the satisfying of his lust, saue his owne goodnesse; for what conquerour hath not power ouer his captiue. Fulgos. lib. 4. cap. 3. Anastatia Constantino politana,Anastatia. when Theodora Augusta was iealous, that shee was not beloued of her husband Iustinianus Augustus, and hauing to that purpose receiued some taunting words from the Emperesse, to approue her innocencie; shee fled both court and cittie, and retyred her selfe into Alexandria, where shee liued obscured in the societie of certaine chast Virgins: But after, hearing of the death of Theodora, her feares were not diminished but augmented, for the Emperors loue appeared to her a greater burden than the hate of the Emperesse; therfore to auoid that which many would haue sought with greedinesse, shee changed her habit, and taking the shape of a young man vpon her, fled into the furthest part of Aegypt, called by the name of Anastatius: where shee liued priuately, austerely, and ended her chast life in great sanctitie. Hieronim. writes that Paula Romana,Paula Romana. after the death of her husband, was so farre from being persuaded to a second, that shee was neuer knowne from that time to eate or drinke in mans companie.Barbara. Of a contrarie disposition was Barbara the wife of Sigismund Emperor, Aenaeus Silu. relates of her, that her husband being dead, when diuers persuaded her to continue still in her widowhood,

proposing vnto her, that women ought to imitate the Turtles, who if one be taken away by death, the other will neuer chuse other mate, but deuote her selfe to perpetuall chastitie? thus answered, If you haue none else to bid me imitate but byrds that haue no reason, why doe you not as well propose me for example the Doues or the Sparrowes? As contrary againe to her was the daughter of Demotian prince of the Arcopagitae, who no sooner heard that her husband Leosthenes was slaine in the Lamick warre, but in^tantly slew her selfe, least she should suruiue a second marriage. Others there bee that haue kept a viduall chastitie euen in wedlocke. The Virgin Edeltrudis,Edeltrudis. as Sigilbertus and Beda both witnesse, was the daughter of Annas a Christian king of the East-Angles, shee was first deliuered by her father in marriage to Candibertus a great prince, who were no sooner married but by mutuall consent they vowed lasting Virginitie: at length he dying, shee was by her father compelled to a second nuptialls with king Cephordus, with whom shee liued twelue yeares, yet neuer (as they could adiudge it) vnloosed her Virgin gyrdle. After which time, by her husbands consent she tooke vpon her a religious life, and entered a monasterie, where (as Marullus lib. 4. cap. 8. sayth) she liued a more secure, but not a more chast life. Infinite to this purpose are remembered by Fulgosius, Marullus, Albertus Cranzius, etc. as of Maria Desegnies, Margarita Aegypta, Cecilia Virgo, Kunegunda Augusta, wife to Henry of that name the first Emperour, Bafilissa, espoused to Iulianus Antiochenus, Stamberga the niece of Clodonius, married to Arnulphus a noble Frenchman. These and others without number (which is somewhat difficult to beleeue) haue wedded, bedded, boorded, lyne and liued together, yet went as pure Virgins to their graues as they came first to their cradles. Of these I may say as Ouid Metamorph. lib. 1. of Daphne:
Saepe pater dixit generum mihi filia debes,Saepe pater dixit, etc.
Thou ow'st me sonnes, oft would her father say,Yong Boyes and Gyrles, with whom my age might play,Thou ow'st me child; this would he oft repeat:When shee as if with skorne and hatred greatSh'abhor'd the nuptiall bed, and held it sinne,With modest blushes dyde the tender skinneOf her faire cheeke: then to her father growes,And her white armes about his neck she throwes,And saith, Deere sir, this one thing grant your child,That I may liue from lustfull man exil'd,A voteresse. Diana this desired,And from her father had what she required.
I will onely produce one historie or two at the most from our moderne Histories, and so cease further to speake of our marryed Virgins. It is reported in the Legend, That after Editha the daughter of Earle Godwin,Editha. was married to king Edward (otherwise called S. Edward) they mutually vowed betwixt themselues perpetuall chastitie, and therein perseuered to the end of their liues. There continued in them (sayth the Legend) a Coniugall loue, without any Coniugall act; and fauourable embraces, without any deflowring of Virginitie: for Edward was beloued, but not corrupted; and

Editha had fauour, but was not touched; she delighted him with loue, but did not tempt him with lust; she pleased him with discourse and sweet societie, yet prouoked him to no libidinous desire. It is moreouer in that Treatise recorded, That they vsed to call Marriage a shipwracke of Maidenhead, comparing it to the fierie Furnace of the Chaldaeans; to the Mantle that Ioseph left in the hand of a strumpet, the wife of Putiphar; to the lasciuious outrage of the two wicked Elders, who would haue oppressed and vitiated Susanna the wife of Ioachim:Susanna. and lastly, to the enticements of drunken Holofernes towards faire Iudith,Iudith. one of the deliuerers of her people. And so much for the Legend. But Richardus Diuisiensis sayth, That being awed by Earle Godwin, and for the feare of hasarding his life and kingdome, Edward was compelled by threats and menaces to the marriage of Editha. Moreouer, Polydore reports, That for the hate he bore her father (who had not long before most trayterously slaine his brother Alphred) hee caused himselfe to be diuorced from her, seising her goods and dower to his owne vse and pleasure. Ranulphus, and one that writes himselfe Anonimos (as willing to conceale his name) say, That shee was disrobed of all her Queenelike honors, and confined into the Abbey of Warnwell, with only one maid to attend her, and so committed to the strict custodie of the Abbesse. William of Malmesbury, and Marianus Scotus haue left remembred, That hee neyther dismissed her his bed, nor carnally knew her; but whether it was done in hatred to her kindred, or purpose of Chastitie, they are not able to determine. Robert Fabian confesseth as much in his Chronicle, Part. 6. cap. 210. Howsoeuer, the effects of that abstenious life were not onely preiudiciall, but brought lamentable effects vpon this distracted kingdome, namely, Innouation and Conquest: for Edward dying without issue, England was inuaded and opprest by the Normans, and the people brought to that miserie, that happie was that subiect that could say, I am no Englishman. And in this, agree Matthew Paris, Capgraue, Fabian, and Polydore. As I hold it not necessarie for marryed folke to tye themselues to this strict kind of abstinence, so I hold it not conuenient for any such as haue to themselues, and in their soules, taken vpon them the strict life of Virginitie, to be compelled to an enforced marriage; as may appeare by this discourse following, recorded by Gulielm. Malmsburien. Simeon Danelmens. Matthew Paris, Roger Houeden, Capgraue, etc. Henry the first of that name, king of England, and crowned in the yeere of Grace 1101, was by the instigation of Anselme (once a Monke of Normandie, but after by William Rufus constituted Archbishop of Canterburie) marryed vnto Maude,Maude. daughter to Malcolme the Scottish king, she hauing taken a Vow, and being a profest Nunne in the Abbey of Winchester. Much adoe had the King her father, the Queene her mother, her Confessor, Abbesse, or the Bishop, to alienate her from her setled resolution, or persuade her to marriage: but being as it were violently compelled thereunto, she cursed the Fruit that should succeed from her bodie; which after (as Polydore affirmes) turned to the great misfortune and miserie of her children: for afterwards, two of her sonnes, William and Richard, were drowned by Sea. Besides, her daughter Maude (who was afterwards Empresse) prooued an vnfortunate Mother; and amongst many other things, in bringing forth Henry the second, who caused Thomas Becket to be slaine; it thus happened: All forraine warres being past, and ciuile combustions pacified, in the yeere of our Lord 1120,

Henry the first with great ioy and triumph left Normandie, and came into England. But within few dayes following, this great mirth and iollitie turned into a most heauie and fearefull sorrow; for William and Richard (his two sonnes) with Mary his daughter, Otwell their Tutor and Guardian, Richard Earle of Chester, with the Countesse his wife, the Kings Neece, many Chapleines, Chamberlaines, Butlers, and Seruitors (for so they are tearmed in the storie) the Archdeacon of Hereford; the Princes play-fellowes, Sir Geffrey Rydell, Sir Robert Maldvyle, Sir William Bygot, with other Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, great Heires, Ladyes, and Gentlewomen (to the number of an hundred and fortie) besides Yeomen and Mariners (which were about fiftie; all these (sauing one man, which some say was a Butcher) were all drowned together, and not any one of their bodyes euer after found. Many attribute this great Iudgement to the heauie Curse of Queene Maude, others censure of it diuersly: Howsoeuer, in this King (as Polydore sayth) ended the Descent and Lyne of the Normans. Of this Anselme (before spoken of) there are diuerse Epistles (yet extant) to many women, in those dayes reputed of great Temperance and Chastitie: as, To Sister Frodelina, Sister Ermengarda, Sister Athelytes, Sister Eulalia, Sister Mabily, and Sister Basyle, To Maude, Abbesse of Cane in Normandie; and Maude, the Abbesse of Walton, here in England. Hee writ a Treatife about the same time, called Planctus a missae Virginitatis, i. A bewayling of lost Virginitie. So farre Iohn Bale: And so much shall serue for Chast Wiues in this kind, being loth to tyre the patience of the Reader.



Of Women Wantons.
DIon the Historiographer in Tiberio sayth, that Lyuia the wife of Augustus Caesar beholding men naked, sayd to the rest about her: That to continent women and chast matrons, such obiects differed nothing from statues or images; for the modest heart with immodest sights ought not to be corrupted. The vnchast eye more drawes the poyson of sinne from beautie, which is Gods excellent workemanship, from which the chast and contrite heart deriues the Creators praise and glorie. But my hope is, that in exposing vnto your view, the histories of these faire Wantons, you will looke vpon them (should I strip them neuer so naked) with the eyes of Lyuia, that is, to hold them but as beautifull statues, or like Appelles his woman not better than a picture of white Marble. I haue heard of a man that liuing to the age of threescore and ten, had led so austere a life, that in all that time he neuer touched the bodie of a woman, and had proposed to himselfe to carrie that Virginall vow with him to his graue; but at length being visited with sickenesse, and hauing a faire estate purchased with his small charge and great husbandrie, and therefore willing to draw out the thread of his life to what length he could, hee sent to demaund the counsell of the Phisitians; who hauing well considered the estate of his bodie, all agreed in this, that since the phisick of the soule belonged not to them, but onely the phisick of the bodie, they would freely discharge their duties; and indeed told him, that this present estate was dangerous, and they found but onely one way in art for his cure and recouerie, which was in plaine tearmes, To vse the companie of

a woman, and so tooke their leaues and left him to consider of it. Loath was the old man to loose his Virginitie which hee had kept so long, but more loath to part with his life which he desired to keepe yet longer; and hauing meditated with himself from whom he was to depart, and what to leaue behind him; namely his possessions, his money, his neighbours, friends, and kindred, and whether hee was to remooue, to the cold and comfortlesse graue; he resolued with himselfe to prolong the comfort of the first, and delay (as long he could) the feare of the last: Therefore hee resolued rather than to be accessorie to the hastening his owne death, to take the counsell of the doctors. It was therfore so ordered by some that were about him, that the next night a lustie young wench was brought to his bed, one that feared not the robustious violence of youth, much lesse to encounter the imbesillitie of sicke and weake age. I know not with what queasie stomach the patient relished his phisicke, but early in the morning he gaue content to his shee Apothecarie, who was conueyed out of the house vndiscouered. The next day diuers of his friends comming to comfort him, they found him sadly weeping, and by no meanes could they weane him from that extasie: at length the one of them who was priuie to the former nights passage, began to compassionate with him, and told him hee was sorie for his extreame heauinesse, and (as knowing the cause) sayd, No doubt but God was mercifull, and wished him not to despaire but bee of comfort, and with ghostly counsell persuaded him to take nothing to his heart, because hee hoped all would bee well. The old man told him hee vnderstood not his meaning, but desired him to be more plain, that he might know to what purpose his language did in^end. His neighbour answered him againe, Sir I haue beene acquainted with you long, haue knowne your continence and strictnesse of life, and withall your abstinence from women; and I am sorie that your last nights businesse should be the occasion of this melancholly and these teares. To whom the sicke (but pretily well recouered) man thus replyde, Neighbour you much mistake the cause of my sorrow, I neither greeue nor weepe for the good and wholsome phisicke I had the last night, but I now vex and torment my selfe that I haue so idly spent mine age, there being such a pleasure vpon earth (aboue all that I haue hetherto inioyed) that I neuer had the grace to know it sooner, and trie what it was before this time. If then Lust can strike this stroke, and haue this efficacie in age, o how much should wee pittie youth readie dayly and hourely to run into this dangerous inconuenience.
Of these Wantons there bee two sorts, Meretrices and Scorta, that is, Whores and common Women, such as either for Lust or Gaine, prostitute themselues to many, or all. The second are Concubina or P^llices, Concubines to kings and princes, or such as wee call the priuate Mistresses to great men. The last are as our Accidence teacheth, like Eduardus or Gulielmus, proper names to this man or that. The first like Homo, common to all men: both degrees sinners, but not in the like kind. I haue read of a third sort, but know not what consonant or agreeing name to conferre vpon them. I haue heard of some that haue beene called honest whores, It may bee those that I shall speake of were such, and because they are the strangest, I will begin with them first. Dosithaeus lib. 3. Lydiacorum, tells vs that the Sardians hauing commenced warre with the Smyrnaeans, inuested themselues before the cittie of Smyrna, and hauing begyrt them with a straight and difficult siege, those

of Sardis (it seemes being hot fellowes) sent their Embassadors into the citie to this purpose, That vnlesse they would send them their wiues, to adulterate at their pleasures, they would not onely race their citie, and leuell it with the earth, but kill man, woman, and child, and so extirpe their memorie. This message bringing with it not onely terror but horror, much perplexed the besieged: and betwixt the distractions of perpetuall infamie and most certaine death, not able what to determine (and hauing sat long in counsaile, but nothing amongst them concluded) a yong lustie Virago (one that was hand-maid or bond-woman to Philarchus) desired to be admitted into the Senate. And being called in amongst them to know what shee had to say, shee told them, That vnderstanding to what miserable exigent they were driuen, shee had deuised (so pleased them to be swayed by her direction) a meanes not onely to deliuer themselues from skorne, their wiues from dishonor, their children from the reproach of bastardie, and their liues and goods from spoyle, but to subiect the barbarous enemie into their hands, with a noble and memorable victorie. No maruell if to such a proiect they gaue attention, when greedily demanding, By what meanes the least of these proposed blessings might be accomplished? she thus counsailed them, Send (saith she) to these lustfull Sardinians, and tell them you will in all points satisfie their desires: At the time appointed, let me with the rest of your slaues and vassals, be attyred in the habits of our ladies and mistresses; for (no question) being deckt in their ornaments and iewels, wee shall appeare not onely free women, but sufficiently beautifull. Now in the night, when we are fast lodged in their embraces, and they dreaming of no further dangers than their present delights, and that you thinke wee haue sufficiently cooled their hot courages; arme your selues against the Sardinians, whom (if they offer to rise and arme themselues at the Alarme giuen) wee will keepe still fast lockt in our armes, till what wee haue left of them being naked, you your selfe dispatch being armed. This counsaile was followed, and accordingly tooke effect. In memorie of this, the Feast called El^theria, i. of Free-women, is yeerely celebrated in Smyrna; in which, the maid-seruants, attyred in their mistresses habits, sit at the Table, and are waited on by them, whom they attend all the yeare after. Aristides Milesius, lib. 1. Italicorum, parallels this Historie thus: Atepomarus king of the Gaules, infesting the Romans with warre, and hauing compelled them to the like exigent, demanded the like horrible conditions of peace, namely, to adulterate their wiues: but being in the same manner aduised by their hand-maids, and hauing intelligence giuen them by one Retana,Retana. the chiefe of that counsaile, when the Gaules were sunke in sleepe and lust, they set vpon them in the night, and gaue them a braue defeat: from whence the Feast of the Handmaids tooke beginning, which is celebrated amongst the Romans euen to this day.
A Tale something like vnto these, I haue beene told of a Mistresse, that in some sort did as much to saue her maids honestie; but whether to the same commendable purpose, of that I am somewhat doubtfull. In some great citie it was (I cannot say London) that a citisen of good reckoning hauing a faire wife, kept diuerse prentices and maid-seruants in his house: one of those busie young fellowes had cast a wanton eye vpon her that ruled the rost in the kitchin, and longing as much to be in her bookes as out of his time; and waiting many nights for opportunitie to find her in some remote

place, or darke entry, it happened that one night hee dogg'd her at the heeles: she hearing him to tread softly after her, to escape him, stept vp a payre of stayres iust as her mistresse came downe. The prentice groping in the darke, catcht hold vpon his mistresse, and without any word speaking began to proportion his worke according to the shortnesse of his time. The gentlewoman all this while let him alone to see what he would doe, and hauing made proofe of him to the full, she might verie well perceiue what his vnchast intent was, when clinging him close too her least hee should escape vndiscouered, She asked what bold sawsie knaue he was that durst offer her that iniurie? the young fellow knowing her voice and finding his mistake, down on his knees and besought her to pardon him and not to tell his maister, for he to (...) her for one of the maides: The maides sayth she, which of the maides^ hee answered, The kitchin-maid: and is it so (sayth shee) well (...), I will henceforth preuent the getting of Bastards in my house, without knowing who shall father them, and for that night sayd no more: but the next morning to preuent all future danger, pickt a quarell with the kitchin-wench, payde her her wages and turned her away. It seemes after, the yongman did well, for shee made him (before his time was fully out) both her iourneyman and foreman. It followes next in course, that I should define vnto you, what these prostitutes and common women are; but what need I trouble my selfe so farre, when in these corrupt daies almost euerie Boy of fifteene or sixteen yeres old, knowes what a strumpet is, better by his own practise than I can illustrate to him by all my reading. And for Concubines wee need not trauell so farre as the Turkes Se^aglio, since but few kings pallaces are without them. And for such as wee call Sweet-hearts, Friends, or Good wenches, should we but search noble mens Diaries, gentlemens Summer-lodges, or cittisens Garden-houses, and trauell no further, wee should no question find plentie sufficient. It would also become this place well, to persuade these loose and incontinen^ women with some elaborat exhortation, to retyre themselues from that wicked and abhominable course of life. But I am altogether discouraged, when I remember the positions of one most notorious in that trade; word being brought her, as of a strange and vnexpected noueltie, That one who had beene a famous strumpet, had retyred her selfe from all her leaude courses, and was lately turned honestwoman. Tush sayth she, tell mee that as often as you will I will neuer beleeue it, For once a whore and euer a wh^re, I know it by my selfe: Of these Plautus thus speakes in Truculento:
Meretricem ego item esse reorMare vt est --
Strumpets are like the Sea which doth deuourRiuers and brookes, and what so else you poure,Into his vastnesse: neither hath it beeneFuller by them, nor their great bountie seene.So what so ere thou spend'st vpon a whore,It doth not make her rich, but thee still poore.
Terentius in Helyra sayth:
Nee pol-istae metuunt Deos nec hos respicereDeos opinor.They feare not God, and he regards not them.
I could produce innumerable adages and sayings of wise men both Poets and Hystoriographers to the like purpose, but I desire to be prolix in nothing. Petronius Arbiter in his Satyricon hath left remembred,Panachis. that when Panachis, a gyrle of seuen yeares old, was brought to the faire youth Gyton robe strumpeted, one wondering that so young a thing was capable of prostitution; to him Quartilla the bawde thus answered,Quartilla. Minor est ilia quam ego fui cum primum virum passa sum, i. Is she lesse than I was when I lost my Virginitie? and thus proceeded, May Iuno euer be displeased with me, if I can remember since I was first a maid; for being an infant I commixt my selfe and had congresse with little ones like my selfe, and as I grew in yeares so I pickt out children of equall age, euen till I came vnto this burden that you now see, and hereupon (sayth she) I thinke came the prouerbe, Such may easily be brought to carrie an Oxe, that practised at first to carrie a Calfe. I thinke the name of Quartilla was giuen her because she began to practise at foure yeares and held on to fourescore. From common strumpets I should proceed to priuat mistresses: I will begin and end with them in this Sonnet.




A Sonnet.

Though my Mistresse seeme in show.
Whiter than the Pyrene Snow:
Though I sitly might compare her
To the Lyllies, or things rarer,
Christall, or to yce congeal'd
If those parts that lie conceal'd,
Be others giuen and kept from mee,
What care I how faire she bee.


Though her visage did comprise
The glorious wonder of all eyes:
Captiue led she hearts in chaines,
Kil'd or cur'd with her disdaines:
Chus'd Beautie (that commandeth fate)
Her forebeadwhere to keepe her state:
Should another step in place,
I care not, I'd not loue that face.


Imagine next her braine diuine,
Or mansion for the Muses nine:
Did her bosome yeeld choise places
For the Charites and Graces:
Had she stately Iunos stile^
Pallas front, or Venus smile:
If he inioy her and not I,
For those vertues what care I.


Trac't she Loues queene in her treasure,
And could teach the act of pleasure,
Make Lais in her trade a foole,
Phrine or Thais set to schoole,
To Helen reade; or could she do^
Worth Io and Europa too:
If these sweets from me she spare,
Ile count them Toyes, nor will I care.


But if my Mistresse constant be,
And loue none aliue saue me,
Be chast, although but something faire;
Her least perfection Ile thinke rare,
Her Ile adore, admire, preferre,
Idolatrize to none but her.
When such an one I find, and trye,
For her Ile care, Ile liue, Ile dye.






Lais.
THis Lais (as Aristophanes Bizantius relates) was a strumpet of Corinth: she was called Axine, for her ferocitie and rudenesse of manners. Her, all the prime and noblest Heroes of Greece frequented, and extasied with her beautie, came dayly in troupes to visit her. Athenaeus in his Dipnosoph. speakes of her countrey, behauiour, and sepulchre, reporting her to be so beautifull, that the most exquisite Painters of Greece came frequently to her, and besought her to bare her necke, breasts, and other parts of her bodie before them: For when they were to limne any extraordinarie Piece, (wherein was to be expressed Iuno, Venus, Pallas, or any well-shaped goddesse, or woman) her faire feature or lineaments might be their example. Shee had a great emulation with Phrine the Courtizan, for they liued both in one age. Aristippus the Philosopher (sirnamed Cyrenaicus) about the season that the Feasts were celebrated to Neptune, did yeerely for the space of two moneths together associate himselfe with this Lais. Diogenes meeting him vpon a time: O Aristippus (sayth hee) thou keepest companie with a common strumpet, be rather a Cinicke of my Sect, than a Philosopher of such loose and dissolute behauiour. To whom Aristippus answered, Appeares it to thee, o Diogenes, a thing absurd to dwell in an house which others haue before inhabited? who answered, No: Or to sayle in the same Ship (sayth Aristippus) in which diuerse passengers haue before-time put to sea? Againe hee answered, Neither: Nor doe I thinke it (replyes hee) O Diogenes, worthie thy iust taxation, to accompanie with a woman with whom many others haue had commerse. Againe, being by others calumniated for his often repayre and publike recourse to her (in regard of her common prostitution, and therefore the greater blemish to his more austere profession) hee thus satisfied them: This is the difference betwixt me and the rest of her Clyents; I onely enioy Lais, all others are enioyed by her. When Demosthenes (the famous Orator of Athens) desired to haue had companie with her, and shee for one nights lodging demanded of him a thousand Drachmaes; affrighted with the name of so great a summe, he thus replyed: I purpose not to buy repentance so deare. A young man, much taken with her beautie, came to Diogenes the Cinicke, and asked him this question, What if a man should marrie with Lais? Who presently answered, For a young man it is much too soone, and for an old man it were farre too late. Concerning her, I haue read an elegant Epigram, of an

old man desirous of companie with her at any rate, and her wittie answere to him:
Canus rogabat Laidis noctem Myron,Tulit repulsam protinus,Causamque sensit, and caput fuligineFucauit atra Candidum, etc.
White-headed Myron did of Lais craueTo haue one night, and he her price would pay:Which she deny'd. But why he could not haueHis purpose, he perceiu'd, his head was gray:He knew his age betray'd him, therefore heeDyes his hayre blacke, and did his suit renew.She seeing face and head to disagree,And them comparing with considerate view,Thus sayes, Why do'st thou vrge me thus? the rather,Since but eu'n now I did denie thy father.
Nimphodorus Syracusa in his booke De admirabil. writes, That Lais came into Sicily from Hycaris, the most defenced citie of that countrey: but Strattis in Macedon. or Pauson. affirmes her to be of Corinth, in these words:
Dic vnde sunt ductae puellaeVenere nuper ex Megara CorinthiaeDecus Lais Ingens.
Aelian. de Varia Histor. Lib. 10. sayth, That Lais casting her eyes vpon a young man of Cyrenaea, called Eubatas, neuer left solliciting him by all womanish enticements, till shee had made him promise her marriage, but the solemnization not to be performed till hee had returned Victor from the Olympicke Games: in which hauing had good successe, but fearing to hazard the embraces of a strumpet, he tooke her Picture onely, and carryed it to his citie of Cyrena, boasting by the way, that hee had marryed and borne thence Lais. Which she hearing, and enraged at the skorne thereof, writ to him this or the like Letter:
O false and periured man,Whose lust hath no satietie,Since nothing please thee can,Saue changes and varietie:O thou alone,Constant to none,In nothing settled saue Impietie.Our Sex why do'st thou blame?Tearme women sole offenders?'Tis you, that past all shame,Are still your owne commenders;That care nor feareTo whom you sweare,Cease iudging, and be now suspenders.Phillis was chast and faire,Demophoon false and cruell,Sapho thought Phaon rare,And he tearm'd her his Iewell:But Traytors theyTheir Loues betray,Poore we, can oft fore-see, but not eschew ill.Falser than eyther, thouAs foulely hast betray'd me,But Ile beware thee now:As Heauen I hope shall ayd me,All thy procurements,And slye allurements,Hence-forth shall neuer more persuade me.Thy Oathes I hold as Lyes,As skorne, thy craftie smiling,Thy shape a meere disguise,Thy practise but beguiling;All thy protests,As scoffes and ieasts,And thy faire words no better than reuiling.Poysons Ile thinke thy Kisses,And from mine keepe thee fastings;Thy torments, count my blisses;Thy breathings, feare as blastings.And thanke my fate,I now can hateThee, whom I now abandon euerlasting.
It is moreouer reported of her, That being of purpose conueyed into the bed of Xenocrates, by the meanes of his schollers, whom hee had instructed in all austeritie and strictnesse of life: but she by no whorish blandishments able to corrupt his temperance, his schollers asking her the next morning, How shee sped? shee told them, They had lodged her with a Statue or an Image, but no man. Tymaeus in his thirteenth booke of Histories sayth, That she was beaten to death with woodden foot-stooles, by certaine women of Thessalie, in iealousie and madnesse, because she was beloued of a beautifull young man called Pausonias, on whom some of them doted: This was done at a sacrifice, in one of the Chappels of Venus: for which cause, the place was euer after called, The Groue of wicked or vniust Venus. Her Sepulcher was neere vnto the riuer Paeneus in Thessalie, which runnes betwixt the two great mountaines of Ossa and Olympus; and vpon her Tombe-stone this inscription was grauen:
Roboris inuicti, ac animi sit Graecia quamuisVicta tamen, formae paruit illa suae,Laiais, ipse parens Amor est, aluitque CorinthusAt nunc ipsa tenet, inclita Thessalia,Though Greece of vnmatcht strength and courage bee,It obey'd Lais to thy shape, and thee:Loue was thy father, thee Corinthus bred,Who now in stately Thessaly lyest dead.
(This notwithstanding) some will not allow her to haue beene educated in the Cranaeum, which is a place of exercise in the citie of Corinth.


Phrine.
SHe for her beautie was emulated by Lais, and was a prostitute in Thespis, a citie of Boetia: who being for some capitall crime conuented before the Senate, and (notwithstanding she had a famous Aduocate to plead in her behalfe) fearing some harsh and seuere censure, she trusting to her beautie, bethought her of this proiect; before the Sentence was pronounced, shee cast off her loose and vpper garments, and without any word speaking, as farre as womanish modestie would suffer her, exposed her bodie naked to the Iudges. (O Beautie, thou canst more preuayle than the tongues of a thousand Orators.) With her rare forme and extraordinarie feature, the old gray-beards were so taken, that where before their purpose was to inflict vpon her some seuere punishment, they changed their austeritie into loue and pitie, and dismissed her without mulct or fine. Therefore the famous Orator and Grammarian Quintilian, thus speakes: The admirable beautie of so compleate a Fabricke more preuayled with the Senate, than all the Rhetoricall eloquence of the Aduocate Hyppari^. Vpon this occasion an Edict was published, That from thence-forward no Clyent whatsoeuer should be in presence whilest their Cause was in pleading, least either pitie or affection to the person should sway the ballance of Iustice and equitie. It is further remembred of her, That Praxitiles the most excellent Painter of his time (for some courtesies shee had done him, or some fauours grac't him with) promised to giue her the best and most curious Table in his worke-house: but shee by no persuasion or cunning able to wrest from him which (amongst so many) had the prioritie, shee bethought her of this sleight; watching a time when the Painter was abroad in the citie, shee hyred a messenger to run to him in all hast, and counterfeiting a suddaine passion, to tell him his house was on fire, and many or most of his elaborate Pieces burnt to ashes: At which Praxitiles amased, and strangely mooued, broke forth into this language, But is the Picture of Cupid safe and reserued from combustion? by which, she found that to be his maisterpiece, and therefore due to her by promise. This Phrine neuer vsed the hot Bathes, as other of her profession accustomed to doe: onely at the Feasts of Ceres and Neptune, shee would in the sight of all the Grecians (in her loose garment, and hayre disheuelled about her shoulders) walke downe to the Sea side, and there wash her selfe. And from her, as Athenaus in his Dypnos. Lib. 13. cap. 22. affirmes, Apelles drew that admirable and vnmatched Peece, called Venus Emergeus, i. Venus swimming or rising out of the waters: Of which, Ausonius composed an Epigram, with this inscription, In venerem Andiomenen.

Emersam Polagi nuper genitatibus vndis
Cipria Apellai, Cerne laboris opus.



Behold faire Cipria from her natiue Brine
Flunging (Apelles a braue worke of thine)
Who shaking off her golden curles, late drown'd,
Raynes the salt-sea-drops from her shoulders round:
Her hayres, yet danke, 'bout her white wrists she winds,
Which wreath'd, she in her silken hayre-lace binds.
Pallas and Iuno said (this ha^ing seene)
We yeeld the Palme to thee, faire beauties Queene.

Praxitiles, the Statuarie before spoken of, drew from her the Picture of Venus Cnidia, and vnder the Table of Loue (which was giuen to adorne the Theatre) he caused these verses to be inscribed:
Praxitiles pinxit, prius est quem passus amorem,Deprompt sit proprio pectore qui Archetipum.
Loue which himselfe hath suffred, and best knew,From his owne breast (this piece) the Painter drew.
This Picture of Loue, some say was placed in Thespia, a free towne in Boetia, neere Helicon, and dedicated to the Muses, which others take to be a citie in Magnesia, neere Thessalie: but her golden Picture, made by Praxitiles, was hung in Delphos aboue the Marble Statue of Mercurie, and betwixt that of Archidamus king of the Lacedemonians, and Philip of Amintas, hauing this inscription, Phrine Epicleis Thespia. This, when Crates Ci^icus beheld, he said, This Table is dedicated to expresse the intemperance of the Grecians, as Alcaetus witnesseth, Lib. 20. deposit^rum in Delphis. Apollodorus in Lib. Amicarum, speakes of two Phrines, the one was called Saperduis, the other Clausigelos, of Kleo, i. Lugeo, to mourne; and Gelos, i. Risus, Laughter. Herodicus sayth, Lib. 6. Obi^^gator^m, That she was called by the Orators Se^tus, because she rifled and despoyled her Clients, and the other Thespica. This Phrine grew exceeding rich, and made offer to begirt Thebes with a new wall, so that vpon the chiefe gate they would make this inscription: This Alexander the Great demolished, which Phrine the Courtesan at her owne charge erected; for so writes Calistratus in his booke Amicarum. Ti^^cles Co^^^^i writ of her infinite riches in his Ne^ra, as likewise Amphis in No^acula. Ari^^igiton in an Oration against Phrine affirmes, That her proper name was M^esarete. Of her, Posidippus Comicus writ more at large in Ephesia.
There was one Timandra,Timandra. daughter to Tyndarus and Laedia, the sister of Cli^^innestra: but Pliny speakes of a notorious strumpet of that name, beloued of Aleibiades the Athenian, for whom (being dead) she erected a famous Sepulcher: shee was, with her friend Atcis, opprest in battaile by Lysander. Equall to her in beautie was Campaspe,Campaspe. by some called Pancasta, a wanton of extraordinarie feature, and much affected by the excellent Painter Apelles; she was prisoner to Alexander the Great, and at his earnest intercession, bestowed on him by the Macedonian Conqueror.


Glicerin or Glicera, and others.
THis Glicera was sirnamed Thespi^nsis of the cittie where shee was borne.Satyrus in ^itis. Pra^i^^les the Painter much doted on her beautie, and gaue her a Table in which Cup^d was most curiously pou^^^yde: which, after her death shee bequeathed as a legacie to the cittie. S^^yrus reports, That Stilp^ beeing at a

banquet with her, and reproouing her as a great corrupter of the youngmen of Thespis, she answered, We are o S^ilpo of one and the same error guiltie alike: For it is said of thee, That all such as conuerse with thee and participate of thy precepts, thou corruptest with thy amatorious and vnprofitable Sophismes: small difference then there is to bee traduced by thee a Philosopher, or by me a professed Prostitute. She was a great fauourite of the Poet Menander. Hipperides in an oration against Manlithaus, as also Theopompus affirmes, That Harpalus after the death of Pyth^nice sent for Glicera to Athens, who comming to Tarsus was receiued into the kings palace, whither much confluence was assembled, bowing their knees to her, and saluting her by the name of Queene; neyther would they suffer Harpalus to assume the Diademe till shee were likewise crowned; and in Rhossus where his statue was erected in brasse, she caused hers to be placed, for so Clearchus writes in his historie of Alexander, as likewise Catanaeus: Clearchus obserues of her, that when any faire young lad appeared before her, shee vsed to say, Then doe boyes appeare most beautifull,Plini^^ lib. 21. cap. 2. when they most resemble the lookes and gestures of women. She was affected by Pansia Sicionius a famous Painter.
Harpalus the Macedonian hauing robbed Alexander the Great of much treasure, flying to Athens sollicited there Pythonica,Pythonica. and by many great gifts woon her to his embraces: she dying, he profusely lauished many talents vpon her obsequies, and as Possidonius in his Histories affirmes, not onely with the artificiall skill of many of the best artists and workemen, but with organs, voyces, and all kinds of musicall harmony decorated her funerall. Dyo^^rchus writes,Dicaearch. de discensu, ad Trophonium. That whosoeuer shall crauell towards Athens, by the sacred way called Elusinis, there hee shall behold a goodly temple built, in state height and compasse exceeding all others, which who so shall considerately peruse, hee shall guesse it either to bee the cost of Miltiades, Pericles, Ci^^^, or of some other Athenian equally with them illustrious, and especially of such a one that for merit towards the common weale, might commaund a voluntarie contribution from the publike treasurie. Theopompus in an epistle to Alexander thus carpes at the intemperance of Harpalus, Consider (quoth he) and inquire of the men of Babylon, with what superfluous charge hee hath interred his strumpet Pythonic^, who was but handmaid to Bachis the shemusitian, and Bachis the seruant of Sy^^^e Threissa, who from the cittie of Aegina transported her bawdries into Athens, shee being not onely of the third rancke and degree of seruants, but of baudes; for with more than two hundred Talents charge, he hath dedicated vnto her two sumptuous monuments, to the admiration of all men; when it hath not beene knowne the like honour or cost to haue beene bestowed (by him or any other) in memorie of any braue souldier, or of such as perished in Cilicia for the Empire and libertie of whole Greece, shee onely hauing perdurable monuments raised to her as well in Babilon as in Athens, Temples and Altars with sacrifices offered her by the name of Venus Pythonica. With other such vpbraidings he complained on him to Alexander, of whom Alexis in Licisca likewise speakes, as also that after her death hee tooke to his bed the beforenamed Glicera. Next her followers Irene.Irene.
Athenae^ Dipr. lib 13.That Ptolomaeus that placed garrisons in Ephesus and was the sonne of king Philadelphos, had a beautifull mistresse called Irene; she, when Ptolomaeus was ^ssaulted by ^he Thracians in the cittie of Ephesus, and to shun their violence fled into a Chappell consecrated to the goddesse Diana, would not in

that distresse forsake him, but entred the place together, and when the souldiers role open the gates vpon them to kil the king, she remoued not her hand from the ring of the doore, but with her owne blood sprinkled the altar, till the souldiers likewise falling vpon her, shee expired in the armes of the slaughtered king. As noble was that of Danae.
Philarchus remembers one Sophron of Ephesus to haue had in his delightsLib. 12. Danae,Danae and Laodice. daughter to Leontius, of the Sect of the Epicures, a man well seene in the speculations of Philosophie. To her trust were all the domesticke affaires of the house committed, euen by the consent of his wife Laodice; who at length perceiuing his loue to encline to Danae, shee purposed at her next best opportunitie to make away with her husband. This being found out by Da^ae, and in great secrecie reuealed to Sophron, he gaue at the first no credit to the report; yet at her importunacie, hee promised within two dayes to consider of the matter, and in that time to deliberate what was best to bee done in the preuention of such a mischiefe, and in that interim conceales himselfe in the citie: by which, Laodice finding her purpose to be discouered, she accused Danae for his murther, and instantly (without further processe) by the helpe of her friends and seruants, hurryed her to the top of a high P^omontorie, from thence to throw her headlong; who seeing imminent death before her eyes, fetching a deepe sigh, she thus said: I meruaile (...) now that the gods haue so small honour done to them, in regard of their iniustice, since I am thus punisht for sauing the life of my friend, and this Laodice is thus honoured, that would haue tooke away the life of her husband.


Agathoclaea.
WArres hauing beene long continued betwixt Ptolomey of Aegypt and Antioch^s of Syria,Iustine, lib. 30. insomuch that Ptolomaeus was by his embassadors rather by feare than necessitie as it were enforced to sollicite a peace; notwithstanding, Antioch^s inuading Aegypt, tooke from him many townes and ci^ies of consequence: which proffer drawing Ptolomey to the field, hee gaue him a braue affront and foyle, and had he taken the aduantage of the prese^t fortune, had payd him home with an irrecouerable ouerthrow: but Ptolomy wholly deuoted to effeminacie and luxurie, onely contented with what hee had recouered of his owne, and pursuing no further aduantages, made choyse of a dishonorable peace before a iust warre, and so concluded all dissention with an vnalterable league. And being free from all forraine invasions, he began domesticke troubles at home. For being giuen ouer to b^ owne appetite, and be^orted to his insatiate pleasures, he first began with (...) (both his sister and wife) causing her to be slaine, that hee might the more freely enioy the societie and fellowship of his most rare and beautifull mistresse Aga^hoclea so that the greatnesse of his name, and the splendor of his maiestie both set apart, he abandoned himselfe solely to whoredomes by night, and to banquets and all profusenesse of riot by day. And now libertie being growne to law, the boldnesse of the strumpet (for no better my Author styles her) cannot be contayned within the walls of the kings house, which the ouer do^ag^ of the king, the extraordinarie graces and hono^s conferred for her sake on her brother Agathocles, together with her owne ambitions (growing euery day more and more to greater insolence made still more manifest. Next, there was her old mother, called (...), a cunning Hagge I may tearme her, who by reason of her double

issue, Agathocles and Agathoclea, had a great hand with the king, or rather a great power ouer him. Therefore not contented with the king alone, they possesse the kingdome also: They ride abroad in all state to be seene, are proud to be by all saluted, and with such great traynes to be attended. Agathocles (as if sowed to the kings elbow) was not seene without him, but with a nod or word swayed and gouerned the citie. The gifts of all militarie honors, as the Tribunes, Prefects, and Captaines, all these were appointed by the women, neyther was there any in the kingdome that had lesse power than the king himselfe: who long sleeping in this dreame of maiestie (hauing giuen away all that was essentiall in a king) he fell sicke and dyed, leauing behind him a child of fiue yeeres old by his afore-murthered wife and sister Laodice.Laodice. But his death was by these fauorites long concealed, whilest they had by all couetous rapine snatched what they might out of the kings treasurie, by this to strengthen a faction of the most base and desolate subiects; that by mony thus ill got, and deboisht souldiers thus leuied, they might set safe footing in the Empire: but it fell out farre otherwise, for the kings death and their dissigne was no sooner discouered, but in the rude concourse of the multitude, the Minion Agathocles was first slaine, and the two women, the mother and the daughter, were in reuenge of murdered Laodice hanged vpon gybets, being now made a skorne to euerie man, that was before a terror to all: the pupillage of the infant and the safetie of the realme to his vse, the Romans most noblie (after) tooke to their protection.


Cleophis.
Iustine Hist. lib. 12.ALexander the Great after many glorious conquests entring into India, that hee might contermine his Empire with the Ocean and the vtmost parts of the East, and, to which glorie that the ornaments of his armie might suit, the trappings of his horses and the armour of his souldiers were all studded with siluer; and his maine armie of their Targets of siluer (as Curtius writes) he caused to be called Argyraspides.Q. Curtius. In processe, by gentle and pleasurable marches they came to the cittie Nisa, the cittisens making no opposition at all, trusting to the reuerence due to Liber Pater, by whom they say the cittie was first erected, and for that cause Alexander caused it to bee spared: passing those fruitfull Hills (where grapes grow in aboundance, naturally and without the helpe of art or hand of man) hee thence passed the Dedalian mountaines, euen to the prouinces and kingdome of the queene Cleophis, who hearing of his victories and fearing his potencie, thought rather to affront him by faire meanes than by fo^ce, by policie than power; for knowing her selfe to bee a woman of extraordinarie state and beautie, she by her Embassadors sollicited an interuiew; which Alexander graunting, she appeared before him with such a Queenelike maiestie, and her accomplishments of na^ure so help^ with the ornaments of are (for she was adorned with the richest and best shining stones of India) th^^ her glorie so captiuated the heart of the conquerour, that they came to treat of composition: shee proposing to him, That it were no honour for so magnificent a victor, so famous through the world for his conquests oue^ men, to insult vpon the weake spoyles of a woman, i^ured to no other armes than the armes of a sweet and louing bedfellow; yet if for the ransome of her Empire hee would accept of her loue and seruice, in that kind shee was there in person at his command, his subiect and seruant. Her beautie, with

this submission wrought such impression in the king, that it was concluded betwixt them and by both parties agreed, That her honour should bee the ransome of her Empire. In conclussion, they louingly lay together, and so ended these threatned hostilities in an amorous peace; her bodie he left tainted, but her kingdome vntouched. She was that night with child by him of a sonne, whom after his fathers name she called Alexander; hee inherited the kingdome after her: but by the Indians from that time forward, in regard of her prostitution, she was called The kings whore.


Callipygae.
SO much were the Grecians giuen to all voluptuousnesse and pleasure,Athenaeus. that (amongst others) diuers Chappels and Temples were dedicated to Venus Callipyga, the word importing, Quasi pulchras habens nates, i. She that hath faire buttocks; the originall of that superstition (as Aegenaeus relates) was this, A countrey Farmer beeing the father of two beautifull young Virgins, these two concluded betwixt themselues which should haue the prioritie in beautie: But modestie forbidding them to dispute it with open faces, they concluded betweene themselues to come to a place adioyning to the high-way, and there to expose their backe-parts naked to all such as passed by, and so by the most voices to bee censured. Amongst many others, a noble young gentleman of the next citie, by accident passing that way, and somewhat astonished at so vnwonted an obiect, enquired the reason thereof, and by one of the spectators being presently resolued, he as suddenly gaue the Palme to the elder; and intimating by that he saw, what the rest might proue, grew greatly enamoured, and returning to his fathers house, surprised with melancholly, was of his brother demanded the cause; hee after some few bash^ull denialls, still vrged with the others importunacies, discouered to him the whole circumstance of the businesse. The brother de^i^ous to be further instructed, was by the louer conducted to the place and obiect which made him first grow enamorated; whither he was no sooner brought, but he grew presently inflamed with the loue of the yonger, and gaue his censure on her part. These two had an old Senator to their father, who much obserued his children: of him they demanded these Virgins in marriage; but he proposing to them matches more honourable, they would no way assent. But wonne at length with their importunacies, hee sent in their behalfe to the F^^mer, to demand his daughters in marriage. An Enterview was granted, the parties agreed, a marriage concluded, and after consummate, with satisfaction on all sides. From which time, euer after, the two young marryed wiues were called Callipygae. Of these, Ger^ldas Megapelitanus in his Iambicks to this purpose speakes, These two liued in Syracu^a, who by their marriage hauing attayned to wealth sufficient, erected a famous Chappell to Ven^^, whom they styled Dea Callipygae. These, diuers other cities of Greece (^^ter them) imitated. This Historie Arche^a^s likewise in his Iambicks records.


Alogunes, Cosmartidenes, Andia.
YOu shall read in the Historie taken out of Ex Ctesiae ^ersicis, That Artaxerxes being dead, Xerxes his sonne succeeded, the legitimate heire by his wife Damaspia (who dyed the same day with her husband, therefore to be registred amongst the women most mastrious:) after their deaths the Eunuch

Bagorazus caused both their bodyes to be borne into Persia, and there to bee intombed amongst their ancestors. It is remembred of this Emperour Artaxerxes, that he had by seuerall concubines seuenteene bastards, amongst these was Secundianus borne of Alogunes,Alogunes. hee by treason succeeded Xerxes (hauing before slaine his brother:) this Alogunes was borne in Babylon. By another concubine of the same cittie called Cosmartidenes hee had two sonnes,Cosmartidenes. Ochus and Arsites; this Ochus by supplanting his brother Secundianus (raigning some few months) succeeded him in the Empire. Xerxes had issue likewise by one Andia a Ladie of the same nation,Andia. Bagapaeus and Parisatis who was the mother of one Cyrus and another Artaxerxes. Xerxes the Persian Emperour (yet liuing) gaue to his second sonne Ochus the Prefect-ship ouer the Hircanians: Likewise Parisatis to wife, daughter to Xerxes and naturall sister to Ochus. This Ochus was after called Dariaeus, who in all his counsells and proiects neuer did any thing without the aduise of his sister queene; before his aspiring to the Empirie hee had issue by his wife Parisatis two children, a daughter called Amistris and a sonne Arsaca, who after changed his name to his grandfathers, and was called Artaxerxes: after his instalment she brought him a sonne called Cyrus, after him Artostes, and so to the number of thirteene, of all which onely the fourth sonne called Oxendras suruiued, the rest perished in their minoritie. These were concubines of Persia.


Iulia.
IT is remembred of Augustus Caesar whose daughter this Iulia was, that hee established a law which was called Lex Iulia, concerning adulterers, after what processe persons so offending should be punished, being conuicted and found guiltie. It happened that a young gentleman of Rome being accused of the same fact with the Emperours daughter Iulia before named, Augustus grew into such furie, that not able to conteine himselfe he fell vpon the gentleman and gaue him many violent and sound buffets, till the supposed offendor cryed out, o Emperour where is your Iustice? you haue made a law concerning these matters, why am I not then iudged by that? At which words it so repented him of his rashnesse, that all that day and night he forbore to tast any food. At a certaine sword-playing or such like pastime solemnised in the great Roman Theatre, Lyuia the mother, and Iulia the daughter, had turned the eyes of all the multitude vpon them twaine, and that by reason of the difference of their habits and their attendants; Lyuia being matron-like attired, was accompanied with aged Senators and Ladies of approued modestie and grauitie; Iulia on the contrarie, loosely and wantonly habited, had in her traine none but butterflie-pages, wild fashion-mongers, and fantasticke gallants: which obserued by Augustus, he the next day admonished her by letters, To obserue what difference and oddes there was in the appearance of two such high and noble persons: which hauing read, she returned him onely this short answere, Well, and these people about mee shall be old likewise when I am. This Iulia, to a noble Senator of stayd grauitie giuing her counsell to frame her selfe after her fathers graue and sober behauiour, she presently replyde, Though my father doth not remember that he is an Emperour, yet I cannot forget that I am an Emperours daughter. It is further remembered of her, that beginning to haue gray haires with the soonest and before she was old, as her maides and gentlewomen were kembing her head the Emperour came in suddenly vpon her, and espyde them picking and

plucking the white haires vp by the rootes which still stucke vpon their garments; the Emperor for that present said nothing, but not long after amongst many other discourses taking occasion to speake of old age, he demaunded of his daughter, Whether she had rather in the processe of a few yeares haue a reuerent white head, or to be directly without any haire at all? she answered, She had rather to haue a white head: Why then (said he) doe thy damosells all they can to make thee cleane bald before thy time? Augustus much greeued with her licenciousnesse, and seeing it subiect to no reformation, he banished her the Court, and with her, her daughter Iulia his grandchild, who tooke something too much after the mother; and after that Agrippa whom hee had once adopted his heire, but after for his intemperance and bruitish and luxurious riots cast out of his fauor. Whensoeuer mention was made of any of these three, hee would recite a verse out of Homer, which imports thus much:
What's now my sorrow, would haue beene my pride,If I (as some) might issuelesse haue di'de.
He vsed not to call any of those three by any other names than Vlcers or rotten Impostumes, Cankers, and such like: for hee vsed much more patiently to take the deaths of his friends than their dishonours. Hee further prouided by his last will, That whensoeuer either Iulia his daughter or Iulia his grandchild expired, their bodies should not rest beneath his monument. One thing of her I had almost forgot; Vpon a time comming to visite and doe her dutie to her father, she perceiued his eyes to be much offended with the gawdinesse of her attire, as sauering of immodestie; the next day taking occasion to reuisite him, she changed her habit into a comely ciuill and matronly garbe, and in that sort came to embrace her father: Caesar who had the day before suppressed his greefe, was not now able to conteine his ioy, but broke out into these tearmes, o how much more decent and seemely are these ornaments for the daughter of Augustus? to whom shee instantly replyde, Indeed this day I apparelled my selfe to please the eyes of a father, but my yesterdayes habit was to content the eyes of a husband. She, when some that knew of her frequent inchastities, demanded how it was possible she should bring forth children so like her husband, considering her so often prostitution with strangers? answered. Because I neuer take in passenger till my ship haue her full fraught and lading. Macr^b. lib. 2. cap. 5. Satur. And so much for Iulia.
Phileterus speaking of those wantons that liued afore his time and were now dead,In Cenegide. scoffes them thus, Nonne Cercope iam egi^ annerum ^ria millia? etc. i. Hath not Cercope alreadie liued three thousand yeares? (and proceeding) and rough haired Diopethi^, and a second Tele^is ten thousand: for The^lite none. knowes or can remember when she was borne; Was not This dead when she should haue prostituted her selfe and come vnder? Ionias and Neaera are now dead and rotten, so is Philace. Of Siph^^, Galinas, and Cor^nas, I speake not. Of Nais I hold my peace, because her teeth are now no grinders.
Sinope and Phanostrate with others are remembred by Demosthenes in his oration against Androtio^es. Herdicus Grateticus speakes of this Sinope in his Commentaries, and sayth, That when she grew into yeares she was called Abidus; shee was no question a famous strumpet in her youth, for Antipha^es speakes of her in many of his Comedies, in Ar^ade, in Horlicom^, in

Medicatrice, in Piscante, in Neottide: So likewise Alexis in Cleobulina, and Calicrates in Moscione. Of Phanostrate, Appollodorus writes, That shee was a prostitute in Athens (and that of her ranke were many others) and was called Ph^herophile of (...) Pediculus, and (...) Porta, Propter quod pediculos cum staret in limine Porta queritabat. Menander in Adulatore hee numbers these wantons, Chrisis, Coronis, Antecyra, Ischades, and Nanniculum, whom hee calls Formosum valde, Exceeding faire.
Potonice.Quintus Curtius in his tenth booke of the life of Alexander the Great, writes, That after many honourable Conquests, hauing alreadie subiected sundry Nations to his iurisdiction (beeing now in India, where all his attempts were prosperous, and his designes successefull) proud of his victories, and thinking himselfe to be Fortunes minion, insomuch that despising the off-spring from whence hee came, hee caused himselfe to be called the Sonne of Iupiter. Being puffed vp with these thoughts, and swelling in all ambitions, hee betooke himselfe to all voluptuous delicacies, and of them, to the most tempting riots of wine and women; insomuch, that lulled in all effeminacie, he so farre forgot both his high maiestie, and that commendable temperance, for which he was before all his predecessors renowned, that he sent as farre as Athens for a notorious strumpet (branded in her life, though famous for her beautie) called Potonice, on whom the king was so much besotted, that hee not onely gaue her most princely and magnificent gifts in her life time, but after her death caused a Tombe to be erected ouer her bodie, on which structure the king bestowed thirtie Talents. It were strange if our English Chronicles should not affoord some or other, to haue correspondence with these.


Harlotta, or Arlotta.
THis Historie is recorded by an Historiographer of ancient times, who writes himselfe Anonymus, or without name, by Gulielm. Malmesbury, Vincentius, Ran^lphus, Fabian, Polydore, and others. As Robert duke of Normandie, and father to William the Conqueror, rid through the towne of Falois, he beheld a beautifull Virgin (a Skinners daughter) playing and dancing amongst other Virgins: with whose feature beeing on the suddaine surprised, he so farre preuayled by his secret messages and gifts, that shee was priuately conueyed into the dukes chamber, and there lodged and put in a bed, to await his comming: who glad of such a purchase, without much circumstance made himselfe readie for the businesse intended. The chamber cleared, and the place voyded, and he readie to accomplish his desires, she rent her smocke from the chinne to the foot^ to make the freer way for the Prince: and hee demanding the reason of her so doing, shee made him this prettie and read^^ answere; It were neyther fit nor comely, that the nether part of my smocke should be ^^^ned up, and kisse the lippes of my lord: at which the duke was much delighted. And that night was begot Willia^ the Bastard, whom our Chronicles honour with the name of Conqueror: whether at first in memorie of this least, or since, in disgrace of the Wanton, it is not decided. But from that Harlotta, or Arlotta, our prostitutes and common wenches ^re to this day in our vulgar Tongue called Harlots.
Guinilde. ^^ban. Bal. Act. Engl Vot^r. Guliel. Malms. li. 2. de reg etc.In the yeere of our Lord 1036, Henry the second Emperour of that name, was marryed to Guinilde, the daughter of Can^tus a D^ne, and king of England. This Empe^our had a sister, a professed Nunne, whom he loued so

entirely, that oft times he would haue her lye in his owne Pallace, and neere to his owne priuie chamber. It happened in a cold Winters night, a Chaplaine belonging to the Court (it seemes to keepe her the warmer, and one that had beene before much suspected) lay with her: and in the morning, least both their footings should be seene in the Snow (newly fallen that night) shee tooke him vp, and carryed him out of the Court towards his chamber. The Emperour chancing (as his custome was) to rise iust at the same houre, was spectator of this close conueyance, and beheld how all the businesse happened. Not long after fell a Bishopricke, which the Priest expected, and a Nunnerie which the Nunne much desired: Whereupon the Emperour calling them before him the one after the other, Take that Benefice (saith he to the Priest) but saddle no more the Nunne; And you the Abbesse (saith hee to his Sister) saddle no more the Priest, or looke thou neuer more beare Clerke riding vpon thy backe. It is said, that this serued after for a modest chiding betwixt them, and that they were parted vpon these friendly tearmes.


Of diuerse Wantons belonging to sundry famous men, and others.
ARistophanes,Athen. in Dypnos.Appollodorus, Ammonius, Antiphanes, and Georgia Atheniensis, of your Athenian strumpets haue writ at large: as also of the like argument Theomander, Cyrenaus, Eleus, Amasides, Theophrastus in libro Amatorio, Polemon de Tabellis, lib. 3. Ouid, and infinite others, out of whom may be collected many famous wantons in their times. Ocymus is the name of a strumpet, much beloued of a skilfull Sophist in Corinth; Thalatra, of Diocles; Corianno, of Pherecrates; Antea, of Philillius, otherwise called Eunicus; Thais and Phannium, of Menander; Opora, of Alexis; Clepsydra, of Eubulus: for so Asclepiades, the sonne of Arius, reports in his Commentarie vpon Demetrius Phalareus; where hee affirmes her proper name to be rather Methica,In Agrestis. which Antiphanes writes to be the name of a wanton. The Poet Timocles speakes of Cina, Nannium, Plangon, Lyca, Pithionica, Myrhina, Chrisis, Conallis, Ieroclea, Lopadium: Of these, likewise Amphis makes mention.In Nouaculis. Anaxandries in his description of the madnesse of old men, amongst others hee reckons vp Lagisca, and Theolyte. Polemon the Historiographer speakes of one Cottina, whose Statue is erected in the citie of Lacedemon, not farre from the Temple of Dionisius; she is mounted vpon a brasen Bull.Athen. in Dypnos. Alcibiades was beloued by a woman of Aegida, of whom hee was likewise amorous: after (relinquishing Athens, and Lacena) of one Me^ontide of Abidos, and with her sayled through the Hellespont, with Axioch^s a friend of his and much deuoted to his fellowship; for so the Orator Lysias witnesseth of him in an Oration made against him. Hee had two other mistresses with whom hee was conuersant, Damasandra the mother of Lais Iunior, and Theodota, by whom hee was preserued when remaining in Melissa, a citie of Phrygia, Pharnabazus layd traines entrap his life. Abrotonax was the mother of Themistocles, a strumpet, as Amphicrates relates.Hist. lib. 3. Neanthes Cyzicenus (a Greeke Historiographer) calls him the sonne of Euterpe. The second Philodelphus, king of Aegypt, had many famous Concubines,Lib. 3. as Ptolomaeus E^^rgetes in his Commentaries witnesseth; Didima, and Bilistiche: besides these, Agathoclea, and Stratonica, whose monument was erected in the sea; El^sina, Myrtium, with many others.

Polybius in his foureteenth booke of Histories remembers one Clino, that was his Cup-bearer, in whose honor many Statues were erected in Alexandria: Mnesides (a shee-Musitian of the citie Mnesis) and one Pothinae: his most delicate houses, in which he tooke much delight, he was wont to call after the name of two of his Paramours, eyther Myrtiae or Pothinae. Timothaeus, the great Captaine of the Athenians, was knowne to be the sonne of a common woman of Threissa: which being obiected to him as an aspersion, hee answered; I am glad to haue beene borne of such a mother, that had the wisedome to chuse Conon to bee my father. Caristius in his Historicall Commentaries auerres Phileterus (who soueraignized in Pergamus, and the new Region called Boca) to be the sonne of a wanton shee-Minstrell, borne in Paphlagonia. Aristophon the Orator, who in the reigne of king Euclides published a Law, That all such as were not borne of ciuile and free women, approued for their modestie and temperance, should be held as bastards; yet hee himselfe is mocked by the Comicke Poet Calliades, for being the sonne to the Prostitute Chorides, as may appeare in the third booke of his Commentaries. Of Lamia the strumpet, the king Demetrius had a daughter called Phila:Polem. de Var. porticu. Polemon affirmes Lamia to haue been the daughter of Cleonor the Athenian. Machon the Comick Poet numbers Leaena amongst this kings mistresses, with many others. Ptolomaeus, the sonne of Agesarchus, in his Historie of Philopater speaking of the mistresses of kings, bestowes Philinna, a Dancer, vpon Philip of Macedon, by whom he had Aridaeus, who succeeded after Alexander. Damo was the delight of Antigonus,Heracl. Lembus Histor. lib. 33. by whom he had Alcyonaeus. Mysta and Nisa were the beloued of Seleucus Iunior: and Mania, most famous for her wit and ingenious discourse, of Demetrius Poliorcetes. Of her, Machon the Poet writes much, as also of Gnathaena, who with Depithaea were said to be two Lasses much beloued of the Poet Diphilus. The citie of Athens was so full of famous strumpets, that Aristophanes Byzantius reckon'd vp at one time 135. but Appollodorus more, so likewise Gorgias; as these, Parenum, Lampride, Euphrosine (the daughter of a Fuller of Cloth) Megista, Agaellis, Thaumarium, Theoclea (otherwise called Corone) Lenetocistus, Astra, Gnathaena, with two neeces by her daughter, Gnathenum,Lynceus Comicus. and Siga; Synoris, sirnamed Lichnus; Euclea, Grammea, Thriallis, Chimaera, Lampas, Glicera, Nico (sirnamed Capra) Hippe, Metanira, of whom many things worthie obseruation are remembred.Caelius. One Sapho is likewise numbred amongst these loose ones; not Sapho the Lyrick Poetresse, but another borne of a strumpet. Many Roman wantons may here likewise not vnfitly be inserted (as some related) others beloued and celebrated by them in their Poems; as Ipsithilla, of Catullus, Quintilia, of Caluus Licinius; Lyde, of Calimachus; Bathis, of Phileta; Lycinea and Glicera, of Horace; Leucadia, of Terentius Varro Arecinus, Delia, Sulpitia, Nemesis, Neaera, all these affected by Tibullus; Hostia, otherwise called Cinthia, by Propertius;Prop. lib. 1. Melenus, of Domitius Marsius Martialis; Cesennia, by Caius Getulicus the Epigrammatist; Bissula, by Ausonius Gallus; Metella, of Tycida Epigrammatista; Citheris (who was also called Licoris) of Cornelius Gallus; Pamphilia, of Valerius Aedituus;Gellius. Chrisis, of Q. Trabaea the Comick Poet; Martia, of Hortensius; Terentia, of Marcus Tullius Cicero, Calphurnia, of Plinie; Prudentilla, of Apuleius; Neaera, of Licinius Imbrex, a writer of Comedies; Aeme, of Septimius; Aufilena, of Quintius; Lesbia, whose true name was Claudia, of Catullus; Argentaria, of Lucanus; Delia, of Tibullus; Beatrix, of the Italian Poet Dante; Aureta, of Petrarche; Pandemus, a famous curtisan, cited by Coelius, and therefore may clayme a place in this Catalogue. Aegiptia was doted on by Theon; Manulia, a

prostitute, spoke on by Gellius; Barine, the name of a famous Roman wanton, deciphered by Horace; Spatale, by Martial called Mammosa; Chione, the name of a common woman, expressed by the same Author. Licisca, not onely remembred by him, but by Iuuenal, in these words: Nomen mentita Licisca. Coelia is taxed in Martial for one that would for gayne prostitute her selfe to all men. Hermia was a loose woman, so doted on by Aristotle, that hee was said to sacrifice vnto her, and dedicate sundry Hymnes to her prayse:Origines. for which, being vpbrayded by Eurimidon and Demophilus, he forsooke Athens (where hee had taught the space of thirtie yeeres) and remooued himselfe to Chalcides. Martial in one of his Satyres reprooues Philenis, who was much beloued of the Greeke Poet Philocrates. So farre haue these wantons preuayled euen with Princes, that some (to gratulate them, and continue their loues) haue not spared to robbe the Altars of the gods.Athena. Gimos. lib. 13. cap. 18. Bromia, a shee-minstrell, so much delighted Phiallus, that hee rewarded her with a rich Bowle taken out of the Temple, which was a gift presented by the Phoceans. To one Pharsalia, a Thessalian shee-dancer, Philometus gaue the golden Crowne of Daphnes, the Offering of the Lampsacens. This Statue of Daphnes was in Metapontus, erected in the peregrination of Aristaeus Proconnensis. In this place Pharsalia appearing, and strutting in her new honors, the Priests surprised with a suddaine furie, and in the presence of all the people, tore her to pieces, dismembring her limbe from limbe: and being demaunded the reason, it was answered, It was the iust anger of the Nymph,Myrtilus. for being so despoyled of her Crowne. Lyda is remembred to haue beene the mistresse of Antimachus. There was likewise another of that name, beloued of Laminthius Milesius.Clearch. in reb. Amator. Clearchas affirmes either of these Poets to haue beene besotted on that name, the one expressing himselfe in Elegies, the other in a Lyricke Poeme, Manno the Minstrell was doted on by Mimnermus, as Leontium by Hermosinax Colophonius, both Greeke Poets. Naucrates produceth one Dorica (amongst many other faire and beautifull wantons) whom Sapho writes to be the sweet-heart of her brother Charaxus, when as a Marchant hee touched in Naucrates; where shee complaynes, That by her, her brother was despoyled of all or the greatest part of his goods and fortunes. Herodotus (though ignorantly) calls her Rhodope; not knowing, that this is diuersse from her, who erected those famous Obeliskes in Delphos, of whom Cratinus makes ample mention. Of this Dorica, Posidippus speakes often in his Aethiopia, and of her composed this Epigram:
Dorica te capitis ornarunt Mollia vincla,Et late vnguentum pallia quae redolent,Quae quondam periucundum complexa Charaxum, etc.
Thy Hayre ty'd in soft knots, become thee well;Thy Robes, that distant, of sweet odours smell,(Faire Dorica) doe thee no common grace,In which thou erst Charaxus didst embrace.
Archedica, a very beautifull Girle, was likewise of this citie: for as Herodotus affirmes, this place much gloryed in her faire ones. Sapho of Eressus (who was enamored of louely Phaon) was here famous, as shee her selfe expresseth to her Nymphes, in her peregrination through Asia. No ignoble

wench was Nicarete the Megarensian, both for the antiquitie of her blood, and for her practise in the best disciplines, as well to be beloued as admired, being a profest hearer of the Philosopher Stilpo. To her wee may compare Bilistiche the Argiue, who deriued her birth from the antient Familie of the Atrides; for so they relate of her, that composed the Grecian Histories. Bittiles was the mistresse of the Poet Euripilus.Nicol. Damascen. Samia was the beloued of Demetrius Phalareus: hee was vsed ieastingly and in sport to call her Lampito, as Diyllus reports: She was also called Charitoblepharus, which signifies Gratia Cilium, From the beautie of her eye-browes. Nicareta was enioyed by Stephanus the Orator, and Metanira by Lysias the Sophist. Of their familiaritie were Antea, Aratola, Aristoclea, Phila, Istmias, and Neaera (who was mistresse to Stratoclides) Zenoclides the Poet, Hypparchus the Player, and Phrisoninus Paeaneius, the sonne of Damon, and by his sister the nephew to Democharis. It is said, That by arbitration Stephanus the Orator, and one Phrynion, enioyed Neaera by turnes, and seuerall dayes. These called her youngest daughter Strobyla by the name of Phano, acknowledging her to be their owne. But least with this multiplicitie of Histories I should grow tedious, here (though abruptly) I will pawse for the present.



Of Famous Wantons.
OF some of these, something more at large. It is a Maxime, Amor vbique in natura; Loue is euerie where in Nature. The Poets (as Euripides, and others) called him, The Great and most mightie of the gods: and graue Aescilus in Danais introduc'd his mother Venus, thus saying:
Ferire purus Aether, arua concupitAmorque terrae, consequi vult Nuptias, etc.
The pure Ayre euer loues to stroake the fields,And to the Nuptials of the Ayre, th'Earth yeelds;The showres drop from the cleare Heauens, and raine downeTo kisse the Earth, and giue her a fresh Gowne,Whose garments were l^te thred-bare: euen these proueIn senselesse things, congresse, and marriage-loue;Whose birth we looke for: where the countrey SwaineThe Mid-wife playes; and Apples, Fruits, and GraineReturnes vs in their time. Then Ceres takesThese Infants to her charge; nor them forsakes;But (whilest she can) from all corruption saues,Till being ripe for death, we find them graues.If you would know who first prescrib'd these LawesOf this free birth, I (Venus) am the cause.
The like Euripides speakes in Hyppolitus. If then this vniuersalitie of Loue be in senselesse creatures, no maruell if it be so frequent in such as pretend to vnderstand. Herodotus, Lib. 1. sayth it was a Law amongst the Babylonians,The manner of the Babylonians. That all women free-borne, and Denisens of the citie, were enioyned once in their life times to make repayre to the Temple of Melitta (for by

that name the Assyrians called Venus) and sitting in the Porch, to subiect themselues to the embraces of any stranger. But some of the noblest and richest not willing to publish themselues to open prostitution, were drawne thither in Chariots couered, leauing their trayne and attendants behind them: many sitting in the Temple in Pues, or places allotted them, with garlands vpon their heads; of which, whilest some are called apart, others still returne (for their passages to and fro are distinguished by small cords or strings, which direct strangers vnto such women to whom they are most addicted.) But of these, not any returne to their houses (after they haue once tooke vp their seats) till some clyent hath cast some coyne or other into her lappe (be it neuer so small or great) and haue had carnall companie with her in a sequestred place of the Temple: which done, hee is to say, So much I did owe thee, o goddesse Melitta. Nor was any woman to refuse the money that was offered her (whatsoeuer it were) because it was to be employed in their supposed pious vses. Neyther was it lawfull for a woman to refuse any man, but she was compelled to follow him that cast the first coyne into her apron. This beeing done, it was lawfull for her to mingle her selfe in prostitution with whom she pleased. The fairest and most beautifull were for the most part soonest dispatcht, but others that haue beene vgly and deformed, haue beene forced to sit in the Temple, some one, some two, some three yeeres, and vpwards, before they could meet with any by whose helpe they might giue satisfaction to the Law, returne to their owne houses, and make vse of their free libertie. The like custome (though not in euerie particular) was in Cyprus.
Amongst the Caunians (a people in Coria) there was a yeerely conuention of yong men and women to the like purpose, as the same Author in the same booke affirmes. Aelianus de var. Histor. lib. 4. sayth, That the Lydian women before their marriage presented themselues for gaine, till they had purchased to themselues a competent dowrie; but hauing once selected a husband, they from that time liued in all continence and chastitie. From this generalitie I come to particulars, and first of Thais.Thais. Shee was a strumpet of Corinth, whose beautie bewitched all the Atticke youth. Her the Greeke Poet Menander in his workes most celebrated, of whom shee was called Menandraea. Clitarchus specifies vnto vs, That shee was much beloued of Alexander the Great; at whose request (after the conquest of Cyrus) all the Imperiall Pallaces in Persepolis (with the greatest part of the citie) were set on fire, and burned downe to the earth. This strumpet (after the death of Alexander) was marryed to the first Ptolomey of Aegypt, by whom she had two sonnes, Leontiscus and Lagus, with one daughter called Irene, whom Solon king of Cyprus after tooke to wife.Lamia. Lamia was a Courtizan of Athens, and entyred to Demetrius, a lord of many Nations, insomuch that in his Armour and Crowne, with his Imperiall Diademe, he was often seene publikely to enter her roofe, to conuerse with her, and eate at her Table. It had beene lesse dishonour for so great a person, to haue giuen her meeting more priuately. In this one thing Diodorus the Minstrell was preferred before Demetrius: who being diuerse times sent for to this Courtezans house, refused to come. This Lamia was wont (as Aelianus, Lib. 12. reports) to compare the Greekes to Lyons, and the Ephesians to Wolues. Gnathana was of the same countrey,Gnathana. and borne in Athens, of whom it is thus remembred: A noble fellow drawne as farre as the Hellespont by the

attractiue fame of her beautie, shee gaue him both meeting and entertainment: of which he growing proud and somewhat insolent, vsing much loquacitie and superfluous language (being in the heat of wine, and lust) shee asked him, Whether (as he pretended) he came from the Hellespont? To whom he answered, He did: She replyed, And doe you know the name of the chiefe citie there? He told her, Yes. She then desired him to giue it name? Hee told her, it was called Sygaeum. By which, shee ingeniously reproued his verbositie; since Syga (of which Greeke word the citie takes denomination) signifieth silence and taciturnitie. Of her prompt and wittie answeres the Poet Machon sets downe many: for shee was held to bee wondrous facetious and scoffing, and exceedingly beloued of the Poet Diphilus. Lynceus likewise remembers many things concerning her. Pausonius Lacus beeing dauncing in her presence, in doing a loftie tricke aboue ground, and not able to recouer himselfe, hee fell headlong into a Vessell that stood by: See (sayth she) Lacus in cadum incidit, i. The Poole hath powred himselfe into the Vessell: Lacus not only signifies a Poole, but a Vessell which receiueth the wine when it is pressed. Another, offering her a small quantitie of wine in a great and large Bole, and told her withall, That it was at least seuenteene yeeres old, Truly (answered she) it is wondrous little of the age. Two young men in the heat of wine quarrelling about her, and going to buffets, to him that had the worst, shee thus said, Despayre not youth, Non enim Coronarium est certamen sed Argenteum, i. This was a prize for Money onely, not for a Garland. When one had giuen her faire daughter (who was of the same profession) a piece of Gold valued at a pound, and had receiued no more than labour for his trauaile, and bare lookes for his money, to him she said, Thou for this pound art made free of my daughter, as those that are admitted into the schoole of Hyppomachus the maisterwrastler; who oft times see him play, but seldome prooue his strength; admire his skill, but neuer trie his cunning. Many such (with great elegancie) came frequently from her; for (as Lynceus sayth of her) shee was Concinna admodum and vrbana. Aristodemus in his second booke Ridiculorum memorab. relates, That when two men had bargained for her at once, a souldier and a meane fellow, the souldier in great contumelie called her Lacus, or Lake: Why doe you thus nick-name me? sayth she, because you two flouds fall into me, Lycus, and Liber: Lycus is a riuer not farre from Laodicea, which sometimes runneth vnder the earth, and in many places bursteth vp againe. Shee writ a booke which shee called Lex Conuinalis, imitating the Philosophers of those times, who had compiled workes of the like subiect: The proiect of her booke was, how her guests ought to behaue themselues at Table towards her and her daughter. The like Law Callimachus composed in three hundred and three and twentie Verses.
Rhodope.Rhodope was a Curtesan of Aegypt, one that by her prostitution came to such a masse of wealth, that she of her own priuate charge caused to be erected a magnificent Pyramis, equalling those that were raised by the greatest Princes. Sapho calls her Dorica, and makes her the mistresse of her brother Charaxus, vpon whom he spent and consumed all his fortunes, euen to the vtmost of penurie: of whom Ouid thus writes, Arsit inops frater etc. Aelianus and others report her for a woman most beautifull, who bathing herselfe in a pleasant and cleere fountaine in her garden, her handmaides attending her with all things necessarie, vpon a sudden an Eagle sowsing

downe, snatched vp one of her shooes, and flying with it as farre as the great cittie Memphis, let it fall from aboue into the lap of the king Psamneticus, then sitting in publike iudgement: who much amased at the strangenesse of the accident, but most at the riches, proportion, and curiositie of th^ shooe, instantly commaunded that all Aegypt should be through-sought, till they could find the owner thereof, by matching it with the fellow: which hapned soone after. Being brought before the king, he was so infinitely surprised with her feature, that the same houre he contracted her in marriage, and consequently made her his Queene. Some say she was first a Thracian damsell, and seruant to Iadmone of Samos; shee was after carried into Aegypt by the Philosopher Zanthus Samius. She was a friend and Patronesse of Aesopus, so famous for his Fables still frequent amongst vs.
Metra was the daughter of Erisichthon a Thessalian,Metra. who hauing spent all his fortunes, and wasted euen his necessarie meanes (as brought to the lowest exigent of penurie) was forced to make marchandise of his daughters Chastitie; but she would not yeeld herself to the imbraces of any man, without the gift and tender of a Horse, an Oxe, a Cow, a Sheepe, or a Goate, or some such like commoditie, to the supplie of her fathers necessitie: (for it seemes that Coine and Iewels were not then in vse) For the exchange aforesayd the Thessalians fabled, That she could transhape her selfe into all those creatures presented vnto her by her louers. And hence came that old adage, More changeable than Erisicthons Metra,Cyrene. Much of the like continence was Cyrene, a notorious strumpet, who as Erasmus reports, explaining of that old prouerbe, Duodecem artium homo, i. A man of twelue Arts or Trades, could vse her professed Venerie twelue seuerall wayes. Archianassa was sirnamed Colophonia,Archianassa as borne in the cittie of Colophon, and was beloued of Plato the diuine Philosopher, of whome he himselfe thus protested.

Archianassam ego teneo Colophonis amicam,
Cuius and in rugis, mollia ludit amor.


Archianassa I still hold
My mistresse, and I say
There is no wrincle in her face,
In which loue doth not play.

Thus we see euen the deepest Philosophers and the wisest men, haue made themselues the captiues of Beautie and vassailes vnto Lust, Demosthenes the Orator was guiltie of the like aspersions, and subiect to much intemperance. It is sayd that hauing children by a noted strumpet, when both the mother and the children were cited before the iudgement seat (to auoid calumnie) hee presented the issue without the mother, though it were against the custome of the cittie: for as Idomeneus sayth, notwithstanding he were outwardly of a modest disposition and carriage, yet inwardly he was profuse and incontinent. It is reported of him, that he was wonderous prodigall and expensiue in banquets and women, in so much that the publike Scribe speaking of him in an oration, thus sayd, What shall wee then thinke of the Orator Demosthenes, when what he hath by his great trauell and industrie purchased in a whole yere, he will dissolutely spend in one night vpon a woman? The like Nicolaus Damascenus writes of Demetrius, the last of that succession, who so much doted on Myrina Samia,Myrina Samia. That she comaunded from

him all things saue his Diadem, so that not only Philosophers but euen Kings haue made themselues subiect to all kind of voluptuousnes and luxuries; and what hath bin the lamentable successe, but shame and dishonor, the wasting of priuate estates, and the miserable subuersion of kingdomes. Therfore Claudian in his third booke in Stiliconis Laudes thus sayth:
--Nam cetera regna.Luxuries vitijs odijsque superbia vertit, etc.
Of other kingdomes, the imperiall stateLust doth subuert with vices; Pride, with hate:So by the Spartans Athens was subdu'd;And so Thebes fell: The Medes did first intrudeInto th'Assirian Monarchie: their lustBuried their towring honours in the dust.From the luxurious Medes, the Persians restTheir proude dominion: they growne lustfull, leftTheir Empire to the Macedonian sway,Who kept it till they wanton grew: then theyTheir honours to the temper at Romans sold,For so the antient Sibills had fore-told.
Aspasia.The effects of this will more plainely appeare in the Historie ensuing. Aspasia, otherwise called Socratica, is numbred amongst the fairest women of her time, insomuch that shee had seuerall suitors from all the Prouinces of Greece, as Aristophanes deliuers in his discourse of the Peloponnesian warre: insomuch, that Pericles (for the loue of this Aspasia, and for some seruants of hers, taken from her by force) begun and established that terrible Decree against the Megarenses, remembred by Stesombrotus Thasius. She about her priuate and necessarie occasions sending her bawde Symaetha to the citie of Megara, the young men of the citie detayned her: vpon which restraint she sent two others, who not beeing suffered to returne, from these strumpets did arise a warre, almost to the depopulation of the greatest part of Greece. It is likewise spoken of that Cyrus (who warred against his brother) to haue had a mistresse of great wisdome and wonderfull beautie, bred in the citie of Phocis, who as Zenophanes sayth, was first called Milto, and after Aspasia. Of these in generall, I^^enal with great elegancie speakes in his Satyrs:
Nil non permittit mulier, sibi turpe putat nilCum virides gemmas collo circumdedit, and cumAnribus extentis magnos committit elenchos.
There's nothing that a woman will respect,Nothing so vile or odious that she feares,So she with glistring Iewells may be dect,And haue great pendant Pearles way downe her eares.

Of Mista, and others.
PHilarchus obserues this Mysta to be much fauoured by the king Seleucus: who beeing expelled by the Galathians, and hardly escaping with life, when his Pallace was seised and surprised, she casting aside all her princely

ornaments, put on a seruile habit and mingled her selfe in the societie of her handmaides and seruants, hauing so disguised her selfe that shee remained vnknowne, and by that means was sold amongst the rest at a small rate, and bought by the Rhodian merchants, to whom after she disclosed her selfe. They to insinuat into the fauour of Seleucus (who had recouered his former fortunes) sent her to him nobly attended in great state and magnificence, of whom she was accordingly receiued and they most bounteously rewarded. Antecyra (as Caelius,Antecyra. lib. 13. cap. 6. reports) was a famous (or rather infamous) strumpet, so called because she yeelded vp her bodie to lunatickes and madmen; or else because the Phisition Nicostratus, at his death left her such a quantitie of Hellebore. Caluia Crisalpina is called by Tacitus,Caluia Crisalpina. lib. 17. the stale misteresse of Neroes lust, an apt pupill for such a tuteresse. Appollodorus and Caelius write of two sisters called Stragonium and Anthis,Stagonium. Anthis. both of the venerall profession: These were by a nickname called by some Aphiae, because of the smalnesse of their statures and the greatnesse of their eyes. Cynna,Cinna. Saluacha,Saluacha. and Casauria,Casauria. were three famous strumpets of Athens, many times remembred by Aristophanes in his Comedies. Hermippus, lib. 1. de Aristot. speakes of Herpillides the paramour of Aristotle,Herpillides. hee had by her a sonne called Nicomachus. MelissaMelissa. the daughter of Proclaeis (as Pythenetus in his third booke de Aegina relates) was beloued of Periander ex Epidauro king of Corinth, and numbered amongst the seuen wise men of Greece: Hee seeing her attyred after the manner of the Peloponnesians (that was, almost naked, saue a linnen garment next to her skin) and in that manner ministring wine to his seruants and workemen; he was suddenly so surprised with her beautie, that he first entertained her as his friend and familiar mistresse, and shortly after in great state and publique solemnitie receiued and acknowledged her his queene and wife. Xenophon reports of Socrates to haue had familiar conference with Theodota,Theodota. whose speech was to this purpose, Before thee o Socrates (sayth she) I claime a iust precedence, and hold my selfe the worthier person of the two: he demaunding the reason, shee thus proceeded, Because thou with all thy grauitie and austeritie of discipline, canst not alienate from mee and my societie any one of my suitors and clients; but I when I please can drawe from thee the best of thy schollers and pupils, both such as I like and at what time I best please. To whom Socrates replyde, It is no wonder, o Theodota, since the way to thy house is meerely to naughtinesse, and lyes down the hill; but the path to my schoole is solely tending to noblenesse and vertue, and is the way vp hill, therefore the passage sublime and difficult. It is sayd that Appelles espying Lais (when she was a yong Virgin) drawing water from the Pyrenaean fountaine, admiring her beautie, which was not yet growne vnto perfection, he conducted her by the arme home to his shop, and presented her to the societie of his fellow Painters; but they deriding his folly that hee would entertaine a virgin, one not capable of prostitution: hee sayd, Doubt you not, for within this three yeares I will deliuer her vp to the game the most beautifullest of any virgin liuing. The like Xenophon in Mirabil. testates, That Socrates presaged of this Theodota in her child-hood, Quod pulcherima (...), pectusque quouis ratione haberet formosius, i. He sayd, That she would not onely prooue outwardly faire, but her brest within euerie way more beautifull Demades the Orator had a sonne called Demeas, by a she-minstrell, one that played vpon the Flute, or the Shaume, this young man puffing and blowing, and being (as our English phrase sayth) in a p^lting chafe, Hyperides

then standing by, Peace (sayth he) young man and bee patient, for thy cheekes begin to swell bigger than thy mothers. Nicaeeus in Successionis Philosoph. sayth, That the Philosopher Doristhenites was the sonne of a strumpet called Olimpia Lacaena.Olimpia Lacaena. Sophocles the Tragedian had in his delights one Theorides,Theorides. in his age and decaying strength: therefore in his prayer to Venus hee thus sayth,
O nutrix iuuenum exaudi, mihi da mulieremAbunere hanc etc.
Here me thou nurce of youth, I thee intreate,And grant that she to whom my lou's so great,May shun the beds of young men, and despiseTheir hot affection: onely cast her eyesOn aged men, whose heads are snow'd by time,Who though decayde in strength, haue minds sublime.
Stasimus sayth that this Theorides was first the friend of Theoris. Sophocles after forsaking her, made election of another called Archippe,Archippe, whom as Hegesander writes, he made his heire. Isocrates the modestest of all Orators, was taxed with two wantons, namely, Metanira and Calles,Metanyra. Calles. for so Lysias affirmes in his Epistles. Demosthenes in an oration against Neaera confers Metanira vpon Lysias, who had another mistresse called Lagis,Lagis. whose Encomium was writ by the Orator Cephalus, as Alcidamus Laites (the scholler of Georgius) most eloquently penned the prayses of his beloued Nais.Nais. This Nais, Lysias gaue discription of in an oration against Philonides, her proper name was Archias: of her Aristophanes makes mention in Geritade and in Pluto, where he saith,
Amat ne Lais, num tua Philonedem causa?
Which should be writ Nais, not Lais, as Athenaeus is of opinion. Hermippus speaking of Isocrates sayth, That he entertained into his house the strumpet Lagisca, by whom he had a daughter. Lysias in an oration reckons vp diuerse other prostitutes, Philyra, Scione, Hyppaphesis, Theoclea, Psamathe, Lagisca, Anthaea, Aristoclaea, and Dagnista. Alce was the name of a famous Curtisan,Alce. as may be gathred out of the words of Laberius, Petrus Crinitus, and others. Pythagoras (sayth he) the Samian Philosopher, in speaking of his transformations, reporteth himselfe first to haue beene Euphorbus, then Pyrander, then Calidena, and after a strumpet of admired feature called Alce: with this Pithagorian Metamorphosis, Laberius the Minick Poet thus sported,
--Vt nos olim mutant PhilosophiEt nunc de mulo hominem, de muliere colubrum,Faciant --
i. As the Philosphers of old would change vs, making of a Mule a Man, and of a Woman a Snake. Petrus Crintius calls her Famoso nominus Alce. In the threescore and fourth Olimpiad, in the time that Hippias and Hipparchus tyrannised in the citie of Athens (as Eusebius relates in his Annalls) Harmodius and Aristogiton with others (but those of the most note) made a coniuration against the two princes, and in this conspiracie was Hypparchus slaine.Leaena. Leaena a famous strumpet, being knowne to be affected to some of that faction (as being indeered to them for some former curtesies) was called into question,

and being commanded to discouer the Regicides, and obstinately refusing it, she was iudged to the racke, where with wonderous patience induring many almost insufferable torments, and still beeing vrged to discouer what shee knew concerning that confederacie; she with a noble and memorable resolution bit out her tongue, and cast it into the face of the tyrant Hyppias: which act, Pliny and others record as a president of admirable patience in a woman. Let Leaena (sayth he) the strumpet be memorised for her constancie, who by no tortures could be inforced to discouer Harmodius and Aristogiton, by whose hands the tyrant Hipparchus fell. For the like resolution is Anaxarchides renowned amongst men by Zeno and others.Synope. Erasmus in Chiliad. speakes of Sinope before named, a famous strumpet of Corinth, to bee so extreamely giuen ouer to lust, that from her came the Latine word Sinopissare, which signifieth, to be in the highest degree libidinous or voluptuous. Suidas sayth, That Nannium the whoore was called Capra,Nannium. because shee deuoured a Vintner (or made him breake) called Thallus, which word sometimes signifies Germen, i. A bough or sprig on which Goats loue to feed. Acca Laurentia,Acca Laurentia. the wife of Faustulus the kings shepheard, who beeing a beautifull woman, prostituted her bodie for gaine: she was sirnamed Lupa, and from her euen to this day all brothel-houses are called Lupanaria. She nursed and brought vp Romulus and Remus, Liu. lib. 1. Decad. 1. Plutarch in Vita Romuli. Flora the strumpet,Flora, or Laurentia. who was likewise called Laurentia, constituted the people of Rome her heire; from her came the yearely feasts celebrated, called Floralia: of her, Gellius lib. 6. cap. 7. and Vollat. lib. 16. speakes more at large.Manilia. Manilia was a Roman Curtesan, whom Hostilius Mancinus called into question, because a stone was cast vpon him from one of her galleries: Gellius.Phebe. Phebe was a freed woman to Iulia the daughter of Augustus Caesar, and a companion with her in all her lusts and brothelries; who when she heard that her mistresse was confined by her father, fearing some seuere censure from the Emperor, slew her selfe to preuent further torture: Dion in Augusto. The immoderate lust of Caelia,Caelia. Martial, lib. 7. thus reprooues:
Das Cattis, das Germanis, das Caelia Dacis,Nec Cilicum spernis Cappoducumque toros, etc.
To th'Catti, Germans, and the Dacians, thouCaelia giu'st welcome, and thou do'st allowThe Cappadians, and Cilicians bed:Besides, from Pharo thou art furnishedWith Memphian whorers, from the red sea sailesThe swarthie Indian, and he brings thee vailes,And thou tak'st all, neither wilt thou refuseThe offer of the circumcised Iewes, etc.
Catullus of his Lesbia thus speakes:Lesbia.
Nulla potest mulier tantum se dicere amatum,Vere, quantum a me Lesbia amata mea est.
No woman truly can report to be,So well belou'd, as Lesbia thou of me.
Chrisis.So Quintus Frabaeus Comediographus of his loue Chrysis:
De improuiso Chrysis vbi me aspexerit,Alacris obuiam mihi veniet, etc.
When Chrysis on the sudden me espide,She look'd vpon me with a chearefull face,Wishing withall, that me she might embrace,To whom she owes her selfe: this I haue tri'de.It is a fortune I haue seldome knowne,And such as I preferre before mine owne.
Dion, Nicaeus, and Xiphilinus, in the life of the Emperour Commodus, besides the strumpet Martia whom hee tooke to wife, remembers one Damostrat^,Damostrato whom he after bestowed vpon Cleander, him whom from a bondman he raised to be of his priuie-chamber. Time, Paper, and Leysure would faile me before example, and I desire not to be tedious. I haue hitherto shewed you what whoores are, I now desire to expresse vnto you what they should bee. Marie Magdalen the daughter of Syrus and Eucharia,Marie Magdalen. and sister to Lazarus and Martha, for some yeares gaue her selfe vp to all voluptuousnesse and pleasure, in so much that she had incurred the name of a common strumpet; but after, when shee cast her selfe prostrat and washed the feet of our Sauiour with her teares, and dryde them with the haires of her head, and annointing him with costly oyntment in the house of Simon the Leaper, her sinnes were forgiuen her. We reade likewise of Aphra who was borne in Creet,Aphra. her mothers name was Hylaria a notorious bawde: This Aphra with her three seruants Dimna, Eugenia, and Eutropia, for mony prostituted themselues to all men; but she her selfe being after conuerted to the Faith, by Narcissus bishop of Ierusalem, abiured all incontinence, and adhering to the Christian religion, prooued so constant in the same, that for the true Faith she suffered martyrdome.Niceta. Aquilina. Nicaeta and Aquilina were two beautifull strumpets and made gaine of their bodies; these were imployed by king Dagnes to tempt and traduce the blessed Saint Christopher, and to vpbraide him of false religion, but it fell out contrarie to the purpose of the tyrant; for those two being by him conuerted to the true Faith, and not to bee remooued by menaces or torments, were after by the same king both caused to bee slaine. Faucula Clauia is remembred by the Historiographer Lyuie,Faucula Clauia. who though she was of that wanton and loose behauiour, yet highly to be commended for her pietie; she to her great charge ministered food and sustenance to many of the distressed Roman souldiers, all the time that Hannibal was possessed of Capua. Marullus lib. 2. cap. 12. and Sabin. lib. 5. cap. 5. speake of Thais an Aegyptian strumpet,Thais Aegypti^. who by the often admonitions of the Abbot Pannutius, repented her of her wicked and leaud life; and to giue the best satisfaction to the world that she was able, shee caused a great fire to bee made, and all that wealth which she had gathered by her prostitution she cast therein, and caused it to be burned before her face: and from a common Brothel-house, retyred her selfe to a priuat Monasterie, where after three yeares penetentiall sollitude she expired. Pelagia Antiochena,Pelagia Antiochena so called because she was borne in Antioch, exceeding in wealth and excelling in beautie, was wholy giuen ouer to immoderate luxuries, in so much that no woman appeared in publike more gawdily apparrelled, or more voluptuouslly minded than her selfe; but being

drawne by some religiously disposed friend of hers, to heare the Sermons of Nonius Bishop of Heliopolis, shee acknowledged her error, cast off her gay and gawdie attyre, bewayled her sinnes, and lamented her leaud course of life, distributing her wealth amongst the poore, and as a farwell to all loosenesse and intemperance, builded a poore Cottage in the Mount of Oliues. And least any violence in such a sollitude might be done vnto her, in the way of preuention shee changed her habite, and called her selfe Pelagius, proceeding in that sanctitie of life; that where before of Pelagia shee was called Pelagus Vitiorum, i. A Sea of Vices, shee was after stiled Pelagus Virtutum, amarissimus Marath aquas in dulces conuertens, i. An Ocean of Vertues, turning the most bitter Waters of Marath into sweet. And thus I conclude with these Wantons, wishing all such whose liues haue beene as ill, and infamous, that their ends might prooue as good, and glorious.


Explicit Liber Sextus, Inscriptus ERATO.


THE SEVENTH BOOKE, Inscribed POLYHIMNIA, or MEMORIE. Intreating of the Pietie of Daughters towards their Parents, Women to their Children, Sisters to their Brothers, Wiues to their Husbands, etc.
THERE is no gift (according to Reason) bestowed vpon man, more sacred, more profitable, or auayling towards the attayning of the best Arts and Disciplines (which include all generall Learning) than MEMORIE, which may fitly be called the Treasure-house or faithfull Custos of Knowledge and Vnderstanding. Therefore with great wisedome did the Poets call her the Mother of the Muses, and with no lesse elegancie did they place Obliuion below in Hell, in regard of their opposition and antipathie. Our Memorie (as Sabellicus saith)

is a benefit lent vs from aboue, that hath her existence in Nature, but her ornament and beautie from Art. Alexand. ab Alex. Lib. 2. cap. 19. That the Aegyptians in their Hieroglyphicks, when they would figure any man of an excellent memorie, they would doe it by a Fox, or a Hare, with vpright and erected eares: But when they would represent one dull and blockish, they did it by a Crocodile. That Nation, of all others, hath beene remarkable for their admirable retention; who, before they knew the true vse of Letters, had all the passages of former ages by heart, and still the elder deliuered them to the younger, keeping no other Records than their owne remembrances. Themistocles in this was eminent; insomuch, that Simonides the Poet promising by Art to adde something vnto that which he had alreadie perfect by Nature, he told him, he had rather he could teach him the Art of Forgetfulnesse, because he was still prone to remember such things as he desired to forget, but could not forget such things as he gladly would not remember. Cic. Lib. 2. de Finibus. It proceedeth from a moderate temperature of the braine, and therefore may be numbred amongst the necessarie good things which belong vnto mankind. Many men haue in this beene famous, but few women, vnlesse for remembring an iniurie. Most necessarie to a good Memorie, is Meditation; for as Ausonius saith, in Ludo septem sapientum:
Is quippe solus rei gerendae est efficax,Meditatur omne qui prius negotium.
He onely squares his deedes by measure true,That meditates before what shall ensue.
And againe:
Nihil est quod Amplior^^ Curam postulat, etc.
Nothing there is that greater care should aske,Than to fore-thinke ere we begin our taske:All humane Actions iustly are derided,That are by Chance, and not by Counsaile guided.
There is a Prouerbe frequent amongst vs, Oportet mendacem esse memorem, It behooues a Lyar to haue a good Memorie. Neyther is the sentence more common, than is the practise in these corrupt dayes: insomuch, that one ingeniously speaking of the generalitie of it, thus sayd, or to the like effect; Young men haue learnt to lye by practise, and old men clayme it by authoritie: Gallants lye oftener to their mistresses, than with them; nay, euen womens Aprons are stringed with excuses. Most of our Tradesmen vse it in their bargayning, and some of our Lawyers in their Pleading. The Souldier can agree with the thing it selfe, but quarrels at the name of the word. It hath beene admitted into Aldermens Closets, and sometimes into States-mens Studies. The Traueller makes the modestest vse of it, for it hath beene his admittance to many a good meale. At a meeting of gentlemen about this Towne, whether in a Tauerne, or an Ordinarie, I am not perfect, but amongst other discourse at the Table, one amongst the rest, began thus:
It is recorded (saith hee) by a Spanish Nobleman who had beene Embassadour in Russia,A poore man and a Beare. that in the time of his residence there, a strange accident befell, which was after this manner: A poore man of the Countrey, whose greatest meanes to liue was by gathering stickes and rotten Wood in the Forrest, and after to make marchandise thereof amongst the neighbour villages; hee climbing a hollow Tree, much spent with age, and that Countrey (aboue many others) beeing full of Bees, as appeares by their traffique of Waxe and Honey; of which, in the bulke and concauitie of the Tree there was such a quantitie, that treading vpon a broken branch, and his foot-hold fayling, he fell into the trunke thereof, where presently hee was vp to the arme-pits deepe in Honey, besides the emptinesse aboue his head, not being able to reach to any thing by which he might vse the helpe of his hands. In this sweet pickle hee continued the space of three dayes, feeding vpon the reliefe the place affoorded, but altogether despairing euer to be released thence, as not daring to crye or call out for helpe, fearing the danger of wild beasts, of which in those Wildernesses there are infinite plentie. But it so fell out, that a mightie great Beare comming that way, and by reason of the poore mans moouing and stirring himselfe vp and downe within the Tree, smelling the Honey (which they say Beares haue appetite vnto aboue all other things whatsoeuer) hee mounts the Tree, and (as their custome is) not daring to thrust in their heads first, as fearing to fall headlong, prouident Nature hath allowed them that fore-sight, as catching fast hold vpon the top with their fore-feet, with one of their hinder legges (as with a Plummet) they sound the depth of the place, and how farre it is to the commoditie for which they come to search. All this the Beare did, at such time as the miserable poore man was casting his armes abroad to catch hold of any thing by which he might rayse himselfe out of that pittifull Purgatorie, who meeting with such an vnexpected Pulley, or Crane, catcht fast hold vpon the Beares legge: at which, the beast being suddenly affrighted (fearing to leaue one of his limbes behind him) drew it vp with such a mightie strength, that he pluckt out the man withall to the top, where he first fell in, by which meanes the poore wretches life was preserued, and the affrighted Beare (as if the Deuill had beene at his tayle) neuer lookt backe, till he had got into the thickest parts of the Wildernesse.
His discourse being ended, and euery one admiring the strangenesse of the accident, a Traueller that sat next him affirmed it for truth, as being then in the Countrey at the same time: and thereupon tooke occasion to discourse of the cities, the riuers, the manners, and dispositions of the people; and withall, the coldnesse of the Clime, which in some places (saith he) I protest is so extreame, that one of my countreymen and I talking together one morning in the fields,A cold Countrey. our words still as we spoke them, froze before vs in the ayre, and that so hard, that such as the next day past that way, might read them as perfectly and distinctly as if they had beene ^exted in Capitall Letters: to which one of the gentlemen with great modestie replyed, Truly Sir me thinkes that should be a dangerous Countrey to speake Treason in, especially in the depth of Winter. Something before this discourse was fully ended, came vp the gentlewoman of the house to bid her guests welcome, and taking her c^ai^e at the vpper end of the table^ It seemes gentlemen, saith she, your discourse is of Russia; my first husband (God rest his soule) was a great Traueller, and I haue heard him in his life time speake much of the Country,

but one thing amongst the rest, which I shall neuer forget whilest I haue an houre to liue,My Hostesses Lye. That riding from Musco, the great citie, to a place in the countrey, some fiue miles off, in a mightie great Snow, and the high way being couered, and hee mistaking the path, hee happened to tumble horse and man into a deepe pit, from which hee could not finde any possible way out eyther for himselfe, or for his beast: and lying there some two houres, and readie to starue with cold; as necessitie will still put men to their wits, so hee bethought himselfe, and presently stepping to a Village some halfe a mile off, borrowed or bought a Spade; with which comming backe, hee fell to worke, and first digged out himselfe, and after his Horse; when mounting, hee (without more trouble) came to the end of his Iourney: And this (sayth shee) hee hath told to a hundred and a hundred Gentlemen, in mine owne hearing. To end this discourse in a word (which by examples might be amplified into an infinite) one of the guests sitting by, said, I can tell you a stranger thing than all these: being demaunded what? hee answered, I beleeue all these things related, to bee true. Plutarch in his booke De educandis liberis sayth, Prater haec omnia ad sue faciendi sunt pueri vt vera dicant, etc. Aboue all things, children ought to be accustomed to speake the truth, in which consisteth the chiefe sanctimonie: but to lye, is a most base seruile thing, worthie the hate of all men, and not to be pardoned in seruants. Homer, Iliad. 1. to shew the difference betwixt Truth and False-hood, hath these words:
Poene mihi est orci portis inuisior ipsis.Cuius verba son^^t aliud quam mente recondit.
Hee's to me hatefull, as the doores of Hell.That when he ill doth meane, doth promise well.
Iuuenal in his third Satyre giues it a more full and ample expression, after this manner:
Quid Romae faciam? mentiri nescio; librumSi malus est, nequeo laudare, etc.
What should I doe at Rome? I cannot lye:If a bad Booke be layd before me, INor prayse it, nor desire it; I haue no skillIn the Starres motions, neither can n^r willI make deepe search into my fathers fate,To know when he shall die, nor calculateFrom the Frogges entrailes by inspection: neuerWas it my studie, how by base endeuourTo panderize, or close conueyance hideBetwixt th' Adulterer and anothers Bride.These practises, seeke they (that list) t'attaine,Such as I haue beene, I will still remaine.
This Muse Polyhimnia, vnder whom I patronize this seuenth Booke, as she is the Mistresse and Ladie of Memorie, and consequently of the multiplicitie both of Hymnes and Histories, so from her I assume a kind of libertie

to continue my varietie of Discourse, and from Mendacia come to Sales, or Dicteria, i. From Lyes to Ieasts, or ingenious and wittie answeres. For which, Athenaeus in his Dypnos. lib. 13. remembers these women famous; Lamia, Gnathena, Lais, Glicera, Hyppo, Nico, Phrine, Thais, Leontium, and others. Yet least women should not be content to equall men onely, but to antecede them; I will here commemorate some things, wittily and facetiously spoken by Princes and others. Anton. in Melissa, Part. 1. Serm. 56. speakes of an vnskilfull Physician comming to visit an old friend of his (or at least an acquaintance) saluting him in this manner:A Physician. Sir, God bee thanked you haue liued to a faire age, and are growne an old man: Yes Sir (answered he) and you Sir haue my health too, for I neuer made vse of any Physician.Cicero. Cicero thus playd vpon Vatinius, who was but a few dayes Consull: A great prodigie (sayth he) there happened in the yeare of his Consul-ship, That there was neither Spring, Summer, Autumne, nor Winter: one asking him, Why he had neglected to visit the Consull in his honour? he answered, Hee had purposed it, but the night preuented him. Hee sported in the like kind vpon Caninius, Of him (sayth he) we haue had a most vigilant Consull, who neuer so much as slept in his Consul-ship. Lucius Manilius,Lucius Manilius. an excellent Painter, had drawne wonderous beautiful faces, but his children were exceedingly deformed: A friend of his supping with him one night, taunted him in these words, Non similiter fingis and pingis: as much to say, Thou doest not get thine owne children as thou doest paint others; No wonder answered hee, For I get those faces in the darke; but when I paint others, I doe them by the light of the Sun. The Christian Princes hauing vnited their forces to redeeme the Holy Land from the oppression of the Infidells,Santius of Spaine. Santius brother to the king of Spaine was made Generall of the Christian forces; a man of great sanctitie and an austere life, and withall a noble souldier: hee amongst other Princes sitting in Councell with the Pope, but not vnderstanding the Roman Tongue, in which the businesse was then debated, onely hauing his interpreter placed at his feet; vpon the sudden (after their Decree) there was a great acclamation and clamour, with flinging vp their caps, etc. At which Santius demanded of his interpreter, What that sudden ioy meant? hee told him, It was because the Pope and Colledge of Cardinalls had by their publique sufferage created him king of Aegypt (for the Saladine then vsurped in the Holy citie.) Is it so (saith he) then arise and proclaime the Pope Caliph of Baildacha. Thus with a Princely libertie modestly taxing their forwardnesse; who as they gaue him a Kingdome without a Countrie, he to requite the Popes gratitude, gaue him a Bishoprick without a Diocesse.Pacuuius Taurus. Pacuuius Taurus hauing for his former service sued to Augustus Caesar for some great and grosse summe of money, and the rather to induce the Emperor to bountie, told him, That it was voyced in the citie, and was frequent in euerie mans mouth, how hee had alreadie receiued a large donatiue from Caesar: to whom hee answered, Let them say what they will,Augustus Caesar. but doe not thou Pacuuius belleue it. To another that was remooued from his commaund, and sued for a pention, yet insinuating with the Emperour that it was for no couetous intent or any hope of gaine, but because it should be thought, that for no criminall cause he was put out of his place and dismist his office, that hee desired an annuall fee from the Treasurie: to whom Augustus replyed, Doe thou then report openly that thou hast a pention, and if any shall aske me about it, I will not denie but that I haue giuen it. The same Augustus going into a shop to buy Purple or Skarlet (for in those dayes

the Emperours were not so curious as some gentlemen are now) hee cheapening a piece of Cloth, but not liking the colour, because it was not bright ynough, and the Draper hauing (it seemes) a darke shop (such as are common amongst vs in our dayes) faith the Draper to him, So please your Maiestie but to hold it vp into the light, and you shall see the colour more perfect. Gramercie for that (saith he) so when I purpose to shew my selfe amongst my subiects, to shew the true colour of my garments, I must likewise be tyed to walke vpon the Tarresses and tops of houses. Many other things are remembred of him, worthie to be commended to posteritie. Philip,Philip of Macedon. the father of Alexander the Great, had a custome when his armie was in the field, to leaue his owne Tent, and come into the priuate Halls and Cabbins of his souldiers, and obserue how they spent their idle howres: The Poet Calliniad. then following the campe, to whom the king had a particular loue, hee stole vpon him one day, and found him busily seething a Conger, stirring vp the fire, skimming the Kettle, and doing other such Cooke-like offices, for his particular diet: the king clapt him vpon the shoulder, and said; I neuer read, o Poet, that Homer, when hee was writing his famous Worke called the Iliades, could euer find so much spare time, as to kindle a fire, set on water, and skimme a Conger. To whom he presently answered: Neither remember I, O king, that I euer read in that Homer, the Prince of Poets, that Agamemnon, in all the time of the tenne yeeres siege of Troy, had such vacancie as thou hast now to prie into the Boothes of his souldiers; and neglecting the publike affaires, to busie himselfe to know how euerie priuate man cookt his owne diet. This was a modest passage betwixt him that contended to act noble deedes, and him that the king knew could giue them full expression. Erasmus. lib. 6. Apoth. speakes of the Orator Crassus,Crassus. That when one Piso (beeing accused by Sylus for some words speaking) had incurred a Censure, and Crassus being then the Aduocate of Piso, found that Sylus his testimonie proceeded meerely from mallice and enuie; after the Sentence was past, Crassus thus spoke to Sylus: It may be (saith he) this Piso (notwithstanding this accusation) was mooued, or angry, when he spake those words: who answered (as reuerencing his authoritie) Sir, It may be so. It may be too Sylus (said he) thou didst not at that time rightly vnderstand him: who againe answered, It was like ynough. And it may be (said Crassus againe somewhat hastily) That Piso neuer spoke those words which thou sayest thou heardest; who answered vnaduisedly, And it may be so too: At which the Auditorie fell into a great laughter, Piso was acquit, and Sylus punisht, by the reuersement of Iudgement. It pleased a king of France, who had heard a great fame of the learned Scotus,Scotus. to send for him and to seat him at his Table (which was a grace not common) with expectation (it seemes) to heare from him some extraordinarie rare discourse, answerable to the fame was giuen of him. The scholler seeing such rarietie and varietie set before him, onely intended that for which he came, and eat with a good and sound stomacke: Which the king a prettie while obseruing, interrupts him thus; Domine, qua est differentia inter Scotum and S^tum? i. Sir, What is the difference betwixt a Scot and a Sot? To whom he without pause replyed, Mensa tantum, i. The Table onely: the king playing vpon his name, and hee taxing the kings ignorance. A great Earle of this kingdome was sent ouer by Queene Elizabeth, to debate concerning State-businesse, and ioyned with him in commission one Doctor Dale,Doctor Dale. a worthie and approoued scholler: To meet with these, from the Spaniard were sent

(amongst other Commissioners) Richardetti, that was Secretarie to K. Philip. These meeting about State-affaires, question was made, In what Language it was most fit to debate them? Richardetti standing vp (and belike hauing notice that our Embassadour was not well practised in the French Tongue) thus said: In my opinion, it is most fit that this businesse about which wee are met, be discoursed in French; and my reason is, because your Queene writes her selfe Queene of France. At which word, vp start the Doctor, and thus replyed: Nay then rather let it be debated in the Hebrew Tongue, since your king writes himselfe King of Ierusalem.
These may appeare digressions: I will onely, because this is a womans booke, end this argument with the answere of a woman, remembred by Petrarch. Azo, the Marquesse of Este,The wife of the Marquesse of Este. was eminent for many extraordinarie blessings both of Nature and Fortune: But as these were neuer perfectly enioyed without some difficultie and trouble, so it prooued in him; for hauing a beautifull Ladie to his wife, he grew extreamely suspitious of her faith and loyaltie. He hauing by her a young sonne and heire then in the Cradle, looking earnestly vpon him, hee fetcht a deepe sigh; of which shee demaunding the cause, he thus said, I would God wife this infant were as certainly mine, as it is assuredly thine, to confirme which to mine owne wishes and desires, I would willingly part with the greatest moietie of my meanes and fortunes. To whom shee answered, Let this be neither griefe to your heart nor trouble to your mind, for of this doubt I wil instantly resolue you: and taking the infant from the Cradle and holding it in her armes, she thus said, No man sir I hope, makes question but this child is mine: to which words he assenting, she thus proceeded, Then to cleere all former doubts and suspitions, Receiue him freely from my hands as my guife, and now you may presume he is only and absolutely yours. Whether she equiuocated or no, I am not certaine, only this I am most sured of, That she hath left a precedent behind her to all succeeding wiues, how their iealous husbands may be best confirmed in their suspected issue. I feare I haue bin somewhat to long in the Preamble, I will therefore now proceede to the matter. And first of Filiall pietie, ascending from Daughters to their Parents.

Of Pious Daughters.
OF Sonnes that haue beene remarkably gratefull to their Parents for their birth and breeding, the Histories are many, and the examples infinite: as of Coriolanus to his mother, celebrated by Tully in Lelio, Dionisius Halicarnasseus, Plutarch, Plini^, Gellius, Appianus, etc. as likewise of Lucius Manlius. Torq^atus, of M. Co^^a, Caius Flaminius, Cimon, remembred by Iustine, lib. 2. Cleobis, and Bithon; Amphinomus, and Anapus, recorded by Herodotus and Solinus; the sonne of Croesus, etc. Yet should I vndertake to write them all at large, they cannot exceed that Pietie of which I haue read in women. Suetonius and Cicero in an Oration pro Caelio,Claudia. speaking of Claudia one of the Vestall Virgins, thus report of her: Shee seeing her father in his triumphant Chariot riding through the streets of Rome, and by the Tribunes of the people (who enuied his glorie) pluckt and haled from his seat, she with a wondrous dexteritie, and a masculine audacitie, fr^ed him from the hands of the Tribunes and their Lictors, and maugre all their opposition,

lifted him vp into his Chariot; nor forsooke him, till shee saw him in all magnificent pompe receiued into the Capitoll: insomuch, that it was questioned amongst the Romans, which of them merited the greater triumph, hee for his vertue and valour in the Forum, or shee for her zeale and pietie in the Temple of Vesta: nor can it yet be decided which may claime a iust prioritie, the Father for his victorie, or the daughter for her goodnesse. Plinie,The Historie of a Pious Daughter. lib. 7. cap. 36. and Solinus speake of another Roman Ladie, of a noble Family, who when her mother was condemned at the Iudgement-Seat by the Praetor, and deliuered vp to one of the Triumviri to be committed to strait prison, and there for her offence to be priuately executed. But the keeper of the Gaole commiserating the Matron so sentenced (eyther because he pittied her grauitie, or suspected her innocence) did not cause her to be instantly strangled, according to the rigor of her sentence. At the importunacie of the daughter, he gaue her leaue to visit and comfort her mother, but narrowly searcht before her entrance into the prison, least shee should carrie with her any food or sustenance to her reliefe; rather desiring she should perish by famine, and dye that way, than himselfe to haue any violent hand in her execution. The daughter hauing dayly accesse to the mother, who now had past ouer more dayes than the keeper thought was possible by nature, and wondering in himselfe how she should draw her thred of life out to that length, without any meanes to maintaine it; hee casting a more curious eye vpon the young woman, and watching her, might perceiue how shee first drew out one breast, and after another, with her owne milke relieuing her mothers famine. At the noueltie of so strange and rare a spectacle being amazed, he carryed newes thereof to the Triumvir, he to the Praetor, the Praetor he related it to the Consuls, they brought it before the Senate; who to recompence what was good in the daughter, pardoned all that was before thought ill in the mother: For what will not loue deuise? or whither true zeale not penetrate? What more vnheard or vnexpected thing could be apprehended, than for a mother to be fed from the breasts of her daughter? Who would not imagine this to be against nature, but that we see by proofe, true naturall pietie transcends all bounds and limits? The like of this we may read of in Plinie, of another young marryed woman, who when her father Cimon was afflicted with the same sentence, and subiect to the like durance, prolonged his life from her breasts, for which she deserues to be equally memorized. Our Parents in no dangers or necessities are to be by vs abandoned, and that by the example of Aeneas, in whose person Virgil thus speakes, as to his father Anchises, Aeneid. 2.

Eia age chare pater ceruici imponere nostrae,
Ipse subibo numeris, nec me labor iste grauabit, etc.


Come my deare father, and get vp, for see,
No burthen to my shoulders you can bee,
No weight at all; and hap what can betide,
One danger, or one safetie, wee'l abide.

Rusticana.Sabellic. lib. 3. cap. 6. remembers vs of Rusticana, a noble Matron of Rome, and the daughter of Synnarchus, who with his brother Boetius (the famous Philosopher) being put to death by Theodoricus, king of the Gothes. Shee, after the Tirants miserable end, was the cause that all his Statues in Rome

were demollished and ruined, purposing vtterly (if it were possible) to extirpe his memorie, that was the inhuman murderer of her father; for which fact of hers being called in question before king Totila who succeeded him, she was so far from excuse or deniall, that she approued the deed with all constancie; whose noble magnanimitie and resolution prooued more auailable to her saftie, than any timerous euasion could haue done, for he not only dismissed her vnpunished, but highly applauded and commended. Fulgos. Sabellicus and Egnatius writing of Alboinus king of the Longobards, who at his first enterance into Italie, hauing subdued and slaine Turismundus (whom some call Cunimundus) sonne to Cunimundus king of the Gepidanes, and after taken his daughter Rosamunda to wife; the Historie sayth, hee made a bole of her fathers skull, in which one night hauing drunke somewhat lauishly, he caused it to be filled with wine and sent to Rosamunda,Rosamunda. then in her chamber, with this message, Commend me to my Queene and say, I command her to drinke with her father. The Ladie though shee knew him to be slaine by the Longobards, receiuing his death by a common casualtie and chance of war, and by this assuring her selfe that he fell by the hand of her husband; betwixt filiall dutie and coniugall loue (being for a time destracted) the bond of affection towards her father, preuailed aboue those nuptiall fetters in which she was tyde to her Lord; in so much that to reuenge the death of the one, she resolued to take away the life of the other: to bring which about, she deuised this proiect, she had obserued one Hemegildus a noble man amongst the Lumbards, to bee surprised with the loue of one of her waiting gentlewomen, with whom she dealt so far, that when her maid had promised to giue this Hemegildus meeting in a priuate and darke chamber, she her selfe supplyde the place of her seruant; after which congression she caused lightes to be brought in, that he might know with whom he had had carnall companie, and what certeine preiudice he had therein incurred, protesting withall, that vnlesse he would ioyne with her in the death of the king, shee would accuse him of rape and outrage. The Lumbard to preuent his own disaster, vndertooke his soueraignes death, which was accordingly betwixt them performed. The murder done, they fled together to Rauenna, she preferring the reuenge of a slaughtered father before the life of a husband, the title of a Queene, State, Soueraigntie, or any other worldly dignitie whatsoeuer.
Something is not amisse to be spoken in this place concerning the loue of mothers towards their children,The loue of mothers to their children. which as Plutarch in his Grec. Apotheg. saith, was excellently obserued in Themistocles Prince of the Athenians, who was wont to say, That hee knew no reason but that his young sonne (whom his mother most dotingly affected) should haue more power and comma^nd than any one man in Greece whatsoeuer; and being demanded the reason, hee thus answered: Athens (sayth he) commands all Greece, I Themistocles haue predominance ouer Athens, my wife ouer-swayes me, ^nd my sonne ouerrules his mother. Olympias the mother of Alexander,Olympias. caused Iollaes graue to be ript vp (who was Butler to her sonne) and his bones to be scattered abroad, raging against him in death, on whom in his life time shee could not be reuenged on for the death of her sonne, to whom this Iollas was said to haue ministred poyson. Agrippina,Agrippina. the mother of Domitius Nero, by all meanes and industrie possible labouring to confirme the Empire vnto her sonne, enquired of the Chaldaeans and Astrologers, Whether by their calculations

they could find if he should liue to be created Caesar? who returned her this answer, That they found indeed by their Art that he should be Emperour, but withall that he should be the death of his mother. To whom she answered, Inter-ficiat modo Imperet, i. I care not though he kill me, so I may but liue to see him raigne, Sab. lib. 3. cap. 4.
Louing Mothers.The same Author tells vs, that in the second Punick warre, the Romanes being ouerthrowne with infinite slaughter, in the battailes fought at Thrasiamenus and Cannas, many that were reported to be assuredly dead escaping with life, after their funeralls had beene lamented, returning home vnexpectedly to their mothers, such infinite ioy oppressed them at once, that as if sinking beneath too great a burden, betwixt their kisses and embraces they suddenly expired. Aruntius the Roman being proscribed by the Triumuirat, his wife would neddes haue him take her deerely beloued sonne along with him, to associat and comfort him in his trauels, who when they had gone a ship-boord intending for Sicilia, and crost by an aduerse tempest, could neither proceede on in their voyage, nor returne to any safe landing; such was their fate that they perished by famine, which the mother vnderstanding, more for the greefe of her sonne (whom she her selfe proscribed) than for her husband exiled by the Triumuirat, slew her selfe. The matrons of Carthage in the third Punick warre,The Mothers of Carthage. when the choysest of all the noble young men of the cittie were selected to bee sent as hostages into Sicilia, with weeping and lamentation followed them to the water side, and kept them hugged in their strict embraces, not suffering them to goe aboord; but when they were forcibly plucked from them and sent vnto the ships, they no sooner hoysed saile, but many of these wofull and lamenting mothers, opprest with the extreamitie of sorrow, cast themselues headlong into the Sea and there were drowned, Sabel. lib. 3. cap. 4. The wife of Proclus Naucratides hauing a wilde and misgouerned sonne,The wife of Proclus. addicted meerely to voluptusnesse and pleasure, and withall to Cockes, Horses, Dogges, and such like pastimes; his mother did not only not reproue him in this licensiousnesse, but would be still present with him to helpe to feed his Cockes, dyet his Horses, and cherish his Dogges: for which being reproued by some of her friends, as an incourager of his vnstayd and irregular courses to whom shee answered, No such matter, hee will sooner see then into himselfe and correct his owne vices, by conuersing with old folkes, than keeping company with his equalls. Niobes sorrow for her children, Auctoliaos death at the false rumor of her sonne Vlysses his Tragedie, Hecubaes reuenge vpon Polymnestor for the murder of her yong sonne Polydore, and Tomiris queene of the Massagets against Cyrus for the death of her sonne Sargapises, are all rare presidents of maternall pietie; nay so superaboundant is the loue of mothers to their children, that many times it exceedes the bounds of common reason, therfore Terens in Heuton thus saith:
Matres omnes filijsIn peccato ad iutrices, and auxilio in patresSolent esse--
i. All mothers are helpers in their childrens transgressions, and ayd them to commit iniuries against their fathers; Therefore Seneca in his Tragedie of Hippolitus breakes out into this extasie:
-- Oh nimium potensQuanto parentes sanguinis vinclo tenesNatura? quam te colimus inuiti quoque.
-- Nature ohToo powerfull, in what bond of blood thou stillBind'st vs that parents are: commanding so,Wee must obey thee though against our will.
So great was the loue of Parisatis,Parisatis. the mother of Cyrus the lesse, to her sonne, that he being slaine, her reuenge vpon the murtherers exceeded example: for she caused one of them, whose name was Charetes, to be ten daies together excruciated with sundrie tortures, after commanded his eyes to be put out, and then moulten lead to be powred downe into the hollow of his eares; the second, Metroclates, for the same treason shee commaunded to be bound fast betwixt two boats, and to be fed with figges and honey, leauing him there to haue his guts gnawne out by the wormes which these sweet things bred in his intrailes; of which lingring torment he after many dayes perished; the third, Metasabates, she caused to be flayed aliue, and his bodie to be stretched vpon three sharpe pikes or stakes, and such was his miserable end, a iust reward for Traitors. Fulgos. lib. 5. cap. 5. tels vs, That Augustus Caesar hauing subdued Cappadocia, and taken the king Adiatoriges prisoner,The wife of Adiatoriges. with his wife, and two sonnes; after they had graced his triumphs in Rome, hee gaue command, That the father with the eldest sonne, should be put to death: now when the ministers designed for that execution, came to demand which of the two brothers was the elder (for they were both of a stature) they exceedingly contended, and either affirmed himselfe to be the eldest, with his owne death to repriue the others life; this pious strife continuing long, to the wonder and amasement of all the beholders. At length Dietenius, at the humble intercession of his mother (who, it seemes, loued him some deale aboue the other) gaue way (though most vnwillingly) for the younger to perish in his stead. Which after being knowne and told to Augustus, hee did not onely lament the innocent young Princes death, but to the elder (who was yet liuing with his mother) he gaue great comforts, and did them after many graces and fauours; so great a reuerence and good opinion doth this fraternall loue beget euen amongst enemies. Neither was this Queene to he taxed of seueritie or rigor to the youngest, since it was a necessitie that one must dye; it was rather a Religion in her, hoping to leaue her firstborne to his true and lawfull inheritance. Now least I should leaue any thing vnremembred that comes in my way, that might tend to the grace and honor of the Sex, there is not any vertue for which men haue beene famous, in which some women or other haue not beene eminent; namely, for mutuall loue, amitie, and friendship.Friendship in women. Marul. Lib. 3. cap. 2. tells vs of a chast Virgin called Bona,Bona. who liued a retyred life in a house of religious Nunnes: Shee had a bedfellow, vnto whom aboue all others shee was entired, who lying vpon her death-bed, and no possible helpe to be deuised for her recouerie, this Bona being then in perfect health of bodie (though sicke in mind for the infirmitie of her sister) fell vpon her knees, and deuoutly besought the Almightie, that shee might not suruiue her, but as they had liued together in all sanctitie and sisterly loue, so their chast bodies might not be separated in death. As shee earnestly prayed, so it futurely happened; both

died in one day, and were both buried in one Sepulchre, being fellowes in one House, one Bed, and one Graue, and now (no question) ioyfull and ioint inheritors of one Kingdome. Thus farre Marrull. But now to returne a little from whence wee began. Some sonnes haue beene kind to their parents: as in Sicilia, when the mountaine Aetna began first to burne, Damon snatcht his mother from the fire. Aeneas, in the fatall massacre of Troy, tooke his father vpon his backe, his sonne Ascanius in his hand, his wife Creusa following him, and passed through the sword and fire. Wee reade likewise in Hyginus, of Cleops and Bilias (whom Herodotus calls Cleobis and Bython) who when their mother Cidippe,Cidippe. the Priest of Iuno Argyua, should be at the Temple at the appointed houre of the Sacrifice, or failing, to forfeit her life: but when she came to yoake the Oxen that should draw her Chariot, they were found dead, her two sonnes before named layd their neckes vnder the yoake, and supplying the place of those beasts, drew her in time conuenient vnto the place where the sacred Ceremonies were (according to the custome) celebrated. The Oblations ended, and she willing to gratifie their filiall dutie, besought of the goddesse, That if euer with chast and vndefiled hands she had obserued her Sacrifice, or if her sonnes had borne themselues piously and religiously towards her, that she would graunt vnto them for their goodnesse, the greatest blessing that could happen to any mortall or humane creatures. This prayer was heard, and the two zealous sonnes drawing backe their mother in her Chariot from the Temple, vnto the place where she then soiourned, being wearie with their trauaile, layd them downe to sleepe. The mother in the morning comming to giue her sonnes visitation, and withall, thankes for their extraordinarie and vnexpected paines and trauaile, found them both dead vpon their Pallets: by which she conceiued, That there is no greater blessing to be conferred vpon man, than a faire death, when Loue, good Opinion, and Honor attend vpon the Hearse. These (I must confesse) are worthie eternall memorie, and neuer-dying admiration: But hath not the like pietie towards their parents beene found in women? I answer, Yes. How did Pelopea,Pelopea. the daughter of Thiestes, reuenge the death of her father? Hypsipile,Hypsipile. the daughter of Thoas, gaue her father life, when he was vtterly in despaire of hope or comfort; Calciope would not lose her father,Calciope. or leaue him, though hee had lo^t and left his kingdome; Harpalice,Harpalice. the daughter of Harpalicus, restored her father in battaile, and after defeated the enemie, and put him to flight; Erigone,Erigone. the daughter of Icarus, hearing of the death of her father, strangled her selfe; Agaue,Agaue. the daughter of Cadmus, slew the king Lycotharsis in Illyria, and possest her father of his before vsurped Diademe;Xantippe. Xantippe fed her father Nyconus (or, as some will haue it, Cimonus) in prison with milke from her breasts; Tyro,Tyro. the daughter of Salmoneus, to relieue her father, slew her owne children. Who will be further resolued of these, let him search Hyginus. And so much shall suffice for filiall dutie towards their Parents.

Of Sisters that haue beene kind to their Brothers.
THe Poets and Historiographers, to impresse into vs the like naturall pietie, haue left diuerse presidents to posteritie. Innumerable are the examples of fraternall loue betwixt Brother and Brother. To illustrate

the other the better, I will giue you a tast of some few. Volater. lib. 14. cap. 2. de Antropo,Examples of fraternall Pietie. relates, how in that warre which Cai. Cornelius Cinna, Tribune, (beeing expelled the citie with Caius Marius, and others) commenced against the Romans, there were two brothers, one of Pompeyes armie, the other of Cinnaes, who meeting in the battaile, in single encounter one slew the other: but when the Victor came to rifle the dead bodie, and found it to be his owne naturall brother, after infinite sorrow and lamentation, he cast himselfe into the fire where the slaughtered carkasse was burned. M. Fabius the Consull, in the great conflict against the Hetrurians and Veientians, obtained a glorious victorie: when the Senate and the people of Rome had with great magnificence and cost, at their owne charge, prepared for him an illustrious triumph; hee absolutely refused that honour, because Q. Fabius his brother (fighting manfully for his countrey) was slaine in that battaile: What a fraternall pietie liued in his breast, may be easily coniectured, who refused so remarkable an honour, to mourne the losse of a beloued brother? Valer. cap. 5. lib. 5. Wee reade in our English Chronicles of Archigallo, brother to Gorbomannus, who being crowned king of Brittaine, and extorting from his subiects all their goods to enrich his owne Coffers, was after fiue yeeres deposed and depriued of his Royall dignitie, in whose place was elected Elidurus the third sonne of Morindus and brother to Archigallo, a vertuous Prince, who gouerned the people gently and iustly. Vpon a time beeing hunting in the Forrest, hee met with his brother Archigallo, whom hee louingly embraced, and found such meanes that he reconciled him both to the Lords and Commons of the Realme; that done, he most willingly resigned vnto him his Crowne and Scepter, after hee himselfe had gouerned the Land fiue yeeres. Archigallo was re-instated, and continued in great loue with his brother, reigning ten yeeres, and was buried at Yorke; after whose death, Elidurus was againe chosen king. What greater enterchange of fraternall loue could be found in brothers? To equall whom, I will first begin with the sisters of Phaeton, called by some Heliades, by others Phaetontides;Phaetontides who with such funerall lamentation bewayled the death of their brother, that the gods in commiseration of their sorrow, turned them into Trees: whose transformations Ouid with great elegancie expresseth, Lib. 1. Metamorph. as likewise Virgil in Cutice; their names were, Phaethusa, Lampitiae, Phebe, etc. Antigone,Antigone. the daughter of Oedipus, when her brother Eteocles was slaine in battaile, shee buried his bodie, maugre the contradiction of the Tyrant Creon: of whom Ouid, Lib. 3. Tristium,
--Fratrem Thebana peremplamSupposuit tumulo rege vetante soror.
The Theban sister to his Tombe did bringHer slaught'red brothers Corse, despight the king.
Hyas being deuoured of a Lyon,Hyades. the Hyades (his sisters) deplored his death with such infinite sorrow, that they wept themselues to death: And for their pietie, were after by the gods translated into Starres; of whom Pontanus,
Fratris Hyae quas perpetuus dolor indidit astris.
Electra. Iliona.Thus you see how the Poet did striue to magnifie and eternize this Vertue in Sisters. No lesse compassionat was Electra, the daughter of Agamemnon, on her brother Orestes; and Iliona, the issue of Priam, when shee heard the death of young Polidore. Stobaeus, Serm. 42. out of the Historie of Nicolaus de morib. gentium, sayth, That the Aethiopians, aboue all others, haue their sisters in greatest reuerence: insomuch, that their kings leaue their succession not to their owne children, but to their sisters sonnes; but if none of their issue be left aliue, they chuse out of the people the most beautifull, and warlike withall, whom they create their Prince and Soueraigne. Euen amongst the Romans, M. Aurelius Commodus so dearely affected his sister, that being called by his mother to diuide their fathers Patrimonie betwixt them, hee conferred it wholly vpon her, contenting himselfe with his grandfathers reuenue. Pontanus de Liber. cap. 11.
I will end this discourse concerning Sisters, with one Historie out of Sabellicus, li. 3. c. 7. the same confirmed by Fulgosius,The wife of Intaphernes. lib. 5. cap. 5. Intaphernes was (say they) one of those confederat Princes who freed the Persian Empire from the vsurpation of the Magician brothers, and conferred it vpon Darius: who now being established in the supreme dignitie, Intaphernes hauing some businesse with the king, made offer to enter his chamber; but being rudely put backe by one of the groomes or waiters, he tooke it in such scorne, that no lesse reuenge would satisfie his rage, than to cut off his eares and nose: of which the king hauing present notice, his indignation exceeded the others rage; for he gaue commandement, That for this insolence and outrage done in the Pallace, and so neere his presence, that not onely Intaphernes the Delinquent, but all the male issue of his stocke and race whatsoeuer, should be layd hold vpon, and after, to the dread and terror of the like offendors, by mercilesse death tast the terror of the kings incensement. The Sentence of their apprehension was performed, and their execution hourely expected: when the wife of Intaphernes cast her selfe groueling before the Court gate, with such pittifull eiulations and clamours, that they came euen to the eares of Darius, and much penetrated him, being vttered with such passionate and moouing accents, able to mollifie the Flint, or soften Marble. Imprest therefore with her pittious lamentations, the king sent vnto her, That her teares and clamours had so farre preuayled with him, that from the condemned societie they had ransomed one, and one onely, to continue the memorie of their Name and Familie; chuse amongst them all, whose life she most fauoured, and whose safetie with the greatest affection desired, but further than this to graunt her his Sentence was vnalterable. None that heard this small (yet vnexpected) fauour from the king, but presently imagined she would either redeeme her husband, or at least one of her sonnes, two of them beeing all that shee had then groning vnder the burthen of that heauie Sentence. But after some small meditation (contrarie to the expectation of all men) shee demaunded the life of her brother. The king somewhat amased at her choyse, sent for her, and demaunded the reason, Why shee had preferred the life of a brother before the safetie of such a noble husband, or such hopefull children? To whom shee answered, Behold (O king) I am yet but young and in my best of yeeres, and I may liue to haue another husband, and so consequently by him more children: But my father and mother are both aged, and stricken in yeeres; and should I lose a Brother, I should for euermore be depriued of that sacred Name.

At which words the king exceedingly moued, to see with what a fraternall zeale they were spoken, he not onely released her brother, but added to his vnexpected bountie the life of her eldest sonne.



Of Matrimonie, and Coniugall Loue.
IT was inserted in Platoes Lawes, That what man soeuer liued a Batchelor aboue fiue and thirtie yeeres of age, was neyther capable of Honor, nor Office, Alexand. ab Alex. lib. 4. cap. 8. Licurgus, the Law-giuer amongst the Lacedemonians (as the same Author testifies) to shew the necessitie of Marriage, made a Decree, That all such as affected singlenesse and sollitude of life, should be held ignominious. They were not admitted to the publique Playes, but in the Winter were compelled to passe through the Market-place naked, and without garments. The Law of the Spartans set a fine vpon his head first, that married not at all; next, on him that married not till hee was old; and lastly, on him they set the greatest mulct, that married an euill wife, or from a strange Tribe, Stobae. Sermon. 65. Fulgosius calls these Iudgements Cacogamia, and Opsigawi^, lib. 2. cap. 1. So laudable and reuerent was Marriage amongst the Lacedemonians, procreation of children, and fertilitie of issue, That whosoeuer was the father of three children, should be free from Watch and Ward by day or by night; and whosoeuer had foure, or vpward, were rewarded with all Immunities and Libertie: This Law was first confirmed by Q. Metellus Numidicus, Censor; after, approoued by Iulius Caesar; and lastly, established by Augustus. Memorable are the words of Metellus, in a publike Oration to the people: If wee could possibly be without wiues, O Romans (saith he) wee might all of vs be free from that molestation and trouble: but since Nature incites vs, and necessitie compells vs to this exigent, That wee can neither liue with them without inconuenience, nor without them at all; more expedient it is therefore, that we ayme at the generall and lasting profit, than at our owne priuate and momentanie pleasure. Bruson. lib. 7. cap. 22. The Athenians, the Cretans, the Thurians, all in their Statutes and Ordinances encouraged Marriage, and punished the obstinacie of such as tooke vpon them the peeuishnesse of singlenesse, and sollitude, either with amercement, or disgrace. To that purpose was the Law Iulia instituted, that incited young men in their prime and flourishing age to the marriage of wiues, propagation of issue, and education of children; and that such should be encouraged by rewards, and the opposers thereof to be de^erred with punishments. Tiberius Caesar depriued one of his Quaestorship, because he diuorced himselfe from his wife, hauing beene but three dayes married, alledging, That hee in whom there was such lightnesse, could not be profitable for any thing. Claudius Caesar caused the Law Papia to be abrogated, giuing men of threescore yeeres and vpwards, the free libertie to marrie, as at those yeares of abilitie to haue issue. Theodoretus, lib. 1. cap. 7. and Sozomenus, lib. 1. cap. 10. both write, That in the Nicene Councell, when certaine of the Bishops would introduce into the Church a new Decree, before that time not knowne, namely, That all Bishops, Prelates, Priests, Deacons, and Spirituall or Religious men, should be made vncapable of Marriage;

as also all such as in the time of their Laitie (before they booke the Ministerie, or any seruice of the Church vpon them) should be separated from their wiues, of whom they were then possest: One Paphnu^ius, Confessor, (who was likewise Bishop of a citie in the vpper Thebais) stood vp, and with great feruencie opposed the motion, yet a man of approoued chastitie, and great austeritie of life: who though he were mightily opposed, yet at length so farre preuailed with the Synod of the Fathers, that it was definitiuely concluded, That though the marriage of Priests were interdicted^ and singlenesse of life inioyned them, yet all such as had wiues were dispensed withall, till death made a separation betwixt them. Pius, the second Pope of that name (being a man of vnquestioned prudence and grauitie, weightie in his words, and discreet in all his actions) was often heard to say, That he held it more conuenient and consonant both to reason and Religion, that their wiues should be restored to Priests, than taken from them. For the wise Bishop well vnderstood, that the restraining them from lawfull marriage, was the occasions of their falling into many great and grieuous sinnes, which by the former legall and regular course might be preuented: and if the libertie of Marriage were againe admitted, peraduenture many of those sinnes might in time decrease and be forgotten, into which by that restraint they were subiect hourely to fall, Fulgos. lib. 7. cap. 2. This short discourse shall serue for the necessitie of Marriage; which is euer the most pleasing and contented, when it is made betwixt equals. Therefore Ouid. Lib. Epist. Heroid. thus writes:
Quam male inequales veniunt ad aratra iuuenciTam premitur magn^ coniuge Nupta minor,Non honor est sed onus, etc.
Which though not verbum verbo, yet the intent of the Author I giue you thus in English:
Vnsightly doe the vnmatcht Heifers draw,Nor can the Plough goe euen then: such the LawOf Wedlocke is; to preuent Nuptiall strife,There must be paritie 'twixt man and wife.Then needes the one the other must oppresse,The husband great in power, the wife much lesse:It is no honor, but a burthen rather,To ioyne, and not be equall: this we gatherFrom th'vneuen yoake, for so you cannot strikeThe furrow straight; if match, match with thy like.
Times forbidden in Marriage.From the conueniencie or rather necessitie of Marriage, I will speake briefly of the times granted and allowed for the ceremonie, or limitted and forbidden amongst other Nations; as also of some proemes or preambles, before the consummation. It was religiously obserued among the Romans, that no marriage was suffered to be celebrated in the month of May, in which the Lemuria were kept solemne, which were in remembrance of Remus and to the pacification of his ghost or shaddow; nor whilest the Feralia nor the Parentalia were solemnised. The first was to appease the gods for dead soules, (as our All-soules-day) the others were feasts made at burialls of their fathers, brothers, or ancestors; neither any day that was held impure, nor when the

Ancylia were obserued, nor vpon any feastiuall or holy-day, nor in the month of Iune till after the Ides, neither did the Romans in their espousalls neglect Auguries and Presages, if either there were earth-quake or a troubled firmament, they held it fatall; and therfore deferred it to a more quiet Earth, or lesse turbulent Heauen. A Crow they hold to predict a fortunate Omen, and an inuiolate league of future faith and loyaltie betwixt the bride and bridegroome, for such is the societie of Crowes that if one dye the other which is widowed neuer chuseth other mate: the like is remembered of the beast called a Loz or Lynx, aboue all other the quickest sighted, as also of the Turtle. Alex. ab Alex. lib. 2. cap. 5. No betrothed Virgin could marrie amongst them, vpon any of their holy dayes or such as they called feastiuall; but a widow had that libertie, so it were done in priuat and without any solemne ceremonie: the reason pretended was, Because to a widow there could be no force offered as to a Virgin, and therefore it was no violent but a meere holy-day labour: Vpon this Verrius Flaccus tooke occasion apud Verronem in these words,
Fossas veteres festis diebus licet tergereNouas facere non licet.
Old ditches on the feast-dayes they might skower,But to digge new the law admits no power.
The Persians were onely permitted to contract matrimonie in,Ceremonies before Marriage. or before the Sommer equinoctiall, but not after: The Dapsolites once a yeare make a solemne conuention of all the men and women that are disposed to marriage, in one day, in which after their great feast, the women retyre themselues and lay them downe vpon their seuerall pallats, the lightes being all put out, the men according to their number are admitted in the darke, where without any premeditate choyse but meere lot and chance, euerie man chuseth her whom he first lightes on and diuirginates her; and be shee faire or foule, euer after holds her as his wife, Stobae Sermon. 42. Amongst the Carmanians no man is suffered to marrie, before hee hath presented the head of an enemie to the king. About the Lake Meotes, there is a people called Laxamatae^ amongst whom no Virgin contracts matrimony before she hath subdued an enemie. There is a law amongst the Armenians, that Virgins are first prostituted in an old Temple dedicated to the goddesse Anetes, whose picture was of sollid gold; which Antonius after sacriligiously (as they held it) tooke away: according to the gaine of their compression, it was lawfull for any man to chuse a wife where he pleased. Amongst the Ciprians, the Virgins before marriage dayly repayre to the Sea-shore, and there companie with strangers, till they haue got such a competent summe as may make vp their mariage dower. The Phoenicians doe the like in the cittie of Syca, but their prostitution is in the Temple of Venus; but the surplusage that ariseth aboue the dower, returnes towards the repayring of the Church. The Carthagenians obserue the like custome. The Lydian Virgins before they were suffered to lye with their husbands, made themselues for a cert^ine time common to any man, till tyred with sacietie they came gentle and quiet to their beds, and from that time forward vowed chastitie, but if any one was found euer after to transgresse the bounds of temperance, she was punished with all rigor and crueltie, Aelian. lib. 4. de Var. Hist.

Lycurgus hauing prescribed a certaine age, before which time it was not lawfull for young men and maides to haue carnall companie, being demaunded the reason, answered, Because the issue that proceedes from those of ripe yeares and growne strength, is likewise able and perfect; but the hastie and vntimely generation is still subiect to weakenesse and infirmitie. Plutarch in Laconic.

Of Contracts before marriage, and of Dowries, amongst whom they were allowed, and by whom forbidden.
Of ContractsIT was a custome amongst the Grecians and Lacedemonians, when a yong man and a Virgin were contracted, to eate of bread together that had bin deuided by a sword: Romulus the first erector of the citie Rome, caused the couenant of marriage to bee performed betwixt them by a reciprocall receiuing of bread and water. There was after his time no stipulation or nuptiall league fully confirmed, without fire and water placed at the threshold of the doore where they should enter, both these they both were inioyned to touch; with the water the new bride was after sprinckled, as if by that ceremonie they were coupled and ioyned in an inexpiable couenant and inseparable bond of affection; these two being the cheefe elements of nature, on which the life of man in our common food most essentially exist. Amongst the Indians, vnlesse both the husband and wife annointed their bodies all ouer with a gum or oyle distilling from certaine trees growing by the riuer Pha^is, the matrimonie was not to be allowed. The Persians and the Assirians, onely ioyned their right hands in contract: so likewise the antient Germanes, accounting that the onely firme pledge of their loue and loyaltie. Amongst the Galatians in their espousalls, the bridegroome drunke to the bride in a cup of Greekish wine; in other places of milke, which shee pledged him; by this ceremonie intending that their nuptialls were not onely firmely contracted, by that mutuall loue, equall societie, coniugall loyaltie, marriage concord, but like food and dyet should alwayes bee common betwixt them. Alex. ab Alex. lib. 2. cap. 5.Of Nuptiall Dowries. Concerning nuptiall Dowries, by some nations approoued by others interdicted. Lycurgus and Solon because they would not haue the Virgins oppressed by the couetousnesse of men, forbad by their lawes that any man should demaund a dower with his wife (a necessarie and profitable decree;) by which he was condemned, that being a long suitor to the daughter of Pysander, and promising her marriage in her fathers life time, repudiated the contract after his death, because he dying poore, her dower did not answere his expectation. Aelian. lib. 6. de Var. Histor. Amongst the Hetru^ians it was held base and ignoble, and absolutely forbidden by their inscribed statutes, for a man to send tokens or gifts to her whom he affected; accounting them no better than bribes or mercenarie hire, not fit to bee thought on in such a sacred commixion, where nothing should bee meditated saue sincere loue and coniugall pietie. The Aegyptians were so opposite to demaunding of portions with their wiues, that they called all such as receiued them, no better than slaues to them and their dowries. Now touching bridall gifts and presents,Of Nuptiall Gifts or Presents. It was an antient custome amongst the Greekes, that the father, the day after the solemnisation of the marriage, sent to the bride some spousall offerings, which they called Epa^lia dora, they were vshered by a beautifull yong

lad attyred in a long white vesture reaching to his heele, bearing in his hand a bright burning taper: in order followed after him all such young men and maides youthfully attyred, that brought the presents; one presented Gold, another Gemmes, a third a Basin and Ewre with other Plate-dishes, a fourth Boxes of Alablaster full of sweet Oyles and Vnguents, a fift rich Sandals or Slippers, with other necessaries belonging as well to the whole house as to their priuat bed-chamber, Alex. ab Alex. lib. 2. cap. 5. Solon to this marriage-offering allowed onely three sorts of garments for the Bride to bring with her, besides such small gifts as were tendered by the kindred, friends, and houshold seruants. A damosell of Lacaena being poore, and demanded, What Dower she had to bring to her husband, and to marrie her with? answered, That which was left mee as an inheritance from mine ancestors, namely, Vertue and Modestie; Ingeniously inferring, that there is no more commendable Dower to be expected in marriage, than Chastitie and vncorrupt Manners. The daughters of C. Fabritius, Cn. Scipio, and Manius Curius, because their fathers left them not portions sufficient to bestow them according to their byrth and qualitie, had their Dowers allotted them from the common Treasurie. There was a Law amongst the Romans, That no Virgins Dower should exceed the summe of ten thousand pieces of Siluer: But after, that limitation was taken away, and brought to fortie thousand and vpward. Insomuch, that Metulia (because the Dower of which she possest her husband,Metulia amounted to fiue hundred thousand pieces) had a sirname bestowed vpon her^ beeing euer after called Dotata.Dotata. In ancient times the husbands wooed their Brides with a Ring of Iron, without any Stone or Gemme, but meerely circular and round; by that denoting the parsimonie of diet, and frugalitie in liuing. Homer (the Prince of Poets) hauing no wealth with which to bestow his daughter vpon a thriftie citisen, gaue her onely an Epithal^mium, with certaine Cyprian Elegies; for so Pindarus and Aedianus, lib. 9. affirme. The Carthaginians gaue no Portions with their Virgins, but were onely at the charge of the Nuptiall feasts, which grew to be immoderate and wastfull. Amongst the Indians, none can clayme a greater Dower with his wife than the price of a yoake of Oxen; neither can he marrie out of his owne Tribe. The Assyrians brought their noblest Virgins into the marketplace, and their prices there publikely proclaymed by the Cryer, whosoeuer wanted a wife, and would reach to the summe propounded, might there be furnished; and he that had not readie money, if he could put in good securitie, it was held sufficient. The like custome was amongst the Babylonians; in which they obserued this order, They first set out to sale the most ingenuous, and beautifull, and those at an high rate; and when they were put off, they brought forth the worser featured, euen vnto the degree of deformitie, and then the Cryer proclaymes, That who will marrie any of them, he shall haue so much, or so much, to recompence her foulenesse, or lamenesse. And this money which sells them, is collected from the ouerplus of the price of the other: so that the beautie of the faire ones, helpes to bestow and dispose of the foule. The Mass^lienses would not suffer any man to receiue with his wife more than an hundred pieces of Gold. Amongst the Cretans, halfe the brothers estate was conferred vpon the sister, to make her a Dowrie. The antient Germans, when they had made choyse of such with whom they meant to marrie, at their proper charge prouided them of Dowries. Which custome euen to these later times hath beene continued amongst the

Celtiberians, who dwelt in a part of the Pyrenes, a Prouince which is now called Biskay, Fulgos. lib. 2. cap. 1. And with the Dower which he sent, he was tyed to present her likewise with a Horse bridled, a Sword, a Targuet, and an Armour, with a yoake of Oxen. And these were held to be the most assured Pledges of Coniugall loue, without which no Nuptials were legally solemnized. Alexand. ab Alex. lib. 2. cap. 5. Idem, lib. 4. cap. 8.


Of Nuptiall Ornaments, Pompe, Feasts, Epithalamions, etc.
Nuptiall Ornaments.AMongst the Greekes, the Bride was crowned with water-Mints, or Cresses: her head was kembed with a piece of a Lance or Speare of a Fencer, with which some man had beene slaine; it was called Caelibaris, which imported, that the new-married Bride should bee as conioynedly commixt with her husband in mutuall affection, as that Speare was inward in the trans-pierced bodie, when it was drawne from the wound: A strange Aenigma it appeares to me; howsoeuer, it is so recorded. Her hayre was parted the one way and the other, leauing a seame in the middest, that her forhead and face might be the plainlyer discouered. Some interprete it as an Embleme, that she might be the breeder of a warlike and valorous issue; or else, that by that ceremonie she should euer acknowledge her selfe obsequious to the will and pleasure of her husband, Alexand. ab Alex. lib. 2. cap. 5. In other places of Greece the Brides heads were couered with a Veyle, to signifie her bashfulnesse and modest shame: It was of Clay-coloured Silke, by which colour the Matrons of the most temperate life and modest carriage, denoted vnto the world their continence and vertue. Amongst the Athenians, the Bridegroome kept his Bride concealed and couered at home in the place where she was after to be devirgined; the doores of the house were adorned with white Wooll, and crowned and beautified with Lawrel, which were first touched by the Bride, who annointed the posts and daubed the thresholds with Swines grease, or the fat of Wolues, to preuent all Pest, or pernicious diseases from euer hauing entrance into that house. Some vsed to sprinkle their heads with a rough kind of hearbe called Carix, much like vnto Broome, with the fruits of Palme-trees, with Pulse or Pease, and with a kind of powder which belongs to Painting: this office was still performed by new seruants, at their first entrance into the houses of their maisters. The Law of Lycurgus amongst the Spartans was, That the Bride should cut her haire, and putting her selfe into mans habite, be brought into her chamber by the Bride-maids, who had before prepared it; and being left by them, the Bridegroome then entred, and first vnloosing her Virgin Girdle, hee had free libertie of congression. In Boeotia their Virgins were crowned with a wreath made of the hearbe called Sperage. In the Isle Cous the husbands were compelled to enter the Bride-chamber, attyred like women. It was an vse amongst the Locrenses, for the Matrons to picke and gather selected flowers to make garlands for the Brides; but such as were bought for money, were held vile and contemptuous. The antient Latines, as well the Bride as Bridegroome, wore Ribbands and Laces partie-coloured, White and Purple: so likewise they are apparcelled in checkred garments, of the same colours; or else their neckes are put into one yoake (a ceremonie they haue) of which Iuno, the goddesse of Marriage, is called

Iugalis; intimating, that with concordant minds and equall sufferance they should beare all distresses and disasters. All Marriages amongst the Lusitanians were celebrated in Rose-coloured garments, or else not permitted. The Chelidonian women that had prostituted themselues to strangers, went with halfe of their faces open, the other halfe couered, else it was not lawfull for them to be seene abroad. They wore Girdles of Sheepes wooll wouen, about their Wasts, which was fastened about them with an Herculean Knot, which was not lawfull for any to vnloose, but either in the Bride-bed, or in the celebration of the Sacreds; in which they obserue a kind of Omen, that they should prooue as fruitfull in the propagation of issue, as Hercules was in getting of children. The German Virgins, when they prepared to giue meeting to their betrothed, and so to proceed to the Coniugall ceremonie, put on a straight or plaine garment, such a one as they in some places call a Huke, and ouer that a Cloake without spot or stayne, bearing a garland wouen of Veruaine, an hearbe dedicated to Venus, with other selected flowers intermixed. And so much for their Habite and Nuptiall Ornaments vsed amongst forraine Nations: I will now giue you the description of a Bride, in her way to the Bride-chamber.





Descriptio Egredientis Sponsae.
At length comes forth the Bride (in all parts rare)The Bride comming out of her chamber.
Full ripe for man (of Venus the iust care:)
A Virgins face, a Virgins chast active
She weares. Now modest blushes kindle fire
Within her bashfull cheeke, which by degrees
Growes still more hot, and warmes all that she sees.
The youthfull fri^, dispersed here and there,
On tip-toe mooue, to see this starre appeare,
And rise with such refulgence: on each hand
The aged Fathers and the Matrons stand,
And make a reuerent Lane for her to passe:
She makes them thinke vpon the time that was,
Their prime, their youth, their strength (now gone and wasted)
And Nuptiall sweets, which they before ha^e tasted.
On still she goes, and by the armes her lead
Two Ganimedes: where she vouchsafes to tread,
The Earth would haue her feet still to insist,
As loth to part with what so late it kist.
Still further she proceedes vpon the way,
With her loose locks the Winds delight to play,
And Boreas (as if once againe turn'd Louer)
Blowes off her Veyle, the better to discouer
So rare a Beautie; and amaz'd, dare sweare
A new Orythea doth in h^r appeare:
He wantons with her garments, to behold
Her pictured Vesture, clouded late in Gold;
Did not her modest hands her coates ke^^^ downe,
Hee'd blow her bare, them seize her as hi^ own^.
Thus habited was Argius Hellen seen^,
When Menelaus made her Sparta^s Q^eene.
The Goddesses celestiall, when they trace
The milkie path to Ioues high Pallace, grace
Their rich attyre no better, scarce so well:
They in some one thing 'boue the rest excell,
But she in youth, strength, state maiesticall,
In vntoucht puritie, pulchritude, all
That beautifies the Sex. Thus is the Bride
Brought to the place, where she must now reside.


Egrediens Sponsus.
The Bridegroomes first appearing.See from another part the gates spread wyde,
From whence the Bridegroome issues tow'rds the Bride,
A Youth of the first haire, whose tender skinne^
Yet neuer rasor felt, his budding chinne
(Saue Downe) can nothing show: vpon him flowes
A curious mantle, which he carelesse throwes
About him with neglect, as skorning pride,
The ground thereof in Tyrian Purple dide,
And mixt with golden Wyres; for vnderstand,
'Twas wouen with his carefull mothers hand;
About the edge double meanders run:
'Twas long in worke, but against this day done.
His count'nance loftie, and his shoulders spred,
As sometimes we haue seene gods figured:
In whose bright eye the life of youth doth shine,
And as the day-starre from the Oceans bryne
Where he hath newly wash't himselfe appeares,
And as he mooues, the place about him cleeres;
So he, his star-like eyes ayme at the place
To which he hasts, his deere loue to embrace:
Loue troubles him, whil'st she attends him still,
Till entring, hee finds time to gaze his fill,
And feasts his eyes vpon his souereigne blisse,
That done, they first take hands, embrace, then kisse.


Oblatio munerum, or the Offering.
The Nuptiall Offering.The young men with their Presents next proceed,
With an affected gate, they neither speed,
Nor doth their pace seeme tarde, but on row
In order march, to make the goodlier show.
(Their parents set about them) now behold,
The first a rich roabe offers, stain'd with gold,
Figured with beasts and birds and creeping things.
Talents of gold and yuorie the next brings,
One an embrodered Chaire, and then another
A Cabinet, which for the time doth smother
Iewels, and Gemmes. The Tables seeme to bend
And swell with golden heapes the offerers send,
Of Coyne and Plate, the next before them throwes:
Chaplets, set round with stones to decke their browes,
To her a hand-maid's giuen, as tither brest
A sucking babe; the morall is exprest,
In fertile marriage, as he would haue sed
Loe here the faire fruits of a nuptiall bed.
Foure young men, and as many Virgins stand
Obsequious all to hers and his command.
Their hair's alike (as 'tis the custome) shorne,
And all their neckes rich chaines of gold adorne.


The Epithalamium, or Nuptiall song.
The mothers then, with more than common care
Make businesse, and bestirre them; who prepare
To leade them to their rest, whom as they bring
Neere to the chamber doore, the Quirers thus sing:



Oh you most Faire, most Chast, and meriting Bride,The Nuptiall Song.
Of a like Husband; now to sports vntride
Applie your selues: and may your Nuptiall sheetes
Flowe and abound with all delicious sweetes:
Oh may Lucina when her childing growes
Be present, and release her painefull throwes:
Prooue fruitfull as the Vine, let Bacchus fill
Her cup to th'brim, with iuices that distill
From his choice Grapes: the husband in all places
Skatter ripe Nuts, with Ribbands and with Laces;A Ceremony, for them to cast Nuts about, vsed amongst the Romans.
The Altars hang and deck, since he hath got
To lodge with him, a Virgin without spot,
A Flower, a Vertue, Glorie of man-kind,
And of her Sex the pride, o may you find
Long dayes of ioy, nights shortned in your rest,
And as your parents are in you, liue blest
In your faire Issue, you are happie then,
Harke, harke, to this, the Fates cry all Amen.



Ingressus in cubiculum, i. Their entrance into their bed-chamber.
Being entred, and the bed with all things fit,Their going to bed.
Vpon the side therof a while they sit,
When (left alone) they talke, and ioy, and smile,
She whil'st she can the time seekes to beguile,
Till suddenly her cheekes are all bewept,
To loose so soone what she so long hath kept,
And oft she casts her eye vpon the place
Where she's to wrestle, and she hides her face,
But thinking on't, nor dares to enter in,
Doubting what's lawfull, still to be a sin:
He with such gentle force compells the lasse,
As would not breake her were she made of glasse,
So loath he is i^ hur^ her, yet he throwes
Her softly downe and to her side then growes,
Venus begins to teach them a new trade,
The marriage queene here playes the chambermaid;
Iuno her selfe, who's now officious growne,
And there attends to teach them warres vnknowne,
Th'whilst he seekes for babyes in her eyes,
Feeles her white neck and yuorie brests, that rise
Like two white snowie Hills, and still doth praise
All that he feeles or touches; then thus says,
Oh fresh and flowrishing Virgin, now my Bride,
And are you growne at length thus neere my side?
Of all my hopes the store-house and the treasure,
My long expected, now my latest pleasure:
My sweet and deerest wife, this could not be,
Nor happen thus but by the gods decree,
And will you now tht power of Loue withstand?
At this she turnes, and stayes his forward hand,
Trembling to thinke on that which was t'ensue,
Or prooue the thing which yet she neuer knew.
'Twixt Hope and Feare, she thus replyes^ Oh faire
And louely Youh, list to a Virgins praier,
By thee I in^reat, by those which got thee, such
Thy parents (loe) I onely begge thus much,
Pittie my teares, put me to no affright,
I onely craue repriue but for this night.
With that she seemes intranc't, and prostrate lyes,
Hath not one word to vtter more, nor eyes
To see her selfe vnuirgin'd, winckes, lyes still,
And since he needs must, lets him act his will:
Betwixt them two they quench their amorous Fires,
She, what she feares, he hath what he desires.





I dare proceede no further with the Author, whose conceit I haue borrowed, but his words not altogether imitated; those that haue read him I make no question, will say I haue broke off and shooke hands with him in good time, and as farre as I haue gone hand in hand with him, rather added to his inuention, than any way derogated from his stile, or detracted from his conceite; therefore I pause and now proceede to the Nuptiall Pompe, vsed amongst forreine nations, according to my promise.
Nuptiall Pompe.Pausonias hath left related, That it was the custome amongst the Grecians, for the bride to bee placed betwixt her betrothed husband and one of her next of kindred, and so in a Chariot (which was called by them Parochus) to be drawne thorow the streetes, the Axel-tree thereof at her comming home was taken off and burned before the gates of her house, to signifie that she must euer after be an housewife and keepe within, as a faithfull and industrious ouerseer of their domesticke affaires and businesse. It was the fashion in other Prouinces of Greece, that those of lower degree (I meane the brides) when they were conducted home to their husbands, a young Boy went before them hung round with Oaken leaues and Acornes, bearing on his arme a wicker Basket full of bread; who all the way cryed aloud, Efugi malum, and inueni bonum, i. I haue shunned the bad, and found or

made choyse of the good. As she enters the doores, there the bridegroome stands readie to receiue her, the children demaund wall-nuts, which are cast vnto them in aboundance. Amongst the Rhodians, the bride is called from her fathers house by the common Cryer, and by him conducted to the bed of her betrothed. The Romans obserued another custome: Their brides were not to touch the ground or pauement with their feet, but were snatched vp in their armes and borne vpon their shoulders, and as if shee were rapt and forcibly against her will hurried to her bedchamber: so Plutarch affirmes, others adde, That their haire was braided and combed with a peece of a souldiers speare, intimating that they were now valiantly and resolutely to enter a new warr and skirmish. Amongst the Lusitanians, she was not permitted either to walke her selfe, or be led to her nuptiall Chamber, but the yong men came, and with pretended rudenesse and force snatched her from the armes of her mother, as if according to the Roman custome shee were rauished thence; before them went a piper and one that sung an Hymenaean song, all her alliance and kindred attended her, of whom one bore a Distaffe with Towe, another a Spindle, next her a young man and a maide that had their parents liuing, one lighting them with a taper whose staffe was made of a Pine-tree; and with these ceremonies shee was conducted to her bride-bed.


Sacred Auguries and Nuptiall Expiations, etc.
THe Auspices or Auguries, were Southsayers and such as vsed to handfast or contract marriages, and these were still consulted with, as well in vndertaking Warres as propounding Nuptialls, as also in most of their publique enterprises or priuate imployments: these diuined either from the voyces or by the flying of birds. The women supt with their husbands the first night in their beds as they lay together, which seemed to be an inuitation of the gods, Because Iupiters banquets are (as some report) after the same manner celebrated, for he still feasted in his bed, and Iuno and Minerua sitting in chaires or vpon benches, Valer. lib. 2. cap. 1. The Athenians at their bridalls had the roome fumed with the skin of a blacke dogge, burned in the fire, his p^iuie parts were buried vnder the threshold of the doore; at the outward gate was hid in the Earth the snowt of a Wolfe, and these they held to expell all Effacinations and Witch-crafts from the house: others vse a Fish called Stella Marina or the Sea-starre,Alex. ab. Alex. lib. 1 cap. 24. which sprinckled with the blood of a Wolfe preserued the marriage couple from all dangers or disasters. Cynxia and Gamelia Iuno were deuoutely celebrated in Hymenaean contracts.Cinxia. Gamelia. In all their sacrifices they tooke from the entrailes the Gall of the beast, and buried it in an obscure and remote place not far from the Altar, thereby signifiing that all marriage ought to bee without gall or bitternesse. Amongst the Boetians and Locrens^s no contract was held firme vnlesse they had before offered at the Altar of the Virgin Euclia.Euclia. In Rome there was a custome of old, that all maides before marriage should kneele some certeine houres in the Temple of the god Futinus (whom wee may tearme the god predominant in the act of Copulation) and of him intreate happie successe in their future congression. The Etrurians in their Hymenaenan bargaines from the noblest to the lesse qualified, slew hogges in their sacrifices, by that calling the gods to witnesse, That their league and couenant was from thencefoorth inviolable not to be altered but by lawfull Diuorse, Death, Captiuitie, or Slauerie and

losse of freedome. Many other are reckoned vp by Alex. ab Alex. too tedious here to insert: a word or two of their Hymnes and Nuptiall Inuocations.
Hymnes and Inuocations.The antient Greekes vsed a kind of Verse, which they called Amboeum carmen, the same which (they say) was sung by the gods at the brydalls of Peleus, the father of Achilles and Thetis. Aristophanes in Auibus saith, That they were wont to cry aloud, Humin Ho Humenai Ho Humin. In other places, at their marriages, the Matrons held the Tapers and Torches, at which time were sung Fesciuini, which were broad and bawdie Verses: and they being ended, that which they call the solemne and sacred Hymne in the Athenian Espousals, was sung;
Bonos ama timidos repelle, etc.
Loue those that good are, and the fearefull shun;Obseruing these, thou do'st what's to be done.
Plato in Gorgia affirmes, That at Nuptiall Feasts was vsed to be sung this short Hymne following:
Formosum esse and diuitem and be^e valere,Summum existimari bonum.
To attaine the soueraigne blisse, let vs imploreHealth, Wealth, and Beautie, then we need no more.
The Romans (as Liu. lib. 1. Decad. and Plin. cap. 2. de viris illustribus, affirme) in all their celebrations called aloud vpon the name of Thalassius, which they held as an Omen to their future successe and prosperitie. Their Brides, when they entred into the houses of their husbands, whilest their feet were yet vpon the threshold, inuoked the name of Caia Cecilia,Caia Cecilia, or Tanaquil. by another name called Tanaquilla, continuing and not surceasing to iterate that name from the doore till she came into the Bride-chamber. Tanaquilla was the wife of Tarquinius Priscus, king of the Romans, for temperance, modestie, vertue, and all the accomplishments that best grace a woman, most eminent; thus intimating, that by remembring her name, they might imitate her life. All other Ornaments layd apart, there was onely borne before them a Distaffe and a Spindle: and thus the mothers of Martia, of Portia, of Lucretia, were first vshered to their Nuptiall chambers.
Nuptiall Diet.Touching their Diet, Solon published a Law, That no Virgin might be permitted to enter the Bride-bed, if at supper her husband and shee had not before tasted of a Quince-Peare, which they call Malum Cydonium. The Naucratians in all such Feasts forbid both Egges, sweet-meats, or any confection in which there was Honey: Amongst them no seruice was admitted sauing Skallions, or such roots as were diuided into cloues, Pine-apple Nuts, the iuice of the hearbe called Rochet, and Pepper, and these were in the place of a Banquet. Amongst the Persians, the husband was not permitted to come to visit his Bride, vnlesse he had first eaten an Apple, or else tasted of a sweet Rush called Squinanthum, or Camels meat; neither might he eat of any thing else for that day. Amongst the Babylonians they bedded not, without red Storax first tasted. The Carthaginians in their Hymenaean Feastiuals sliced the fish called a Tunny, without the eating of which there was no perfect and absolute celebration. Alex. ab Alex. From their Feasts I come to ceremonies obserued concerning the copulation in or before Marriage; and of that briefly.
Amongst the Trogloditae,Nuptiall Copulation. their betrothed Virgins were first brought forth by their neerest kinsmen and allyes, and by them promiscuously prostituted. After which time, they betake themselues to all ciuilitie and continence, which whosoeuer was knowne to violate or digresse from, was most seuerely chastised, without all commiseration or pitie. The same custome is obserued amongst the Gymnesians, the Lydians, and the inhabitants of the Islands Baleares. The Andrimachides (a people of Africa) before they can bestow their daughters, offer their Virginities to their Princes first, and such as he best affects, he vitiates at his pleasure, and then they are permitted to marrie. The like custome was held in Scotland: but since the Christian Religion was there professed, that Law hath beene abrogated; onely the maids redeeme their Virginities with a certaine piece of money, and by that Tenure their lands are held to this day. The Volcinienses are tyed to a more base seruitude, because they are compelled before marriage to prostitute their free daughters to their slaues and seruants. Alex. ab Alex. lib. 1. cap. 24. Herodotus writes, That the Adyrmachidae present their daughters maidenheads first to their king, ere their betrothed husbands can be admitted any congresse with them. The Babylonians neuer haue companie with their wiues, but they before sitting about a fire, make a fume of a strong sent, which they snuffe vp at their nosthrils; by the Authors description, it should not much differ from that which we haue now in such frequent vse, and call Tabacco: In the morning they both wash, before they touch any Vessell whatsoeuer. The Spartans (by the Decrees of Lycurgus) in all their Bridals, the man still came into the womans chamber, the Light being first extinct; where (with bashfull feare, and a religious kind of modestie) they performed the offices of Nature, Loue, and Custome.


The Coniugall Loue of Women towards their Husbands.
HAuing done with the superstitious ceremonies of the Gentiles concerning Marriage, as farre as Polyhimnia or Memorie will helpe me; I will now proceed with some few remarkable examples of Coniugall Loue, being an argument that cannot be too oft remembred, nor ouer-much handled, I begin with the women of India.Indian women. These, according to the custome of the country, being many married vnto one man, he is no sooner dead, but they all contend together which of them was of him in his life time best beloued; and if it cannot be determined amongst themselues, they bring the controuersie before the Iudges, and plead as earnestly to accompanie him in death, as for some great fortune and honour: shee amongst the rest that preuailes, exults with ioy, as hauing attained a great victorie, when being led by her best friends and neerest of kinred (partakers with her in the same triumph) vnto the place where her husbands bodie is readie to bee consumed; with a pleasant and merrie countenance shee casts her selfe into the fire, and is th^re burned with him together; the rest that suruiue and were depriued of this last honour, consume the remainder of their liues in great discontent, sorrow, and anguish. Of this custome Cicero remembers vs Tusc. Quest. lib. 5. Vaeler. Maxim. lib. 2. cap. 1. Alex. ab Alex. Aelianus, Egnatius, and others. This funerall ceremonie, as Fulgos. lib. 2. cap. 6. is continued amongst them vnto this day: alluding to this purpose, is that of Propert. lib. 3.

Foelix eo is lex funeris vna maritis, etc.

Which I thus paraphrase in English:
You Easterne Husbands, in your funerall LawesMost happie, and their first inuentors wise,In which you are more famous then, becauseOn you the blushing morning first doth rise.When Death hath with his last mortiferous woundThe Husband strucke, his last Rites to prepare,A pious troupe of Wiues engirt him round,Drying their moist cheekes with their scatt'red haire,Who striue which shall associate him in fate,And bed with him together in the flame;To liue beyond him, is a thing they hate,And he once dead, life is to them a shame:She that can die with him, hath her desire,And leapes with ioy into the funerall fire.
Thracians.The like is obserued by a people of Thrace, that inhabite a little aboue the Crestonaeans. They likewise are delighted with pluralitie of wiues; who after the decease of their husbands enter into the like contention, as the women of India; and she that is Victoresse (as if glorying in some great conquest, adorned in her best and richest ornaments) is with great ceremonious pompe (amongst all her kindred and allyes) conducted vnto the place where his bodie is to be interred: where being slaine by her next of kinne (as the best office he can doe her) she is buried in the same graue with her husband,Geates. Herod. lib. 5. The wiues amongst the Geates repayre to their husbands Sepulchre, and holding all life tedious and burthensome without them, offer their bodies willingly either to the sword, or to the fire. The custome of the Catheoreans was,Catheoreans. That when the Bride chose her husband, she made a couenant with him, at his death to be burnt in the same Pile, Alex. ab Alex. lib. 1. cap. 25.Herulians. The women amongst the Herulians (a people that inhabite beyond the riuer of Danubius) repayre to the graues of their husbands, and iust ouer-against them, strangle themselues. Which marriage-loue appeares the more strange, because the men are of that barbarous and inhumane incontinence that they hold it no shame to leaue the societie of their women, and haue congression with brute beasts. Bonifacius in his Epistle vnto king Ethelbaldus, as Gulielm. Malmsbur. lib. 1. cap. 64. de Anglia relates it,Winedi. sayth, That the Winedi are the worst and the most nastie people among the Germans; yet their wiues are of that incomparable zeale and pietie toward their husbands, that shee is held to be the most laudable and prayse-worthie, that with her owne hand kills her selfe, to burne with him in his last funerall fire. From the generalitie of women, I descend to particulars.Phila. Admirable was the loue of Phila towards her husband king Demetrius, and haughtie and magnanimous her spirit; who receiuing newes of his defeat in battaile, and that his whole armie being dispersed and scattered, he was retyred into Cassandria; dranke poyson, and so died. The wife of Straton,The wife of Straton. Prince of Sydonia, when the citie was straitly besieged by the Persians, her greatest care was, least the person of her husband should fall into the hands of the mercilesse enemie, which she purposed to preuent by death. When therefore shee heard they had skaled the walls, and were readie to be instantly possest of the towne, and seize vpon the person of her

husband, she snatcht from him his sword, with which she first ^lew him, and then (laying out his bodie with as much comelinesse as the shortnesse of the time would permit) after fell vpon the same sword; thus by voluntarie death preuenting the dishonor of captiuitie. Fulgos. lib. 4. cap. 6. Fannia,Fannia. the daughter of Arria the younger, wife to Poetus Patauinus (before remembred in her braue and heroick death with her husband) was the Spouse of Heluidius Priscus, who followed him in all his exile, euen to his vnfortunate and most vniust death: she was the third time confined, from the reigne of Tiberius Nero to the death of Domitian. Plinie with infinite prayses applauds the incomparable vertues of this Fannia, with both the Arriaes, in Lib. 9. in his Epistle to Quadratus,Triaria. and in his seuenth to Genitor and Priscus. Triaria was the noble and chast wife of L. Vitellius, brother to Aul. Vitellius the Emperor, who as Hypsicrataea followed Mithridates in all his combustious warres, so she neuer forsooke her husband, but was present with him in all those ciuile dissentions against Vespasian. And the night when Vitellius her Lord with a great armie of souldiers inuaded and entred the citie Terecyna, shee presented her selfe in the middest of the slaughter, not onely daring but doing equally with the most valiant, killing on all sides, till shee had hemmed her selfe in with dead bodies, slaine by her owne hand; so bold and magnanimous a spirit had the coniugall loue to her husband imprest in her: Her memorie is made famous by the same Author.Antonia or Archona. Antonia Flaxilla (by some called Archona) when her husband Priscus was found guiltie of the Pysonian Faction, and for that cause exiled by Nero, and when shee might haue enioyed all the plentie and abundance in Rome, left all the pleasures and delights of the citie, to accompanie her desolate Lord in his penurious and vncomfortable banishment. Her example Egnatia Maximilla imitated,Egnatia Maximilla. who likewise associated her husband Gallus, guiltie of the same Conspiracie with Priscus. Fulgos. lib. 6. cap. 7. From Iacobus, the sonne of Vsson Cassannus, amongst many other Captaines that reuolted, there was one eminent in that Rebellion, called Pandoerus, who had a most beautiful young wife (her age exceeded not sixteene yeeres) to whom he was ardently and in conioyned loue affected.The wife of Pandoerus. He being by her often earnestly entreated to forbeare all conflicts with the enemie, but by no meanes either mooued by her teares, or perswaded with her intercessions and prayers (persisting resolute for a present encounter) shee then begged of him, That before he hasarded himselfe to the extremitie of danger, hee would first take away her feares, by transpiercing her with his sword: which when he likewise denyed, he presently left her, and gaue signall of battaile; in which conflict he was vanquished and slaine, his Tent rifled, his wife surprised, and committed into the hands of one of the chiefe Captaines belonging to the king: who pittying her teares and sorrow (to which her feature and beautie gaue no common lustre) made instant suit vnto her, to make her his wife. Shee (whilest shee could) put him off with all possible delayes: but after perceiuing, that what hee could not compasse with her good will, hee purposed to attaine vnto by compulsion and force, shee craued onely some few houres of deliberation priuately to her selfe: which graunted, and beeing retyred, shee first writ in a short Scedule these words, Let none report, that the wife of Pandoerus harboured so little loue, as to out-line him. Which Note leauing vpon the Table, she tooke a sword then hanging in the chamber, with which she immediately dispatcht her selfe of life, and so expired, following him in death, with whose life shee could be

no longer delighted. Ibidem. Equall in all Matrimoniall pietie with this Ladie, was Cecilia Barbadica Veneta,Cecilia Barbadica. who after the death of her husband Philippus Vedraminus, by no counsaile, comfort, or persuasion, could be woon (either by her kindred or friends) to taste the least food whatsoeuer, or giue answer to any word that was spoken to her; in which silence and consumption, shee (after some few dayes of vnspeakable sorrow) breathed her last, Egnat. lib. 4. cap. 6. Petrus Candianus, after the decease of his first wife espoused a second, called Walberta,Walberta. the daughter of Vgon one of the Princes of Italie, who liued with him in all obedience, with a religious obseruation of true coniugall loue and pietie, neuer forsaking him in any disaster, but attended him with her young sonne in law Vitalis. The Duke her husband being after slaine by the Venetians in a seditious mutinie, Vitalis escaped the furie of the Massacre, and fled, but shee stayed to abide the vtmost danger, with the bodie of her dead husband, meditating all posible meanes to reuenge the death of her husband vpon the Conspirators: but her womannish inabilitie not preuayling, shee likewise secretly left the citie, and followed her sonne Vitalis; in whose societie shee fled to Adeleta,Adeleta. the wife of Otho the German Emperour, who at the same time resided in the citie Placentia: but after long vaine intercession (seeing her hopes and purposes quite frustrate) she retyred againe to her owne citie, where she liued a sad and solitarie life, still inuoking the name of Petrus Candianus, with whose name in her mouth she not long after deceased.The wife of Franc. Foscarus Egnat. (the remembrancer of the former Historie) speakes likewise of Franciscus Foscarus, another Duke of Venice, who married a second wife out of the noble Family of the Nanae, with whom he conioynedly liued long and had by her hopefull issue: But the Senate in his age depriuing him of the Principalitie, with the griefe thereof he retyred himselfe into the most antient house of his owne Family, and there (after three dayes) died. Whose bodie, when the Fathers would haue had brought forth to a solemne and Princely Funerall, because he had once beene their Duke and Soueraigne, she shut her gates against them, blaming their former ingratitude, alledging, she had both wealth and will sufficient (without them) to bestow vpon him the latest rites due to a worthie and royall husband: And though the Fathers were instant vpon her, first with entreats, and after menaces, yet she constantly persisted in her resolution, not suffering them once to approach the place, much lesse to take thence the bodie where she had carefully bestowed it; still exclayming on the Senates mallice, and the Common-weales ingratitude, who to their former wrongs went about to adde this new iniurie, not to leaue him in death to her, whom they had so periuriously in life forsaken. Notwithstanding these exclamations, they shut her vp in her chamber, and perforce tooke thence the bodie, all the Fathers attending vpon the Hearse, vpon which they bestowed a solemne and a pompous Funerall. The greater their counterfeit sorrow was outwardly, the greater was her inward and essentiall griefe, still more and more weeping, euery succeeding day adding to her teares, to thinke that her Princely husband should in his death be for any courtesies at all beholding to his enemies; desiring, that he (whom from his Principalitie they had degraded, and compelled to a priuate life) might onely by her and from her haue had a priuate Funerall: with whose choyse affection, and rare Coniugall pietie, I haue broke off, to enter vpon a new Proiect.




De Laenis, or of Bawdes.
FRom the honor of Women, I now come to the disgrace and shame of their Sex, in which I will striue to bee as briefe as I know the verie name to bee to all chast mindes odious. Sotades Marionites Cinedus, that is, one abused against nature or addicted to preposterous Venerie, was a Poet and writ most bawdie and beastly Iambicks in the Ionicke tongue, which he intituled Cinaedi; in which were described the formes and figures of seuerall new deuised Lusts (and before that time) vnheard-of prostitutions: Of whom Martiall thus sayes,
Nec retro lego Sotadem Cinaedum.
Neither doe I read Sotades Cinaedus backeward.
For as Valeterran. Lib. 17. Antropoph. relates, his verses were all to bee read backeward, least their included nastinesse might appeare too plaine and palpable, Tranquil. reports of Tiberius Caesar, That hee had built Cellers and Vaults, in which all kind of lusts and monstrous congressions were practised in his presence, which would offend any modest eare but to heare related. The Emperour Domitian succeeded, if not exceeded him in those detestable and diuillish abhominations, Hee as Suetonius affirmes, deuised that which was called Clinopales, i. The wrestling in the bed; he was often seene to bath himselfe and swimme in the companie of the basest and most common strumpets, hee stuprated his brothers daughter yet a Virgin, after shee was contracted to another man. Cratinus Atheniensis the Comicke Poet, was so dissolutely addicted both to Wine and Venerie, that hee hung his chamber round with Glasses, the better to discouer himselfe in his own vnnatural and beastly prostitutions. The like some of our scandalous Grammarians most falsly would asperse vpon Horace. Suet. confers the like vpon Tiberius, as likewise Gyrald. Dial. 6. Historiae Poetarum. Elephantis Philaenis and Astianassa writ bookes of the seuerall wayes of Congression, with the pictures of them inserted; but of them I shall speake further in the title of the Poetesses, but before I come to those shee-monsters in particular, I will remember some few men infamous in the like kind. Erasmus in Chiliadib. speakes of one Clobulus a most wicked He-bawde, who kept in his house two most infamous strumpets, whose bodyes he prostituted for money to all strangers, and what the whoores could not extort from them, hee himselfe would robbe them of, from whence came the prouerbe. Clobuli ingum, which was still in vse when two knaues of like dishonestie were seene to haue friendship and socitie together. Timaeus apud Erasmun speakes of one Cymarus a Selenusian Bawde, who all his lifetime promised to leaue his ill gotten goods to the Temple of Venus, in whose seruice he had got them; but at his death they were all squandred and lost, by the direption of the multitude. One Cippius counterfeited himself to sleepe and snort, that others with the lesse feare or doubt might haue free intercourse and carnall societie with his wife; an argument that hee was not haunted with the fiend called Iealosie, from him grew the adage which Cicero vsed in an epistle to Fabius Gallus, Non omnibus d^rmio, i. I sleepe not to all men. Lucilius apud Beroaldum. Catullus remembers vs of the Bawde Silo, and Guido of one Bitraphus that made his wife basely

mercenarie. Cai. Ticinius Minternensis, prouoked his wife to inchastitie for no other reason than to defraud her of her ioynter. Gemellus one of the Tribuns in Rome, a man of a noble familie, yet was of that corrupt and degenerat condition, that he made his owne Pallace no better than a common stewes, in so much, that in the Consullship of Metellus and Scipio, hee suffered Mutia.two great Ladies Mutia and Fuluia (innobled both waies in their families) with the noble child Saturnius to be vitiated in his owne house.Fuluia. Clemens Alexandrinus Lib. 3. Stromatum and Euseb. Lib. 4. haue left remembred, that the Arch-heriticke Nicolaus hauing a faire wife,Of him came the Nicolaietans. and beeing reprooued of Iealosie by the Apostles, to show himselfe no way guiltie thereof, hee brought her into the publique assembly, offering her freely vp to the prostitution of any man whatsoeuer; more (in my mind) offending in his too much remisnesse, than before in his ouer great strictnesse. Nay least this detestable sinne should want a countenancer, euen from royaltie, Lycosthenes in his Theater of Humaine life, tells vs of Henricus Rex Castalionensis, who shamed not to bee a Bawde to his owne Queene, you may reade further of him in the Spanish historie by the title of Henrie the Vnable. Now of She-Bawdes, and of them briefly. Plutarch in the life of Pericles reports,Aspatia. That Aspatia his sole delight, made her house a Stewes, in which the bodies of the fairest young Women were made common for money. It is reported,Callistion or Proche. that Callistion sirnamed Proche, being hyred to lye with a common fellow or bond-man, and by reason of the hot weather beeing naked, she espyed the markes and skarres of blowes and stripes vpon his shoulders; to whom she sayd, Alas poore man how came these? he willing to conceale his base condition answered, That being a child hee had skalding hot Pottage poured downe his necke, I beleeue it (sayth shee) but sure they were Calues Pottage, or made of Calues flesh, promptly reproouing his quallitie, because slaues eate Pottage made of Veale, and the things with which they were lashed and skourged were made of Calues-skinnes. Erasm. Apotheg. 6.Dipsas. Dipsas is the name of an old Bawde in one of Ouids Elegies, whom for instructing his mistresse in the veneriall trade, he reprooues in these verses.

Est quaedam (quicunque volet cognosere lenam
Audiat) est quaedam nomine Dipsas as anus.


If any man an old Bawde list to know,
'Tis the crone Dipsas she is titl'd so.

Of the Bawde Quartilla I haue before giuen you a true character from Petronius Arbiter. Tacitus lib. 17. puts vs in minde of Caluia Crisalpina,Caluia Crisalpina. who was the schoole-mistresse of Neros Lures, a fit tuteresse for such an apt and forward pupile. In my opinion to be wondered at it is, that these beeing past their owne actuall sinnes, wherein too much sacietie hath bred surfet, or the infirmitie of age, or disease, a meere disabilitie of performance; yet euen in their last of dayes, and when one foot is alreadie in the graue, they without any thought of repentance or the least hope of grace, as if they had not wickednesse ynough of their owne to answere for, heape vpon them the sinnes of others; as not onely intycing and alluring Virgins and young wiues to that base veneriall trade, and the infinite inconueniences both of Soule and bodie depending thereupon, but to weare their garments by the prostitution of others, and eate their Bread, and drinke Sacke and Aqua-vitae by

their mercenarie sweat; and so base an vsurie and vncomely a trauell of their bodies, as is not onely odious in the eyes of Man, but abhominable in the sight of Angells. This apprehension puts mee in mind of what Cornelius Gallius writes in a Periphrasis of old Age,Of Age. which I hold not altogether impertinent to be here inserted. These be his words:
Stat dubius tremulusque senex semperque malorumCredulus, and stultus qua facit ipse timet,Laudat preteritos, presentes despicit annosHot tantum rectum, quod facit ipse, (...), etc.
What he speakes of the old man, may be as well appropriated to the aged woman; his Verses I thus English:
The trembling old man he is doubtfull still,And fearefull in him selfe of that knowne ill.Of which hee's author, and in this appearesHis folly, to be cause of what he feares.Past yeeres he^l praise, the present hee'l despise,Nought sa^e what's his, seemed pleasing in his eyes.
It after followes:
Hae sunt primitiae, etc.
Of Death these the first fruits are, and our f^thersDeclining towards the Earth, she her owne gathersInto her selfe, though with a tardie pace.We come at length; the colour of the face,Our habit, nor our gate, is still the same,Nor shape that was, yet all at one place ayme.For the loose garments from one shoulders slides,And what before too short seem'd, now abidesA trouble to our heeles: we are contracted,As if (of late) in a new world compacted,Decreasing still; our bones are dride within,As seemes our flesh shrunke in our wither'd skin.We haue scarce libertie on Heau'n to looke,For prone old Age, as if it in some bookeMeant to behold his face, lookes downe-ward still,Prying where he th'indebted place might fill,From whence he first was borrowed, and the sameMatter returne to Earth, from whence it came.We walke with three feet first, as infants creepe,Next crawle on foure, as if the ground to sweepe.We follow our beginning, all things mourneTill to their generation they returne,And fall vpon the brest where they were nurst,,,That goes to nothing, which was nothing first.This is the cause that ruinous Age still beatesTh'Earth with th'staffe he leanes on, and intreatesA place to rest in, as if he should say(With often knocking) mother giue me way.At length into thy bosome take thy sonne,Who faine would sleepe now all his labour's done.
Let this suffice as a short admonition to these old corrupters of Youth.


De Gulosis and Vinolentis, i. Of Women addicted to Gluttonie, and Drunkenesse.
OF these there are not many left to memorie, the reason (as may bee coniectured) is, because to seeme the more temperat, being inuited to publique Feasts and Banquets; many of them will dyne at home before they come, eating in priuat and drinking in corners. Of men for their incredible voracitie, there are presidents infinite, I will giue you onely a tast of some few, and those not altogether common, and with them to compare some women. I will passe ouer Eri^iethon remembred by Ouid, Ctaesias by the Poet Annaxilas, Morichus obserued by Aristophanes, Melanthius by Suidas, Theagines by Raues. Textor (who at one meale eate vp a whole Bull in imitation of Milo, who deuoured an Oxe at a breakefast) Pub. Gallonus by Laelius sirnamed Gorges, as also those Roman Emperours infamous for the insacieties of their Throats and Bellyes, as Tiberius Nero, C. Caligula, Nero, Galba, Vitellius, Aelius V^rus, Plautia^u^, Seuerus, Anton, Heliogabalus, Bonosus, Maximinus Imperator, Firmius, Galie^^^, Augustus, the most moderate in dyet of them all able to ground a Historie. Petrarch remembers mee of one Hugotie Fagiolanus a Prince, who after many rough and tempestuous stormes of Fortune, as his last refuge retyred himselfe into the pallace of Caius Magnus Duke of Verona, Hugotio being then an old man, where hee was magnificently feasted and receiued, more like a father reuerenced, than a guest entertained; vpon a time discourse being commenced at table concerning eating and deuouring stomaches, where many of rauenous and insaciat appetites were remembred; Hugotio being a man fat, grosse, and of an extraordinarie bulke, began to recite many vnbeleeuable things concerning his appetite in his youth. One Petrus N^vus sitting then at table, a man of a readie and accute wit, thus replyed, Wee wonder not o Prince, at these strange and maruelous things which you haue alreadie related, hauing concealed greater than you haue yet spoken of, for there is none here but knowes that at one dinner you deuoured the two rich dukedomes of Luca and Pysa; in these few words reprehending both his incredible voracitie and discommendable prodigalitie. As a fit match to this great eater, Aelianus puts vs in mind of Aglais the daughter of M^gacles a she-minstrell,Aglais. who at one meale vsually deuoured twelue pounds of flesh, foure great loaues of bread, by the Grecians called Choenices panum (a Choenix contained a measure of a quarter of a peck, which was as much as a man was allowed to eate in one day) to which shee vsually drunk foure Congiumus of Wine, euerie one conteining six Sextaries, and is according to our measure, a Gallon and a Pint. Timocre^^ of Rhodes for his gulosity in meat and wine, was cald Hell^o, which signifies an insaciable glutton, after his death this epitaph was inscribed vpon his tombe-stone:
Multa bibens, tam multa vorans, male plurima dicensMultis, hic iaceo Tymocreon Rhodius.
Much drinking, eating much, and much ill speaking, I(Of many) here beneath this stone Rhodian Tymocreon lie.
What shall I now thinke of Agarista the daughter of Clisthenes,Agarista. who it seemes had an extraordinarie good stomach, since Aelianus in his twelfth booke tells vs, that when Smindrides of the citie Sybarita came to visite her as a suitor, he sent before him a thousand Cookes, a thousand Bird-catchers or Fowlers, and a thousand Fishermen to catch fishes, and all to the furnishing of one table. Astidamas Milesius being inuited to supper by the Persian Ariobarzanes, he alone deuoured what was prouided for himselfe and all his other guests. It is read likewise of Gathis queene of Syria to bee so gluttonous,Gathis. that shee caused an Edict to be published with a great penaltie depending vpon the breach therof, That it was not lawfull for any subiect to tast or eat fish, vnlesse she were inuited to the feast. Rauisius. Philoxenus Eressius the son of Leucadius, a Parrasite, for his gluttonie was called Philodipnos, by others Philichthis, by Aristotle, Pachemerus, and in his third book Ethicorum, Opsophagos, because (as Melanthius before him did) hee wished his necke so long as a Cranes, that hee might bee the better delighted in the swallowing of his junkets. If any dish were set before him that realished his pallat, hee would purposely cast therein some nastie or noysome thing offensiue to the guests, that they abhorring the tast thereof, hee might haue the libertie to deuoure it alone: he being set at Dionisius his Table, and a small Mullet beeing placed before him, when the greater were set at the vpper end of the boord, he took the little fish and held the mouth thereof close to his eare, which Dyonisius obseruing, asked what his reason was to doe so? who presently answered the king, that he was inquiring of that small fish concerning Nereus and Galataea, to be resolued of some Sea newes; but the young Mullet excused himselfe by reason of his youth and iunioritie, but commended him to those his elders and greaters aboue, from whom he might be better ^atisfied. Dyonisius pleased with his ieast, reached him downe the bigger fi^hes on which hefed to his content. This Philodipn^s dyed in Syracusa, after heat one meale had deuoured vp a whole Porpoise of two cubits long, all saue the head. Gyrald. Dial. 9. Histor. Poetarum. Though not for such voracious deuouring, yet for her profusenesse and prodigallitie in dyet,Cleopatra. Cleopatra the last queene of Aegypt is remarkable, who as Sidanius testifies of her, at one supper to which she inuited Marc. Antonius, bestowed an infinite masse of treasure, one dish in the second course being valued at two hundred and fiftie peeces of gold; more famous she was for her draught in which she drunk vnto him, in which she pownded a Pearle that was valued at no lesse than the ransome of a king. From eating I come now to drinking. The Greekes in all their feasts and celebrations, vsed at first small cups and moderate draughts, but after, boles of greater receit and deeper quaffing healths, in so much it grew to a pro^erbe, if any man tooke an extraordinarie draught, he was sayd, Greco more ^^bere, that is, to drinke after the manner of the Gretians. Alex. ab Alex. lib. 5. cap. 21. sayth, That there was a law amongst them established, that such as would not freely take the round as it past, must depart the place. They vsed at those publike meetings, in their cups to salute the gods, and in turning vp the bottome of the bole or glasse at the end of euerie draught, to nominate

them.The first drinking of Healths. At the chusing of their Magistrates, or conferring any new Honors vpon a man, they drunke to him in a cup brimmed with wine, as a confirmation of his dignitie: And from them it may be coniectured, these drunken Healths (so frequent in these dayes) had their first originall. I need not reckon vp any great Drinkers of old, or deriue the custome from antiquitie, since this age in which wee liue, is not able to equall them onely in deepe carowsing, and quaffing, but farre to exceed them in strange and new deuised Healths: nay, there is now scarce any meeting without superfluitie of wine, and drinking, euen to surfet. Adrianus Berlandus, Centuria prima, reports, That a young man being at a banquet, was accused for many scandalous and calumniated words spoken against a Priest: for which being questioned and cited before the Iudges, a question was demaunded him, Why he durst speake so contumeliously against a man of his holy profession and sacred Order? who answered, Should he inuite me againe vnto the like Feast, and plye me so fast with wine as he did then, I should not onely be apt to maligne and reuile, but beat out of the roome (if they were then present) the twelue Apostles. The Iudges by this vnderstanding that his contempt onely proceeded from the excesse of wine, dismist him vnpunished, and vpon the Priest that had first inuited him, and after accused him, they layd this Penance, That hee should taste no wine for foure whole dayes together. Old Ennius (notwithstanding these effects) neuer buckled himselfe to the writing of any braue Heroicke Verse, before his braine was moistened, and his Muse kindled and awaked with the spirit of the Grape: of whom Horace,
Ennius ipse pater nunquam nisi potus ad armaProfituit, etc.
They need no further explanation, the former words expresse them fully. Tiberius was so addicted to immoderate cups, that being in the campe, the souldiers vsed to nick-name him, and in stead of Clodius called him Caldus; for Tiberius, Biberius; and for Nero, Mero; all of them reproouing his intemperate Vinositie. Iuuenal in his Satyrs reports one Lanfella,Lanfella. a woman, for an incontinent wine-bibber. Martial taxes another, called Myrtale,Myrtale. for her insatiate drinking; but because her breath should not smell of the Grape, shee vsed to temper her wine with the leaues of Lawrell: His words be these:
Foetore multo Myrtale solet vinoSed fallat vt nos, solia de^orat Lauri.
Myrtale drinkes much wine: which to excuse,Least that her breath thereof should stinke, and smell,To deceiue vs, she in her cups doth vseTo haue her wine with Lawrell temp'red well.
Fescenina.The like Epigram he hath, Lib. 1. of another called Fescenina, a great drinker of wine, whom hee brands for her intemperance. In so great a custome was this rioting in drinke growne, that when the great and sumptuous Espousals of Hyppolita and Alphonsus were celebrated by king Ferdinand his father, where euerie thing was carryed with extraordinarie magnificence and state, as well the Martiall Exercises abroad, as the Maskes, Reuels, and

priuate sports within, which extended not onely to condigne praise, but admiration of all the spectators: and all these Pastimes, Feasts, and Banquets, kept to the end with great plentie and abundance, yet without vaine excesse and superfluitie. In the shutting vp of all these solemnities, one amidst the multitude (by Nation a German) clamoured out aloud (euen to the hearing of the King, and all his Princely guests) in these words; Oh valeant ludi quibus nemo bibit, i. Happie be those sports, in which there is no excesse in drinking. Pontanus. And thus for the present I giue ouer Healthing.

Of Women beloued of diuerse Creatures.
EGesidemus vpon Plinie tells vs, That the child Hermias was so beloued of a Dolphin, that she would come to the Sea-shore and suffer him to get vpon her backe, then swimme with him into the Sea: and hauing sported with him sufficiently bring him safe to Land, and then attend him the next day. It happened, that hauing long continued this loue betwixt them, vpon a time being mounted on the Dolphins backe, a suddaine tempest arose, by the violence of which the Lad was beaten off, and so perished in the Sea. Which the Dolphin perceiuing, and hauing lost him whom she so much loued, she left the Water, and casting her selfe vpon the drie Continent, there gaue her selfe vp to a voluntarie death. Of the loue of that kind of Fish to men and children, there are diuerse remembrances, as of Arion, and others. In Argis, the child Olenus was affected by a Goose: so likewise Lycidas, the Philosopher; who would neuer depart from him, nor be driuen out of his companie, but was his continuall associate, in publique and priuate, in the Bath, in the Night, the Day, without any intermission. Plin. Lib. 10. cap. 22. Glauce the Harper, was beloued of a Ramme; a youth of Sparta, by a Daw. Nicander apud Caelium witnesseth, That one Selandus, the Butler to the king of Bithinia, was beloued of a Cocke, whom they called Centaurus. A Cocke doted likewise on a young Lad, whose name was Amphilochus, by Nation an Olenian. Why may wee not then as well giue credite, that Semiramis was affected by a Horse,Semiramis. and Pasiphae by a Bull? when Plinie tells vs,Pasiphae. That in Leucadia a young Damosell was so beloued of a Peacocke,A Virgin of Leucadia. that the enamored Bird neuer left her in life, and accompanied her in death: for seeing the Virgin dead, shee neuer would receiue food from any hand,Gratitude. but so pyned away, and dyed also. In the citie of Sestos,A Virgin of Sestos. a young Eagle (taken in a neast) was carefully brought vp by a Virgin: The Bird beeing come to full growth, would euerie day take her flight abroad, and all such fowle as shee could catch, bring home, and lay them in the Lappe of her mistresse: And this shee vsed dayly, as it were to recompence her for her fostering and bringing vp. At length this Virgin dying, and her bodie beeing borne vnto the Funerall fire, the Eagle still attended: which was no sooner exposed vnto the flames, but the Bird likewise cast her selfe, with a voluntarie flight, amidst the new-kindled pyle, and to her mistresses Hearse gaue her selfe a most gratefull sacrifice. Plinie, lib. 10. cap. 5. Saxo Grammat. in the tenth booke of his Danish Historie reports, That certaine young maides of a Village in Swetheland, playing and sporting together in the fields vpon a holy-day, suddainely an huge hee-Beare rushed out of the forrest, and snatched vp the fairest amongst them, and hurryed her away to his Denne; but gently, and without any harme: where hauing bestowed her, long gazed on her face,

as if with a kind of admiration he grew so enamored of her on the suddaine, that in the stead of a murtherer, he became a louer, imparting vnto her all the prey that he got abroad. The sequele of this Historie (which is almost past beleefe) I am loth (for many speciall reasons) to prosecute any further here: therefore (though abruptly) I breake it off.



Of Women excellent in the Art of Painting, Weauing, etc.
INnumerable are the men that haue been excellent in the qualitie of Painting: the Catalogue of their Names (without a Capitulation of their Workes) would aske much Paper, but greater paines to set downe. Yet as of the rest, I will giue you a small taste of their exquisite dexteritie in that Art. I haue read, That Apelles hauing made an excellent Piece, in which he had deciphered a Horse to the life, he thought it then a Present worthie Alexander: and comming to present it to the king, hee onely gaue it a neglected looke, neither praysing it, nor discommending it, but found other discourse. The Painter still holding it vp, Bucephalus (on whom the king was then mounted) casting his eye vpon the Table, fell a neighing, thinking the liuely effigies had beene a liuing Beast. Which Apelles obseruing, could no longer containe himselfe, but cryed out aloud; O Alexander, I now well perceiue thy Horse hath better iudgement in Painting than thy selfe. Zeuxes being almost with him equally famous, Apelles maligning that any Painter should be named whilest hee was yet aliue, tooke occasion in an humour, to make a purposed Iourney to giue him visitation, but especially to obserue the manner of his shop, and worke-house: and crossing an Arme of the Sea, hee came to the citie where Zeuxes then liued; and enquiring out his house, was directed thither, where knocking, the maid came to the doore; Apelles asked her for her maister: shee told him, hee was gone into the Towne about very serious occasions, and was not then within; but I pray (Sir) when my maister returnes, who shall I say was heere to speake with him? Apelles spying a faire Table hanging in the shop, readie to be wrought, but no worke therein, and the Pensils and Colours all readie by it, By thy leaue maid (saith hee) and entring the shop, chused out a Pensill, with which hee onely drew a curious small Line crosse the Table, almost of that finenesse to deceiue the eye: which hauing suddainely ended, Tell thy maister (saith hee to the maid) That hee that drew this Line, was here to haue spoken with him, and so away hee goes: who was no sooner out, but Zeuxes returning, and asking her, If any man had beene there to aske for him in his absence? shee told him all, and shewed the Line drawne vpon the Table; on which hee looking with admiration, suddainely broke out into an acclamation, saying, This could neuer haue beene done, but by the hand of Apelles; and instantly sent vp and downe the Towne to seeke him. In the Interim (this president being still standing before him) in a kind of emulation, it animated him to aduenture on something worthie the sight of Apelles; when chusing out another colour, differing from that Apelles had wrought, he with his Pensill cut the first Line iust in the middle with a kind of miraculous sted fastnesse and euennesse: when glorying in his worke (which indeed was rare) Now tell the Painter (saith he) if he come againe to enquire of me, that I haue been since at home, witnesse that, and shew him the Table;

and so retyred himselfe into the inner part of the house. Soone after comes Apelles, and askes the maid, If her maister had beene yet at home? Yes Sir (saith she) and bad me shew you this, and aske you how you like it. Apelles wondered (as thinking it had scarce beene to be found in Art) and was startled at the first; but as one that had neuer beene equalled, and loth now to be exceeded, he againe tooke the Pensill, and altering the colour, in the very life and spirit of Art he diuided the (almost inuisible) Line of Zeuxes, parting it in the middest, with such a constant proportion, that it seemed altogether to exceed the practise of Science. Which hauing done, Now (saith hee) commend me once more to thy maister, and aske him from me, If this last Line hath not made good the imperfections of the former: at which word Zeuxes appeared, and before he had the power to giue him any salutation (looking vpon what he had done) acknowledged him Victor, yet held it no dishonor to him to be so ouercome. This Table was after held as a rare and an vnparalleld maister-piece, and being sold for a great summe of money, as a choyse Iewell hung vp in the Capitoll of Rome, where it was long preserued, euen till time had defaced the colours, and raced out the memorie thereof. Amongst thousand Excellencies both in their Workes and Inuentions, these shall suffice in this place: I now come to my Women Painters.
Tymarete,Tymarete. the daughter of Mycon, or Mycaon (a man eminent in that qualitie) amongst other curious Pieces (wrought by her owne hand) made that admirable Picture of Diana, which was hanged vp in the Temple of Ephesus, clayming prioritie aboue many that proceeded from the best Artists: Shee flourished in the time that Archelaus reigned in Macedonia: Plinie, Lib. 35. cap. 11. Irene was the daughter and scholler of the Painter Cratinus:Irene. shee was famous for pensilling the Maid, whose effigies was kept as a Relike sacred to Memorie, in the citie Eleusina.Calipso. Calipsoes excellencie was expressed to the life, in drawing the old Iugler Theodorus.Alcisthine. Alcisthine limned a Dancer and shee-Minstrell, and by that got her a name amongst the best.Aristarete. Aristarete was the daughter and scholler of the Painter Marchus, and drew Aesculapius. One Olimpias professed the same Art,Olimpias. and instructed many schollers; amongst whom (as Plinie saith) was Antobulus.Lala Cyzicena. Lala Cyzizena liued a perpetuall Virgin, and was the sole daughter of Marcus Varro: shee practised in Rome, and drew both with the Pensill and with a sharpe-pointed Quill, called Cestrum: shee cut in Iuorie. Shee medled not with the Faces of men, but women only; shee made her owne Picture from a Looking-glasse: shee was commended for the nimblenesse and dexteritie of hand, for none euer equalled her in quicknesse; and for curiositie, she exceeded two of the greatest and best practitioners in her dayes, Sopylon, and Dionisius.
From Painting, I come to Weauing: The practise of which was held in great vse and estimation amongst Princesses, and the chiefe Matrons; in which to be excellent, was held as a prime honour. The Exercise thereof was accounted a commendable thing in Wiues, and a great signe of womannish modestie in Virgins. It was first brought from the Phrygians to the Romanes. King From him all rich and costly Arras Hangings are called Attalia. Attalus was the first that deuised to weaue with threads of Gold. It grew to that reuerent and respected custome, that sisters for their brothers, mothers for their sonnes, and women for their husbands, with their owne hands weaued Cloakes and Gownes. And therefore the Romanes in all their Marriages, caused

the new married Virgins to present their husbands with a Distaffe, Thread, and Spindle: it is a custome which the Iberians still obserue; as also, That whatsoeuer their women first spinne, and after weaue, is brought to be viewed in publique, and rated; shee that hath done most, and best, hath so much the more respect and honour, Alexand. ab Alex. Lib. 4. cap. 8. Amongst the Phoeacenses, the men mind onely Nauigation, and the women Texture and Weauing; but amongst the women of Persia it is held a great dishonour to lay her hand to the Webbe, or Needle.Penelope. Penelope (by the testimonie of Homer, and other Poets) in this Art was excellently practised; of which came the Prouerbe, Tela Penelopis and Icariotis, The Webbe of Penelope, or Icariotes (because shee was the daughter of Icarus.) Virg. Aenead. Lib. 5. nominates one Pholoe to be eminent in that exercise.Pholoe. Plin. lib. 11. cap. 22. conferres the inuention of Weauing vpon Pamphile,Pamphile. the daughter of Plates, who deuised it in the Isle Coos. In this, Acecaeus Patarensis, and Helicon Caristius, exceeded all others: these two brothers woaue and embrodered a Vesture and a Hood for Pallas Poliades, who was honoured in the Temple of Athens, which was done with such vnimitable cunning, that thereupon came the Adage in Greece, if any thing were curiously or exquisitely performed, it was called, The Worke of Acecaeus, and Helicon. Aboue others most magnified by Ouid, Metamorph. lib. 6. is Arachne Lydia,Arachne. the daughter of Idmones, whose mother was borne in the small citie Hypepis: shee hauing by many degrees exceeded all mortall women, and that without difficultie durst compare with Minerua her selfe, who for her boldnesse and pertinacie she turned into a Spyder. Her controuersie with Pallas, is with great elegancie expressed in Ouid. Alexander of Macedon,Olimpias. and Octauius Augustus, the one wore a Garment woauen by his Mother,Lyuia. the other a Mantle, by the hands of his Wife. These Ladies had sequestred places in some part of their Pallaces, and kept their handmaids and damosells at worke; of which, these two potent and mightie Queenes disdayned not to bee the dayly Directoresses and Ouer-seers. Alexand. ab Alex. cap. 4. lib. 8. Part of the Wooll which Tanaquil spunne,Tanaquil. with her Distaffe, Spindle, and Slippers, were long time reserued as sacred Reliques in the Temple of Ancus Martius, as also a Kingly Garment or Imperiall Roabe, woauen quite through with Rayes and Flames of Gold, wrought with her owne hand, in which Seruius Tullius oft went in state, and sat in the high Iudgement-Seat, in the Capitoll. Varro apud eundem. By the Law called Pagana, all women were forbidden to spinne or draw out any thread in the streetes, or the common high-wayes, because they held it ominous to the prosperitie of the Graine sowne in the Earth, or the Fruits blossomed, or growing vpon the Trees, as the same Author testifies. Ausonius speakes of one Sabina,Sabina. not onely excellent in this Science, but a Poet withall, which he left to posteritie in one of his Epigrams:
Siue probas Tyrio textam sub tegmine vestraSeu placet inscripti commoditus tituli, etc.
Which is thus Englished:
If thou affect'st a purple Roabe,Woauen in the Tyrian staine,Or if a Title well inscrib'd,By which thy wit may gaine;Behold her workes vnpartially,And censure on them well:Both, one Sabina doth professe,And doth in both excell.
And thus I take leaue of weauing, for Memorie now transports me to another Argument.


Of Women Contentious, and Bloodie.
TExtor in his Officine remembers vs of one Kailla,Kailla. who was of that barbarous and inhuman crueltie, that being at dissention with her husband Vazules, she hauing banished all coniugall pietie and pittie, caused his eyes to be digged out of his head, spending the remainder of his age in vncomfortable darknesse. These subsequent stories of flintie and obdure hearted women, though I could willingly haue spared them out of this worke, that the world might almost be induced to beleeue that no such immanities could euer haue place in the smooth and soft bosomes of women, yet in regard I haue promised briefly to run ouer all Ages, Features, Affections, Conditions, and Degrees, though they might perhaps haue beene thought well spared by some, yet I make no question but they might be challenged at my hands by others. The rather I present them and with the more confidence vnto your view, because, though their actions to the tender brested may seeme horrid and feareful, and therfore the hardlier to purchase credit, yet the testimonie of the Authors being authenticke and approoued, will not onely beare me out as their faithfull remembrancer, but in the things themselues fasten an inherent beleefe. I proceed therfore.Cyrce. Cyrce the Witch slew the king of Sarmatia to whom shee was married, and vsurping the regall Throne, did much oppresse her subiects: of her Sabellicus writes more at large.Clitemnestra Clitemnestra was the wife of Agamemnon Archduke or Generall of the Gretians at the siege of Troy, she by the helpe of Aegistus (with whom she adultrated) slew her husband, of this Virgill speakes, lib. 11. Seneca in Agamemnonae and Iuvenall in Satyr. Danaus the sonne of Belus had fiftie daughters, who were espoused to the fiftie sonnes of Aegistus; these made a coniuration in one night to kill all their husbands, which they accordingly did, all saue the yongest, Hypermnestra, who spared the life of her husband Lynceus, Senec. Hercul. Fur. Alexander Phaereus,The wife of Alex. Phaereus. a tyrant of Thessaly, when hee had shewed his wife naked to a certaine Barbarian, she tooke it so impatiently, that she cut his throat sleeping:Albina. Ouid in Ibin. Volaterranus reports that Albina daughter to a king of Syria had two and thirtie sisters, who all in one night slew their husbands, who beeing exild their countrey, landed in Brittaine; and that of this Albina this Kingdome first tooke the name of Albion.Laodice. Laodice was the wife of Antiochus king of Syria, who caused himselfe to be cald God: She poysoned her husband because of his too much familiaritie with Berenice the sister of Ptolome. Fabia slew Fabius Fabriclanus,Fabia. that shee might the more freely inioy the companie of Petronius Volentanus a young man of extraordinarie feature, with whom shee had often before accompanied.Agrippina. Agrippina

poysoned her husband Tiberius Claudius the Emperor.Lucia. Lucilla the wife of Antonius Verus Emperor, poysoned her husband because she thought him too familiar with Fabia.Filia Bentiu. Galeotus prince of Forolinium, married with the daughter of Ioannes Bentiuolus, of whom being despised and finding her selfe neglected, she hyred certaine cut-throat Phisitians, who slew him in his chamber. Andreas the sonne of Carolus king of Pannonia,Ioanna. was slaine by his wife Ioanna Queene of Cicily, for no other reason but that he was idle and held vnprofitable to the weale publique.Althaea. Althaea sorrowing that her two brothers Plexippus and Toxeus were slaine by her sonne Meleager, shee burned that Brand, of which the fatal Sisters had made a prediction, That his life and health should continue as long as that was preserued:Agaue. Ouid Trist. lib. 1. Bocat. in Geneol. Agaue a Theban woman slew her sonne Penth^us, because he would not honour the feast of the Bachinalls, with the rest of the Menades: Virgill in Culice. Ericthaeus taking armes against Eumolpus, and hauing an answere from the Oracle, That he should haue a certaine victorie, if he would sacrifice his only daughter to the gods;Praxitha. by the persuasion of his wife Praxitha gaue her vp to slaughter: Euripides apud Plutarch. Elearchus one of the kings of Creet, at the persuasion of his second wife Phronima,Phronima. commaunded his onely daughter by the hand of one Themisones to bee cast into the riuer and there drowned: Herodot. PolidicePolidice. betrayde her father king Pletera to Creon king of Thebes and caused him to bee slaine; as likewise Nisus being besieged by Min^s, by the treason of his daughter lost that purple hayre which was the stay of his soueraigntie: Ouid Metam. and Seruius. Tiphon Aegiptius, as Berosus, Seneca, Diodorus, and others relate, slew his brother Osiris then raigning in Aegypt and gouerning iustly, which done hee caused him to be cut into twentie six pieces, and to euerie one of the conspirators gaue a part, the better to secure him of their fidelities:Isis. but Isis their sister after she had lamented the death of her brother Osiris, by the assistance of her sonne (who was called Oros) slew Typhon and auenged his death. Draomitia was a queen of Bohemia,Draomitia. she caused Ludimillia (much deuoted to religion) to bee slaine:Ludimillia. by her instigation her sonne Boleslaus was the murderer of his brother Wenceslaus: Volaterran. The nymph Lara was of that loquacitie,Lara. that raising dissention betwixt Iupiter and Iuno, by telling her of his escapes, that in reuenge thereof he pluckt out her tongue.Talantia. Talantia Spartana hauing intelligence that her sonne Pedaretes tyrannised ouer the men of Chius, writ to him in this or the like language, Or gouerne there better, or remaine there; if thou returnest to me, thou art not safe: thus admonishing him of better gouernment, or menacing him with death. Damariana was a woman of Sparta,Damariana. and with her owne hands slew her sonne, because shee found him of a timorous condition and would not be drawne to the warres. Amastris was the wife of Xerxes,Amastris. and did prosecute the wife of Massissa the President with that inhumane and barbarous crueltie, that hauing first slaine her, shee caused her breasts to be cut off, and cast vnto the dogges, dismembring her of her Nose, Eares, Eyes, Lippes, and Tongue. Rauis. Textor. Cisenis,Cisenis. the daughter of Diogerides king of Thrace, was of that sauage inhumanitie, that shee tooke pleasure to see liuing men to be dismembred and cut in pieces, causing young children to be killed and drest, after commanding them to be serued in to their parents, and to be by them eaten. Solinus. Tullia,Tullia. the wife of Tarquinius Superbus, she caused her Chariot to be drawne ouer the face of her dead father Seruius Tullius, presently before murthered by her husband in the Capitoll. Liuie.Irene. Irene the

Empresse was wife to Leo the fourth, and caused her owne sonne Constantius Sextus to be first cast in prison, and after to haue his eyes digged out, because before shee had by him beene expelled the Empire.Fuluia. Fuluia was the wife of Marcus Antoninus: and how the excellentest of Orators, M. Tullius, being dead, was tyrannized ouer by him, many Authors haue commended to posteritie; whose sacred hands and head being cut off, were nayled vnto that Pulpit where hee had often most learnedly declaimed. His head was first brought to Anthonie, which he caused to be placed before him vpon a Table, and scarce in a whole day could hee satiate his rancorous mallice with so sad and pittifull a spectacle; but at length (as Appianus Alexandrinus reports) he commanded it to be tooke thence: And (as it is gathered out of the collections of Dion, Prusius, and Suidas) when Fuluia, the wife of Antoninus, came to the sight of it, shee tooke it in her hands, and after the breathing of many fearefull maledictions, execrations, and curses against it, spit in the face thereof: then taking it into her lappe, with a Bodkin or Penner which she wore in her haire for an ornament, pricked his tongue, which she had caused violently to be forced out of his iawes, least there should be any thing wanting that might adde to an vndiscreet womans hate and inhumane crueltie. This murther and horride act against so worthie a Senatour, hath beene deplored by many, as well in Prose, as in Verse; as Portius Latro, Albutius Sylo, Caestius Murrhedius, and others: but none more elegantly than Seuerius Cornelius, in these Verses of his, which we haue by tradition from A^^aeus Seneca:
Oraque magnanimum spirantia pene virorumIn rostris iacuere suis, etc.
As they were at large remembred in Crinitus. Euridice,Euridice. the wife of Amintas king of Macedonia, who had by him three sonnes, Alexander, Perdicas, and Philip, father to Alexander the Great; as likewise a daughter, called Euryones. This Euridice not onely polluted the bed of her husband, but sought his life, to transferre the Principalitie into the hand of the adulterer: and least her daughter should discouer either her whoredome or treason, she likewise plotted against her life. The old man in the middest of these dangers dyed, leauing the kingdome to his eldest sonne Alexander; she after caused him to be slaine: A president of strange and (almost) vnheard of crueltie in a mother. Iustine Histor. lib. 7.
Spitamenes (a puissant Captaine that had long opposed Alexander the Great in many battailes and conflicts,The wife of Spitamenes. with his competitor Daha) so dearely loued his faire wife, that he drew her to be a partner with him in his warres, and lodged her in his Tent: But being put to many affrights and distresses, (the common casualties belonging to warre) shee grew so tyred with Alarums, tumults, mutinies, affrights, slaughters, and such like, that shee dayly importuned him (being before onely vsed to feasts, banquets, and effeminate delicacies) to submit him to the Macedonian Conqueror. So long and so vrgently she sollicited him to peace, both by her children, her friends, and her selfe in person, that being a blunt and plaine souldier, traded in combustion (and to whom the very thought of submission was more odious than death) though hee entirely affected her, yet vpon a time hee aduanced his hand to haue strucke her, and had done it, had not his brother come in by accident and supprest his incensed furie: yet he concluded, That if euer after

she persuaded him to peace, or troubled his eares with that base word of submission, that Hand which so long had opposed Alexander (all Coniugall amitie set apart) should be her luddaine and assured ruine. The Ladie affrighted with the name of death, thought it no safetie to interpose so robustious and setled a constancie, especially in a souldier dayly and hourely enured to bloud and massacre, therefore considering with her selfe what was best to be done; in meditating for her owne safetie, she thought it better, by yeelding, to conquer, than by contending against power and aduantage, to be ouercome. After submission therefore made, and a new reconcilement established betwixt them, shee inuited him to a banquet in her Tent (which was furnished with all the dainties the Campe would yeeld, and whatsoeuer rarietie remote places could affoord) where she carryed her selfe with all humilitie and obedience. At this feast shee caused him to be plyed with Healths, and lauish Cups, till the Wine hauing got the preheminence of his better sences, hee grew drowsie, and retyred himselfe to his Pallat. The Tables were then withdrawne, and euerie man that was inuited, repaired either to his charge in the Armie, or to his rest. They hauing disposed of themselues, and the place now priuate, shee had confederated with one of her seruants, by whose assistance, shee in his depth of sleepe cut off the head of her husband, and gaue it to him. This done (hauing the Word) they past through the Watches and Guards, and by the breake of day came vnto the Campe of Alexander, desiring to haue conference with him about affaires which concerned him neerely. The Prince vnderstanding it was a woman, commanded shee should be admitted into his Tent; which was accordingly done, and she appeared before him all stayned and sprinkled with blood (for she had not yet changed her habite) at which hee grew at the first amased, demaunding the cause of her repaire thither? She desired her seruant might be likewise admitted (who attended at the doore of his Tent) for hee had that about him by which he should be better informed. His entrance was graunted: but being suspected by the guard (because they perceiued him hide something folded vp in his garments) they searcht him, and found a head cut off, but by reason of the palenesse of the face (which was disfigured with the clottered and congealed bloud) the countenance thereof could hardly be discerned. The seruant was brought in, with the head (still dropping blood) in his hand. At which the king more wondering, desired by her to be better certified concerning the Nouell; to whom she boldly replyed, Loe here (o Alexander) the end of thy many troubles and feares, the head of the great Captaine Spitamenes, who though my husband, yet because hee was thine enemie, I haue caused his head to be cut off, and here present it vnto thee. At the horridenesse of these words, the king, with all that stood by, were abashed; euerie one glad of the thing done, but in their hearts detesting the manner of the deed. The Ladie still expecting an answer, Alexander (after some pawse) thus replyed: I must confesse (Ladie) the great courtesie and infinite benefit receiued from you, in presenting me the head of an Out-Law, a Traytor, and one that was to mee a great obstacle and an hinderance in the smooth passage to my intended Victories; but when I vnderstand it to be done by the hands of a woman, nay a wife, the strange horridenesse of the fact takes away all the thankes and reward due to the benefit. I therefore command you instantly to depart the Campe, and that with all speed possible; for I would not

haue the sauage and inhumane examples of the Barbarians contaminate and infect the mild and soft temper of the noble Grecians: With which words she was instantly hurried from his presence. As noble a president of Iustice in a Prince, as it was an abhorred example of crueltie in a most vnnaturall wife. Q. Curt. lib. 8. de Alexandri Histor. From a remorselesse wife, I come now to as obdurate a step-mother.
Pelops hauing married Hyppodamia,Hyppodamia. the daughter of Tantalus and Eurianassa, had by her two sonnes, Thiestes and Atreus, and by the Nymph Danais a third sonne, called Crisippus, to which he seemed outwardly better affected than to the former; on whom king Laius of Thebes casting an amorous eye, at length stole him from his father. But Pelops, with his two sonnes by Hyppodamia, made warre vpon Laius, tooke him prisoner, and recouered Crisippus: and when hee truly vnderstood that loue was the cause of his rape, hee was attoned with Laius, and an inuiolable league of amitie combined betwixt them. Whilest the Theban yet soiourned with Pelops, Hyppodamia persuaded with Atreus and Thiestes to conspire against the life of Crisippus, as one that aymed at the succession in the kingdome: but not preuayling, she meditated with her selfe, how to despoyle him of life with her owne hands; when hauing conueyed the sword of Laius out of his chamber, when he was fast sleeping, she came to the bed of Crisippus, and transpierced him as he lay, leauing the sword still in his bodie, and left the place vndiscouered, accusing the Theban for his death: but the youth not fully dead, recouered so much spirit as to discouer the murtheresse; for which, king Laius was acquitted, and she from her husband receiued condigne punishment for her immanitie and murther. Dosythaeus in Pelopedis. Progne,Progne. to reuenge the rape of her sister Philomela vpon her husband Tereus, king of Thrace, feasted him with the bodie of his owne sonne Itis; of which, you may read at large in Ouids Metamorphosis. Some women haue beene so vnnaturall, as to betray their fathers. After Troy was vtterly subuerted and despoyled, king Diomede (one of the most valiant amongst the kings of Greece) in the returne towards his countrey, being by stormes and tempests violently cast vpon the coast of Thrace, where Lycas the sonne of Mars then reigned, and according to the bloodie custome of the countrey, sacrificed all such strangers as landed vpon his Continent;Callirhoe. his daughter Callirhoe surprised with the loue of king Diomede, not onely released him from durance, but betrayed the life of Lycus her father into his hands; notwithstanding, hee most trecherously left her: for which ingratitude (and vrged with remorse of conscience, for proouing so vnnaturall vnto him from whom she had her being) by strangling her selfe, shee despairingly expired, Iuba, lib. 3. Libicorum. Paralleld with this, is that which wee reade of Calphurnius Crassus, an illustrious Roman, and sent by M. Regulus against the Massilians, to take in a most defensible Castle called Garaetium: but by the crosse disaster of fortune being surprised in the siege thereof, and reserued the next day to be sacrificed to Saturne, being in despaire either of rescue, or life; Besalia,Besalia. daughter to the king (who was then possest of the Port) falling in loue with Calphurnius, not onely deliuered vp vnto him the keyes of the Castle, that hee might freely escape with life, but betrayed vnto him the libertie and life of her father: but after being most degenerately forsaken by him, she desperately slew her selfe. Hegesinax, lib. 3. rerum Africarum. I am wearie with setting downe these immanities in women, and Polihimnia now inuites me to a new argument.


Of Women strangely preserued from death, and such as haue vnwillingly beene the death of their Fathers.
Iole.NIceas Maleotes (as Plutarch in his thirteenth Paralell testates) reports, That when Hercules for the loue of Iole the daughter of Cacus inuaded Oechalia, and shee abhorring the embraces of him who had before slaine her father, retyred herselfe for safetie into the strongest Cittadell in her countrey; in which beeing straightly besieged by Hercules, and the Fort readie to be surprised and taken, she hauing no way to escape, and vnwilling to stand to the mercie of so louing an enemie, mounted vp into the highest Turret of the Castle, and from thence cast her selfe headlong downe towards the Earth, but the wind gathering vnder her loose garments so extenuated the fall, that she came to the ground without any hurt at all; by which miraculous fortune shee inioyed a desperate life, and Hercules a most desired mistresse. Answerable vnto this, is that which Theophilus Italicorum tertio relates: The Romans in the Etrurian warre, instituted Valerius Torquatus Generall of their forces,Clusia. hee hauing beheld Clusia the daughter of the Tuscan king, grew innamoured of the Virgin^ and sent Embassadors to demaund her of her father: but shee not willing to make any contract with her countries enemie, and her father as loth to contradict his daughter, the motion and offer of Torquatus was peremptorily denied; at which inraged, hee begyrt the citie with a strong and fearefull siege, ingaging the defendants to all dangers and difficulties, in so much that Clusia timerous of surprisall, and preferring death before captiuitie, threw her selfe from the highest part of the wall, to destroy her selfe in the open view and face of the enemie: but either (as the former late mentioned) fauoured by the windes, or (as my Author tels me) greatly supported by the hand of Venus, or whether the pittious Earth vnwilling to hurt or harme such faire and well featured limbes, and therefore with more than accustomed courtesie fauorably receiued her into her lappe, I am not certaine, but the Ladie (to the wonder of all the beholders) was taken vp whole and sound, without wound or the least-astonishment, and from thence conducted to the Tent of the Generall; who beecause he made but offer to violate her chastitie, the euer nobly minded Romans, not onely tooke from him the charge of the armie (alleaging that hee that could not gouerne his owne affections, was not fit to command others) but confined him into the Island Corsica adiacent, neere to the continent of Italie. Not much lesse strange was that of Perhibaea,Perhibaea. the daughter of Accathous, who when Telamon the sonne of Aeacus and Eudeides, came into the cittie of Euboea where shee then soiourned with her father, and tooke her at that aduantage, that shee was by him devirgined and deflowred, his name or person not being knowne by her or any, and so priuily escaped and fled away by night. Accathous after perceiuing her by assured tokens to bee growne bigge with child, and suspecting it to be done by some one of his citisens or subiects, hee was thereat so incensed, that banishing all pietie or paternall pittie, he deliuered her into the hands of one of his captaines, commaunding him either to kill her with his sword, or cast her into the Sea: the souldier vndertakes the imposition of his soueraigne vpon him, with many vowes and protestations to performe his pleasure with all strictnesse and seueritie; but by the way commiserating her wretched fortune, and loth to be

the destroyer of such youth and beautie created for better vse: comming neere the Sea-shore, and spying a ship there at Anchor, he sold her to the cheefe marchant for a summe of money, returning to the father with an assured relation of his daughters death. The marriners presently with this faire purchase hoysed sayle, and a faire and gentle gale fauouring them, they attained vnto the port of Salamine, and there harboured, where purposing to make sale of their marchandise, they exposed them to the publique view, amongst the rest they set a price on the Princesse Perhibaea. Telamon who was duke of Salamine and then resiant in the cittie, tooke his attendants with him, and hearing of this new marchant, went downe to the Key to take the first view of his goods, and prouide himselfe of such things as he wanted; amongst all, the faire Perhibaea pleased him best, whose face he well knew and still remembred what had past betwixt them: hee bargained for her, payd downe her price, conducted her to his pallace, and there acquainted her with the true passage of all his former proceedings. Within few moneths shee brought him a sonne which he called Aiax: and this was that Aiax Telamon, who at the siege of Troy betwixt the two armies combatted with bold Hector in the plaine of Scamander: you shall reade this historie in Aretades Guidius in his second booke inscribed Insulis. The next that insues hath correspondence with this. Lucius Trocius had a beautifull young daughter called Florentia,Florentia. shee was stuprated by the Roman Calphurnius, and when the act came to the knowledge of her father, deliuered to the trustie executioner to bee cast into the Sea; who in the same manner was by him pittied and sold to a marchant, his ship beeing then bound for Italie, where she being exposed to publique sale, was seene, knowne, and bought by Calphurnius, by whom hee had a sonne called Contruscus. I proceede to such as haue vnwittingly beene the death of their parents.
Euenus, the sonne of Mars and Steropes, by his wife Alcippa the daughter of Oennemanus had a beautifull female issue,Marpissa. whom hee called Marpissa who had vowed perpetuall virginitie; her, Idas the sonne of Aphareus rauished and stole away, which her father hearing, prosecuted him euen vnto his owne countrey, but in vaine, for not able to ouertake them, and returning without her, in greefe of his lost daughter whom he so deerely loued, hee threw himselfe into the riuer Lycormus and was there drowned; some thinke that by his death the flood lost his name, and was euer after called Euenus. Dosithae lib. 1. rerum Italicarum. Anius king of the Etruscians, hauing a rarely featured damosell to his daughter called Salia,Salia. whose virginitie he had vowed to Diana, and therefore admitted no suitors, though many great and rich offers were made vnto her: at length, as shee was sporting abroad amongst other virgins shee was espyed by one Calthetas, a hopefull young gentleman and ennobled by his familie, who at the first sight of her was so extaside with her beautie, that maugre all feare of pursuit or danger, hee snatcht her vp in his armes, and vsed such meanes that hee got her safe within the walls of Rome. Her father following the rauisher, but not ouertaking him, was strucke into such a deepe sorrow, that desparate of all comfort or counsell, hee violently cast himselfe into the next Foord that parted Rome and his owne Kingdome, which euer since that time still beares the name of Anius. Calihetus had by Salia two braue sonnes, Latinus and Salinus, who were famous in their noble nad flourishing issue, insomuch, that some of the best and greatest families in Rome, were proud from them to deriue

their ancestrie. This historie is recorded by Aristides Milesius, by Alexander and Polihistor lib. tertio Italicorum.



Of Clamorous Women commonly called Skoulds.
CNeius Pompeius to make his faction the stronger, by his friend Munatius sent to Cato that hee would bee pleased, of his two Neeces to contract the one of them to himselfe, the other to his sonne: by whome Cato sent word backe to Pompeius, That though he as a friend tooke gratefully the free profer of his friendship and allyance, yet beeing a man, hee had euer kept himselfe from beeing intricated in the snares of women; but hee protested hee would adhere vnto him in a more firme league of amitie, than could be contracted by kindred, if hee would studie any thing conducent and profitable for the common-weale, but against the publique good hee would neither giue nor take hostages; calling his neeces (who as some write were his daughters, giuen so in matrimonie) no better than pledges, of much future inconuenience, especially in matters of state, where the common-weale is distracted and diuided. Eras. 5. Apotheg. Socrates was wont to say, that hee had patiently suffered three torments, Grammer, Pouertie, and a skoulding Wife Xantippe, two of which he had prettily well euaded, namely, Grammer and Pouertie, but the morositie of a Skould hee could neuer put off. Anton. Parle. 2. Meless. Serm. 34. The like may be sayd of Sausarion the Comicke Poet, equally tormented with a bitter and rayling wife. Pittacus Mitelenus hauing married the sister of Draco the sonne of Penthilius, a proude insolent and rayling woman, persuaded a deere friend of his to marrie with the other sister, for if hee were neuer so much giuen to wrath and anger, shee would teach him sufferance and patience. Laertius when Georgias the Sophist at the solemnitie of the Olimpicke games, had made an elabourat Oration Concerning concord, and to persuade men to vnitie: one Melanthius in the conclusion or catastrophe thereof spake aloude, This man persuades all Greece to peace, who hauing but one wife and three maides at home, yet his house is neuer without clamour and dissention, and with all his smooth and filed phrases cannot make his owne peace. Erasm. 6. Apotheg. Mar. Pacuvius vpon a time sayd (weeping) to his familiar friend and neighbour Actius (alias) Arius,Suidas calls him Arius. Deere friend (saith he) I haue a tree in my garden, in my minde the most prodigious and vnhappie that euer the earth produced or gaue sappe vnto, for vpon that my first wife hanged her selfe, and after that the second, and now but this morning my third and last; to whom Arius his neighbour replyde, I wonder you beeing a learned man and approoued for your wisedome, should be any way greeued at these successes and chances, Dij boni (inquit) quot tibi dispendia arbor iste suspendit? i. Oh you gods, how many of thy dammages and losses hast thou hanged vpon that tree; and proceeded thus, Deere friend giue me some of those grafts and scientes, tha I may plant them in my orchard or garden. Valerius records this in an epistle to Rufinus. As also Cicero reports the like of a Sicilian in 2. de Orat. and Gyraldus Dial. 8. Histor. Poetarum. Euen Cato Censorius could not escape a brawling and crabbed wife, though he married her from an ignoble stocke and familie. Guid. Bitturn. sayth, That Hadrianus had a wife called Sabina,Sabina. hard, peruerse, vntoward, rude in her behauiour towards her husband, and worthie

to be repudiated, and her bed and societie abandoned. Alphonsus king of Naples, demaunding of one Antonius Panormita, What noble Neapolitane gentlemen were delighted in Hunting, or whether any late Writer had published any Treatise, concerning the goodnesse and excellencie of Dogges? To whom Panormita answered, I beseech thee (o king) rather aske this knight (pointing to one that was then in presence) who can better resolue you, who for the space of fortie yeeres hath beene continually so conseruant amongst such creatures, that euerie night he beddeth with a Canicula (which word, as it signifieth a Brach or Bitch, so it is taken for a detractor or snarling slanderer, as also for a Dogge-fish:) and proceeded, Therefore hee (o king) can best describe vnto you their natures and conditions. This knight of Naples (whose name for his honors sake is concealed) onely smiled at the taunt giuen by Antonius, well apprehending, that by Canicula hee intended his wife; a woman barkingly clamorous, most contentious, and bitter. Pontanus. Gregorius Hamburgensis, a famous and eloquent Lawyer (amongst all the German practisers the most approoued) when all his busie imployments were ended in the Court of Caesar, where hee was stayed some two moneths, or thereabouts; and (as wee say in our English phrase) the Terme being done, and hee returning home to his owne house, not farre from the Towne of Nurimburch, (where hee then dwelled) hee met with a friend and neighbour, who after some familiar salutes past betwixt them, told him, That his wife was liuing, and in good health at home: to whom shaking his head, he made this short reply, Si vxor viuit, saene obij, i. If my wife be liuing, then am I but dead; thereby intimating, that the morositie of a curst wife is no better than a dayly death to her husband. Aeneas Sylu. Lib. 3. Commentar. de reb. Cestis Alphonsi. Thisponius the Lawyer, and of the learned Councell to king Alphonsus, hauing at one time three hundred pieces of Gold stolne from him, which was part of the Dower of a peruerse and peeuish wife whom hee had lately married, for which being wondrous sad and pensiue in the presence of the king, Alphonsus looking vpon him, and seeming to commiserate his sadnesse, broke out into these tearmes, O how happie a man were Thisponius, if the theeues had stolne away his wife, and left the Gold behind them. Panormita, Lib. 1. de Gestis Alphons. Euripides, the most excellent of the Greeke Tragicke Poets, had two wiues; the name of the first was Cherile,Cherile, or Chaerine. or (as Suidas calls her) Charine, the daughter of Mnesilochus, by whom hee had three sonnes, Mnesiloches the Actor or Stage-player, Mnesarchides the Marchant, and the third, Euripides the Orator: yet partly for suspition of adulterie, and by reason hee led with her an vnquiet life, after so hopefull an issue, shee was diuorced from him. After this separation, hee married another called Melitto,Melitto. who being apprehended in adulterie with Ctesiphon the Player, hee was so branded for a Cuckold, and so taunted and ieasted at by the Comicke Poets in the publique Theatre, that he was forced to leaue the citie and to remoue himselfe into Macedonia, where hee spent the remainder of his life in the Court of king Archelaus. Gell. Lib. 15. cap. 20. Athenaeus, Lib. 13. Arnus, Tarquinius, and Tullia, liued together in perpetuall discord and dissention, by reason of her vntoward and crabbed condition. Adrianus Berlandus tells vs of an Inne-keeper or Host (a pleasant and frolicke fellow) who when a guest of his complained vnto him, that he could not endure such noyse and clamour, for his

wiues tongue neuer ceased walking, finding fault with this thing, then that; besides, there was no cessation of her perpetuall brawling and chiding with her maids and seruants. To whom the merrie Host replyed, And I pray (my friend) is this a iust cause for your impatience, or discontent? What doe you thinke of me then, that for two and thirtie yeeres space haue had this noyse and clamour continually in mine eares, night and day, without ceasing, and yet you see with what sufferance I beare it; and cannot you endure it for the space of a few minutes? By which words hee not onely gaue present satisfaction to his guest, but conuerted his wiues anger into laughter. Seruius Tullius, king of the Romanes, conferred his two daughters vpon the two Tarquius,Tullia, and her sister. Aruns, and Superbus: of seuerall dispositions were the men, and of sundrie conditions the women; as they were opposite in humour, they were as vnfitly disposed. To Aruns (a man of a quiet and mild temper) Tullia (a Ladie bold and daring) was giuen: on Superbus (a Prince haughtie and insolent) the other (beeing a modest and meeke Ladie) was bestowed. Disparitie of mindes could not brooke the inequalitie of manners: Therefore bold and bloodie Tullia poysons her faire and gentle-conditioned Aruns, the other modest and mild-tempered sister is made away by the proud and ambitious Superbus: the best are lost^ the worst left. They two contract an incestuous Marriage, Pride with Crueltie, and Immanitie with Ambition; Murther is the ground or cause, and Treason and Vsurpation the prodigious effect: shee complots the death of her owne naturall father; and hee, the ruine of his liege Lord and Soueraigne: shee a Parricide, hee a Regicide. The king is betwixt them slaine, ouer whose dead bodie shee caused her Chariot to be drawne: Her cheekes blushed not, when the wheeles of her Waggon were stained with her fathers blood. And so much to giue Tullia a short character, the most insolent of Wiues, and the worst of Daughters. Of a lower voice, softer spirit, and more temperate condition,Chilonia. were these wiues following. Chilonia the wife of Cleombrotus king of Sparta, and daughter of Leonides, who had before soueranised, when in those ciuile combustions the sonne in law had expulsed the father, and compelled him into exile, shee neuer ceased to importune her husband, till shee had called him home from banishment. But in processe of time, when Fortune had turned her Wheele, and Leonides in those dissentions (hauing got the better) had confined Cleombrotus, shee was an hourely intercessor for the repeale of her husband; but finding her father to bee obdure, and her suit by him not listened too, though she might in all pleasure and ease haue happily spent her age in her owne cittie with her father, shee rather made choise to be a faithfull companion in all distresses with her husband, Fulgos. lib. 6. cap. 7. Anaxandrides, the sonne of Leontias, marryed with his sisters daughter, whom hee exceedingly loued, but because shee was barraine and that by her he had no issue, the Ephori made suit vnto him to be diuorsed from her, and would haue compelled him vnto it: but when he had absolutely denied to condiscend with them in that point, they made another request vnto him, That hee would take vnto him another wife more fruitfull, least the most fortunate issue of Euristaeus might in him bee extinguished. Hee therefore at their intreaties tooke to him a second wife, namely Perinetades,Perinetades the daughter of Demarmenus, and so brought her

home to his house; where (which is strange) the two women liued together peaceably, without emulation or enuie. His last wife brought him a sonne, whom hee called Cleomenes: and not long after, his first wife (before barraine) made him the fortunate father of three sonnes; the first, Dorie^s; the second, Leonides; the third, Cleombrotus: but Cleomenes (the eldest by the second wife) succeeded in the Soueraigntie. Herodot. Lib. 5. Thesca,Thesca. the sister of Dionisius, beeing marryed to Polixenus, who hauing entred into a Coniuration with other noble gentlemen, to supplant the Tyrant, but fearing discouerie fled for his best safetie: Vpon whose flight, Dionisius calls his sister into question, as one that must of necessitie be priuie to his escape. To whom shee boldly thus answered: Thinkest thou (o Dionisius) thy sister to be a woman of that seruile and degenerate condition, that had shee knowne the least purpose of his retyrement, shee would not haue made her selfe a companion in all his Nauigations, and Trauaile? Erasm. Apotheg. Lib. 5. Caius Caligula the Emperour, hauing found Herod (the husband to Herodias) Tetrarch of Galilee,Herodias. engaged in a reuolt from the Empire, with Artahanus king of the Parthians, amerced him in a great summe of money for that defect; and till it was leuied and payed into the Treasurie, gaue him in custodie to king Agrippa, whom he had found loyall vnto him, and in whose fidelitie hee much trusted. Hee after banished Herod into Lyons (a citie of France) with an irreuocable doome of exile imposed vpon him: but vnderstanding Herodias to be sister to the wife of Agrippa (whom hee much fauoured) out of Herods mulct, or fine, hee proportioned her a large Dower, reserued in the hands of Agrippa to her vse, as not dreaming shee would haue beene a companion with him in his confinement. To which extraordinarie grace from the Emperour, shee thus replyed: You (o Emperour) as best becomes your Maiestie, speake like a royall and munificent Prince, but the Coniugall Bond of Loue and Pietie, in which I am tyed to a husband, is to me an impediment, that I am not capable of this great Largesse and vnmerited bountie. Vnmeet it is, that I (who haue beene a partaker with him in all his prosperous and flourishing fortunes) should now forsake him, and not be a companion with him in the worst that disaster or aduersitie can inflict. This noble answere Caligula tooke in such scorne and high displeasure, to see himselfe in magnanimitie and greatnesse of spirit to be exceeded by a woman, that hee banished her with her husband Herod; and the bountie (before bestowed on her) hee conferred vpon her brother in law Agrippa. Ioseph. in Antiquitatibus. Cleomenes,The wife of Cleomenes. the sonne of Anaxandrides and Perinetades (but lately spoken of) being expulsed from Sparta by Antigonus, king of Macedonia, fled for refuge to Ptolomeus, king of Aegypt: whither his wife would haue followed him, but dissuaded by her parents (notwithstanding a strict guard was set ouer her) yet in the night shee beguiled her keepers; and hauing prouided a Horse for the purpose, posted with all possible speed to the next Port Towne, that was least suspected; where hyring a shippe, with all the Coyne and Iewels shee had then about her shee sayled into Aegypt, and there spent the remainder of her dayes with him in his vncomfortable exile. Fulgos. lib. 6. cap. 7. I haue but one more (gentle Reader) to trouble thy patience with at this present.
Blanca Rubea Patauina,Blanca Rubea Patauina. the wife of Baptista a Porta, betaking her selfe into the same free priuiledged Towne, of which Bassianus was then Gouernour,

and whither her husband for his safetie was retyred in the yeere of our Redemption 1253, when A^^iolinus the Tyrant hauing lost Padua, and bending all his forces to the surprisall of Bassi^^^^, compassing that at length by fraud and stratagem, which by opposition and violence hee could neuer haue accomplished; in the entring of which Towne Baptista was slaine, and Blanca Rubea being armed, and fighting boldly by his side till shee saw him fall, was (notwithstanding her masculine valour) taken prisoner by a souldier, and presented to the Tyrant; who gazing on her rare feature (much more beautified by the rich armour shee then had on) grew exceedingly enamoured on this manly Virago, and first with faire enticing blandishments hee courted her loue, but finding no possibilitie to satiate his libidinous affections that waye, where faire meanes fayled, hee purposed force: which to auoid, and to preuent the dishonour intended her, shee cast her selfe out from an high Bay-window, two stories from the ground; where being taken vp halfe dead, with much difficultie shee was recouered. No sooner was shee well able to walke, but the Tyrant still prosecuted his beastly and bruitish desires; which shee still opposing, with that small strength shee had left, hee caused his seruants to bind her according to his lustfull direction, and not able to stirre hand nor foot, in that horrible manner rauished her. At length being loosed from those hatefull and vnsufferable bonds, shee (with what patience shee could) dissembled her griefe, and wrought so farre with some that compassioned her miseries, that shee had libertie to visit her dead husband in his Tombe, into which (with lowd shrikes and passionate lamentation) shee entred, still inuoking her husbands name, and with all the force shee had, plucked the great and ponderous Tombe-stone vpon her, the weight whereof forced the breath out of her bosome. And by this meanes shee purchased the honourable name of a most chast wife, at which her life still aymed; and a common graue with her husband, which euen in death shee most desired: one Stone beeing the couer to both their Hearses. Bernard. Scardeonus, Lib. 3. Histor. Pataminae.


Varietie of Discourse concerning Women.
APOLLO, or the Sunne, is said to haue fiue Daughters, which by their names appeare to be no other than the fiue Sences:The daughters of Apollo. The first is called Pasiph^^, or Sight, of (...), i. Omnibus apparens, i. Visible to all; for the Sight is a Sence that hath inspection into all the rest: for the Eye sees him that calls, or clamours, beholds him that feeles, obserues those that taste, and intend such as smell. The Sunnes second Daughter, is Medea, or Hearing, of the Greeke word (...), i. Nullam visionem. The third Phaedra, or Odoratus, of (...) Afferens s^auitatem, i. Affoording sweetnesse and pleasantnesse. Dirce is deriued of (...), i. Saporis Index, To iudge by taste; or Acre Iudicare, that is, To censure acutely. The Syrens were the daughters of the floud Achelous,The Syrens. and the Muse Melpomene, so saith Hyginus: others deriue them from Calli^pe. They are by the Greekes called Tractatoriae, as attracting or insinuating into the eares of man by their seuerall illecebrations, or enticements; by Song, by Sight, by Custome. They are three in number; the first excels in Voice, the second in the Harpe,

the third in the Pype: it was so ordered by the Fates, that whosoeuer listned to their musicke should instantly perish, but when any one escaped their Incantations, they themselues should liue no longer; which destinie of theirs was made good in Vlysses. For stopping his owne eares and the eares of his saylers, with waxe (by the counsell of Mercurie) and causing them all to bee tyde to the Masts of the ship, when these Syrenes perceiued that they were preuented, they tumbled themselues from the Rockes headlong into the Seas and were so drowned. The place still beares their name and is called Syrenides, it lyes betwixt Sicilia and Italie. Some think that by these Syrenes were intended no other than strumpets, who by their inchanting insinuations and luxurious flatteries, haue beene the ruine of many eminent and excellent men, as likewise of others meanlier degreed and quallified; but whatsoeuer he be that by his wisedom can preuent them is his own preseruer, and their destroyer. Their bodies vpward were feminine, withall faire; and from the nauell downward beastiall, or fishie, denoting vnto vs the vglinesse of sinne and deformitie of lust. Diuerse differ about their number; These are reckoned vnto vs, Aglaosi, Telsipoi, Pisno, Iligi: some thinke the cittie Parthinope to take denomination from Parthenopaea, once numbred amongst these Mermaides, because she was there buried: Others reckon amongst them the two nymphs Leucosia and Lygia. Plutarch in Amat^r. speakes of Oenanthe a she minstrell and a dauncer,Oenanthe. as also Aristonica, Aglais, and others.Aristonica. These and the like of their alluring profession, to these Syrens may not vnfitly be compared.Aglais.
Some women haue to honest purposes changed their garments,Women that haue dessembled their shape. and dissembled themselues in mens habits; laudable it was in Theodora a Virgin of Antioch, who when a rude and rough hewed souldier was sent vnto her into prison,Theodora. forcibly to despoyle her of her virgin chastitie, shee with her modest lookes and becomming teares mixt with passionat persuasions, not only mollified his obdurate heart and deterred from his wicked purpose, but woon him to change habits with her, by which fortunate stratageme shee escaped out of prison, and so preuented the threatened slaughter intended her by the tyrant Dioclesian, Ambros. lib. 2. de Virgin. Euphrosina a maide of Alexandria,Euphrosina. tooke vpon her a mans habit, and for the space of thirtie six yeres dissembled her Sex vnknowne to any, all which time she spent in a religious monasterie onely for deuotion sake. Volaterran. Dicearchus apud Caelium testates, That only for the loue of learning and to bee truely instructed in the grounds of Phylosophie, Lasthenia, Martinea, Axiothea, and Phliasia came disguised in mens habits into Platos schoole and were his daily auditors, into which place women were not to be admitted. Pelagia a woman of Antioch,Pelagia. being in her youth solely giuen ouer to voluptuousnesse and pleasure, at length was so retyred from all worldly delights and vanities, that abandoning humane societie, she assumed the shape of a man, least her Sex might be discouered, and so betaking her selfe to the sollitude of a most disolate wildernesse, led a contemplatiue and deuoute life till she expired her last. The like I haue before related of Marina, who with her habit changed her name to Marinus, and Eugenia to Eugenius. Here I might fitly introduce Iohanna Anglicana, but I haue reserued a place for her amongst the learned. Not to the like commendable purpose, we reade how Semiramis betrayde her Sex,Semiramis. and for many yeares together beguiled the eyes of her people, tooke vpon her the stile of a king, and raigned in the person of her sonne.
Women that haue changed their Sex.As those before remembred haue dissembled their shape, so there bee some recorded in historie, that haue miraculously changed their Sex. In Phestus a citie of Creet liued one Lictus or Lignus of a noble family,Iphis. who being married to Telethusa,Telethusa. a Ladie of equall byrth, both nobilitated as well in wealth as parentage, he as an addition to the rest being honourable aboue others by his place and office; his wife being great with child and something neere her deliuerie, he not onely besought her at the first but after inioyned her vpon her life of two things, the one was that shee should bring him a male child to inherit, the other that if it prooued to be a gyrle, she should instantly bereaue it of life. Hard was the imposition to a mother, and it somwhat penterated the heart of the father, for he no lesse wept to speake it than shee moystned her cheekes to heare it; it drew teares from both, yet by reason of a vow solemnely made to the gods, notwithstanding all her passionate intersessions, he stood obstinate from being remooued, and she altogether in dispaire because he would be no further intreated. All her small hope was now in the hasard, as not knowing what her issue would proue; if a male the ioy of her life, if a female her double death, as not intending to suruiue her infant. The night before her deliuerie she was comforted in her dreame, in which a Vision appeared to her, to cammaund her to saue the child howsoeuer, for the gods would take it into their protection; this somewhat cheared her throwes: A gyrle is borne, the Sex is concealed betwixt her and her nurce, the father is proude of his young sonne, sends to comfort the mother, and performes the ceremonies of the vow before past, nor doth the countenance of the infant any way betray the Sex, for as Ouid Metamorph. lib. 9. sayth of it:
Cultus erat pueri, facies quam siue puellaeSiue dares pueri sierat formosus vterque.
The habit of a Boy she woreAnd it had such a face,As whether she were Boy or Gyrle,It either Sex would grace.
Lictus giues it the name of the grandfather, and calls it Iphis, a name that may belong equally either to man or woman; the mother holds it as a fortuate Omen. The infant growes to be ripe for marriage, and the father is as readie to prouide a wife for his supposed sonne: Ianthe is found,Ianthe. the daughter of Dyctaeus and Thaleste,Thaleste. a young damosell of large dower and commendable beautie; Iphis and Ianthe were of equall yeares and alike in feature, they were bred together, brought vp and schooled together, and as they had like instructions, so they had like affections, they were paraleld in loue but not in hopes, Ianthe expected to be possessed of Iphis, Iphis was in despaire euer to inioy Ianthe; as her feare still growes greater, so the marriage day approcheth neerer, the fathers ioy and comfort is the mothers dread and greefe, the ones exaltation to blisse, the others deiection to sorrow. The Contract is past, the Nuptiall day come; there are two Brides, and no Bridegroome: notwithstanding, Himen is present, Iuno at hand, Venus not farre off, and Lucina (the goddesse of Child-birth) in hope of future imployment. The mother retyres to her prayers, the daughter to her teares: Where humane hope fayles, and Nature opposeth (or at least helpeth not:)

whither should we flye but to the gods, for assistance? So they repaire to the Altar, where they humbly kneele, and as deuoutly pray. Prayers are said to be the daughters of Iupiter, and haue at all houres accesse to the eares of their father. Their Orisons ended, the mother and daughter returned; if not helped, yet in their resolutions armed against hurt. In the way backe, as Ouid my maister tells me, it thus happened:
Mater abit Templo, sequitur Comes Iphis enutemQuam solita est maiore gradu, etc.
The mother from the Temple Iphis guides,She followes her, but yet with larger stridesThan when she thither went; and thinkes it strangeTo find within her selfe such sudden change,Because she feeles about her something grow,The like she neuer saw, nor yet doth know.The whitenesse in her Cheeke begins to fade,She seemes more swart; besides, more breadth is laidVpon her spreading shoulders; she is nowMore strong than erst, and in her modest BrowA Looke more manly: her faire Haire, that hungBelow her Waste, still shortens; and her ToungHath got a bigger tone: nor maruell, whenIphis the Maid may now be rank'd 'mongst Men.
What, and how great ioy this prodigious change was, I leaue to them that can truly apprehend the happinesse of such a hopelesse and vnexpected fortune betwixt two Louers: but whether this was done meerely by the miraculous worke of the gods, or were possible in Nature, might be disputed. To this purpose, he that collected the Memorable Histories of these times, hath quoted an Author, in many things beleeuable, That the like hath been knowne in our later ages: yea, children haue beene borne, that by the Midwiues, Nurses, and Parents, haue beene mistaken for daughters, and so continued for some yeeres. But growing to the age of twelue, or thereabouts, and are able to distinguish of good or euill (being capable of passions, and subiect to affections) whether Loue or Time haue produced these strange effects, I am not certaine: but those manly parts that were before inuerted, and concealed within the bodie, haue burst sorth, and beene made apparant; insomuch, that they haue beene forced to change their womens names into mens, with the exchange of their habits; and after made choise of wiues, and as this Iphis to Ianthe, haue beene ioyfully married. Ouid in his twelfth booke of Metamorphosis remembers the like transhape from the mouth of Nestor. Caenis (saith he) the daughter of Elataeus,Caenis. one of the most beautifull Virgins of Thessaly, and of such fame, that euen Peleus, the father of Achilles (amongst many others) was an earnest suitor vnto her to haue made her his Bride and Queene: but the proud Girle despising both his proffers and person, gaue him a like repulse with the rest, pretending a perpetuall Vow of Chastitie. At length Neptune grew enamoured of her, and encountred her at such opportunitie and aduantage, that mauger all resistance, she was by him vitiated and devirgined. To recompence which iniurie, he bad her aske whatsoeuer was in his power (being a god) to grant,

and shee should be recompenced to the fullnesse of her wishes and desires. Shee fearing least the temptation of her incomparable beautie might bring her in danger of the like violence, and to base prostitution (which she aboue all things hated) to him she thus answered:
Metam. lib. 12.Magnum (Caenis ait) Facit haec iniuria votamTale pati, iam posse nihil, da femina ne sim,Omnia prestiteris, etc.
My iniurie doth make me (Caenis sayd)To aske a mightie Boone, which graunt I pray,(That I no more in this kind be betray'd)Make me to be no woman from this day:'Tis all I begge. The last words that she spake,Seem'd to be vtt'red with more manly soundThan were the first: Great Neptune for her sakeHad granted it (which in her selfe she found)And added more; To recompence this deed,Neuer shall that smooth skinne by weapon bleed.
After which time she proued invulnerable, changed her name to Caeneus, practised Armes, and prooued a famous Souldier. Shee was in that great battaile betwixt the Centaures and the Lapithes, where fell by her hand Stiphilus, Bromus, Antimachus, Helimus, and Pyrachmon, fiue valiant Centaures. Now though this may seeme somewhat to fauour of fabulous Poetrie, may not she (leauing out the compression of Neptune, or being made wound-free) by the former probabilitie so late remembred (being borne of a warlike race, and hauing in her the inherent seedes of hereditarie valour) though shee was first thought a Damosell, yet when time produced her virilitie, make shew of that, imperfect Nature had not till then ripened, and practise Armes, agreeable with the braue spirits of her ancestors? And because eyther her good fortune assisted her, or her valour so protected her, that shee neuer receiued any apparant wound in battaile; may shee not therefore (and without any palpable absurditie) bee thought invulnerable? And so much to apologie (in the way of discourse) for those supposed impossibilities; onely producing these Histories, least any thing (that sauours not of immodestie) that can bee spoke of Women, should be left vnremembred.

Explicit Liber Septimus, Inscriptus POLYHIMNIA.



THE EIGHTH BOOKE, Inscribed VRANIA: Intreating of Women euerie way Learned; of Poetresses, and Witches, etc.
POLYHIMNIA remembers me to looke vp to her Sister VRANIA, whose contemplation is in the Starres and Planets; where (mee thinkes) I behold the twelue Signes, as Manilius (in his first booke ASTRONOMICON) thus describes their order:
Aurato Princeps Aries in vellere fulgensRespicit, admirans aduersum surgere Taurum, etc.
The Princely Ramme, clad in his golden Wooll,Lookes backe, admiring to behold the BullAgainst him rise; who with a chearefull faceCalls to the Twinnes, to bid them mend their pace:The Crab these followes, and the Lyon than;Next, the Celestiall Maid, not knowne by man:Libra comes after, who (least Time should faile)Weighes out the Nights and Dayes in equall Skale,And calls the Scorpion on, who in his trayneBeares a bright fulgent starre, at which (in vaine)The Centaure (with his string drawne to his eare)Aimes his keene shaft: the Goat doth next appeare,That's Capricornus call'd, who oft-times lowres,Because to quench his starre, Aquarius powresHis Lauer forth: next after him, are plac'tPisces, that of the twelue Signes are the last.
And now whilest mine eyes are yet fixt vpon the starres, let it appeare no vnprofitable digression, to speake something concerning Astronomie. Atlas for his skill in that Art, the Poets fabled him to support Heauen on his

shoulders; and Endimion for obseruing the course of the Moone, was therefore sayd to be her friend and louer. The Babylonians are reported to bee the first obseruers of the Starres and Planets, by whom the Grecians being instructed, found out the two Poles, deuised the Dyall, and distinguished the Day and the Night into foure and twentie houres. Zoroastres that flourished in the time that Ninus raigned in Assiria, was in this Art famous. Palamides the sonne of Nauplius and Climene, was the first amongst the Greekes that accommodated the Weekes, Moneths, and Yeares, and proportioned them to the true course of the Sunne; hee obserued the terrible eclipse of the Sunne, and taught it to be a meere natural cause and not prodigious, as it was then feared. Philostratus in Heroicis. Thales Milesiu^ one of the seuen wisemen of Greece, applyde himselfe to this studie, and as Calimachus witnesseth of him, was the first that disputed vpon Vrsa maior, as E^demus predicted the Eclips of the Sunne to the Ionians, which happened in the time that Haliattes was king of Lidia, and fought a great and terrible battaile against Aiaxaris king of the Medes, Herodotus in Clio. Laertius, Lib. 1. Anaximander Milesius the scholer of Thales, first taught that the Moone shined only by a borrowed Light, and that the Sunne equalled in bignesse the compasse of the whole frame of the Earth, and was the purest fire; he made the first Sun-dyall in Lacedemon, and placed it where it might best giue a shaddow from the reflection of the Sunne; he obserued the Aequinoctiall, and made Spheres and Horoscopes, Laert. lib. 2. Anaxagoras Clazimonius taught, That the Sunne was a fire perpetually burning, greater in the Circumference than the Island of Peloponessus, hee called it a fierie Stone; he predicted that a stone should fall from the Orbe of the Sunne, which happened neere to Aegos a flood in Thrace in the second yere of the seuentie eight Olimpiad. This made Euripides his scholer in Pha^tontide, to call the Sunne a golden Turfe; and that the Moone conteined within her Sphere, Houses, and Dwellings, Hills, Valleys, Forrests, Beasts, and People. Hee affirmed the Galaxia or Milkie-path to be a meere reflex of the Sunne, and no inter-light arising from the Starres; Commets he taught to bee a concourse of the wandering Starres, and the flames or beards which proceed from them loose sparkes shaken by the Ayre: Being asked to what end he was borne into the world, hee answered, Onely to haue inspection into the Sunne, the Moone, and the Planets, Laert. li. 2. Plin. lib. 2. cap. 60. In this were eminent Parmenides Eleates the scholer of Xenophon, Leucippus Eleates, Democrates Abderites, Xenocrates Chalcidonius, who writ six bookes de Astrologia, as Laertius witnesseth lib. 4. E^doxus Guidius, Theophrastus Erisius, Oenopides Chius, Meton Lacedemonius (both remembred by Aelianus) Protagorus Astrologus, with infinite others: and among these Hyppatia a learned woman of Alexandria,Hyppatia. daughter of Theon the famous Geometrition, and wife to the Phylosopher Isiodorus, shee writ of Astronomie, kept schoole in Alexandria, where she was frequented by many worthie schollers, shee flourished in the time of Arcadius the Emperour, and was after by such as enuied her fame in learning pittifully slaine and massacred. From the professors of this Art I come to the effects therof. It is related of Meton the expert Astrologian, when the Athenian forces were to be shipped into Sicily to fight against the Syracusans, hee foreseeing by his Art the lamentable successe of that battell, which after proued accordingly, to auoid the danger thereof, being a man of especiall imployment in that businesse, and to come off without suspision of feare or cowardise, hee counterfeited

madnesse; which the better to confirme, hee fi^ed a Summer^house of his owne which stood neere Pyceta, by which act he was iudged to be distracted in his sences, and for that reason dismist from his charge, Plutarch in Alcebiad. P. Nigidi^s Figalus was of the Pythagorian Sect, excellent both in the Mathematickes and Physicke, of whom Lucian, lib. 1.

At Figulus cui cura deos secretaque mundi
Nosse fuit


But Figulus, whose cheife care was to find
And know the gods, with secrets from mankind
Conceald, etc.

Hee flourished in the time of Caesar, hee was skillfull in the reuolutions of the Heauens aboue all that liued in his time: amongst other notable effects of his Art, hee predicted to Angustus beeing an infant, the Imperiall Purple. Xiphilin. in Augusto. Scribonius Mathematic^^ told Lyuia, the mother of Tiberius Caesar being with child, that shee was great with a male infant, not a female, adding (wherein his Art failed) Verum sine diademate, i. But without a Diademe, as ignorant then to what height the maiestie of the Caesars were to ascend, Sabellicus, lib. 1. cap. 1. It is reported of the Astrologian Thrasillus that when Tiberius was banished by Augustus into the Island of Rhodes, and in his greatest mellancholly and discontent had beene often comforted by Thrasillus his schoole-maister, as promising him some speedie good newes apprehended from his Art. But on a time they two walking together vpon the bankes of the Sea, Tiberius still fretting and chasing inwardly with himselfe that he had beene so long fooled with vaine and idle promises, by the Mathematician his maister, he rated him with bitter and harsh tearmes, reuiling his Art, and was readie to haue cast him headlong (in this extremitie of rage) from the promontorie: when Thrasillus intreating his patience but a few houres, espyed a ship with full ^ayles making towards the harbour, when suddenly reioycing, Be of good comfort Tiberius (saith he) for in yon ship is brought thee what thou most de^irest; which prooued accordingly, for they attending their landing, letters were deliuered to Tiberius from Augustus and Lyuia, of his repeale from exile, and his calling backe to Rome; at which time was layd the foundation of his Empire. Fulgos. lib. 8. cap. 11. Dion in August. reports it thus, Tiberius walking with Thrasillus, and priuately intending to cast him from the rocke, without any appearance of anger, on the sudden he grew wonderous melancholly and sad, vpon which Tiberius demanding the cause, Thrasillus answered, because I find there is now a present mischiefe intended against me; vpon which words the purpose of Tiberius was altered, and the others prescience by him much commended. Euen Tiberius himselfe studious and expert in Astrologie, Astronomie, and other mysticall and hidden Arts, insomuch that he caused many noble gentlemen of Rome to be innocently put to death, for no other reason than that by calculating vpon their natiuitie, hee presupposed them dangerous to the state; he obserued the carriage and conditions of all men, and whosoeuer excelled others in vertue, or entred into least popular loue, him hee cut off. It is sayd, that meeting with Galba vpon his marriage day, he cast a stedfast looke vpon him, and withall vttered these words, Et tu ^liquando Princip^tum degustobis, i. And thou also shalt in time attaine vnto the Principalitie.

The Emperour Hadrianus was not onely industrious in the attaining to the height of perfection in the knowledge of all other generall learning, but also in the Mathematicks, in so much that Marius Maxim. affirmes of him, That hee assuredly knew all things that were spoken of, or by him; he writ downe euerie morning with his owne hand the chances and successes that should follow the same day, and thus hee continued to the houre of his death. He was often heard to say of Verus whom he had adopted,
Ostendent terris hunc tantum fata, nec vltraEsse sinent, etc.
The fates will to the Earth but shew him, then,Ere fully seene, snatch him away agen.
Volaterran. Auturo, lib. 23. saith, That he continued the writing downe daily of those predictions, euen to the last moneth of the yeere in which he dyed, and then gaue ouer; speaking openly, that within the compasse of that moneth he should be gathered to his fathers, Fulgos. lib. 8. c. 11. Seuerus Pertinax hauing buried his wife Martia, made choise of a second called Iulia, borne of obscure parents; for no other reason, but that by the inspiration into those Starres that were predominant at her birth, he found that she was borne to participate of Imperiall honours. Volaterran. lib, 23. An Astrologian in the court of Frederick the second, Emperour, with great ceremonie and diligence obserued Rodulphus Earle of Hausburch (a plaine gentleman of meane fortunes and lesser hopes, and one whom all the other courtiers despised) and still he was mocked when he had neglected others of great place and office, to be only obsequious to him: this being to the Emperor, he commanded the Artist before him, demanding the reason of his so doing; to whom he answered, Because o Frederick, in this Rodulphus I see a succeeding Emperour, who when thy issue shall faile must repaire the dignitie of the Caesars, and his noble memorable acts fill all Christendome with condigne praises: neither was this presage friuolous or vainely spoken, for in the yeere of our redemption 1273, in the Kalends of October, this Rodulphus was by the Princes of Germanie confirmed in the Imperiall dignitie, and crowned at Frankefort: Caspinianus in Caesaribus. Marullus speakes of one Byli^tus an Astronomer, who died with eating of Mushroms, or such as we call Toadstooles, his words be these:
Dum canet Astrologus prituris sidera amicisDum sibi Boletos non canet ipse perit.
Whil'st to foresee his friends mishaps,His skill the Artist tryde:His owne sad fate he could not find,But eating Mushroms, dyde.
Rare effects of this Art were showed in Guido Boiatus foro liuiensis, who liued vnder Martin the fourth, who sent to Guido Earle of Mountferrat, that if such a day and at such an houre he would issue out of the citie, and by stratagem inuade his enemyes, posteritie should remember him in that honourable victorie, in which he should giue them a strange defeate and assuredly ouercome, and himselfe receiue a dangerous wound in the thygh. The Earle

at the day appointed issued from the citie, and assaulted them, prouiding himselfe of all things necessarie about him for a wound. Hee winnes the day, followed the victorie, was hurt in the same place, and after healed. F^lgos. Lib. 8. cap. 11. Egnat. Lib. 8. cap. 11. Paulus tertius Pope (Farnesius) was miraculously skilfull in Astrologie: He sent to his sonne Peter Aloysius (who at that time with great crueltie vsurped in the Dukedome of Parma and Placentia) and warned him to beware and take heed of his owne safetie the tenth day of September, in the yeere of Grace 1547. for that day was malignant to his life, and opposite to his good aboue all others. The father (as my Author saith) had power to fore-warne his sonne, but the soone had not grace to preuent the danger; for the same day predicted, hee was slaine in his owne Castle by Augustinus Landus and Iacobus Scotus, two Earles of Placentia, who pretended priuate conference with him. Being dead, hee was deliuered vp to the long afflicted people; who first hanged him vp by the priuie parts, and after (without all humane pitie) tore him limbe from limbe, to satisfie their malicious vengeance. Sleidanus, Lib. 19. Comment. I feare I haue stayed too long amongst the Starres, and conferred so much amongst those Men, that some may feare I haue forgot the Women: but it is otherwise, for I now proceed with them. And first,

Of Women Orators, that haue pleaded their owne Causes, or others.
STrange and admirable is the efficacie and force of Eloquence. It is writ of the Poet Ty^aeaus, That when the Lacedemonians had beene in three sundrie battailes defeated, and were in despaire for euer reobtaining their pristine honours and dignities; in this lowest of their deiectednesse, hee with his excellently eloquent Verses so kindled and awaked their dull and drowsie courages, that they the fourth time opposed the Massenians, their enemies; and wearing about them the names of their noble ancestors (whose braue exploits hee in his Poemes had celebrated) they reassumed their former forces and courages, with such an addition and encrease of fortitude, that they after grew vnresistable. Answerable to the facunditie and eloquence of the Poet Tyrtaeus, was that of Amesia,Amesia. a modest Roman Ladie, who being of a great crime accused, and readie to incurre the sentence of the Praetor, shee in a great confluence stept vp amongst the people, and without any Aduocate pleaded her owne Cause so effectually and strongly, that by the publique Suffrage shee was freed and acquit from all aspersions whatsoeuer: Which shee did with such a manly yet modest constancie, that from that time forward shee was called Androgine. Valer. Maxim. Lib. 8. cap. 3. Equall to her was Hortensia,Hortensia. the daughter of Q. Hortensius: shee, when the Roman Matrons had a grieuous fine imposed vpon them by the Tribunes, and when all the Lawyers and Orators were afraid to ^a^e vpon them the patronage of their Cause; this discreet Ladie in person pleaded before the Triumuirate, in the behalfe of the women; which shee did boldly and happily, for

as one hereditarie to her fathers eloquence, shee preuailed so farre that the greatest part of the mulct imposed vpon them was instantly remitted. Differing from their Modesties, was that of Caia Affrania,Caia Affrania. the wife of Lycinius Bructio, a woman prompt and apt for all contention and discord, and in all troubles and controuersies still pleaded her owne Cases before the Praetor: Not that shee wanted the helpe of an Aduocat, but rather to expresse her owne impudence; whose common rayling and loquacitie before the Bench, grew to that scandall that it almost stretcht to the iniurie of the whole Sex: insomuch, that if any woman were iustly taxed with boldnesse or irregularitie, shee (in the way of a Prouerbe) was branded with the name of Affrania. Her spleene extended euen to Caius Caesar Tertius; as likewise to M. Seruilius the Consull. My Author leaues her with this Character, That it is much better to enquire when such a Monster dyed, than curiously to be inquisitiue when or of whom she was borne. Val. Max. Lib. 8. cap. 3.
From Orators I come to Sophists, and from Declamers to Disputants. It is reported of Caecilia,Caecilia. the chast Roman Virgin (being married against her will to a noble gentleman, called Valerianus) when they were left together in the Bride-chamber, shee with her strong reasons and prompt arguments discoursed and disputed with him in the patronage and defence of her Virginitie, prouing vnto him from the Scriptures, how iustly vowed Chastitie is more acceptable in the eyes of the great Maker, than Marriage: insomuch, that notwithstanding his heat of youth, meeting with a tempting and prouoking beautie, the conuenience of opportunitie, time, and place (with the lawfulnesse of the act, established by the Ceremonies of the Church) yet he (at her intercession) not onely abstained from that time to offer her any force or violence, but euer after both betwixt themselues vowing lasting Virginitie. She, likewise when Tiburtius (the brother to Valerianus) contended with her in disputation, refuted the Opinions then generally held, concerning the idolatrous worship of the false Pagan gods^ so that hauing conuinced him with vndenyable Propositions, hee turned a zealous Conuerti^e to the true Christian Faith. Catherina Alexandria,Catherina Alex. vnder the Tyrannie of Maxentius, argued with all the best and cunningest Sophists of those dayes, stoutly and constantly maintaining the Faith of the Gospell, and sillogistically refuting all their schismaticall Opinions, causing many of them to deliuer vp their names to the sincere profession of Christianitie. In her appeared how the wisedome of the world gaue place and submitted to the Diuine knowledge; insomuch, that notwithstanding all the Sillogisticall cunning, and Sophisticall Dilemmaes (in which they were elaborately practised) they were forced to yeeld and submit to the authoritie of a plaine Virgins tongue, her wit and reason being illuminated with Diuine knowledge from aboue. Marull. Lib. 5. cap. 6. Guido Bit. in his Catalogue of Philosophers, reports Diodorus Socraticus to haue had fiue daughters, all Disputants, and skilfull in Logicke. Hypparchia,Hypparchia. the sister of Megocles and wife to Crates Cynicus, shee with one Sophisme put to silence Theodorus (surnamed (...)) Quod faci^n^ Theodorus non diceretur iniuste facere, idem si faciat Hypparchia non diceretur iniuste facere, i. That which Theodorus doing, he is not said to doe vniustly; If Hypparchia doe the same, shee is not said to doe vniustly. To which when hee granted, shee added this: But Theodorus beating himselfe, is

not said to doe vniustly; Ergo, If Hipparchia beat Theodorus, shee cannot doe vniustly. To this Theodorus made no answere, but in snatching vp his Cloake, and leauing the place, hee taunted her in a Greeke lambicke Verse, which was to this purpose, Why shee being a woman, would trouble her selfe with such Disciplines as are solely appertaining vnto men? thus saying, Radios apud Telas reliqui femina. To whom shee replyed; Thinkest thou I haue beene ill counsailed, if that time which I might haue past vpon the Loome, or Distasse, I haue spent in the attaining of the liberall Arts and Disciplines? Of Debora of the Tribe of Ephraim, her wisedome, and her Prophe^ies (in which she excelled) the holy Scriptures giues ample testimonie; as likewise of Mary the sister of Moses, Anna the Prophetesse, and others. I procced to such as haue beene studied and practised as well in Theologie, as Philosophie.


Of Women studious in Diuinitie.
TAbiola a Roman matron was verie laborious in the reading and vnderstanding of the sacred Scriptures,Tabiola. she was frequent in the old Prophets, the Gospells, and the Psalmes of Dauid, which shee had almost ad vnguem and by roat, her continuall reading practised her in a more perfect knowledge; shee was of that reuerent respect amongst the learned, that Saint Ierome vouchsafed to dedicate a booke vnto her, intituled de Vesta Sacer dotali.Marcella. Marcella Romana for her industrie in the Scriptures, in which she was zealously trauelled; was in many of Saint Ieromes Epistles saluted by name: Hee writ a booke to her De mundi Contemplu, i. Of the contempt of the world; another of the ten names by which God is called amongst the Hebrewes; a third, of our Faith, and the doctrine of the Heretikes; a fourth, of Blasphemie against the holie Ghost; a fifth, of the studie of Theophilus bishop of Alexandria, with diuers others. The same Saint Ierome witnesseth of Eustochium the daughter of one Paula a Roman matron,Eustochium who was excellently practised in the Greeke and Latin Dialects, as also in the Hebrew Charracter, in so much that shee in her time was called, The new Prodigie of the World: she gaue her studie cheefly to meditation vpon the Scriptures, in so much that shee read the Psalmes of Dauid familiarlie, and without the least hesitation.Anastatia. Anastatia the scholler to Crisog^nus the Martyr, and wife of Publius Romanus (who faining a counterfeit disease, sequestred himselfe from her and quite abandoned her bed) shee writ certaine Epistles to her Maister and Tutor Crisogonus, in which shee complained that all her meanes and substance was consumed and wasted by her impious and sacrilegious husband, who most vnnaturally deteined her in prison. This deuout woman for the Faith and ministring to the Saints, was arraigned and condemned to the fire, where shee publikely suffered a most glorious Martyrdom: of her Volateran. makes mention.Giliberta Anglica. Giliberta Anglica was borne in Maguns or Mens in Germanie, where shee was beloued of a young scholler, for whose sake, and least their priuat and mutuall affection should at length come to the eares of her parents, all virginall modestie and womanish feare set aside, she put her selfe into a yong mans habit, fled from her fathers house, and with her deere friend and paramour came into England, where as well as to his obseruance and loue, shee gaue her selfe to the

practise of the Arts, and to attaine to the perfection of Learning. At length the young man dying (finding her selfe entred into some knowledge, and desirous to bee further instructed, as one hauing a wondrous prompt and acute braine) shee still continued her habite, and withall her laborious studie, as well in the Scriptures as other humane Learnings. At length comming to Rome, shee read publiquely in the Schooles, where shee purchased her selfe a great and frequent Auditorie: And besides her singular wisedome, shee was much admired and beloued for her seeming sanctitie and austeritie of life, and after the death of Leo the fift elected and confirmed in the Papall Dignitie, for thus writes Volaterran, Sigebertus, Platina, and others that haue writ the Liues of the Roman Bishops: shee is remembred likewise to this purpose by Boccatius in his booke de Claris Mulieribus. But Sabellicus, Lib. 1. Aeneadis, calls her Ioanna Anglica, i. Ioane English, who in her minoritie dissembled her Sex; and so habited, trauailed as farre as Athens, and there studied with infinite gaine and profite: insomuch, that comming to Rome, few or none could equall her in Disputation, or Lectures; which begot her such reuerence and authoritie with all men, that shee was by a generall Suffrage elected into the Papacie, and succeeded Leo the fourth. Rauisius in Officina, tit. 6. Others will not allow, that euer any such woman was Pope, and excuse it thus: There was one Bishop of Rome, who was a decrepit and weake old man: He (by reason of age) not being well able to manage his temporall affaires, and domesticke businesse, receiued into his Pallace as a guide and gouernesse, a woman called Ioanna, his sister or neere kinswoman: this woman tooke vpon her great pride and state, and vsurped vpon the infirmitie of her brother: insomuch, that hauing the command of all things, and being auaricious by nature, no businesse was dispatched but by her, nor any thing concluded without her, for which shee was both hated and scorned; and therefore vpon her that vsurped the authoritie of the Pope, they likewise bestowed his stile, and nick-named her Pope Ioane. This I haue not read, but I haue heard some report it. From her I come to Rosuida,Rosuida. borne in Germanie, and by Nation a Saxon: shee liued vnder Lotharius the first, and was of a religious place called Gandresenses, in the Diocesse of Hildesemensis; shee was facundious in the Greeke and Roman Tongues, and practised in all good Arts: shee composed many Workes, not without great commendation from the Readers, one especially to her fellow Nunnes and Votaresses, exhorting them to Chastitie, Vertue, and Diuine worship. Shee published six Comedies, besides a noble Poeme in Hexameter Verse, of the Bookes and Heroicke Acts done by the Otho Caesars. Shee writ the Liues of holy women, but chiefely a Diuine Worke of the pious and chast life of the blessed Virgin in Elegeicke Verse, which began thus, Vnica spes Mundiem. Cranzius, Lib. 6. cap. 20. Metrapoleos. Fulgos. Lib. 8. cap. 3. Elizabetha,Elizabetha Abatista. Abbesse of Schonaugia, zealously imitated the practise and studies of this Rosuida, which shee professed in the citie of Triers. Shee writ many things in the Latine Tongue, of which shee was diuinely admonished and inspired from aboue, besides many persuasiue Epistles to her Couent of Sisters, and others, full of great conceit and elegancie: A Booke also, that was entituled, A path to direct vs the way to God; besides, a Volume of many learned Epistles, full of great iudgement and knowledge. Fulgos. Lib. 8. cap. 3. and Egnat. ibidem.

Constantia,Constantia. the wife of Alexander Sforza, is deseruedly inserted in the Catalogue of women, famous and excellent in Learning: Shee from her child-hood was so laborious in the best Disciplines, that vpon the suddaine, and without any premeditation, she was able sufficiently to discourse vpon any argument, eyther Theologicall or Philosophicall; besides, shee was frequent in the Workes of S. Hierome, S. Ambrose, Gregorie, Cicero, and Lactantius. For her extemporall vaine in Verse, shee was much admired; in which shee was so elegantly ingenious, that shee attracted the cares of many iudicious schollers to be her dayly Auditors. And this facilitie is reported to be innate and borne with her, as proceeding with such smoothnesse, and without the least force or affectation.Baptista. Her daughter Baptista succeeded her both in fame and merit, beeing accepted and approoued for one equally qualified with her mother Constantia: Therefore Politianus in N^tricia doubts not to ranke her amongst the best learned and most illustrious women. Baptista Prima,Baptista Prima. the daughter of Galeatinus Malatesta, Prince of Pisauria, and after the wife of Guido Montefelcrensis, Earle of Vrbin, made many commendable proofes of her wit and learning; for shee held many disputations euen with those that were best practised and grounded in the Arts, from whence shee came off with no common applause. Shee writ a Volume in Latine, which shee titled, The Frailetie of mans Life; with other prayse-worthie bookes, De vera Religione, i. Of true Religion. Fulgos. Lib. 8. cap. 3.Isota Nauarula. Isota Nauarula Veronensis deuoted her life wholly to the studie of all humane knowledge, and withall, to the contemplation of Diuine Mysteries, to which shee added the honour of perpetuall Chastitie. Shee writ many eloquent Epistles to Pope Nicolaus Quintus, as also to Pius the second, being sufficiently seene as well in Theologie as Philosophie. Amongst other Workes, shee composed a Dialogue, in which it was disputed which of the two of our Parents Adam and Eue, sinned first, or more offended in the beginning Egnat. and Fulgos. Lib. 8. cap. 3. Alpiades a Virgin (who much desired to be instructed in the true Faith) was inspired from aboue with a miraculous knowledge in the Scriptures. Rauis. in Offic.


Of Women excellent in Philosophie, and other Learning.
FRom Theologie I descend to Philosophie.Nicaula. Nicaula Queene of Saba trauelled from the farthest part of Aethiopia vp to Hierusalem, to prooue the wisedome of Salomon in darke Problemes and hard Questions: which when he had resolued, and satisfied her by his diuine wisedome, inspired into him from aboue, she returned into her countrey richer by her gifts, more benefited by her knowledge, and fruitfull, as bearing with her in her wombe a child begot by Salomon. Lycasth. in Theat. Human. vitae, Lib. 1. cap. de Femin. doctis. Adesia,Adesia. a woman of Alexandria (a neere kinswoman to the Philosopher Syrianus) both for her Chastitie and Learning is commemorated by Suidas, Vata. Lib. 13. cap. 3. Antrop. NicostrataNicostrata. (by some called Carmentis) helped to make vp the number of the Greeke Alphabet: shee is also said to haue added to our Roman Letters. Hermodica was the wife of Midas,Hermodica. king of Phrygia: shee is not

onely celebrated for her rare feature and beautie, but for her wisedome: shee was the first that euer stamped Money, or made Coyne amongst the Cimenses. Heraclides. Numa was the first that made Money amongst the Romanes, of whose name it was called Nummus. Isiodor. Lib. 16. cap. 17. It is likewise called Pecunia, of Pecus, which signifies Cattell: for the first that was made to passe currant betwixt man and man, was made of the skinnes of beasts stamped with an impression. It hath beene currant amongst our English Nation; part of it may at this day be seene (as an antient Monument) in the Castle of Douer. Saturne made Money of Brasse, with inscriptions thereon; but Numa was the first that coyned Siluer, and caused his name to be engrauen thereon, for which it still retaines the name in the Roman Tongue, and is called Nummus.Aspasia Aspasia was a Milesian Damosell, and the beloued of Pericles: shee was abundantly skilled in all Philosophicall studies; shee was likewise a fluent Rhetorician. Plutarchus in Pericles. Socrates imitated her in his Facultas Politica, as likewise Diotima,Diotima. whom he blushed not to call his Tutresse and Instructresse. Of Lasthenea, Mantinea, Axiothaea, and Phliasia (Platoes schollers in Philosophie) I haue before giuen a short Character. Themiste was the wife of Leonteius Lampsacenus,Themiste. and with her husband was the frequent Auditor of Epicurus: of whom Lactantius sayth, That saue her, none of the ancient Philosophers euer instructed any woman in that studie,Arete. saue that one Themiste. Arete was the wife of Aristippus the Philosopher, and attained to that perfection of knowledge, that shee instructed her sonne in all the liberall Arts, by whose industrie hee grew to be a famous professor. Hee was called Aristippus, and shee surnamed Cyrenaica.Cyrenaica. Shee followed the opinions of that Aristippus, who was father to Socrates. Shee (after the death of her father) erected a Schoole of Philosophie, where shee commonly read to a full and frequent Auditorie. Genebria was a woman of Verona,Genebria. shee liued in the time of Pius the second, Bishop of Rome: Her Workes purchased for her a name immortall. Shee composed many smooth and eloquent Epistles, polished both with high conceits and iudgement: shee pronounced with a sharpe and lowd voyce, a becomming gesture, and a facundious suauitie.Agallis. Agallis Corcyrua was illustrious in the Art of Grammar, Caelius ascribes vnto her the first inuention of the play at Ball. Leontium was a Grecian Damosell,Leontium. whom Gallius calls a strumpet, shee was so well seene in Philosophicall contemplations, that she feared not to write a worthie booke against the much worthie Theophrastus. Plin. in Prolog. Nat. Histor. Cicero, lib. de Natur. Deorum, D^m^,Dama. the daughter of Pythag^ras, imitated the steps of her father, as likewise his wife; The^no her husband,Theano. the mother and the daughter both prouing excellent schollers. Laer^. Themistoclea,Themistoclea the sister of Pythagoras, was so practised a student, that in many of his workes (as he himselfe confesseth) hee hath implored her aduise and iudgement. Istrina Queene of Scythia,Istrina. and wife to king Ari^ithes, instructed her sonne Sythes in the Greeke Tongue, as witnesseth Herodotus. Plutarch in Pericte saith, That Thargelia was a woman whom Philosophie solely illustrated:Thargelia. as likewise Hyparchia Greca, La^r^^ Cornelia was the wife of Africanus,Cornelia. and mother to the noble Familie of the Gracobi, who left behind her certaine Epistles most elaborately learned. From her as from a Fountaine, flowed the innate eloquence of her children, therefore Quintil* thus sayth of her: Wee are much bound to the Mother or Matron Cornelia* for the eloquence of the Gracchi

whose vnparaleld learning in her exquisite Epistles she hath bequeathed to posteritie. The same Author speaking of the daughters of Laelius and Quint. Hortensius vseth these words, The daughters of Laelius is sayd in her phrase to haue refined and excelled the eloquence of her father; but the daughter of Q. Hortensius to haue exce^ded her Sex in honor. So likewise the facundity of the two Lyciniaes flowed hereditarily from their father, L. Crassus, as the two daughters of Mutia inherited the learning of either parent.Fuluia. Fuluia the wife of M. Antonius was not instructed in womanish cares and offices, but as Volater. lib. 16. Antrop. reports of her, rather to direct Magistracies and gouerne Empires: she was first the wife of Curio. Statius Papinius was happie in a wife called Claudia,Claudia. excellent in all manner of learning.Amalasuntha. Amalasuntha Queene of the Ostrogothes, the daughter of Theodoricus king of those Ostrogothes in Italie, was elaborately practised in the Greeke and Latine Tongues, shee spake distinctly all the barbarous Languages that were vsed in the Easterne Empires. Fulgosius, lib. 8. cap. 7. ZenobiaZenobia. (as Volaterran. speakes from Pollio) was Queene of the Palmirians, who after the death of Odenatus gouerned the kingdome of Syria vnder the Roman Empire: shee was nominated amongst the thirtie Tyrants, and vsurped in the time of Gallenus; but after beeing vanquished in battaile by the Emperour Aurelianus, was led in triumph through Rome, but by the clemencie of that Prince, she was granted a free pallace scituate by the riuer of Tyber, where shee moderately and temperatly demeaned her selfe: shee is reported to be of that chastitie, that she neuer entertained her husband in the familiar societie of bed, but for issues sake and procreation of children, but not from the time that shee found her conception, till her deliuerie: shee vsed to bee adored after the maiesticke state and reuerence done to the great Sophies of Persia. Beeing called to the hearing of any publique Oration, shee still appeared with her head armed and her helmet on, in a purple mantle buckled vpon her with rich jems: she was of a cleare and shrill voice, magnanimous and haughtie in all her vndertakings, most expert in the Aegyptian and Greeke Tongues, and not without merit numbred amongst the most learned and wisest Queenes. Besides diuerse other workes, she composed the Orientall and Alexandrian Historie. Hermolaus and Timolus her two sonnes in all manner of disciplines shee liberally instructed, of whose deaths it is not certaine, whether they dyed by the course of nature, or by the violent hand of the Emperour. Olimpia Fuluia Morata was the ornament and glorie of our latter times,Olimpia Fulu. Morata. the daughter of Fulu. Moratus Mantuanus, who was tutor in the Arts to Anna, Prince of Ferrara, shee was the wife of Andreas Gunthlerus, a famous Physitian in Germanie; shee writ many learned and elaborate workes in either tongue; at length in the yeare of our Lord 1555 in the moneth of October, being of the age of twentie nine yeares she dyed in Hedelburgh. Saint H^lena may amongst these be here aptly registred,S. Helena. for thus Stow, Harding, Fa^ian, and all our moderne Chroniclers report of her: Constantius a great Roman Consull, was sent into Brittaine to demaund the tribute due vnto Rome; immediately after whose ariuall, before he could receiue an answer of his Embassie, Coill who was then king dyed, therefore the Brittaines the better to establish their peace, dealt with the Roman Embassador to take to wi^e Helen^, the daughter of the late deceased king, a young Ladie of an attractiue (...), adorned with rare gifts and indowments of the Mind, (...), Learning and Vert^^; the motion was no sooner made but accepted,

so that Constantius hauing receiued the Brittish tribute returned with his new bryde to Rome, and was after by the Senat constituted chiefe ruler of this kingdome. After twentie yeares quiet and peacefull gouernement (which was thought her wisedome) Constantius dyed and was buried at Yorke: in his time was Saint Albon martyred at Verolam, since called Saint Albones, as Iohn Lidgate Monke of Burie testifies, who in English heroicall verse compiled his Historie: Constantius (sayth hee) the younger succeeded his father Constantius, as well in the kingdome of England as diuers other Prouinces, a noble and valiant Prince, whose mother was a woman religious and of great sanctimonie; this young Prince was borne in Brittaine and prooued so mightie in exploits of warre, that in time hee purchased the name of Magnus, and was stiled Constantine the Great, a noble protector and defender of the true Christian Faith. In the sixt yeare of his raigne he came with a potent armie against Maxentius, who with greeous tributes and exactions then vexed and oppressed the Romans: and being vpon his march, hee saw in a Vision by night, the signe of the Crosse shining in the Ayre like fire, and an Angell by it, thus saying, Constantine in hoc signo vinces, i. Constantine in this signe thou shalt conquer and ouercome; with which beeing greatly comforted, be soone after inuaded and defeated the armie of Maxentius, who flying from the battaile was wretchedly drowned in the riuer Tiber. In this interim of his glorious victorie Helena the mother of Constantine being on pilgrimage at Ierusalem, there found the Crosse on which the Sauiour of the world was crucified, with the three nayles with which his hands and feete were pierced. Ranulphus amplifies this storie of Helena, somewhat largelier after this manner, That when Constantine had surprised Maxentius, his mother was then in Brittaine, and hearing of the successe of so braue a conquest, shee sent him a letter, with great thankes to heauen, to congratulate so faire and wished a Fortune; but not yet being truely instructed in the Christian Faith, she commended him that he had forsaken idolatrie, but blamed him that hee worshipped and beleeued in a man that had beene nayled to the Crosse. The Emperour wrote againe to his mother, That she should instantly repaire to Rome, and bring with her the most learned Iews and wisest Doctors, of what faith or beleefe so euer, to hold disputation in their presence concerning the Truth of religion. Helena brought with her to the number of seuenscore Iewes and others, against whom Saint Siluester was only opposed. In this controuersie the misbeleeuers were all nonplust and put to silence. It hapned that a Iewish Cabalist among them spake certain words in the eare of a mad wild Bull that was broke loose and run into the presence where they were then assembled; those words were no sooner vttered but the beast sunck down without motion and instantly dyed, at which accident the iudges that sat to heare the disputation, were all astonished, as wondering by what power that was done. To whom Siluester then spake, What this man hath done is onely by the power of the deuill, who can kill but not restore vnto life, but it is God onely that can slay and make the same bodie reuiue againe; so Lyons and other wilde beasts of the Forrest can wound and destroy, but not make whole what is before by them perished: then (saith hee) if hee will that I beleeue with him, let him rayse that beast to life in Gods name, which hee hath destroyed in the Deuils name. But the Iewish Doctor attempted it in vaine, when the rest turning to Siluester, said, If thou by any power in Heauen or Earth canst call backe

againe the life of this beast which is now banished from his bodie, wee will beleeue with thee in that Deitie, by whose power so great a miracle can be done. Siluester accepted of their offer, and falling deuoutly on his knees, made his prayers vnto the Sauiour of the world, when presently the beast started vp vpon his feete; by which Constantius was confirmed, Helena conuerted, and all the Iewes and other Pagan Doctors receiued the Christian Faith, and were after baptised: and after this, and vpon the same occasion, Helena vndertooke to seeke and find out the Crosse. Ambrose and others say she was an Inne-keepers daughter at Treuerent in France, and that the first Constantius trauailing that way, married her for her beautie; but our Histories of Brittaine affirme her to be the faire, chast, and wise daughter of king Coil, before remembred. The perfections of the minde are much aboue the transitorie gifts of Fortune, much commendable in women, and a Dowrie farre transcending the riches of Gold and Iewels. Great Alexander refused the beautifull daughter of Darius, who would haue brought with her kingdomes for her Dower, and infinite Treasures to boot, and made choyse of Barsine,Barsine. who brought nothing to espouse her with, saue her feature, and that shee was a Scholler; and though a Barbarian, excellently perfect in the Greeke Tongue, who though poore, notwithstanding deriued her pedigree from kings: And vpon that ground, Licurgus instituted a Law, That women should haue no Dowers allotted them, that men might rather acquire after their Vertues than their Riches, and women likewise might the more laboriously imploy themselues in the attaining to the height of the best and noblest Disciplines. It is an argument that cannot be too much amplified, to encourage Vertue and discourage Vice, to persuade both men and women to instruct their Mindes more carefully than they would adorne their Bodies, and striue to heape and accumulate the riches of the Soule, rather than hunt after Pompe, Vaine-glorie, and the wretched Wealth of the world; the first being euerlastingly permament, the last, dayly and hourely subiect to corruption and mutabilitie. Horace in his first Epistle to Mecaenas sayth:
Vitius Argentum est Auro, virtutibus Aurum.
Siluer is more base and cheape than Gold, and Gold than Vertue.
To encourage which in either Sex, Plautus in Amphit. thus sayes:
Virtus praemium est optimum, virtus omnibusRebus anteit profecto, etc.
Vertue's the best reward, and before allIustly to be preferr'd. That which we callLibertie, Life, our Parents, Children Wealth,Our Countrey, Reputation, Honor, Health,By this are kept (though by the bad despis'd),,All that is good, in Vertue is compris'd.
Moreouer, all that are Noble, Vertuous, Learned, Chast, and Pious, haue their places allotted them aboue; when on the contrarie, their soules are buried lower in the locall place of torment, than their soules that are hayd to sleepe in the graue. At the blessednesse of the good, and future

glorie assigned vnto them, Lucan most elegantly aymed at, Lib. 9. de Bello Ciuili, where hee thus writes:
Ac non in Pharia manes iacuere fauilla,Nec cinis exiguus tantam compescuit vmbram, etc.
Which I thus English:
In th' Pharian flames, the bright Soule doth not sleepe,Nor can so small a Dust and Ashes keepeSo great a Spirit: it leapes out of the fire,And leauing th'halfe-burnt members, doth aspireAnd aymes vp to the place where Ioue resides,And with his power and wisdome all things guides.For now no ayre his subtile passage barres,To where the Axle-tree turnes round the starres,And in that vast and emptie place which lyesBetwixt vs and the Moone (the visible Skyes)Th' halfe-godded Soules inhabite: such are nam'dThere, whom bright fierie Vertue hath inflam'd,And were of pious life: their hopes are faire,Made Citizens and Free-men of the Aire,And such redeem'd from all that was infected,Are now within th'eternall Orbes collected.
This somewhat more illustrated by the Tragicke Poet Seneca in Hercule Oeteo, thus saying:
Nunquam Stigias fertur ad vndasInclita Virtus, etc.
To the darke and Stigian shades,Vertue (when it seeming fades)Is neuer borne. Then, O you chastAnd valiant, though your yeeres may wast,No limit (Time) to that can giue,It Death suruiues; then euer liue.The cruell Fates can clayme no due,Nor the blacke Stigian waues in you:But when wasted Age hath spentThe vtmost minute Time hath lent,Then Glorie takes in charge the Spirit,And guides it to the place of Merit.
Let these serue for an encouragement to Vertue, and the attayning vnto all commendable Arts and Disciplines, by which the Bodie is honoured, and the Soule glorified. And thus I take leaue of the Female Students in Theologie and Philosophie, and now consequently come to the Poetesses: may the Muses be fauourable to me in their relation.



Of Poetrie.
Horace sayth, Et prodesse solent and delectare Poetae, In Poets there is both pleasure and profit, who are for the most part (I meane the best) studious for the pleasingest phrase and most moouing eloquence. From hence it grew that those of the first age, first introduced common ciuilitie, and humane moralitie amongst men, reducing them from irregular and bruitish conditions, into a mutuall and well gouerned societie: for by pleasant and delightfull language refined from the vulgar Barbarisme, they first drew the eares of the ruder people to attention, from attention to instruction, and by instruction to practise; so that in processe of time, by their smooth and gentle persuasions, illustrated with facunditie and eloquence, they brought them from voluptuousnesse to temperance, from the fields into houses, from liuing in villages to build walled cities, and by degrees from edifying of houses for themselues, to erect Temples to the gods; by whose adoration it impressed a reuerent feare to offend them: and so consequently reduced them from rudenesse to a more formall regularitie. They were the first that taught them shame, and feare; shame, to seeme bruitish to humanitie; feare, to appeare inhumane before a deitie. They moderated the ferocitie of their mindes, by smooth orations, profitable documents, and learned writings; and the more to insinuate into their dull vnderstanding, when prose seemed vnto them lesse delightfull, they deuised verse, and still as one kind grew stale or common they apprehended new; and thus that eloquence that before lay loose and skattered, was first contracted within feet and number. Then when the vulgar seemed lesse capable of deepe Sophismes tending to moralitie and ciuile gouernement, and therfore their grauer doctrines appeared to their eares harsh and vnpleasant, they dealt with them as carefull fathers vse to doe with their vntoward children; when things profitable will not still them, they seeke to please them with toyes; so the Poets, when wholesome foode would not tast their mouths, they deuised sweet meates to realish their pallats, finding out merrie and delightfull tales, best agreeable with their itching eares: comprehending notwithstanding, golden truths in leaden fables. They after instituted good and wholesome laws, to incourage the good, and deiect the bad, to raise the vertuous and well disposed to honor, and to punish the euill doer either with pennance or shame: then came the industrious man to bee first distinguished from the sloathfull, and the thriftie from the prodigall: things were no more made common, euerie man eate of his owne labour, and what he earned he might call his owne: Hence first grew Industrie, without which no common-weale nor publike state can stand. And these and much greater were the first fruits of Poetrie, now in this age so much despised; the vse whereof was antient, the apprehension diuine, the practise commendable, and the name reuerent. There is a sympathie and correspondence betwixt Poetrie and Rhetoricke: Appollo is god of the first, and Mercurie the Mecenas of the second; which the ancient writers the better to signifie vnto vs, say, That Apollo acquainted Mercurie with the Muses, and Mercurie in requitall first inuented the Harpe and gaue it to Apollo, being the instrument to which the Muses most delighted to sing; as if they more plainely would

haue sayd, A Poet cannot be excellent vnlesse he be a good Rhetorician, nor any Rhetorician attaine to the heigth of eloquence, vnlesse he hath first layd his foundation in Poetrie. They are two excellencies, that cannot well exist one without the other: Poetrie is the elder brother, and more plaine in his condition; Rhetorick the younger, but more craftie in his profession: hence it comes Poets are so poore, and Lawyers so rich; for they haue made a younger brother of the elder, and possesse all the land. Besides, as much as Apollo is excellent aboue Mercurie, as being God of Light, of Musicke, of Physicke, of Arts, etc. and the other God of Bargaining, Buying, Selling, of Cousening, Theeuing, and of Lyes; so farre doth the first claime due prioritie aboue the second. They may be thus distinguished: Poets in that which outwardly appeares fabulous, colour and shaddow golden truths, to their owne painefull studies and labour, and to the pleasure and profit of others: But many Orators, vnder seeming truths, apparrell scandalous fictions, aymed onely to their owne benefit, to the impouerishing of others, and many times stripping them out of a faire inheritance: I speake of some, not all; and I honour the Law, because I liue vnder it. Poets, they were the first teachers and instructers; the people held them to bee inspired from aboue, and to speake as from the mouthes of the gods: some were Holy, as Ennius; some Diuine, as Homer; others Prophets, as hauing the name of Vates conferred vpon them: and amongst these, may bee numbred the Sybills, the Priests of Apollo, and such as belonged to all the other Oracles. Of the Poets there were many sorts, and such as writ in diuerse kinds, yet all these imitated at least (if not equalled) by women. There were such as were called Physiologi, that Poetised in Physicke, as Palephatus Atheniensis, Pronopides, Xenophanes, Coliph^nius, and others; there were Poetae Mathematici, that writ of the Mathematickes, as Ma. Manilius, Thales Milesius, Aratus, Solensis, etc. Poetae Medici, as Thaletas Cretenses, Damocrates, Seruilius, Andromachus Cretensis, etc. Poetae Vates, or Prophets, as Moyses, Dauid, Hieremias, Isaiah, etc. Poetae Theologi, as Salomon, Dantes, Alegerius Florentinus; and amongst the Heathens, Linus Chalcedensis, Pyerius, Thamyras, Amphion, Orpheus, etc. There are besides Ethici, Impudici, Historici, Mechanici, Epici, Heroici, Eliogeographaei, Satyrici, Epigrammatographi, Comici, Tragici, Mimographi, Histrionici, Melopaei, Lyrici, Mel^fi, Iambici, Himnographi: and amongst these, not any whom some ingenious women, in one age or other, hath not facetiously imitated. I am loath to dwell too long in the Proeme, I will now giue you their names, with a particular of their workes, who haue beene in many or most of these eminent.


Poetriae, or Women Poets.
Of the Sybills, the Muses, Priests, and Prophetesses (included amongst those whom wee called Vates) I haue alreadie spoken at large; I now proceed to others.Theanae tres Theano Locrensis was so called, as borne in the citie of Locris: she writ Hymnes and Lyrick Songs; she was also a Musicall Poetesse, such as were called Melicae. There was a second of that name, the wife of Pithagoras, a Poetesse; besides a third, called Thuria or Metapontina, daughter of the Poet Lycophron,Nicostrata, or Carmentis. a Pythagorist, and wife of Caristius, or Brantinus Crotoniata, Teste Suida. Nicostrata was otherwise called Carmentis, skilfull

both in the Greeke and Latine Dialect; of a quicke and nimble wit, and conuersant in diuerse kinds of Learning. Sulpitia liued in the time of the Emperour Domitianus, her husbands name was Galenus, or Gadenus, with whom shee liued in most conioyned wedlocke for the space of fifteene yeeres. Some fragments of her Poetrie I haue read, inserted amongst the Workes of Ausonius. Of her, Martial in one of his Epigrams, Lib. 10. thus writes:
Oh molles tibi quindecim CaleneQuos cum Sulpitia tua ingalesIndulsit Deus and peregit annos, etc.
O those soft fifteene yeeres, so sweetly past,Which thou Calenus with Sulpitia hastIn iugall consocietie (no doubtA time by the Gods fauoured, and pickt out)O euerie Night, nay Houre, mark'd by thy handWith some rich stone, fetcht from the Indian strand,What warres, what combats haue betwixt you beene(But to your Bed, and Lampe) not knowne or seeneOf any. Happie Bed, and Tapers grace,Made of sweet Oyles, whose smoake perfumes the place.Thrice fiue yeeres thou hast liu'd (Calenus) thus,Reckoning by that account thine Age to vs:So to compute thy yeeres, is thy great'st pride,No longer to haue liu'd than with thy Bride.Were Atropos at thy entreats contentTo giue thee backe one day so sweetly spent,Thou at a higher rate would'st prise that one,Than foure times Nestors Age, to liue alone.
This Epigram hath expressed the loue of Calenus to Sulpitia, the husband to the wife: but in 35. of the same booke, her pious Loue, chast Muse, and Beautie, the same Author hath most elegantly illustrated, his words be these,
Omnes Sulpitiam legant puellaeVno quae cupiunt viro placere,Omnes Sulpitiam legant mariti,Vnae qui cupiunt placere nuptae, etc.
All women reade Sulpitia, such as can,In their desires betake them to one man;All husbands reade Sulpitia, such whose lifeCan be contented with one single wife.Shee neuer spake of mad Medeas sinne,Nor why Thyestes Banquet was seru'd in;It neuer with her pure thoughts could agree,A Scilla or a Biblis there could bee:Sa^e chast and pious Loues she did not write,Yet mixt with modest pleasures and delight.Her Verses who shall reade, and reade againe,And sift them well, shall find them without staine.Such were the words diuine Egeria spake(The wife of Numa) when shee did betakeHer selfe to sollitude. Had Sapho beeneTutor'd by her, her Poems read and seene,More chast sh' had beene, with greater Art endu'd:Or had rude Phaon these together view'd,And both their beauties well obseru'd and noted;He that left her, had on Sulpitia doted, etc.
Michaele.Seneca speakes of one Michaele, a shee Centaure, who in an Elegant Poem instructed the Thessalians in the Remedie of Loue, whom Ouid in his Remedium Amoris is said to haue imitated. Aristophanes (as also Suidas) speake of one Charixena,Charixena. the Author of many excellent Workes: amongst others, shee writ a Poeme, called Crumata.Musaea. Caelius, Lib. 8. cap. 1. speakes of Musaea an Epigrammatist, in which kind shee was eminent; besides shee composed sundrie Lyrickes. Textor remembers vs of one Moeroe,Moeroe. who (besides her other Workes) is most celebrated for a Hymne to Neptune.Manto. Manto was the daughter of Tyresia, the Prophetesse; of her, the famous cittie Mantua tooke name: shee was not onely a Poetesse, but famous for her Diuinations, for by the entrailes of beasts shee could predict and fore-tell things to come. Textor. Cornificia was the sister of the Poet Cornificius,Cornificia. and famous for many excellent Epigrams.Luccia Mima. Luccia Mima (as Plinie reports of her) was a writer of Comedies, in which practise shee continued no lesse than an hundred yeeres. Amongst the Poets,Cassandra. Cassandra the Prophetesse (daughter to Priam and Hecuba) is also numbred. Archilas Hermonaicus (as Camelion saith) writes of a Poetesse called Megalostrate,Megalos^rate. beloued of the Poet Alcman, hee that first deuised the amatorious Verse, in which was expressed all lasciuious intemperance (which some attribute to Thamyris, as their first inuentor:) shee, Amatores vel ipsis colloquijs ad se trahere potuit, i. Shee with her verie discourse could attract louers: shee was tearmed Flana Megalostrate. Athenae. Lib. 13. cap. 16.Polla Argentaria. Polla Argentaria was wife to the famous Poet Lucan, and hath a merited place in this Catalogue; of whom Martial thus speakes:
Haec est illa dies, quae magni conscia partusLucanum populis, and tibi Polla dedit.
This day of that great birth made conscious is,Which gaue him to the world, and made thee his.
Shee was reputed to be of that excellent learning, that shee assisted her husband in the three first bookes, entituled Pharsali^. Her, Statius, Lib. 2. Sylu. thus remembers:
Haec Castae titulum decusque Polla.
Shee likewise writ excellent Epigrams. As much as Sta^ius of her, Plin. Secundus speakes of his wife Calphurnia.Calphurnia. Fulgos. Lib. 8. cap. 3. Aspasia Milesia, the beloned of Pericles,Aspasia Milesia. as shee was otherwise learned, shee is likewise numbred amongst the Poets; some of whose Verses are remembred by Athenaeus.

Hedyle was the mother of Hedylogus Samius (who by the same Athenaeus,Hedyle. Lib. 4. Dypnoph. hath allotted him a place amongst the Poets) shee was the daughter of Moschina Attica,Moschina. that writ Iambickes. This Hedyle composed a Poeme, inscribed Scilla; shee made another, called, The Loues of Glaucus. Sosipatra (as Eugapius apud Volaterran. relates) was a woman practised in many kinds of Disciplines,Sosipatra. and so excellent in all her studies, that shee was said to be educated by the gods.Thymele. Thymele was a Poetesse that first introduced Dances into the Scene, which the Greekes from her call (...), i. The place which is onely free for the Actors. Of her, Martial thus speakes:
Quae Thymele spectas derisoremque Latinum.
Suidas writes, That Thymele was an Altar frequently vsed in the Theatres, which from her borrowed the name.Hyldegardis Hildegardis Moguntina was eminent both for Learning and Pietie; insomuch, that from her verie childhood shee seemed inspired from aboue. Eugenius the third, in the Councell held at Tryer (where Doctor Bernard was then present) approoued her Workes: shee flourisht in the yeere of Grace, 1188. Of Clitagora Lacedemonia,Clitagora. Aristophanes speakes much;Hesteia. but Strabo in Homerica Iliade, more of Hesteia Alexandria. Auyle writ Epigrams against Themistocles,Auyle. with Verses vpon Birds, which are read vnto this day.Myrtis Anthedonia. Myrtis Authedonia in a Poeme expressed the death of the Damosell Ochne, who had beene before the destruction of the Heroe Ennostus. Praxilla Syconia flourished in the 32 Olympiad,Praxilla Siconia. whom Antipater Thessalus giues the first place vnto amongst the nine Lyricke Poets: Shee writ Dithycambi, and a Worke which was called by her Metrum Praxillium. Shee called Adonis from Hell, to demand of him what was most beautifull in Heauen: who answered, The Sunne, the Moone, Figges, Apples, and Cucumbers: That and such like was the subiect of her Poeme; of which grew a Prouerbe against Lunatikes and mad men, euery such was called Praxillaes Adonis.Nossis. Nossis the Poetresse was the composer of Greeke Epigrams, and is by Antipater numbred with Praxilla amongst the Lyrickes. Myro Byzantia shee writ Elegies,Myro Byzantia. and such as the Greekes call Melae, or Musicall Poemes: shee is said to be the mother of Homer, and reckoned one of the seuen Pleiades, the daughters of Atlas: shee was the wife of Andromachus, an illustrious Philosopher. Pamphilus her Statue was erected, which (as Facianus witnesseth) was made by Cephisiodotus. Damophila was the wife of the Philosopher:Damophila shee was a friend to Sapho, and louer, whom in all her Poemes shee striued to imitate. Her Hymnes were sung at the sacrifices which were celebrated to Diana Pergaea, after the manner of the Aeolians and Pamphilians. Shee writ moreouer certaine bookes, which shee titled, Libri Amatorij.

Of Minerua, etc.
MInerua,Minerua. the daughter of Iupiter, was for no other reason numbred amongst the gods, but for her excellencie and cunning in Poetrie and other good Arts, of which shee is said to be the first inuentresse. From her the antient Athenians haue borrowed the immortalitie of their name. Next her, wee reckon the Corinnaes.Corinnae tres. There were three of that name: The first, called Corinna Thebana, or Tanagraea; shee was the daughter of Archelodorus and Procratia,Megalostrata Poetria Athenaeus, lib. 13. cap. 16. and scholler to Myrtis: shee in seuerall contentions fiue sundrie times bore away the Palme from Pindarus, Prince of the Lyricke

Poets: shee moreouer published fiue bookes of Epigrams: of her Propertius speakes. The second was called Corinna Thespia, shee is much celebrated in the bookes of the antient Poets,Lib. 3. Silu. especially by Statius. The third liued in the time of Augustus, and was to Ouid much indeered: but of her wantonnesse than her Muse, there is more memorie extant. I come to speake next of Erinna who was sirnamed Teia,Erinna. or (as some will hane it) Telia of the Island Telos not farre distant from Gnidon, shee flourished in the time of Dion of Syracusa, and published an excellent Poem in the Doricke tongue, comprised in three hundred Verses, besides diuerse other Epigrams, her stile was sayd to come neere the maiestie of Homers,Proper. lib. 2. she dyed when she was but ninteene yeares of age.Damophila. Damophila was a Greeke Poetesse and the wife of Pamphilus. shee was Cousin-german and companion with Sapho, Lyrica Poetria, shee writ many Poems that were called Poemata Amatoria, because their argument was meerely of loue: one Poem shee writ in the praise of Diana, for so much Theophrastus in the life of Appolonius remembers of her. Hyppatia was a woman of Alexandria,Hyppatia. the daughter of Theon the Geometritian, and wife to Isidorus the Philosopher, shee flourished in the time of the Emperour Arcadius, shee writ certaine bookes of Astronomie, and was frequent in diuerse kinds of Poetrie: shee purchased her selfe much fame for her learning, in so much that shee ingrossed a great confluence of Auditors in the citie of Alexandria where she professed, Suidas apud Volaterran.


Sapho.
Elian. lib. 12.ELianus affirmes her to be the daughter of Scamandronius; Plato,Plato. of Ariston; Suidas and other Greeke writers deliuer to vs that there were two of that name,Suidas. the one called Erixia, a much celebrated Poetesse) who flourished in the time of the Poet Alcaeus, of Pittachus, and Tarquinius Priscus) who first deuised the vse of the Lyre or Harpe with a quill; some giue her the honor to bee the inuentor of the Lyricke verse: the other was called Sapho Mitelaena long after her who was a singer and a strumpet, shee published many rare and famous Poems amongst the Greekes, and therefore had the honour to bee called the tenth Muse, the reason why she fell in loue with Phaon, Pliny attributes to the vertue of an hearbe,Plin. lib. 23. Bablist. Egnat. but Babtista Egnatius a later writer and exquisite both in the Greeke and Latin tongues, in trasferring this fable from the originall into the Romon tongue, as likewise others of his opinion, conclude, that Phaon was of the profession of such as get their liuing by transporting passengers from one side of a riuer vnto another, a plaine Ferrie-man, and that it happened vpon a time that Venus comming to the place where he kept his passage, without demaunding any hyre he gaue her a free transportage, not knowing to whom it was hee did that courtesie, no way suspecting she had beene a goddesse: This, Venus tooke so gratefully, that shee thought to requite his freenesse, with a bountie farre transcending the value of his paines. Shee therefore gaue him an Alablaster box full of a most pretious vnguent (teaching him how to apply it) with which he no sooner annoynted his face, but hee instantly became of all mortall creatures the most beautiful, of whom the Lesbian damsels grew inamoured, but espesially hee was ardently and most affectionately beloued of Sapho. Phaon hauing occation to passe from Lesbos into Cicilie, shee was tortured in soule for his absence, intimating that it was done in despight

or disgrace of her; first purposed to cast herselfe from Leucate, a high promontorie in Epyre, downe into the Sea, which she after did; yet before she would attempt it, she first in an Epistle thought by all the allurements of a womans wit, to call him backe againe into his countrey; which Ouid in her behalfe most feelingly hath exprest. And since it lies so fitly in my way for the opening of the Historie, I thus giue it English,
Ecquid vt aspecta est, etc.Ouid. Epist. Sapho Phaoni.Ist possible as soone as thou shalt seeMy charracter, thou knowst it comes from mee?Or else not reading of the authors name,Could'st thou haue knowne from whence this short worke came?Perhapes thou maist demand, Why in this vaineI court thee, that professe the Lyricke straine?My lou's to be bewept, and that's the reason:No Barbitos, id est, Carmen Lyricum. Barbit number suits this tragicke season.I burne as doth the corne-fields set on fire,When the rough East winds still blow high and higher,Now Phaon the Typhoean fields are thine,But greater flames than Aetnaes are now mine.No true disposed numbers flow from hence,(The emptie worke of a distracted sence.)The Pirhian gyrle, nor the Methimnian lasseNow please me; not the Lesbians who surpasse.Vil's Amithon, vile Cidno too, the faire,So Atthis that did once appeare most rare,And hundreds more, with whom my sinn's not small:Wretch, thou alone inioyest the loues of all.Thou hast a face, and youth too, fit for play,Oh tempting face that did'st mine eyes betray.Take Phoebus Faith vpon thee, and his bow,And from Apollo who can Phaon know?Take hornes, and 'bout thy temples wreaths of vine,What's he can say but th'art the god of Wine?Phoebus lou'd Daphne, Bacchus Gnosis bright,Yet neither she, nor she, could Lyrickes write.The nine Muse-sisters of my verse dispose,And what my numbers are the whole world knowes,Nor can my countrey-man Alcaeus moreAlcae^s, a Lyrick Poet of Mitelene.Than I, though he in age stand rank't before:Nor though his name sound louder, can he raiseOr from his Lyre, or Country, greater praise.If niggard Nature haue denide things fit,Yet what I want in shape, I haue in wit:My statur's low, but know my name is high,And bruited through all regions farre and nigh.I am not faire, what therein doe I lacke?Andromida pleas'd Perfeus, yet she blacke.The whitest Doues with mingled colours make,And the blacke Turtle will the Greene-bird take.If none can be thought worthie of thy loue,But such as shall thy like in beautie proue,Young man despaire, thou art for euer free,None such ere was, none such shall euer bee.When first thou readst my Verses, thou didst sayI onely pleas'd, and I was faire that way,That I became my phrase (and none so well)Then did I sing (wee louers, all must tell;)And I remember, thou ('tis still my pride)At euery Note didst on my lippes diuide.Nay, euen those kisses pleas'd thee wondrous well.But most of all, when I beneath thee fell,My wantonnesse contented thee 'boue measure,My nimble motion, and words apt for pleasure.Then when in confus'd rapture we both lay,Fulnesse of ioy depriu'd all vse of pla^.Now the Sicilian girles are thy new spoyle,Ile be of them, and leaue the Lesbian sayle.You Nisea, a mounta^nous countrey neere Aetna. Nisean mothers, and faire daughters, bredIn Sicilie: let him be banishedFrom forth your earth, nor let the many LyesThe smoothnesse of his false tongue can deuise,Beguile your simple truth; what to you ^eSpeaks now, h'hath spoke a thousand times to me.And goddesse Venus called so of Erix, a mountaine in Sicilie, where shee had a famous Temple. Erecina, thou that do'stThe barbarous rude Sicania honor most,Aduise thy Poetesse by thy wit diuine,And giue me counsell, since thou know'st I am thine.Can Fortune in this bitter course still run?Vowes she to end those Ills she hath begun?Six yeeres are past, since my aborti^e gr^nesMourn'd, and my teares wet my dead parents bones.My needie Chor^xus, who doted on the famous strumpet Rhodop^^ whome hee bought of Aesopus for a great summe of money. brother (as a second crosse)Dotes on a strumpet, suff'ring shame with losse,Turn'd Pyrate, prooues the Seas with sayle and oare,And badly seekes wealth, lost as ill before.Because my faithfull counsaile (that course rated)My guerdon is, that I by him am hated.And least my endlesse torments should find ease,My yong irregular Cl^is, a wanto^ daughter to Sap^o. daughter addes to these:The last and great'st cause why I thus miscarrie,Thou art; my Barke still sayles with winds contrari^.Behold my erst well-ord'red Locks mis-plac'd,And those that in times past my temples grac'd,Neglected are, as if they were not mine^No precious gemmes vpon my fingers shine:My habit's vile, my haire no Crispin weares,Nor smell my Locks of sweet Arabian The teares of Mirrha, with which they vsed to perfume their haire. teares.Whom should I seeke to please, since ^ee's absent,That was sole author of mine ornament?My soft heart is with easie shafts imprest.There's still new cause to lodge loue in my brest,Either because the Sisters three, had force,When I was borne, to spin my thread so course;Or this, my studies in the Arts constraine,Since soft Thalia doth infuse my braine.What wonder if a youth of the first chinneSurprise me? yeres which man to man might winne.I was afraid least faire Aurora thouFor Cephalus would'st steale him, and I nowAm still in feare, for surely this had past,But that thy first loue holds thee still so fast.If Phoebus (that spyes all things) thee had seene,Phaon in lasting slumbers cast had beene.Venus had rapt him into heauen by this,But that she fear'd Mars would haue made him his.Thou, that no child, and yet scarce man appeares,(Best age) the pride and glorie of thy yeares,Returne v^to my bosome, since of theeI beg not loue, but that thou lou'd would'st bee.Lo as I write, teares from mine eyes amaineStill drop, behold how they my paper staine.Thy parting had beene gentler (in words few)Had'st thou but sayd, Sweet Lesbian lasse adue.Thou took'st with thee no parting kisse, no teares,I little dream't I was so neere my feares.Of thine, saue wrong, I nothing haue, no moreThou (let that mooue thee) all my loue dost store:I gaue thee no command, nor had that day,Vnlesse some such, Do not forget me pray.By Loue that neuer can forsake that brest,By our nine sacred sisters I protest^He's gone, when some (but who I know not) sayd,For a long space both words and teares were stayd,Mine eyes had banish't teares, and greefe my tongue,Through cold, my heart vnto my ribs was clung.(My greefe retyr'd) I ga^ to beat my brest,To teare my haire, nor blush to walke vndrest;Like carefull mothers, who with loude exclaimesBeare their dead children to their funerall flames-Charaxus walkes by lang hing too and fro,And from my extasie his pleasures grow,And (which more shame vnto my sorrow giues)Askes why this woman weepes, her daughter liues?But Shame and Loue are two, the people stareTo see my garments torne and brests vnbare,Thou Phaon art my care, and my dreames stay,Thee fled (you dreames that haue made night my day)I find thee there, though absent many a mile,But o, my dreames last but a little while.Oft thinke I that thy armes my necke infold,As likewise these two are with thine like bold.I know thy kisses, thy tongue-sport I know,Which thou wast wont to take, and to bestow.More pleas'd sometimes, words (like to truth) I spake,And to thy forme, my sences are awake.What's more, I shame to tell, and blush to write,Dreaming all done, may perfect our delight.No sooner Titan dons his golden beames,And with them all things sees, I curse my Dreames:Desarts and Dennes I then seeke, as if theyCould profit me (once guiltie of our play)Madly, like her whom mad Erictho beares,I thither runne, my haires falne 'bout mine eares.I see the Cauernes with rough Grauell strew'd,To me they like Mygdonian Marble shew'd.The shades I find, that gaue vs oft our rest,And friendly Herbage, by our burthens prest.Thee (maister of those Groues and me) no placeCan shew me, therefore they appeare most base.I knew the very flowers where wee haue line,Our weights haue made their vpright heads decline:Where thou hast falne, I threw me in that place,But first the gratefull flowers drinke from my face.The boughes despoyl'd, a sadnesse seeme to bring,And on their top-most branches no birds sing,Onely the Philomela. Daulian hird her discontentsChaunts out aloud, and Itis still laments;Itis the bird laments, Sapho, th'affrightOf Loue forsaken: so we spend the night.There is a perfect, cleare, and Glasse-like Well,Sacred, and where some thinkes the gods doe dwell,O're which the watrie Lothos, the daughter of Neptune, turned into a Tree, so called. Lotos spreads her bowes,The ground a soft and gentle Turfe allowes.Here as I lay to rest me (drown'd in teares)One of the Nayades before m' appeares,And standing, thus spake: Thou that scortcht do'st lye,In flames vnequall, to Ambracia, a citie in Epire, so called of king Ambraces. Ambracia flye;Hence Phoebus from on high surueyes the Sea,Some, Actium calls the place, some Leucate.Deucalion from this Rocke his Pyrha craues(First seene) and she (vndanger'd) proues the waues.Here Pyrha prostitutes to his desires.Deucalion here first quencht his amorous fires.The place the same law keepes: climbe Leucats crowne,And from that high Rocke feare not to leape downe.This spoke, she vanisht: I affrighted rise,Whilest my wet cheekes are moistned by mine eyes.Thither let's run Nymphs, till that Rocke appeare,From Loue distracted we should banish feare.Proue how it can, much better than you seeIt hath yet chanc'd, it needs must fall to mee.And gentle Loue, to me thy feathers lend,Still to support me, as I shall descend,Least being dead, by my vntimely fall,Leucadia for my sake be curst of all.Then Phoebus, Ile bequeath into thine handMy Harpe, and by it shall this Distick stand:Sapho, thy gratefull Poetesse, doth assigneThis Lyre to thee, being hers as well as thine.Why do'st thou send me to Actia hence,When thou may'st call thy exil'd foole from thence?Safer to me, than can those waters proue,Thou mayest, so Phoebus did he Sapho loue.Canst thou (O harder than the Rocks obdure)It should be said, Thou didst my death procure?Thy Sapho's ruine? O, how better farreWere it these breasts, that now dis-ioyned are,Should friendly meet, and mutually please,Than mine alone be swallow'd in the Seas?These are the breasts thou Phaon once didst prayse,Which seene, they fire did from thy coldnesse rayse.O would I were as eloquent as then,But sorrow takes all fluence from my Pen,So might my braine haue euerie ill withstood:But now my passion makes nothing seeme good.My Verse is of her first power destitute,Silent's my Quill, my Harpe with sorrow mute.You Lesbian Matrons, and you Lesbian young,Whose names haue to my Lyre beene oft times sung.You for whose loues my fame hath suffred wrong,No more in troopes vnto my Musicke throng,Phaon hath stole all that you nam'd Diuine,I was (O wretch) about to call him mine.Make him returne, my Muse shall then retire,He dulls my wits, or can my braine inspire.Can prayers preuaile? or such a stubborne mindBe softened, or made rougher? Shall the windDisperse my words, as meerely spoke in vaine?Would the same winds could bring thee backe againe,That mocke my sighes, and make thy sayles to swell,It were a worke that would become thee well.If so thou mean'st, why do'st thou keepe awayFrom all those vow'd gifts that thy comming stay?Why do'st thou with thy absence my breast teare?Loose from the Hauen, set sayle, and doe not steare,Shee's Sea-borne Venus call'd, and therefore stillShee makes the waues calme to a louers will,The gracious winds shall in thy course preuayle,And bring thee safe when thou ar^ vnder sayle,Euen Cupid at the Helme shall sit and steare,He shall direct which way thy course to beare,If so thou please thy Sapho shun'd must be,Yet thou shalt find there's no iust cause in me:At least, thy cruell answer she now craues,To end her fate in the Leucadian waues.
From that Rocke, shee cast her selfe headlong into the Sea, and so perished. For preposterous and forbidden Luxuries which were imputed vnto her, Horace calls her Mascula Sapho; yet many are of opinion, this to be the same whom Plato tearmes the Wise: of her, Antipater Sydonius thus writes;
Dulcia Mnemosine demirans carmina SaphusQuesierit decima Pyeris vnde foret.
Mnemosine,
When Sapho's Verse she did admiring reed,Demanded whence the tenth Muse did proceed.
As likewise Ausonius:
Lesbia Pyerijs Sapho soror addita Musis.
i. Lesbian Sapho, a Sister added to the Pyerian Muses. Her, Papinius and Horace, with many others, celebrate.


Of Cleobule Lindia, and other Poetesses.
SHee was the daughter of Cleobulus Lindius, one of the seuen wise men of Greece; shee was called also Eumite, and Cleobulina:Cleobulina, or Eumite. in her writing, shee imitated her father. Shee was eminent for Aenigmaes, and Riddles; of which, this one is redeemed from obliuion, and remembred of her:
Est vnus genitor, cui vni sunt pignora bis sex,His quoque triginta natae, sed dispare formaHae niuiae aspectu, nigris sunt vultibus illae,Sunt immortales omnes, moriuntur and omnes.
One father hath twelue children, great and small,They beget thirtie daughters, vnlike all,Halfe of them white, halfe blacke, immortall made,And yet we see how euerie houre they fade.
Helpis.Helpis was wife of the famous Philosopher and Poet Boethius Seuerinus, a Roman Patrician; shee was by Nation a Sicilian, of an elegant wit and capacious inuention. Many of her Hymnes to the Apostles are yet extant: one began, Aurea Luce; another, Foelix per omnes mundi cardines, i. Thou Feast that art happie in being celebrated through all the countries of the world. Ranulphus calls her the daughter to the king of Sicilie, and the best Writers constantly affirme these holy Songs to be hers, witnesse Gyraldus Dialogo 5. Histor. Poet. She writ her Epitaph with her owne hand, which

was ^fter inscribed vpon her Tombe, which I thus giue you in English, something neere to Treuisaes, as he translated it from Ranulphus.




AN EPITAPH.
Elpis my name, me Sicilie first bred,
A husbands loue drew me from hence to Rome,
Where I long liu'd in ioy, but now lye dead,
My soule submitting to th'Almighties doome:
And I beleeue this flesh againe shall rise,
And I behold my Sauiour with these eyes.




Eudoxia, or Eudocia,Eudocia. was the wife of the Emperour Theodo^ius Iunior: Shee was excellently qualified, and her chiefe delight was to be conuersant amongst the Muses, for which shee was stiled (...). Shee was the daughter of Leontius, of no higher degree than a Sophist of Athens: shee was first called Athenais, but after being married to the Emperour, hee caused her to be baptised by Atticus the great Bishop of Constantinople, and for Athenais gaue her the name of Eudocia, which much pleased the Emperour her husband. Some attribute a Centon vnto her, of Christ the Sauiour of the world; it was called (...), which others would conferre vpon Proba. Cyrus Panopolita shee aduanced vnto the Praetorship. Gyrald. ex 5. Dialog. Philenis was a strumpet of Leucadia,Philenis. her Verses were as impurely wanton as her life was immodest and vnchast: shee imitated Elephantis,Elephantis. if wee may beleeue Suidas, and they both Astianassa,Astianassa. one of Hellens maids, the wife to Menelaus. Shee was the first that deuised (...) in the Veneriall Trade, and left certaine bookes behind her of Veneriall Copulation. This you may reade in Gyraldus in 30. Dialog. Histor. Poet. Bocho,Bocho. a penurious and needie woman of Delphos, who composed Hymnes and pronounced Oracles; shee is remembred by Gyraldus, Dialog. 20. Elephantis,Elephantis. or Elephantina, was a woman most wickedly wanton, and of notorious intemperance. Shee (as Spinthria) described the seuerall wayes and figures of Congresse and Copulation,Spinthria. from whose bookes Lalage presents a gift to Priapus,Lalage. in Priapaeis Poematibus: and Tiberius Caesar builded that chamber, wherein were discouered the omnivarious shapes of beastly and preposterous Luxuries, least any president of dishonest Brothelrie should be left vnremembred. Proba Valeria Falconia,Proba Valeria Falconia. a Roman Matron (and wife to Adelphus Romanus the Proconsull, a man of noble and religious carriage) flourished in the reignes of Honorius and Theodosius the Iunior, Emperours. Shee composed a Diuine Worke, of the Life and Miracles of Christ, which shee entituled Cento Virgilianum: shee dedicated it to the Empresse Eudocia, wife of Theodosius. Shee also paraphrased vpon the Verses of Homer, and called the Worke Homeroukentra, which some would conferre vpon Eudocia. Her husband being dead, shee is said to haue inscribed vpon his Tombe this or the like Epitaph:
To God, to Prince, Wife, Kindred, Friend, the Poore,Religious, Loyall, True, Kind, Stedfast, Deere,In Zeale, Faith, Loue, Bloud, Amitie, and Store,He that so liu'd, and so deceas'd, lyes heere.
Amongst these (and not vnproperly) are numbred the Sibylls: but I

haue spake of them in their place, therefore I proceede to others, and next of Telesilla.


Telesilla Poetria.
THis incomparable Ladie I know not where to equipage, or in what ranke to place, whether amongst the women illustrious for Vertue, or amongst the Warlike women, imitating the Amasonians for their noble Courage and Valour, amongst the Chast, the Faire, or the Wise, as beeing a most famous and learned Poetesse; her Historie I will giue you in briefe. Amongst the memorable and remarkable acts attempted and atchieued by women, there is none more glorious or better deseruing a Cronicle of Perpetuitie than that performed by the Argiue women against king Cleomenes, by the persuasion and incouragement of Telesilla the Poetesse; shee was borne of a noble familie, and in her youth being subiect to many infirmities of the bodie, she asked counsell of the gods concerning her health, answere was returned her from the Oracle, That she should apply her selfe to the studie of the Muses, and imploy all her industrie in verse and harmonie. Not long it was ere recouering her health, she grew to that perfection of Art, especially in Poetrie, that shee was onely held in admiration amongst all other women. Cleomenes king of Sparta, opposing the Argiues with all the rigor that hostilitie could make, and hauing slaine of them an infinite number almost incredible to relate (for so sayth Plutarch;Lib. de V^rtutib. Mulier.) in reuenge of this losse, a notable courage and an vnspeakable boldnesse inspyred the hearts of these Argiue women, in so much that vnder the conduct of Telesilla, whom they made their Generall, they tooke armes to maintaine their fortresses, guard and defend the walls, and issue out vpon the enemy, not without admiration and terror to the besiegers, in so much that Cleomenes was repulsed with the losse of many of his souldiers. Another king (as Socrates sayth) called Demaratus, who besieged Pamphiliacum, they sent thence with losse and infamous retreat. The citie thus by their valour preserued, all such women as fell in the conflict, the inhabitants honourably interred in a place cald Via Argiua, i. The Argiue way, and to the suruiuers as a memorable gratitude to their vertues and valours, they granted a famous solemnitie cald the dedication of Mars. This battaile was fought (as some say) in the seuenth day (others in the new Moone) of the month which is now cald the fourth, but by the Argiues was of old called Hermaeus or Mer^ulialis; as that day they yerely celebrat the great Feast stiled Hybristica, in which the women are habited like men, and the men are attired in vestures of women: And to make good the losse of so many men that perished in the late combustions, the matrons did not (as Her^dotus afirmes) match with their slaues and seruants, but they ioyned themselues in marriage to the best and noblest of the next adioyning citties; vpon whom notwithstanding they cast such a contemptible neglect, that they enacted a law which inioyned all married women still to put beards vpon their faces, when they first went to bed to their husbands.
Perhilla.Perhilla was a young Roman ladie who liued in the time of Augustus Caesar, it seemes of no great noble familie, nor extraordinarie riches, onely of an admirable wit and excellent facilitie in Poetrie, she was scholler to Ouid, who enterchanged with her and she with him many Elegies and Epigrams, she flourishdd in the time of his banishment. Her workes it seemes neuer

came to light: but that she was answerable to the character I haue giuen her, I referre you to his seuenth Elegie, in his third booke de Tristibus, in which he giues her an approoued testimonie: the title in, Mandat Epistolam vt Perhillam Adeat, which the better to expresse of what condition she was (and that speaking of Poetesses, it will not bee amisse a little to Poetise) I thought thus to English:
Vade salutatum, etc.Ouid. lib. Trist. 3. Eleg. 7.My wandring Letter to Perhilla goe,Greet her as one that doth my mind best know.Find her thou shalt, or with her mother sit,Or 'mongst her Bookes and Muses, searching wit.What ere she be a doing, when she knowesThee thither come, her worke away she throwes,And without least delay, she will enquireWherefore thou com'st, or what thou canst desire.Tell her I liue, but so, as life bemoning,Mischiefes augment, but do not ease my groning.Though by the Muses harm'd, I loue their name,And to euen numbers how my words to frame.Still doe you to your common studies cling,And your learn'd Verse to forraine fashions sing,Nature that gaue you Beautie, thought it fitTo adde rare Gifts, chast Manners, and choise Wit.I taught you first from Hellecon to write,Least such a fertile Spring should perish quite.I saw how farre in youth it did extend,I was your Father, Captaine, and your Friend.If the same fires within your breast still liue,To none saue Lesbian Sapho the Palme giue.I feare my fate your forwardnesse may slack,And from your course my fortunes pluck you back.The time was when your Lines to me were read,And when by me your Muse was censured,'Twas lawfull then with both: and in those dayesYou did me as your Iudge and Tutor prayse.Either vnto your Verses I gaue eare,Or made you blush when I forbore to heare.Perhaps (by my example) since my MuseHath done me hurt, that practise you'l not vse;And feare, because I su^^er in my Art,That in my ruine you shall beare a part.Feare not (Perhilla) for no woman shall,Or man, by thy Muse learne to loue at all.Therefore (most learn'd) all cause of slouth adiorneAnd to these sacred and good Arts returne.That comely fauour will in time decay,And rugged furrowes in thy cheekes display.Age (without noyse) will by thee stealing passe,When some will say by thee, once faire she was:Thou then wilt grieue, thy faded front despise,Or else complaining, sweare thy Steele-glasse lyes.Your Riches are not great (O worthie more:)But say you Wealth had in the amplest store,Fortune bestowes or takes at her owne pleasure,Hee's Irus now, that late had Cressus Treasure.'Briefe, saue corrupt things, here we nothing gaineExcept the Treasures of the Breast and Braine.I, that my House, my Countrey, and you, lacke,In all they would take from me, suffred wracke.My Braine I still keepe with me to this howre,For ouer that, great Caesar had no power:Who though in rage he doome me to be slaine,When I am dead, my fame shall still remaine.Whil'st warlike Rome on seuen Hils lifts her head,To o'relooke the conquer'd World, I shall be read.And you (whom happier studies still inspire)Preserue your name from the last comming fire.
Before many, or most of those, I may iustly and without flatterie preferre the famous Queene Elizabeth. Of her Wisdome and Gouernment, all the Christian Princes that flourished in her time, can giue ample testimonie: of her Oratorie, those learned Orations deliuered by her owne mouth in the two Academies, in the Latine Tongue, beare record in her behalfe. In the Greeke Tongue she might compare with Queene Istrina, before remembred amongst the Linguists. In the French, Italian, and Spanish, she needed no Interpreter, but was able to giue answere to such Embassadours in their owne Language. Of whose pleasant Fancies, and ingenious Ditties, I haue seene some, and heard of many. Others there haue beene likewise of our owne Nation, of whose elegancie in these kinds the World hath taken notice, and pittie it were their memories should not be redeemed from obliuion: as the Ladie Iane Grey, daughter to the Duke of Suffolke, the vnhappie wife of as vnfortunate an husband, L. Guilford Dudley. Here likewise worthily may be inserted the excellent Ladie Arabella, who had a great facilitie in Poetrie, and was elaborately conuersant amongst the Muses; as likewise the ingenious Ladie, the late composer of our extant Vrania. For others, let me referre you to Sir Iohn Harrington, in his Allegorie vpon the 37. booke of Ariosto, where he commends vnto vs the foure daughters of Sir Anthonie Cooke, the Ladie Burleigh, the Ladie Russell, the Ladie Bacon, and Mistresse Killegrewe, giuing each of them in that kind a worthie Character. In the same place the Author commends vnto vs a great Italian Ladie, called Vittoria,Vittoria. who writ largely and learnedly in the praise of her dead husband: with whom (though not in that Funerall Elegeick straine) I may ranke (if in the comparison I vnderprise not) the beautifull and learned Ladie Mary, Countesse of Penbrooke, the worthie sister to her vnmatchable brother Sir Philip Sydney. But not to dwell too long on her prayse (whom I neuer can commend sufficiently) I will onely bestow vpon her Muse that Character which Horace bequeathed to Sapho:
Viuuntque commissi CaloresAeoliae fidibus Puellae.




Of Witches.
IOhannes Bodinus, Andegauensis lib. 3. cap. 3. de Magorum Demonomania writes, That there is nothing which precipitates men or women to perdition, or more allures and incites them to deuote and giue themselues vp to the Deuill, than a sortish and meere Artheisticall opinion setled in them, That he hath power and will to giue to the needie, riches; to the afflicted, ease; to the weake, strength; to the deformed, beautie; the ignorant, knowledge; the abiect, honor; grace and fauour to them whom birth hath nobilitated, and meanes, and supplie, to such as aduersitie hath deiected: when on the contrarie, we see by common proofe than such miscreants none more miserably base, more penurious, more ignorant, more deboisht and contemned. Plutarch remembers vs that when Olimpias the wife of Philip king of Macedon, hearing that her husband was ensnared, and extreamely besotted with the beautie of a noble yong ladie, she much desired to see her: who being brought vnto her presence, and beholding a woman with all the accomplishments of nature so euery way graced, one of so exquisit feature, she hauing neuer beheld the like till then, she grew astonished, and without offring her the least discourteous violence, brake out into these tearmes, This rare and incomparable beautie which hath bewitched my husband, is likewise of force to effacinate the gods. Most certaine it is, nothing seemes fairely featured and beautifully composed within this large vniuerse, but it shewes to vs the glorie of the maker, who is the only true and perfect pulchritude; neither is the^e any thing louely or amiable, which proceeds not from his especiall grace and miraculous workemanship. But it was neuer found or knowne that euer any Witch could by exorsismes or incantations adde any thing to Nature, to make her selfe in any part appeare more comely. It is further obserued, that all such are for the most part stigmaticall and ouglie, in so much, that it is growne into a common Adage, Deformis vt Saga, i. As deformed as a Witch. Moreouer, Cardanus who was not held the least amongst the Magitians (as hauing his art,Lib. 20. de Subtilit or rather diabolicall practise from his father hereditarie) confesseth, that in all his life time, in his great familiaritie and acquaintance amongst them, he neuer knew any one that was not in some part mishapen and deformed. The same Author (with whose opinion Wicrius, Hippocrates, and others assent) affirms that all those Demoniacks, or Witches, after they haue had commerce and congresse with the Deuill, haue about them a continuall nastie and odious smell, of which (by the ancient writers) they were called Faetentes, by the Vasconians Fetelleres, a Faetore, i. Of stench; insomuch that women who by nature haue a more sweet and refreshing breath than men, after their beastly consocietie with Sathan, change the propertie of nature, and grow horrid, putred, corrupt, and contagious: For Sprangerus witnesseth (who hath taken the examination of many) they haue confessed (a thing fearefull to be spoken) to haue had carnall copulation with euil and vncleane spirits, who no doubt, beare the smell of the in^isible sulphure about them. Now concerning this Magicke, what reputation it hath beene in amongst men, (which in effect is no better than plaine Witchcraft in women) we may reade in Nauclerus, and Platina; That all the Popes inclusiuely

from Siluester the second, to Gregorie the seuenth, were Magicians: but Cardinall Benno, who obserued all the Bishops that way deuoted, numbers but fiue, Siluester the second, Benedict the ninth, Iohn the twentieth, and one and twentieth, and Gregorie the seuenth. Of these, Augustinus Onuphrius one of the Popes chamber (that from the Vatican, and the Liues of the Popes there registred, made a diligent collection) speakes of two only, Siluester the second, and Benedict the ninth; one of them was after expelled from the Papacie. Siluester lying vpon his death bed, desired his tongue to be torne out and his hands to be cut off that had sacrifised to the Deuill, confessing that he had neuer any inspection into that damnable Art,How the Deuil rewards his seruants. till he was Archbishop of Rhemes. These are the best rewards that Sathan bestowes vpon his suppliants and seruants: how comes it else so many wretched and penurious Witches, some beg their bread, some die of hunger, others rot in prisons, and so many come to the gallowes or the stake. It is reported of a gentleman of Mediolanum, that hauing his enemie at his mercie, held his steeletto to his heart, and swore that vnlesse he would instantly abiure his faith, and renounce his Sauiour, had he a thousand liues he would instantly (with as many wounds) despoile him of all; which the other for feare assenting to, and he hauing made him iterate ouer and ouer his vnchristianlike blasphemies, in the middle of his horrible abiuration stabd him to the heart, vttering these words, See, I am reuenged of thy soule and bodie at once; for as thy bodie is desperate of life, so is thy soule of mercie. This vncharitable wretch was an apt schollar to the grand Deuill his master, who in the like manner deales with all his seruants, who after he hath made them renounce their faith, blaspheame their maker, and do to him all beastly and abhominable adoration (such as in their owne confessions shall be hereafter related) he not only leaues them abiects from Gods fauour, whose diuine maiestie they haue so fearefully blasphemed, but deliuers them vp to all afflictions and tribulations of this life, and all excruciations and torments in the world to come. Horrible and fearefull haue beene the most remarkeable deaths of many of the professors of this diabolicall Art, for whom the lawes of man hath spared (as a terror to others) the hand of heauen hath punished: I will onely giue you a tast of some few.The wretched ends of sundry Magitians. Abdias Bab. Episcopus lib. 6. Certam Apostol. writes, That Zaroes and Arphaxad (two infamous Magitians amongst the Persians) with their exorcismes and incantations deluding the people, in the houre when Simon and Iude suffered martyredome, were stroke with lightning from heauen, and so perisht. Lucius Piso, in the first booke of his Annals speakes of one Cinops, a prince amongst the Magitians, who at the prayer of S. Iohn the Euangelist was swallowed vp in a riuer. Olaus Magnus lib. 2. cap. 4. de gentib. Septentrional. tells vs of one Methotis, who by his prestigious iuglings had insinuated into the hearts of the people, and purchast that opinion and authoritie amongst them, that he was called, The high and chiefe Priest to the gods, who was after torne to peeces by the multitude: from whose scattred limbes such a contagion grew, that it infected the ayre, of which much people perished. Hollerus the Magitian was staine. Oddo the Dane was (besides his skill in Magicke) a great pyrat, it is written of him Wierius li. 2. ca. 4. that without ship or boat he would make his transmarine passage ouer the Ocean, and by his Inchan^ments raise stormes to shipwrecke the vessells of his enemies: hee was after, notwithstanding, swallowed in the sea, and

there most wretchedly perished. D. Iohn Faustus, borne at Kuneling, a Village neere Cracouia, was found dead by his bed side, his face blasted and turned backward, in the Dukedome of Wittenberch, at which time the house wherein he died was shaken with a tempest and horrible Earthquake. The Earle Matisconensis (a practitioner in the same diuellish studie) sitting at Dinner amongst many Lords, Barons, Captaines, and others, was snatcht from the Boord by Deuils, and in the sight and view of all the people, three times hurried swiftly round about the citie, being heard to cry, Succurrite, Succurrite, i. Helpe, Helpe: of him, Hugo Cluniacensis writes more largely. A Priest at Noremberch searching for hidden Treasure in a place where the Deuill had directed him, found it guarded by a Spirit, in the semblance of a great blacke Dogge; in the search of which, the Earth fell vpon him, and buryed him aliue: And this happened in the yeere 1530. Wierius. A Magician of Salsburch vndertooke to call all the Serpents together within a mile of the place, and bring them into one Pit digged for the purpose: in the trayne of which, came (after the rest) a great Serpent (supposed to be the Deuill) and twining about him, cast him in amongst the rest, where they together perished. The like vntimely deaths wee reade of Appion Grammaticus, Iulian Apostata, Artephius, Robertus Anglicus: amongst the Heluetians, Petrus Axonensis, sirnamed Conciliator, Albertus Teutonicus, Arnoldus de villa noua, Anselmus Parmensis, Pycatrix Hispanus, Cicchus Ascalus Florentinus, and many others. Commendable therefore it was in the French king, who when one Friscalanus Cenomannus (a man excellent in this Science) came to shew diuerse prestigious feats and trickes before him, for which he expected reward; amongst others, he caused the Linkes of a Golden Chayne to be taken asunder, and remooued them to diuerse remote places of the chamber, which came of themselues to one place, and were instantly ioyned together as before: Which the king seeing, and being thereat astonished, he commanded him instantly from his sight, neuer againe to behold his face, and after caused him to be arraigned and iudged. And these are the Graces, Honors, and Aduancements, Offices, and Dignities, to which the Deuill exalts his liege people.
Of these seuerall sorts of Iuglings,Seuerall sorts of superstitious Iugling. with which the Deuill deludes his schollers (besides such as I haue before spoken of, amongst such as predicted of things to come) I will nominate some few. One thing which is vsed now amongst our cunning Women and Witches, is so antient, that it was before the age of Lucian, or Theocritus, it is called Coskinomanteia, i. Cribri saltatio, i. (as wee call it) The Syue and the Sheeres, and that is not shamed to be publiquely vsed. Bodinus himselfe sayth that hee saw in Lutetia a Boy in a Noblemans house, and before many honest and iudiciall spectators, by speaking of a few French words^ make a Syue turne which way he pleased: but the same words vttered by another, could not make it to mooue at all. Another superstition is with a Knife or a Key. If any be suspected of Theft, reade but such a Psalme, and name the partie accused, if the Knife at the speaking of his name, mooue or stirre, hee is then held guiltie: and that practise is called Axinomanteia. That which is done by a Ring put ouer a Cruse of Water, is called Daktuliomanteia: And this is a famous Sorcerie, much in vse with the Witches of Italie. Ioachimus Cameracensis had a speaking Ring, in which was a Familiar, or a Deuill; that kind is called Vdromanteia, as also Dactyliomanteia, i. A Ring wherein Spirits are worne. Coniectures

made from Wells and Fountaines, were called Idromanteia: these, Numa Pompilius was said to be the first inuentor of, which Varro otherwise interpretes, i. Of a Boy employed by the Magicians to looke vpon Images in the water, one of which pronounced distinctly fiftie Verses of the warres of Mithridates, before any such rumor was spread, or purpose of the like businesse intended. Aeromanteia is a superstitious prediction by the ayre; but most certaine, when the wind is South. Another was made from Meale or Chaffe, and was called Alphitomanteia, or Aleuromanteia, remembred by Iamblicus; but to what purpose it was, hee explaneth not; as likewise of Lythomanteia, which was practised by Stones. Diuination by Lawrell was called Daphnomanteia. The praescience which they gathered from the head of an Asse, Kephaleomanteia. Puromanteia and Kapnomanteia were coniectures from Fire. Rabdomanteia was vsed by a Physician of Tholosa, in speaking certaine mysticall words in a low and submisse voyce. The like vnto that, was Zulomanteia, with loose chippes of Wood, much practised in Illyria. But of all these diuellish and detestable practises, there is none (saith Bodinus) more Heathenish, irreligious, and dangerous, than that so commonly in vse now adayes, and by Witches continually practised, to the iniurie and wrong of new married women; it is commonly called Ligare ligulam, or to tye knots vpon a point; which as it is vsuall, so it is not new: For Herodot. Lib. 2. reports, That Amasis king of Aegypt was by the like Exorcisme bound and hindered from hauing any mutuall congresse with his wife Laodice,Laodice. till those ligatorie Spells were after vncharmed. Paulus Aemilius in the life of Clotharius the second witnesseth, That king Theodoricus was by the like ligaments effascinated by his Concubines, from hauing lawfull consocietie with his wife Hermamberga.Hermamberga. Bodinus reports, That he heard from the mouth of Roileus, Embassadour generall amongst the Blesenses, who affirmed, That at the marriage of a young couple, iust as they were to receiue the benediction from the Priest, a Boy was seene by him tying one of these Magicke knots in the Temple; whom thinking to haue deprehended, the Boy fled, and was not taken. Bodinus further addes, That in the yeere 1567. he then being Procurator in Patauia, the gentlewoman in whose house he soiourned (being it seemes a pregnant scholler in this Art) related vnto him in the presence of one Iacobus Baunasius, That there were fiftie seuerall wayes of tying this knot, to hinder copulation, either to bind the Husband, or the Wife onely, that one hating the others infirmitie, might the freelyer pollute themselues with Adulteries. Shee said moreouer, the man was often so charmed, the woman seldome, and difficultly: besides, this knot might be tyed for a day, for a yeere, for the present time, or for euer, or whilest the same was vnloosed: That it might be tyed for one to loue the other, and not be againe beloued, or to make a mutuall and ardent loue betwixt them; but when they came to congression, to bite and scratch, and teare one another with their teeth and nayles. In Tholosia, a man and his wife were so bewitched, who after three yeeres being vncharmed, had a faire and hopefull issue; and which is more to be wondered at, in that time there appeared vpon some part of their bodies so many tumors, or swellings, like small knobs of flesh, as they should haue had children, if that impediment had not happened. Some there are that may be charmed before wedlocke, and some after, but those hardly. There are others, whom their effascinations can keepe from eiecting their Vrine; others, to make them that they cannot

restraine it at all: but of the first, diuerse haue perished. Shee likewise told him sundrie speeches belonging to these Witcheries, the words whereof were neither Hebrew, Greeke, Latine, French, Spanish, Italian, nor indeed deriuing their Etimologie from any knowne Language whatsoeuer.
Erasmus in his explanation of the Adage, Pasetis Semiobulus, writes of some Witches that by their Incantations could commaund in any voyd roome, Tables on the sudden to bee spread and furnished with meates and iunkets of all varieties to tast the palat, and when the guests had sufficiently fed and satisfied euerie man his owne appetite, with one word could likewise command all things away as if no such thing had beene: others also that when they had bought any commoditie of any man, their backes were no sooner turned but the money they layde out would instantly forsake the seller and returne into the purse of the buyer. But to begin with the antient Poets, by their testimonies it is manifest that the practise of Witches and Witch-craft hath beene so great, that by their Charmes and Spells they haue had the power to transhape men into bruit beasts, to alter the course of the Planets, and Starres, haue changed the Seasons, making the naturall course of the yeare preposterous: further, that their exorcismes haue extended to Hearbes, Flowers, Fruits, and Graine, to infect men with Diseases, and cattell with Murren, to delude the Eyes and weaken the Sences, bewitch the Limbes, binde the Hands, gyue the Feete, and benumbe the other Members, apoplex all the vitall Spirits, and raise vp dead bodies from their Sepulchres; nay more, to call the Moone downe from her Sphere, with other most strange things, as miraculous to relate as difficult to beleeue, of such in his first booke Tibullus speakes,
Hanc ego de Caelo ducentem sidera vidi:
-- This Witch I did espyTo call the Starres and Planets from the Sky.
Now, that women haue beene more addicted to this diuellish Art than men, is manifest by the approbation of many graue Authors: Diodorus in his fift booke de Antiquorum Gestis, Speakes of Hecate, that shee was the first that euer tempered Aconitum (a venomous Hearbe, which some cal Libbards bane, others Wolues bane) applying her self to confections of sundry deadly poysons.Valer. lib. 2. This was frequent among the Romans, nay euen among the noblest matrons,Lib. 3. cap. 17. as their owne writers testifie. Of the like, Saint Augustine speakes in his booke de Ciuitate Dei: So Plinie affirmes in his fiue and twentith booke and second chapter, That women are most prone to these vnlawful Arts; for so we read of Medea, Cyrce, and others whom the Poets fabled to be goddesses, of whom we shall find occasion to speake of in their order. Suidas of women Witches cites an old prouerb, Thessala Mulier, by which he notes all of that practise as peculiar to that Sex,Lib. 5. Orat. Instit. and not to men. Therefore Quintilian speaking of this argument, thus determines it, Theft (sayth he) is much preuailing with men, and Witchcraft most familiar with the Sex of women.

Of Cyrce, and others remembred by the Poets.
SHe was the daughter of the Sunne,Virgill in Beucol. and the Nymph Persa, and was sayd to be so exquisitely cunning in these effacinations, that she changed men into seuerall shapes of beasts, and the companions and associates of Vlisses into

Swine. She inhabited not farre from Caieta a citie of Campania. The Marsians a people of Italie were sayd to bee linially descended from this Cyrce,Lib. 16. cap. 11. who likewise succeeded her in that diuellish Art. Gellius writes of this nation, That they had skill in taming the most poysonus Serpents, and to make them gentle and seruile to their vse; their Charmes, Exercismes and Incantations, by which they had power in the transhapes of creatures, their mixtures of hearbes and tempering of drugges beeing to them left as hereditarie by her. Who would reade further of her, I referre him to Ouid, who in his Metamorphosis giues her a full and large character, so Homer in his tenth booke of his Odisses, the argument of which, for her better expression I thus English:
Aeoliam ventorum agimor patriamque domuque.VlissesFrom the Island of the Cyclops, where hee thrust out Polyph^mus his eye. thence into Aetolia past,Where Aeolus the king of Windes then raign'dWho the foure brothers gaue him closed fastIn leatherne bags (for so they were constraind.)With prosperous speed he sailes, and growing neereHis natiue Ithaca, whil'st he was sleeping,His men suppos'd some wealth inclosed there,Within those bags giuen to their maisters keeping,And opening them, the imprisoned windes now free,With aduerfe gusts, despight his helme and glasseBlow him quite backe, so he is forc't to seeIslands in the Sea so called. Antiphates, and the Lestrigone's.Some ships there lost, he attaines the Cercian shore,Where the most powerfull goddesse as she feasts,Transhapes Eurilochus with many moreOf his companions, into sundrie beasts,The wylie Greeke, by Mercuries admonishment,Alone escapes the Witches transformation,Who failing in her Art, bred both astonishment,And of his many vertues, admiration:His wisedome so preuailed, him Cyrce ador'd,And to his mates their pristine shape restor'd.
Medea.Medea was the daughter of Otes and Ispaea king and queene of the Colchians, and sister to Cyrce: shee found out the vertues of many Hearbes, Plants, and Rootes, and tempered their juice to her diuellish purposes, growing to that height of cunning, that by her incantations shee tamed the mad Bulls that from their mouths and nosthrills breathed fire and bellowed terror, charming asleepe the euer-waking Serpent that kept the Golden fleece, least they should hinder Iason her beloued in the purchase thereof: for which courtesie hee tooke her to wife, and by long trauell arriuing in Thessaly, Aeson the father of Iason now growne decrepit through age, shee restored to his former youth and strength: notwithstanding, her husband forgetfull of this great benefit done to his father, forsooke her bed, and married Creusa daughter to Creon king of Corinth; with which ingratitude Medea inraged (yet dissembling her malice) she after some insinuation presents Creusa with a glorious Mantle to the eye, which shee no sooner put on

but her whole bodie was in a flame and she consumed vnto ashes: after the same sort perished king Creon with his queene. This done, she murdered her children had by Iason, and being openly hurried by winged dragons through the Ayre, she fled to Athens, and there was married to king Aegeus; whose sonne Theseus, when she attempted to haue poysoned in a cup of Gold tempered with Aconitum (gathered from an hearbe that grew from the ^ome of Cerberus) her treason being discouered and preuented, by her Magick skill shee shut her selfe within a cloud in which with her young sonne Medus (whose father Aegeus was) she escaped into Asia. Of her Ouid speakes, Proportius, Valerius Flacchus, Pliny, and many others.
Vitiae were so called of an infamous Witch called Vitia,Vitia. these (as some Authors write) haue power like the Ba^iliske to kill with the eye, especially all such on whom they cast an enuious and malicious looke: of the selfesame condition are a certaine people amongst the Tribullians and Illyrians Textor in Officin.Lib. 12. Micale.
Mycale is the name of a Witch in Ouid, likewise Dipsas; of the one hee writes thus:
Mater erat Mycale quem deduxisse canendoSepe reluctantis, constabat cornua lunae.
Her mothers name was Mycale,Knowne to haue had the skill,By spells, to pull the horned MooneFrom heauen, against her will.
And of the other in the first booke of his Elegies:
Est quaedam quicunque volet, etc.
Locusta is numbred amongst the rest,Locusta. and remembred by Cornelius Tacitus, for making certaine venomous confections with which Agrippina poysoned her husband Claudius; from her many or the most of her diabolicall practise, are called Locustae, shee is likewise spoaken of by Iuuenall in one of his Satyres.Satyr. 1. Eriphila was an inchanteresse of that diuellish condition that vpon whom soeuer she cast an enuious eye,Eriphila. that creature was sure to come to some extraordinarie mischiefe; of whom was raised a prouerbe, cast as an aspersion vpon all such kind of women, Anus Eriphus: Textor in Officin. cap. de Venificis. Thracia was a Nymph famous for her incantations,Thracia. who for her skill in hearbes and cunning in exorcismes, was by some adored as a goddesse; of her came the people amongst whom she liued, to bee called by the name of Thracians. Gyge was the name of a beldame,Gyge. who was a houshold seruant to Parasatis the mother of king Cyrus, and by the queene especially imployde in all her sorceries,Canidia Neapol. Herodotus. Canidia Neopolitana was a confectione^ of vnguents, a Witch, and practised in diuers kinds of sorceries, excellently discribed by Horace.In Epod. Erictho. Erictho was the name of a notorions Witch of Thessaly, deciphered by Lucan, whom who shall reade and desire plainely to be instructed in that horrible Art, he shall not find it more truely and punctually discouered by any of the Latine Poets.Gunthrune. Gunthrune was a Witch of a strange diuellish condition, who by her incantations was the death of many creatures, as well beasts as men, yet beeing dead there was no wound or marke of death appearing about them. Sagana,Sagana. Veia,Veia. and Folia,Folia. were professors of the selfesame diuellish Art, and are remembred by

Tacitus, Iuuenal, and Horace, these were said to haue had hand in the death of the noble child Varus.
A Witch of Scotland.It shall not be amisse to insert amongst these, what I haue heard concerning a Witch of Scotland. One of that countrie (as by report there are too many) being for no goodnesse by the Iudges of Assise arraigned, conuicted, and condemned to be burnt, and the next day according to her iudgement brought and tied to the stake, the reeds and fagots placed round about her, and the executioner readie to giue fire (for by no persuasion of her ghostly father, nor importunitie of the sherifes, she could be wrought to confesse any thing) she now at the last cast, to take her farewell of the world, casting her eye a tone side spied her onely sonne, and calls to him, desiring him verie earnestly as his last dutie to her, to bring her any water, or the least quantitie of licour (be it neuer so small) to comfort her, for she was extreamely a thirst: at which he shaking his head, said nothing; she stil importuned him in these words, Oh my deere sonne helpe me to any drinke, be it neuer so little, for I am most extreamely drie, oh drie, drie; to whom the young fellow answered, by no meanes deere mother will I do you that wrong: For the drier you are (no doubt) you will burne the better.


Of Witches transported from one place to another by the Deuill.
THe difference betwixt Witches, or to define what Magae are and what Lamiae, were but time mispent, the rather because it hath beene an argument so much handled in our mother tongue, I will onely rehearse vnto you some few particular discourses concerning Witches, out of Danaeus, Bodinus, Wierius, Grillaneus Italus, and others: all agree, that some haue made expresse couenant with the deuill by Bond and Indenture sealed and deliuered; others by promise and oath onely: as likewise that all such haue secret markes about them in some priuate place of their bodies, some in the inside of the lip, some in the hai^e of the eye browes, some in the fundament, some in the inside of the thigh, the hollow of the arme, or the priuie parts. Albertus Pictus an Aduocate in the Parlement of Paris, reported he had seene one in the castle of Theodoricus who had a plaine marke vpon the right shoulder,Io. Herui^^eria. which the next day was taken off by the Deuill. Claudius de Fagus the kings procurator affirmed the like of one Ioanna Heruilleria. Concerning the transportation of Witches through the aire, Paulus Grillandus an Italian Doctor of the law, that writ the histories of many Witches, saith, That a countrie villager not far from Rome, vpon a night spying his wife daube her selfe with a certaine vnguent, and instantly leape out at the window, after her stay from him some three or foure houres, had prouided against her returne a good cudgell, with which he so soundly entertained her, that he forced her to confesse where she had beene, but would not grant her free pardon till she had made him promise to bring him to the sight of all these nouelties, and vnbeleeueable passages by her related: the match was concluded, she forewarned him that he must in no wise vse the name of God by the way, vnlesse it were in scorne or blasphemie, with other such horrible instructions. The night came, they were both annointed, when presently two rough goats appeared at the window, vpon which they being mounted, were instantly hurried through the aire into a place where were an infinit multitude of people, men and women, and in the middest one that seemed to be prince and soueraigne of the rest, to whom euery of them did

obeisance and adoration, she bid her husband stand in a remote place till she had likewise done her worship, which she accordingly performed: This done, they all danced together in a circle or ring, not as our custome is face to face, but backe to backe, the rest may be coniectured, least if any should be apprehended one might appeach the other. After their dance was ended, the tables were couered and furnished, she calls to her husband to sit downe amongst the rest, and bids him welcome, he begins to feed, but finding the meat to haue no ^elish, in regard it was not well seasoned, he calls aloud for salt, and many times before it came, it was brought at length, which he seeing, before he tasted it, he thus said, Hor laudato sui Dio per e venuto questo sale, i. Now God be thanked that the salt is come: these words were no sooner spoken, but Men, Meat, Tables, Deuills, Witches, all were vanished in an instant, he was left alone naked, almost frosen with cold, ignorant in what place, or whether to trauel for shelter; day came, he spies sheepheards, and askes them where he is? they tell him in the principalitie of Beneuent, vnder the iurisdiction of the Pope, aboue an hundred miles from Rome. He was forced to beg rags to couer him, and bread to releeue him, being eight daies before he could reach to his cottadge; he accuseth his wife, she others, who were all after deliuered to the fire and burnt aliue. The li^e historie the same author relates of a young damosell inticed by an old Witch to this damnable assemblie, in the Duchie of Spoletum, in the yeare of grace 1535. The like confession of these assemblies, dances, and banquets, and after all, their common carnall societie, women with he-Deuills and men with she-spirits, was extorted from a Witch of Lochinum, another of Lions, both suffered by fire; and their arraignements, confessions, iudgements, and executions published by Danaeus in the yere 1474. Of these meetings, banquets, dances, and congressions, Friscalanus the before named Magitian gaue ample testimonie to Charles the ninth king of France. Saluertes the President speakes of a Witch called Beronda,Beronda. who being brought to the stake, accused a great ladie of France, for being one of that damned societie, but she obstinately denying it, the Witch thus said, Haue you forgot since our last meeting, when you were appointed to carrie the Challice of poison? Olaus Magnus li. 3. ca. 11. saith that many of these conuenticles are made in the North, and are frequent in the mount Atlas; as likewise Mel. lib. 3. Solinus lib. 38. cap. 44. and Plinie lib. 5. cap. 1. Infinit are the Histories to this purpose.A Spanish Magician. Antonius de Turquemada a Spaniard, saith, That a Magitian would needs persuade his friend to be a spectator of this wicked assemblie, all things being prepared for the purpose, in the middest of which con^^uence was an huge vglie goat, sitting vpon a sublime throne, whom euerie one came to kisse by turnes, En la parte ma senzia que tenia, those that vnderstand the Spanish know it to be a place which cannot modestly be named: which when his companion beheld, as detesting such a bestial adoration, he left all patience, and with an acclamation said to his friend, Dios a mui grandes bozes, i. Oh God with a loud voice; which was no sooner spoken, but all things vanished in a tempestious whirlewind, he was only left desolately forsaken, being three yeres before he could come to visit his owne fields and gardens. Of their exportation after their vnction, many authors testifie, as vpon a Goat, a Pegasus, a Night-crow, an inchanted staffe, etc. This puts me in mind of a discourse which was told by a great ladie, to haue happened at her being in the Brill,A Witch of Brill. which was then one of the Cautionarie

townes in the possession of Q. Elizabeth, a Muscatier one night standing centinell vpon the walls, a little before day, he heard a great noise of tatling gossips, laughing and talking aloude, their voices (as he thought) came from the aire, when casting his eies about to knowe from whence this prodegie might proceed: he might perceiue a duskie cloud come sweeping close along by him, in which it seemed to him they sat that were so merrie; being first affrighted at the obiect, and after taking courage, he giues fire and shoots towards the cloud at randome, at the report of the musket the town is vp in armes, his officers leaue the court of guard and come to know the matter, he tells them an incredible discourse, which he spares not to confirme with a volley of oathes, they seeke further towards the place where he aimed his musket, and found an old woman with a bunch of keyes at her girdle and a bullet in her buttock, dropt out of the cloud, and the rest vanisht, they ceise her, she is after examined, and confesseth who had bin to make merrie in her companie, some of them prooued to be rich burgers wiues of the citie. The L. Adrianus Ferreus vicar generall amongst the Laodunenses hath left remembred, that one Margarita Bremontia the wife of Noel Laueretus confest vnto him that she with her mother Marie vpon a monday night,Margarita Bremontia. not long before her examination, came into a like assemblie at the mil called Franquisenum, which stands in the medow neere vnto Loginum, who bestriding a broom staffe, after some few words mumbled to her self, they were presently transported thither, where they found Ioanna Roberta, Ioanna Guillemina, Marie the wife of Simou Agnes, and Gulielma the wife of one Grassus, euery one mounted vpon the like wodden horse; there met them six spirits, or Deuills, according to their number, in humane shape, but in aspect horrible, etc. who after they had danced together, euerie Deuill singled out his mistresse, and had with them mutuall copulation, she saith the Deuill kist her twice, and had her companie for the space of halfe an houre. Guillemina confest the like, as also, Perfrigidum semen ab eo Excreatum. The song vsed in those dances was this; Har, Har; Diabole, Diabole; Sali huc, Sali illuc; Lude hic, Lude illic: Then answered the rest; Sabaoth, Sabaoth, i. The feast day of rest, etc. Iohannes Megerus the accurate writer of the Flanders Historie, relates thar in the yeare 1459, a great number of men and women Witches were burned, who publickely confessed their vnguents, transuections, dances, feasts, and consocietie with Deuills: so likewise Iacobus Sprangerus of German Witches, in the cities and villages about Constantienses and Ratisbone, in the yeare 1485, reports the like. I could tire the reader with infinit examples, authors, testats, and adiurors, with the places, times, and circumstances, one or two at the most shall suffice. Ioachimus Camarensis in his booke de Natura Demonum, tells vs of a traueller that passing by night through a forest, heard the like noise of musicke, mirth, dancing, and reuells, and approaching neerer to discouer the nouell, espied the like conuention, when on the sudden the Deuills and Witches all vanished, and left behind them certaine boules and cups of plate, with the names of the owners ingrauen vpon them, which he tooke and carried the next day to the magistrates, by which many of the Witches were knowne, these discouered others, all which were condemned to the stake. In the yeare 1564, Saluertus being President amongst the Pictauians, where he with Dauentonius his fellow President sate as Iudges, three men and one woman were conuicted, and after doomed to the fire, all these confest the ceremonies in the before

named nightly meetings: as also, that there was a Goat placed in the middest of them, whose hinder parts they all kist, euery one holding a lighted Candle in their hand. At length, with these Lights the Goat was burnt to ashes, of which euerie of them receiued a quantitie. This dust they scattered vpon the thresholds of Houses, Stable-doores, Oxe-stalls, or Sheepecoates, to destroy either Children, Horses, Sheepe, or such Cattell of their enemies. This being distributed amongst them, the Deuill cryed with a loud voyce, Reuenge your selues of your enemies, or die your selues. At the next meeting, euerie one was particularly examined of the mischiefes they had done; and such as could not giue iust account of some or other ill, were publiquely mocked and derided by the rest, and after receiued so many stripes as were adiudged her by the Deuill; insomuch that one Witch confessed shee could neuer rest nor be at quiet in her owne thoughts, vnlesse shee were doing some villanie or other; and if shee had no worse worke in hand, shee must breake Pots, Glasses, plucke out the Spiggots and let the Beere runne out of the Barrells into the Cellar floores, to keepe her hand in vre. Of the power of Witches, and Witchcraft, Virgil (who was held not to be the least amongst the Magicians) speakes in many places; but none more amply than Ouid, when he thus writ:
Quum volui, ripis ipsis mirantibus, amnesIn Fontes rediere suos, etc.
When I so list, I make the bankes admireTo see the flouds backe to their heads retire,And stay them there: when standing on the shore,I strike the Seas, I make the billowes rore,And calme them being angrie, I beat backeThe stormie Clouds, or can command the RackeTo bring in sweeping Tempests: the foure WindsMy Incantation doth let loose, or binds.I remoue Woods, shake Mountaines: when I speake,The Vipers iawes I by my Spells can breake.When I but please, the Earth beneath me grones,And Sepulchers from the corrupted BonesSend forth their Ghosts, before my face t'appeare.I thee, o horned Moone, call from thy Spheare, etc.
Much more might be cited out of the antient Poets, to illustrate these collected out of our moderne Histories of later times, and almost euery day presented before our eyes. But this one shall serue for many.


Of Witches that haue eyther changed their owne shapes, or transformed others.
WHether this be possible in Nature, or no, or whether it hath any time been suffered by the Diuine permission, hath beene a Question as well amongst the Theologists, as the Philosophers: It is no businesse of mine at this present to reconcile their Controuersies, my promise is onely to acquaint you with such things as I haue eyther read, or heard related: which if they erre in any thing from truth, blame not me,

but the Authors. Concerning Lycantropia,Lycantropia or men that change themselues into Wolues, Doctor Bordinus (generall Procurator for the king) relates, That a Wolfe setting vpon a man, hee shot him with an arrow through the thigh: who being wounded, and not able to plucke out the shaft, fled to his house, kept his bed, being found to be a man, and the arrow after knowne by him that shot it, by the Lycantropies confession. Those that are the diligent Inquisitors after Witches, report in a booke intituled Malleum Maleficarum, That a countreyman was violently assaulted by three great Cats, who in the defence of himselfe wounded them all dangerously; and these were knowne to be three infamous Witches, who were after found bleeding, and by reason of their hurts, in great danger of death. Petrus Mamorius in his booke de Sortilegis, affirmes that he saw the like in Sabaudia. Henricus Coloniensis in Libello de Lamijs, affirmes for an vndoubted truth, as also Vlrichus Molitor in his booke dedicated vnto Sigismund Caesar, in a Disputation before the Emperour, confidently witnesseth, That he saw of these Lycantropi (which haue transhaped themselues) at Constantinople, accused, conuicted, condemned, and vpon their owne confession deliuered vnto death. These, the Germans call Werwolff; the Frenchmen, Loups Garous; the Picards, Loups Warous, i. diuerse Wolues: The Greekes call them Lukanthr^pous, or Mormolukias; the Latines (or the Romans) call them Versipelles, i. Turne-coats, or Turne-skinnes, as Plinie in these transmutations hath obserued. Franciscus Phoebus Fecensis Comes, in his booke de Venatione, i. of Hunting, sayth, That by the Garouz is signified Gardez vous, i. Guard, or looke to your selues. Pomponatius and Theophra^tus (the Princes of the Philosophers in their age) most constantly affirme the transmigration of Witches into Wolues. Gasper Peucerus (an approued learned man, and the cousin german to Philip Melancthon) held these things to be meere fables, till by Merchants of worthie reputation and credit hee was better informed (from certaine proofes brought him from Liuonia) of such that for the same fault were (vpon their owne confessions) adiudged to death. These, and greater, are confirmed by Languetus Burgundus, Agent for the Duke of Saxonie, with the king of France; as also by Herodotus Neurios, who affirmes these conuersions and transhapes to be most frequent in Liuonia. In the Historie of Iohannes Tritemius you may reade, Anno 970. of a Iew called Baianus, the sonne of Simeon, who could transforme himselfe into a Wolfe at his owne pleasure. Of the like to these, Herodotus, Homer, Pomponius Mela, Solinus, Strabo, Dionisius, Afer, M. Varro, Virgil, Ouid, and many others haue written, long before these times; as likewise Epanthes, remembred by Plinie, and Agrippas in his Olimpionicis, who speakes of (...) Demaenetius Parrhasius, translated into a Wolfe. Or who so would be better confirmed, let him reade Olaus Magnus, of the Nations of Pilapia, Narbonia, Fincladia, and Augermania; or else Saxo Gramaticus, Fincelius, and Gulielmus Brabantius. And therefore those things are not altogether incredible,Lycaon, who was transformed into a Wolfe. which Ouid speakes of Lycaon (who included much truth in many Fables) who in his Metamorphosis thus sayes:
Territus ipse fagit, noctusque silentia rurisExululat frustraque loqui conatur, etc.
Frighted he flyes, and hauing gotThe silence of the shades,Thinking to speake he howles, and thenThe neighbour flockes inuades.
So much for monsterous Wolues, I come now to meere Witches. Saint Augustine in this booke de Ciuitate Dei, Lib. 18. cap. 17. and 18. tells of diuers hostesses or Inkeepers practised in these diabolicall Arts, who put such confections into a kind of Cheese they made, that all such trauellers as guested with them and eate thereof, were presently metamorphosed into labouring beasts, as Horses, Asses, or Oxen, all which they imployde either in drawing or bearing of burdens, or else let them out for Hackneyes to gaine profit by-their hyre, and when their worke was done and they had made of them what benefit they could, they restored them to their pristine shape; Ranulphus and Willielmus de Regibus lib. 20. relates a Historie of two such Witches that liued in the road-way to Rome.A strange Witch-craft. A Minstrell or Pyper trauelling that way, tasted of this cheese and was presently changed into an Asse, who notwithstanding hee had lost his shape, still retained his naturall reason, and (as one Bankes here about this citie taught his Horse to show trickes, by which he got much money) so this Asse being capable of what was taught him, and vnderstanding what he was bid to doe, showed a thousand seuerall pleasures (almost impossible to be apprehended by any vnreasonable creature) to all such as came to see him and payde for the sight, insomuch that he was sold by these Witches to a neighbour of theirs, for a great summe of money, but at the deliuerie of him sayth one of the Witches, Take heede neighbour (if you meane to haue good of your beast) that in any case you leade him not through the water: The poore transhaped Pyper this hearing, apprehends, that water might be the meanes to restore him to his former humane figure, purposing in himselfe to make proofe thereof at his next best opportunitie. Carefull was the new merchant of the charge giuen, and watered him still in a paile, but would neuer let him drinke from the riuer; but the maister trauelling by the way and to ease his beast alighting, and leading him in his hand: the Asse on the sudden broke his bridle, ran out of sight, and leaped into the next riuer he came neere, where leauing his saddle and furniture behind, he waded out in his owne shape: the man pursues him with all the speede he can, and followes him the way he tooke, the first hee meetes is the Pyper, and askes him if he saw not such a kind of beast, and describes him to a haire. The fellow acknowledgeth himselfe to haue beene the same Asse he bought of the Witch; the maister wondereth, and relates this to his Lord, his Lord acquaints this nouell to Petrus Damianus a man of approoued knowledge and wisedome, and numbred amongst the greatest schollers of his age; he examines the Maister, the Pyper, the Witches, and such as saw him leape into the riuer a Beast and returne a Man, and informes Pope Leo the seuenth thereof. All their examinations and confessions were taken, and a disputation of the possibilitie thereof held in the presence of the Pope, before whom the truth thereof was acknowledged and recorded. The same Historie is told by Viacentius in Speculo lib. 3. cap. 109. and Fulgentius lib. 8. cap. 11.
Wee reade in Gulielmus Archbishop of Tyrus,Miraculous Transformations. whom Sprangerus the great Inquisitor cites to the same purpose: An English souldier being in Cyprus, was by a Witch transformed into an Asse, and when all his mates went on ship-board, hee following them as loath to loose their fellowship, was by

his owne friends and countrey men that gaue him lost, beaten backe with clubs and staues. They put to Sea without him, and he hauing no other owner, returned backe to the Witches house that had transhaped him, who imployde him in all her drudgeries; till at length hee came into the Church when the Bishop was at diuine seruice, and fell on his knees before the Altar, and began to vse such deuout gestures as could not bee imagined to proceede from a bruit beast, this first bred admiration, and then suspition. The Witch was called before the Iudges, examined and conuicted, after condemned to the stake; hauing before restored him to his former shape after three yeares transformation. Answerable to this we reade of Ammonius the Philosopher, of the Sect of the Peripate tickes, who hath left recorded, That an Asse came vsually into his schoole at the time of reading and with great attention listened to his Lecture. Merchants haue deliuered, that nothing is more frequent in Aegypt than such transhapes, in so much that Bellonius in his obseruations printed at Lutesia, sayth, That hee himselfe in the subburbes of Caire (a great citie in Aegypt) saw a Commedian that desired conference with the Asse that he himself rode on, who wondering what he then intended gaue him libertie of free discourse; where they seemed to talke with great familiaritie (as hauing bin before acquainted) where the Asse by his actions and signes seemed to apprehend whatsoeuer was spoken to him; when the one protested with the hand vpon his brest, the other would strike the ground with his foote and when the man had spoke as if hee had told some ieast, the Asse would bray aloude as if hee had laughed heartily at the conceit, appearing to him, not onely to apprehend and vnderstand whatsoeuer was spoken, but to make answere to such questions as were demanded him. These things haue been so common, that Saint Augustine himselfe, as he will not affirme the transformation of Apuleius, so he doth not denie it, but leaues it as a thing possible to be done by Witch-craft; De Ciuitate Dei, lib. 18. cap. 18. Of the like opinion is Paulus Aegenita, Theophrast, Paracethus, Pomponalius and F^rnetius, the excellentest Physitions of their age, Fern. lib. de abditis rerum causis, You may reade in the Historie of Saint Clement, That Simon Magus transformed Faustinianus into his owne shape,Simon Magus. insomuch that he was not onely vnknowne to familiar friends, but denied and abiured by his own wife and children. This Simon came likewise to Nero, and told him if hee cut off his head hee would within three dayes appeare to him aliue; which Nero hauing caused to bee done in a great confluence of people, he came to him after according to his promise, for which Nero caused a statue to be erected to his honour, and inscribed vpon the same, Simoni Mago deo, i. To Simon Magus the god. From which time Nero wholely applyde himselfe to that diuellish Art. But Simon, as the Historie relates, had deceiued the eyes of the Emperour with the multitude, and had caused a Goat to be beheaded in his shape. The like Apuleius relates of himselfe, who when he thought he had slaine three sundrie men with his owne hand, found them after, three Goats skinnes effacinated by the Witch Pamphila. Among these Witches, it shall not be amisse to insert a shee-diuell or two.
She Diuels.Franciscus Picus Mirandulanus in his booke de Praenotione tells of a Priest who was a Witch, called Benedictus Berna, of the age of fourescore yeares, with whom he had conference, hee confessed vnto him that for the space of fortie yeares and vpward he had carnall consocietie with a she-Spirit,Hermione alias Hermelina. who called her selfe Hermione, who continually attended on him, but visible to no

man saue himselfe. He further confest that he had sucked the bloud of many infants, with other most horrid and execrable commissions; and in this Wierius and Bodin (though in many opinions they were Antagonists) agree. They relate a further historie confirmed by Cardanus de varietat. lib. 15. cap. 80. of one Pinnetus who liued to the age of seuentie yeares and vpward, and exercised the like congression with a Spirit in a feminine shape, who called her selfe Florina,Florina. and continued their familiaritie and acquaintance for the space of fortie yeares. How true or false I know not, but I haue heard the like (not many yeares since) by an English gentleman, whose name I am loath to vse, who had the like companie of a Spirit, who called her selfe Cadua;Cadua. the circumstances I cannot discouer without offence, though they be worthie both relation and obseruation.


Of Witches that haue confest themselues to haue raised tempests in a most serene Skie, with other things of no lesse admiration.
IN the booke of Inquisitors, lib. 4. de Malific. it is recorded, that anno Dom. 1488 in Constantiensis, there were terrible tempests, prodigious hail^ and stormes, the like not seene before, and these within the compasse of foure miles: but the aire or temperate heauens beyond that space seemed no way disturbed; vpon which the villagers laid hands vpon all such suspected women as were thought to be of that Deuillish practise: amongst which were two, the one called Anna de Mindele,Anna de Mindele. the other Agnes,Agnes. who first obstinately denyed themselues to be so addicted; but after being called before the magistrats, and strictly examined apart, they confest, that the one vnknowne to the other, went into the fields, where either of them made a pit in the earth, into which they poured a certaine quantitie of water, somewhat before noone, and by vttering certaine words not fit to be named, and inuoking the name of the Deuill, they were no sooner got home to their cottages, but those miraculous stormes and tempests happened. The same author specifies the confession of another Witch of the same place, who seeing all her neighbours and acquaintance inuited to a solemne wedding, where after dinner in a faire and ^^mperate day, all the guests disposed themselues into the fields to sport and dance, according to the custome, she caused her selfe to be transported into the aire by the Deuill (in the open day and sight of certaine sheepheards) to a certaine hill neere vnto the village, where because she had no water readie, she notwithstanding digged a pit, and for necessitie (because it is a ceremonie vsed in all these diabolicall practises) she made water, which stirring in the same pit, and speaking some blasphemous words, instantly the aire and skie which was then cleere and vnclouded, was filled with stormes, haile, and tempest, which poured with such vehemencie vpon the guests of the village, and vpon them alone, that they were pittiously wet and weatherbeaten, till they had not any of them a drie thred about them; all imagined this to be done by Witchcraft: the same woman was accused by the sheepheards, who confessing the fact, was adiudged vnto the stake. In this is to be obserued that the fruits, the graine, nor vines were blasted, though there is a law extant in the twelue tables, Qui fruges incantassit poenas dato, i. They that shall inchant or blast the fields let them be punished. There was another edict which prohibited any man from drawing

the fertilitie and haruest of another mans field into his owne ground, in these words, Ne alienam segetem pellexeris incantando, and in another place, Ne incantanto ne agrum defraudanto, which hath reference to the former. By the authoritie of these Roman ordinances specified in the twelue tables, Turnius was accused by Spurius Albinus, because when there was a dearth in the countrie, his fields were onely aboundant and plentifull, and where other mens cattell died of the ro^ and murren, his were fa^, faire, and in good plight and liking: vpon this accitement he caused his horses, his ox^n, his teemes, cattell, and seruants all to appeare with him before the Senate, and there pleaded that the masters eye made the cattell fat, and his care and industrie the seruant thriuing, sightly, and in good liking, protesting he knew no other inchantments; and for that answere was acquited by the Senat. Notwithstanding this, wee may reade in Sprangerus of Hyppones and Stradlinus, two famous Magitians of Germany, who confessed that they could at any time, steale the third part of the croppe out of anothers field at their pleasure; when by the most authenticke iudgements it is aprooued that no Witch or Coniurer was euer knowne to inrich himselfe the value of one mite by his Magick documents. The like I could produce out of Pontan^s and other Authors,Lib. 5. with that antient verse borrowed by all the Magitians from Virgill:
Flectere si nequeam superos acheroeta mouebo.
If to my prayers the gods will not inclineI will sollicit Hell, and make that mine.
Boetius lib. 2.In the Scottish-Cronicle it is related of king Duffus to be troubled with a strange disease, that he could eate well, drinke well, and in the constitution of his bodie found no imperfection at all, onely he could not sleepe, but spent the tedious night in faint and cold sweats, insomuch that there was despaire of the kings health and safetie: There was at length a rumor published, That the Morauians (certaine inhabitants of Scotland, once great rebells and enemies of the king, but since made regular, and reconciled to their faithfull obeysance) had hyred certaine Witches to destroy king Duffus, vpon which report, one Douenaldus was made Pre^^^^ to enquire after this businesse, and had authoritie to passe into Morauia, and if he found any such malefactors, to punish them according to their offences; he being carefull of the charge imposed on him, had such good intelligence, and withall vsed such prouidence, that hee came iust at the instant when certaine Witches were rosting of a Picture called by the name of the king, and basted it with a certaine liquor: Douenaldus surprising them in the act, examined them, who confessed the treason, and were condemned to the stake; at which instant, by all iust computation, the king recouered and was restored to his pristine rest and health. After the same manner it seemes Me^eager was tormented by his mother, the Witch Althaea,Althaea. who in the fatall Brand burned him aliue, as it is expressed at large by Ouid in his Metamorph. The like effacinations wee haue had practised in our memorie euen vpon the person of Queene Elizabeth.
A Tale of a Witch.A woman of good credit and reputation, whom I haue knowne aboue these foure and twentie yeares and is of the same parish where I now liue, hath often related vnto me vpon her credit with manie deepe protestations

(whose words I haue heard confirmed by such as were then passengers with her in the same ship). That comming from the Landsgraues Court of Hessen (where shee had beene brought a bed) to trauaile for England, and staying something long for a passage at Amsterdam (either her businesse or the wind detaining her there somewhat longer than her purpose 7 an old woman of the towne entreated her to lend her some money of a Ket^^e; which she did, knowing it to be seruiceable for her, to keepe a Charcoale fire in at Sea, to comfort her and her child. When the wind stood faire, and that she with her seruants had bargained for their passage, and they were readie to go aboord, she sent for this woman, to know if shee would redeeme her pawne, for shee was now readie to leaue the towne, and depart for her countrey. The old woman came, humbly entreating her she would not beare away her Kettle, notwithstanding she had as then no money to repay of that she had borrowed, but hoped that she was a good gentlewoman, and would proue her good mistresse, etc. she answered her againe, That she had lent her so much mony, and hauing a pawne sufficient in her hand, finding it necessarie for her purpose, she would make the best vse of it she could a shipboord. The old woman finding her resolute, left her with these words, Why then (saith shee) carrie it away if thou canst. Marry and I will crie what I can doe, replyed she againe; and so they parted. The Maister called aboord, the wind stood faire, the Sea was calme, and the weather pleasant: but they had not beene many houres at Sea, when there arose a suddaine, sad, and terrible tempest, as if the winds and waters had beene at dissention, and the distempered ayre at warre with both. A mightie storme there arose, insomuch that the Maister protested, that in his life time he had not seene the like, and being in despaire of shipwracke, desired both Saylers and passengers to betake themselues to their prayers. This word came from them that laboured aboue the Harches to those that were stowed vnder: their present feare made them truly apprehend the danger, and betake themselues to their deuotions; when suddenly one casting vp his eyes, espyed an old woman sitting on the top of the maine Mast: the Maister saw her, and all those that were aboue, being at the sight much amased. The rumor of this went downe; which the gentlewoman hearing (who was then sitting with her child in her Cabbin, and warming it ouer a Charcoale fire made in the Kettle) O God sayth she (remembring her former words) then the old woman is come after me for her Kettle; the Maister apprehending the businesse, Marrie and then let her haue it, saith he, and takes the Kettle, coales and all, and casts them ouer-boord into the Sea. This was no sooner done, but the Witch dismounts her selfe from the Mast, goes aboord the Brasse Kettle, and in a moment sailes out of sight: the Ayre cleared, the Windes grew calme, the tempest ceased, and she had a faire and speedie passage into England: and this the same gentlewoman hath often related. Nor is this more incredible than that which in Geneua is still memorable.A Witch of Geneua. A young wench instructed in this damnable science, had an Iron Rod, with which whomsoeuer she touched, they were forced to dance without ceasing, til they were tired, and lay down with wearinesse. She for her Witchcraft was condemned to the fire, to which she went vnrepentant with great obstinacie: and since which time (as Bodinus saith, who records this historie) all dancing in memorie of her is forbidden, and held euen till this day abhominable amongst those of Geneua. Our most learned writers are of opinion, that these Inchantresses can bewitch some, but not all, for there are such

ouer whom they haue no power. The same Author testifies, That he saw a Witch of Auerne,Another kind of Witchcraft. in the yere 1579, who was taken in Lutetia, about whom was found a Booke of a large Volume, in which were drawne the hayres of Horses, Oxen, Mules, Swine, and other beasts, of all colours whatsoeuer: She (if any beasts were sicke) would vndertake their cure, by receiuing some number of their hayres, with which she made her Spells and Incantations; neither could she helpe any beast, by her owne confession, but by transferring that disease or maladie vpon another; neither could shee cure any creature, if she were hyred for money: therefore she went poorely, in a coat made vp with patches. A nobleman of France sent to one of these Witches, to cure a sicke Horse whom he much loued: shee returned him answer, That of necessitie his Horse or his Groome must die, and bid him chuse whether: The nobleman crauing some time of pawse and deliberation, the seruant in the interim died, and the Horse recouered; for which fact she was apprehended and iudged. It is a generall obseruation, That the Deuill (who is a destroyer) neuer heales one creature but by hurting another, and commonly he transmits his hate from the worse vnto the better: For instance, if a Witch cure a Horse, the disease falls vpon one of higher price; if shee heale the wife, shee harmes the husband; if helpe the sonne, she infects the father. Of this I will produce one or two credible instances:The Lord Furnerius. The first, of the Lord Furnerius Aureliensis, who finding himselfe mortally (as hee thought) diseased, sent to a Witch to counsaile with her about his recouerie; who told him, there was no hope of his life vnlesse he would yeeld that his yong sonne (then sucking at the Nurses breast) should haue his mortall infirmitie confirmed vpon it. The father to saue his owne life, yeelds that his sonne should perish: of which the Nurse hearing, iust at the houre when the father should be healed, is absent and conceales the child. The father is no sooner toucht, but helped of his disease; the Witch demands for the child, to transferre it vpon him: the child is missing, and cannot be found: which the Witch hearing, broke out into this exclamation, Actum est, de me, puer vbinam est? i. I am vndone, where is the child? when scarce hauing put her foot ouer the threshold to returne home, but she fell downe suddenly dead, her body being blasted, and as blacke as an Aethiope.Example of the like. The like remarkable Iudgement fell vpon a Witch amongst the Nanuetae, who was accused of bewitching her neighbour: The magistrates commanded her but to touch the partie distempered with her Inchantments (which is a thing much vsed by all the German Iudges, euen in the Imperiall Chamber it selfe) the Witch denyed to doe it: but seeing they began to compell her by force, shee likewise cryed out, I am then vndone; when instantly the sicke woman recouered, and the Witch then in health, fell downe suddenly and died, whose bodie was after condemned to the fire: And this, Bodinus affirmes to haue heard related from the mouth of one of the Iudges who was there present. In Tholosa there was one skilfull in Magicke, who was borne in Burdegall: hee comming to visit a familiar friend of his (who was extreamely afflicted with a Quartane Ague, almost euen to death) told him he pittied his case exceedingly; and therefore if he had any enemie, but giue him his name, and he would take away the Feauer from him, and transferre it vpon the other. The sick gentleman thanked him for his loue, but told him, there was not that man liuing whom he hated so much, as to punish him with such a torment: Why then (saith he) giue it to thy seruant; the other answering, That he had not the conscience so to reward

his good seruice: Why then giue it me sayth the Magician; who presently answered, With all my heart take it you, who it seemeth, best knowes how to dispose it. Vpon the instant the Magician was stroke with the feauer, and within few dayes after dyed, in which interim the sicke gentleman was perfectly recouered. Gregorie Turonensis lib. 6. cap. 35. sayth, That when the wife of king Chilperick perceiued her young sonne to bee taken away by Witch-craft, shee was so violently incensed and inraged against the verie name of a Sorceresse, that she caused diligent search to be made, and all such suspected persons vpon the least probabilitie to be dragged to the stake, or broken on the wheele, most of these confessed that the kings sonne was bewitched to death, for the preseruation of Mummo the great Master, a potent man in the kingdome: this man in the middest of his torments smiled, confessing that he had receiued such inchanted drugs from the Sorcerists, that made him vnsensible of paine: but wearied with the multitude of torments, he was sent to Burdegall, where he not long after died. I desire not to be tedious in any thing: for innumerable Histories, to these purposes, offer themselues vnto me at this present; but these few testimonies proceeding from authenticke Authors, and the attestations of such as haue beene approouedly learned, may serue in this place, as well as to relate a huge number of vnnecessarie discourses from writers of lesse fame and credit. Neither is it to any purpose heare to s^^ake of the Witches in Lap-land; Fin-land, and these miserable and wretched cold countries, where to buy and sell winds betwixt them and the merchants, is said to be as frequent and familiarly done amongst them as eating and sleeping.
There is another kind of Witches that are called Extasists,Witches called Extasists. in whose discouerie I will striue to be briefe. A learned Neapolitan (in a Historie not long since published, that treates altogether of naturall Magicke) speakes of a Witch whom he saw strip her selfe naked, and hauing annointed her bodie with a certaine vnguent, fell downe without sence or motion, in which extasie she remained the space of three houres; after, she came to her selfe, discouering many things done at the same time in diuers remote places, which after inquirie made were found to be most certaine. Answerable to this, is that reported by the President Turetranus, who in the Delphina^ saw a Witch burned aliue, whose storie he thus relates: She was maidseruant to an honest citisen, who comming home vnexpected, and calling for her, but hearing none to answere, searching the roomes, he found her lying all along by a fire which she had before made in a priuate chamber; which seeing, he kickt her with his foot, and bid her arise like a lasie huswife as she was and get her about her businesse: but seeing her not to mooue, he tooke a tough and smart wand and belabored her verie soundly;A strange kind of Witchcruft. but perceiuing her neither to stirre nor complaine, he viewing her better, and finding all the parts of her bodie vnsensible, tooke fire and put it to such places of her bodie as were most tender, but perceiuing her to haue lost all feeling, was persuaded she was dead, and called in his next neighbours, telling them in what case he found her, but concealing vnto them the shrewd blowes he had giuen her: the neighbors left the house, the master and mistresse caused her to be laid out, so left her and went to their rest; but towards the morning, hearing some bodie to stir and gro^ne in the chamber, they found their seruant remooued, and laid in her bed, at which the good man much amased, asked her in the name of God, being la^e dead, how came she so

soone recouered? to whom she answered, Oh master, master, why haue you beaten me thus? the man reporting this amongst his nighbours, one amongst the rest said, if this be true she is then doubtlesse a Witch, and one of these Extasists: at which the Master growing suspitious, vrged her so strictly that she confessed, though her bodie was there present, yet her soule was abroad at the assemblie of diuers Witches, with many other mischiefes, for which she was held worthie of death, and iudged. At Burdegall in the yere 1571, when there was a decree made in France, against the strict prosecution of Witches, an old Sorceresse of that place, amongst many horrid and fearefull things confessed by her, she was conuicted and imprisoned, where D. Boletus visited her, desiring to be eye-witnesse of some of those things before by her acknowledged: to whom the Witch answered, That she had not power to do any thing in prison. But desirous to be better satisfied concerning such things, he commanded her for the present to be released and brought out of the Gaole to another lodging, where she in his presence hauing annointed her bodie with a certaine vnguent, from the crowne to the heele naked, fell into a sodaine apoplex, appearing to them as dead, depriued of all sence or motion: but after fiue houres returning to her selfe, as if she awaked out of a dreame, she related many things done neere and farre off in that interim; of which sending to know the truth, they found her to erre in nothing: this was confirmed to Bodinus by an Earle of great honour, who was then present when this thing was done. Olaus Magnus in his historie, saith, That those things are common in the Northren parts of the world, and that the friends of those Extasists diligently keepe and safeguard their bodies whilest their Spirits are abroad, either to carrie rings, tokens, or letters to their friends though neuer so farre off, and bring them answers backe againe, with infallible tokens of their being there. Many I could here produce to the like purpose, I will end with S. Augustine lib. de Ciuitate Dei 18. who affirmes the father of Prestantius hath confest himselfe to haue beene transported with such extasies, that when his Spirit hath returned to him againe, he hath constantly affirmed that he hath beene changed into an horse, and in the companie of others carried prouision into the campe, when in the meane time his bodie was knowne to lie at home in his chamber breathlesse, and without moouing, and this hath reference to Liranthropia, i. The changing of men into beasts. So much spoken of by the antient writers, and now so frequent in the Orientall parts of the world. Some obserue, as Strangerus Danaeus, and others, that no Witch can weepe or s^ed a teare. Others (as the Germans in some parts) that a Witch cannot sinke,Things obserued in Witches. nor drowne in the water, and therefore to trie them being suspected, they cast them into moates and riuers. They can do nothing in prison, neither will they confesse any thing till the Deuill hath qui^e forsaken them (I meane in his power to helpe them, not in his couenant to inioy them.) They are all penurious and needie, neither haue they the least power of the Iudges: they haue art to hurt others, but none any way to benefit themselues. There is not any of them but weares the Deuills marke about her. They neuer looke any man or woman stedfastly in the face, but their eyes wander of the one side or other, but commonly they are deiected downward: they answer pertinently to no question demanded them. They all desire to see the Iudges before they come to their arraignement, being of a confident opinion, that if they behold them first, the Iudges haue no

power to condemne them: but if they be first brought to the place, all their Sorceries are vaine and of no validitie. Others are remembred by D. Adamus Martinus, Procurator of Laod^num, prooued vpon the famous Witch Beibrana,Beibrana. whom hee sentenced to the stake. But these shall suffice for this present, for CALLIOPE now pluckes me by the elbow, to remember her.


Explicit Liber Octauus, Inscriptus VRANIA.


THE NINTH BOOKE, Inscribed CALLIOPE: Intreating of Women in generall, with the Punishments appertaining to the Vitious, and Rewards due to the Vertuous.
WHEN I enter into a true consideration of how many seuerall Affections, Dispositions, Actions, and Passions in Women I haue had occasion to speake^ of the Good and Bad, Famous and Infamous, Vertuous and Dishonest, Illustrious and Obscure; next, of all Ages, from the Cradle to the Graue, the Swathband to the Winding sheet^ then, of all Estates, Degrees, and Callings, from the Empresse in the Court to the Shepheardesse in the Village: when I next ponder with my selfe, that all these are gathered to the Earth from whence they came; and that wee (who are yet breathing) doe but hourely tread vpon our Graues, lingring and prolonging a few vncertaine minutes, and must necessarily follow; and that our liues are but a Circular motion, or a Circle drawne by a Compas^ ending where it first began, being but as the wheeles of a Clocke wound vp, and (as we mooue in the passage of our life) like the Hand of a Dyall, point first to one houre, then a second, so to a third, still shewing our yeeres in our growth, that any man may reade what a Clocke it is with vs by our Age: but when the Plummets and Weights haue forced our Wheeles so often about, till there is no more Lyne left, then wee cease both motion, noyse, and being: Next, that all know

they must die, but none the time when they shall die, and that as Seneca in Hercule Furente sayth:
Prima quae vitam dedit hora carpsit.
i. That the first houre of our life, takes an houre from our life. These considerations of humane frailetie (as that there is but one Life, but many wayes to destroy it; but one Death, yet a thousand meanes to hasten it) mooues me to persuade all, as well men as women, young as old, noble as base, of both Sexes, and of what calling or condition soeuer, to doubly arme themselues with constancie to abide it, and courage to entertaine it: For as Ausonius in Periandri Sententia saith, Mortem optare malum, timere peius, i. As it is ill to wish death, so it is worse to feare it: besides, as it is base Cowardise dishonourably to shun it, so it is meere Pusillanimitie despairingly to hasten it. It is obserued, such as liue best, dread it least. Let this then persuade you vnto Vertue; since to the Vicious onely it seemes terrible, why should we feare the Graue? since there the modest and chast Virgin^ lyes fearelesse and secure, though by the side of the libidinous Adulterer; there the true man may rest, and though he haue twentie Theeues about him, sleepe soundly, and neuer dreame of Robbing; there the poore Tenant is not afraid of his oppressing Landlord; nor trembles the innocent, to lye next the wicked and corrupt Iudge; the Handmaid is not frighted with the tongue of her proud and curst Mistresse, nor quakes the young scholler at the terrible voice of his Maister. There is no Brawling, but all Peace; no Dissention, but all Concord, Vnitie, and Equalitie: which Propertius in his third booke, Eleg. 5. elegantly illustrates.

Haud vllas portabis opes Acherontis ad vndas,
Nudus ad Infernus stulte vehere rates, etc.


No Wealth thou canst beare with thee (O thou foole)
All naked thou must passe the Stigian Poole:
There is no strife in Weapons, or in Wits,
But now the vanquisht with the Victor sits.
The Captiue Iugurth hath an equall place
With Consull Marius, now in eithers face
Shines Loue and Amitie. There is no Throne
For Lydian Croesus, he is now all one
With poore Dulichian Irus: no regard
Of persons there; he dies best, dies prepar'd.

Then, since all things acquire and pursue their ends, that no earthly thing hath beene made, that shall not be destroyed; why should we not with as much cheare and alacritie welcome our newest and last houre, as the Labourer desires to rest, or the wearie Traueller to come to his inne? To this purpose Seneca speakes in his Tragedie of Agamemnon:
Qui vultus Acherontis atriQui Stigia tristem non tristis videt,Audetque vitae ponere finemPar ille Regi, par superis erit.Feareles who dare gaze vponBlacke and griesly Acheron?He that merrily dare lookeOn the gloomie stygian Brooke.Who so beares his spirit so hyeThat he at any houre dares dye,A king he is in his degree,And like the gods (in time) shall bee.
Some may wonder why I haue tooke this occasion to speake of death, I am willing to giue them this satisfaction, The Muse CALIOPE vnder whom I patronise this last book, being no other than a redundance of sound, or one entire Musicke arising from eight seuerall Instruments, and therefore as shee participates from euerie one, so she exists of all; therefore in this succeeding tractate, I purpose by the helpe of the deuine assistance, to take a briefe suruey of what hath passed in the eight former bookes, to show you the punishments belonging to all such vices as I haue discouered in the frailtie of the Sex, to deterre the Vicious, and expose vnto the eyes of the Noble, Chast, and Learned, the honour and reward due to their excellent gifts, thereby to incourage the Vertuous. Then since besides the Shame or Honour in this life, the one is punished and the other glorified in the life to come, what more necessarie meditation than (that wee may liue the better) hourely to thinke of death, and that is the scope I ayme at: but before I can arriue so farre, I purpose to deliuer vnto you the dispositions, conditions, and quallities of diuerse sorts of women by me not yet remembred.

Of Women Rauished, etc.
MArpissa the daughter of Euenus was rauished by Apollo,Marpissa, shee was the wife of Idas.Perhibaea. So Proserpine the daughter of Iupiter and Ceres, by Pluto, therefore hee is called by Claudian,Europa. Ouid, and Sylus, lib, 14. the infernall Rauisher.Auge. Perhibea by Axus the sonne of Oceanus, as Europa by Iupiter, and Auge by Hercules.Phaebe. Castor and Pollux who for their valour were called Dioscuri,Ilairia. which imports as much as the issue of Iupiter; they from Messene raped the two daughters of Leucippus, Phoebe and Ilaira, whom they after married: of Pollux and Phoebe was begot and borne Mnesilius; of Castor and Ilaira, Anagon. They with their associats, Idas and Lynceas, the sons of Aphareus, had driuen away a great prey of cattell; when they came to diuide the bootie, a motion was made that an Ox should be diuided into foure, according to the number of the brothers, with this condition, that he which could deuoure his quarter first should haue the one halfe of the cattell, and hee that had next made an end of his part, should possesse the remainder. This was no sooner agreed vpon, but Idas suddenly eate vp his owne portion, and presently deuoured that which belonged to his brother, by which hee claimed the whole heard, and being stronger in faction than the Dioscuri draue the prey backe to Messene. With which iniurie the two brothers incensed, they leuied fresh forces^ inuaded Messene, and tooke from thence a much greater bootie than the former: the spoile being safely disposed off, Castor and Pollux awaited the pursuers, ambushed themselues beneath a broad

spreading Oake, quick-sighted Linces espying Castor showed him to his brother, whome Idas slew with an arrow; whom Pollux pursuing, transpiersed Linceus with his iaueline,Ap^llod. lib. 3. and vnaduisedly chasing, Idas was brained by him with a stone; for which Iupiter stroke Idas with a Thunder-bolt, and translated the two princely brothers (the Dioscuri) into starres. Of these Propert. lib. 1. thus sayth:
Non sic Leucippi succendit Castora PhoebePollucem cultu, non Ilaira soror.
Faire Phoebe did not so inflameHer Castor with desire,Nor Ilaira Pollux brestDeckt in her best attire.
Ariadne.Theseus rapt Ariadne daughter of king Ninus, as also Hellen the daughter of Tindarus and Laeda, and sister to Castor and Pollux, long before Paris, but returned her backe vnuitiated.Diomeda. Achilles forced Diomeda the daughter of Phorbas from Lesbos,Orythea. as Boreas the faire Orithea daughter of Erisicthon from Athens;Pyrene. Hercules rauished the nymph Pyrene of Bebritia, from her the Pyrenaean Mountaines tooke name, of whom Syllius:
Nomen Bebricia duxere a virgine collesHospitis Alcidae crimen, etc.
From the Bebrician maid these hills tooke name,Of her guest Hercules, the fault and blame.
Lanissa.Pyrhus sirnamed Neoptolemus the sonne of Achilles and Deiadamia rap't Lanissa the niece of Hercules,Tecmessa. Aiax the sonne of Telamon did the like to Tecmessa, of whom Horace:
Mouit Aiacem Telemone satamForma captiuae dominum Tecmessae.
Captiue Tecmessas beautiegaz'd vpon,Insnar'd her lord, the sonne of Telamon.
Aiax Oilaeus rauished Cassandra, Nessus the Centaure Deineira the wife of Hercules, sister to Meleager, and daughter to Oeneus and Althea king and queene of Calidon^Axiothia. Tleoptolemus stole Axiothia from Ephira a citie of Peloponessus, hee was the sonne of Hercules and Astioche,Astioche. he was first a suitor to Hellen, and came to the siege of Troy with nine shippes, and was after slaine by the hand of king Sarpedon. Hypodamia the daughter of Atracius and wife of Perithous, suffered the like violence by the Centaures, being heated with Wine and Lust, especially by Euritus, of whom Ouid lib. 12. thus speakes,
Euritus, Hyppodamea, alij quam quisque probabatAut poterat rapiunt --
Euritus rap't Hyppodame, and after him, the restBy his example did the like, and snatcht where they lik't best,
The great enmitie betwixt the Grecians and Barbarians, though it might

seeme to arise by reason of the distance of countries and difference of manners; yet most probable it is that their inueterate hate and irreconsilable malice, tooke first originall from diuerse rapes committed on either part: for first the Phoenician Merchanrs, exposing their commodities to publique sale in the citie of Argis,Io. when Io the kings daughter amongst other damosells came downe to the Key to take view of what marchandise she best liked, to furnish her selfe according to her womanish fancie, the Merchants beeing extreamely surprised with her beautie, seised both her and the rest of her attendants, and stowing them vnder hatches, hoised saile and transported them into Aegypt. Not long after, the Cretenses awaiting the like opportunitie, stole away Europa the daughter of the king of the Tyrians and bore her into Creet, in requitall of the former rape. The Heroes of Greece next, sailed in the great Argoe to Cholcos, pretending their iourney for the golden fleece,Medea. and raped thence Medea the daughter of Areta; after whom sending Embassadors into Greece to redemand his daughter, they returned him answere, That the barbarous Phoenicians had made no restitution nor satisfaction at all for the rape of Io, neither would they for Medea. After that, Paris the son of Priam, rather to reuenge the iniurie done to his Aunt Hesione,Hesione. than for any loue or affection to Spartan Hellen, stole her from Lacedemon and brought her to Troy in Asia. The Princes of Greece redemanding her, answere was returned, That since they made no restitution of Europa, nor of Medea, nor Hesione, neither would they of Hellena: which was the originall of that memorable siege of Troy, and the destruction of that famous citie; Herodotus, Lib. 1. Thrasimenes being enamored of the faire daughter of Pisistratus,The daughter of Pisistratus. and his affection dayly more and more encreasing, he gathered to himselfe a societie of young men, and watching the Ladie when shee came with other young damosells to offer sacrifice (according to the custome of the countrey) by the Seaside, with their swords drawne they set vpon the companie that attended her, and hauing dispiersed them, snatched her vp and hurrying her aboord, sailed with her towards Aegina. But Hyppias the eldest sonne of Pisistratus, beeing then at Sea to cleere those coasts of Pyrats, by the swiftnesse of their Ores imagining them to be of the fellowship of the Sea robbers, pursued them, boorded them, and tooke them; who finding his sister there, brought her backe with the rauishers. Thrasimenes with the rest of his faction being brought before Pisistratus, not withstanding his knowne austeritie, would neither doe him honour nor vse towards him the least submission, but with bold and vndaunted constancie attended their sentence, telling him, That when the attempt was first proposed, they then armed themselues for death and all disasters. Pysistratus admiring their courage and magnanimitie, which showed the greater in regard of their youth, called his daughter before him, and in the presence of his nobilitie, to recompence his celsitude of minde and spirit freely bestowed her vpon Thrasimenes; by which meanes he reconciled their opposition, and entertained them into new faith and obedience, no more expressing himselfe a Tyrant but a louing and bountifull father, and withall a popular citisen. Polinae lib. 5. The daughters of king Adrastus were rauished by Acesteneutrix, as Statius lib. 1. hath left remembred. Euenus the sonne of Mars and Sterope married Marpissa daughter to Oenemaus and Alcippa,Marpissa. whom Apharetas espying as she daunced amongst other Ladies, grew innamoured of, and forcibly rapt her from her companie, Plutarch. in. Paral.

Hersilia,Hersilia. with the Sabine Virgins, were likewise rap't by Romulus and his souldiers, at large described by Ouid. Lib. de Arte Amandi, 1. Lucrece, the chast Roman Matron, was stuperated by Sextus Tarquinius: of whom, Seneca in Octauia thus saith:
Nata Lucreti stuprum saeui passa Tyranni.
Eudoxia.Eudoxia being left by Valentinianus, was basely rauished by the Tyrant Maximus, who vsurped in the Empire: for which, shee inuited Gensericus out of Africke, to auenge her of the shame and dishonour done vnto her. Sigebertus in Chronicis. The same Author tells vs of Ogdilo, Duke of Boiaria, who forced the sister of king Pepin: for which iniurie done to her, the king opprest him with a cruell and bloudie warre.

Of Handmaids, Nurses, Midwiues, and Stepdames.
Plecusa.PLecusa was a Handmaid to Diana, whom Martial. Lib. 1. thus remembers:
Et cecidit sectis Icla Plecusa Crinis.
Lagopice.Lagopice is another, Lib. 7. remembred by the same Author. Cibale was the maid-seruant to a poore man called Similus,Cibale. remembred by Virgil in Morete. Phillis Troiana was the Handmaid to Phoceus,Phillis. as Briseis was to Achilles. Plinie, Lib. 36.Ocrisia. cap. 27. makes Ocrisia the Damosell to the Queene Tanaquil:Gyge. so Horace makes Cassandra to Agamemnon. Gyge (as Plutarch relates) was such to Parysatis Queene of Persia, and mother to Cyrus. Thressa was maid-seruant to Thales Milesius,Thressa. who (as Theodoricus Cyrenensis affirmes) when shee saw her maister come home durtie and myrie, as being newly crept out of a Ditch, chid him exceedingly for gazing at the starres to finde those hidden things aboue, and had not the foresight to see what lay below at his feet,Rhod. Thracia. but hee must stumble. Herodotus in Euterpe calls Rhodope (the famous Aegyptian strumpet) the Handmaid of Iadmon Sami^s, a Philosopher.Elos. Elos was a Damosell to king Athamas, from whom a great citie in Achaia tooke denomination,Lardana. and was called Aelos. Lardana (as Herodotus affirmes) was at first no better than a seruant, from whom the noble Familie of the Heraclidae deriue their first originall.Titula. Titula (otherwise called Philotis) was a Roman Virgin of the like condition, and is remembred for such by Plutarch in Camillo,Proconnesia as also by Macrob. Lib. 1. Saturnalium. Proconnesia is remembred by Plinie, who in one day brought forth two children, the one like her maister, and the other like another man with whom she had had companie;Lathris. and being borne, deliuered either child to his father. Lathris was the Handmaid to Cinthia,Cypassis. so much spoken by Propert. as Cypassis was to Cersinna the mistresse of Ouid: of whom he thus writes, Eleg. Lib. 2.
Commendis in mille modis praefecta capillisComere sed solas digna Cipasse Deas.
She rules her mistresse hayre (her skill is such)A thousand seuerall wayes, to her desires:O, worthie none but Goddesses to touch,To combe and decke their heads in costly Tyres.
Chionia was Handmaid to the blessed Anastasia,Chionia. so likewise was Galanthis to Alcmena,Galanthis. the mother of Hercules; of whom, the same Author Lib. 9. thus sayes:
Vna ministrarum media de plebe GalanthisFlaua comas aderat faciendis strenua iussis.
Amidst them all Galanthis stood,With bright and yellow haire,A wench that quicke and nimble was,Things needfull to prepare.
From Handmaids I proceed to Nurses: Annius vpon Berosus, and Calderinus vpon Statius, nominate Caphyrna or Calphurnia,Caphirna. the daughter of Oceanus, to haue beene the Nurse of Neptune, as Amalthea and Melissa were to Iupiter,Amalthea. Melissa. who fed him with the Milke of a Goat in his infancie, when hee was concealed from his father. Hence it came, that the Poets fabled how Iupiter was nursed by a Goat, for which courtesie hee was translated amongst the starres: Others say he was nursed by Adrastea and Ida,Adrastea. Ida. the two daughters of king Melisaeus; for so Erasmus teacheth in the explanation of the Adage, Copiae Cornu. Ino was the Nurse of Bacchus,Ino. as Ouid witnesseth in Ib. where he likewise calls her the Aunt to Bacchus, in this Verse:
Vt teneri Nutrix eadem Matertera Bacchi.
Of the same opinion with him is Statius, Lib. 2. Silu. But Ammonius Grammaticus makes Fesula the woman that gaue him sucke:Fesula. Plinie calls her Nisa, and saith shee was buried neere to the citie Scythopolis.Policha. Polycha was the Nurse of Oedipus, who fostered him when his father Laius cast him out in his infancie, because the Oracle had fore-told he should perish by the hand of his sonne. Barce was the Nurse to Sychaeus,Barce. the most potent and rich king of the Phoenicians, and husband to Dido: Her Virgil remembers, Aenead. Lib. 4. Charme was Nurse to the Virgin Scilla:Charme. of whom the same Author in Syri thus sayes:
Illa autem, quid nunc me inquit Nutricula torques?
i. Why,Beroe. o Nurse, doest thou thus torment me? Beroe Epidauria was Nurse to Cadmeian Semele,Aceste. the mother of Bacchus, as Aceste was to the daughters of Adrastus.Eupheme. Stat. Lib. 1. Theb. Eupheme is memorated to be the Nurse to the Muses: shee had a sonne called Erotus, who inhabited the Mountaine Pernassus,Spaco. and was wholly deuoted to Hunting, and the Chafe. Spaco was Nurse to Cyrus, who because that word in the Median Language signifies a Bitch, Cyrus was said to be nursed by a Brache; for so saith Herodotus in Clio. Archimorus (the sonne of Licurgus, king of Thrace) whose Nurse was called Hypsiphile,Hypsiphile. being left by her in the fields, was fed by a Serpent: Teste Statio. Ericlia, or Euriclia,Euriclia. was the Nurse to Vlysses. Homer. in Odyss. and Ouid. in Epist. Caieta was Nurse to Aeneas,Caieta. Lib. 7. Aenead.

Tu quoque littoribus nostris Aeneia Nutrix
Aeternam moriens famam Caieta dedisti.


And thou Aeneas Nurse, Caieta,
Vnto our Shores hast left
A neuer dying fame, because
(There) of thy life bereft,

Amicla.Alcibiades had a Nurse, whose name was Amicla, or as some would haue it Amida; his schoolemaster was Zopyrus, so saith Plutarch in Lycurg. and Alcibiad Hellanice was the Nurse to Alexander the great,Hellanice. witnesse Qu. Curtius. Acca Lauentia was Nurse to Romulus,Acca Lauentia. so saith Plinie li. 18. ca. 2. so Statius li. 1. Sil. in this Distican.

I am secura parens Thuscis regnabat in agris,
Ilia, portantem lassabat Romulus Accam.


Ilia the mother of Romulus.Our parent Ilia now secure
The Tuskan waters keepes,
The whilest in Accaes wearied armes
Young Romulus fast sleepes.

Yet Liuie, and almost all the Roman Historiographers write, that Romulus and Remus were nourst by Lupa,Lupa. wife to the sheepeheard Faustulus; she was so called because she prostituted her selfe for gaine: they were cast out by the king Amulius, and was found by the bounds of Tiber. Plinie calls her Acca Laurentia. Philix was Nurse to the Emperor Domitian,Philix. who when he was slaine, and his corse lay derided and neglected, tooke vp his bodie and putting it in a common Beare, caused it by ordinarie and mercinarie bearers to be carried to the suburbs wherein she liued, and interred it in the Latine highway, Author Sueton. Macrina was a pious and religious woman,Macrina. the disciple and scholler of Gregorie Neocaesariensis, she was Nurse and schole mistresse (in the first foundation of Christian religion) to the great Basilius, as he himselfe witnesseth in an Epistle to the Neocaesarienses. From Nurses, a word or two of Midwiues.
Phanarite.Phanarite was one, the mother of Athenean Socrates, she is remembred to be the first that disputed of Morality (that which we cal Ethick Instructions) and taught the mysticall Philosophie of the Starres and Planets, how it might be made familiar and haue correspondence with our humane and terrestriall actions. The sonne imitated the mother, and prooued as happie a Midwife of the mind, as she of the bodie, both helping into the world ripe, timely, and fruitfull issues. Volateran lib. 19. Laertius in eius vita, and Valerius Maxim. lib. 3. cap. 4. Plinie lib. 28. cap. 7. speakes of two Midwiues, the one called Sotyra,Sotyra. the other Salpe, whose opinions and rules he obserueth in the cures of many diseases; of Salpe he speakes more largely,Salpe. lib. 32. cap. 6. Lycosthenes speakes of one Philippa Midwife to Iolanta,Philippa. who indured many distresses and changes of fortune.
Of Stepmothers I will only name some few and so passe them ouer, because where they be can be exprest nothing but malice and vnnaturall crueltie in women. The histories must of force appeare harsh and vnpleasant, besides, some of their bloodie acts I haue touched before vnder another title. Ino was Sepmother to Phrixus, and Helles the daughter of Athamus; Hyppodamia, to Chrisippus; Stratonice, to Antiochus Soter; Iulia, to Anton. Caracalla; Gedica, to Cominius; Iuno, to Hercules; Opaea, to Scylis king of Scithia; Eribaea, to Mercurie; Alphriga, to Edward the second of that name before the Conquest, king of England; Martina, to Constantinus Heraclius who she slew by poison, etc.




Of Women for their Pietie and Deuotion remembred in the sacred Scriptures.
I Desire to leaue nothing vnspecified, or not remembred in this worke, that might not make the excellencie of good Women oppose in all contradiction, the excesse of the bad; and to draw (if it were possible) the worst to the imitation of the best. Hanapus c. 125. commemorates these: Rebecka,Rebecka. who when she saw the seruant of Abraham at the Well where she came to draw water, and desiring to drinke; answered cheerefully, and without delay, Drinke sir, and I will also draw water for thy Cammells till they haue all drunke their fill, Genes. 24. The Midwiues feared God, and did not according to the command of Pharaoh king of Aegypt, but preserued the male-children whom they might haue destroyed, Exod^s 1. The daughter of Pharaoh comming downe to the riuer to wash herselfe (with her handmaid) and finding the young child Moses in the arke amongst the bulrushes, she had compassion on the infant, and said, Surely this is a child of the Hebrewes; so caused him to be nursed, brought vp in her fathers court, and after adopted him her sonne, Exod. 2. Rahab the strumpet,Rahab. when she knew the spies of Ioshua to be pursued, and in danger of death, concealed them, and returned them safe to the armie, Iosh. 2. The messengers that were sent to Dauid in the wildernesse, to informe him of the proceedings of his sonne Absolon, were by a woman hid in a Well which she couered, and by that meanes deluded their pursuers, Kings 2.17. When two common Women contended before Saloman, about the liuing and dead infant, the one had a tender and relenting brest and could not indure to see the liuing child to perish, Kings 3.3. The widdow woman of Zerephath entertained Eliah as hir guest, and by her he was relieued, Kings 3. and 17. The Shunamitish woman, persuaded with her husband, that the Prophet Elisaeus might haue a conuenient lodging in her house, to go and come at his pleasure, Kings 4. and 2. When wicked Athalia had giuen strict command to destroy all the Kings seed, Iosaba the daughter of King Ioram tooke Ioas,Iosaba. one of the Kings children, and by hiding him out of the way preserued his life,Esther. Kings 4. and 11. Esther hauing commiseration of her people (when a seuere Edict was published to destroy them all, and sweepe them from the face of the earth) she exposed her selfe (with the great danger of her owne life) to the displeasure of King Ahashuerosh, purchasing thereby the freedome of her nation, and her owne sublimitie, Esther 4.5. Women ministred to the Sauiour of the world in his way as he went preaching to the towns and cities, Luk. 8. when he walked from place to place, preaching and teaching, he is said neuer to haue had more free and faithfull welcome, than in the house of Martha and Marie,Martha. Marie. Luke 10. Iohn 12. When the Scribes and Pharisees blasphemed at the hearing and seeing the Doctrine and Miracles of Christ, a certaine woman giuing deuout attention to his words, as extasied with his diuine Sermon, burst forth into this acclamation: Blessed bee the wombe that bore thee, and the brests that gaue thee sucke, Luke 11. Christ being in Bethania, in the house of Simon the leaper, as he sate at the table, there came a woman with a box of ointment of Spicknard, verie costly, and she brake the box, and poured it vpon his head; and when some said, disdaining,

To what end is this wast, for it might haue beene sold for more than Which is six pound English 300 pence, and giuen to the poore: Iesus said, Let her alone, she hath wrought a good worke on me, etc. and proceeded, Verily I say vnto you, wheresoeuer this Gospell shall be preached throughout the whole world, this also that she hath done shall bee spoken in remembrance of her. The woman of Canaan was so full of naturall pittie and maternall pietie, that she counted her daughters miserie and affliction her owne, when she said to Iesus, Haue mercie vpon me oh Lord the sonne of Dauid, for my daughter is vexed with an euill Spirit, Math. 15. The women stood by to see the Lord suffer, and followed the crosse when he was forsaken of his Apostles, Luke 23. Iohn 19. they were carefull likewise to visit him in his sepulchre, Math. 28. Luke 24. The wife of Pilat had more compassion of Christ, and more vnwilling that he should suffer vpon the crosse, than any man of whom the Scripture makes mention, Math. 27. Marke 16. Iohn 20. For deeds of charitie, and dealing almes to the poore and needie widdowes and orphans, they intreated Peter (weeping) that he would visit Tabitha being dead;Tabitha. who mooued with their teeres, kneeled and praied, at whose intercessions she was restored to life, Act. Apost. 9. Herod hauing slaine Iames the brother of Iohn with the sword, and seeing that it pleased the people, he proceeded further to take Peter, and put him in prison, deliuering him to the charge of foure quaternions of souldiers to be kept: but the Angell of the Lord appeared to him in the night, tooke off his double chaines, and led him out of prison, who hauing past the first and second watch, the yron gate opened to the Angell and him; and finding that which he thought to be a vision, to be a reall truth, he came to the house of Marie the mother of Iohn, whose sirname was Marke, where many had seperated themselues to praier. Peter knocking, a maide (whose name was Rhode) came to the doore,Rhode. who hearing and knowing Peters voice, the Scripture saith, she opened not the doore for gladnesse, but ran in and told them that Peter stood without at the entrie. In which are to be obserued two memorable women for their zeale and pietie, namely Rhode the handmaid, whose ioy was so great at the verie voice of Peter, released from the prison of Herod: and Mary her mistresse, who was a deuout harboresse, and one that gladly entertained the Disciples of Christ into her owne house (notwithstanding the persecution) to performe their zealous and religious exercises, Act. Apost. 12. Lydia a dier of purple,Lydia. beleeuing the gospell which Paul preached, was baptised with her whole household, after which she intreated them in these words, If thou thinke me worthie (saith she) to be a faithfull seruant to my Lord and God, vouchsafe to enter my house, and abide there, and she compelled vs, as Luke saith. By which is concluded, that women haue beene the readie, willing, and deuout hearers of the word of God, Act. Apost, 16. Many (no question) zealous and religious women haue to their power striued to imitate those with their best of industrie. Amongst others I might instance one, now of a great age, as hauing much past that number by which Dauid reckons the yeares of man, yet from her youth hath lead a life without any noted staine or blemish, deuout in her zeale, remarkeable in her charitie, beloued of all, hated of none, a Phisitian to the sicke, and Chirurgion to the wounded, who with her owne hands hath sent more lame and diseased persons from her gate whole and sound, than Lazarus had sores about him when he lay at the rich mans gate vnrelieued, she feeding with loaues, when that purple

glutton would not spare his crummes, she doing this out of a widowes mite when he would not doe any thing out of a Mammons treasure; happie be her resurrection, as her byrth was hopefull, whose name at the Font was a future prediction to her blessednesse aboue; Felicitie she is called on Earth, Eternall Felicitie may she inioy in Heauen.
Peter de Loyre a Frenchman in his booke of Specters, Sights, and Apparitions, hath verie well obserued, that the Syrens and Muses may bee in some sort compared together: for as there are three sorts of Nymphs, namely, of Ayre, Water, and Earth, so there are of the Muses, some that take their being from the continuall moouing and stirring of Waters; a second, made by the agitation of the Ayre engendring sounds; a third from the Earth, which is called Voice, or distinguishable words spoken to the capacitie of the hearer. So of the Syrens, Parthenope presented with a womanish,Parthenope. amiable, and inchanting face, importeth the Voice, and proceedeth from the Earth, as of the three the most materiall and weightie. Ligia denoteth Harmonie,Ligia. arrising from the melodious sounds of the Ayre. And Leucosia,Leucosia. called Albadea, or the white goddesse, is the Hierogliphick of the ebbing and flowing of the Sea, which begetteth the white froth or some, of which Venus is said to be ingendred: so that by these three, the Nymphs, the Muses, and the Syrens are comprehended: the art of Musicke existing of three things, Harmonie, Rythme, and Number; Harmonie proceeding from the Ayre; Number from the Sea, bounded within his compasse, yet as wee see in Hexamiter and Pentamiter and other verse, ebbing and flowing, according to the growth and wane of the Moone. To these is added the Voice, which the Greekes call (...) the French Romans Dictier. To Harmony are approprited Sounds; to Number or Rythme, Dances; and to the Voice, all kind of Verse. But to come to my present purpose, all these including one generall musicke, and Calliope as she participates from euerie one, so comprehending all, I thinke it not impertinent, as in a consort many Instruments make but one melodie, so in this booke to recollect my selfe and giue you a tast of many or the most heads discoursed of in the former, the better to put you in minde of the penaltie due to the Vicious, and the guerdon and reward stored for the Vertuous, and that in compendious Historie. The Goddesses, Nymphs, Graces, Muses, Sybills, Vestalls, etc. I omit, as sufficiently spoken of, and apply my selfe to things more familiar and necessarie to instruction. I begin with the bad, because my desire is to end with the best, and of Incest first.

The sister of Leucippus,
I Insist not of the seueral sorts of Incest,The sister of Leucippus. neither purpose I to stand vpon the multiplicitie of Historie, let this one serue to remember you of the former. Leucippus the sonne of Xanthius, who deriued his genealogie from Bellerephon, he was excellent both in strength and valour aboue all that liued in his dayes, not in priuat contentions onely but in forreine combustions, he demeaned himselfe with such discretion and courage, that hauing subdued the Lycians, and awed all the neighbour nations about him, hauing no enemie to inuade, nor opposite people to lift vp a rebellious hand against him, hee retired himselfe into his countrey, and laying aside his victorious armes which woon him same and honour abroad, hee abandoned himselfe to ease and the priuat pleasures of his fathers house, and now wanting

other imploiment (as idlenesse is the greatest corrupter of vertue) he began to intertaine such vnusuall flames, and vnaccustomed cogitations, as before he had no time to feele, or leasure to thinke on; for now he cast his incestuous eye vpon his sister. His passions much troubled him, at the first, and all possible meanes he vsed to shake them off, but in vaine: he liued in the same house with her, they dieted at one table, had libertie of vnsuspected conference, and he hauing nothing else to do, had only leasure to meditate on that which was fearefull to apprehend, but horrible to enterprise. To this purpose Ouid with great elegancie in remed. Amor. lib. 1. speaking of Aegistus, who in the absence of Agamemnon adulterated his queene Clitemnestra, thus writes:
Queritur Aegistus quare sit factus adulter?In promptu causa est, desidiosus erat, etc.
Doth any man demand the reason whyAegistus an adulterer was? Lo ICan tell, Because that he was idle, whenOthers at Troy were fighting, and their menLed stoutly on: to which place were accitedThe Gretian Heroes with a force vnited.He no imploiment had: There was no war,In Argos where he liued (from Troy so far)No strife in law, to which being left behind,He carefully might haue imploid his mind,That which lay plaine before him, the man proou'd,And least he should do nothing, therefore lou'd.
As Ouid of Aegistus, so may I say of Leucippus, whom rest, and want of action, in a stirring braine, and bodie, wrought this distemperature. Ashamed he was to court his sister, first because he knew her modest; a second impediment was, she was elsewhere disposed, and contracted to a gentleman of a noble familie: besides, she was his sister, to whom he wisht all good, and then to corrupt her honor, he could deuise for her no greater ill: he considered that to persuade her to her owne vndoing, would shew ill in a stranger, but much worse in a brother. In these distractions, what should he doe, or what course take? the thing he apprehended was preposterous, and the meanes to compasse it was most prodigious; for he came to his mother, told her his disease, and besought her of remedie: his words as they were vttered with feare, so they were heard with trembling, for they feauered her all ouer. Being in to the knees, hee cared not now, to wade vp to the chinne, and proceeded, That if she would not be the meanes for him to compasse his sister, notwithstanding all obstacles what soeuer, he would by speedie and sudden death rid himselfe out of all his miseries, desiring her speedie answer, or with his naked poniard in his hand, he was as readie for execution, as she to deny her assistance. I leaue to any mothers consideration but to imagine, with what strange ambiguities, his words perplexed her, and what conuulsions it bred in her bosome, euen to the verie stretching of hir heart strings: but as she knew his courage to dare, so she feared his resolution to act, therefore more like a tender hearted mother, than a vertuous minded matron, rather desiring to haue

wicked children, than none at all, she promised him hope, and assured him helpe, and after some persuasiue words of comfort, left him indifferently satisfied. What language the mother vsed to the daughter to inuite her to the pollution of her bodie, and destruction of her soule, is not in me to conceiue: I only come to the point, by the mothers mediation the brother is brought to the bed of his sister, she is vitiated, and his appetite glutted, yet not so, but that they continued their priuate meetings, in so much that custome bred impudence, and suspition certaine proofe of their incestuous consocietie. At length it comes to the eare of him that had contracted her, with attestation of the truth thereof: he, though he feared the greatnesse of Leucippus his knowne valor, and popular fauour, yet his spirit could not brooke so vnspeakeable an iniurie; he acquaints this nouell to his father, and certaine noble friends of his, amongst whom it was concluded by all iointly, to informe Xanthius of his daughters inchastitie: but for their owne safetie (knowing the potencie of Leucippus) to conceale the name of the adulterer. They repaire to him, and informe him of the businesse, intreating his secrecie till he be himselfe eye-witnesse of his daughters dishonor. The father at this newes is inraged, but armes himselfe with inforced patience, much longing to know that libidonous wretch who had dishonoured his familie. The incestuous meeting was watcht and discouered, and word brought to Xanthius that now was the time to apprehend them; he calls for lights, and attended with her accusers, purposes to inuade the chamber: great noise is made, she affrighted rises, and before they came to the doore, opens it, slips by, thinking to flie and hide her selfe; the father supposing her to be the adulterer, pursues her, and pierceth her through with his sword. By this Leucippus starts vp, and with his sword in his hand, hearing her last dying shreeke, prepares himselfe for her rescue, he is incountred by his father, whom in the distraction of the sodaine affright, he vnaduisedly assaulted and slew. The mother disturbed with the noise, hasts to the place where she heard the tumult was, and seeing her husband and daughter slaine, betwixt the horridnesse of the sight, and apprehension of her owne guilt, fell downe sodainely and expired. And these are the lamentable effects of Incest, the father to kill his owne daughter, the sonne his father, and the mother (the cause of all) to die sodainely without the least thought of repentance. These things so infortunately happening, Leucippus caused their bodies to be nobly interred, when forsaking his fathers house in Thessalie, he made an expedition into Creet, but being repulst from thence by the inhabitants, he made for Ephesia, where he tooke perforce a citie in the prouince of Cretinaea,Leucophria and after inhabited it. It is said that Leucophria the daughter of Mandrolita grew innamored of him, and betrayed the citie into his hands, who after maried her, and was ruler thereof. This historie is remembred by P^rthenius de Amatorijs, cap. 5. Of incest betwixt the father and daughter, Ouid lib. Metam. speakes of, whose verses with what modestie I can, I will giue you the English of, and so end with this argument.

Accipit obscoeno genitor sua^ viscera lecto,Cynarus and Mirha.
Virgeneosque metus le^^t Hortaturque timentem etc.


Into his obscene bed the father takes
His trembling daughter, much of her he makes,
Who pants beneath him; 'bids her not to feare,
But be of bolder courage, and take cheare.
Full of her fathers sinnes, loath to betray
The horrid act, by night she steales away
Fraught, that came thither emptie; for her wombe
Is now of impious incest made the Tombe.

The punishment of incest.Next to the sinne I will place the punishment. Iacob blessing his children, said to Reuben, Thou shalt be poured out like water, thine excellencie is gone because thou hast defiled thy fathers bed, Genes. 49. Absolon went in to his fathers concubines, and soone after was slaine by the hand of Ioab, Kings 2.16. and 18. Of later times I will instance one Nicolaus Estensis, Marquesse of Ferrara, who hauing notice that his sonne Hugo (a toward and hopefull young gentleman) had borne himselfe more wantonly than reuerence and modestie required,Parisia. in the presence of his stepmother Parisia, of the familie of Malatestae; and not willing rashly either to reprooue or accuse them, he watcht them so narrowly by his intelligencers and spies, that he had certaine and infallible testimonie of their incestuous meetings, for which setting aside all coniugall affection, or paternall pittie, he caused them first to be cast in strict and close prison, and after vpon more mature deliberation, to be arraigned, where they were conuicted, and lost their heads, with all the rest that had beene conscious of the act, Fulgos. lib. 6. cap. 1. I will borrow leaue to insert heare one remarkable punishment done vpon a Iew at Prague in Bohemia, in the yeare 1530, who being taken in adulterie with a Christian woman, they compelled him to stand in a tonne pitched within, they boared a hole, in which they forced him to put in that part with which he had offended: iust by him was placed a knife without edge, blunted for the purpose, and there he stood loose, saue fastened by the part aforesaid; fire being giuen, he was forced through the torment of the heat, with that edgelesse knife to cut away that pars virilis and ran away bleeding, after whom they set fierce mastifes, who worried him to death, and after tore him to peeces, Lychost. in Theatro Human. vitae.


Of Adulterie.
The wife of Argento Coxus.THe wife of Argento-Coxus Calidonius, being tanted by Iulia Augusta, because it was the custome of their countrie for the noble men and women promiscuously to mixe themselues together, and to make their appointments openly without blushing; to her thus answered, I much commend the custome of our countrie aboue yours, we Calidonians desire consocietie with our equals in birth and qualitie, to satisfie the necessarie duties belonging to loue and affections, and that publickely; when your Roman Ladies professing outward temperance and chastititie, prostitute your selues priuatly to your base groomes and vassals. The same is reported to haue beene spoken by a Brittish woman, Dion Nicaeus Xiphilin in vita seueri. Her words were verified (as in many others that I could heere produce) so in the French Queene Fredigunda,Fredigunda. who though she infinitly flattered the King Chilpericus her husband outwardly, yet she inwardly affected one Laudricus, to whom she communicated her person and honour: these in the Kings absence were scarce to be found asunder, in so much that Chilperick himselfe could not more freely command her person by his power, than

the other by his loose and intemperate effeminacies. It happened, the king being on hunting, and leauing the Chase before his houre, stole suddainely vpon his Queene, and comming behind her as shee was taking her Prospect into the Garden, sportingly toucht her vpon the head with the Switch hee had then in his hand, without speaking: shee not dreaming of the kings so suddaine returne, and thinking it had beene her priuate friend, (without looking backe) Well sweet-heart Landricus (saith shee) you will neuer leaue this fooling; and turning towards him withall, discouered the king, who onely biting his lippe, departed in silence. Shee fearing the kings distaste, and consequently his reuenge, sends for Landricus, and as if the king had beene the offendor, betwixt them two conspired his death, and within few dayes affected it (for seldome doth Adulterie but goe hand in hand with Murther.) From the Sinne, I come to the Punishment.
Amongst the Israelites, it was first punished with Fin^s,The punishment of Adulterie. as may be collected from the historie of Thamar: who being with child by Iudas, hee threatened her to the stake, and had accordingly performed it, had shee not shewed by manifest tokens that he himselfe was the author of her vnlawfull issue; Genes. 38. The Aegyptians condemned the Adulterer so deprehended to a thousand Scourges, the Adulteresse to haue her Nose cut off, to the greater terror of the like Delinquents: Diodor. Sicul. Lib. 2. cap. 2. Coel. Lib. 21. cap. 25. By Solons Lawes, a man was permitted to kill them both in the act, that so found them: Rauis. In Iudaea they were stoned to death. Plat. Lib. 9. de Legibus punisheth Adulterie with death. The Locrenses (by tradition from Zaluces) put out the Adulterers eyes. The Cumaei prostituted the Adulteresse to all men, till shee died by the same sinne shee had committed: Alex. ab Alex. Lib. 4. cap. 1. It was a custome amongst the antient Germans, for the husband to cut off his wiues haire so apprehended, to turne her out of doores naked, and scourge her from Village to Village. One bringing word to Diogenes, That a fellow called Dydimones was taken in the Act: Hee is worthie then (saith hee) to be hanged by his owne name; for Didymi in the Greeke Tongue are Testiculi, in English the Testicles, or immodest parts. By them therefore (from whence he deriued his name, and by which he had offended) he would haue had him to suffer: Laert. Lib. 6. Hyettus the Argiue slew one Molurus, with his wife, apprehending them in their vnlawfull congression: Coelius. Iulius Caesar repudiated his wife for no other reason, but because P. Clodius was found in his house in womans Apparrell. And being vrged to proceed against her, hee absolutely denyed it, alledging, That hee had nothing whereof to accuse her: but being further demanded, Why then hee abandoned her societie? hee answered, That it was behoofefull for the wife of Caesar, not onely to be cleare from the sinne it selfe, but from the least suspition of crime: Fulgos. Lib. 6. cap. 1. Augustus banished his owne Daughter and Neece (so accused) into the Island called Pandateria (after into Rhegium) commanding at his death, That their bodies (being dead) should not be brought neere vnto his Sepulchre. To omit many, Nicolaus the first Pope of that name, excommunicated king Lotharius (brother to Lewis, the second Emperour) because hee diuorced his wife Therberga,Therberga. and in her roome instated Gualdrada,Gualdrada. and made her Queene. Besides, he degraded Regnaldus, Archbishop of Treuers, and Gunthramus Archbishop of Collen, from their Episcopall dignities, for giuing their approbation to that adulterate Marriage.

And so much for the punishment: I will conclude with the counsaile of Horace, Lib. 1. Satyr. 2.

Desine Matronas sectarier, vnde laboris
Plus haurire mali est, quam ex re decerpere fructum est.


Cease Matrons to pursue, for of such paine
Thou to thy selfe more mischiefe reap'st than gaine.



Sisters that haue murdred their Brothers.
Fratricides.AFter the vntimely death of Aydere, his brother Ismael succeeded him in the Persian Empire, who arriuing at Casbin was of his sister receiued with ioy, and of the people with loude acclamations: and beeing now possessed of the Imperiall dignitie, the better (as hee thought) to secure himselfe, hauing power answerable to his will, after the barbarous custome of the Turkish tyrannie, he first caused his eight younger brothers to be beheaded, stretching his bloodie malice to all or the most part of his owne affinitie, not suffering any to liue that had beene neere or deere to his deseased brother; so that the ^^ttie Casbin seemed to swimme in blood, and ecchoed with nothing but lamentations and mournings. His crueltie bred in the people both feare and hate, both which were much more increased when they vnderstood hee had a purpose to alter their forme of religion (who with great adoration honour their prophet Aly) into the Turkish superstition; his infinite and almost incredible butcheries concerne not my proiect in hand, I therefore leaue them and returne to his sister whose name was Periaconcona,Periaconcona. who when this Tyrant was in the middest of his securities, and the sister (as hee imagined) in her sisterly loue and affection; vpon a night when he was in all dissolute voluptuousnesse sporting amidst his concubines, she into whose trust and charge he had especially committed the safetie of his person, hauing confederated with Calilchan, Emirchan, Pyrymahomet, and Churchi Bassa, the most eminent men in the Empire, admitted them into the Seraglio in womans attyre, by whom with her assistant hand in the middest of his luxuries hee was strangled: an act though happily beneficiall to the common good, yet ill becomming a sister, vnlesse such an one as striued to paralel him in his vnnaturall cruelties, Turkish Histor.
QuendredaEquall with this was that of Quendreda, who after the death of Ranulphus king of Mercia, his young sonne Kenelme, a child of seuen yeares of age raigning in his stead, whose royall estate and dignitie beeing enuied by his sister, shee conspired with one Heskbertus, by whose treacherous practise the king was inticed into a thick forrest, and there murdered and priuatly buried; his bodie long missed and not found, and the conspirators not so much as suspected: But after, as Willielm. de regib. li. 1. and de Pontificibus lib. 4. relates, a Doue brought in her bill a scroule written in English golden letters, and layde it vpon the Altar of Saint Peter, which being read by an Englishman contained these words (by which the place where the bodie lay was discouered) At Clent in Cowbach Kenelme Keneborne lyeth vnder Thorne, heaued by weaued, that is in plainer English, At Clent in Cowbach vnder a thorne Kenelme lyeth headlesse slaine by treason. Some say it was found by a light which streamed vp into the Ayre from the place where his bodie lay couered. His hearse being after borne towards his sepulchre, to be a second time

interred, with solemne Dyrges sung by the Churchmen. Quendreda sitting then in a window with a Psalter in her hand, to see the funerall solemnely passe by, whether in skorne of the person, derision of the ceremonie, or both,The punishment of Fratricides. is not certaine, but she began to sing the Psalme of Te Deum laudamus backeward; when instantly both her eyes dropped out of her head, with a great flux of blood which stained her booke, and it was after kept as a sacred relique in memorie of the diuine iudgement. What need I trouble you with citing antiquities how this sinne ought to be punished on earth, when we see how hatefull it is in the eyes of Heauen; besides, to insult vpon the bodies of the dead is monstrous, and euen in things sencelesse to be punished. Ausonius remembers vs of one Achillas, who finding a dead mans skull in a place where three sundrie wayes deuided themselues, and casting to hit it with a stone, it rebounded againe from the skull and stroke himselfe on the forehead, his words be these:
Abiecta in triuijs inhumati glabra iacebatTesta hominis, nudum iam cute caluicium,Fleuerant alij, fletu non motus Achillas, etc.
Where three wayes parted, a mans skull was found,Bald, without haire, vnburied aboue ground:Some wept to see't, Achillas more obdure,Snatcht vp a stone, and thinkes to hit it sure;He did so, At the blow the stone rebounds,And in the face and eyes Achillas wounds.I wish all such whose impious hands prophaneThe dead mans bones, so to be stroke againe.


Of Mothers that haue slaine their Children, or Wiues their Husbands, etc.
MEdea,Parricides, etc. the daughter of Oeta king of Colchos, first slew her young brother in those Islands, which in memorie of his inhumane murther still beare his name, and are called Absyrtides; and after, her two sonnes, Macareus and Pherelus, whom she had by Iason. Progne, the daughter of Pandion, murthered her young sonne Itis (begot by Tereus the sonne of Mars) in reuenge of the rape of her sister Philomele. Ino (the daughter of Cadmus) Melicertis, by Athamas the sonne of Aeolus. Althea the daughter of Theseus, slew her sonne Meleager, by Oeneus the sonne of Parthaon. Themisto (the daughter of Hypseus) Sphincius, or Plinthius, and Orchomenus, by Athamas, at the instigation of Ino, the daughter of Cadmus. Tyros (the daughter of Salmoneus) two sonnes, begot by Sysiphus the sonne of Aeolus, incited thereto by the Oracle of Apollo. Agaue (the daughter of Cadmus) Pentheus, the sonne of Echion, at the importunitie of Liber Pater. Harpalice, the daughter of Climenus, slew her owne father, because he forcibly despoyled her of her honor. Hyginus in Fabulis.
These slew their Husbands. Clitemnestra (the daughter of Theseus) Agamemnon, the sonne of Atreus. Hellen (the daughter of Iupiter and Laeda) Deiphebus, the sonne of Priam and Hecuba; hee married her after the death of Paris. Agaue, Lycotherses in Illyria, that she might restore the kingdome to her father Cadmus. Deianira (the daughter of Oeneus and Althea) Hercules,

the sonne of Iupiter and Alcmena, by the Treason of Nessus the Centaure^ Iliona (the daughter of Priam) Polymnest^r, king of Th^^ce, Semyramis her husband Ninus, king of Babylon, etc. Some haue slaine their Fathers, others their Nephewes and Neeces; all which being of one nature, may be drawne to one head: And see how these prodigious sinnes haue beene punished.
Martina.Martina, the second wife to Heraclius (and his Neece by the brothers side) by the helpe of Pyrrhus the Patriarch poysoned Constantinus, who succeeded in the Empire, fearing least her sonne Heraclius should not attaine to the Imperiall Purple, in regard that Constantinus left issue behind him two sonnes, Constantes and Theodosius, which he had by Gregoria,Gregoria. the daughter of Nycetas the Patritian: notwithstanding, hee was no sooner dead, but shee vsurped the Empire. Two yeeres of her Principalitie were not fully expired, when the Senate reassumed their power, and called her to the Barre; where they censured her to haue her Tongue cut out, least by her eloquence shee might persuade the people to her assistance: her sonne Heraclius they maimed of his Nose, so to make him odious to the multitude; and after, exiled them both into Cappadocia. Cuspinianus in vita Heraclij. A more terrible Iudgement was inflicted vpon Brunechildis,Brunechildis. whose Historie is thus related: Theodericus, king of the Frenchmen, who by this wicked womans counsaile had polluted himselfe with the bloud of his owne naturall brother, and burthened his conscience with the innocent deaths of many other noble gentlemen, as well as others of meaner ranke and qualitie; was by her poysoned and depriued of life: for when he had made a motion to haue taken to wife his Neece, a beautifull young Ladie, and the daughter of his late slaine brother, Brunechildis with all her power and industrie opposed the Match, affirming that Contract to be meerely incestuous, which was made with the brothers daughter; shee next persuaded him, that his son Theodebertus was not his owne, but the adulterate issue of his wife by another: at which words he was so incensed, that drawing his sword, hee would haue instantly transpierst her; but by the assistance of such Courtiers as were then present, shee escaped his furie, and presently after plotted his death, and effected it as aforesaid. Trittenhemius de Regib. Francorum, and Robertus Gaguinus, Lib. 2. Others write, that hee was drowned in a Riuer, after hee had reigned eighteene yeeres. Auentinus affirmes, That presently after hee had slaine his brother (entring into one of his cities) hee was strucke with Thunder. Annal. Boiorum, Lib. 3.Punishment due to Regicides. But this inhumane Butcheresse Brunechildis (after shee had beene the ruine of an infinite number of people, and the death of ten kings) at length moouing an vnfortunate warre against Lotharius (to whom shee denyed to yeeld the kingdome) shee was taken in battaile, and by the Nobilitie and Captaines of the Armie condemned to an vnheard of punishment: She was first beaten with foure Bastoones (before shee was brought before Lotharius) then all her Murthers, Treasons, and Inhumanities were publikely proclaimed in the Armie; and next, her Legges and Hands being fastened to the tayles of wild Horses, pluckt to pieces, and disseuered limbe from limbe, Anno 1618. Sigebertus Trittenhemius, Gaguinus, and Auentinus. And such bee the earthly punishments due to Patricides and Regicides. Touching Patricides, Solon (when hee instituted his wholesome Lawes) made no Law to punish such, as thinking it not to be possible in nature to produce such a Monster. Alex.

Lib. 2. cap. 5. Romubus appointing no punishment for that inhumanitie, included Patricides vnder the name of Homicides, counting Manslaughter and Murther abhorred and impious, but the other impossible: Plutarch^ in ^^amulo. Marcus Malleolus hauing s^aine his mother, was the first that was euer condemned for that fact amongst the Romans; his Sentence was to be sowed in a Sack, together with a Cock, an Ape, and a Viper, and so cast into the Riuer Tiber: a iust infliction for such immanitie. The Macedonians punished Patricides and Traitors alike, and not onely such as perso^ally committed the fact, but all that were any way of the confederacie. Alex. ab Alex. Lib. 3. cap. 5. and all such were stoned to death. The Aegyptians stabbed them with Needles and Bodkins, wounding them in all the parts of their bodie, but not mortally; when bleeding all ouer from a thousand small orifices, they burnt them in a pyle of Thornes: Diodor. Sical. Lib. 2. cap. 2. de rebus antiq. The Lusitanians first exiled them from their owne confines, and when they were in the next forraine ayre, ^to^ed them to death. Nero hauing slaine his mother Agrippin^ by the hand of Anicetes, had such terror of mind and vnquietnesse of conscience, that in the dead of the night he would leape out of his bed horribly affrighted, and say, (when they that attended him, demanded the cause of his disturbance) That he heard the noyse of Trumpets, and charging of Battailes, with the groanes of slaughtered and dying men, from the place where his mother was interred. Therefore he often shifted his houses, but all in vaine, for this horror still pursued him, euen to his miserable and despairing end; for so Xiphilinus testates, the Abbreuiator of Dion. in Nerone.
The perfidiousnesse of Husbands to their Wiues hath been thus punished. By the Law I^l^^, all such were condemned as rioted and wasted the Dowries of their wiues. The Romans did not onely hold such, impious and sacrilegious, that prophaned their Temples, and despised the Altars of the gods, but those also that were rudely robustious, and layd violent hands vpon their wiues and children; in such a reuerent estimation they held fatherly loue and coniugall pietie. Alex. Lib. 4. cap. 8. Almaricus hauing married the sister of the French king, and vsing her most contumeliously and basely (for no other reason, but that she was a faithfull follower of the true Religion,Punishments of vniust Diuorce. and quite renounced Arrianisme) was by her brother Chilbertus vexed and tormented with a bloudie and intestine warre. Michael Ritius, Lib. 1. de Regib. Francorum. M. Valer. Maximus and C^i. ^anius Brut^s being Censors, remoued L. Antonius from the Senate for no other reason, but that without the aduice and counsaile of his friends he had repudiated a Virgin, to whom hee had beene before contracted. Val. Maxim. Lib. 2. cap. 4. So Tiberius Caesar discharged an eminent Roman from his Quaestorship, for diuorcing his wife the tenth day after he had beene married; accounting him meerely void of faith, or constancie, that in a businesse so weightie, and of so great moment, in so small a time exprest himselfe variable and inconstant. Alex. Lib. 4. cap. 8. Rhodulphus Veromandorum Conies forsooke his wife, to marrie the sister of the Queene Petronilla, for which he was excommunicated by the Church of Rome; and the Bishop Laudunensis, Bartholomaeus Noui^comensis, and Simon Peter Syluanectensis, that were assistants to the Earle Rhodulphus in that vniust Diuorce, were all suspended by the Pope. Robertus Abbas in Chronicis. The reuenge of these libidinous insolencies was most app^rant in the Emperour Andronicus, who after the death of Emanuel (who

preceded him) caused his sonne (the immediate heire to the Empire) to be sowed in a Sacke and cast into the Sea. And being now securely installed in the Constantinopolitane Principalitie, besides a thousand Butcheries, Slaughters, and other insufferable Cruelties, he addicted himselfe to all luxurious intemperance, as vitiating Virgins, corrupting Matrons, contaminating himselfe with shamefull Whoredomes and Adulteries^ not sparing the religious Nunneries, but forcing the Cloysters; rauishing thence whom hee pleased to glut his greedie and insatiate lust, and when his owne desires were qualified, would deliuer them vp to be stuperated by his groomes and vassales. With whose vnbridled appetites, and insufferable madnesse; the people being vexed and tyred, they inuited Isacius to the Empire, and besieging the Tyrant, tooke him and presented him before the Emperour elected; who, because he had so maliciously trespassed against euerie man, deuised for him a punishment that might giue satisfaction to all: hee therefore first caused him to put off his Imperiall Robes, and to appeare no other than a priuate man, such as he had maliciously offended; next, caused one of his eyes to be pluckt out (the punishment deuised by Lycurgus for Adulterers;) hee mounted him vpon an Asse, with his face towards the tayle, which being forced to hold in his hand, and putting a Garland of Derision about his temples, commanded him to be led through all the streetes of the citie, allowing all men and women to speake against him what opprobry they pleased, without limitation, and doe him all outrages that stretched not to destroy his life. Thus was the Tyrant conducted along through an implacable multitude, entertained by the way with Clamors, Shouts, Raylings, Curses, and all manner of Contempts and Derisions, some spitting, others casting soyle and durt, the women emptying vncleanely Vessels vpon his head; insomuch, that no disgrace or abiect vsage could be deuised, of which he was not then in some kind sensible.Whoredome punished. This done, he was carried to the common place of execution, and there like a Felon hanged vpon the gallowes. Guido Bituricensis. And this which was done to him, vndoubtedly belongs to all such shamelesse, barbarous, and brutish women, who with brasen impudence hauing abandoned all grace and goodnesse, expose themselues to the profession of all impuritie and abhominable dishonestie, making their corrupt bodies no better than Sinkes of Sinnes, and Spittles of Diseases; not onely pleased in their owne ruines, without the destruction of others, till their Soules be euerie way as leprous as their infected Bodies: nay more, since the Maladies and Aches of the one is but momentarie, and for them the Graue is a Bed of Rest, and Death the Surgeon; but the other are permanent and endlesse, namely, those of the Soule; of which, Hell is the Prison, and the Deuill the Tormentor. From these greater, I now proceed to lesse; and though not in that measure, yet in some kind punishable.


Of Loquacitie and Excesse, and how they haue beene punished.
BEcause I desire Women to entertaine nothing, either to the preiudice of themselues, or others, I could ingeniously wish, by taking away the cause to remooue the effect^ and by suppressing the temptation, to cut off all occasion that might allure men to offend. Two things there

are, that be great corrupters of Modestie, and prouokers to Sinne; namely, Wanton and vnbridled Discourse, and vaine and fantasticke prodigalitie in Attyre: I will speake a little of the due reprehension belonging vnto these, ere I begin with others. If then the tongue be the Orator of the heart, and by our words our minds are specially signified, how much care ought women to haue what they speake, and with what modestie to gouerne the Organ of their thoughts, since corrupt words arise from corrupt apprehensions, and nothing but what is pure and irreprouable should proceed from a heart that is without staine and blemish. Besides, too much Loquacitie I could wish you to forbeare, with which many of your Sex hath beene vnsparingly branded. Many also haue accused you to be so open breasted, that you cannot conceale any secret committed vnto your trust. I aduise you to be counsailed by Horace, Lib. 1. Epistot. ad Saeuam.

Sed tacitus pasci si posset Corvus, haberet
Plus dapis, and rixae multo minus inuidiaeque.


Would the Crow eat in silence, and not prate,
Much better she might seed, with much lesse hate.

It is reported of Theocritus Chius,Punishment of Loquacitie. being taken in battaile, that in the way as the souldiers conducted him, with purpose to present him before the king Antigonus, they persuaded him when hee appeared before the eyes of the Conqueror, to beare himselfe with all submisse humilitie, and no doubt but he should find the Prince royall. He rather willing to hasard his life, than lose his ieast (notwithstanding his bonds and captiuitie) thus answered: If I cannot be assured of safetie till I be brought before the eyes of your king Antigonus, he hauing but one eye (for he had lost the other in battaile) what then shall become of me? At which words Antigonus being enraged, caused him instantly to be slaine; who had he kept his tongue, might haue beene sent home safe and ransomelesse. Fulgos. Lib. 8. cap. 1. Plautus in Asinaria thus reprooues your verbositie:
Nam multum loquaces merito habemur omnesNec mutam profecto repertam vllam esseHodie dicunt mulierem, illo in seculo.
Great praters all we women are, they say,And full of words: there's not amongst vs foundAny that can keepe silence, but betrayOur selues we must (and seeke the whole world round.)
If then Loquacitie be so reproueable in your Sex,Punishment of Lying. how ill then would Lyes (which women tearme Excuses) appeare in your mouthes? For who will beleeue the chastitie of your Liues, that finds no truth in your Lippes? It is reported of two Beggars, who watching Epiphanius (a zealous and charitable man) as he came forth of his gates, to gaine of him the greater almes, the one of them fell prostrate vpon the earth, and counterfeited himselfe dead, whilest the other seemed pittiously to lament the death of his companion, desiring of Epiphanius something towards his buriall: The good man wished rest to the bodie diseased, and drawing out his Purse,

gaue bountifully towards his Funerall, with these words; Take charge of his Corse, and cease mourning my sonne, for this bodie shall not presently rise againe; and so departed: who was no sooner gone, but the Beggar commending his fellow for so cunningly dissembling, iogges him on the elbow, and bids him rise, that they might be gone; but he was iustly punisht for his dissimulation, for he was strucke dead by the hand of Heauen: which his fellow seeing, ran after Epiphanius with all the speed he could make, desiring him humbly to rayse his companion againe to life: to whom he answered, The Iudgements of God once past, are vnchangeable; therefore what hath happened beare with what patience thou canst. Zozomenus, Lib. 7. cap. 26. Therefore Plantus in Mercatore thus sayth:
Mihi scelus videtur me parenti proloqui mendacium.
i. It appeares a heynous thing to me, to lye to my father. If Lying be so detestable, what may we thinke of Periurie?Punishment of Puriurie. The Indians vsed to sweare by the water Sandaracines (a floud so called,) and who violated that Oath, was punished with death, or else they were curtailed of their Toes and Fingers. In Sardinia was a Water, in which if the Periurer washt his eyes, hee was instantly strucke blind, but the innocent departed thence purer in his fame, and more perfect in his sight. Alex. Lib. 5. cap. 10. Miraculous are those Ponds in Sicilia,Aristotle calls this Fountaine Acedinus. called Palici, neere to the riner Simethus, where Truths and Falsehoods were strangely distinguished: The Oathes of men and women being written in Tables, and cast in them, the Truths swum aboue water, and the Lyes sunke downe to the bottome. All such as forswore themselues, washing in these waters, dyed not long after, but others returned thence with more validitie and strength. The sinne of Periurie was hatefull amongst the Aegyptians, and the punishment fearefull. All Periurers had their heads cut off, as those that had two wayes offended, in their pietie towards the gods, and in their faith to men. Diodor. Sicul. Lib. 2. cap. 2. de rebus antiquis.
From instructing your Tongues, I come next to your Attyres: but hauing touched it elsewhere, I will onely speake of the iust Taxation, luxurious Habite, or prodigalitie in Apparrell hath been branded with in all ages, and reprooued in all persons, especially in such whose garments exceed their estates, which argues apparant pride; or such as pretend to be meere Fashion-mongers, pursuing euery fantasticke and outlandish garbe, and such may iustly be reprooued of folly: but since they are both so common in our Nation, to discouer both too plainely, I should but contend against custome, and seeking to please few, offend many. There was a Law amongst the Grecians, That all such as vainely spent their patrimonie, either in riotous excesse, or prodigalitie in attyre, as well women as men were not suffered to be buried in the sepulchres of their fathers. Alex. Lib. 6. cap. 14. So hatefull was sprucenesse in habite, and effeminacie amongst the Macedonians, that Philip (the father of Alexander) depriued a Nobleman of Tarentum of all his Honours and Offices, because hee but delighted in warme Bathes, thus reproouing him: It seemes thou art neither acquainted with the customes nor manners of the Macedonians, amongst whom thou hast not once heard of a woman (though great with child) that euer washt but in cold water. I see not how that which is so reprooueable in men, can be any way commendable in women. What shall we thinke then of those affected pleasures

now adayes so much in vse, as Riots, Reuels, Banquets, Pride, Surfets, Vinocitie, Voracitie: which as in men (I meane being vsed in excesse) they appeare odious, so in young Virgins, in whom should be nothing but affected Modestie; in married Wiues, that ought to be presidents of Chastitie; and temperate and graue Matrons, that should be the patternes and imitable obiects of sincere Vertue, they cannot but shew abhominable. The inconuenience of these Excesses, Silius Italicus well obserued, Lib. 15. de Bello Punici, when he thus said:
--Inde aspice latePunishment of Prodigalitie and Excesse.Florentes quondam luxus quas vertitit vrbesQuippe nec Ira Deum tantum, nec tela, etc.
--Thence looke abroad and seeHow many flourishing Cities ruin'd bee,Famous of old, since neither the Gods Rage,The hostile Weapon, nor the Enemies strage,Hath ruin'd Man in that abundant measure,As Riot hath, mixt with vnlawfull pleasure.
These are the sinnes that punish themselues, who as it is said of Lust, carrie their owne whips at their girdles. I was bold in some part of this Worke (presuming on the goodnesse of your Sex) as to say, There was no excellent gift in man, which was not in some sort paralleld by one woman or other. Therefore if any of you haue beene or are still addicted to these enormities, I entreat them but to remember what is writ of Themistocles, who in his youth was so wholly giuen ouer to all dissolutenesse, namely these two excesses, Wine and Women, that his father banished him his house, and his owne mother through griefe strangled her selfe. Valer. Max. Lib. 6. cap. 11: But after Miltiades was made Generall, and fought that memorable battaile at Marathon, in which (against infinite oddes) hee defeated the Barbarians, there was neuer any thing seene or knowne in him, which was not modest and comely. And being demanded, how hee came so suddainely changed, Militia inquit, etc. The thought of Warre (saith hee) will admit neither slouth in me, nor wantonnesse: Plutarch. in Grecor. Apotheg. Would you but entertaine into your thoughts as settled an enmitie against all Vices (your publike enemies) as hee did against the Persians (the forraine inuaders) you shall vndoubtedly (after the Battaile of the Mind, constantly fought against all barbarous temptations) be ranked equall with him in all his triumphs. It is likewise recorded of Isaus, an Assyrian Sophist, who in his youth being giuen to all voluptuousnesse and effeminate delicacies, but comming to riper vnderstanding, assumed to himselfe a wonderous continencie of life, and austeritie in all his actions: insomuch, that a familiar friend of his seeing a beautifull young woman passe by, and asking him, If shee were not a faire one? To him hee answered, (...), i. Desij laborare de oculis, i. I am no more sicke of sore eyes. To another that demanded, What Fish of Fowle was most pleasant to the taste? hee replyed, (...), i. I haue forgot to looke after them; and proceeded, I perceiue that I then gathered all my Fruits out of the Garden of Tantalus: insinuating vnto vs, that all those vaine Pleasures and Delights, of which Youth is so much enamored,

are nothing else but shadowes and dreames, such as Tantalus is said to be fed with.


Of seuerall degrees of Inchastities, and of their Punishments.
PHilip of Macedon making warre against the Thebans, Aeropus and Damasippus, two of his cheefe captaines, had hyred a mercenarie strumpet and kept her in one of their tents; which the king hearing, he not onely cashiered them from their commaunds, but banished them his kingdome: Polynaeus, lib. 4. In Germanie Chastitie and Modestie is held in that reuerent respect, that no meane Artificer though of the basest trade that is, will entertaine a Bastard into his seruice or teach him his science: neither in the Accademies will they permit any such to take degree in schooles; though it be a strange seueritie against innocent children, who gaue no consent to the sinnes of their parents, yet it is a meane to curbe the liberties of men and women, deterring them from the like offences. Aeneus Siluius, lib. 1. of the sayings and deeds of king Alphonsus, tells vs of one Manes Florentinus, who being taken in forbidden congression with a strumpet, was adiudged to pennance, which was not altogether as our custome in England is, to stand in a white sheete, but naked all saue a linnen garment from his wast to his knees, after the fashion of Bases; the Priests comming to strip him in the Vestrie, would haue put vpon him that roabe to couer his shame, which hee no way would admit, but was constantly resolued to stand (as our phrase is) starke naked: but when the church officers demanded of him, If he were not ashamed to shew his virile parts in such a publike assemblie (especially where there were so many Virgins, married Wiues, and widow Women?) he answered, Minime gentium, nam pudenda haec quae peccauerunt, ea potissimum dare panas decet, i. By no meanes, quoth he, most fit it is that those shamefull things that haue offended and brought me to this shame, should likewise doe open penance. Pontius Offidianus, a knight of Rome, after he had found by infallable signes his daughters virginitie to be dispoyled and vitiated by Fannius Saturnius her schoole-maister, was not content to extend his iust rage vpon his seruant, and punish him with death, but hee also slew his daughter, who rather desired to celebrat her vntimely exequies, than follow her to her contaminated Nuptialls. Val. lib. 6. cap. 1. Pub. Attilius Philiscus, notwithstanding in his youth hee was compelled by his master to prostitute his owne bodye to vnnaturall lusts, for bruitish and vnthriuing gaine, yet after prooued a seuere father; for finding his daughter to haue corrupted her virginall chastitie, hee slew her with his owne hand. How sacred (then) may wee imagine and conceiue puritie and temperance was held in Rome, when such as had professed base prostitution in their youth, became iudges and punishers therof euen vpon their owne children, in their age? Val. Max. lib. 6. c. 1. Appius Claudius Regillanus, the most eminent amongst the Decemviri, so doted on Virginia the daughter of Virginius a Centurion,Virginia. who was then in the campe at Algidus, that he suborned a seruant of his to seise her and claim her as his bondwoman, and bring the cause to be decided before him: needs must the businesse passe on his side, beeing both the accuser and the iudge. The father being certified of these proceedings by Icilius a hopefull young gentleman before contracted vnto her, leauing his charge abroad, repaires

to the citie and appearing before the iudgement seat, sees his owne lawfull daughter taken both from himselfe and betrothed husband, and conferred vpon another as his slaue and bondwoman. The iudgement being past, he desires leaue to speake with his daughter apart, it was granted him by the Court, who slew her with his owne hand: then taking vp her bodie and lifting it vpon his shoulders, posted with that lamentable burden to the campe, and incited the souldiers to reuenge: Liuie, Volater. lib. 14. cap. 2. Antropol. Quintus Fabius Seruilianus hauing his daughters chastitie in suspition, first deliuered her to death, and after punished himselfe with voluntarie banishment. The punishment of these inchastities is by the Poets to the life illustrated in the fable of Titius the sonne of Terra, who intending to stuperate Latona, was by Apollo slaine with an arrow, and being thrust down into Hell and chained to a rocke, his Liuer and Heart is perpetually tyred on by a rauenous Vulture, who still renewes his inceasible torments. Virgill lib. Aeneid. 6. vnder the person of Titius, would pourtray vnto vs the vnquiet conscience, which though sometimes it may be at a seeming peace, yet the torment by beeing still renewed, dayly increaseth and gnawes the heartstrings of all such persons as to themselues are guiltie.


Of Witches and the Punishment due to them.
VIncentius cites this following Historie from Guillerimus in Specul. Histor. lib. 26.Punishment of Witchcraft. cap. 26. which also Iohannes Wyerius, Ranulphus, and others, commemorats; an English woman that dwelt at a towne called Barkley in England, being a Witch, yet not being much suspected, liued in indifferent good opinion amongst her neighbours, and beeing feasting vpon a time abroad and wonderous pleasant in companie, shee had a tame crow which she had brought vp, that would be familiar with her and sit vpon her shoulder and prate to her in the best language it could: she at this feast (the Table being readie to be drawne) sported with her, which spake to her more plainely than it vsed some wordes which shee better than the rest of the companie vnderstood, at which suddenly her knife dropped out of her hand, her colour changed, the blood forsooke her che^kes, and shee looked pale, readie to sinke downe, and fetching some inward suspires and grones, shee at length broke forth into this language, Woe is mee, my plow is now entred into the last furrow, for this day I shall heare of some great losse which I must forciblly suffer. The rest wondring at her sudden change from myrth to passion, next at her alteration of looke, and lastly at her mysticall language, when her words were scarce ended, but a messenger rushed hastily into the roome, and told her that her eldest sonne with all the whole familie at home were found suddenly dead: which she no sooner heard but ouercome with sorrow she fainted, and beeing recouered and conducted to her owne house she tooke her bed, and presently caused the onely two children she had liuing to be sent for, the one a Monke the other a Nunne, who presently came to visit her and know her pleasure, to whom with a pensiue and destracted heart, the teares running from her eyes, she thus speake: Alas my children behold me your mother, and commiserat my wretched and distressed estate, whose fate hath beene so maleuolent and disastrous, that I haue hetherto beene a wicked professor of diabolicall Witchraft, hauing beene a mistresse of that Art, and a great persuader to those abhominations; now, all the refuge I haue to flie to is your religious zeale, and pietie, in

this despaire, for now is the time that the Deuils will exact their due. Those that persuaded me to this mischiefe, are readie to demand their Couenant. Therefore by a mothers loue I charge you, and by your filiall dutie I coniure you, since the Sentence of may Soules perdition is irreuocable, that you will vse your best endeuour and industrie for the preseruation of my Bodie. This therefore I enioyne you, in stead of a Winding-sheet, sowe my Bodie in the skinne of a Hart, or Bucks Leather, then put me in a Coffin of Stone, which couer with Lead, and after bind it with Hoopes or Barres of Iron, to which fasten three strong Chaynes: If my Bodie thus coffin'd, lye three dayes quiet, burie me the fourth day, though I feare the Earth for my manifold Blasphemies will scarce giue entertainment to my Bodie. For the first two nights together, let there be fiftie Psalmes sung for me, and as many Masses for so many dayes; which said, shee gaue vp her last breath. Shee dead, the brother and sister were carefull to performe the mothers last Will, and did all things accordingly. The first two nights, when the Quires of Church-men sung Psalmes about the Bodie, the Deuils with much ease broke open the Church doores, which were bolted, barr'd, lockt, and propt, and broke two of the Chaynes by which the Coffin was fastened, but the third remained stedfast. The third night, about the time when the Cocke begins to crow, the foundation of the Temple seemed to shake with the noyse of the Deuils who clamoured at the doore: one of the rest, taller in stature and more terrible in countenance than his fellowes, knocked with more violence than those which attended him, till hee had broken the doore to shiuers; when stalking to the Coffin, he called the woman by her name aloud, and bad her arise and follow him: to whom the dead bodie answered, I cannot for these Chaynes. To whom he answered, Those shall be loosed to thy mischiefe; when tearing them asunder as they had beene Linkes made of Rushes, hee snatched vp the Coffin, and carried it to the Church doore, where stood readie a blacke Sumpter-horse, loudly neighing, whose hoofes were diuided like Eagles tallons, vpon which he layde the bodie, hurried it away with seeming ioy, whilest all the Quirristers looked on, and so vanished: Her shrikes and eiulations were heard foure miles off. Let this one suffice for many: I come now to Temporall Punishments.
The Iudges called Areopagitae, when they deprehended a Witch, and were to deliuer her to death, if shee were with child, stayed the execution till shee were deliuered of her Infan^, because they would not punish the innocent with the delinquent: Aelian. de var. Histor. Lib. 5. The Law to punish Witches amongst the Persians, was to bring them to a place where their heads were beaten to pieces betwixt two Rockes: So suffered Gyge, the handmaid to Parisatides, the mother of Cyrus: Plutarch. in Artaxerxes. Charles the seuenth, king of France (or the Frenchmen) caused Prince Egidius de Raxa, Marshall of France, to be first hanged, then burnt, because hee confessed himselfe to be a Witch, and professor of Magicke; and withall, to haue beene the death of an hundred and twentie children, and women great with child. A Witch of Auerne was burnt aliue, for killing young infants, and salting their flesh and putting them into Pyes, and baking them for publike sale: Fulgos. Lib. 9. cap. 2. Ioha^nes Bodinus, Lib. Mag. Demonomaniae 4. cap. 5. tells vs, That there is a Law sacred in France, That if any Magician, or Witch, or Soothsayer, or Mathematician, (that shall goe beyond

the true rules of Astrologie) or expounder of Dreames, shall frequent the Court, be he neuer so great in fauour, or potent in office, he shall be immediately degraded from all his honours, and put to the racke and torture. And this Law is fitting (saith he) to be writ in golden characters vpon euery Court gate, because there is no greater Pest extant either to Prince or people, than this viperous brood: therefore (aboue our Christian Princes) hee commends the Ethnick kings. In the time of Marius, an Inchantresse (whose name was MarthaMartha.) who pretended to fore-tell to the Roman Senat the successe of the Cimbrian warre,Tacit. was banished: Plutarch. in Mario. Claudius Caesar condemned a knight of Rome to death,Plin^ Lib. 29. cap. 3. and forfeited all his goods to the people,Some say, a Serpents ^gge. because he wore about him a Cocks egge, as a Charme to dispence with Religion^ and that all the causes which hee had in controuersie, should (in despight of the Iudges) passe of his side. Euen fellowes that were scarce of any name or opinion in the world, that were but suspected of Negromancie, were condemned to death vnder Tiberius Caesar. The Emperor Caracalla adiudged all such as but vsed inchanted hearbes to the curing of Agues and Feauers: Spartian. in Caracalla. The Scripture saith, Thou shalt not suffer a Witch to liue. Bodinus (contrarie to Wyerius, who will scarce beleeue there be any such, accounting all those Iudges as condemne them to the Stake, or Gallowes, no better than Executioners and Hangmen) hee shewes diuerse probable Reasons why they ought not to liue.Reason 1. The first is, Because all Witches renounce God and their Religion;Deut. 13. now the Law of God saith, Whosoeuer shall forsake the God of Heauen, and adhere to any other, shall be stoned to death; which punishment the Hebrewes held to be the greatest could be inflicted:2. R. Maymon, Lib. 3. The second thing is, That hauing renounced God and their Religion, they curse, blaspheme, and prouoke the Almightie to anger.Leuit. 24. The Law saith, Whosoeuer shall blaspheme, their sinne shall remaine with them; and whosoeuer shall take his name in vaine or in contempt, shall be punished with death.3. The third thing is, That they plight faith, and make couenant with Deuil, adore him, and sacrifice vnto him; as Apuleius testifies of Pamphila Larissana, a Witch of Thessalie; as likewise a Witch in the Laodunensian suburbes, in the month of May, 1578. who blushed not to doe the like before many witnesses:Exod. 20.32. Deut. 13.27. Numb. 25. now the Law saith, Who that shall but incline or bow downe to Images (which the Greekes call (...)) shall be punished with death. The Hebrew word Tistaueb, and the Chaldaean Fisgud, (which all our Latine Interpreters translate Adorare) imports as much as to incline, or worship: now these Witches doe not onely incline vnto him, but inuoke and call vpon him.4. A fourth thing is (which many haue confessed) That they haue vowed their children to the Deuill;Leuit. 21. Deut. 18. now the Law saith, God is inflamed with reuenge against all such as shall offer their children vnto Moloch; which Iosephus interpretes Priapus, and Philo, Satanus: but all agree, that by Moloch is signified the Deuill and malignant spirits.5. A fifth thing is (gathered out of their owne confessions) That they haue sacrificed Infants not yet baptized, to the Deuill, and haue kild them by thrusting great pinnes into their heads. Sprangerus testifies, that he condemned one to the fire, who confessed, that she by such meanes had been the death of one and fortie children. A sixt thing is,6. That they doe not only offer children in the manner of sacrifice (against which the Holy Ghost speakes,Deut. 18. That for that sinne alone God will extirpe and root out the people) but they vow them in the wombe. A seuenth is,7. That they are not themselues blasphemers and Idolaters only,

but they are tied by couenant with the Deuill, to allure and persuade others to the like abhominations;Deut. 13. when the Law teacheth, That whosoeuer shall persuade another to renounce his Creator, shall be stoned to death. An eight is,8. That they not onely call vpon the Deuill, but sweare by his name; which is directly against the Law of God,Ierem. 5.12.9. which forbids vs to sweare by any thing saue his owne Name. A ninth is,9. That adulterous Incests are frequent amongst them, for which in all ages they haue been infamous, and of such detestable crimes conuicted; so that it hath almost growne to a Prouerbe, No Magician or Witch, but was either begot and borne of the father and daughter, or the mother and sonne: which Catullus in this Distick expresseth;
Nam Magus ex Matre, and gnato gignatur oportetSi vera est Persarum impia Relligio.
Intimating, that if the impious Religion of the Persians were true, Witches of necessitie should be the incestuous issue of the mother and sonne, or else e contra. A tenth,10. They they are Homicides, and the murtherers of Infants; which Sprangerus obserues from their owne confessions, and Baptista Porta the Neapolitan, in his booke de Magia: Next, That they kill children before their Baptisme, by which circumstances their offence is made more capitall and heinous. The eleuenth,11. That Witches eat the flesh of Infants, and commonly drinke their blouds, in which they take much delight. To which Horace seemes to allude, when he saith:
Nue pransae Lamiae vinum puerum extrahat Aluo.
Nor from the stomacke of a Witch new din'd,Plucks he a yet 'liue Infant--
If children be wanting, they digge humane bodies from their sepulchres, or feed vpon men that haue been executed. To which purpose Lucan writes:
--Laqueum nodosque nocentesOre suo rupit, pendentia corpora carpsit,Abrasit cruces, etc.
The Felons strangling Cord she nothing feares,But with her teeth the fatall Knot she teares:The hanging bodies from the Crosse she takes,And shaues the Gallowes, of which dust she makes, etc.
Apuleius reports, That comming to Larissa in Thessaly, he was hyred for eight pieces of Gold to watch a dead body but one night, for feare the Witches (of which in that place there is abundance) should gnaw and deuoure the flesh of the partie deceased, euen to the very bones; which is often found amongst them. Also, Murther by the Lawes of God and man is punishable with death:Deut. 19. besides, they that eat mans flesh, or deliuer it to be eaten, are not worthie to liue: Cornel. Lib. de Sicarijs. A twelfth is,12. That they kill as oft by Poysons, as by Powders and Magick Spells: now the Law saith, It is worse to kill by Witchcraft than with the Sword: Lib. 1. de Malific. A thirteenth is,13. That they are the death of Cattell; for which, Augustanus the Magician suffred death, 1569. A fourteenth,14. That they blast the Corne and Graine, and bring barrennesse and scarcitie, when there is a hoped plentie and abundance. A fifteenth,15. That they haue carnall consocietie with the Deuill, as it hath

beene approued by a thousand seuerall confessions. Now all that haue made any compact or couenant with the Deuill, if not of all these, yet vndoubtedly are guiltie of many, or at least some, and therefore consequently not worthy to liue. And so much for the Punishment of Witches, and other knowne malefactors: I come now to the Rewards due to the Vertuous, and first of some noble Ladies, for diuerse excellencies worthie to be remembred.


Of Tirgatao Moeotis, Camiola Turinga, and others.
TIrgatao,Tirgatao Moeotis. a beautifull and vertuous Ladie, was ioyned in marriage to Hecataeus, king of those Indians that inhabite neere vnto the Bosphor, which is an arme of the Sea, that runneth betwixt two coasts. This Hecataeus being cast out of his kingdome, Satyrus the most potent of these kings, reinstated him in his Principalitie; but conditionally, That he would marrie his onely daughter, and make her Queene, by putting Tirgatao to death. But he (though forced by the necessitie of the time, and present occasion) yet louing his first wife still, would not put her to death, according to the couenant, but caused her to be shut in his most defenced Castle, there to consume the remainder of her life in perpetuall widowhood. The Ladie comforted with better hopes, and borne to fairer fortunes, deceiued the eyes of her strict keepers, and by night escaped out of prison. This being made knowne to the two kings, the sonne in law and the father, they were wonderfully perplexed with the newes of her flight, as fearing if shee arriued in her owne countrey, she might accite the people to her reuenge. They therefore pursued her with all diligence and speed, but in vaine: for hiding her selfe all the day time, and trauelling by night through pathlesse and vnfrequented places, at length she arriued amongst the Ixomatae, which was the countrey of her owne friends and kindred. But finding her father dead, she married with him that succeeded in the kingdome: by which meanes now commanding the Ixomatae, she insinuated into the breasts of the most warlike people inhabiting about Moeotis, and so leuied a braue Armie, which she her selfe conducted. She first inuaded the kingdome of Hecataeus, and infested his countrey with many bloudie incursions; she next wasted and made spoyle of the kingdome of Satyrus, insomuch that they both were forced with all submisse entreaties, by embassadours to sue vnto her for peace; to which she assented, hauing before as hostage of their truce, receiued Metrodorus, the sonne of Satyrus. But the two kings falsified to her their faith and honor: for Satyrus dealt with two of his subiects (whom hee best trusted) with whom he pretended hainous displeasure; for which, flying and retiring themselues to her for refuge, they there attend a conuenient opportunitie, to insiderate her life. They submitting to her, her Court becomes their sanctuarie. Satyrus sends to demand the offendors: shee by her Letters entreats and mediates their peace and pardon. These attend their next occasion: the one pretends priuate conference with her, and bowing submissely to her, as she enclines her bodie to attend him, the other inuades her with his Sword; her fortunate Belt kept the Steele from entring: Clamor is made, her seruants enter, the traytors are apprehended, and confesse all that before had passed betwixt Satyrus and them: Therefore shee commands his sonne Metrodorus (the Hostage) to be slaine, and the two conpirators with him; gathers another Armie, and inuades the Bosphorean Tyrant: Shee punisheth his perfidiousnesse with Rapes, Murthers, Combustions,

and all the calamities of warre, till Satyrus himselfe (oppressed with miseries and surcharged with griefe) expired, whom Gorgippus his sonne succeeded in the Principalitie, but not with any securitie, till he had acknowledged his Crowne as giuen to him by her, and with many costly and rich gifts compounded for his peace: Polyb. Lib. 8. This Ladie hath a merited name for an inuincible courage and a masculine spirit.
Comiola Turinga.No lesse worthie to be remembred, is Comiola Turinga; her historie is thus reported: In that great Nauie which Peter king of Sicilie sent against Robert king of Naples, in the aid of the Lyparitanes, with other Princes and Noblemen, there was in that fleet one Roland, bastard brother to king Peter. The Sicilians being defeated by the Neapolitans, Roland (amongst many other gentlemen) was surprised and cast into prison. Now when the friends and kinsmen of all such captiues had beene carefull of their release, and almost all of them were ransomed thence, king Peter blaming the flouth and cowardise of his subiects the Sicilians, neglected his brother, and would entertaine no discourse that tended to his redemption. Whereupon he was put into a more close prison, no better than a Dungeon, where he was debarred the benefit of light, and shortened of his diet, where he spent his time in discontent and miserie. This extremitie of his (with the Dukes slacknesse in his release) comming to the eare of a beautifull young widow of Messana, who had a large Dower from her parents, and was left infinitely rich by her husband: shee pittying his distressed estate, and withall being somewhat enamored of his person, sent to him priuately by such as she best trusted, to know of him, If he would accept her as his wife, if she did instantly pay downe his ransome. The motion being made, he seemed ouerioyed, thanked the Heauens for their diuine assistance, and with great willingnesse accepted of the motion. They are contracted by Proxie, and shee payes readie downe two thousand ounces of Gold for his freedome. This done, and Roland comming backe to Messana, he was so farre from acknowledging the Contract, that he would not so much as see her, or confesse himselfe obliged vnto her in the smallest courtesie, who (had it not beene for her charitable loue and pietie) might haue languished in an vncomfortable durance all the dayes of his life. Comiola Turinga at this ingratitude much grieued; for she had not onely payd downe so great a summe, but that which most afflicted her, was, that the fame of her marriage being all ouerspread, the Contract being denyed, and by Roland abiured, must at least redound to her perpetuall scorne, if not to the disparagement of her fame and vertue. To salue both, with what conuenience she could she was aduised to accite him into the Ecclesiasticall Court by Processe, and to plead the forenamed Contract, and (which shee could easily doe) prooue it by witnesse. Which the friends and kindred of Roland hearing, persuaded him (to shun the common fame which went of his ingratitude) to reconcile the tongues of euill speakers, and to preuent all controuersies and troubles in Law, to accept of her as one that best deserued him. With much adoe he accepts of the motion. A publike confluence of friends and kindred at an appointed day are assembled, where when the bastard expected to heare her and her friends sollicite him concerning the mariage, she in that publike conuention first ript vp her courtesies, and with what a charitable and chast purpose she had done them; next she laid open his barbarous ingratitude, not to acknowledge them; and lastly, his corrupt and dishonest heart, in lying to God and her, by denying

a contract past in the presence of so many witnesses: therefore shee told him, shee now renounced both contract, clayme, or interest in him, accounting it a dishonor vnto her to cast her selfe away vpon one perfidious and a coward. As for marriage, she had now contracted her selfe to single chastitie, and all the wealth shee had, shee vowed to the seruice of God and his Church: and so left him with a kind of noble disdaine, being by all that saw and heard her constant resolution, as much commended for her courage, as he condemned for his mutabilitie and cowardise: Fulgos. Lib. 5. cap. 3.Honour and Reward to Fortitude. If Lucius Aemulius Regillus in a Nauall fight hauing defeated Hanniball (then Generall for the king Antiochus) was brought into the Temple of Apollo by the Senate; where first hauing all his braue seruice rehearsed by the Herald, or Cryer, with how puissant a Nauie he had fought, how many of the enemies shippes hee had foundred in the Sea, and how many taken, and brought to Rome; for which, by the consent of the Fathers, hee was graunted a Triumph: Liu. Lib. 8. de Bello Macedon. and Volater. Lib. 13. cap. 3. Anthrop. If Aurelius Alex. Emperor, for fighting against the Persians, and vanquishing the king Artaxerxes (whom Herodian in his Historie calls Artaxaces) for this Act alone (after a large and learned Encomiastick Oration, made of the excellencie of his Valour) had likewise a publike Triumph allowed him by the Senate: Volater. Lib. 23. If Leocritus the Athenian, and sonne of Protarchus (being but a priuate souldier vnder the Generall Olimpiodorus) at the assault of Pyraeum (then guarded and defenced by Demetrius, the sonne of Antigonus) because hee was the first that mounted and broke into the Rampier, then called Musaeum, in entring which, hee was slaine; yet for this onely braue Act of Resolution had all Militarie Honours done to his Bodie, his Shield with his name engrauen thereon, with his valiant Enterprise inscribed, as a thing sacred to perpetuall memorie, and dedicated to Iupiter the Deliuerer: Pauson. Lib. 1. What prayse, what admiration, and condigne Honours may this magnanimous Queene Tyrgatao Meotis clayme, who not in one, but many battailes, opposed two potent and puissant kings; whose martiall valour righted her owne iniuries in person, met them, braued them, and beat them in field, and after many victorious defeats vassalled their insolent pride, and subiected them to her owne Heroicall mercie? If amongst the Romans, he that in battaile had saued but the life of one citisen, and bestrid him in battaile, and in the same conflict had slaine an enemie, was honoured with a Ciuicke Crowne and Garland; to which, the Golden Honours, the Murall, and those Wreathes of Dignitie that either belonged to the Campe or the Pulpit, gaue place: which as hee was tyed perpetually to weare, so all the people were enioyned to giue him way, and doe him honour; insomuch, that if hee came late to be a spectator of the Sports in the Theatre, at his first appearance in the Orchestra, a place in the Theatre onely for the Nobilitie. Orchestra, all the Princes and Senators arose, from the highest to the lowest, and offered him place: How shall we celebrate the euer to be admired magnanimitie of the Amazons, Marpesia, Lampedo, Orythea, Antiope, Penthesilea, and others of that masculine Vertue and courage? The Archduke Agamemnon, because Aiax had but fought with Hector (though not vanquisht him) caused an Oxe to be sacrificed vnto him, rewarding him with the hinder Loynes and the Hornes: Homer. Lib. 7. Iliad. and 10. What Immolations then deserued Menalippe, for combatting Hercules; or Hippolite, who hand to hand encountred Theseus?

The same Generall presented Achilles for his valour, because he slew Hector (though, as some write, with the oddes of base aduantage) with seuen three-footed Pots of Brasse, twentie Cauldrons, ten Talents of Gold, twelue Steeds, and seauen beautifull Lesbian Damosels: Idem. How would he haue guerdoned the magnanimitie of Te^c^, the wife of Argo^, and Queene of Illyria, who not onely led valiant men in person to the field, but opposed the Roman Legions in all their might and flourishing time of their Empire, obtaining from them many glorious Victories? The ordinarie souldiers in Rome (euen for priuate and common seruices) were guerdoned some with Obsidionall, Nauall, and Ciuicke Garlands; others, with Lances headed with Gold; some with Iuorie Chayres; others with Staues of Iuorie; figured Gownes, called Vestes Palmatae, which were wrought or embroidered all ouer with Palme trees (such Conquerors vsed in Warre, and Consuls in the time of Peace:) blew Ensignes, for Sea-conquest; golden Chaynes, double Corne, double stipendarie Wages, or Pay; and sometimes, with the dignitie of ciuile Magistracie and Office. Others were presented with Rings, Bracelets, Flags or Pendants, Coats of Mayle, and golden Vessels: some were allowed Ouations, others Triumphs, with Laudations, Acclamations, Gratulations, etc. If these things were allowed to men, onely borne for action, What Celebrations, Dignities, Prayses, and Encomi^^s, what rich Chaynes of Pearles, and Carkanets of Diamonds, nay Crownes embellished with Carbuncles, what Pictures, Statues, Sepulchers, and Monuments to eternize their memorie (if it were possible) beyond all posteritie) merits Hypsicratea, the wife of Mithridates; Artemisia, of Manso^^s; Tomyris, Queene of the Scythians; Zenobia, of the Palmirians; Amalasumh^, of the Gothes, who haue changed their soft effeminacies into noble Virilitie, and their feminine weakenesse into masculine Valour; in which by following, they haue got the start, and by imitating, excelled. I now proceed to the honor due to Modestie and Temperance, lately expressed in Comiola Turinga.
Honor due to Temperance.Otho the fourth, Emperour, being in Florence, and amongst many other beautifull young Damosels (then in the flower of their age) casting his eye vpon one Galdrata Bertha,Galdrata Bertha. daughter to a Florentine citizen, whose name was Bellincionus, he spake liberally of her beautie in the presence of her father; insomuch, that his words sauored of great loue and affection towards the Virgin: which apprehended by Billincionus, he told the Emperour, That if his fancie were that way addicted (and in the presence of the Damosell) that hee might freely kisse and embrace her at his will and pleasure: To whom shee instantly replyed vpon his words (first desiring the Emperours pardon) That shee had made a Vow, that shee would neuer kisse any man, saue him whom shee assuredly knew should futurely be her husband. Which answer the modest Prince tooke in such good part, as that he purposed her vertue should not passe without reward: who asking, If shee were yet contracted to any^ and shee answering, No; Then (saith the Emperour) giu^ me leaue to prouide thee of a husband: when calling to him one Gu^^o Germanus, a noble young gentleman, and one in his especiall fauour, to him hee presently contracted her (a man, as hee was approued in Armes and Vertue, so hee was eminent in his Stocke and Familie, being nobly descended) and gaue her for her Dower all that large Valley which lyes beneath the Hill Casentinus, in the fields that are called Aretini Agri, and made it an Earledome,

which Tide he bestowed on him. And from them two proceeded the famous. Familie of the Earles G^^don^, whose eminence endured many hereditarie successions: Fulgos. Lib. 6. cap. 1. I could samplifie the Reward due to Temperance, and illustrate it with as many modest and chast women, before remembred, as I haue Magnanimitie in the Heroike Queenes and Warlike Ladies: But to auoid prolixitie (which I labour to sh^^) let this one suffice for many.


The reward due to Fertilitie, or many Children, with such as haue restored their decayed Families.
THere was a law amongst the Spartans, that whosoeuer had three sonnes that familie should be quit from watching and warding and such common seruice; but he that had stored the common weale with fiue, hee claimed immunitie in all publique offices, Aelian. lib. 6. de Var. Histor. Amongst the Persians those that had the most numerous offspring, were capable of the most honours, to whome the king yearely sent rich presents, Herodot. lib. 1.Regina. What merited honours then deserued Regina the daughter of M^scinus Scalliger and Thadaea Garroriensis, who beeing married to Prince Bernobonus Viscount of Mediolanum, had by him foure sonnes and twelue daughters: The first and eldest was married to Peter king of Cyprus; the second o Lewis Dolphin and first borne sonne to the French king; the third to the Duke of Bauaria; the fourth to the Duke of Austria; the fifth to Vicount Gallen^ius, the sixth to Leopoldus of Austria, grandfather to Frederick the third Emperour; the seuenth to another Duke of Bauaria; the eighth to Frederick king of Sicilia; the ninth to Frederick Gonzage; the tenth to Duke Ernestus Monachus; the eleuenth to Frederick his younger brother, the twelfth and last to the Earle of Kent, eldest sonne to the king of great Brittaine, from whose generous offspring most of the royallest houses of Christendome (such as still flourish in their pristine honours) claime their descent, so that this fruitfull queene may bee called a Cibele or mother of the gods, Bernardus Scardeonus lib. 3. Histor. Pat. Plinie confers great felicitie vpon a Lacedemonian Ladie called Lampedo,Lampedo. because she was the daughter of a king, the wife of a king, and mother to a king; when a certaine rich Ladie of Ionia came to Lacena, and with great boasting and pride shewed her, her pretious iewells and rich garments, shee pointed to her foure faire children whom shee had liberally and vertuously educated, and sayd, These are treasures onely in which modest and discreet women ought to glorie. Plutarch in Apotheg. Luconic.Eumele. Eumele the wife to Basilius Helenopontamos of Pontabus (as Nazianzenus testifies) had by him fiue sonnes of which three at one time were learned bishops and stour champions for the Gospell, namely, Gregorius Nissenus, Basilius Magnus Caesariensis, and Petrus Sebasta, then I blame nor Epaminondas, who in all his noble exployts and prosperous successes in warre, was often heard to say, That nothing was so pleasing and delightfull to him, as that both his parents were yet aliue to participate with him in his honours: hee in the great battaile called Lenctricum, had a glorious victorie ouer the Lacedemonians, Plutarch in Grec. Apotheg. So Basilius Magnus Bishop of Cesaria, gloried of nothing so much (with dayly thankes to God) as that hee was borne of Christian parents, namely Helenopo^tanus his father and schoole maister, and Enmele Capadoce

his mother, and that hee was nourced by Macrina,Macrina. who had beene a zealous and frequent auditor of Gregory Naeocae Soriensis, his grandfather in that bloodie persecution, vnder the Emperour Maximinus, with his kinsmen and familie retyred himselfe into a Caue in a moate, where with bread onely hee miraculously fed himselfe and the rest for the space of seuen yeares, and after for the Faith of the Gospell suffered a blessed and glorious Martyrdom, Licosck, in Theat. Human. Vitae. Saint Hierom commends Paula the religious Roman matron for her nobilitie of byrth, as being begot by Rogatas a Gretian, who deriued himselfe from Agamemnon king of Mecene, and royall Generall of those famous expeditious against Troy, and borne of Blesilla Romana,Blesilla. of the antient familie of the Scipioes and the Gracchi, and was married vnto Toxilius, illustrous in his blood, as claiming his descent from Aeneas and the Iulian pedegree: but nobility of byrth not being our owne but our ancestors, it is not my purpose to insist of it any further. It followes that I should speake something of such as haue beene the restorers of antient and decayde Families, euen when they were at the last gaspe and readie to perish and be as it were swept from the face of the Earth.
Vital is Michael duke of Venice returning with his weather-beaten Nauie out of Greece, where almost for the space of two yeares together without cessation he had opposed Prince Emanuel Constantinopolitanus, beeing so exhausted, that scarce Commanders, Marreners, or any nauall protection sufficiently accommodated was left to bring backe his fleete; whether by a pestilentiall mortallitie, or that Prince Manuell had poysoned the Springs and Fountaines, where the Venetian souldiers furnished themselues with fresh water is not certaine, but most sure it is, besides many other disasters and discommodities, that which hee held to be the greatest, was, that there was not any of male issue of the Iustinian Familie left aliue, but all of them in that infortunate expedition perished to one man, not any of that noble stocke suruiuing, by whom the memorie thereof might bee restored to posteritie: This the Duke Michaell often pondering with himselfe in great sadnesse and sorrow, at length he bethought him of one Nicholaus, a young man, who had deuoted himselfe to a sequestred and religious life, and was of the order of the Benedictan Fryers; he had besides, one onely daughter whose name was Anna,Anna Veneta. her he had a great desire to conferre vpon Nicholaus, so he could any way admit a dispensation from Alexander then Pope: therefore to that purpose hee earnestly petitioned him, and made great friends to sollicite him in that behalfe, who willing to repaire the ruines of so noble a familie now altogether spent and wasted, gaue approbation touching the marriage, which was accordingly publikely and with great pompe solemnised. These two, now the onely hopes of that future posteritie, had faire and fortunate issue, males and females, who were no sooner growne to any perfection and disposed of to liberall and vertuous education, but (which is remarkable in two so yong) they conferd together to this purpose, that since Heauen had blessed them with that for which marriage was ordained, and the purpose for which the dispensation was granted (namely issue, and to reuiue a dying familie) that they would with an vnanimous consent, againe enter into religious vowes and orders, This motion was betwixt them resolued, and hauing nobly disposed of their children, hee tooke vpon him holy orders, and retyred himselfe to the monasterie of Saint Nicholas; his wife Anna erected a Nunnerie not far from Torcellus, which shee made

sacred to Saint Adrian, how great and almost miraculous was their abstinence and Pietie, that abandoning all worldly pleasures and delights, when they flowed about them in all aboundance, euen then vowed themselues to solitude and heauenly meditations, in which profession they both in a faire and full age deseased, Egnat, lib. 4. cap. 3. and Marullus in Vita Vitalis. Not much different from this is that which wee reade of Pharon Meliensis a noble Prelat, who with his wife after some yeares of affectionate consocietie passed betwixt them, made by a vnited consent a strict vow of future chastitie; shee betooke her selfe to a Nunnerie, hee to a Monasterie: but after seuen sollitarie winters passed, hee was still troubled in his thoughts, for often calling to remembrance the beautie of his wife, he repented himselfe of his former vow, and often sollicited her for a priuat meeting, which shee still denying, and he more and more importuning, at length shee yeelded to giue him visitation; but the prudent and chast Ladie had her face couered, her eyes deiected, and presented herselfe in a base and sordid garment, where with her intreaties mixt with teares, she so farre preuailed with him that without breach of their promise made to Heauen they tooke their lasting leaue, he still remaining in his Couent, and shee repairing to her Cloyster, Marul. lib. 4. cap. 7. Volateran. writes of Petrus Vrseolus duke of Venice, who after he had one sonne by his wife, by their vnanimous consent, they vowed perpetuall abstinence from all venerall actions. So likewise Aloysius de Caballis a noble Venecian with his wife (a Ladie deriued from the blood of the Patritians) these two agreed together neuer to haue carnall congression but onely for issue sake, neither would they suffer any motion, temptation, or any word, looke, or gesture that might tend to the least prouocation, in so much that (if we may beleeue report) the verie linnen which they wore next them, was so interwoauen and disposed about them, that when they lay together, with great difficultie one might touch the others naked bodie, Egnat. lib. 4. cap. 3. Now what meede these deserue I am not able to iudge, I leaue it to his wisedome who is the rewarder of all goodnesse and is the searcher of the hearts and reines, and knowes who are Hippocrites, who true prosessors, who pretend deuotion meerely for deuotion sake, and who professe it for sincere zeale and religious pietie.


Of Beautie and the reward thereof.
TO the great and solemne marriage betwixt Peleus (the father of Achilles) and Thetis,Higinus lib. 1. Fab. all the gods and goddesses weae inuited, sauing Eris, i. Discord, who taking it ill, that she alone of the immortall deities, should either bee forgotten or neglected in that high and solemne conuention, and was not admitted to the banquet: shee casts in amongst them a golden Ball or Apple with this inscription, Detur pulcherrimae, i. Let this be giuen to the fairest. This was no sooner done, but vp start the then most potent goddesses euerie one assumming to themselues the excellencie of Beautie, in so much that snatching at the Ball, it had almost come to blowes, till Iupiter was by them intreated to end the controuersie. But knowing how it would offend his wife to bestow it vpon either of his daughters, and againe, if on the one, hee must of force distast the other; hee therefore rather than to sentence partially, willing to bee no iudge at all, commanded Mercurie to conduct them to the mount Ida, and there this dissention to bee ended by Paris the sonne of Priam, who then was a Neateheard and kept cattell in the mountaines.

These suddenly appearing before him, and the young man abashed, Mercurie cheered him vp, told his message from Iupiter, and withall deliuered him the golden prise to bee disposed of at his pleasure, to whome the bashfull Neateheard thus answered, How can I (o Mercurie) that am but a mortall man and brought vp in all rusticie bee a iust and equall censurer of such diuine Beauties, such causes ought to bee decided by those that haue bin trained vp in the vrbanitie of walled townes or the delicacies of Courts, to both which euen from my infancie I haue beene an alien and meere stranger, I (alas) haue onely iudgement to distinguish this shee-goat from that, and which heighfer or the other is the fairer; but for these coelestiall beauties, in my eyes they are all infinitely absolute and alike equall, in so much that I looke not vpon one but my sight dwells vpon her; and if I transferre mine eyes vpon a second, though I be refresht yet I am not benefited; and if vpon a third, I am cloyed with varietie, not dispariging any, but still applauding the present: if I cast mine eye vpon her, she is fairest; if vpon, her, she appeares no lesse; if on the last, she equalls both the other; and stil that which is neerest seemes the best, as if succession bred excellencie. And now I could wish my selfe like Argus, to bee eyes all ouer, that the pleasure which I receiue from two, might by taking these miraculous obiects from an hundred, at once bee multiplied vnto me according to the number, to make my now sacietie a surfeit. Besides, the one is Iuno the wife and sister of Iupiter, the other are Minerua and Venus his two daughters, so that of necesssitie in gaining one vncertaine friend, I shall purchase two most constant enemies; therefore (sayth he) I intreat you (o Mercurie) so farre to mediate for me to these goddesses, that since but one can conquer, the two vanquished will not bee offended with me, but rather to impute my errour (if any be) to the weakenesse of my humane sight, than to any premeditated and pretended spleene or malice. To which euerie one (trusting to their own perfections) willingly assented; when Paris thus proceeded. Only one thing I desire to know, whether it be sufficient for me being a iudge to censure of these features as they are apparelled, or more accuratly to prie into euerie linement of their bodies, it be behoouefull for mee to see them naked. To whom Mercurie replyde, You being iudge, and they now standing at the barre of your censure, haue power to commaund them at your pleasure: then (sayth Paris) for my better satisfaction I desire to see them naked. Mercurie then sayd, Strippe your selues to your skinnes, o you goddesses, for it behooues him to see, that iudges: for mine owne part I am neither one that sits vpon the bench to censure, nor stand at the barre for witnesse, therfore whilest you show all, I will see nothing, but turne my face and looke another way. At this Iuno first began, Tis right, o Paris, and see (as most presuming) I first vnlace my selfe, and behold these are small and slender fingers, blew vayned wrists, white armes, and faire and delicat shoulders, looke vpon my round yourie brests, proportioned wast, smooth and soft skinne; nor doe I onely boast the splendor of my amiable face, and cleere and p^esent eyes, for the lower thou lookest thou wilt the more commend my feature, for know I am queene and goddesse of marriage, totally, equally, and vniformely faire all ouer. This sayd, Paris bad Venus expose herselfe to his free view, to which Minerua replyde, Not, o Paris, before shee haue vnloosed and cast aside that golden and embossed gyrdle; for she is a Witch, and it is not fit that thou beiug aiudge shouldst be effacinated by her, neither

ought shee to haue come to this place so neately accommodated, nor so painted and plastered with colours, temptations rather beseeming a strumpet than a goddesse, when in the deciding of so weightie a contention it is fitting that all our lineaments should bee exposed without addition, simplie and of themselues. To whom Venus replyde, If I be compelled to put off my virginall gyrdle, that which all young married men vse to vnloose from the wasts of their fresh and flourishing brides, before they can enter into the new Elisium, and of virgins make them women; why doest not thou then Minerua lay by thy helmet, by which (it may bee) thou hopest to seeme terrible to the iudge, and so awe him to thy will: thou oughtest to shew thy head and forehead bare as mine is, but perhaps thou thinkest with thy broad and threatening burgonet, to shaddow thy faint and blew eyes, which to thy pretended beautie will appeare no small or ordinarie blemish. Then satih Minerua, There lyes my helmet; and Venus, And there my gyrdle; and so they presented themselues before him all three, naked: at which sight Paris beeing extaside, broke foorth into this acclamation, Oh Iupiter, thou monster-maker, and tamer, what spectacle is this? what pleasure? what delight? what pulchritude? what beautie is this in her? what regall state and maiestie? In the second, what affright? what terrour? yet withall, what amiablenesse in honour? and what sweetnesse in victorie? In the third, what tempting lookes and alluring smiles? what inticing effeminacies and bewitching blandishments, able to melt yron and soften marble? o who shall then be vanquished, when euerie one is wotthie to ouercome? I haue enough of felicitie, for I swim in a vast and boundlesse ocean of rapture, and surfeit in a riot of superaboundant delacies. When no longer able to conteine himselfe from satiating his heigthned appetite with one of them at least (or had it been possible, with all) he desired that they would singly appeare vnto him, as not knowing how iustly to determine, when his two eyes were distracted three wayes at once. It was then ordered by Mercurie, that Minerua and Venus should depart for the present, and Iuno haue the first hearing, who thus began. Thou hast beheld me (o Paris) from the crowne to the heele, neither in all my bodie canst thou find the least blemish, then iudge me the fairest; Scepters, Crownes, and Kingdomes, Potentates, Empires and Dominions are in my gift: I will first make thee Emperor of all Asia, of which thy father hath but a nooke or corner; and if that satisfie not thy ambition, Lord and Ruler of the world. Who told her, he would consider of what she had sayd, but till he had heard all he could not determine of any thing, and so dismissed her (assured of the prise, for selfe loue is euer confident.) Minerua next appeared, and thus accosted him: o thou faire Phrigian swaine, doe mee this honour, in all Tumults, Conflicts, and Combustions thou shalt euer returne victorious and neuer vanquished, thy brother Hector thou shalt excell in fame, and thy father Priam in honour, in all Combats thou shalt ouercome, and in all battails triumph; of a Shepheard I will make thee a souldier, and to command more armies than thou keepest heards. Farther shee was proceeding, when he interrupted her thus; I haue no neede (Minerua) of martiall discipline or militarie prowesse: Asia is in peace, Phrigia and Lydia without disturbance, my fathers Empire fearelesse of hostilitie, nor doe I despise your great and godlike offers, nor would I haue you to despaire, but you may now put on your helmet, for I haue sufficiently beheld you all ouer. She departed, and smiling Venus lastly presented herselfe with

an a morous looke and moouing affabilitie, thus saying, Behold me Paris, looke on me consideratly, and view me in all and euerie part exactly, let not thine eyes wander loosely but stedfastly dwell and insist vpon euerie lineament with iudgement. This Face, these Eyes, this Necke, these Armes (and spread them wide, in which hee could not chuse but wish himselfe lockt) these Paps, this Wombe, this etc. and what thy eyes see not, let thy thoughts feelingly apprehend. Hast thou not perused me ynough? yet consider mee further; what are kingdomes but cares? or thrones but troubles? what are battailes but bloodsheds? or victories but triumphs ouer slaughter? To loue and be beloued is content, and that conteines a kingdome in it selfe; to war and here to vanquish, combat and thus to come off, is honour without harme, and conquest without crueltie; nor is this feature on which thy eyes dwell with such admiration, the guerdon proposed thee for my victorie: but a Face fairer, Eyes brighter, Hands whiter, Flesh softer, Skinne purer, Hayre more imitating gold, and Lippes more liuely resembling rubies. Thinke on such kisses Paris, Hellens, Hellens of Sparta, she is the daughter of Leda, whom Iupiter in the shape of a Swanne deflowred; white therfore she must needes bee, and tender, as hatched by so beautifull a byrd. This is that Hellen whom Theseus thought worthie of a rape, and royall Menelaus of the Pelopidan familie, his Hymenaean contract: if thou fearest and doubtest to attaine to this superaboundance of happinesse, loe I haue two children, Amabilitie and Loue, these I will deliuer vnto thee, who shall be captaines of thy Voyage, vnder thee their generall, Cupid my eldest shall inflame her, and Amabilitie shall make thee gratious and amiable in her eyes; I will more ouer intreate the Graces to be companions with thee in thy iourney. These words were so sweetly deliuered by her, and so inflamedly apprehended by him, that by giuing the golden apple to her, she had the glorie to be esteemed the fairest and worthiest. Now what greater reward for Beautie than to be preferred before Wisedome and Potencie:Reward of Beautie. Therefore Iohannes Sambucus Tyrnabiensis, in his argument to Lucians twentith Dialogue inscribed Deorum Iuditium thus writes:
Matris Acidaliae iuvenis deceptus amoreNon curat reliquas, (Caecus) habere DeasPallade quidmelius Iunone potentius ipsa,Preferimus Cipridos munera pruna tamen.
The Phrigian youth with Venus loue surpris'd,Tooke of the other goddesses no care:Pallas, and potent Iuno, he despis'd,Leauing the good, and great, to chuse the faire.
The Beautie of a woman is especially seene in the face, by which we may coniecture the excellencie of the other hidden lineaments of the bodie; and therein is many times the pulchritude of the minde illustrated, as in the bashfull eye, modest looke, and shamefaced countenance, therefore doth the face deseruedly challenge the first seat of Beautie, the Head being the noblest part of the bodie, the Will, the Mind, the Memorie, the Vnderstanding haue their place and residence, where they exersise their diuerse effects and quallities, therefore though they bee in the other parts of the body excellently featured, though they be Wise, Learned, irreproouable in Life

and conuersation, vnblemished in their reputation, and euerie way laudable, yet the Face is the first thing contemplated; as noble aboue the rest, and from which all other excellencies are approoued; for when all the rest are masked and hidden, that onely is continually visible, and layde open: and that may be the reason why most women that are not borne faire, attempt with artificiall beautie to seeme faire: Beautie therefore being a Dower of it selfe, is a Reward in it selfe.


Of Bountie, Charitie, Pietie, and other Vertues in Women, with their Rewards.
ONe Berta,Berta. a Countrey maid, of the Village of Montaguum, in The Prouince belonging to Padua. Patauia, who hauing spunne an exquisite fine thread, which was so curiously twisted, that it was not to be matched by the hands of any: and offering it in the cittie to publike sale, when none would reach to the price at which shee valued her paine and skill, shee thinking it a gift worthie an Empresse, presented it to Bertha, the wife of Henry the fourth, Emperour, who at that time soiourned in Patauia. Shee both admiring the excellencie of the Worke, and willing with her royall bountie to encourage the plaine Wench that wrought it, commanded her steward to take the Yearne, and goe with the maid to Montaguum, and out of the best soyle there, to measure so many acres of ground as that thread (stretched out in length) would compasse: by which her royall bountie, poore Berta grew suddainely rich, and from a Dowerlesse Virgin became a Match enquired after by the best men of the Countrey: insomuch, that from her flowed the illustrious Patritian Familie in Padua, which deriue themselues from Montaguum. This the women of neighbour Villages seeing, they all began to striue to equall (if not exceed) Berta, at their Wheeles and Spindles, and hoping of the like reward, troubled and oppressed the Empresse with multiplicitie of presents; who causing them all to appeare before her at once, shee thus spake to them: If not in Art, yet Berta was before you in time; I thanke your loue, and commend your skill, but shee hath preuented you of the blessing. Which saying of hers is still remembred as a Prouerbe in all that Countrey: for when any thing is done vnseasonably, or not in due time, they say, Mon e pui quel tempo, che Berta filaua, i. You come not in the time when Berta spunne: or as our English Prouerbe is, You come a day after the Faire. Bernard. Scardeonus, Lib. 3. Histor. Patau. In which, the Empresse expressed great wisedome; who as shee shewed a rare bountie (in which men and women come neerest the Gods, who are the free giuers of all good things) so shee knew how to dispose it; namely, to he^ that came to tender her loue: not such as auariciously presented their Offerings meerely for lucre and benefit, for such come but like faire weather after Haruest.Bountie rewarded. And how could the Empresses Vertue bee better rewarded, than to haue her Bountie outlast her Death, and her Wisedome suruiue her Dust?
Touching Charitie, Bruson. Lib. 2. cap. 21. relates, That a poore begger desiring an almes of Lacon, hee thus answered him^ If I giue thee any thing^ I make thee a greater begger, and tho^^ mayest curse him that first gaue thee, for it was hee that made thee one. Amongst the Lacedemonians^

nothing was more shamefull than to begge, being an industrious Nation, hating slouth, and contenting themselues with little. Notwithstanding, Charitie is commendable in all, and reckoned amongst the best Theologicall Vertues: neyther is it any fault in such, if their goodnesse and bountie be not a meanes to encourage idlenesse and slouth in bad people, who make a pretence of want and penurie: therefore commendable it is in any man that is apt to giue, to know vpon whom hee doth bestow. King Archelaus being at a banquet, where such as hee vouchsafed to set at his Table, were wonderous pleasant about him; amongst others, one that had great familiaritie with him, demanunded as a gift, a great standing bole which the king had then in his hand: which hee had no sooner spoken, but the king called to one that waited at his elbow, to whom hee sayd, Hold, take this bole and beare it to the Poet Euripides, and tell him I bestow it on him as my free gift. The other demanding the reason thereof, Archelaus answered, Thou indeede art onely worthie to aske, but not receiue, but Euripides is worthie to receiue without asking. In which hee nothing abated of his kingly bountie, onely hee apprehended how most worthily to dispose it: Plutarch. in Regum Apotheg. But how this Charitie in women is rewarded, I will onely instance Tabitha, spoken of in the Acts; who beeing dead,Charitie rewarded. was thought worthie for her former Charitie (in relieuing Widowes and Orphants) to haue Peters knees and prayers, to restore her againe to life.
Now of the reward of religious Pietie, in which many Matrons and godly martyred Virgins (amongst such as haue suffered strange deaths) may be included, as some by the Sword, some by Fire, others suffocated by Smoake, stifled in Iakes, shot with Arrowes, tortured vpon Wheeles, scourged with Whips, seared with Irons, boyled in Caldrons, etc. their Crownes are glorie, their Rewards neither to bee expressed by penne, tongue, or apprehension of man.


Loosenesse of life first conuerted, and the conuersion rewarded, in a home-bred Historie.
A Conuertite rewarded.A Ciuile gentleman (within memorie) in the heat of Summer hauing beene walking alone in the fields, contemplating with himselfe, and returning backe not the same way hee went out, but through another part of the Suburbes, to which hee was a meere stranger, and finding himselfe extreamely athirst, hee stepped into the first house that fairelyest offered it selfe to him, and called for a Cup of Beere, seating himselfe in the first Roome next to the street. He had not well wiped the sweat from his face with his Handkerchiefe, but two or three young Wenches came skittishly in and out the Roome; who seeing him a man of fashion, and therefore likely to be of meanes, they thought to make of him some bootie, being (it seemes) set on by the Grandam of the house, for as it prooued, it was a common Brothelhouse. The youngest and handsomest amongst the rest was put vpon him: who entreated him, not to be seene below, where euerie Porter, C^^^an, and common fellow came to drinke, but to take a more conuenient ^nd retyred Roome. The gentleman suspecting the place (as it was indeed) to be no better than it should be, and being willing to see some fashions,

tooke her gentle proffer, and went with her vp the stayres: where they two being alone (and a Bed in the Roome) Beere being brought vp, shee began to offer him more than common courtesie, being so farre from modestie, that shee almost prostituted her selfe vnto him. Which hee apprehending, asked her in plaine tearmes, If these were not meere prouocations to incite him to Lust? which shee as plainely confessed. To whom he replyed, That since it was so, he was most willing to accept of her kind proffer; onely for modestie sake, hee desired her to shew him into a darker roome. To which she assented, and leads him from one place to another; but hee still told her, that none of all these was darke enough: insomuch, that shee began at length somewhat to distaste him, because in all that time hee had not made vnto her any friendly proffer. At length shee brought him into a close narrow roome, with nothing but a Loope-hole for Light, and told him, Sir, vnlesse you purpose to goe into the Coale-house, this is the darkest place in the house: How doth this please you? To whom he answered, Vnlesse (thou strumpet) thou canst bring me to a place so palpably tenebrious, into which the eyes of Heauen cannot pierce and see me, thou canst not persuade me to an act so detestable before God and good men: For cannot he that sees into the hearts and reines of all, behold vs here in our wickednesse? And further proceeding, told her the heynousnesse of her sinne towards God, that her prostitution was in sight of him and his Angels, and the euerlasting punishment thereto belonging. Or if (irreligious as shee was) shee held these but Dreames and Fables, hee bad her consider her estate in this world, and what her best could be; a Whore: the name odious, the profession abhominable; despised of the indifferent, but quite abandoned of those confirmed in Vertue: That shee was in her selfe but a meere Leprosie, to destroy her selfe, and infect others, a Sinke of Sinne and Diseases. Or if her extraordinarie good fortune were such, to escape the Spittle and the Surgeon, yet shee was a continuall vasall to euerie Constable and Beadle, neuer certaine of her Lodging, if not in the Stocks, in the Cage, but the chiefest of her hopes in Bridewell, etc. To conclude, hee read vnto her so strict and austere a Lecture, concerning her base and debosht life, that from an impudent Strumpet, hee wrought her to be a repentant Conuertite. Her Brasen forhead melted at his fierie zeale, and all those skales of Immodestie (like a Maske plucked off) fell from her face, and shee appeared to him in her former simple and innocentious life. When further questioning with her of her birth and countrey, shee freely confessed vnto him, That shee was borne in the North countrey, her father a gentleman, once of faire Reuenue; but being impouerished by peeuish Suites in Law, her mother first, and hee (whether by age, or griefe, shee knew not) soone after died. Shee being an Orphant, and left distressed, loth to begge of those whom her Parents had before relieued, finding charitie there cold, and willing rather to appeare base any where, than where shee was knowne, sold such small things as shee had, to come vp to London with the Carriers: where shee was no sooner allighted at her Inne, but shee was hyred by this Bawd (altogether vnacquainted with her base course of life) who by degrees trayned her to such base prostitution: but withall protested with teares, that course of life was hatefull vnto her; and had shee any friend, or kinsman, tha^ could propose her any meanes to relinquish that Trade,

which in her soule she detested, she would become a new woman, desiring that one moneth of her leaudnesse might be forgot, for from that houre shee protested Chastitie all her life time after. Her apparant teares and seeming penitence much perswading with the gentleman, he protested, If it lay in him, he would otherwise dispose of her according to her wishes; and withall charging her, That if hee sent vnto her within two or three dayes with money, to acquit her of the house, that shee would attyre her selfe as modestly as shee could possibly, not bringing with her any one ragge that belonged to that abhominable house, or any borrowed garment in which she had offended, but instantly to repaire vnto him, at his first sending: and this being agreed betwixt them, for that time they parted. The gentleman wonderous carefull of his vndertaking (because shee was now his new creature) came to a Matron-like gentlewoman, a kinswoman of his afarre off (with whom and her husband hee had familiar acquaintance, and by that meanes daily accesse to the house, who had prettie fine children, and were of a faire reuenue) and told her there was a ciuile maid (a kinswoman of his, lately come out of the countrey) who wanted a seruice, whom if shee pleased to entertaine, it might prooue a great good to her, and no lesse courtesie to him. Briefely, the motion was accepted, shee sent for, according to appointment, and (after he had tutored her in all things which shee should answere) accepted, and entertained. Her modest behauior and faire carriage, with her tender loue and diligence about the children, woon her in short time a good opinion of her maister, a greater affection from her mistresse, and a generall loue of the whole household; insomuch, that within lesse than a yeere shee was raysed from a Chambermaid, to be Waiting-gentlewoman, and the onely bosome friend of her mistresse: who falling sicke, euen to death, readie to expire her last, so much doted on her new seruant, that shee sent for her husband, and besought him (if it stood with his good liking so to dispose of himselfe) after her decease to make that woman his wife, and mother to his children; for one more louing and carefull hee should not finde, and search England thorow and thorow. The gentlewoman soone after dyes, hee is left a widower, and the charge of the whole house committed to our new Conuertite, with the bringing vp of his children. Which shee executed with such fidelitie, that hee casting a more curious eye vpon her youth and beautie, and withall remembring his wiues last words, not knowing for the present how better to dispose of himselfe (Time, Place, and Opportunitie, all things furthering her preferment) hee contracted himselfe vnto her, and they were soone after married. But before any of these late passages happened, I must remember you, that instantly vpon the preferment of this young woman, the gentleman who brought her this fortune, aduentured all his meanes vpon a Voyage, which miscarryed (for the shippe wherein hee sayled, was taken by the Spaniard, and hee almost a tweluemoneth kept prisoner in Lisbone.) But at length (by what meanes I know not) being ransomed, he came for his countrey, but so poorely and deiected, that hee was ashamed to shew himselfe to any of his friends: for hauing tryed some, and finding their charitie cold, hee was loth to make proofe of the rest; insomuch, that hee walked by Owle-light, without a Cloake, and scarce had honest ragges to couer him from nakednesse, or hide him from shame. It happened, that iust vpon his returne the old gentleman died too,

and left her possessed of eight hundred a yeere during the minoritie of the children, but the thirds howsoeuer: and withall (so great and good opinion he had of her) that he made her full Executor. Now iust as shee followed the Herse to the Church (hauing diuerse suitors before her husbands bodie was scarce cold) this gentleman by chance comming by, like the picture of the Prodigall (as I before relate him to you) shee casting her eye aside, had espyed him, and presently apprehended him to be the man he was, and whispering a seruant in the eare (willing to be truly satisfied) bad him to fall into discourse with him, to enquire his name, his Lodging, with other questions, as she directed him, and so proceeded to the Funerall; but in any case to speake nothing as from her. The seruant fell off from the Trayne, and did as he was commanded, and without suspition of him that was questioned, brought her true word how all things stood. The next morning (by her appointment) came a gentleman very early to his Lodging (shee hauing taught him his Lesson before hand) who desired to speake with him, and first asked him his name, which (though loth) he told him: the other proceeded, that if he were the same man he pretended, he had heard of his worth and noble qualities, and withall, of his casualties at Sea; and not willing that any gentleman should groane beneath so great a burthen, told him there was a hundred pounds, bad him furnish himselfe with apparrell and other necessaries, and so was readie to take his leaue. The other extasied with so great a courtesie from a stranger, whom hee had not seene before, enforced him backe, to know what reason he had to be so charitable, entreating him to consider what hope he had of future satisfaction, or at least to resolue him what securitie he demanded. The other answered, That for the first, his courtesie was grounded vpon his worth; his satisfaction, was in his acknowledgement; and his securitie, in that he knew him honest, and told him some three dayes after he would call vpon him, when hee was habited like himselfe, to entreat his further acquaintance, and so presently left him. But troubled in his mind aboue wonder, to receiue such bountie from a man vnknowne, when all his kindred and familiar friends were ashamed of his acquaintance; yet tooke the benefit of the present occasion, and suited himselfe according to his former, not his present fortunes. When the gentleman came according to promise, he seemed glad to see this present alteration, and withall entreated him to walke abroad with him to dinner: hee (who could not denie him any thing) seemed willingly to assent, not once demanding whither. In the meane time, the late widow had prouided a great Feast, whither shee had inuited all her suitors (who were not few) this gentleman whom shee had imployed (and knew no further of her mind) being one of the chiefest. Meat was vpon the Table, the guests readie to sit downe; now the last that came in, were the two new friends late remembred: In comes the widow, to bid them all welcome. This new made vp gentleman ignorant of whatsoeuer had before happened, demanded of his friend, If it were not such a woman? who briefely told him all: How shee came a stranger to the house, and what a fortune by her good demeanure she had in a short time purchased; That shee was now a widow, had such and such meanes left, and all or most of those gentlemen (and himselfe amongst the rest) were suitors, and that their hope was, this day shee would make choyse of a husband. Whatsoeuer he thought, he said nothing for the present.

The widowes turne was to place euerie man according to his degree, or at least to our owne fancie: this new gentleman was neglected, and the stooles being furnisht, left standing at a bay window: She tooke place at the tables end only, leauing her husbands chaire emptie, when suddenly starting vp, Me thinks saith she, some one in this roome might be well spared, for we haue more guests than stooles. The gentleman at these words bit his lip, and was intreated to sit downe by his friends, but whilest they were straining curtesie, she proceeded, Is this a suitor too? no question some that either hath borrowed his clothes, or ingaged all his credit for this one new suit, in hope to gaine the widdow; but women are now adaies growne more wise. By whose acquaintance came he hither? Mine, answered his friend: then saith she, perhaps he wants a dinner, and hath not mony to pay for his ordinarie: Well, he may sit downe amongst the rest; some of you there make him some small elbow roome. These words made him wish himselfe againe prisoner in Lisbone, or any where, saue where he was. This was sport to the rest, but torture to him, who much blamed her ingratitude, yet arming him with patience (the rather for his friends sake who brought him thither) he sate downe silent with an ill stomack, eating as little as he spake. All were merrie at the table, some of them making him their mirth the rather to please her. A Health went round to the widowes next husband: All pledged it gladly, hee enforcedly. At length rising from her stoole: Me thinkes (saith she) we are all merrie, onely that gentleman at the lower end of the Table is melancholy: but I know the reason, it is perhaps because he is placed so low; but if that be his disease, I haue for it a present remedie: when walking to him where he sat, she pluckt him by the sleeue, desiring him to remooue, for she had another place for him. Who desiring her to torment him no further, refused to rise: but shee would needs enforce him, the rest likewise persuading, as wondering what further sport shee would make with him. Well (saith hee) I am this day yours, but will be mine owne euer hereafter: And so being drawne by her to the vpper end of the chamber like a Beare to the stake, where her late husbands Chayre stood emptie: Now Sir (saith shee, with a more serious countenance than before) my new husband, sit here in my old husbands Chayre, and bid these your guests welcome. Still hee fretted, and they laught, as before: when she crauing pardon for so abusing his patience, openly protested, That this meeting was meerely for his sake, and to make them witnesses of their present contract: for if hee refused her to wife, shee vowed neuer to haue other husband; acknowledging, that all her fortunes (next to the Diuine Prouidence) came by his goodnesse (omitting the former circumstances) and that she knew no way better to expresse her gratitude, than to conferre them on him, by whom they first came. Thus the close proued better than the beginning, and the banquet of Sweet-meats made amends for the harsh Feast, for they found this last (of all the other passages) to be only serious. They were there contracted (the suitors witnesses and soone after married. And thus his vertue and her conuersion had one ioint Reward.


Cura.
ONe woman I had almost forgotten, but better remember her at last than not at all; and strange it is I should doe so, since she is still present with the King in his Throne, with the Generall in the Campe, the

Tradsman in his Shop, and the Plowman in his Cottage, shee is with the Scholler in his Studie, and the Statesman in his Closet, shee is still at the elbow of euerie Father or Mother, and no Familie can exist without her. In this my worke shee hath rise earely with mee in the Morning, and againe sat vp with me till past Midnight, shee will leaue no man Waking, nor forsake him till she see him fast Sleeping. This womans name is, Care, the grandmother of Feares and Doubts, who passing a riuer, and finding a veine of bittuminous and clammie Clay (being full of thoughts) shee began to fashion a part thereof to the true semblance and shape of a man, and deliberating with her selfe what she had done, and being enamoured with her late workemanship, and casting how best to dispose of it, Ioues Herald (Mercurie) comming that way by accident, saluted her, whome shee intreated to be an intercessor to Iupiter in her behalfe, to giue that picture life. Hee at Mercuries intreaties, did so. There was then question made how to name it, Cura would haue it called after her owne name, Care; but Iupiter would not agree to that, but giue it his; next, vp start Tellus, i. The Earth, and pleaded the name belonged to her, because from her it first proceeded. The deciding of this controuersie was put to Saturne, who thus ended it: You Iupiter shall take charge of it, and after death receiue the Spirit backe that first gaue it; Care, because she first fashioned it, Care shall all the life time possesse it. But because the difference is about the name. Homo vocetur quia ex humo factus esse videtur, i. Let it bee called man because made of the Earth: And therefore with great elegance Tibull lib. 3. Eleg. 3. thus writes:
Nam graue quid prodest pondus mihi diuitis auri?Aruaquae si findant pinguia mille boues, etc.
What profit golden heapes weighed by the pound?Or if a thousand Oxen plow my ground?What profits me my house? although it standOn Phrigian collumns, wrought by curious hand;Dig'd first, and fetcht from the Tenarian Mine,Or else Caristus whether brought from thine?Or woodes, beneath my roofe planted for stateWhich seeme the sacred groues to imitate?My golden beames and floores with marble pau'd,Or my Pearle-shinining vessalls so much crau'dFrom th' Ericthraean shores? what, all my prydeIn wooll, that's in Sydonian purple dyde.Or what besides, the vulgar sets on fire,Who still most enuie where they most admire.These but the temporall gifts of Fortune are,And 'tis no pompe can free my thoughts from Care.


Rewards due to Philosophers, Orators, and poets.
IN what honour all Philosophers haue beene of old with Princes and Emperours, lyes next in me to speake of, as Agathe Pithagoricus with Arcesilaus king of Macedon, Plato, with Dionisius, Aristotle, with Philip, and Alexander, Xeno Citteius the sonne of Mnasenus with the Athenians, Theophrastus honoured by Demetrius, Psaleraeus with golden statues, Posidonius entyred to

Cneius Pompeius Magnus, Ariston to Iulius Caesar, Zenarchas to Augustus, Appollonius Tyanaeus to Bardosanes king of Babylon, Dion Prusienis to the Emperour Traianus, Arrius to Alexander, Heliodorus to Adrianus, Sopater to Constantinus Magnus, wi^h infinite others, of which it is not necessarie now to insist. Plutarch remembers vs in the life of Alexander, That hee hauing taken ten of these Gymnosphists,So called of Sabbea cheefe citie of Arabia. that were the cause of the falling off of the Sabbea a people of Arabia, who had done many outrages to the Macedonians, because they were esteemed Phylosophers, and famous for their readie and accute answeres, he therfore to those ten propounded ten seuerall questions, with this condition, that hee who answered the worst of them should bee first slaine, and so in order the rest; and of this hee made the eldest iudges. Of the first he demanded, Whether in his iudgement he thought there to be more men liuing or dead? who answered, Liuing, because the dead are not. The second, Whether the Earth or the Sea harboured the greater Monsters? Resp. The Earth, because the Sea is but part thereof. The third, What beast of all creatures was the most craftie? Resp. That which to man is best knowne. The fourth, Why did the Sabbae reuolt from Macedon? Resp. That they might either Liue well, or Dye ill. The fifth, Whether the day was before the night, or the night before the day? Resp. The day, for one day was before another. The sixth, What was the best way to make a man generally beloued of all? Resp. To be the best man and no tyrant. The seuenth, How might a man bee made a god? Resp. By doing that which a man is not able to doe. The eigth, Whether is Life or Death the stronger? Resp. Life, because it beareth so many disasters. The ninth hee demanded, How long hee thought a man to liue? Who answered, Iust so long as he desired not to see Death. When the king turning to the iudge, bad him giue iust sentence; hee sayd that one had answered more impertinently than another: then sayth the king, thou art the first that oughtest to die for so iudging. But he replyde, Not so o king because it was your owne condition, that he should suffer first that made the worst answere. This sayd, the king dismissed them bounteously and royally rewarded. If then for ambiguous answeres to such slight and yet doubtfull questions, Alexander thought them worthie of such gifts and presents; with what Memories, what Praises, what Crownes, Collumnes, and Statues ought we to dignifie and celebrate the names of queene Zenobia? Amalasuntha, Aspatia, Fuluia, Morata, and others? This Salomon the wisest (not only of kings) but of men, well knew, when hauing made proofe of the wisedome of Nicaulis Queene of Aethiopia, he sent her backe into her countrey so liberally furnished and so royally rewarded. What I haue spoke of these may be pertinently applyde to our women studious in Diuinitie, Oratorie, and Sophistrie, and laboriously practised in all other liberall Arts and Sciences; Nor can I more fitly in my mind conclude this worke, than as I begun with goddesses, so to end with good women: Onely of the honour due to Poetesses, because it belongs something to mine owne profession, I will borrow my conclusion from Ouid in his last Elegie of the first booke Amorum, the title is Ad iuuidos quod fama poetarum sit perennis:
Quod mihi liuor edax ignauos obijcis annos?Ingenij que vocas carmen inerte meum?
Why (eating Enuie) dost thou as a crime,Obiect vnto me Sloath, and mispent time?Tearming the Muse and sacred Numbers vaine,The fruitlesse issue of an idle braine.I am not woon to spend my youth in warre,By which our predecessors famous are:It tempt's not me to search the brabling laws,Or at the barre to quarrell in a cause:These studies mortall are, and transitorie,When mine shall purchase me eternall glorie.Whil'st Ida stands, or Tenedos hath name,Or Symois streames shall run, so long thy fame(Meonides) shall liue, whil'st graine shall grow,Which men with sythe or sicle, reape or mowe:Whilst vineyards grapes, and these grapes yeeld vs wine,Famous Ascraeus, euen so long shall thine.Battiades, the whole world shall impart,For what he wants in wit he hath in art.No losse can chance to thy Cothurnate straine,Oh Saphocles: nor Aratus thy vaine.The honours by the Muses you haue wunne,Shall last, if not outlast both Moone and Sunne.Whil'st ther's a craftie Seruant, or hard Sire,Fat Bawde, or merrie Whoore, men shall admireMenander thee; Ennius, although obscure,And weightie Accius, you shall both indure.All shall reade Varro that but heare of Greece;In him, the first ship lancht to fetch the fleece.Then shall, Lucretius, thy bright fame decay,When all the world shall perish in one day.Whil'st Rome triumphant o're the world shall bee,So long, o Maro, shall the world reade thee.Whil'st Cupid shall beare shafts or amorous fire,So long Tibullus shall thy Muse respire.Gallus in the East, and Gallus in the West,With faire Lycoris whom he loued best,Shall both be famous. Whil'st theres Tree, or Stone,Or Plant, or Hearbe, or Ground to tread vpon,When Flints consume, and when the Plow shal wastAnd be forgot, yet Numbers still must last.Vnto the Muse, euen Monarchies must yeeld,And glorious Tpiumphs purchast in the field:To her yeeld Tagus with thy golden shine,You Terrhene are, and onely she diuine.Let then the vulgar, what is vile admire,That nothing else saue ^anthie drosse desire.Gold hair'd Apollo with full hand shall bringMy flowing cup fill'd from the Muses spring.And crown'd with myrtle, I shall now be sung,And be made frequent in each louers tongue.Enuie the liuing sole detracts, but FateConcluding life, she likewise ends her hate,And then her rancour is no longer fed,When liuing Honor shall maintaine vs, dead:And when my Funerall Rites their last fires giue,Then shall the great'st part of my selfe still liue.
And this perpetuitie of Fame, which Ouid in giuing to others, likewise attributes to himselfe, is that which all the truly Noble, Chast, Wise, Vertuous, Learned, and Religious Virgins, Wiues, and Matrons haue proposed as their iust Reward; who lift their thoughts vpward, and despising the Fraileties, Vncertainties, and Vanities of the Earth, ayme their Meditations, Contemplations, and Pious Actions at the sublimities of Heauen.



Opus Excogitatum, Inchoatum, Explicitum, Et a Typographo excusum, inter septemdecem septimanas.
LAVS DEO.






