



Thrice--Worthy Gentlemen.
YOu are not to learne what Artibus impietas ingeniosa caret. Artificiall shadowes Heresie hath in all ages contriued, for the couering of her Monstrum horrendum informe, ingens cui lumen ademptum. vgly shape; neither are you vnable to discern the counterfeit colours wherwith she hath varnished her Reuelabo pudenda tua, in facie tua. Nahum. 3.5 wrinkled deformities, for the alluring of the giddie world to her banefull lust. The truth is, she hath so long forged, and forced the countenance of venerable Antiquitie, by her impious positions, and whorish practices, that her vsurping impudence, and impudent vsurpations, haue now iustly occasioned, not only Church-men

to dispute, but euen Lay-men to doubt of the authority of that Charter, wherewith their fore-fathers were so grosly deluded. Hence it commeth to passe that finding her self displumed of her wonted retinew, which shee is well-nigh out of hope to Jctus Piscator sapit. regaine, and depriued of those naturall supplies, wherwith her state was supported, and her pompe maintained, she now flieth abroad like a shrewish distracted malecontent, in her frantique mood, Vel vi, vel fraude valebo. pulling, haling, spurning, scratching, and tearing al that stand in her Aut inuentam aut ficiam viam. way: yea bee they neuer so noble by discent, eminent in place, profound in Iudgement, skilful in tongues, famous for learning, vertue, or experience in trauailes, if they Laesit qui non haesit. refuse to dance a rou^d in her Orgions antick, she will be sure they shall not passe, without a broken head, or a black eye: witnes so many scurrilos and scandalous Pamphlets which haue of late bin scatterd; wherin neither the highnesse of sacred Maiestie, the matchlesse gouernours of a well

setled state, nor the sincere professors of a spotlesse truth, haue escaped without some vile blurr, and maleuolous aspersion, from one or other her suborned Pandars and whifling agents: Neither hath their inraged malice, as yet vented all those venemous crudities, wherwith their surfeited stomacks are surcharged, but as if they meant to make worke for a world of Galenists, and Paracelsians, they daily corrupt our pure ayre, by casting out of that sulphurious pit, no small quantitie of their infectious dregs, and hellish druggs, Iras viuaces gerunt. wherwith their vaine hope is, to cast the ignorant, into a senceless sleepe, and the learned into causeless disgrace.

@. 2.
AMong this Brethren in euill. Gen. 49. v 15 Vasa iniquitatis bellantia. fraternity, there is a fresh vpstart, (vnto whom I presume Pandoraes boxe was entayled) desirous to bee admitted. Hee is onely knowne vnto mee by the marke of I. R. but if I bee not

mistaken in the (...) Gen. 16 v. 15. (...) Esa. 30.1. Hierogliphicks, his familiars may salute him by the name of Ishmael Rabshacheh, he is so wholly compact of (...) Gen. 2^.^ v. 9. mocking and rayling, that hee well seemeth to haue the mixed quintessence of them both. This Polypragmist, forsooth, to shew his inuincible courage, and vndaunted spirit, (which I must confesse doth many miles outstrip his leaden art, and heauy-heeld learning) hath vndertaken the Combat with one of your Mr VV. Crashaw. Lecturers, and professeth (as if his breast were the store-house of Aesculapius his medicinall receits) the present cure of all those festered wounds, which were by him discouered, in the diseased body of the Romish Church; little remembring, that Roma iam ve^us est malum. old flesh, and inueterate sores, require more then ordinary skil; and that it must bee a better tongue, then his mouth can yeild, to licke them whole. Notwithstanding, in this his presumptious heat, his swelling and pregnant wit, hauing by the vvindie incursion of superiour

hopes, conceiued the Idaea of an ill propotioned Brat, where-with for want of a good Mydwife he hath beene in trauaile these fiue yeares, is now at length deliuered of a little prettie Pygmie: whom, as if it had descended of the stock of Hercules, he hath christned, The Nil nisi bella crepat, bella, horrida bella. ouerthrow of the Protestants pulpet Bables: and hath entred it into the Church-booke, to bee the worke of I. R. Rudent, (I should say Student) in diuinity, Anno Domi. 1612. And, as if he had had the law on his side, he hath Preface dedicatory. inuited your worthy selues, the Gentlemen of the Inns of Court, to the vpsitting. His hope, no doubt, is, that according to the law of Goshipping, you will dandle the fathers none boy, and sweare it is a iolly pretie ape. And so I protest you may: your verdite herein will not bee much amysse, for wot you what? he hath taught it, in lesse then three monethes, to know mee better, then euer I knew my selfe. You would wonder to heare how in the lisping language it will name Pag. 7. D.

Iewel,Pag. 7. 149 D. Andrews.Pag. 137. D. Morton,Pag. 8. D. Feild. Pag. 85. 91 303. Sir Edwyn Sands, and among the rest Sir Edward Hoby, as if it had beene acquainted with either of vs, twice seauen yeares at the least. Nay more then so, he hath breathed into it such a Criticque, and discretiue spirit, that it is able to controule, the valour, sincerity, and learning of the best of vs all. But trust me truely, it hath one propertie, which all this praemature forwardnesse, is no waies able to counteruaile: you will find it the most foule-mouthed Impe, that euer Cerberus bred or Tit. c. 1. v. 12Crete saw. Yet must I not conceale the benefit, which I haue in my own perticular reaped thereby, which is not much vnlike, that which obliged Lib. 1. c. 13 Gelon (of whom Aelian maketh mention) to his yolping Curre,



@. 3.
THis poore man, taking, (as it may seeme) an after-noones nap, fell into a very fearefull dreame, that his bowells were peirced with a thunder-bolte, the soddain and ghastly apprehension whereof, so affrighted him, that he sent forth most pitiful grones, in so much as his dog being not far off, and hearing the noyse, fel on barking, till at lengh he quit his Maister, of his sleepe and feare. Right so fared it with me, who thinking to repose my superlatiue (...). Vulnera vulneribus non addas plura receptis. sorrow, (for the losse of one onely Child, a vertuous and louing wife, a broken arme, a burning feuer, and weaknesse of eies, all in one yeare conglomerated) by the solace of a rurall deuoted Deus nobis haec otia fecit. priuacy, fell, I know not how, to clyme the steepe hills of certaine craggy studies, and vnwonted speculations, and had not the belowing of this roaring Ouid. Met. lib. 1. Lycaonite, somwhat awakened mee, it is twenty to one, I

had bin no lesse perplexed with (...) Printed at Venice. 1593. Arca Noe, then Gelon with his dismal dream. Wherfore I should I much degenerate from my self, if in leiw hereof, I would not vouchsafe a litle conference with him, whose cal hath freed my braine from so great a burthen, And seeing he refers him-self to the censure of your learned society, of whose noble disposition, and renowned discretion, your nuptiall reuells, and graue pleadings haue giuen sufficient testimony, to the admyring world, I cannot repute it, the lest part of my hapines, that I am summoned to answer, at so honorable abench, against those vniust Cauills and (...) est morsus figura^us, qui sape, fraude, vel vrbanitate regitur vt aliud sonet, aliud intelligatur. Macrob. scommatizing imputations, which this falsefiing Ouid. Met. lib. 14. Cecropidan hath forged, against certaine passages, in a short letter of mine, which some few yeares since, past from my pen To Ma. T. H. to the presse. And here, before I enter the list, I must desire you, to be informed, that my purpose is not to forestal (...) M. Crashaws market, nor to put my sickle into his haruest, I doubt not but hee

hath store of strong powders to mak him feele the smart of those wounds, which by drawing ouer a faire skin, he seeks to hide, and his Quiuer full of such forked shaftes, for the entring of the weake sides, of the Romish cause, that the best chirurgians, in the Iesuites Hospitall, shall hardly with all the art they haue, bee so hardy as to pluck them out. So far am I from vsurping the least part of his praise, that it grieus me to think, he shold waste his forces vpon so inglorious a Hic cum victus erittecum certasse feretur foe. The only straite that I am in, is, in respect of my self, how I should wade through with your good opinion, being to sute my Apology to the Ishmalites obiections, whereof some are personall, and cannot be well answered by my selfe Nec te collaudes nec te culpaueris ipse. without apparance of vainglorious ostentation, and some so friuolous, that I haue little or no vse of those my smale readings, which in a more materiall cause, I mought with greater pleasure to my selfe, and perhaps content to you, haue imployed;

But because I am singled out, onely to defend my selfe, I must craue your forbearance in this, till my fitter opportunitie inhable mee to repay your patience in a better kinde.


@. 4.
THe first Epithite with which it pleaseth this Hagueren to grace those my cursory lines is, the friendly censure, of Preface dedicatory. pag. 22. an vnlearned letter, as if him-selfe were Act. 8.9. Habet quenda acul^um contumelia, quem pati prudentes as viri boni difficillime possunt. (...), such a one as had by his laborious industry, climed the top of Pernassus, and drunke the fountaine of Helicon drie: the triall hereof I referre, to the vnpartiall reader.
Indeed I cannot but ingenuously confesse, that I haue lost many Hoescio, quod nihil Scio howers, which I would be glad with double pains, and greater price to redeeme: yet haue I not beene such a stranger to those sacred Sisters, but that I haue seene Aristotles

Well, and friendly conuersed with them all. And were it not that Vide. @. 3. my infirmities did suppresse the virility of my spirit, I could perhaps readily shew (absit inuidia verbo) as many of their fauors, as this boasting Ishmaelite, yea should hee seeke and search all the corners of his deske. Had any approued Artist, laid ignorance to my charge, I should the sooner haue suspected my selfe; but when your wisdomes shall peruse the Si ego dignus hac centumelia, tu indignus qui faceres tamen. Solaecismes, crabbed phrases, and incongruities of this nibling Probationer, I doubt not but the comparison will purchase my Nullitie, the title of Mediocria firma. Mediocritie. In the entrance of his preface, which may serue as a Perspectiue to the rest, hee casts a Fygure, and rayseth such a number of iffs, that Barbarisme it selfe, would blush to reade them. If (saith hee) many seduced soules in our (in this respect,) vnhappy nation. etc. If if, etc. Heare is a iobbing Parenthesis, and a crabbed strayne indeed.
In this my learned Magnificoe, showes what refined stuffe we shall meete withal, in sifting the sequele of his discourse: Many a good mans dog, hath broken his leg ouer a lesse style. Now if I should spell all his iffs backwards, and turne them into so many Phi. nota faetoris. fyes, I might cry, fy vpon those Telas arane arum texuit. Cobweb allusions, so often iterated, that the margent would not contain, the perticular Pages, wherein the Pag. 4.20.22. fower times. 31 36.50.57.58.59.133. Spyder or Flye is praedomina^t. Fy vpon your accidental and genericall christening of Pag. 246. Bells and relatiue honor ofPag. 201. Images. Fy vpon the bird that defiles his owne nest, terming his country an Pag. 3. vnhappy kingdom, the Climat Pag. 36. Clownish, and infamous, the ayre grosse, and this Island an vsurper of the surname of Pag. 18. Crete. Fy vpon that blockish simplicity, that co^founds a rhethorical acclamation, which the Prophet vseth to the Esay. 45. v. 8. Clowdes, and a theological inuocation, which the Papists direct to the woden Pag. 207. Crosse: not distinguishing betweene a Hyperbolicall exaggeration, and a Superstitious obsecration.
The like art he vseth vnder the priuiledge of a simple Metaphor, to diuide the kingdom between God, and The throne of mercy is hers by a Metaphor. pag. 168. the Virgin. Deserues hee not to haue your voices for the Rhethoricke Lecture? Thus might I stuffe much paper, with many like vnsauoury P. 40. Baberies, wherwith being P. 52 absorpt, in his P. 44. extaticall contemplations, he perfumeth his il current and worse cadent lines. So that hee doth well to enioine the reading of his imaginary refutation as a P. 50. pennance to your iudicious eyes; neither haue you any reason to stop him with a Nil minus, when in plaine tearms he co^fesseth, P. 50. Ex ore tuo te iudico. Factus sum insipiens, I am become a foole; vnder this colour of affected simplicity, his desire is to passe, for Tom tell troth, that so with his fooles boltes hee might P. 14. cracke in peeces the credit of our English Church: But albeit hee slauer my poore letter, with his driueling tearmes, I wil yet do him his right, since hee will needes bee a foole, I dare vndertake you shall finde him a crafty

foole. When any of their owne auncient Records are produced, he hath a trick to turne them oft in a trice, blearing his Reader, that these are but P. 7 23. worme-eaten sayings of an old glosse: when they are charged with lying stories, painted in their Chappels, that fault hee layes to the P. 15. Paynters pensil, and when they are vrged with idolatrous appeale, from God to the Virgine, and the like absurdities, hee shifts them off to the P. 37. Picto^i^us atque Poetis. Poets pen.


@. 5.
THus doth he with the long sided skirts of his fooles coat, thinke shiftingly to hide that, which he dares not doctrinally defend: betweene Poets and Painters he challengeth licence for his Church, to teach and write what shee list, without check and controle. Which idle conceit, hath so fully possessed them, that there are fewe, or none of their late VVriters, who haue not beene free, of one, or both

those (so largely priuiledged) companies. Their boundlesse, and groundlesse fictions, bewray the most to be either Poets, or Paynters; when their Church Hymns are confessed to be but figuratiue Poems, and Poeticall fancies, and their pictures but Paynters deuices, you may ghesse of the insolidity of the rest.
I feare Rabshachehs Fy vpon a sloud of fools. fooles coate, will be well clawed by his Superiors, for telling of tales out of schooles, as also for discountenancing their highly esteemed P. 208. Breuiaries, and P. 156. Councells: And he well deserues it, as being the most brazen faced intrudor, that Fooliana euer harboured. You would wonder how he should lurke in the Parliament house, to publish our (supposed) P. 59. commaunds. Is it not strange, that a principall Earle of Salisbury. Secretarie of so great a state, should let fall to such an open mouthed fellow, his dislike, and resolution to discarde P. 52 Master Crashawes Sermon, as our Cecropidan, peraduenture, to raise some sinister suspition, pretends.

Were he now aliue to heare those new inuented fictions, I wonder what he would thinke of such poring spies, and hollow-harted Intelligencers M. Tom. Dyrre.Did a Courtier of my acquaintance, who is not far behind him for learning, heare him as-certain so much, I smile to thinke how hee would looke. I presume the afore-said Councellor would soone cast a net to catch this fleeting Gudgeon, that makes himselfe so priuy to his inward thoughts: And yet (though by all likelihood hee is not Out of the current of his natiue streams extra quatuor Maria) this would not easily be compassed, For if euer any fellow were made of quick-siluer, this is he, as I verily thinke. One while he is in P. 322. Virginia, and can tell you what pease-pottage (tawny) the Minister did eate, whilest his fellowes vvere fighting. An other vvhile hee is at an execution at P. 106. Oxford, and by and by he conuerseth with a P. 321. Credite Pisones. Gentleman of Honour, vvho bringeth him nevves from my Lord De la Warres ovvne mouth: Nay, there can no

sooner bee an argument propounded at my table, but hee hath it straight by the end. If he be now amongst the roaring Pag. 100. Rakehile, in the Colledge pumpe, he will in a moment bee inuisible, among the Gossippes in P. 185. 245 Pemblico: It is not vnlike hee hath met with Fortunatus his hat, his eares are as quicke, as his thought, and his pen so well feathered, that it follows him close at the heeles: whatsoeuer his Philautie presenteth, his heart crediteth, and his hand publisheth.
Among many other his imaginarie discoueries, hee would faine make vs beleeue, that hee hath beene with (glorious) Pag. 104. Qui vbique nullibi Q. Elizabeths ghost, taking vpon him to determine with what consorts shee is accompanied; and as if hee had a priuy key to the closet of your hearts, hee is so shamelesly audacious, as vnder colour of rumor, to sound a false Alarum, informing his Readers, that Pag. 5. your generall dislike, of Mr. Crashawes intemperancie in writing, and folly in marrying,

(being held no conuenient qualitie for your Preacher) did praesage his present discharge from his office. Is not this a daungerous mate, that hath such a number of Familiars, to send into euery But Picke. hatch, Bedlam Shorditch. Pag. 276. coast? Can hee bee so carefull of your Honors, as hee pretends, that broacheth out of his fustie braine, such musty scandales, for the vilifying of your iudgement, and traducing the constancie of your faith? No maruaile if hee taxe my learning, vvho laies so hard a censure vpon the blessed soule, of so worthy a Saint, chargeth a great Counsellor of estate, and your venerable Societie, with these surmises; were that time bestowed in his theologicall studies, which hee spends in hunting after fabulous reports, hee might with more probability, haue made a greater breach into our Fort, then hee is now with his paper-shot like to performe.



@. 6.
YEt I cannot but commend him for his iugling, what hee wants in reall, hee supplies vvith personall imputations: I haue eaten more then a bushell of salt in Fraunce, the Lowe-Countries, Spaine, Portugal, etc. in all vvhich time I cannot iustly accuse my selfe of any military seruice, by sea or land which I refused, or dishonorable disgrace which I pocquetted: Yet doth this Lycaonite, for vvant of better stuffe, display mee to be a Knight, Pag. 21. more famous for my penne, then my sworde.
It seems he grieues that I should sleepe in a sound skinne; the truth is, as I was neuer forward in putting my selfe vppon the pikes of needelesse daungers; so did I neuer turne my backe, where my aduersarie durst shevv his face. Sua vulnera narrat. Miles gloriosus, beene long since a laughing stocke, to the vvhole Theatre:

I haue euer held it more valour to let others feele, then for my selfe to make boast of the sharpenesse of my sworde. If I haue not beene famous for quarrels, it hath either been my happinesse, which hee seemeth to enuy, or my heedinesse, vvhich hee hath reason to commend. Whether Mars or Mercury had the praedominance in my Natiuity, I am not so cunning Format enim natura prius no^intus ad omnem fortunarum habitum. a Starre-gazer to determine. It shall bee my greatest content, to stand as a Jsti adsimiles sunt abacorum calculis, qui and secucdum voluntatem Cal culatoris modo obolum aereum, modo, talentum valent J^a A^lici ad nutum Principis, modo beati, modo miserifi un^. Cypher, in what ranke of employment my Masters fauour shall bee pleased to place mee: To whose honor, and seruice, I will neuer be daunted to sacrifice my dearest blood. How this Rodomantado may vnderualew my worth, vnlesse hee were a more competent Iudge, the matter is not great.



@. 7.
HIs next flurte is at my witt, which (saith hee) pag 22. Were it aunswerable to my name, or my learning, as high, as my own conceite thereof, I were a soaring birde. Thus do his squibbes flie about to sindge my feathers. By all meanes I would not haue him lose this conceit. Marke the allusion: were my wit aunswerable to my name, I were a soaring bird: Well flowne Buzzard: I perceiue hee will flie farre for a iest: would hee not proue (think you) a good Anagrammist, that can descant so well vppon a name? Well I am glad I had it for him, or else all this sport had beene mar'd. To iustifie my witte, were wit-lesse folly; Yet if an ambitious spirit, had that little in keeping, I am perswaded hee should haue no great neede, to borrow of this indigent Artist: who would make

vs beleeue he was borne in the ful moone, when wit was a dealing. The fates, no doubt, were very partiall, to emptie all their vyalls, into one caske; It cannot be but he must needs haue a great skonce, that hath ingrossed such a masse of wit. There is no question but this Brauo will wel perform the gybing task, vnto which by the Ladies liberall purse--promises (their former Spreta exolescuat, si irascare, aguita videntur. c. Tacit. Libels being turned into smoake) he stands ingaged. If hee misse his pay let him sobbe for I. R. vnderstandeth me, she was of the arting kinds. her death, who hauing giuen first incouragement, did not long after, by Gods great mercy, ende her daies in a farre other manner, then he expected.



@. 8.
THe conceipt of my learning, wherewith my innocent thoughts are vniustly vpbrayded, cannot bee well remoued by bare words; but had hee a window into my breast, to survaie the imaginations of my heart, his pen is not now so busie in censuring, as his tongue would bee diligent in reuoking. I am, God wot, too priuy to mine owne defects, to giue credit to any comparatiue attributes in that kinde. My desire hath bin to holde conformity herein, to my first breeding, and to keepe pace, with men of my owne ranke. Wherein, if I haue gayned so much as may serue for my owne meditations, and my Countries affayres, wherein I am interessed, I neither enuy them that haue more, nor disparrage those which haue lesse.
Whervpon this his surmize should grow, I cannot readily tell, vnlesse he find himselfe wrung with his owne Obtrectator magis m^rbum suum quam mores alienos prodit. shooe. Had I as much learning as hee wants, I could finde good vse for much more. The Apostle long since taught me, and lent me a brydle, which may serue as a curbe, to subdue the like motions of his swelling pride: 1. Cor. 3 v. 2. Si quis se existimat scire aliquid, nondum cognouit, quemadmodum oporteat eum scire. The greatest Tympany hath not alwaies the best burthen; where the hill is highest, commonly, the grasse is lowest; the deepest riuer runnes with the least noice, Sapere supra sobrietatem, O di pracocia ingenia. hath beene as dangerous in the Church, as pernicious in the state. A great Mast soone ouerturnes a little Barke, and hee which bringeth a great Armie into the field, without victuall or munition, is like to goe by the worste. Wherefore, how-soeuer I may be misconstrued, my course hath euer beene, by comparing that which I doe not know, with that little

which I haue attained, to substract many ounces, from that ordinary opinion, which men of his profession doe in like case intertaine. It is for children to bee proude of Peacocks feathers, and for base aspiring spirits, to set out their paynted butter-flies with Eagles winges.
True generosity banisheth such base thoughts, if the Vino vendibili non o^us haedera. wine bee good, no matter for a greene bush. Wherfore I am well content to bestow this Cauill vpon the first Plaerique in id nati, vt neque ipsi quiescant, nec alios sinant. Thucid. founder, for his paines If his meanes may bee bettered, or his credit more currant, by the stampe which it shal receuie, from the partial hand of his ouerweening imagination, I shall not repine to see him make his best of such ordinary commodities. The world will perhaps wonder at my charity, and the rather for that hee further taxeth mee for, Pag. 22. fluttering in a webbe of weake s^unders, which is so vile a reproach, that patience it selfe would shrinke, if not sinke, vnder the burthen.
A man had neede haue the sheilde of Pallas to repell these poysoned dartes: but as longe as they flie from so weake a hand, without the vantage of firmer proofes, there is good hope they will neither fly flarre, nor peirce deepe.


@. 9.
WHat hee should meane by these weake slaunders, my dull brayne cannot conceiue, vnlesse he haue reference to those three Falsifications, where-with his seditious treatise, would gladly perswade Saint Augustine to finde him-selfe greiued. Pag. 134. This (saith he) is not onely, grose ignorance, but also great impudency, etc. Want of conscience, which I haue bewraied, in framing sentences for Sainst Augustin; which he neither wrote, nor so much as dreamed of. And therfore he warnes Maister Crashawe that, in proofe of his assertion,

hee bring not such testimony as the three alleaged by me, out of that Father, to proue he reiected the Machabees. Thus doth this Spider-catcher trauaise his ground, with a goodly flourish, as if he meant, with the weake Goddesses, to binde Iupiter: but if he bring not some Briareus to assiste him, it wil not be long ere he be Magn^is tamen excidit ausis. out of breath. Amongst all that I wrote in an 114, pages, hee hath only a spite at one leafe, which lies in the heart of my letter; and that the world may know hee is a man of his handes, hee puts euery sillable to the sword. One shall hardly finde such an Examiner in a country. I beshrew his curiosity; Hee is so nice, that hee hath made Mee and my Printer allmost fall out, about setting Pag. 135. Grande piaculum. Razis for Razias. The best satisfaction I could get from him was, that if Master Ishmael be so strict for a letter, rather then he would stand in law with him, he would willingly graunt that last sillable, to Nunquam ego hominem magis asinam vidi him and his heires for euer.
This is he by way of amends content to set downe vnder his hand. And that you may see hee meanes no double dealing, he is well pleased, the whole world should be witnesse: adding this protestation, that he is sorry he hath withheld his due so longe. But to return to that Marble pillar, that glorious Saint, that euer admired Augustine, I cannot but deplore my hard hap, that I should be indited for the least wronge, done to him, to whose heauenly Meditations, sweet sayings, and learned discourses, I owe more then the half of my self. Would any man beleeue, that I shold father that booke, de mirabilibus sacrae scripturae vpon him?Pag. 122. Varius ait, Scaurus negat. Rabshacbeh auerres that. Indeed I cannot denie that finding it in their owne Coppies in equall rancke, with those other bookes that goe vnder the title of Saint Augustine his workes, and hauing no other certaine, or knowne author, vnder whose name I mought cite it, I was loath to trouble the margent, with any

Circumloquution, co^tenting my self only to note where it might be found. And this I did to a double end. First, to draw and extort from the aduersarie, an open confession of the falsehood of their forefathers, in packing and placing their bastardly brood, amongst the naturall children, and true branches of those Angelical Doctors. Which vniust dealing, hath not beene the least bane of the Christian world. Secondly, to inferre vpon their owne acknowledgement, and discarding this booke, that the testimonie euen of the most partiall, that vented their follies in those first declining yeeres, will steed them but very little, for authorizing the Machabees, from whence the foundation of their praier, and oblation for the dead was first deriued. As neere as I can remember, I thus argued with my selfe: If they grant that Saint Augustines penne doe feuer the Machabees from the diuine Canon, then the matter will bee soone at an end: and if they deny that

booke to bee his, then hovv vvill they excuse the infidelitie of their Church, who hath in her time plaide manie such lewde prankes as this? Or how vvill they answere Antiquitie, vvhich distinguished these bookes eight hundred and nine yeeres; before either The book de Mirabilibus, was written 627. vt. P. 133 Luther or Suinglius vvere borne.
So that my reply is this: If it bee a booke of no account, not sauouring of Saint Augustines vvit, learning, and stile, then are they culpable either of forging, or maintenance, or both; If it bee not his, why was it entertained? vvhy is it continued in their own editions amongst his golden works? If they print it vnder his name, they may giue me leaue so to note it, where they might be sure to finde it. Yea, butP. 3. q. 45. art. 3. ad 2. teste Tho. Aquinate, it hath beene long since pronounced discarded: By like it will not serue the Popes turne; vvhy then welfare their honest Index expurgatorius, that will tell manie tricks of the like cleanly conueiance. In what an

intricate age doe wee liue? A man cannot, safely, read any their fathers, but he must turne ouer Thomas Aquinas, before hee can tell what workes are their owne; and consequently, may catch a Snake, instead of an Eele, ere hee be aware.


@. 10.
THus you well see (ingenuous Gentlemen) how I haue quit my hands of the first falsehood, my scope being not then to prooue that booke de mirabilibus to be Saint Augustines, but first to euince them of forgerie, and then to shevve vvhat their ovvne Antiquitie did manie hundred yeeres agoe thinke, of those Apocriphall books. Had I bin indeed perswaded, that it had bin S. Augustines owne off-spring, I should haue held it needles to cumber the breuity of a letter with more then one other proofe of the

same Father* But because I foresaw, that by this baite I should bring the opposite partie, to one of those ineuitable disaduantages formerly mentioned; I therefore added tvvo seuerall testimonies, (vvhich he cannot disauow) to confirme the same truth; in the alleaging vvhereof, hee cries out, P. 134. that I am a notorious falsefier. For triall vvherof my pen prostrates it selfe to your censure.
The vvords by mee cited are these; Mr. T. H. P. 60. Machabaeorum Scriptura recepta est ab Ecclesia, non inutiliter, si sobrie legatur, vel auditatur, maxime propter istos Martyres: vvhereupon my inference was this, Ergo ob hanc causam in Canone morum, non fidei censeri posset. Which last clause I wonder how it should so passe my sight in the re-vievv: For, perusing my first draught, I finde go vvritten short in another letter, to distinguish my inference from his proofe; It seemeth either my Manuaties haste, or the Dominum De um^n^strum Papam, not his Phrase but ouer-sight in print. P. 149. Printers misprision, hath turned go into (sed) as if the same

had beene continued, vvhereas my English reddition was plaine. And that (consequently) they are in the Canon of Manners, etc. vvhich Aduerbe, their former error caused them vtterly to omit. Verstij Parasceue. Such scapes oftentimes happen, when the Author himselfe cannot attend the presse. Now that you may perceiue there is no such Trophey in this casuall addition, which no man of sence vvould willingly haue suffered, when the Authors are obuious to euery eye; you shall see, I had S. Hieroms authority for that inference, though I then did not quote him, whose words are these:
Jn praf. lib. Salomonis.Iudith, Tobiae, et Machabaeorum libros legit quidem Ecclesia, sed eos inter Canonicas Scriptur as non recepit: and hee explaines himselfe how this should be vnderstood, Legat Ecclesia, (sayth hee) ad aedificationem plebis, non ad authoritatem dogmatum Ecclesiasticorum confirmandam; reckon all these together you shall find them amount to no lesse summe, then that

the bookes of Machabees are in Canone morum, non fidei, censendi. Might it haue pleased him to haue sifted Lyra, Brito, Rabanus, and Caietan, vvhom I there cited, this matter would not haue beene such a beame in his eye.
How will he looke when Mr. Crashaw shal make him fly to his Printer for Sanctuarie in greater extremities, then the mistaking of a word? Will you giue me leaue to praesage vvhat he will say? Admit this clause annexed be true in it selfe; yet how can it bee collected out of these former words, when as S. Augustine, shewing that the Iewes doe not admit the booke of Machabees, as they do the Law, Prophets, and Psalmes, addeth Sed recepta est ab Ecclesia non inutiliter, si sobrie legatur, vel audiatur, maxime propter istos Martyres Machabaeos; How can you then conclude, ergo, it is not Canonicall?
Nay rather, the consequence will be this, ergo the Christian Church doth admit the booke of Machabees, as Canonicall

in that sense, that the Iewes did refuse them, to wit as the Lawe, Prophets, and Psalmes, any of P. 135. which may more hurt then profit, if the same bee read in a drunken fit of a wanton wit.
This inference I grant is in another letter indeed, his Printer hath done him right to set it in his owne Character; for neither did Saint Augustine dreame, neither would any sober setled braine stumble vpon such a sense. Doth not hee make Saint Augustine speake that which hee neuer meant, vvhen hee rackes his words, inforcing him to say that Canonicall Scripture is receiued of the Church, with a Si, which is necessarily to bee acknowledged, though it fall out by default to bee Sapor mortis ad mortem? or did hee dreame of such a drunken Church, as theirs seems to be by their cloyning of the Scriptures from the common people, least it should hurt them? Had his purpose bin to set these books in the same throne imperiall vvith the sacred Scriptures,

to vvhat end dooth he instance in, those Machabees Martyrs? This specification (maxime propter istos Martyres Machabaeos) declares vvhere the daunger lies: implying, if vvee sayle vvell by these rocks, there is (though no necessity) some vse of the rest. So that the words, rightly poysed vvill beare that distinction, vvhich Saint Hierome, vvho was better acquainted vvith Saint Augustines meaning, and the Churches custome, dooth resolutely maintaine, that Canonicall Scripture must necessarilie bee receiued: as for other vncertaine writings, they may not vnprofitablie bee read:
And whereas hee confesseth that the Iewes, vvho were the best Surueyors of the authority of their ovvne Histories, did reiect them; You may well thinke, hee held it small reason for after ages to intertaine them in the highest esteeme, as Iudges of their faiths: though hee saw many good things, for which the

Church, with a little caution, did approue them.


@. 11.
THus for want of better sporte, this trifling companion, is faine to play with a feather, which when he hath blown vp as high as hee can, falls downe, and stickes vpon his owne coate: I cannot blame you if your Angligena attollant equites, peditesque cachinnum. laughter some-what passe modesty, when you consider how wittely he workes, vpon that clause, Si sobrie legatur, turning the weakenes of the iudgement (which Saint Augustine vpon good probability feared) into that intemperance of disordered affection, which was not by him intended. By this common acceptation of the word Sobrie (in this place ridiculous) hee glides to this needlesse conclusion, Pag. 135. that there is no story, nor miracle in the holy Bible, which some will not deride, when they bibble, and take

Faeda Tobacciseriquid vult contagio sum, Prater inauditam perlus membre lu^m? Tobacco, or when they read the Scripture, as Sir Edward Hoby doth seeme to doe Lypsius his booke, of our Ladies miracles by the fier side, when men roast crabs to driue a man out of a melancholy fitt; To M. T. H. Pag. 102. I presume you haue read that discourse, so that I shall not need twise to present you with the same dish. Neuer did your eies behold such lewd lies, and incredible false-hoods, as that Aliquando fit in Eclesia maxima deceptio populi in miraculis sactis a Sacerdotibus propter lucrum L^^a. in. ca. 14. Daniel. Miracle-monger setteth to sale for sound truthes. It is not vnlike, that this probationer hath taken vp some store of them vpon trust, and because he cannot now so cleanly put them to sale, but that they still he vpon his hand, (the dullest sent finding that they haue taken too much winde,) hee therefore takes it in dudgeon that I should hinder his market by saying that Reddere personae sci^ cenuenientia cuique. Lypsius is worthy the reading by the fier side, when men roast crabbs. This makes him as hotte as a toste. This roasting of Crabbs settes his teeth on edge.
Doe you see what a queasie stomack

hee hath? His Et data Romanis venia est in digna poet^^. Poets and Painters may lymme and faine, what ridiculous Chimaeras they please, by vertue of his dispensation; But Sir Edward Hoby must be called in question, if hee chance to clap a Verbaque praeuisam rem non inuita sequuntur. wilde phrase vpon a vile fiction: As if I were now to learne of such an Hipodidascalian Paedagogue to Quo scribi possunt numero, quoue ordine dicam. measure my phrase by his Sibi conuenientia fingit. rule and line. Alasse poore Nouice, I haue liued a little too longe to goe to schoole to such an Ignatius as hee is, that cannot distinguish between a Helmet, and a Couentry capp. I haue euer held it art enough, for mee to please my Quem penes arbitrium est, et ius, et forma loquendi. selfe; It is for such seruile pens as his, to write in Moode and Figure: But doth hee not (thinke you) deserue the wood of the Crabb, that is so angry with the Crab of the wood? Can you deny that hee flutters in a web of foolish Baberies, when he bables of bibling and taking Nuga mea arguuntur, adeo factorum innocens sum.Tobacco. I am sure this is no mortal sin, though if it were, I haue litle reason to trauel to the Popes toe for a Pardon, no not if I were

sure to haue the paring of his nayle with th' appurtenances for my paines. Shall I be so bold as to make you my confessors? Then I confesse in my time I haue not beene an enemy to that Indian weede, and perhaps haue spent some-what that way, which had bin better giuen to the poore. Yet my tennants cannot say, but that my chimneys did euer smoak more then my nose. As for these late yeares, I doe not remember, that I had a pipe in my hand twice. So that the Informer may put vp this iest in his boxe; If he be as free from all his olde vices, and drunken conceites, as I am from this vanity, hee shall not neede any great pennance. You may see how gladly hee would finde a hole in my coate, who catcheth so at a Et fumus et fimus. vapour, which is long since flowne out of his reach.



@ 12.
THe next flaw which he finds is Pag. 135. an imperfect Allegation of the same Father, without any direction where hee might finde it. In which he hath shewed himselfe a very kinde Aduersarie, by quoting the place, and adding the words which were wanting. I will not requite him with the Prouerbe, that profered seruice merits small thankes: but in lieu of his labour, I will more fully aduertise him of my scope, which hee seemes wholie to mistake. My purpose was from a ground out of Saint Augustine, to proue that the booke of Machabees is not Canonicall. My Major is S. Augustine, as well knowne as the Beggar knoweth his dish, In libris Canonicis, nusquam nobis praeceptum, permissumue, etc. In holy Canonicall Scripture there is no diuine precept or permission to be found, that either to gayne immortalitie or to escape

any perill we may make away with our selues: But Razias mentioned in the Machabees, is commended for a fact of this kinde: Ergo, These bookes are not Canonicall.
This Syllogisme I had a desire to contract. Artis est artem dissimulare. Hee is a simple Painter that is driuen to write a Goose, or a VVoodcocke ouer-head, that people may know what feature hee hath drawne vnderneath. Neither doe Rhethoricians vse to distinguish their propositions by name, leaueing worke for the Logicall Analysis, to set euery part in the proper place: VVherefore being then loath to be tedious to the Reader with long Quotations, I held it best to abridge two Authorities in one, and did forbeare to note the places, because I was resolued to deliuer the words by waight, and not by tale.
The words by mee deliuered were these: In sanctis Canonicis libris nusquam nobis diuinitus, praeceptum, permissumue reperiri potest, vt vel ipsius adipiscendae immortalitatis,

vel vllius Carendi, Cauendique mali causa nobis ipsis necem inferamus. At Razias seipsum occidens laudatur. Pag. 135. These foure words (saith he) are added to the Text, S. Augustine hath them not. Farre was it from S. Augustines grauitie, to say, that Razias was therefore praised in the Machabees; For hee saith the contrary in expresse termes, in the very same place against Gaudentius.
I will not be the man, that shall set S. Augustine at oddes with S. Augustine. I could gladly haue concealed it, if there be any such contradiction. But seeing hee sues me to iustifie my Assumption, That Razias is therefore commended in the Machabees, I must referre you to Lyra in 2 Mach. 14. Lyra, 2 Mach. 14. VVhere hauing deliuered two cases, wherein the Iewes held it not onely lawfull, but meritorious for a man to kill himselfe: as first, Ne subditus fieret peccatoribus: Secondly, Ne in contemptum Dei Coeli, eius vita in ludibrio

haberetur: Hee concludes, Et vt dicunt aliqui, hoc modo intelligendum est dictum Augustini, quod habetur hic in Glossa: and, as some thinke, S. Augustines saying, which followeth here in the Glosse, is thus to be vnderstood. O that I could meete with that saying of S. Augustine, which I omitted to cite. Doth Lyra say, it followeth here in the Glosse? then will I presume so farre vppon your patience, as to write it out. Lyra in Mach. l. 2. c. 14. Vnde and Scriptura huius Libri, quae recepta est ab Ecclesia ad legendum pro informatione morum, non videtur hic Raziam arguere, sed potius Marke Mr. Rab^echeth. commendare, de sui ipsius interfectione. Si autem praedicta non sufficiunt ad eius excusationem, potest dici quod fecit hoc per spiritualem instinctum Spiritus Sancti: Whereupon the Scripture of this Booke, which is receiued by the Church to be read, for the information of manners, doth not seeme here to reproue Razias, but rather to commend him for killing of himselfe, etc.
Now whether S. Augustine were of this minde or no, let it lye vpon Lyraes report, who here relateth, eyther the very wordes, or the receiued sense. Yet doth not this Sophister sticke to say, It was farre from his grauitie, hee read not that Booke with so little sobrietie. Howsoeuer, it is not much materiall, for hauing my Major out of S. Augustine, that in no Canonicall Booke there is eyther Precept or Permission for a man to kill himselfe, it is sufficient for mee, to proue from the assent, euen of the Rabbins, (albeit that Father had not iumped in this point, as hee seemes to doe,) that Razias is here commended: and so may conclude, That they are not Canonicall.
How would this dizzie brainde Ishmalite haue insulted, had I noted S. Augustine, de Ciuitate Dei, in the Margent, for the whole, which error a man might easily haue committed vpon Lyraes warrant, that my Clause and Minor

Proposition, that Razias is therefore commended, was not onely held by the opinion of the Rabbins, but euen of Saint Augustine himselfe: VVherefore as hee hath found Saint Augustine for the first part, let him put Lyra to the last, and then I will passe my word, the Conclusion shall be free from his supposed collusion.
Did I doubt of the agilitie of your apprehension, I could be more prolixe in the explication thereof, but because I haue another Crow to pull with him, I will no further inlarge my Apologie in this point.



@ 13.
THe last Pag. 318. occasion which he pretends hath giuen him iust cause to carpe is, for that I said To Mr. T.H. Pag. 92. our English nation was not conuerted vnto Christ by that proud and insolent Augustine, their great Gregories delegate: affirming that he taught vs no more, then wee knew before, setting some friuilous Ceremonies aside. VVherevpon hee enforceth, that J neuer read that Master-worke of the three Conuersions of England, wherein the testimonie of Guildas, by mee cited, is largely handled and fully declared. Should I graunt all, I cannot see what inconuenience will ensue. Is there no better imployment of my time, then the pervsall of that Arch-fugitiues lines? Or hath none besides of their faction beaten this bush, and harped on the same string? Or am I in conscience bound to put the seale of my assent

to whatsoeuer F. Parsons did write? I confesse hee acknowledgeth that Saint Peter was here, hee mentioneth also (perhaps vpon greater probabilitie) the comming of Saint Paul, Simon Zelotes, Aristobulus, and Joseph of Arimathaea. VVhere doe I say, that they weary the World, and bob their credulous Ladies, as if they neuer had heard of Gildas his Testimonie? I neuer named their Author, nor questioned that matter. Howsoeuer it please him to ioyne the pieces of two sentences together, which are almost a whole Page distant; and to fetch his Marginall Note 92. Pages off.
Gildas his testimonie (said I) hath beene vrged that the Britaines receiued the Christian Faith from the beginning, and after many such like Instances, I conclude that these particulars haue beene againe and againe renewed, without any verified contradiction; so farre was I from denying that their Author

mentioneth not these, whom I well know hee hath particularly cited. That which I wondred at, was this, that notwithstanding the former instances by them not denied, they should stand so much vpon the Conuersion of England, by Saint Gregories meanes; at which I onely aymed, as if that originall and primitiue Conuersion, had beene a matter which they neuer heard of before. VVhen they haue made the best they can of it, it will proue at the most to be but a new supply, and a further propagation of the Gospell formerly preached among the Inhabitants of this Land. For, if Britaine were many hundred yeeres before that time conuerted (as themselues confesse,) then did not Augustine lay the corner-stone himselfe, but built vpon the Foundation of other men.
So that the particulars were not by mee specified, as if they denyed them,

but to proue from their owne acknowledgement, that they had therefore little reason so to magnifie the enterance of that Delegate, with the glorious stile of the Conuersion of this English Nation.


@ 14.
NOw, whereas hee further replieth, that the people of this Country (the Britaines being expelled) were then Heathen: I demaund, whether hee found not in Britaine, at his Arriuall, amongst the English Saxons, seauen Bishops, and an Arch-bishop, vvho were not onely Professors, but also Preachers of the Christian Faith? VVere there not at that in the Monasterie of Bangor two thousand Monkes? VVas not Bed. lib. 1. c. 25 Q. Aldiberga a good Christian before hee came into Kent? or had the Bishop her Chaplaine no Faith at all?

VVill hee not beleeue Bede, L. 1. c. 17. who writeth that before Augustines comming, the Britaines were infected with Arianisme and Pelagianisme? Perhaps this Cure deserued the name of a Conuersion: yea, but Augustine was not the Physitian. The French-men (saith Bede) at the request of the Britaines, met in a Synode, and sent Germanus and Lupus, by whom the Heretiques were confuted, and the auncient Faith reuiued, before that Monke set foote vpon English ground. But because hee is so confident in the three Conuersions, as if that Mallet were able to strike all dead, let him learne from his owne Author, that which I beleeue hee will be scarse willing to heare, viz. Part. 1. c. 9. n. 1. That from the time of K. Lucius, vntill the comming of Augustine, which was foure hundred yeere and more, they did not alter their Faith, but it remained among them when hee entered.
VVhat is now become of this goodly Conuersion? Dares hee let his witnesse be examined any further? That Faith (saith hee) which Augustine brought, and that which the Britaines had before, must needes bee one and the selfe-same in all materiall and substantiall Poynts. VVee shall not neede to vrge him with further Interrogatories, the Iewrie sees hee failes in this Issue, and therefore their verdict will be, that It was onely a superficiall, and no substantiall Conuersion. Hath hee not now brought his Hoggs to a faire Market? Hath hee read the Booke of the three Conuersions? The case is so cleare now, that his Mulier nihil scit, nisi quod ipsa cupit. Ladies shall be able to conceiue it.
But suppose it were a Conuersion, I hope they presume so farre vpon Augustines honestie, that hee would not broach any other Faith, then that which his Master, by whom hee was sent,

had giuen him in charge. If so, what will become of the Popes Supremacie, Images, Merits of workes, and the like trash; which that Catholike appeale for Protestants. Way to the Chur. Sect. 49. Gregorie was so farre from countenancing by his authoritie, that hee disclaimed by his Penne? So that if he were a Founder, yet was it not of that Faith, which the B. of Romes Proctors doe now so stifly maintaine: and consequently this imaginarie Supposition will bruise their owne Pates. But how shall I then scape his hands for wronging Augustine? Hee cannot endure to heare him tearmed a proud and insolent Delegate: indeede, vvere my Malice the Mynter of this contumelious reproach, I confesse hee had no reason to stand with his finger in his mouth; but hee might haue done well before hee had growne into such a choler, to haue taken Counsell of the Britaine BB. L. 2. C. 2. Bede would haue informed him how Lordly hee sate in his

Chaire, like a little Pope, Vultus animi index. neither arising nor bowing to the BB. when they came into the Synode, more like a Lord, hauing dominion of their Faith, then a Conuerter, beseeching them in the Name of the Lord Iesus. Those BB. were not so simple, but they could Ex vngue Leonem. discouer his Pride, and therefore endeuoured to ouer-thwart him in whatsoeuer hee proposed. VVell did his Master perceiue his ambitious spirit, when hee gaue him this cooling Card touching the BB. of France; Greg. resp. ad inter. Aug. Bed. l. 1. c. 27. In Galliarum Episcopos, nullam tibi authoritatem tribuimus: Wee giue you no authoritie ouer them. All this notwithstanding, I must haue my lips sealed, not daring to say, that Hee was a proud insolent Delegate. I see no reason why vitium and conuitium should be parted: seeing hee deserued it, hee is best vvorthy to haue it.
VVere I now in his case, I should be

in a pittifull feare least the Noble Ladies, whom hee hath so grossely deluded, should like so many Hecubaes, seeke some violent reuenge: what starting hole can there be possibly found, to hide these his writing falsifications from their curious eyes? when they shall perceiue how he coniures my sentences together, to raise his owne sence, hee may well thinke their Contributions will be soone shortned, and Exhibitions reuoked: farre is it from their generous dispositions to giue incouragement to any such audacious Vassall, in the causlesse traducing of a Knight, to whom their Honors is no lesse deare then his owne.



@ 15.
IF hee haue any Plea for himselfe, it will be this; that Pag. 133. 135 22. 218. etc. hee doth not charge the Knight with these ignorant and impudent corruptions: No, hee thinkes not so dishonorably of men of my calling; hee aymes onely at the Minister that suggested vnto mee these corrupted pieces of Saint Augustine. His purpose was onely to gall those Pedanties, Trencher-Schoole-Masters, and humorizing Discoursers, that cast such Flies and follies vpon my Trenchers: If hee haue taxed mee with ignorance, that is pardonable in a Knight: but as for notorious falshoodes, hee is so charitably perswaded of mee, that hee knowes some Trencher-Minister, or Mercenarie Lecturer, (yea, Mr. Crashawe himselfe, who is great in my Booke,) hath cast them on my Trencher, to put into my Booke: and that these Ministers

haue made mee print such stuffe, eyther false, or impertinent, with the losse of my Honor, which had I seene their Bookes I would neuer haue done against my Conscience and knowledge. Adding further, that what J haue written, it hath beene by their suggestions, as hauing my selfe not read, nor knowne so much as the subiect and Argument of the three Conuersions of England, which I seeme to speake against: and that these are the men that made mee flye hoodwinck'd to catch Flyes. In fine, as for any thing that hee hath written, it was to no other end, but that I might no longer trust my Trencher-Schoole-Masters, but set such a frowne vpon them, that they might vanish out of my sight for euer; not suffering my selfe to be thus troubled, and my Credit blowne vp, but rather to lay the matter of the Pamphlet vpon the true Father, onely chalenging to my selfe the Stile and Phrase which may well beseeme a Knight, and is too rich and golden to clothe the

foule Brat of a Ministers Braine. Thus doth hee pleade without his Fee, making the Salue worse then the Cauda and capite mendacium grauiter ferit. Sore: first, treading on my Toe, and then crying mee mercy: but the best is, I am not troubled with Cornes, or if I were, I would soone cut them out. VVhat hee striues to perswade the world with my disabilitie, I am not so Conuitia hominum turpium laudes puta. popular much to heed: neyther can his Cani latranti praeda facile, elabitur. snarling surmises abate one graine of my esteeme. My eyes are not yet, I thanke God, so dim, but that I am able to reade; nor my apprehension so dull, but that I can vnderstand, not onely the Argument, but euen the most artificiall conueyance of the best of their VVorkes.
Vpon my life hee hath beene an old notorious Truant: Had he made Sic vos non vobis. his owne Exercises vvhen hee vvent to Schoole, hee would neuer haue beene so suspicious of my Penne. Is it not strange such a Dottrell, should so presume

of his owne wit, as if hee were able to wooe me to diuide mine owne childe? I assure mee, that all that know me, will vndertake I was not from home when it was begotten. How easily would I haue beleeued him vpon his word, that there was no hand in the building of his Nec oleum, nec operam sapit. Pinnace, but his owne; yet will not hee take my Ego credidi ancillae tuae, tu non credis mihi ipsi? hand for the naturalizing of my owne Lines, which as I had strength to beget, so doubt I not to finde stocke to maintaine. VVere I so happy to see him at my (...). Table, (which runs much in his minde) I presume I should so set his tongue a-worke, that he should doe mee little harme with his teeth. Hee should perhaps then finde, that I am yet able to cite more then a piece of Augustine, without a Prompter; and to cast such a Bone vpon his Trencher, that with all the Dogges teeth he hath, hee should hardly picke. I haue seene in my time, as tall a Logician as hee,

glad to scratch the best powle hee had for an answere. As I was euer different from their humour who loue to eate their morsels Vbi solitudo ibi solicitudo. alone, so hath it euer beene my desire to conuerse with men of the Plenum Theatrum est vir bonus, viro bono. best parts, that so I might by their readings better my selfe. And if at any time I met with a hard knot, hee was the best welcome to mee, that could helpe mee soonest to vnloose it. Neuer did I trust so much to mine owne Apprehension, but that I was well content to haue it eyther confirmed, or rectified by better Iudgements. If this be a fault, I wish from my heart it were the greatest my aduersaries knew by me, or I by my selfe.



@ 16.
I Doe not reade in Gellius that there was any fault found in Gracchus, albeit hee came not at any time to make an Oration to the people without his Minstrell, who by the sound of his Fistula Concionatoris. Pipe, did set him a right and iust Keye for the eleuating or depressing of his voyce. VVhen I was an Eaton-Scholar, I learned out of Lucians Dialogues, that Iupiter was faine to send for Vulcan and his hatchet, before Pallas could come into the world: So that I cannot well discerne what reason hee hath to debarre mee of that conference at my Boord, which their owne Doctors haue in their Libraries. If happily I did moue a Question, how S. Augustine was in such a place to be vnderstood, it did argue my Plus vident oculi quam oculus. care in sounding the depth of the Riuer, before I

launched my Barke into the Streame. I was euer of Demosthenes minde in this, that my writings should not onely smell of the Lucernam olet. Lampe, but if it were possible, be engrauen also in Atilan ok dunmes. Marble. But that I euer suffered my Penne to be guided, or my course ouer-ruled by any other Pilot then my owne Genius, were hee not a meere stranger to my proceedings, hee would neuer be so shamelesse as to auerre. Though it be my error, yet I must needes say, I could neuer endure to let my Clarke passe any Letter, but from my owne mouth: And should the greatest Architect in the Land, giue mee a plot for a building, I am verily perswaded, I should in the end take a cleane contrary course. VVhen I can hardly please my selfe, it will be a matter of more difficultie for others to giue me content. Euery man (as I take it) hath his proper Quot capita, tot (...). veine: for my particular I dare say, it is vnpossible for the pallat of my fancie, to be

fitted by any other Cooke then my selfe. Should I haue eyther an Adjutor, or Supervisor, in any worke I vndertake, I thinke it would proue little better then the confusion of Babell: VVee should sooner fall together by the eares, then bring the Treatise to an end.
The short is, I am Homo perpaucorum hominum, though seeming a VVidower, yet contracted to Mris. Folly: I can gladly heare what others will say, yet when it comes to the point, I loue to doe what (...). likes my selfe best. VVherefore hee hath taken wrong course, to wound M. Crashawe (a man with whom I neuer had the least domestique conuerse,) through my sides.



@ 17.
AND as for House-Pedantes, Trencher-Schoole-Masters, and Mercenary-Lecturers, he that reades my bitter (yet iust)To Mr. T. H. Pag. 24. inuectiue against them, will thinke they haue as little reason to assist mee, as I to trust them. VVherefore I cannot guesse, why hee should cast this foggy mist of misprision before the eyes of the world: (euer and anone comming in vvith A Minister of his owne making,) vnlesse it were couertly to vpbraid mee, for medling in Theologicall affaires, as better beseeming a Minister then a Knight. Herein though I could instance in persons of greater place, euen in former ages, who by publishing their labours in the like subiect, were so farre from reproofe, that they were much more honoured by men of the Church: yet had I rather repaire for defence to my owne

Studies, which (setting some fantasticall yeeres aside) hath for the most part beene spent in diuine Authors. My Ditescit cui Christus dulcescit. Patrimonie (God be thanked) being competent, I endeuoured rather the search of my content, then my profit. And what greater contentation can there be, then the contemplation of (...). heauenly things? If he say, I might haue kept my Candle vnder my owne Bushell, I must answere that his opinion is no Oracle: for besides some other priuate motiues, I held it not inexpedient, euen in this regard, that the truth might be defended by persons whose pennes could not be corrupted with ambitious hope of Because (saith he) they haue no other meanes to liue. Pag. 31. spirituall promotions.
Further, the report of the VVriter might happily induce the Ladies to vouchsafe the reading thereof, whereas their Priests debars them the sight of our Ministers Bookes. I was loath such rare creatures should be ouer gudgeoned

by so foule Popinians, by whom, when their treasure is once wasted, and their younger yeeres spent, they shall be no more esteemed, then so many Motheeaten Glosses: which (albeit they haue formerly stood them in stead) they are not now ashamed to disclaime.
Other incitements I had then to write, which he hath neyther authoritie to extort, nor I reason to declare. And because I then passed my word, to answere any To Mr. T. H. Pag. 6. Romefied Renegado, though I haue small reason to defile my fingers with such a Pezantique Fugitiue, who is ashamed of his Les escrits iniurieux doiuent estre mesprises quand les auteurs sont in cogneus. P. Mat. Fathers name: yet least my silence might preiudice so warrantable a cause, I haue clapt my hand vpon this Gnat, which keepeth such an humming about my eares. This I was not ignorant of before I tooke my penne in hand for this combat, that I should gaine no more by coping with a namelesse Foe, then the Lord

Chiefe Iustice Not long after the Statute made for burning of rogues in the eare. Cataline got, when his Studie was robbed, by the paper which was there left, with this Inscription:
If any aske who hath beene here,Say it wasI. R. Nomen and ^^en. Iack Rogue late burnt in the eare.


@. 18.
A Person not long since of eminent place, esteemed not least Politicall, after he had beene often (as himselfe saith) vexed with their Quo tristis Erynnis, quo fremitus vocat. Virg. 2. Aeneid. Erynnicall Libels, (which are ordinarily addressed to persons of highest rancke) at last vouchsafed a briefe An Answere to certaine scandalous Papers, printed 1606. Apologeticall answere; but with this protestation, that hee neuer intended further Reply. VVherefore, as while he liued, Nature cast this lot vpon me, to be one of the nearest of his bloud; so though hee be dead, I will iumpe with his discretion in this, that if eyther this Cat-sputtrer, or any other Hagaren shall hereafter inter-lace my name

in their Spiders Web, Periti bellatoris est, non minus scire fugiendi artem quam pugnandi. aut Dormitabo, aut Ridebo. VVere not the darknesse of my (...) VVindowes a sufficient Supersedeas, yet shall I by this meanes turne their Follies and friuolous Contumelies into the Trophies of my victorious Patience. VVhereas, Prou. 26.4. By answering a foole according to his foolishnesse, J should also be held like vnto him. It is more then enough, that I haue thus farre yeelded to Pag. 52. bray him in this Morter, with the Pestle of my Penne; if the iuyce be vnpleasing, you must attribute it to the venome of his cankered Complexion: better things I could not extract from such an Aspe.
If you seriously obserue his lame and goutie Arguments, his dangerous intention, and slender prosecution, you shall finde iust ground to say of his Treatise, as Populi Romani legationem, nec pedes, habere, nec caput, nec cor. Cato merrily spake of the three Ambassadours, who being named for Bithinia, excused themselues; one by

a cut in his head, another with a paine in his feete, and the third with a gryping in his heart: neither whole head, good feete, nor sound heart.


@ 19.
IN his Preface Dedicatorie, hee brags, that hee hath sent out his Booke, as a Pinnace, to fetch you into the Arke of the Catholike Church: But I feare by that time Mr. Crashawe hath searched his bottome, it will proue no better then a leaking Friggot. His Sailes are too great for a Vessell of so small burthen, and consequently most like to indanger the Passengers safetie. If all those Bookes, which hee complaines are not suffered to passe our Pag. 89. Ports (except almost inuisible) be like this Pag. 8 Dung-hill of his, let it euer be registred in the Booke of fame, amongst

the due Commendations of that famous, superlatiuely learned, and Noble Lo. Warden of the Cincque Ports. Councellor, to whose care this important charge is committed; that hee hath herein testified his loue to Religion, fidelitie to his Prince, and loyaltie to the State: As his wisedome deserues to be admired, and his lenitie applauded, so doth his sinceritie herein merit high renowne in the Gates of our Sion. For should the infectious Manuels of these pestilent incrochers be passable in our Coast, the contagion would be such, that true Pietie could not long holde vp the head, nor due Alleagiance be able to stand vpon her right feete. The giddinesse which Superstitio initium prabuit, and ortum impietati. Superstition would breede, and the Disobedience which Papall Authoritie would raise in the mindes of the vnlearned, vvhose Capacities are not able to reach the future perill of Innouation, would be so dangerous to a Christian, and vvell

gouerned State, that it would aske the whole imployment of the most experienced Senators, to roote out the weedes which those enuious impes had sowne. All which will be preuented if at their first Arriuall they be cast (...) (...).
I shall not neede any further to weary my selfe, or tyre you, with the repelling of those inuectiues which this Tenebrio hath sharpened vpon the VVhetstone of his malice, to wound my reputation. This shall I hope suffice, that I haue as neare as I could, solidly answered things of waight, dealing in points of lesser import, as I thought their qualitie did require.



@ 20.
THE due regard which I euer had of your iudgements (hauing my selfe beene sometimes an vnworthy member of the same Middle Temple. Societie) hath made mee desirous not onely to send my Defence after his accusations, but also to second it with a further manifestation of my Loue.
May it then please you to take notice, that howsoeuer hee seeke to insinuate himselfe by his charitable pretences into the bosome of your fauors, yet hath hee not left his Loquitur mendacia versipellis. Pag. 12. Scorpions sting at home: For notwithstanding hee fathers his Dedication vpon the Pag. 22. carefull respect of your Saluation and Honour, yet doth hee make no other reckoning of you, then of so many Pag. 81. Parlamentarians, whose Religion is steared by the Helme of the State, as if the Bookes of

Statutes vvere the sole foundations of your Faith. Neyther doth hee sticke to say that you make your Pag. 59. Temples and Courts the places where silly Flies and fooles are caught, by your example as with a stale drawing others into the Snare. If this be the honor he bestowes vpon his friends, I will neuer be importunate with him to grace mee. Doe you remember what Gracchus said to a fellow that spake in disgrace of the vertuous Matron, his Mother Cornelia? Eras. Apoth. Tune, inquit, Corneliam vituperare audes, que Tyberium peperit? Dare thou (saith hee) traduce her, who brought so famous a Sonne as Tiberius? The like answere might I retort in the teeth of this Thersites. Is he not past all hope of future ingenuitie, that fastneth his taunt vpon the venerable Mother of so many honourable Sonnes, saying, Pag. 22. That shee is more full of Cobwebs then any other place? Did Scipio Nascica aske one which had a tough and rough

hand, Rogauit homine^, num manibus ambularet. whether hee vsed to goe vpon his hands? then, should he haue seene the brazen fore-head of this sawcie Malapert, hee might iustly haue demaunded whether hee hath not customarily crept vpon his face. It is well knowne to the Christian world, that these your famous Courts haue brought forth, euen in these latter yeeres, as many Tanquam eu Eque Treiane. sage Councellors of State, religious Iudges, gallant Courtiers, learned Pleaders, and worthy Gentlemen, as the Sunne euer saw. In which number I may both for his merit, and my respect, name that truely Noble Peere the Lo. Elmsmere, in whom it is hard to say, whether wisedome in the decision, or integritie in the impartiall execution of Iustice haue the prioritie. VVell doe I assure my selfe, hee would neyther spare his authoritie, nor forbeare his best meanes to keepe Spiders from breeding, and Cobwebs from growing in those Courts, wherein himselfe

hath spent much time, and gained so great renowne. So that the Fan of truth which he offereth to cleanse your Temples, may better be reserued by him, eyther to keepe off the Mothes from the olde Glosses, or the Flyes from the Priests Post sumptos Calices oscula musca dabit. lips: Herein you may doe the Pope yeoman seruice indeede.


@ 21.
A Greater Commendations there cannot be vnto you that are Students, and Professors of the Lawes of the Realme, then to manifest the sincere affection you beare to true Religion, by your liberall Contributions to such as may instruct you in the Lawes of God. The quarrell hee pickes with you about this, will more deepely imprint the Charecters of your praise. Should you passe the presentation to him, who can tell what Lecturer hee would nominate?

No doubt hee would come in with, Ego Ishmael Rabsbacheh, Pag. 149. Domino Deo nostro Papa a scandalis praesento vobis, dilectum commilitonem meum I. R. Ischarioth de Rubigine, quemscio Homilistam esse egregium, Bibulum celeberrimum, Cantoremque non vulgarem, idque vobis mea, fide praesto, totique contubernio. Yea marry, here is a fine Demilance for the nonce: here is one that will be the formost attendant vpon my Lo. of the Reuels; Hee will neuer holde you a quarter after the glasse is runne. But can you guesse what Countriman hee is? For his life hee is not able to pronounce (...) Shibboleth. VVhy then, you will none of him! O beware of a quare impedit. But the best is, you haue the Law in your hands. You haue a purse priuiledge to be your owne Caruers. If the worse come that can, you may dismisse him to serue the Cure at Pemblico: and so perhaps you may regaine your old choise.
Yea, but Mr. Crashawe hath committed such an error, as deserueth depriuation ipso facto: VVot you what? in his Iesuites Gospell hee makes Pag. 76. Dux Cleri to be the Popes chiefest title: which (if wee may beleeue our Informer) was neuer giuen him by any Catholike, but rather belongs to the Lo. of Canterburie. I will not be so curious to stand vpon the number of 666. thence collected; but, set that aside, I dare say; Crux Cleri had beene the better word for the Pope: and yet to meete with him at the rebound, I hold Dux Cleri to be but a part of my Lo. Graces Title, who by the goodnesse of his affable disposition, bounty in Hospitalitie, painfulnesse in preaching, and dexteritie in the dispach of all occurrences, hath well deserued the Stile of Lux Cleri, as being such a light in Choro and Foro, that if a man should search (like Diogenes) amongst all the Cardinals, hee should misse of his match. So

that mee thinkes the matter neede not be held so haynous, if hee haue taken that part which my Lord might best spare, to pay the Pope more then his due. I see there is then no great reason of complaint: what other Cauils they haue against him, I am neyther so acquainted with the proceedings, nor interested in the cause, to debate.
Touching my selfe, (all due reseruation remembred) I conclude with him, whose questionable authoritie hath bred these broyles: Mach. l. 2. c. 15. v. 39. If I haue done well, and as the matter required, it is the thing that I desired: but if I haue written (...), slenderly and barely, it is that (which on the sodaine) I could. Howsoeuer, you must accept it, as dedicated to your seruice.

From Iames Parke,
Iune 21. 1613.
Edward Hoby.




