



The coppie of a Letter written by Lewes Hughes, Preacher of Gods Word in the
Summer Ilands, to his friends in England.
BEloued friends, the goodnes of Almighty God, in keeping these Ilands secret, from all people of the world (except some that haue come hither against their willes, to their losse, by meanes of shipwrack) till now that it hath pleased his holy Maiesty, to discouer and bestow them vpon his people of England; is so great as should stirre them vp with thankefull hearts, to praise his holy and great name, and to send such to inhabit them as feare God, and giue themselues to serue him in holinesse and righteousnesse, that so, God may loue to dwell in those Ilands, as hee did in
Sion, when he said, This is my rest for euer, heere will I dwell: for I haue a delight therein. Psal 132.13.14. And whereas it is giuen out by some, that wee doe
wrong to the King of Spaine; they that thinke so, are in an errour. For the King of Spaine had neuer any thing to doe heere, and I hope neuer shall. The King of kings hath kept these Hands from the King of Spaine and all other kings in the world; till now, that it hath pleased his holy Maiesty to bestow them vpon the King of England, and hath put vs his subiects in quiet possession of them, without doing any wrong to the King of Spaine, or any other: and our hope is that if the Spaniards shall come to inuade vs, that God will not suffer them to take that from vs, that he hath freely giuen vs.
It may be that som are afraid to com hither, because of the strange reports that haue gone of these Ilands; as that they are the Ilands of diuels, and that heere are strange apparitions of diuels, and fearefull thundering and lightening, as though Heauen and earth did meete together: beleeue me my beloued, here are no such things (thankes be to God). True it is, that as almighty God did set the Cherubims, and the blade of a sword shaking in fearefull manner to keepe
Adam from comming into Paradise: so by fearefull tempests, and terrible lightning and thunder, God hath terrified and kept all people of the world from comming into these Ilands to inhabit them, as appeareth by diuerse signes of shipwrack, in diuers places about the Ilands; and this, as I take it, is the cause that such reports haue gone of these Ilands; and that all Nauigators and Mariners haue been carefull to auoid and shunne them, as they would shunne the diuell himselfe: but now, since it hath pleased God, to discouer them vnto, and to bestow them vpon his
people of England, heere haue been no such tempests nor danger, his holy and great name bee therefore pra^sed. And the more to stirre you vp to praise his hol^ name: consider, I pray you of the manner how he brought our men to the first sight and true knowledge of them.
He did not bring them to their losse and griefe, by shipwrack as he did others, but to their great ioy, in sauing them from shipwrack: for our men were in danger of shipwrack, three daies before they came to the sight of those Ilands: I meane our men that were bound for
Virginia, in a Ship called the Sea-venture, with Sr. Thomas Gates, Sr. George Summers, and Captaine Newport, had their ship so shaken and torn with a cruell tempest, as she receiued so much water as couered two tire of Hogsheads, aboue the ballast, so as men stood vp to the middles with buckets and kettles to baile out water, and continually pumped for three daies and three nights together, the water notwithstanding increasing vpon them, and they so tired and out of hope, as they resolued to shut vp the Hatches, and commit themselues to the mercy of God. Some of them that had comfortable waters fetcht them out, and dranke one to an other, taking their last leaue one of an other, vntill their more ioyfull and happy meeting in Heauen.
Then Sir George Summers sitting vpon the poope of the shippe, where he sat three daies and three nights without meat, couming the ship to keepe her as vpright as he could, did descry land, and called vpon the people to follow their pumping and bailing out of water, which they did, the water still increasing,
and the ship ready to sinke into the bottome of the Sea.
Then Almighty God, who is alwaies at hand ready to helpe in time of neede, did shew his mercy
^nd power, in causing the Sea to be calme, and in keeping the shippe from sinking, and in leading her safely to a safe place, where he lodged her fast, betweene two rockes, so fast as shee could not stirre: then the people with ioyfull hearts, praising God went safely to shore, and saued much of their goods, and continued aboue nine moneths, very comfortably, notwithstanding that their prouision of meate, was spoiled with the salt water, God did feede them plenteously with Hogges, Fish, Fowles, and other his good creatures, and did multiplie them: for, in that time, there were two children borne and baptized; the one which was a boy they called Barmudas, the other which was a girle they called Barmuda. Also they builded them a shippe which they called the
Deliuerance, and a Pinnas which they called the Patience, and so departed from these Ilands safely and comfortably on the tenth of May 1610. with good store of Hogges flesh poudred, to carry with them to Virginia.
The eleauenth of Iuly 1612. Master Richard Moore now Deputy Gouernour, ariued safely, and with him about 50. soules, men, weomen, and children, to inhabite these Ilands, and since that time (by the mercy of God) diuers other shippes out of England haue arriued safely with good supplies: therefore let not the report that hath gone of these Ilands discourage any of the people of England from comming hither.

Neither let the feare of forraine inuasion discourage anie. For; as I am perswaded, and haue heard Marriners, that haue trauelled farre say, the like Ilands are not to be found in the world, where men may dwell so safe from forraine inuasion, because God hath so compassed them about with fearefull rockes, as shippes are not able to come neere, but in two Channels, that leade into two goodly and large harbours; the one at a place called the Gurnats head, the other at a place called Dauies Point.
The Channels are so narrow and curious, as ships must come in very leasurely, one after another, so as the forts on both sides the channels may sinke them with ease, by the helpe of God.
As it hath pleased God, (for the safety of those Ilands) in their first creation, to inuiron them about with fearefull rocks: so now in their first plantation, it hath pleased his holy maiesty, to put into the heart of Mr Moore, now deputy Gouernour, to fortifie them within, so as in the iudgement of man, they are inuincible.
At the Gurnats head he hath built three forts, and planted them with great peeces, and men to defend them; and at Dauies Point he hath builded two forts, and planted them with great peeces and men to defend them. He hath also built diuers other forts to keepe long boates from landing, and to cleer the harbours, if ships should come in.
If long boates should venture to land any there, they will be but as men cast away, because ships can not come neere to rescue or helpe any waie: therefore
let not feare of forraigne inuasion, keepe any from comming hither.
There is great hope that (by the blessing of God) men may in time liue very comfortably heere, and grow rich if they will prouide feedes of Indico, etc. and plants of currants, figges, raisons, mulberry-trees for the silk-worms, and vines, that they may haue wine for their owne drinking: I say for their owne drinking, because wine considering the leakeage, trouble, and charge wil be one of the least commodities these Ilands will afoord.
For the present, Tobacco is the best commoditie.
And for victuals, if men haue boates, nets, lines, hookes, and striking irons, they may haue good fish at all times; as Rockfish, Angell-fish, Hogge-fish, Amber-fish, Cutle-fish, Pilat-fish, Hedgehog-fish, Cunny-fish, Old-wiues, Singraies, Snappers, Groopers, Cauallies, Morraies, Mullets, Mackerels, Pilchers, Breames, Lobstars, Turtles, sharkes, etc.
Also heere are Eeles in fresh water ponds. Riuers here are none, but ponds and welles of very good and holsome water, and a water descending from an hill, which floweth and ebbeth with the Sea, and yet drinketh alwaies sweete, like milke.
Here is also plenty of Sea foules, at one time of the yeere; as about the middle of
October: Birds which wee call Cahouze, and Pimlicoes come in.
The Cahouze continue til the beginning of Iune in great abundance; they are bigger bodied then a Pigeon, and of a very firm and good flesh. They are taken with ease, if one doe but sit downe in a darke night, and
make a noise, there will more come to him then hee shall be able to kill: some haue told mee that they haue taken twelue and fowreteene dozen in an hower.
When the Cahouze time is out, other birds called Noddies, and Sandie birds come in, and continue till the latter end of August.
Here is no kinde of beasts but hogges and cattes, and they but in one or two places, which are thought to come at first by meanes of shippe-wrack. The Hogges were manie, but now are brought to a small number.
The Calues and Lambes that we brought out of England, did prosper exceedingly, till the hunters met with them.
The Cocks and Hennes wee brought with vs, doe prosper and increase much, and are a great comfort vnto vs.
And now that we haue found out the right seasons of the yeere to set Corne, we are like (by the blessing of God) to haue plenty of this countrey wheate, which is very good, large and faire, and more hearty and strong then our English wheate.
Young children doe thriue and grow vp exceeding well, the climate is so temperate and agreeable to our English constitutions.
The Aire is very holsome, and not subiect to such contagious infections as it is in
England.
The longest day in the yeere is fowerteene howers, and the shortest tenne from sun to sun. When it is noone in England, it is about eight of the clock in the morning with vs.

The seasons of the yeere are two; a hot season, that beginneth about the midle of
Maie, and continueth till the middest of August: all the rest of the yeere is as a continuall spring.
The heate of Summer is not so exstreame, but it may be well endured.
Fresh gales of Wind we haue euery daie.
The greatest annoiance are flies, for two moneths and a halfe: they are almost as busie in
England.
Long and drizling raine is seldome seene, but great showers with great droppes very often.
Thunder and lightning, do no such hurt here as in England.
Snow, haile, frost, thick and foggie mistes we haue none.
The night is lighter and more comfortable heere then in England.
The birds make a noise almost all night, but not with such pleasant tunes as the
Larkes, and other birds doe in England.
Heere is no bird that singeth in the daie but the sparrow, the Robin-red-brest, and the Robin williams.
The earth is very fertile, and so mellow and gentle, as it needeth neither plowing, nor digging, so that after the wood is taken off, and the grasse and weeds bee burnt and destroyed, and the common businesse of fortifying bee once ended, men shall liue heere in much case, without such moyling and toyling as is in England. The greatest labour will bee in worming and pruning of some plants, which children may doe as well, and better then men.
I wish that all they that hereafter shal come hither
out of England, would consider with themselues, that these Ilands, were neuer inhabited till now, and that therefore they must of necessity labour hard at first, and be contented to endure hardnes and some want of many necessaries.
In time (by the grace of God) the store-house shall be furnished with all necessaries, for such as haue money, and they that haue not, if they be honest and industrious, shall be trusted: But now in regard that the greatest part of the people that be heere, came very rashly and carelesly, not considering whither they went, nor what they might in time haue neede of, I thinke that all that can bee brought into the store as yet will be taken vp by them: and therefore I aduise such as are to come, (to bring euery one that is able) a barrell or two of biskets for his owne eating, till hee haue cleered his ground, and haue wheat of his owne.
Also let them bring oyle, vinager, aquauite, barrell butter, pottes, kettles, frying pannes, triuets, boules, traies, tanckards or pottes to drinke in, pailes to fetch water in, and little barrels or iarres to keepe it in for their drinke. The water is very good and wholsome, such as many doe delight in.
Also let them bring tongs, fireshouels, bellows, tinder-boxes, brimstone, flint-stones, and steeles, spits, dripping-pannes, candle sticks, lampes, locks, spades, shouels, pick-axes, hatchets, whetstones; sawes, hammers, pearcers pincers, and nailes, of all sorts so many as wil serue to build a house with, and leather to mend their shoes, and sparrowbils, or nailes to driue into them, els the rocks will teare them out quickly.

Also let them bring bedding: flock-beds are better then feather beds. And for apparrell, for the summer, let them bring Canuas, or stuffes; blew linen and good buckrom the women doe wish for.
Also let them not forget to bring Castle sope, pins points, lases, needles, threed, thimbles, sheeres, and scissors. Also let them bring strong fishing lines, of 12. or
14. faddoms long, and som smal of whipcords and strong hookes, the biggest, and as diuers as they can, and some small hooks for breames.
And aboue all things haue a cate to leaue their sins beninde them, and come hither as it were into a new world, to lead a new life; and for the comfort of their soules let them bring Bibles, and other good bookes: and pack vp all their small stuffe in barrels; the barrels wil afterwards serue them for many good vses.
Idle persons, and such as are giuen to filching, doe liue heere in great misery: so also doe all whorish women in great disgrace, hated and loathed of all honest people, which maks them weep, and sigh with teares to wish themselues in England againe, and for their comfort, to coole them a little, they are now and then tawed at a boates taile vp and downe the harbour: so were a couple serued together, a man and a woman that came in the ship that came in, and so haue diuers others.
Also all such as are profaners of the Sabboth, and come to the seruice of God but when they list, I see that God findeth them out, and denieth them his blessing.
All they that haue grace to serue God, are sure to
prosper and liue comfortably, because God hath said.
Behold my seruants shall eate, and ye shall be hungry: behold my seruants shall drinke, and ye shall be thirsty: behold my seruants shall reioice and ye shall be ashamed: behold my seruants shall sing for ioy of heart, and yee shall crie for sorrow of heart, and shall houle for vexation of minde. Isai 65.13.14.
Behold the eye of the Lord is vpon them that feare him, and vpon them that trust in his mercy, to deliuer their soules from death, and to preserue them in famin. Psal. 33.18. and 19
The Lions do lacke and suffer hunger, but they that seek the Lord shal want no manner of thing that is good. Psal. 34.10.
Wait thou on the Lord, and keepe his way, and he shall exalt thee, thou shalt inherite the land, when the wicked shall perish, thou shalt see. Psal. 37.34:
The God of peace, that brought againe from the dead our Lord IESVS, the great shepheard of the sheepe, through the blood of the euerlasting couenant make you perfect in all good workes to doe his will, working in you that which is pleasant in his sight, through IESVS CHRIST, to whom be praise for euer and euer, Amen. Heb. 13.20.21.


From the Summer Ilands this
21. of December. 1614.

Yours as his owne, Lewes Hughes.


