by the lord Depu^... and councel henry falkland whereas the king most excellent majesty have by his ^...ers direct unto we the lord deputy signify his princely pleasure that call to our assistance such of the nobility and counsel we shall think fit a speedy redress and reformation shall be make of diverse abuse and disorder concern arm and armoury in this his majesty realm of Ireland occasion partly through the boldness of some mechanical person who presume to meddle in irmory without direction from the king of arm of the same be the proper officer appoint to attend that service and partly t^...rough the nobility and gentry themselves who have of late of which his Majest. take notice whole in a manner lay aside all fu^...all rite and ceremony by mean whereof as his Majest. in his princely and deep judgement most wise forseeth the house of the nobility and gentry can but in a short time grow into many perplexity and confuse disorder in their arm and petegree for want of the use of arm at obsequy and funeral and for want of the entry of the day of the decease match and issue of the decease party and whereas his most excellent majesty have likewise be please to command that for direction in the premise use shoul^... be make of a order or decree set forth in print by the ^...ight hon. the lord Commiss of the earl marshal office of England for the reform of the like abuse there date the 10. day of nou. in the 16. ye^... of the reign of king JAMES of bless memory authorise we thereby to lay down some such course and order for the redress of the former e^...ormities and for the support of the officer of arm here as shall be think fit and reasonable to stand with the state and condition of this kingdom with provision that the say king of arm have satisfaction for such funeral of the lord knight and other of eminent place and quality as of late have not make use of his office as by his majesty say letter date at Westminster the 7. day of April in the three year of his reign and enrol in the roll of ^...s majesty high court of chancery here more at large appear we therefore in obedience to his majesty say commandment have take a due and considerate view of the forenamed print order and mature ponder the other circumstance enjoin by his majesty do order decree and ordain th^... aswell for the good of the say nobility and gentry of this kingdom as for the honour of the kingdom itself lest the most ancient and laudable use of arm shall whole be lay aside and so no outward token or emblem be leave to make a difference between family and family or to distinguish betw^...n the most honourable nobleman and the poor artificer that all nobleman and noble-woman baronet knight esquire and gentleman 1 1 be in number twenty four contain in a schedule hereunto annex and all other that from henceforth shall be either silent bury in the nighttime by torchlight or otherwise by day or night time without either scuchion or other achievement or without attendance of a officer of arm shall nevertheless immediate after the death and burial of every such defunct return a true certificate of the match issue and time of decease with their arm which of right in their life they bear for the which they shall pay unto the say king of arm though by a clause of his letters-patent he claim the same fee that be pay in 2 2 be double the fee here reserve in every state and degree England such fee as we have and do hereby set down and appoint viz. every gentleman twenty shilling english every esqvy three pound six shilling and ^...ight penny english every knight five pound engl. every baronet and banneret six pound thirteen shilling and four penny english every baron or baroness twelve pound ten shilling english every bishop twelve pound ten shilling english every viscount or vicountesse fifteen pound english every earl or countess seventeen pound ten shilling english every marqve or marchioness twenty pound english every duke or duchess twenty two pound ten shill. engl. and every archbishop twenty two pound ten shilling english all which say several sum of money be to be pay to the say king of arm or his assign be orderly demand after the burial of every such defunct by the heir executor or administrator of all and every person of the degree aforesaid the which certificate and fee if they shall refuse to return and pay the fee be reduce so low under that which be pay in England and so by we according to his majesty caveat think fit and reasonable to stand with the state of the kingdom W^... upon complaint make by the king of arm or his assign to we take such further order therein as shall be meet and expedient for the accomplishment of his majesty commandment and (...) do straight charge the say king of arm who now be or hereafter shall be to make true and fair entry of the certificate abovenamed so return into his office they pay such fee as be before set down by these present 3 3 person of everall degree who certificate must be enter without Fe and likewise to enter the like certificate of all gentleman who estate in land and good exceed not five hundred mark english and of all lady and gentlewoman under the degree of a lady Baronesse as exact as the rest pay no fee at all provide that it be first due prove before two of his majesty justice of the peace or more that the party be no more worth which certificate so enter may in future time determine and end many question that hereafter may arise as by many example of late time have be see in England 4 4 provision for some knight and esquier provide always that if the heir executor or administrator of any knight or esquire shall pretend poverty or disability and shall make the same appear by petition unto the lord deputy or other governor or governors f^... the time be order shall be take upon due proof make that the heir executor or administrator shall be ease of pay the say fee if so i^... shall be think fit and the certificate notwithstanding enter as above nevertheless if any of the degree aforesaid their wife and child shall ^...quire to have their funeral honourable solemnize with the attendance of one or both the officer of arm according to their degree and with such other ceremony as have in former time be use 5 5 the officer of arm in England by the decree above specify be leave at liberty in this case to make their composition as in former time that then they shall pay the abovenamed fee respective with the addition of 6 6 it be two shilling the mile out and two shilling the mile homeward to the k. of arm and twelve penny the mile out and twelve penny homeward to the other officer before according to the custom of England twelve pe^...ce english the mile outward and twelve penny english the mile homeward 7 7 it be before 20 noble for black and livery for 4. servant to the king of arm and a quarter as much beside to the other officer according to the custom of England beside fee in money for every degree above double the fee within name and forty shilling english for black with entertainment of the of^...cer of officer of arm and their servant in the funeral house and meat for their horse as have be accustom and with the accustom and ancient ^...quisite of hearse with all their furniture when any shall be use and the above name fee to stand for satisfaction to both for all demand and for remedy of the former abuse which be daily commit by painter mason glasier goldsmith cutter carver and the like we do straight charge ^...d command they bring this realm that they presume not to meddle with any matter of armoury or arm except those arm that be so common know as there be no likelihood of error and that no painter or other person set forth any funeral or make any scuchion or other funeral ^...orke without special leave and approbation of the king of arm or his sufficient deputy or deputye as they will answer the contrary at their pe^... provide that such as the say king of arm shall appoint to make scuchion and other funeral work shall not exceed the ordinary price no^...sed in and about London as the same shall be certify under the hand of two or more of the king of arm there within a year after the date of the present which certificate be to be enter upon record in his majesty high court of chauncery^...ere ^...ere give at his majesty castle of Dublin the 4. o^...^...ugust in the three year of his majesty reign dom. 1627. Adam loftus Canc. ja. lanc. Dublin r. cork hen. Valentia thom. Cromwell dom. Kilmallocke thom. baltinglasse r. ranelagh r. dillon will caulfield henr. Docwra fr. Aungier Will parson rich. Bolton dud. Norton char. Coote Adam loftus the king of arm of England have within the time prescribe in this decree certify the price of funeral work as follow the price ^eing all english price for funeral work a great banner 40 shilling a standart 40 shilling a penoune 26 s. 8 d. a banneroll 26 s. 8 d. a coat of arm 26 s. 8 d. a Sword x. a target x. a crest carve 13 s. 4 d. a wreath 3 s. 4 mantle furnish 20 shi^... a buckram scuchion 2 shi a buckram scuchion with coronet 2 s. 6 ^... a paper scuchion xi^... a paper scuchion with a coronet xiii^... a badge x^... a scuchion on taffeta ^... furniture for a hearse pencille a dozen x. shill. a water table 6 8 d. a water table with supporter and coronet x. s. a crest on Pastebord 12 d. a scroll 3 4 d. a compartment v. a coronet to compass the hearse 30 a scuchion for the ceiling 13 s. 4 d. a staff for banner or standart 12 d. a conductor staff 6 d. Will seager garter rich. s. George Clarenceux