a remonstrance of the most gracious king of great Britain france and IRELAND defender of the faith etc. for the right of king and the independency of their crown against a oration of the most illustrious cardinal of perron pronounce in the chamber of the three estate the 15. of januar. 1615. the l. cardinal even in the first passage of his oration have lay a firm foundation that ecclesiastic in France be more deep oblige to the king than the nobility and three estate his reason because the clergy do sweet enjoy their dignity and promotion with all their infinite wealth of the king mere grace without all danger and with fair immunity whereas the other two order hold their office by a chargeable and burdensome title or tenure even to the great expense of their blood and of their substance but see now how loose and weak a frame he have erect and pin together upon his firm and solid foundation the three estate be to lay all care to provide remedy against apposted cutthroat upon the clergy and the say remedy as he bold affirm must be derive from the law of conscience which may carry a effectual act or operative efficacy upon the soul and nor from civil or temporal punishment now this consequence limp like a lame cripple after the premise for it be no usual and common matter to see man that be deep in obligation perform their duty and covenant with most fidelity again be it grant the clergy have well hitherto demonstrate their careful watch over the life and honour of their prince yet be it not for spiritual punishment thunder by ecclesiastic to bind the hand of the civil magistrate nor to stop the current of temporal punishment which ordinary do carry a great force and virtue to the bridle of the wicked than the apprehension of God judgement the three estate therefore by who all the officer of France be proper represent as to who the administration of justice and protection of the king right and honour do appertain can deserve no blame in carry so watchful a eye by their wholesome remedy to provide for the safety of the king and for the dignity of his crown for if the clergy shall not stand to their tackle but shrink when it come to the push of their duty who shall charge themselves with careful foresight and prevention of mischief shall not the people now have not all the calamity which the three estate have seek provident to prevent have they not all spring from the clergy as from their proper and natural fountain from whence do the last civil war wherein a world of blood be not more profuse then prodigious and unnatural spill and wherein the parricide of king Henry 3 be impious and abominable commit from whence do those bloody war proceed but from the depose of the say king by the head of the church be they not prelate curate and confessor be they not ecclesiastic who partly by seditious preachment and partly by secret confession pour many a jar of oil upon this flame be not he that kill the forename king be not he one of the clergy be not Guignard a jesuit be not John Chastel bring up in the same school do not Ravaillac that monster of man upon interrogatory make at his examination among the rest by who he have be so diabolical tempt and stir up to his most execrable attempt and act of extreme horror do not the refer his examiner to the sermon make the lend next before where they may be satisfy concern the cause of his abominable undertake and execution be not Bellarmine Eudaemonoiohannes Suarez Becanus Mariana with such other monster who teach the doctrine of parricide uphold the craft of janus-like equivocation in court of justice and in secret confession be they not all Clerics be not all their book approve and allow as it be by a corporation or gross company of doctor with their sign manuel to the say book what be the head the chief promoter the complice of the powder-conspiracie in my kingdom be they not ecclesiastic have not Faux by name a confederate of the same demned crew have not he stout stand to the gunner part which then he be to act in that most doleful tragedy with asseveration of a conscience well assure and settle touch the lawfulness of his enterprise do he not yield this reason to wit because he have be arm with instruction of musket proof in the case before he make passage over from the low country be it not also the general belief of that order that Clerics be exempt from the condition of subject to the king nay be it not confess by the l. cardinal himself pag. 7. that king-killer have engage themselves to undertake the detestable act of parricide under a false credence of religion as be instruct by their schoolmaster in religion and who be they but ecclesiastical person all this presuppose as matter of truth I draw this conclusion howsoever no small number of the french clergy may perhaps bear the affection of love subject to their king and may not suffer the clerical character to deface the impression of natural allegiance yet for so much as the order of Clerics be dip in a deep die and bear a worse tincture of dangerous practice then the other order the three estate have be great want to their excellent providence and wisdom if they shall have relinquish and transfer the care of designment and project for the life of their king and the safety of his crown to the clergy alone moreover the clergy stand bind to refer the judgement of all matter in controversy to the sentence of the pope in this cause be a party and one that pretend crown to depend upon his mitre what hope then may the three estate conceive that his holiness will pass against his own cause when his judgement of the controversy have be sundry time before publish and testify to the world and whereas the plot or model of remedy project by the three estate and the king officer have not prove sortable in the event be it because the say remedy be not good and lawful no very but because the clergy refuse to become contributor of their duty and mean to the grand service likewise for that after the burn of book address to justify rebellious people traitor and parricide of king nevertheless the author of the say book be wink at and back with favour last for that some wretched parricide drink off the cup of public justice whereas to the firebrand of sedition the sower of this abominable doctrine no man say so much as black be their eye it sufficient appear as I suppose by the former passage that his lordship exhort the three estate to refer the whole care of this regal cause unto the clergy have tack his frame of weak joint and tenon to a very worthy but wrong foundation pag. 9 howbeit he labour to fortify his exhortation with a more weak and feeble reason for to make good his project he affirm that matter and maxim out of all doubt and question may not be shuffle together with point in controversy now his rule indubitable be two the first it be not lawful to murder king for any cause whatsoever this he confirm by the example of Saul as he say depose from his throne who life or limb David nevertheless dare not once hurt or wrong for his life likewise he confirm the same by a decree of the council hold at Constance conc. Constan Sess. 15. his other point indubitable the king of France be sovereign in all temporal sovereignty within the french kingdom and hold not by fealty either of the pope as have receive or oblige their crown upon such tenure and condition or of any other prince in the whole world which point nevertheless he take not for certain and indubitable but only according to human and historical certainty now a three point he make to be so full of controversy and so far within the circle of disputable question as it may not be draw into the rank of classical and authentical point for fear of make a certain point doubtful by shuffle and jumble therewith some point in controversy now the question so disputable as he pretend be this a christian prince break his oath solemn take to God both to live and to die in the catholic religion say this prince turn Arrian or mahometan fall to proclaim open war and to wage battle with jesus Christ whether may such a prince be declare to have lose his kingdom and who shall declare the subject of such a prince to be quit of their oath of allegiance the l. cardinal hold the affirmative and make no bone to maintain that all other part of the catholic church yea the french church even from the first birth of her theological school to calvins time and teach have profess that such a prince may be lawful remove from his throne by the pope and by the council and suppose the contrary doctrine be the very quintessence or spirit of truth yet may it not in case of faith be urge and press otherwise then by way of problematical disceptation that be the sum of his Lordsh ample discourse the refute whereof I be constrain to put off and refer unto a other place because he have serve we with the same dish over and over again there we shall see the l. cardinal make way to the dispatch of king after deposition that Saul be not depose as he have presume that in the council of Constance there be nothing to the purpose of murder sovereign prince that his lordship suppose the french king may be deprive of his crown by a superior power do not hold his liege lord to be sovereign in France that by the position of the french church from age to age the king of France be not subject unto any censure of deposition by the pope that his holiness have no just and lawful pretence to produce that any christian king hold of he by fealty or be oblige to do the pope homage for his crown well then for the purpose he dwell only upon the three point pretend questionable and this he affirm if any shall condemn or wrap under the solemn curse the abettor of the pope power to unking lawful and sovereign king the same shall run upon four dangerous rock of apparent incongruity and absurdity first he shall offer to force and entangle the conscience of many devout person for he shall bind they to believe and swear that doctrine the contrary whereof be believe of the whole church and have be believe by their predecessor second he shall overturn from top to bottom the sacred authority of holy church and shall set open a gate unto all sort of heresy by allow lay-person a bold liberty to be judge in cause of religion and faith for what be that degree of boldness but open usurp of the priesthood what be it but put of profane hand into the ark what be it but lay of unholy finger upon the holy censor for perfume three he shall make way to a schism not possible to be put by and avoid by any human providence for this doctrine be hold and profess by all other catholic how can we declare it repugnant unto God word how can we hold it impious how can we account it detestable but we shall renounce communion with the head and other member of the church yea we shall confess the church in all age to have be the synagogue of Satan and the spouse of the devil last by work the establishment of this article which work a establishment of king crown he shall not only work the intend remedy for the danger of king out of all the virtue and efficacy thereof by weaken of doctrine out of all controversy in pack it up with a disputable question but likewise in stead of secure the life and estate of king he shall draw both into far great hazard by the train or sequence of war and other calamity which usual wait and attend on schism the l. cardinal spend his whole discourse in confirmation of these four head which we now intend to sift in order and demonstrative to prove that all the say inconvenience be mere nullity matter of imagination and build upon false presupposition but before we come to the main the reader be to be inform and advertise that his lordship set a false gloss upon the question and propound the case not only contrary to the truth of the subject in controversy but also to the pope own mind and meaning for he restrain the pope power to depose king only to case of heresy apostasy and persecute of the church whereas pope extend their power to a further distance they depose prince for infringe or in any sort diminish the privilege of monastery witness Gregory the first in the pretend charter grant to the abbey of s. Medard at the say charter be annex to his epistle in the rear the same he testify in his epistle to senator by name the 10. of the eleven book they depose for natural dullness and lack of capacity whether inbred and true indeed or only pretend and imagine witness the glorious vaunt of Gregory 7 that Childeric king of France be hoist out of his throne by pope Zacharie not so much for his wicked life Caus. 15. can. qu. 6. as for his unableness to bear the weighty burden of so great a kingdom they depose for collate of benefice and prebend witness the great quarrel and sore contention between pope Innocent 3 and John king of England as also between Philip the fair and Boniface 8 they depose for adultery and matrimonial suit witness philip. 1. for the repudiate or cast off his lawful wife Bertha and marry in her place with Bertrade wife to the earl of Anjou final fain will I learn into what heresy or degree of apostasy Paul Aemil in phil. 3. either Henry 4 or Freder Barbarossa or frederic 2. emperor be fall when they be smite with papal fulmination even to the deprivation of their imperial throne what be it for heresy or apostasy that pope Martin 4 bear so hard a hand against Peter king of Arragon that he acquit and release the arragonnois from their oath of allegiance to Peter their lawful king be it for heresy or apostasy for arianism or Mahumetisme that Lewis 12 so good a king and father of his country be put down by julius the 2 be it for heresy or apostasy that sixtus 5. usurp a power against Henry 3 even so far as to denounce he unkingd the issue whereof be the parricide of that good king and the most woeful desolation of a most flourish kingdom but his lordship best like to work upon that ground which to the outward show and appearance be the most beautiful cause that can be allege for the dishonour of king by the weapon of deposition make himself to believe that he act the part of a orator before personage not much acquaint with ancient and modern history and such as little understand the state of the question then in hand it have therefore be a good warrant for his lordship to have bring some authentical instrument from the pope whereby the french may have be secure that his holiness renounce all other cause avouchable for the degrade of king and that he will henceforth rest in the case of heresy for the turn of king out of their freehold as also that his holiness by the same or like instrument may have certify his pleasure that he will not hereafter make himself judge whether king be taint with damnable heresy or free from heretical infection for that be to make himself both judge and plaintiff that it may be in his power to call that doctrine heretical which be pure orthodox and all for this end to make himself master of the kingdom and there to settle a successor who receive the crown of the pope free gift and grant may be tie thereby to depend altogether upon his holiness have not pope Boniface 8 declare in his proud letter all those to be heretic that dare undertake to affirm the collate of prebend appertain to the king it be that pope gross error not in the fact but in the right the like crime forsooth be by pope impute to the unhappy emperor Henry 4 and what be the issue of the say imputation the son be instigate thereby to rebel against his father and to impeach the interment of his dead corpse who never in his life have beat his brain to trouble the sweet water of theological fountain annal. it be record by Aventine lib. 3. that bishop Virgilius be declare heretic Iwanen for teach the position of antipode episcop the bull Exurge march in the rear of the last Lateran council set down this position for one of Luther heresy a new life be the best repentance among the crime which the council of Constance charge pope John 23 withal one be this conc. Constan Sess. 2. that he deny the immortality of the soul and that so much be public manifest and notorious know now if the pope shall be carry by the stream of these or the like error and in his heretical pravity shall depose a king of the contrary opinion I shall hardly be persuade the say king be lawful depose the first inconvenience examine the first inconvenience grow in the cardinal his conceit by entertain the article of the three estate whereby the king of France be declare to be indeposeable by any superior power spiritual or temporal be this it offer force to the conscience under the penalty of anathema to condemn a doctrine believe and practise in the church in the continual current of the last eleven hundred year in these word he make a secret confession that in the first five hundred year the same doctrine be neither apprehend by faith nor approve by practice wherein to my understanding the l. cardinal voluntary give over the suit for the church in the time of the apostle their disciple and successor for 500 year together be no more ignorant what authority the church be to challenge over emperor and king then at any time since in any succeed age in which as pride have still flow to the height of a full sea so purity of religion and manner have keep for the most part at a low watermarke which point be the rather to be consider for that during the first 500 year the church groan under the heavy burden both of heathen emperor and of heretical king the Visigot king in Spain and the vandal in Africa of who displeasure the pope have small reason or cause to stand in any fear be so remote from their dominion and no way under the lee of their sovereignty but let we come to see what aid the l. cardinal have amass and pile together out of late history provide we still bear in mind that our question be not of popular tumult nor of the rebellion of subject make insurrection out of their own discontent spirit and brainsick humour nor of lawful excommunication nor of canonical censure and reprehension but only of a juridical sentence of deposition pronounce by the pope as arm with ordinary and lawful power to depose against a sovereign prince now then Exampl 1. pag. 18. Evag hist. the l. cardinal set on and give the first charge with anastasius the emperor eccles lib. 3. cap. 32. who euphemius patriarch of Constantinople will never acknowledge for emperor that be to say will never consent he shall be create emperor by the help of his voice or suffrage except he will first subscribe to the chalcedon creed notwithstanding the great empress and senate seek by violent course and practice to make he yield and when afterward the say emperor contrary to his oath take play the relapse by fall into his former heresy and become a persecutor he be first admonish and then excommunicate by symmachus bishop of Rome to this the l. cardinal add that when the say emperor be mind to chop the poison of his heretical assertion into the public form of divine service than the people of Constantinople make a uproar against anastasius their emperor and one of his commander by force of arm constrain he to call back certain bishop who he have send into banishment before in this first example the l. cardinal by his good leave neither come close to the question nor salute it a far off euphemius be not bishop of Rome anastasius be not depose by euphemius the patriarch only make no way to the create of anastasius the sudden commotion of the base multitude make nothing the rebellion of a greek commander make less for the authorize of the pope to depose a sovereign prince the greek emperor be excommunicate by pope symmachus who know whether that be true or forge for the pope himself be the only witness here produce by the lord cardinal upon the point and who know not how false how suppositious the writing and epistle of the ancient pope be just esteem but grant it a truth yet anastasius excommunicate by pope symmachus be not anastasius depose by pope symmachus and to make a full answer I say further that excommunication denounce by a foreign bishop against a party not be within the limit of his jurisdiction or one of his own flock be not any bar to the party from the communion of the church but only a kind of publication that he the say bishop in his particular will hold no further communion with any such party for proof whereof I produce the canon of the council hold at Carthage in one of the say canon it be thus provide and ordain (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) * * Nomocan Africa can. 77. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) if any bishop shall wilful absent himself from the usual and accustom synod let he not be admit to the communion of other church but let he only use the benefit and liberty of his own church in a other of the same canon thus * * can. 81. eiusd Nomo (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) if a bishop shall insinuate himself to make a conveyance of his monastery and the order thereof unto a monk of any other cloister let he be cut off let he be separate from the communion with other church and content himself to live in the communion of his own flock in the same sense hilarius bishop of Poitiers excommunicate liberius bishop of Rome anathema Faber in frag. for subscribe to the arrian confession in the same sense John bishop of Antioch excommunicate Celestine of Rome and Cyrill of Alexandria bishop for proceed to sentence against Nestorius without stay his come to answer in his own cause in the same sense likewise victor bishop of Rome do cut off all the bishop of the east not from the communion of their own flock but from communion with victor and the roman church what resemblance what agreement what proportion between this course of excommunication and that way of unjust fulmination which the pope of Rome have usurp against king but yet certain long course of time after that ancient course and this may stand for a full answer likewise to the example of Clotharius Exampl 2. this ancient king of the french fear the censure of pope agapetus erect the territory of Yuetot unto the title of a kingdom by way of satisfaction for murder of Gualther lord of Yuetot for this example the l. cardinal have ransack record of 900. year antiquity and upward in which time it be no hard piece of work to show that pope will not have any hand nor so much as a finger in the affair and act of the french king Gregory of Tours that live in the same age have record many act of excess and violent injury do against bishop by their king and namely against praetextatus bishop of Rouen for any of which injurious prank then play the bishop of Rome dare not reprove the say king with due remonstrance but see here the word of Gregory himself to king Chilperic if any of we o king shall swerve from the path of justice he thou have power to punish but in case thou shall at any time transgress the line of equity who shall once touch thou with reproof to thou we speak but be never heed and regard except it be thy pleasure and be thou not please who shall challenge thy greatness but he that just challenge to be justice itself the good bishop notwithstanding these humble remonstrance be but rough entreat and pack into exile be banish into the isle of Gernseye but I be not mind to make any deep search or inquisition into the title of the lord of Yuetot who honourable privilege and title be the most honourable badge and cognisance of their ancestor and of some remarkable service do to the crown of France so far I take they to differ from a satisfaction for sin and for the purpose I only affirm that be the credit of this history beyond all exception yet make it nothing to the present question wherein the power of depose and not of excommunicate supreme king be debate and suppose the king by charter grant the say privilege for fear of excommunication how be it prove thereby that pope agapetus have lawful and ordinary power to deprive he of his crown nay doubtless it be rather a mean to elevate and advance the dignity of the crown of France and to style the french king a king of king as one that be able to give the quality of king to all the rest of the noble and gentry of his kingdom do not some part of the spanish king greatness consist in create of his great in the next place follow Gregory i. who in the 10. epistle of the 11. book Exam. 3. pag. 22. confirm the privilege of the hospital at augustodunum in Bourgongne prohibit all king and prelate whatsoever to infringe or diminish the say privilege in whole or in part his formal and express word be these if any king prelate judge or any other secular person inform of this our constitution shall presume to go or do contrary thereunto let he be cast down from his power and dignity I answer the lord cardinal here wrong himself very much in take imprecation for decree may not even the mean of the people use the same tenor of word and say if any shall touch the life or the most sacred majesty of our king be he emperor or be he pope let he be accurse let he fall from his eminent place of authority let he lose his dignity let he tumble into beggary disease and all kind of calamity I forbear to show how easy a matter it be for monk to forge title after their own humour and to their own like for the uphold and maintain of their privilege as for the purpose the same Gregory cite in the end of his epistle a other privilege of the like stuff and stamp to the former grant to the abbey of s. Medard at it be fence with a like clause to the other but of how great untruth and of how little weight it be the very date that it bear make manifest proof for it run date the year of our lord incarnation 593. the 11. indiction whereas the 10. indiction agree to the year 593. beside it be not Gregory manner to date his epistle according to the year of the Lord again the say privilege be sign by the bishop of Alexandria and Carthage who never know as may well be think whether any such abbey of s. Medard or city of be ever build in the world moreover they sign in the thick of a crowd as it be of italian bishop last he that shall read in this Gregory epistle with what spirit of reverence and humility he speak of emperor will hardly believe that ever he arm himself with authority to give or to take away kingdom he style himself * * epist 6. l. 3 ibid. etc. ep. 61. l. 2. the emperor unworthy servant presume to speak unto his lord when he know himself to be but dust and a very worm he profess subjection unto the emperor command even to the publish of a certain law of the emperor which in his judgement somewhat jar and justle with God law as elsewhere I have speak more at large the l. cardinal next bring upon the stage justinian 2. he Examp. 4. be in some choler with Sergius bishop of Rome because he will not favour the erroneous synod of Canstantinople will have cause the bishop to be apprehend by his constable zacharias but by the roman militia that be the troop which the emperor than have in Italy zacharias be repulse and hinder from his design even with opprobrious and reproachful term his lordship must have my shallowness excuse if I reach not his intent by this allegation wherein I see not one word of depose from the empire or of any sentence pronounce by the pope here be now 712. year expire after the birth of jesus Christ in all which long tract of time the l. cardinal have not light upon any instance which may make for his purpose with never so little show for the example of the emperor philippicus Examp. 5. by the cardinal allege next in sequence belong to the year 713. and thus lie the history this emperor philippicus bardanes be a profess enemy to the worship of image and command they to be break in piece in that very time the roman empire be overthrow in the west and sore shake by the saracen in the east beside those misery the emperor be also encumber with a civil and intestine war the great part of Italy be then seize by the Lombard and the emperor in Italy have nothing leave save only the Exarchat of Ravenna and the duchy of Rome then half abandon by reason of the emperor want of force pope Constantine gripe this occasion whereon to ground his greatness and to shake off the yoke of the emperor his lord undertake against philippicus the cause of image by a council declare the emperor heretic prohibit his rescript or coin to be receive and to go currant in Rome forbid his imperial statue to be set up in the temple according to ancient custom the tumult grow to a height the pope be principal promoter of the tumult in the heat of the tumult the Exarche of Ravenna lose his life here see now the mutiny of a subject against his prince to pull from he by force and violence a city of his empire but who see in all this any sentence of deposition from the imperial dignity nay the pope then miss the cushion and be disappoint utter of his purpose the city of Rome stand firm and continue still in their obedience to the emperor about some 12. year after Examp. 6. the emperor Leo isauricus who the lord of perron call Iconoclast fall to fight it out at sharp and to prosecute worshipper of image with all extremity upon this occasion pope Gregory 2. then tread in the step of his predecessor when he perceive the city of Rome to be but weak provide of man or munition and the emperor to have his hand full in other place find such mean to make the city rise in rebellious arm against the emperor that he make himself in short time master thereof thus far the l. card. whereunto my answer for satisfaction be that degrade a emperor from his imperial dignity and reduce a city to revolt against her master that a man at last may carry the piece himself and make himself lord thereof be two several action of special difference if the freehold of the city have be convey to some other by the pope deprive the emperor as proprietary thereof this example may have challenge some credit at least in show but so to invade the city to his own use and so to seize on the right and authority of another what be it but open rebellion and notorious ambition for it be far from ecclesiastical censure when the spiritual pastor of soul forsooth pull the cloak of a poor sinner from his back by violence or cut his purse and thereby appropriate a other man good to his private use it be to be observe withal that when the emperor be not of sufficient strength and pope have power to beard and to brave emperor than these papal practice be first set on foot this emperor notwithstanding turn head and peck again his lieutenant enter Rome and Gregory 3. successor to this Gregory 2. be glad to honour the same emperor with style and title of his lord witness two several epistle of the say Gregory 3. write to Boniface and subscribe in this form 10. date the ten calends of December cal. dom. leone imp. in the reign of our most pious and religious lord crown of God the great emperor in the ten year of his reign the l. cardinal with no less abuse allege pope Zacharie by who the french as he affirm be absolve of the oath of allegiance Examp. 7. wherein they stand bind to Childeric their King and for this instance he stand upon the testimony of Paulus Aemilius and du Tillet a pair of late writer but by author more near that age wherein Childeric reign it be more true testify that it be a free and voluntary act of the french only ask the advice of pope Zacharie but require neither leave nor absolution ado bishop of Vienna in his chronicle have it after this manner the french follow the counsel of ambassador and of pope Zachary elect Pepin their king and establish he in the kingdom Trithemius in his abridgement of annal thus Childeric as one unfit for government be turn out of his kingdom with common consent of the estate and peer of the realm so advise by Zacharie pope of Rome Godfridus of Viterbe in the 17. part of his chronicle and Guaguin in the life of Pepin affirm the same and be it not a easy matter to work Pepin by counsel to lay hold on the kingdom when he can not be hinder from fasten on the crown and have already seize it in effect howsoever he have not yet attain to the name of king moreover the rudeness of that nation then want knowledge and school either of divinity or of academical science be a kind of spur to make they run for counsel over the mountain which nevertheless in a cause of such nature they require not as necessary but only as decent and for fashion sake the pope also for his part be well apay by this mean to draw Pepin unto his part as one that stand in some need of his aid against the Lombard and the more because his lord the emperor of Constantinople be then bring so low that he be not able to send he sufficient aid for the defence of his territory against his enemy but have Zacharie to deal plain not stand upon the respect of his own commodity more than upon the regard of God fear he will never have give counsel unto the servant under the pretend colour of his master dull spirit so to turn rebel against his master the law provide guardian or overseer for such as be not well in their wit they never deprive and spoil they of their estate they punish crime but not disease and infirmity by nature yea in France it be a very ancient custom when the king be trouble in his wit to establish a regent who for the time of the king disability may bear the burden of the kingdom affair so be the practice of that state in the case of Charles 6. when he fall into a frenzy who the pope notwithstanding his most grievous and sharp fit never offer to degrade and to be short what reason what equity will bear the child to be punish for the father debility yet such punishment be lay upon Childerics whole race and house who by this practice be all disinherit of the kingdom but shall we now take some view of the l. cardinal excuse for this exemplary fact pag. 25. the cause of Childerics depose as the l. cardinal say do near concern and touch religion for Childerics imbecility bring all France into danger to suffer a most woeful shipwreck of christian religion upon the barbarous and hostile invasion of the saracen admit now this reason have be of just weight and value yet consideration shall have be take whether some one or other of that royallstemme and of the king own successor near of blood be not of better capacity to rule and manage that mighty State the fear of uncertain and accidental mischief shall not have drive they to sly unto the certain mischief of actual and effectual deposition they shall rather have set before their eye the example of Charles martel this pippin father who in a far more eminent danger when the saracen have already master and subdue a great part of France valiant encounter and withal defeat the saracen rule the kingdom under the title of steward of the king house the principal officer of the crown without affect or aspire to the throne for all that great step of advantage especial when the saracen be quite break and no long dreadful to the french nation in our own Scotland the sway of the kingdom be in the hand of wall during the time of Bruse his imprisonment in England who then be lawful heir to the crown this wall or vallas have the whole power of the kingdom at his beck and command his edict and ordinance to this day stand in full force by the deadly hatred of Bruse his mortal enemy it may be conjecture that he may have be provoke and inflame with desire to truss the kingdom in his talon and notwithstanding all these incitement he never assume or usurp other title to himself then of governor or administrator of the kingdom the reason he have not be bring up in this new doctrine and late discipline whereby the church be endow with power to give and to take away crown but now as the l. cardinal will bear the world in hand the state of king be bring to a very dead lift the pope forsooth must send his physician to know by way of inspection or some other course of art whether the king brain be crack or find and in case there be find any debility of wit and reason in the king than the pope must remove and translate the crown from the weak brain to a strong and for the act of the stratagem the name of religion must be pretend ho these heretic begin to crawl in the kingdom order must be take they be not suffer by their multitude and swarm like locust or caterpillar to pester and poison the whole realm or in a case of matrimony thus ho marriage be a sacrament touch the order of matrimony and religion be wound by this device not only the king vice but likewise his natural disease and infirmity be fetch into the circle of religion and the l. cardinal have not do himself right in restrain the pope power to depose king unto the cafe of heresy apostasy and persecution of the church in the next place follow 3 who by set the imperial crown upon the head of Charles absolve all the subject in the west of their obedience to the greek emperor if the l. of perron may be credit in this example but indeed it be crowd among the rest by a sly trick and clean contrary to the naked truth of all history for it shall never be justify by good history that so much as one single person or man I say not one country or one people be then wrought or win by the pope to change his copy and lord or from a subject of the greek emperor to turn subject unto Charlemagne let i see but one town that Charlemagne recover from the greek emperor by his right and title to his empire in the west no the greek emperor have take their farewell of the west empire long before and therefore to nick this upon the tally of pope Leo his act that he take away the west from the greek emperor it be even as if one shall say that in this age the pope take the dukedom of Milan from the french king or the city of Rome from the emperor of Germany because their predecessor in former age have be right lord and governor of they both it be one of the pope ordinary and solemn practice to take away much after the manner of his give for as he give what he have not in his right and power to give or bestow upon other what be already their own even so he take away from king and emperor the possession which they have not in present hold and possession after this manner he take the west from the greek emperor when they hold nothing in the west and lay no claim to any city or town of the west empire and what shall we call this way of deprivation but spoil a naked man of his garment and kill a man already dead true it be the imperial crown be then set on charlemaine head by Leo the pope do Leo therefore give he the empire no more than a bishop that crown a king at his royal and solemn consecration do give he the kingdom for shall the pope himself take the popedom from the bishop of Ostia as of his gift because the crown of the pope be a office of long time peculiar to the ostian bishop it be the custom of emperor to be crown king of Italy by the hand of the archbishop of Milan do he therefore give the kingdom of Italy to the say emperor and to return unto Charlemagne if the pope have convey the empire to he by free and gracious donation the pope doubtless in the solemnity of his coronation will never have perform unto his own creature a emperor of his own make the duty of adoration as ado that live in the same age have leave it on record pontifice more after the solemn praise end say ado the chief bishop honour he with adoration according to the custom of ancient prince the same be likewise put down by Aventine in the 4. book of his annal of Bavaria Aventinus lib. 4. more the like by the precedent Fauchet in his antiquity and by mons. Petau councillor in the court of parliament at Paris in his preface before the chronicle of Eusebius Hierome and Sigebert it be therefore the people of Rome that call this Charles the great unto the imperial dignity and cast on he the title of empeerour so testify Sigebert upon the year 801. Sigeb an. 801. all the roman with one general voice and consent ring out acclamation of imperial praise to the emperor they crown he by the hand of Leo the pope they give he the style of Caesar and Augustus maria. Scotus lib. 3. marianus Scotus have as much in effect Charles be then call Augustus by the roman Plat. in leon. 3. and so Platina after the solemn service Leo declare and proclaim Charles emperor according to the public decree and general request of the people of Rome Avent. Annal. lib. 4. Aventine and Sigonius in his 4. book of the kingdom of Italy witness the same nevertheless to gratify the l. cardinal suppose pope Leo dispossess the greek emperor of the west empire what be the cause what infamous act have they do what profane and irreligious crime have they commit Nicephorus and Irene who reign in the greek empire in charlemaine time be not repute by the pope or take for heretic how then the l. cardinal help at a pinch and put we in mind that Constantine and Leo predecessor to the say emperor have be poison with heresy and stain with persecution here then behold a orthodox prince depose for what cause for heresy forsooth not in himself but in some of his predecessor long before a admirable case for I be of a contrary mind that he be worthy of double honour in restore and set up the truth again which under his predecessor have endure oppression and suffer persecution doubtless pope Silvester be great oversee and play not well the pope when he wink at Constantine the great and cast he not down from his imperial throne for the strange infidelity and paganism of diocletian of maximian and maxentius who Constantine succeed in the empire from this example the l. of perron pass to fulke archbishop of Reims Examp. 9 pag. 27. by who Charles the Simple be threaten with excommunication and refuse to continue any long in the fidelity and allegiance of a subject to what purpose be this example for who can be ignorant that all age have bring forth turbulent and stir spirit man altogether forgetful of respect and observance towards their king especial when the world find they shallow and simple-witted like unto this prince but in this example where be there so much as one word of the pope or the depose of king Examp. 10. pag. 28. here the l. cardinal chap in the example of Philip 1 king of France but mangle and strange disguise as hereafter shall be show at last he lead we to Gregory 7 surname hildebrand Exam. 11. an. 1076. the scourge of emperor the firebrand of war the scorn of his age this pope after he have in the spirit of pride and in the very height of all audaciousness thunder the sentence of excommunication and deposition against the emperor Henry 4. after he have enterprise this act without all precedent example after he have fill all Europe with blood this pope I say sink down under the weight of his affair and die as a fugitive at Salerne overwhelm with discontent and sorrow of heart here lie at the point of give up the ghost call unto he as it be in Sigebert a certain cardinal who he much favour Sigeb an. 1085. he confess to God and saint Peter and the whole church that he have be great defective in the pastor all charge commit to his care and that by the devil instigation he have kindle the fire of God wrath and hatred against mankind then he send his confessor to the emperor and to the whole church to pray for his pardon because he perceive that his life be at a end likewise cardinal Benno that live in the say Gregory time do testify that so soon as he be rise out of his chair to excommunicate the emperor from his cathedral seat by the will of God the say cathedral seat new make of strong board or plank do crack and cleave into many piece or part to manifest how great and terrible schism have be sow against the church of Christ by a excommunication of so dangerous consequence pronounce by the man that have sit judge therein now to bring and allege the example of such a man who by attempt a act which never any man have the heart or face to attempt before have condemn all his predecessor of cowardice or at least of ignorance what be it else but even to send we to the school of mighty robber and to seek to correct and reform ancient virtue by late vice frisingen in hen. 4. lib. 4. cap. 31. which Otho Frisingensis call into his own private consideration he dare free profess that he have not read of any emperor before this Henry the 4. excommunicate or drive out of his imperial throne and kingdom by the chief bishop of Rome but if this quarrel may be try and fight out with weapon of example I leave any indifferent reader to judge what example ought in the cause to be of chief authority and weight whether late example of king depose by pope for the most part never take the intend effect or ancient example of pope actual and effectual thrust out of their throne by emperor and king the emperor Constantius expel liberius bishop of Rome out of the city theo. lib. 2. banish he as far as beroe hist cap. 16 and place foelix in his room indeed Constantius be a arrian and therein use no less impious than unjust proceed nevertheless the ancient father of the church do not blame Constantius for his hard and sharp deal with a chief bishop over who he have no lawful power but only as a enemy to the orthodox faith and one that rage with extreme rigour of persecution against innocent believer in the reign of Valentinian the 1. and year of the lord 367. the contention between damasus and Vrsicinus competitor for the bishopric lib. 27. fill the city of Rome with a bloody sedition in which be wicked and cruel murder 137. person Decret. dist. 79. to meet with such turbulent action honorius make a law extant in the decretal the word whereof be these if it shall happen henceforth by the temereity of competitor that any two bishop be elect to the see we strait charge and command that neither of both shall sit in the say See by virtue of this law Platina the same honorius in the year 420. expel bonifacius and Eulalius competitor and antipope out of Rome Sigebertus though not long after he revoke bonifacius and settle he in the papal See theodoric the Goth king of Italy send John bishop of Rome ambassador to the emperor justinian Platina call he home again lib. and clap he up in the close prison where he starve to death by the same king peter bishop of Altine be dispatch to Rome to hear the cause and examine the process of pope symmachus then indict and accuse of sundry crime king about the year 537. have the service of pope agapetus as his ambassador to the emperor justinian upon a treaty of peace agapetus die in the time of that Syluerius be make bishop by not long after Syluerius be drive out by belisarius the emperor his lieutenant and send into banishment after Syluerius next succeed Vigilius who with currant coin purchase the popedom of belisarius the emperor justinian send for Vigilius to Constantinople and receive he there with great honour soon after the emperor take offence at his freeness in speak his mind command he to be beat with stripe in manner to death and with a rope about his neck to be draw through the city like a thief as Platina relate the history Nicephorus in his 26. book and 17. chapter come very near the same relation the emperor Constantius in the year 654. cause pope Martin to be bind with chain (...) Sigeberius and banish he into chersonesus where he end his life the pope in that age write to the emperor use none but submissive term by way of most humble supplication make profession of bow the knee before their sacred majesty and of execute their command with entire obedience pay to the emperor twenty pound weight of gold for their investiture which tribute be afterward release and remit justin 123. cap. 3. by Constantine the beard to pope Agatho in the year 679. as I have observe in a other place nay further even when the power and riches of the pope be grow to great height by the most profuse and immense munificence of Charlemagne and Lewis his son the emperor of the west do not relinquish and give over the make and unmake of pope as they see cause pope ' Adrian 1. willing submit his neck to this yoke and make this law to be pass in a council that in Charlemagne shall rest all right and power for the pope election and for the government of the papal See this constitution be insert in the decretal Dist 63. can. * * note that in the same Dist the can of greg. 4. beginning with be false and supposititious because greg. 4. wa^ pope long before Hadri 2. hadrianus and be confirm by the practice of many year in the year of the l. 963. the emperor Otho take away the popedom from John 13. and place Leo 8. in his room in like manner John 14. Gregory 5. and Silvester 2. be seat in the papal throne by the Otho the emperor Henry 2. in the year 1007. depose three pope namely Benedict 9 Silvester 3. and Gregory 6. who Platina do not stick to call three most detestable and vile monster this custom continue this practice stand in force for diverse age even until the time of Gregory 7. by who the whole west be toss and turmoil with lamentable war which plague the world and the empire by name with intolerable trouble and mischief for after the say gregorian war the empire fall from bad to worse and so go on to decay till emperor at last be drive to beg and receive the imperial crown of the pope the kingdom of France meet not with so rude entreaty but be deal withal by course of a mild temper Gregory 4. about the year of the lord 832. be the first pope that persuade himself to use the censure of excommunication against a king of France this pope have a hand in the troublesome faction of the realm be nothing backward to side with the son of Lewis surname the courteous by wicked conspiracy enter into a desperate course and complot against Lewis their own father as witness Sigebert in these word pope Gregory come into France join himself to the son against the emperor their father Bo^he^ Decret. eccles Gallican lib. 2. tit. 16. but annal of the very same time and he that furbush Aimonius a religious of s. benedict order do testify that all the bishop of France fall upon this resolution by no mean to rest in the pope pleasure or to give any place unto his design and contrariwise in case the pope shall proceed to excommunication of their king he shall return out of France to Rome a excommunicate person himself the chronicle of s. Denis have word in this form the lord apostolical return answer that he be not come into France for any other purpose but only to excommunicate the king and his bishop if they will be in any sort opposite unto the son of Lewis or disobedient unto the will and pleasure of his holiness the prelate inform hereof make answer that in this case they will never yield obedience to the excommunication of the say bishop because it be contrary to the authority and advice of the ancient canon after these time pope Nicholas 1. deprive king Lotharius of communion for in those time not a word of depose to make he repudiate or quit Valdrada and to resume or take again Thetberga his former wife the article frame by the french upon this point be to be find in the writing of Hincmarus archbishop of Reims and be of this purport that in the judgement of man both learned and wise it be a overrule case that as the king whatsoever he shall do ought not by his own bishop to be excommunicate even so no foreign bishop have power to sit for his judge because the king be to be subject only unto God and his imperial authority who alone have the all-sufficient power to settle he in his kingdom moreover the clergy address letter of answer unto the same pope full of sting and bitter term with speech of great scorn and contempt as they be set down by Aventine in his annal of Bavaria annal. lib. 4. not forbear to call he thief wolf and tyrant when pope Hadrian take upon he like a lord to command Charles the bald upon pain of interdiction that he shall suffer the kingdom of Lotharius to be full and entire convey and confer upon Lewis his son the same a man of great authority and estimation in that age send his letter contain sundry remonstrance touch that subject among other matter thus he write the ecclesiastic and secular of the kingdom assemble at Reims have affirm and now do affirm by way of reproach upbraid and exprobration that never be the like mandate send before from the see of Rome to any of our predecessor and a little after the chief bishop of the apostolic see or any other bishop of the great authority and holiness never withdraw themselves from the presence from the reverend salutation or from the conference of emperor and king whether heretic or schismitick and tyrant as Constantius the arrian Julianus the and Maxmius the tyrant and yet a little after wherefore if the apostolic lord be mind to seek peace let he seek it so that he stir no brawl and breed no quarrel for we be no such babe to believe that we can or ever shall attain to God kingdom unless we receive he for our king in earth who God himself recommend to we from heaven it be add by Hincmarus in the same place that by the say bishop and lord temporal such threaten word be blow forth as he be afraid once to speak and utter as for the king himself what reckon he make of the pope mandate it appear by the king own letter address to pope hadrianus as we may read every where in the epistle of Hincmarus for there after king Charles have tax and challenge the pope of pride and hit he in the tooth with a spirit of usurpation he break out into these word what hell have cast up this law so cross and preposterous what infernal gulf have disgorge this law out of the dark and obscure den a law quite contrary and altogether repugnant unto the beat way show we in the holy scripture etc. yea he flat and peremptory forbid the pope except he mean or desire to be recompense with dishonour and contempt to send any more the like mandate either to himself or to his bishop under the reign of Hugo capetus and Robert his son a council now extant in all man hand be hold and celebrate at Reims by the king authority there arnulphus bishop of Orleans than prolocutor and speaker of the council call the pope Antichrist and let not also to paint he forth like a monster as well for the deform and ugly vice of that unholy see which then be in their exaltation as also because the pope then win with present and namely with certain goodly horse then present to his holiness take part against the king with arnulphus bishop of Reims then disposs of his pastoral charge when Philip 1. have repudiate his wife Bertha daughter to the earl of Holland and in her place have also take to wife Bertrade the wife of Fulco earl of Anjou yet be alive he be excommunicate and his kingdom interdict by Vrbanus then pope though he be then beard with a antipope as the l. cardinal here give we to understand but his lordship have skip over two principal point record in the history the first be that Philip be not depose by the pope whereupon it be to be infer that in this passage there be nothing material to make for the pope power against a king throne and sceptre the other point be that by the censure of the pope the course of obedience due to the king before be not interrupt nor the king disavow refuse or disclaim but on the contrary that Ivo of Chartres take pope Vrbanus part be punish for his presumption despoil of his estate and keep in prison whereof he make complaint himself in his 19 and 20. epistle the l. cardinal beside in my understanding for his master honour shall have make no word of interdict the whole kingdom for when the pope to give a king chastisement do interdict his kingdom he make the people to bear the punishment of the king offence for during the time of interdiction the church door through the whole kingdom be keep continual shut and lock up public service be intermit in all place bell every where silent sacrament not administer to the people body of the dead so prostitute and abandon that none dare bury the say body in holy ground more it be believe that a man die under the curse of the interdict without some special indulgence or privilege be for ever damn and adjudge to eternal punishment as one that die out of the communion of the church put case then the interdict hold and continue for many year together alas how many million of poor soul be damn and go to hell for a other offence for what can or what may the faltlesse and innocent people do withal if the king will repudiate his wife and she yet live join himself in matrimony to a other the lord cardinal after Philip the 1. produce Philippus Augustus Examp. 12. who have renounce his wife Ingeberga daughter to the king of Denmark and marry with Agnes daughter to the duke of moravia be by pope innocent the three interdict himself and his whole kingdom but his lordship be not please to insert withal what be aver in the chronicle of saint Denis that pope 3. send forth two legate at once upon this errand Bochei pag. 320. who be come into to the assembly and general council of all the french prelate become like dumb dog that can not bark so as they can not bring the service which they have undertake to any good pass because they stand in a bodily fear of their own hide not long after the cardinal of Capua be in the like take for he dare not bring the realm within the limit of the interdict before he be get out of the limit of the kingdom the king herewith incense thrust all the prelate that have give consent unto these proceed out of their see confiscate their good etc. to the same effect be that which we read in math. Paris after the pope have give his majesty to understand by the cardinal of anagnia that his kingdom shall be interdict unless he will be reconcile to the king of England the king return the pope this answer that he be not in any sort afraid of the pope sentence for as much as it can not be ground upon any equity of the cause and add withal that it do no way appertain unto the church of Rome to sentence king especial the king of France and this be do say johannes register in court of parliament at Paris by the counsel of the french baron most notable be the example of Philip the fair and hit the bird in the right eye in the year 1032. the pope dispatch the archbishop of Narbona with mandate into France command the king to release the bishop of Apamia then detain in prison for contumelious word tend to the king defamation and speak to the king own head in very deed this pope have conceive a secret grudge and no light displeasure against king Philip before namely because the king have take upon he the collation of benefice and other ecclesiastical dignity upon which occasion the pope send letter to the king of this tenor and style fear God and keep his commandment we will have thou know that in spiritual and temporal cause thou be subject unto ourself that collate of benefice and prebend do not in any sort appertain to thy office and place that in case as keeper of the spiritualty thou have the custody of benefice and prebend in thy hand when they become void thou shall by sequestration reserve the fruit of the same to the use and benefit of the next incumbent and successor and in case thou have heretofore collate any we ordain the say collation to be mere void and so far as herein thou have proceed to the fact we revoke the say collation we hold they for heretic whosoever be not of this belief a legate come to Paris and bring these brave letter by some of the king faithful servant they be violent snatch and pull out of the legate hand by the earl of Artois they be cast into the fire the good king answer the pope and pay he in as good coin as he have send Philip by the grace of God king of the french to Boniface call and bear himself the sovereign bishop little greeting or none at all may thy exceed sottishness understand that in temporal cause we be not subject unto any mortal and earthly creature that collate of benefice and prebend by regal right appertain to our office and place that appropriate their fruit when they become void belong to ourself alone during their vacancy that all collation by we heretofore make or to be make hereafter shall stand in force that in the validity and virtue of the say collation we will ever courageous defend and maintain all incumbent and possessor of benefice and prebend so by we collate we hold they all for sot and senseless whosoever be not of this belief the pope incense herewith excommunicate the king but no man dare publish that censure or become bearer thereof the king notwithstanding the say proceed of the pope assemble his prelate baron and knight at Paris ask the whole assembly of who they hold their fee with all other the temporalty of the church they make answer with one voice that in the say matter they disclaim the pope and know none other lord beside his majesty mean while the pope work with Germany and the low country to stir they up against France but Philip send William of nogaret into Italy William by the direction and aid of Sciarra Columnensis take the pope at anagnia mount he upon a lean ill-favoured jade carry he prisoner to Rome where overcome with choler anguish and great indignation he take his last leave of the popedom and his life all this notwithstanding the king present after from the successor of Boniface receive very ample and gracious bull in which the memory of all the former passage and action be utter abolish Extravag witness the epistle of Clement 5. wherein this king be honour with praise for a pious and religious prince and his kingdom be restore to the former estate in that age the french nobility carry other manner of spirit than the modern and present nobility do I mean those by who the l. cardinal be applaud and assist in his oration yea in those former time the prelate of the realm stand better affect towards their king than the l. cardinal himself now stand who can find none other way to dally with and to shift off this pregnant example but by plain gloss that heresy and apostasy be no ground of that question or subject of that controversy wherein he not only condemn the pope as one that proceed against Philip without a just cause and good ground but likewise give the pope the lie who in his goodly letter but a little above recite have enroll Philip in the list of heretic he say moreover that indeed the knot of the question be touch the pope pretence in challenge to himself the temporal soveraingntie of France that be to say in qualify himself king of France but indeed and indeed no such matter to be find his whole pretence be the collate of benefice and to perch above the king to crow over his crown in temporal cause at which pretence his holiness yet aim still attribute and and challenge to himself plenary power to depose the King now if the l. cardinal shall yet proceed to cavil that Boniface 8. be take by the french for a usurper and no lawful pope but for one that creep into the papacy by fraud and simony he must be please to set down positive who be pope see that Boniface then sit not in the papal chair to conclude if he that creep and steal into the papacy by simony by canuase or labour of suffrage under hand or by bribery be not lawful pope I dare be bold to profess there will hardly be find two lawful pope in the three last age pope Benedict in the year 1408. be in choler with Charles 6. because Charles have bridle and curb the gainful exaction and extorsion of the pope court see the treatise of Charles du Moulin contra wherein he report a notable decree of the court under Charles 6. by which the realm of France have be exhaust of their treasure send a excommunicatorie bull into France against Charles the king and all his prince the university of Paris make request or motion that his bull may be mangle and pope Benedict himself by some call Petrus de Luna may be declare heretic schismatic theodoric and perturber of the peace in union Tract. 6. and the say bull be mangle and rend in piece according to the petition of the university by decree of court upon the 10. of june 1408. ten day after the court rise at eleven in the morning two bulbearer of the say excommuncaitorie censure undergo ignominious punishment upon the palace or great hall stair from thence be lead to the Lovure in such manner as they have be bring from thence before draw in two tumbrell clothe in coat of paint linen wear paper-mytres on their head be proclaim with sound of trumpet and every where disgrace with public derision so little reckon be make of the pope thunder canon in those day and what will they have do if the say bull have import sentence of deposition against king Charles the french church assemble at Tours in the year 1510. decree that Lewis 12 may with safe conscience contemn the abusive bull and unjust censure of pope Julius the 2 and by arm may withstand the pope usurpation in case he shall proceed to excommunicate or depose the King More by a council hold at Pisa this Lewis declare the pope to be fall from the popedom and coin crown with a stamp of this inscription I will destroy the name of Babylon to this the l. of perron make answer that all this be do by the french as acknowledge these jar to have spring not from the fountain of religion but from passion of state wherein he condemn pope julius for give so great scope unto his public censure as to serve his ambition and not rather to advance religion he secret teach we beside that when the pope undertake to depose the king of France than the french be to sit as judge concern the lawfulness or unlawfulness of the cause and in case they shall find the cause to be unlawful then to disannul his judgement and to scoff at his thunderbolt John Albret king of Navarre who realm be give by the foresay pope to Ferdinand king of Arragon be also wrap and entangle with strict band of deposition now if the french have be touch with no better feel of affection to their king than the subject of Navarre be to the Navarrois doubtless france have seek a new lord by virtue of the pope as the l. cardinal himself do acknowledge and confess unjust sentence but behold to make the say sentence against John Albret seem the less contrary to equity the l. cardinal pretend the pope donation be not indeed the principal cause pag. 5^ howsoever Ferdinand himself make it his pretence but his lor. give this for the principal cause that John Albret have quit his alliance make with condition that in case the king of Navarre shall infringe the say alliance and break the league than the kingdom of Navarre shall return to the crown of Arragon this condition between king never make and without all show of probability serve to none other purpose from the cardinal mouth but only to insinuate and work a perrswasion in his king that he have no right nor lawful pretension to the crown of Navarre and whatsoever he now hold in the say kingdom of Navarre be none of his own but by usurpation and unlawful possession thus his lordship french-born make himself a advocate for the spanish king against his own king and king of the french who shall be fain as he ought if this advocates plea may take place to draw his title and style of king of Navarre out of his royal title and to acknowledge that all the great endeavour of his predecessor to recover the say kingdom be dishonourable and unjust be it possible that in the very heart and head city of France a spirit and tongue so licentious can be brook what shall so great blasphemy as it be of the king freehold be pour forth in so honourable a assembly without punishment or fine what without any contradiction for the king right and on the king behalf I may perhaps confess the indignity may be the better bear and the pretence allege may pass for a poor excuse if it serve his purpose never so little for how do all this touch or come near the question in which the pope usurpation in the depose of king and the resolution of the french in resist this tyrannical practice be the proper issue of the cause both which point be never a whit more of the less consequence and importance howsoever Ferdinand in his own justification stand upon the foresay pretence thus much be confess and we ask no more pope julius take the kingdom from the one and give it unto the other the french thereupon resist the pope and declare he to be fall from the papacy this noble spirit and courage of the french in maintain the dignity and honour of their king crown breed those ancient custom which in the sequence of many age have be observe and keep in use this for one that no legate of the pope nor any of his rescript nor mandate pag. 26. be admit and receive in France without licence from the king and unless the legate impart his faculty to the king attorney general to be peruse and verify in court of parliament where they be to be tie by certain modification and restriction unto such point as be not derogatory from the king right from the liberty of the church and from the ordinance of the kingdom Bochellus when cardinal Balva contrary to this ancient form enter France in the year 1484. and there without leave of the king do execute the office and speed certain act of the pope legate the court upon motion make by the king attorney general decree a commission to be inform against he by two councillor of the say court and inhibit his further proceed to use any faculty or power of the pope legate upon pain of be proclaim rebel in the year 1561. johannes Tanquerellus bachelor in divinity by order of the court be condemn to make open confession that he have indiscreet and rash without consideration defend this proposition the pope be the vicar of Christ a monarch that have power both spiritual and secular and he may deprive prince which rebel against his commandment of their dignity which proposition howsoever he protest that he have propound the same only to be argue and not judicial to be determine in the affirmative Tanquerellus nevertheless be compel open to recant here the l. cardinal answer the history of Tanquerellus be from the matter because his proposition treat neither of heresy nor of infidelity but I answer the say proposition treat of both for as much as it make mention of disobedience to the pope for I suppose he will not deny that whosoever shall stand out in heresy contrary to the pope monitory proceed he shall show but poor and simple obedience to the pope moreover the case be clear by the former example that no pope will suffer his power to cast down king to be restrain unto the cause of heresy and infidelity in the heat of the last war raise by that holy-prophane league admonitory bull be send by pope Gregory 14. from Rome 1591. by these bull king Henry 4. as a heretic and relapse be declare incapable of the crown of France and his kingdom be expose to havoc and spoil the court of parliament be assemble at Tours the 5. of August decree the say admonitory bull to be cancel tear in piece and cast into a great fire by the hand of the public executioner the arrest itself or decree be of this tenor the court due ponder and approve the conclude and unanswearable reason of the king attorney general have declare and by these present do declare the admonitory bull give at Rome the 1. of March 1591. to be of no validity abusive seditious damnable full of impiety and imposture contrary to the holy decree right franchise and liberty of the french church do ordain the copy of the say bull seal with the seal of Marsilius and sign Septilius lamprius to be rend in piece by the public executioner and by he to be burn in a great fire to be make for such purpose before the great gate of the common hall or palace etc. then even then the l. of perron be firm for the better part and stand for his king against Gregory the pope notwithstanding the crime of heresy pretend against Henry his Lord all the former example by we allege be draw out of the time after school of divinity be establish in France for I think good to bound myself within those dole and limit of time which the l. card. himself have set who go not sincere to work and in good earnest where he tell we there be three instance as if we have no more object against papal power to remove king out of their chair of state by name the example of Philip the fair pag. 47. of Lewis 12 and of Tanquerellus for in very truth all the former example by we produce be no less pregnant and evident howsoever the l. cardinal have be please to conceal they all for fear of hurt his cause nay France even in the day of her sore servitude be never unfurnished of great divine by who this usurp pow-of the pope over the temporalty and crown of king have be utter mislike and condemn Robert earl of Flanders be command by pope Paschall 2. to persecute with fire and sword the clergy of liege who then adhere and stand to the cause of the emperor Henry 4. who the pope have ignominious depose Robert by the pope order and command be to handle the clergy of liege in like sort as before he have serve the clergy of Cambray who by the say earl have be cruel strip both of good and life the pope promise the say earl and his army pardon of their sin for the say execution the clergy of liege address answer to the pope at large they cry out upon the church of Rome and call she Babylon tell the pope home that God have command to give unto Cesar that which be Caesar that every soul must be subject unto the superior power that no man be exempt out of this precept and that every oath of allegiance be to be keep inviolable yea that hereof they themselves be not ignorant in as much as they by a new schism and new tradition make a separation and rent of the priesthood from the kingdom do promise to absolve of perjury such as have perfidious forswear themselves against their King and whereas by way of despite and in opprobrious manner they be excommunicate by the pope they give his holiness to understand that David heart have utter a good matter but Paschals heart have spew up sordid and rail word like old bawd and spinster or webster of linen when they scold and brawl one with a other final they reject his papal excommunication as a sentence give without discretion this be the voice and free speech of that clergy in the life time of their noble emperor but after he be thrust out of the empire by the rebellion of his own son instigate and stir up thereunto by the pope persuasion and practice and be bring unto a miserable death it be no matter of wonder that for the safeguard of their life the say clergy be drive to sue unto the pope for their pardon Hildebert bishop of upon the river of Sartre live under the reign of king Philip the first affirm in his epistle 40. and 75. that king be to be admonish and instruct tom. 3. rather than punish to be deal with by counsel rather than by command by doctrine and instruction rather than by correction for no such sword belong to the church because the sword of the church be ecclesiastical discipline D^ consider ib. 1. cap. 6. and nothing else Bernard write to pope Eugenius after this manner whosoever they be that be of this mind and opinion shall never be able to make proof that any one of the apostle do ever sit in quality of judge or divider of land I read where they have stand to be judge but never where they sit down to give judgement again your authority stretch unto crime not unto possession because you have receive the key of the kingdom of heaven not in regard of possession but of crime to keep all that plead by covin or collusion and not lawful possessor out of the heavenly kingdom a little after these base thing of the earth be judge by the king and prince of this world wherefore do you thrust your sickle into a other harvest wherefore do you incraach and intrude upon a other limit elsewhere the apostle be direct forbid to make themselves lord and ruler lib. 2. cap. 6. go thou then and be a lord usurp apostleship or be a apostle usurp lordship if thou needs will have both doubtless thou shall have neither johannes Maior doctor of Paris Dist 24. quaest. 3. the sovereign bishop have no temporal authority over king the reason because it follow the contrary be once grant that king be the pope vassal now let other man judge whether he that have power to dipossesse king of all their temporalty have not likewise authority over their temporalty the same author Comment. in l. 4. sent. the pope have no manner of title over the french or spanish king in temporal matter Dist 24. fol. 214. where it be further add that pope innocent 3. have be please to testify that king of France in temporal cause do acknowledge no superior for so the pope excuse himself to a certain lord of montpellier who in stead of sue to the king have petition to the pope for a dispensation for his bastard but perhaps as be speak it will be allege out of the gloss that he acknowledge no superior by fact and yet ought by right but I tell you the gloss be a aurelian gloss which mar the text among other argument mayor bring this for one this opinion minister matter unto pope to take away a other empire by force and violence which the pope shall never bring to pass as we read of Boniface 8. against Philip the fair say beside that from hence proceed war in time of which many outrageous mischief be do and that Gerson call they egregious flatterer by who such opinion be maintain in the same place Maior deny that Childeric be depose by pope Zacharie the word he depose say mayor be not so to be understand as it be take at the first blush or sight but he depose be thus expound in the gloss he give his consent unto those by who he be depose John of Paris regia and Papali cap. 10. be it grant that Christ be arm with temporal power yet he commit no such power to Peter a little after the power of king be the high power upon earth in temporal cause it have no superior power above itself no more than the pope have in spiritual matter this author say indeed the pope have power to excommunicate the king but he speak not of any power in the pope to put down the king from his regal dignity and authority he only say when a prince be once excommunicate he may accidental or by occasion be depose because his precedent excommunication incite the people to disarm he of all secular dignity and power the same John on the other side hold opinion that in the emperor there be invest a power to depose the pope in case the pope shall abuse his power Almainus doctor of the sorbonic school Almain Eccl. and it be essential in the laye-power to inflict civil punishment Quest. 2. cap. 8. as death banishment and privation or loss of good but according to divine institution the power ecclesiastical can lay no such punishment upon delinquent and Eccl. 5. ult. nay more not lay in prison as to some doctor it seem probable but stretch and reach only to spiritual punishment as namely to excommunication all other punishment inflict by the spiritual power be mere by the law positive if then ecclesiastical power by God law have no authority to deprive any private man of his good how dare the pope and his flatterer build their power to deprive king of their sceptre upon the word of God the same author in a other place be it grant that Constantine have power to give the empire unto the pope quaest 1. eccles and laic. c. 12. and 14. yet be it not hereupon to be infer that pope have authority over the kingdom of France because that kingdom be never subject unto Constantine for the king of France never have any superior in temporal matter a little after it be not in any place to be find that God have give the pope power to make and unmake temporal king he maintain elsewhere quaest 2. c. 8. and that Zacharie do not depose Childeric but only consent to his depose and so depose he not as by authority in the same book take up the word of Occam who he style the doctor Quae. 3. c. 2. the emperor be the pope lord in thing temporal quaest 1 1. c^^ sacerd and the pope call he lord as it be witness in the body of the Text. the lord cardinal have dissemble and conceal these word of doctor Almainus with many like place and have be please to allege Almainus recite occam authority in stead of quote Almainus himself in those passage where he speak as out of his own opinion and in his own word a notable piece of sly and cunning conveyance for what heresy may not be father and fasten upon s. Augustine or s. Hierome if they shall be deem to approve all the passage which they allege out of other author and that be the reason wherefore the l. cardinal do not allege his testimony whole and perfect as they be couch in their proper text but clip and curtail thus he deal even in the first passage or testimony of Almainus he bring it in mangle and pare he hide and conceal the word add by Almainus to contradict and cross the word go before for Almainus make this addition and supply howsoever some other doctor do stand for the negative and teach the pope have power only to declare that king and prince be to be depose and so much appear by this reason because this ample and sovereign power of the pope may give he occasion to be puff up with great pride and the same fullness of power may prove extreme hurtful to the subject etc. the same Almainus bring in occam opinion in express term decide the question quaest 2. Eccl. and laic cap. 12. and there join his own opinion with occam the doctor opinion say Almainus do simple carry the most probability that a pope have no power neither by excommunication nor by any other mean to dedepose a prince from his imperial and royal dignity in cap. 9 10 and 11. and a little before have maintain the greek empire be never transport by the pope to the german and that when the pope crown the emperor he do not give he the empire no more than the archbishop of Reims when he crown the king of France do give he the kingdom he draw this conclusion according to occam opinion I deny that a emperor be bind by oath to promise the pope allegiance on the other side if the pope hold any temporal possession he be bind to swear allegiance unto the emperor and to pay he tribute the say Occam allege by Almainus do further aver that justinian be acknowledge by the pope for his superior in temporal cause for as much as diverse law which the pope be bind to keep and observe be enact by justinian as by name the law of prescription for a hundred year which law stand yet in force against the bishop of Rome and to the end that all man may clear see how great distance there be between occam opinion and the l. cardinal who towards the end of his oration exhort his hearer at no hand to dissent from the pope take you here a view of occam own word as they be allege by Almainus quest ^ cap. 14. the doctor assoyle the argument of pope jnnocent by which the pope will prove out of these word of Christ whatsoever thou shall bind etc. that fullness of power in temporal matter belong to the sovereign bishop for innocent say whatsoever except nothing but Occam assoyle innocent authority as not only false but also heretical and say withal that many thing be speak by jnnocent which by his leave savour and smell of heresy etc. the l. cardinal with less fidelity allege two place out of Thomas his sum pag. 40. the first in the second of his second Quest. 10. Art. 10. in the body of the article in which place let it be narrow examine Thomas will easy be find to speak not of the subjection of believe subject under infidel king as the lord cardinal pretend but of believe servant that live under master whether jew or infidel as when a jew keep servant which profess jesus Christ or as when some of the faithful keep in Caesar house who be not consider by Thomas as they be subject of the empire but as they be servant of the family the other place be take out of Quest. 11. and 2. art. in the body of the article where no such matter as the l. cardinal allege can be find with like fidelity he take Gerson in hand pag. 44. who indeed in his book of ecclesiastical power and 12. consider do affirm when the abuse of secular power redound to manifest impugn of the faith and blaspheme of the creator then shall it not be amiss to have recourse unto the last branch of this 12. consider where in such case as aforesaid a certain regitive directive regulative and ordinative authority be commit to the ecclesiastical power his very word which make no mention at all of depose or of any compulsive power over sovereign prince for that form of rule and government whereof Gerson speak be exercise by ecclesiastical censure and excommunication not by loss of good of kingdom or of empire this place than be wrest by the l. cardinal to a contrary sense neither shall his lordship have omit that Gerson in the question of king subjection in temporal matter or of the dependence of their crown upon the pope power except always the king of France witness that which Gerson a little before the place allege by the cardinal have plain affirm now since Peter time say Gerson all imperial regal and secular power be not immediate to draw virtue and strength from the sovereign bishop as in this manner the most Christian king of France have no superior nor acknowledge any such upon the face of the earth now here need no great sharpness of wit for the search out of this deep mystery that if the pope have power to give or take away crown for any cause or any pretend occasion whatsoever the crown of France must needs depend upon the pope but for as much as we be now hit in with Gerson pag. 108. 109. 119. where the card. take char. 7. for charl. 6. we will examine the l. cardinal allegation towards the end of his oration take out of Gersons famous oration make before Charles 6. for the university of Paris where he bring in Gerson to affirm that kill a tyrant be a sacrifice acceptable to God but Gerson let it be diligent note there speak not in his own person he there bring in sedition speak the word of which word utter by sedition and other like speech you shall now hear what judgement Gerson himself have give when sedition have speak with such a furious voice I turn away my face as if I have be smite with death to show that I be not able to endure her madness any long and indeed when dissimulation on the one side and sedition on the other have suggest the device of two contrary extreme he bring forth discretion as a judge keep the mean between both extreme and utter those word which the l. cardinal allege against himself if the head say Gerson or some other member of the civil body shall grow to so desperate a pass that it will gulp and swallow down the deadly poison of tyranny every member in his place with all power possible for he to raise by expedient mean and such as may prevent a great inconvenience shall set himself against so mad a purpose and so deadly practice for if the head be grieve with some light pain it be not fit for the hand to smite the head no that be but a foolish and a mad part nor be the hand forthwith to chop off or separate the head from the body but rather to cure the head with good speech and other mean like a skilful and wise physician yea nothing will be more cruel or more void of reason then to seek to stop the strong and violent stream of tyranny by sedition these word i think do make very strong and express against butcher even of tyrannical king and whereas a little after the say passage he teach to expel tyranny he have not a word of expel the tyrant but only of break and shake off the yoke of tyranny yet for all that he will not have the remedy for the repress of tyranny to be fetch from the pope who presume to degrade king but from philosopher lawyer divine and personage of good conversation it appear now by all that have be say before that whereas Gerson in the 7 considerate against flatterer do affirm whensoever the prince do manifest pursue and prosecute his natural subject and show himself obstinate bend with notorious injustice to vex they of set purpose and with full consent so far as to the fact then this rule and law of nature do take place it be lawful to resist and repel force by force and that sentence of Seneca there be no sacrifice more acceptable to God than a tyrant offer in sacrifice the word do take place be so to be understand as he speak in a other passage to wit with or among seditious person or else the word do take place do only signify be put in practice and so Gerson there speak not as out of his own judgement his lordship also shall not have balk and leave out Sigebertus who with more reason may have pass for french than Thomas and Occam who he put upon we for French Sigebertus in his chronicle upon the year 1088. speak of the emperor depose by the pope have word of this tenor this heresy be not creep out of the shell in those day that his priest who have say to the king and make a hypocrite to rule for the sin of the people shall teach the people they owe no subjection unto wicked king nor any allegiance notwithstanding they have take the oath of allegiance now after the l. card. have course in this manner through the history of the last age which in case they all make for his purpose do lack the weight of authority in stead of search the will of God in the sacred oracle of his word and stand upon example of the ancient church at last leave the troop of his own allegation he betake himself to the sharpen and rebate of the point of his adversary weapon for the purpose he bring in his adversary pag. 52. and sequentib the champion of king crown and make they to speak out of his own mouth for his l. say it will be object after this manner it may come to pass that pope either carry with passion or mislead by sinister information may without just cause fasten upon king the imputation of heresy or apostasy then for king-deposers he frame this answer that by heresy they understand notorious heresy and former condemn by sentence of the church moreover in case the pope have err in the fact it be the clergy part adhere to their king to make remonstrance unto the pope and to require the cause may be refer to the judgement of a full council the french church then and there be present now in this answer aduer Barclaium the l. cardinal be of a other mind than Bellarmine his brother cardinal for he go thus far that a prince condemn by unjust sentence of the pope ought nevertheless to quit his kingdom and that his pastor unjust sentence shall not redound to his detriment provide that he give way to the say sentence and show himself not refractory but stay the time in patience until the holy father shall renounce his error and revoke his foresay unjust sentence in which case these two material point be to be presuppose the one that he who now have seize the kingdom of the prince displace will forthwith if the pope shall solicit and intercede return the kingdom to the hand of the late possessor the other that in the interim the prince unjust depose shall not need to fear the bloody murderer merciless blade and weapon but on the other side the pope power of so large a size as Bellarmine have shape be no whit please to the l. cardinal eye for in case the king shall be unjust depose by the pope not well inform he be not of the mind the kingdom shall stoop to the pope behest but will rather have the kingdom to deal by remonstrance and to refer the cause unto the council wherein he make the council to be of more absolute and supreme authority than the pope a strain to which the holy father will never lend his ear and yet doubtless the council require in this case must be universal wherein the french for so much as they stand firm for their king and his cause can be no judge and in that regard the l. cardinal require only the presence of the french church who see not here into what pickle the french cause be bring by this mean the bishop of Italy forsooth of Spain of Sicily of Germany the subject of sovereign many time at profess or privy enmity with France shall have the cause compromit and refer to their judgement whether the kingdom of France shall drive out her king and shall kindle the flame of seditious trouble in the very heart and bowel of the realm but be it not possible that a king may lack the love of his own subject and they take the vantage of that occasion may put he to his trump in his own kingdom be it not possible that calumniation whereby a credulous pope have be seduce may in like manner deceive some great part of a credulous people be it not possible that one part of the people may cleave to the pope faction a other may hold and stand out for the king rightful cause and civil war may be kindle by the spleen of these two side be it not possible that his holiness will not rest in the remonstrance of the french and will yet further pursue his cause and whereas now a day a general council can be hold except it be call and assemble by the pope authority be it credible the pope will take order for the convocation of a council by who he shall be judge and how can the pope be precedent in a council where himself be the party implead and to who the sift of his own sentence be refer as it be to committee to examine whether it be denounce according to law or against justice but in the mean time while all these remonstrance and address of the council be on foot behold the royal majesty of the king hang as it be by loose gimmal and must stay the judgement of the council to who it be refer well what if the council shall happen to be two or three year in assemble and to continue or hold eighteen year like the council of Trent shall not poor France I beseech you be reduce to a very bad plight shall she not be in a very wise and warm take to be short his lordship whole speech for the untie of this knot not only surmount possibility but be stuff with ridiculous toy this I make manifest by his addition in the same passage if the pope deceive in fact shall rash and unjust declare the king to be a heretic then the pope declaration shall not be second with actual deposition unless the realm shall consent unto the king depose what need any man to be instruct in this doctrine who do not know that a king so long as he be uphold and maintain in his kingdom by his people can actual and effectual be depose from his throne he that speak such language and phrase in effect say and say no more than this a king be never deprive of his crown so long as he can keep his crown on his head a king be never turn and strip naked so long as he can keep his clothes on his back a king be never depose so long as he can make the strong party and side against his enemy in brief a king be king and shall still remain king so long as he can hold the possession of his kingdom and sit fast in his chair of estate howbeit let we here by the way take notice of these word utter by his lordship that for the depose of a king the consent of the people must be obtain for by these word the people be exalt above the king and be make the judge of the king depose but here be yet a great matter can. Papa Dist 40. for that pope may err in faith it be acknowledge by pope themselves for some of they have condemn pope honorius for a Monothelite s. Hierome and s. hilarius and s. athanasius do testify that pope liberius start aside and subscribe to arianism pope John 23. be condemn in the council of Constance for maintain there be neither hell nor heaven diverse other pope have be taint with error in faith if therefore any pope heretical in himself shall depose a orthodox king for heresy can it be imagine that he which boast himself to bear all divine and human law in the privy coffer or casket of his breast will stoop to the remonstrance of the french and veil to the reason which they shall propound though never so justifiable and of never so great validity and how can he that may be infect with damnable heresy when himself be not always free from heresy be a judge of heresy in a king in this question some be of opinion that as a man the pope may fall into error but not as pope very good I demand then upon the matter wherefore the pope do not instruct and reform the man or wherefore the man do not require the pope instruction but whether a king be depose by that man the pope or by that pope the man be it not all one be he not depose other affirm the pope may err in a question of the fact but not in a question of the right a egregious gullery and imposture for if he may be ignorant whether jesus Christ die for our sin doubtless he may also be to seek whether we shall repose all our trust and assure confidence in the death of Christ consider with i the prophet of old they be all inspire and teach of God to admonish and reprove the king of judah and Israel they neither err in matter of fact nor in point of right they be as far from be blind and fetch over by deceitful calumniation as from be seduce by the paint show of corrupt and false doctrine as they never tread awry in matter of faith so they never whet the edge of their tongue or style against the faultless have it not be a trim device in their time to say that as Isaiah and as Daniel they may have sink into heresy but not as prophet for doubtless in this case that Isaiah will have take counsel of the prophet which be himself to be short if king be only so long to be take for king until they shall be declare heretic and shall be depose by the pope they continual stand in extreme danger to undergo a very heavy and unjust sentence their safe way be to know nothing and to believe by proxy lest if they shall happen to talk of God or to think of religion they shall be draw for heretic into the pope inquisition all the example hitherto produce by the l. cardinal on a row be of a latter date they lack weight be draw from the time of bondage and make the pope themselves witness in their own cause they descant not upon the point of deposition but only strike out and sound the note of excommunication and interdiction which make nothing at all to the music of the question and therefore he tell we in kindness as I take it more oftentimes then once or twice that he speak only of the fact as one that do acknowledge himself to be out of the right he relate thing do but never what shall be do which as the judicious know be to teach nothing the second jnconuenience examine the second inconvenience like to grow pag. 86. as the lord cardinal seem to be half afraid if the article of the three estate may have pass with approbation be couch in these word lay-man shall by authority be strengthen with power to judge in matter of religion as also to determine the doctrine comprise in the say article to have requisite conformity with God word yea they shall have it in their hand to compel ecclesiastic by necessity to swear preach and teach the opinion of the one side as also by sermon and public writing to impugn the other this inconvenience he aggravate with swell word and break out into these vehement exclamation o reproach o scandal o gate set open to a world of heresy he therefore labour both by reason and by authority of holy scripture to make such usurp power of laic a foul shameful and odious practice in the whole his lordship toil himself in vain and make supposition of castle in the air for in prefer this article the three estate have bear themselves not as judge or umpire but altogether as petitioner request the say article may be receive into the number of the parliament book to be present unto the king and his counsel unto who in all humility they refer the judgement of the say article conceive all good hope the clergy and nobility will be please to join for the furtherance of their humble petition they be not so ignorant of state-matter or so unmindful of their own place and charge to bear themselves in hand that a petition put up and prefer by the three estate can carry the force of a law or statute so long as the other two order withstand the same and so long as the king himself hold back his royal consent beside the say article be not propound as a point of religious doctrine but for ever after to remain and continue a fundamental law of the commonwealth and state itself the due care whereof be put into their hand and commit to their trust if the king have ratify the say article with royal consent and have command the clergy to put in execution the content thereof it have be their duty to see the king will and pleasure fulfil as they be subject bind to give he aid in all thing which may any way serve to procure the safety of his life and the tranquillity of his kingdom which if the clergy have perform to the uttermost of their power they have not show obedience as underling unto the three estate but unto the king alone by who such command have be impose upon suggestion of his faithful subject make the more watchful by the negligence of the clergy who they perceive to be link with strict band unto the pope than they be unto their King here then the cardinal fight with mere shadow and move a doubt whereof his adversary have not so much as once think in a dream but yet according to his great dexterity and nimbleness of spirit by this device he cunning take upon he to give the king a lesson with more liberty make semblance to direct his mask oration to the deputy of the people when he shoot in effect and prick at his king the prince also and lord of his counsel who the cardinal comprise under the name of laic who judgement it be not unlikely be apprehend much better by the clergy than the judgement of the three estate now these be the man who he term intruder into other man charge and such as open a gate for I wot not how many legion of heresy to rush into the church for if it be proper to the clergy and their head to judge in this cause of the right of king then the king himself his prince and nobility be debar and wipe of all judgement in the same cause no less than the representative body of the people well then pag. 61. the l cardinal shower down like hail sundry place and testimony of scripture where the people be command to have their pastor in singular love and to bear they all respect of due observance be it so yet be the say passage of scripture no bar to the people for their vigilant circumspection to preserve the life and crown of their prince against all the wicked enterprise of man stir up by the clergy who have their head out of the kingdom and hold themselves to be none of the king subject a thing never speak by the sacrifice priest and prelate mention in the passage allege by the lord cardinal he likewise produce two christian emperor pag. 62. Constantine and Valentinian by name the first refuse to meddle with judgement in episcopal cause the other forbear to judge of subtle question in divinity with protestation that he will never be so curious to dive into the stream or sound the bottom of so deep matter but who do not know that work and provide for the king indemnity and safety be neither episcopal cause nor matter of curious and subtle inquisition the same answer meet with all the rest of the place produce by the l. cardinal out of the father and that one for example out of Gregory nazianzenus orat. be not cite by the cardinal with fair deal for Gregory do not board the emperor himself but his deputy or l. precedent on this manner (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) for we also be in authority and place of a ruler we have command aswell as yourself whereas the l. cardinal with foul play turn the place in these term we also be emperor which word can bear no such interpretation as well because he to who the bishop then speak be not of imperial dignity as also because if the bishop himself a bishop of so small a city as Nazianzum have qualify himself emperor he shall have pass all the bound of modesty and have show himself arrogant above measure for as touch subjection due to christian emperor he free acknowledge a little before (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) that himself and his people be subject unto the superior power yea bind to pay they tribute the history of the same Gregory life do testify that he be draw by the arrian before the consul judgement seat and from thence return acquit without either stripe or any other kind of contumelious entreaty and use yet now at last up start a prelate who dare make this good father vaunt himself to be a emperor it be willing grant that emperor never challenge never arrogate to be sovereign judge in controversy of doctrine and faith nevertheless it be clear than the sun light at high noon that for moderation at synod for determination and order establish in council and for the discipline of the church they have make a good and a full use of their imperial authority the 1. council hold at Constantinople bear this title or inscription canon graeco the dedication of the holy synod to the most religious emperor Theodosius the great to who will and pleasure they have submit these canon by they address and establish in council and there they also beseech the emperor to confirm and approve the say canon the like have be do by the council of Trullo by who the canon of the five and six council be put forth and publish this be not do because emperor take upon they to be infallible judge of doctrine but only that emperor may see and judge whether bishop who feel the prick of ambition as other man do do propound nothing in their convocation and consultation but most of all in their determination to undermine the emperor authority to disturb the tranquillity of the commonwealth and to cross the determination of precedent council now to take the cognizance of such matter out of the king hand or power what be it but even to transform the king into a stand image to wring and wrest he out of all care of himself and his kingly charge yea to bring he down to this base condition to become only a executioner and which I scorn to speak the unhappy hangman of the clergy will without any further cognizance not so much as of matter which most near touch himself and his royal estate I grant it be for divinity school to judge how far the power of the key do stretch I grant again that Clerics both may and aught also to display the colour and ensign of their censure against prince who violate their public and solemn oath do raise and make open war against jesus Christ I grant yet again that in this case they need not admit laic to be of their counsel nor allow they any scope or liberty of judgement yet all this make no bar to Clerics for extend the power of their key many time a whole degree further than they ought and when they be please to make use of their say power to deprive the people of their good or the prince of his crown all this do not hinder prince or people from take care for the preservation of their own right and estate nor from require Clerics to show their card and produce their chart and to make demonstration by scripture that such power as they assume and challenge be give they from God for to leave the pope absolute judge in the same cause wherein he be a party and which be the strong rampire and bulwark yea the most glorious and eminent point of his domination to arm he with power to unhorse king out of their feat what be it else but even to draw they into a state of despair for every win the day or prevail in their honourable and rightful cause it be moreover grant if a king shall command any thing direct contrary to God word and tend to the subvert of the church that Clerics in this case ought not only to dispense with subject for their obedience but also express to forbid their obedience for it be always better to obey God then man howbeit in all other matter whereby the glory and majesty of God be not impeach or impair it be the duty of Clerics to ply the people with wholesome exhortation to constant obedience and to avert by earnest dissuasion the say people from tumultuous revolt and seditious insurrection this practice under the pagan emperor be hold and follow by the ancient christian by who godly zeal and patience in bear the yoke the church in time past grow and flourish in her happy and plentiful increase far great than popery shall ever purchase and attain unto by all her cunning device and sleight as namely by degrade of king by interdict of kingdom by apposted murder and by diabolical train of gunne-powder-mine the place of scripture allege in order by the cardinal pag. 66. in favour of those that stand for the pope claim of power and authority to depose king be cite with no more sincerity than the former they allege these be his word that Samuel depose king Saul or declare he to be depose because he have violate the law of the jew religion his lordship avouch elsewhere that Saul be depose because he have seek profane to usurp the holy priesthood both false and contrary to the tenor of truth in the sacred history for Saul be never depose according to the sense of the word I mean depose in the present question to wit as depose be take for despoil the king of his royal dignity and reduce the king to the condition of a private person but Saul hold the title of king and continue in possession of his kingdom even to his die day yea 1. sam. 23. 20. and 24. 15. and 2. the scripture style he king even to the periodical and last day of his life by the testimony of David himself sam. 2. 5. who both by God promise and by precedent unction be then heir apparent as it be to the crown in a manner then ready to gird and adorn the temple of his head for if Samuel by God commandment have then actual remove Saul from his throne doubtless the whole church of Israel have commit a gross error in take and honour Saul for their king after such deposition doubtless the prophet Samuel himself make know the lord ordinance unto the people will have enjoin they by strict prohibition to call he no long the king of Israel doubtless David will never have hold his hand from the throat of Saul for this respect and consideration 1. sam. 26. 11. because he be the lord anoint for if Saul have lose his kingly authority from that instant when Samuel give he knowledge of his rejection then David lest otherwise the body of the kingdom shall want a royal head be to begin his reign and to bear the royal sceptre in the very same instant which be to charge the holy scripture with untruth in as much as the sacred history begin the computation of the year of David reign from the day of saul death true it be that in the 2. sam. cap. 15. Saul be denounce by god own sentence a man reject and as it be excommunicate out of the kingdom that he shall not rule and reign any long as king over Israel nevertheless the say sentence be not put in execution before the day when God execute upon Saul a exemplary judgement do strike he with death from whence it be manifest and clear that when David be anoint king by Samuel 1. sam. 16. 13. that action be only a promise and a testimony of the choice which God have make of David for succession immediate after Saul and not a present establishment investment or instalment of David in the kingdom we read the like in 1. King cap. 19 where God command Elias the prophet to anoint Hasael king of Syria for can any man be so blind and ignorant in the sacred history to believe the prophet of Israel establish or sacred the king of Syria for this cause 2. sam. 2. 4 when David be actual establish in the kingdom he be anoint the second time in the next place he bring in the pope champion use these word 1. K^^ 12. rehoboam be depose by Ahiah the prophet from his royal right over the ten tribe of Israel because his father Solomon have play the in fall from the law of God this I say also be more than the truth of the sacred history do afford for Ahiah never speak to rehoboam for aught we read nor bring unto he any message from the Lord as for the passage quote by the l. cardinal out of reg. 3. chap. 11. it have not reference to the time of rehoboams reign but rather indeed to Salomon time nor do it carry the face of a iudicatory sentence for the king depose but rather of a prophetical prediction for how can rehoboam before he be make king be deprive of the kingdom last of all but worst of all to allege this passage for a example of a just sentence in matter of depose a king be to approve the disloyal treachery of a servant against his master and the rebellion of brand in scripture with a mark of perpetual infamy for his wickedness and impiety he go on with a other example of no more truth 1. kin. 19 king Achab be depose by Elias the prophet because he embrace false religion and worship false god false too like the former king Achab lose his crown and his life both together the scripture that speak not according to man fancy but according to the truth do extend and number the year of achabs reign to the time of his death prediction of a king ruin be no sentence of deposition Elias never give the subject of Achab absolution from their oath of obedience never give they the least inkling of any such absolution never set up or place any other king in achabs throne that of the l. cardinal a little after pag. 68 be no less untrue that king Vzziah be drive from the conversation of the people by Azarias the priest and thereby the administration of his kingdom be leave no long in his power not so 2. Chro. 26. for when God have smite Vzziah with leprosy in his forehead he withdraw himself or go out into a house apart for fear of infect such as be whole by his contagious disease the high priest smite he not with any sentence of deposition or denounce he suspend from the administration of his kingdom no the day of his reign be number in scripture to the day of his death and whereas the priest according to the law in the 13. of levit. judge the king to be unclean he give sentence against he not as against a criminal person and thereby within the compass of deposition but as against a disease body for the law inflict punishment not upon disease but upon crime hereupon whereas it be record by josephus in his antiquity antiq. l. 9 cap. 11. that Vzziah lead a private and in a manner a solitary life the say author do not mean that Vzziah be depose but only that he disburden himself of care to manage the public affair the example of Mattathias pag. 69. by who the jew be stir up to rebel against Antiochus be no better worth for in that example we find no sentence of deposition but only a hearten and commotion of a people then grievous afflict and oppress he that make himself the ringleader of conspiracy against a king do not forthwith assume the person or take up the office and charge of a judge in form of law and juridical to deprive a king of his regal right and royal prerogative Mattathias be chief of that conspiracy not in quality of priest but of chieftain or leader in war and a man the best qualify of all the people thing act by the sudden violence of the base vulgar must not stand for law nor yet for proof and argument of ordinary power such as the pope challenge to himself and appropriate to his triple-crowne these be our solid answer pag. 67. we disclaim the light armour which the l. cardinal be please to furnish we withal forsooth to recreate himself in rebate the point of such weapon as he have vouchsafe to put into our hand now it will be worth our labour to beat by his thrust fetch from the ordinary mission of the new testament from leprosy stone and lock of wool a leech no doubt of admirable skill one that for subject the crown of king unto the pope be able to extract argument out of stone yea out of the leprosy and the dry scab only forsooth because heresy be a kind of leprosy and a heretic have some affinity with a leper but may not his be as fit apply to any contagious and inveterate vice of the mind beside heresy pag. 66. his warning-peice therefore be discharge to purpose whereby he notify that he pretend to handle nothing with resolution for indeed upon so weak argument a resolution be but ill-favoured and weak ground his bulwark thus beat down pag. 69. let we now view the strength of our own first he make we to fortify on this manner they that be for the negative do allege the authority of s. Paul let every soul be subject unto the high power for whosoever resist the power resist the ordinance of God and likewise that of s. Peter submit yourselves whether it be unto the king as unto the superior or unto governor etc. upon these passage and the like they infer that obedience be due to king by the law of God and not dispensable by any spiritual or temporal authority thus he bring we in with our first weapon but here the very chief sinew and strength of our argument he do witting balk and of purpose conceal to wit that all the emperor of who the say holy apostle have make any mention in their divine epistle be profess enemy to Christ pagan infidel fearful and bloody tyrant to who notwithstanding every soul and therefore the bishop of Rome for one be command to submit himself and to profess subjection thus much Chrysostome have express teach in his hom. 23. upon the epistle to the roman the apostle give this commandment unto all even to priest also and cloister monk not only to secular be thou a apostle a evangelist a prophet etc. beside it be here worthy to be note that howsoever the apostle rule be general and therefore bind all the faithful in equal band yet be it particular direct and of purpose address to the church of Rome by s. Paul as by one who in the spirit of a apostle do foresee that rebellion against prince be to rise and spring from the city of Rome now in case the head of that church by warrant of any privilege contain in the most holy register of God holy word be exempt from the bind power of this general precept or rule do it not become his lordship to show by the book that it be a book case and to lay it forth before that honourable assembly who no doubt expect and wait to hear when it may fall from his learned lip but in stead of any such authentical and canonical confirmation he fly to a sleight shift and with a cavil be bold to affirm the foundation lay by those of our side do no way touch the knot of the controversy let we hear he speak it be not in controversy whether obedience be due to king by God law so long as they be king or acknowledge for king but our point controvert be whether by God law it be require that he who have be once recognize and receive for king by the body of estate can at any time be take and repute as no king that be to say can do no manner of act whereby he may lose his right and so cease to be salute King this answer of the l. cardinal be the rare device evasion and start hole of the jesuit in who ear of delicate and tender touch king-killing sound very harsh but forsooth to un-king a king first and then to give he the stab that be a point of just and true descant for to kill a king once un-kinged by deposition be not kill of a King for the present I have one of that jesuitical order in prison who have face enough to speak this language of ashdod and to maintain this doctrine of the jesuit college the l. cardinal harp upon the same string he can like subjection and obedience to the king while he sit king but his holiness must have all power and give order withal to hoist he out of his royal seat I therefore now answer that in very deed the former passage of s. Paul and s. Peter shall come nothing near the question if the state of the question be such as he bring it make and forge in his own shop but certes the state of the question be not whether a king may do some act by reason whereof he may fall from his right or may not any long be acknowledge for King for all our contention be concern the pope power to un-authorize prince whereas in the question frame and fit by the l. card. not a word of the pope for be it grant and agree on both side that a king by election may fall from his kingdom yet still the knot of the question will hold whether he can be dispossess of his regal authority by any power in the pope and whether the pope have such fullness of power to strip a king of those royal robe right and revenue of the crown which be never give he by the pope as also by what authority of holy scripture the pope be able to bear out himself in this power and to make it good but here the l. cardinal stout say in his own defence by way of rejoinder pag. 71. as one text have let every soul be subject unto the high power in like manner a other text have obey your prelate and be subject unto your pastor for they watch over your soul as man that shall give a account for your soul this reason be void of reason and make against himself for may not prelate be obey and honour without king be depose if prelate preach the doctrine of the gospel will they in the pulpit stir up subject to rebel against king moreover whereas the universal church in these day be divide into so many discrepant part that now prelate neither do nor can draw all one way be it not exceed hard keep our obedience towards God to honour they all at once with due obedience nay be not here offer unto i a dart out of the l. cardinal armoury to cast at himself for as God charge all man with obedience to king and yet from that commandment of God the lord cardinal will not have it infer that king have power to degrade ecclesiastical prelate even so God give charge to obey prelate yet do it not follow from hence that prelate have power to depose king these two degree of obedience agree well together and be each of they bound with peculiar and proper limit but for so much as in this point we have on our side the whole ancient church which albeit she live and groan for many age together under heathen emperor heretic and persecuter do never so much as whisper a word about rebel and fall from their sovereign lord and be never by any mortal creature free from the oath of allegiance to the emperor the cardinal be not unwilling to grant that ancient christian in those time be bind to perform such fidelity and allegiance for as much as the church the cardinal for shame dare not say the pope then have not absolve they of their oath no doubt a pleasant dream or a merry conceit rather to imagine the bishop of Rome be arm with power to take away the empire of the world from Nero or Claudius or Domitianus to who it be not know whether the city of Rome have any bishop at all be it not a master-iest of a strain most ridiculous to presuppose the grand-master and absolute lord of the whole world have a send so dull that they be not able to smell out and to nose thing under their own nose that they see so little with other man eye and their own that within their capital city they can not spy that sovereign arm with ordinary and lawful authority to degrade and to turn they out of their renown empire doubtless the say emperor vassal belike of the pope empire be to be hold excuse for not acknowledge and honour the pope in quality of their lord as become his vassal because they do not know there be any such power in the world as aftertime have magnify and adore under the quality of pope for the bishop of Rome in those time be of no great authority power and mean than some of the bishop be in these day within my kingdom but certes those pope of that primitive age think it not expedient in the say time to draw their sword they exercise their power in a more mild and soft kind of carriage towards those miserable emperor for three several reason allege by the l. cardinal the first because the bishop than dare not by their censure whet and provoke those emperor for fear of plunge the church in a sea of persecution but if I be not clean void of common sense this reason serve to charge not only the bishop of Rome but all the ancient professor of Christ beside with deep dissimulation and hypocrisy for it be all one as if he have profess that all their obedience to their sovereign be but counterfeit and extort or wring out of they by force that all the submissive supplication of the ancient father the assure testimony and pledge of their allegiance humility and patience be but certain form of disguise speech proceed not free from the suggestion of fidelity but faint and feign or at least from the strong twitch and violent convulsion of fear whereupon it follow that all their torment and punishment even to the death be wrongful honour with the title and crown with the crown of martyrdom because their patience proceed not from their own free choice and election but be teach by the force of necessity as by compulsion and whereas they have not mutinous and rebellious rise in arm to assuage the scorch heat and burn flame of tyrannical persecuter it be not for want of will but for lack of power which false and forge imputation the father have clear themselves of in their writing tert. apol. cap. 37. Tertullian in his Apologet all place be full of christian and the city isle castle burrough army etc. if we that be so infinite a power and multitude of man have break from you into some remote nook or corner of the world the city no doubt have become naked and solitary there have be a dreadful and horrible silence over the face of the whole empire the great emperor have be drive to seek out new city and to discover new nation over who to bear sovereign sway and rule there have remain more enemy to the state than subject and friend cypr. cont. Demetr. cyprian also against demetrianus none of we all howsoever we be a people mighty and without number have make resistance against any of your unjust and wrongful action execute with all violence neither have seek by rebellious arm or by any other sinister practice to cry quittance with you at any time for the right of ourselves certain it be that under julianus the whole empire in a manner profess the christian religion yea that his lieutenant and great commander as jovinianus and valentinianus by name profess Christ which two prince not long after attain to the imperial dignity but may have solicit the pope soon to degrade julianus from the imperial throne for say that julians whole army have renounce the christian religion as the l. cardinal against all show and appearance of truth will bear we in hand and contrary to the general voice of the say whole army make this profession with one consent when julian be dead Socr. lib. 3. cap. 19 we be all christian yet Italy then persist in the faith of Christ theod. lib. 4 cap. 1. and the army of julian then lie quarter in Persia sozom. lib. 6. cap. 1. the utmost limit of the empire to the east the bishop of Rome have fit opportunity to draw the sword of his authority if he have then any such sword hang at his pontifical side to make julian feel the sharp edge of his weapon and thereby to pull he down from the stately perch of the roman empire I say moreover that by this general and sudden profession of the whole caesarian army we be all christian it be clear testify that if his army or soldier be then addict to paganism it be wrought by compulsion and clean contrary to their settle persuasion before and then it follow that with great patience they will have bear the depose of julian then if he have suffer they to use the liberty of their conscience to be short in the matter s. Augustine make all whole and by his testimony do evince that julians army persevere in the faith of Christ the soldier of Christ serve a heathen emperor august^n psal 124. but when the cause of Christ be call in question they acknowledge none but Christ in heaven when the emperor will have they to serve and to perfume his idol with frankincense they give obedience to God rather than to the emperor after which word the very same word allege by the l. cardinal against himself do follow pag. 81. they do then distinguish between the lord eternal and the lord temporal nevertheless they be subject unto the lord temporal for the lord eternal it be therefore to pay God his duty of obedience and not for fear to incense the emperor or to draw persecution upon the church as the l. cardinal will make we believe that christian of the primitive church and bishop by their censure dare not anger and provoke their emperor but his lordship by his colour pretence do manifest provoke and stir up the people to rebellion so soon as they know their own strength to bear out a rebellious practice whereupon it follow that in case their conspiracy shall take no good effect all the blame and fault must lie not in their disloyalty and treason but in the bad choice of their time for the best advantage and in the want of take a true sight of their own weakness let stir spirit be train up in such practical precept let desperate wit be season with such rule of discipline and what need we or how can we wonder they contrive powder conspiracy and practice the damnable art of parricide after julian his lordship fall upon Valentinian the young who maintain arianism with great and open violence may have be depose by the christian from his empire and yet say we they never dream of any such practice pag. 82. here the l. cardinal make answer the christian move with respect unto the fresh memory both of the brother and father as also unto the weak estate of the son young year abstain from all counsel and course of sharp effect and operation to which answer I reply these be but frivolous conjecture devise and frame to tickle his own fancy for have valentinianus the young be the son of a arrian and have then also attain to threescore year of age they will never have bear themselves in other fashion than they do towards their emperor then the cardinal go on the people will not abandon the factious and seditious party but be so firm or obstinate rather for the faction that Valentinian for fear of the tumultuous uproar be constrain to give way and be threaten by the soldier that except he will adhere unto the catholic they will yield he no assistance nor stand for his party now this answer of the l. cardinal make nothing to the purpose concern the pope power to pull down king from their stately nest let we take notice of his proper consequence Valentinian be afraid of the popular tumult at Milan the pope therefore have power to curb heretical king by deposition now mark what distance be between Rome and Milan what difference between the people of Milan and the bishop of Rome between a popular tumult and a iudicatory sentence between fact and right thing do by the people or soldier of Milan and thing to be do according to right and law by the bishop of Rome the same distance the same difference if not far great be between the l. cardinal antecedent and his consequent between his reason and the main cause or argument which we have in hand the mad commotion of the people be not here so much to be regard as the sad instruction of the pastor of their good and godly pastor s. Ambrose so far from hearten the people of Milan to rebel that be bishop of Milan he offer himself to suffer martyrdom if the emperor abuse his imperial authority for so Theodoret have recite his word to tyrannize thereby here be I ready to suffer death and what resistance he make against his l. emperor be only by way of supplication in these term we beseech thou o Augustus as humble suppliant we offer no resistance we be not in fear but we fly to supplication epist lib. 5. again if my patrimony be your mark epist 33. enter upon my patrimony if my body I will go and meet my torment shall I be drag to prison or to death I will take delight in both item in his oration to auxentius i can afflict my soul with sorrow epist lib. 5. I can lament i can send forth grievous groan my weapon against either of both soldier or goth be tear a priest have none other weapon of defence I neither can resist nor ought in any other manner to make resistance justinian emperor in his old age fall into the heresy of the aphthartodocite against justinian though few they be that favour he in that heresy the bishop of Rome never dart with violence any sentence of excommunication interdiction or deposition the ostrogot king in Italy the Visigot in Spain the Vandal in Africa be all addict to the arrian impiety and some of they cruel persecute the true professor the Visigot and Vandal be no neighbour to Italy the pope thereby have the less cause to fear the sting of those wasp if they have be anger the pope for all that never have the humour to wrestle or justle with any of the say king in the cause of depose they from their throne but especial the time when the vandal in Africa and the goth in Italy by belisarius and narses professor of the orthodox faith be tire with long war and at last be utter defeat in bloody battle be to be consider then be the time or never for the pope to unsheathe his weapon and to un-case his arrow of deposition then be the time to draw they out of his quiver and to shoot at all such arrian head then be the time by dispensation to release their subject of their oath by that peremptory mean to aid and strengthen the catholic cause but in that age the say weapon be not know to have be hammer in the pontifical forge Gregory i. make his boast that he be able to ruin the Lombard for many year together swear enemy to the bishop of Rome their state present and the hope of all their future prosperity but he tell we that by the fear of God before his eye and in his heart he be bridle and restrain from any such intent as elsewhere we have observe in apol. fidel. if i will have meddle with practise and procure the death of the Lombard his own word lib. 7. epist 1. the whole nation of the Lombard at this day have be rob of their king duke earl they have be reduce to the term of extreme confusion he may at least have depose their king if the credit of the l. cardinal judgement be currant without pollute or stain his own conscience what can we term this assertion of the l. cardinal but open charge the most ancient bishop of Rome with cruelty when they will not succour the church of Christ oppress by tyrant who oppression they have power to repress by depose the oppressor be it credible that jesus Christ have give a commission to s. Peter and his successor for so many age without any power to execute their commission or to make any use thereof by practice be it credible that he have give they a sword to be keep in the scabbard without draw once in a thousand year be it credible that in the time when pope be most debauch abandon themselves to all sort of corrupt and vicious course as it testify by their own flatterer and best affect servant be it credible that in those time they begin to understand the virtue and strength of their commission for if either fear or lack of power be the cause of hold their hand and voluntary bind of themselves to the peace or good behaviour wherefore be not some one pope at least produce who have complain that he be hinder from execute the power that Christ have confer upon his pontifical see wherefore be not some one of the ancient and holy father allege by who the pope have be advise and exhort to take courage to stand upon the vigour and sinew of his papal office to unsheathe and unease his bolt of thunder against ungodly prince and grievous enemy to the church wherefore live under christian and gracious emperor have they not make know the reason why they be hinder from draw the pretend sword least long custom of not use the sword so many age may make it so to rust in the scabbard that when there shall be occasion to use the say sword it can not be draw at all and lest so long custom of not use the same shall confirm prescription to their great prejudice if weakness be a just let how be it come to pass that pope have enterprise to depose Philip the fair Lewis the 12 and Elizabeth my predecessor of happy memory to let pass other in who experience have well prove how great inequality be between their strength yea for the most part from thence grow most grievous trouble and war which just recoil and light upon his own head as happen to Gregory the 7 and Boniface the 8 this no doubt be the reason wherefore the pope never set in for fear of such inconvenience to blast a king with lightning and thunder of deposition but when he perceive the trouble water of the kingdom by some strong faction settle in his estate or when the king be confine and border by some prince more potent who thirst after the prey and be ever gape for some occasion to pick a quarrel the king stand in such estate be it not as easy for the pope to pull he down as it be for a man with one hand to thrust down a totter wall when the groundsil be rot the stud unpind and nod or bend towards the ground but if the king shall bear down and break the faction within the realm if he shall get withal the upper hand of his enemy out of the kingdom then the holy father present he with pardon never sue for never ask and in a father indulgence forsooth give he leave still to hold the kingdom that he be not able by all his force to wrest and wring out of his hand no more than the club of Hercules out of his fist how many worthy prince incense by the pope to conspire against sovereign lord their master and by open rebellion to work some change in their estate have miscarry in the action with loss of life or honour or both for example duke of Suevia be egg on by the pope against Henry 4 of that name emperor how many massacre how many desolation of city and town how many bloody battle ensue thereupon let history be search let just account be take and beside siege lay to city it will appear by true computation that Henry 4 and frederic the i. fight above threescore battle in defence of their own right against enemy of the empire stir up to arm by the pope of Rome how much christian blood be then split in these bloody battle it pass man wit pen or tongue to express and to give a little touch unto matter at home do not his holiness understand right well the weakness of papist in my kingdom do not his holiness nevertheless animate my papist to rebellion and forbid my papist to take the oath of allegiance do not his holiness by this mean draw so much as in he lie persecution upon the back of my papist as upon rebel and expose their life as it be upon the open stall to be sell at a very easy price all these example either joint or several be manifest and evident proof that fear to draw mischief and persecution upon the church have not bar the pope from thunder against emperor and king whensoever they conceive any hope by their fulmination to advance their greatness last of all I refer the matter to the most possess with prejudice even the very adversary whether this doctrine by which people be train up in subjection unto infidel or heretical king until the subject be of sufficient strength to mate their king to expel their king and to depose they from their kingdom do not incense the turkish emperor and other infidel prince to root out all the christian that draw in their yoke as people that wait only for a fit occasion to rebel and to take themselves engage for obedience to their lord only by constraint and servile fear let we therefore now conclude with Ozius in that famous epistle speak to Constantius a arrian heretic a. then in epist solitar. as he that by secret practice or open violence will bereave thou of thy empire shall violate God ordinance so be thou touch with fear lest by usurp authority over church matter thou tumble not headlong into some heinous crime where this holy bishop have not vouchsafe to insert and mention the l. cardinal exception to wit the right of the church always except and save when she shall be of sufficient strength to shake off the yoke of emperor neither speak the same holy bishop of private person alone or man of some particular condition and calling but he set down a general rule for all degree never to impeach imperial majesty upon any pretext whatsoever as his lordship first reason draw from weakness be exceed weak the 2. so be that which the l. cardinal take up in the next place pag. 77. he tell we there be very great difference between pagan emperor and christian prince pagan emperor who never do homage to Christ who never be by their subject receive with condition to acknowledge perpetual subjection unto the empire of Christ who never be bind by oath and mutual contract between prince and subject Christian prince who slide back by apostasy degenerate by arianism or fall away by Mahometisme touch the latter of these two as his lordship say if they shall as it be take a oath and make a vow contrary to their first oath and vow make and take when they be install and contrary to the condition under which they receive the sceptre of their father if they withal shall turn persecutor of the catholic religion touch these I say the l. cardinal hold that without question they may be remove from their kingdom he tell we not by who but every where he mean by the pope touch king depose by the pope under pretence of stupidity as Childeric or of matrimonial cause as Philip i. or for collate of benefice as Philip the fair not one word by that point he easy glide and shuffle it up in silence for fear of distaste the pope on the one side or his auditor on the other now in allege this reason his lordship make all the world a witness that in depose of king the pope have no eye of regard to the benefit and security of the church for such prince as never suck other milk then that of infidelity and persecution of religion be no less noisome and pernicious vermin to the church then if they have suck of the church breast and as for the greatness of the sin or offence it seem to i there be very little difference in the matter for a prince that never do swear any religious obedience to jesus Christ be bind no less to such obedience then if he have take a solemn oath as the son that rebellious stand up against his father be in equal degree of sin whether he have swear or not swear obedience to his father because he be bind to such obedience not by any voluntary contract or covenant but by the law of nature the commandment of God to kiss the son psal 2. who the father have confirm and ratify king of king do equal bind all king as well pagan as christian on the other side who deny who doubt that Constantius emperor at his first step or entrance into the empire do not swear and bind himself by solemn vow to keep the rule and to maintain the precept of the orthodox faith or that he do not receive his father empire upon such condition this notwithstanding the bishop of Rome pull not Constantius from his imperial throne but Constantius remove the bishop of Rome from his papal See and be it so that a oath take by a king at his consecration and after violate be a sufficient cause for the pope to depose a apostate or heretical prince then by good consequence the pope may in like sort depose a king who be neither dead in apostasy nor sick of heresy do neglect only the due administration of justice to his loyal subject for his oath take at consecration import likewise that he shall minister justice to his people a point wherein the holy father be hold short by the l. cardinal who dare prescribe new law to the pope and presume to limit his fullness of power within certain mere and headland extend the pope power only to the depose of christian king when they turn apostate forsake the catholic faith and not such prince as never breathe any thing but pure paganism and never serve under the colour of jesus Christ mean while his lordship forget that king Attabaliba be depose by the pope from his kingdom of Peru and the say kingdom be confer upon the king of Spain though the say poor king of Peru never forsake his heathen superstition and though the turn of he out of his terrestrial kingdom be no way to convert he unto the faith of Christ yea his lordship a little after tell we himself pag. 77. that be the turk possession in the conquest that he make over christian never so ancient yet by no long tract of time whatsoever can he gain so much as a thumb breadth of prescription that be to say the Turk for all that be but a disseisor one that violent and wilful keep a other man from his own and by good right may be dispossess of the same whereas notwithstanding the turkish emperor never favour nor savour christianity let we run over the example of king who the pope have dare and presume to depose and hardly will any one be find of who it may be true avouch that he have take a oath contrary to his oath of subjection to jesus Christ or that he have wilful cast himself into apostatical defection and certes to any man that weigh the matter with due consideration it will be find apparent false that king of France have be receive of their subject at any time with condition to serve jesus Christ they be actual king before they come forth to the solemnity of their sacring before they use any stipulation or promise to their subject for in hereditary kingdom nothing more certain nothing more uncontrollable the king death instant make livery and seisin of the royalty to his next successor nor be it material to reply that a king succeed by right of inheritance take a oath in the person of his predecessor for every oath be personal proper to the person by who it be take and to God no live creature can swear that his own son or his heir shall prove a honest man well may the father and with great solemnity promise that he will exhort his heir apparent with all his power and the best of his endeavour to fear God and to practice piety if the father oath be agreeable to the duty of godliness the son be bind thereby whether he take a oath or take none on the other side if the father oath come from the puddle of impiety the son be bind thereby to go the contrary way if the father oath concern thing of indifferent nature and such as by the variety or change of time become either pernicious or impossible than it be free for the king next successor and heir prudent to fit and proportion his law unto the time present and to the best benefit of the commonwealth when I call these thing to mind with some attention I be out of all doubt his lordship be very much to seek in the right sense and nature of his king oath take at his coronation to defend the church and to persevere in the catholic faith for what be more unlike and less credible than this conceit that after Clovis have reign 15. year in the state of paganism and then receive holy baptism he shall become christian upon this condition that in case he shall afterward revolt from the faith it shall then be in the power of the church to turn he out of his kingdom but have any such conditional stipulation be make by Clovis in very good earnest and truth yet will he never have intend that his depose shall be the act of the roman bishop but rather of those whether peer or people or whole body of the state by who he have be advance to the kingdom let we hear the truth and this be the truth it be far from the customary use in France for their king to take any such oath or to use any such stipulation with their subject if any king or prince wheresoever do use a oath or solemn promise in these express term let i lose my kingdom or my life be that day my last both for life and reign when I shall first revolt from the christian religion by these word he call upon God for vengeance he use imprecation against his own head but he make not his crown to stoop by this mean to any power in the pope or in the church or in the people and touch inscription upon coin of which point his lordship speak by the way very the nature of the money or coin the stamp and mint whereof be one of the mark of the prince his dignity and sovereignty be not change by bear the letter of Christ name on the reverse or on the front such character of Christ name be advertisement and instruction to the people that in show and yield obedience unto the king they be obedient unto Christ and those prince likewise who be so well advise to have the most sacred name inscribe and print in their coin do take and acknowledge jesus Christ for supreme king of king the say holy character be no representation or profession that any king crown depend upon the church or can be take away by the pope the l. cardinal indeed so bear we in hand but he invert the word of jesus Christ and wring they out of the right joint for Christ without all ambiguity and circumlocution by the image and inscription of the money do direct and express prove Caesar to be free from subjection and entire sovereign now if such a supreme and sovereign prince at any time shall bandy and combine against God and thereby shall become a rebellious and perfidious prince doubtless for such disloyalty he shall deserve that God will take from he all hope of life eternal and yet hereby neither pope nor people have reason to be puff up in their power to deprive he of his temporal kingdom the l. cardinal say beside pag. 76. the champion of the pope power to depose king do expound that commandment of s. Paul whereby every soul be make subject unto the superior power to be a provisional precept or caution accommodate to the time and to stand in force only until the church be grow in strength unto such a scantling that it may be in the power of the faithful without shake the pillar of christian state to stand in the breach and cautelous to provide that none but christian prince may be receive according to the law in Deut. thou shall make thou a king from among thy brother the reason whereupon they ground be this because Paul say it be a shame for christian to be judge under unjust infidel in matter or business which they have one against a other for which inconvenience justinian after provide by law when he ordain that no infidel nor heretic may be admit to the administration of justice in the commonwealth in which word of the cardinal the word receive be to be observe especial and above the rest for by chap in that word he do nimble and with a trick of legier-de-main transform or change the very state of the question for the question or issue of the cause be not about receive establish or choose a prince as in those nation where the kingdom go by election but about do homage to the prince when God have settle he in the kingdom and have cast it upon a prince by hereditary succession for that which be write thou shall make thou a king do no way concern and touch the people of France in these day because the make of their king have not of long time be tie to their election the passage therefore in Deuteron make nothing to the purpose no more than do justinian law for it be our free and voluntary confession that a christian prince be to have special care of the law and to provide that no unbeliever be make lord cheife-iustice of the land that no infidel be put in trust with administration of justice to the people but here the issue do not direct we to speak of delegate of subordinate magistrate and such as be in commission from the prince but of the supreme prince himself the sovereign magistrate ordain by nature and confirm by succession our question be whether such a prince can be unthrone by the pope by who he be not place in the throne and whether the pope can despoil such a prince of that royalty which be never give he by the pope under any pretend colour and imputation of heresy of stupidity or infringe the privilege of monastery or transgress the law and line of holy matrimony now that saint Paul commandment which bind every soul in the band of subjection unto the high power be no precept give by way of proviso and only to serve the time but a stand and a perpetual rule it be hereby more than manifest s. Paul have ground this commandment upon certain reason not only constant and permanent by their proper nature but likewise necessary for every state condition and revolution of the time his reason because all power be ordain of God because resist of power be resist the ordinance of God because the magistrate bear the sword to execute justice because obedience and subjection to the magistrate be necessary not only for fear of his wrath or fear of punishment but also for conscience sake it be therefore a case ground upon conscience it be not a law devise by human wisdom it be not fashionable to the quality of the time apostolical instruction for the right inform of manner be not changeable according to time and season to use the l. cardinal language and to follow his fancy in the matter be to make way for two pestiferous mischief first let it be free and lawful for christian to hold the command rule of God for provisional caution and what follow man be lead into the broad way of impiety and the whole scripture be wipe of all authority then again for the other mischief the glorious triumph of most bless martyr in their unspeakable torment and suffering by the l. cardinal position shall be judge unworthy to wear the title and crown of martyrdom how so because according to his new fiction they have give place to the violence and fury of heathen magistrate not in obedience to the necessary and certain commandment of God but rather to a provisional direction accommodate to the humour of the time and therefore the l. cardinal have use none other clay wherewith to daub over his device but plain falsification of holy scripture for he make the apostle say to the corinthian it be a shame for christian to be judge under unbelieve magistrate whereas in that whole context of Paul there be no such matter for when the apostle say I speak it even to your shame (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) he do not say it be a shame for a believer to be judge under a infidel but he make they ashamed of their ungodly course and unchristian practice that in sue and implead one a other they lay their action of contention in the court of unbelieve judge the shame be not in bear that yoke which God have charge their neck withal but in devour and eat up one a other with writ of and with other process as also in uncover the shame in lay open the shameful part and prank play by christian before infidel to the great scandal of the church here I say the l. cardinal be take in a trick of manifest falsification if therefore a king when he fall to play the heretic deserve to be depose why shall not a cardinal when he fall to play the juggler with holy scripture deserve to be disrobe mean while the indifferent reader be to consider how great this doctrine be prejudicial and how full of danger to christian live under heretical or pagan prince for make it once know to the emperor of turk let he once get never so little a smack of this doctrine that christian live under his empire do take God commandment for obedience to prince who they count infidel to be only a provisional precept for a time and wait every hour for all occasion to shake off the yoke of his bondage doubtless he will never spare with all speed to root the whole stock with all the arm and branch of christian out of his dominion add hereunto the l. cardinal former determination that possession keep never so long by the Turk in his conquest over christian gain he not by so long tract of time one inch of prescription and it will appear that his lordship put the turkish emperor in mind and by his instruction lead the say emperor as it be by the hand to have no manner of affiance in his christian subject and withal to afflict his poor christian with all sort of most grievous and cruel torment in this regard the poor christian of Graecia and Syria must needs be very little behold to his lordship as for myself and my popish subject to who I be no less than a heretic forsooth be not I by this doctrine of the cardinal prick and whet against my natural inclination to turn clemency into rigour see that by his doctrine my subject be make to believe they owe i subjection only by way of proviso and with wait the occasion to work my utter destruction and final ruin the rather because turk miscreant and heretic be mashal by the cardinal in the same rank and heretic be count worse yea more just deposeable than turk and infidel as irreligious breaker and violater of their oath who see not here how great indignity be offer to i a christian king parallel with infidel repute worse than a Turk take for a usurper of my kingdom reckon a prince to who subject owe a force obedience by way of provision until they shall have mean to shake off the yoke and to bare my temple of the crown which never can be pull from the sacred head but with loss of the head itself touch the war undertake by the french english and german in their expedition for jerusalem it appear by the issue and event of the say war that God approve they not for honourable that expedition be a device and invention of the pope whereby he may come to be enfeoff in the kingdom of christian prince for then all such of the french english or german as undertake the crusade become the pope mere vassal then all robber by the high way side adulterer cutthroat and base bankrupt be exempt from the secular and civil power their cause be speed in consistorian court so soon as they have get the cross on their cassock or coat-armour and have vow to serve in the expedition for the Levant then for the pope pleasure and at his commandment whole country be empty of their noble and common soldier then they make long march into the Levant for what purpose only to die upon the point of the saracen pike or by the edge of their barbarous courtelass battleax falchion and other weapon without any benefit and advantage to themselves or other then the noble be drive to sell their goodly manor and ancient domain to the churchman at under prize and low rate the very root from which a great part of the church and churchman revenue have spring and grow to so great height see the bull of innoc. 3. at the end of the late conc. then to be short his most bountiful holiness give to any of the riffe-raffe-ranke that will undertake this expedition into the holy land a free and full pardon for all his sin beside a degree of glory above the vulgar in the celestial paradise military virtue I confess be commendable and honourable provide it be employ for justice and that generous nobleness of valiant spirit be not under a colour and shadow of piety fetch over with some cast or device of italian cunning now let we observe the wisdom of the l. cardinal through this whole discourse his lordship be please in his oration to cite certain few passage of scripture cull and pick they out for the most graceful in show leave out of his list whole troop of honourable witness upon who testimony the pope themselves and their principal adherent do build his power to depose king and to give order for all temporal cause take a sight of their best and most honourable witness Peter say to Christ see here two sword and Christ answer it be sufficient Christ say to Peter jer. 1. put up thy sword into thy sheath God say to jeremy I have establish thou over nation and kingdom 1. cor. 2. Paul say to the corinthian the spiritual man discern all thing Christ say to his apostle whatsoever you shall lose upon earth by which word the pope have power forsooth to lose the oath of allegiance Moses say in the beginning God create the heaven and the earth Extavag upon these passage pope Boniface 8. grapple and tug with Philip the fair do build his temporal power other pope and papist avouch the like authority Christ say of himself all thing be give to i of my father and all power be give unto i in heaven and in earth the devil say if thou cast we out send we into this herd of swine Christ say to his disciple you shall find the colt of a ass bind lose it and bring it unto i by these place the adversary prove that Christ dispose of temporal matter and infer thereupon why not Christ vicar as well as Christ himself the place and testimony now follow be very express in stead of thy father shall be thy child psal 45. thou shall make they prince through all the earth item jesus Christ not only command Peter to feed his lamb but say also to Peter arise kill and eat the pleasant gloss the rare invention of the l. cardinal Baronius joh. 12. Christ say to the people if I be lift up from the earth I will draw all thing unto i who let what hinder this place from fit the pope Paul say to the corinthian know you not that we shall judge the angel how much more than the thing that pertain unto this life a little after have not we power to eat these be the chief passage on which as upon main arch the roof of papal monarchy concern temporal cause have rest for three or four age past and yet his lordship dare not repose any confidence in their firm stand to bear up the say roof of temporal monarchy for fear of make his auditor to burst with laughter a wise part without question if his lordship have not defile his lip before with a more ridiculous argument draw from the leprosy and dry scab let we now by way of comparison behold jesus Christ pay tribute unto Caesar and the pope make Caesar to pay he tribute jesus Christ persuade the jew to pay tribute unto a heathen emperor and the pope dispense with subject for their obedience to christian emperor jesus Christ refuse to arbitrate a controversy of inheritance partable between two private party and the pope thrust in himself without warrant or commission to be absolute judge in the depose of king jesus Christ profess that his kingdom be not of this world and the pope establish himself in a terrene empire in like manner the apostle forsake all their good to follow Christ and the pope rob christian of their good the apostle persecute by pagan emperor and the pope now set his foot on the very throat of christian emperor then proud tread imperial crown under his foot by this comparison the l. cardinal allegation of scripture in favour of his master the pope be but a kind of puppet-play to make jesus Christ a mock stock rather than to satisfy his auditor with any sound precept and wholesome instruction hereof he seem to give some inkling himself for after he have be plentiful in cite authority of scripture and of new doctor which make for the pope power to depose king at last he come in with a fair and open confession pag. 85. that neither by divine oracle nor by honourable antiquity this controversy have be yet determine and so pull down in a word with one hand the frame of work that he have build and set up before with a other discover withal the reluctation and privy check of his own conscience there yet remain one objection the knot whereof the l. cardinal in a manner sweat to untie pag. 84. his word be these the champion for the negative fly to the analogy of other proceed and practice in the church they affirm that private person master or owner of good and possession among the common people be not deprive of their good for heresy and consequent that prince much more shall not for the same crime be deprive of their estate for answer to this reason he bring in the defendant of deposition speak after this manner in the kingdom of France the strict execution of law decree in court against heretic be favourable suspend and stop for the preservation of peace and public tranquillity he say elsewhere connivance be use towards these heretic in regard of their multitude because a notable part of the french nation and state be make all of heretic I suppose that out of special charity he will have those heretic of his own make forewarn what courteous use and entreaty they be to expect when he affirm that execution of the law be but suspend for indeed suspension hold but for a time but in a cause of that nature and importance I dare promise myself that my most honour brother the king of France will make use of other counsel will rather seek the amity of his neighbour prince and the peace of his kingdom will bear in mind the great and faithful service of those who in matter of religion dissent from his majesty as of the only man that have preserve and save the crown for the king his father of most glorious memory I be persuade my brother of France will believe that his liege people pretend by the l. cardinal to be heretic be not half so bad as my roman catholic subject who by secret practice under-mine my life serve a foreign sovereign be discharge by his bull of their obedience due to i their natural sovereign be bind by the maxim and rule publish and maintain in favour of the pope before this full and famous assembly of the estate at Paris if the say maxim be of any weight and authority to hold i for no lawful king be there teach and instruct that Paul commandment concern subjection unto the high power adverse to their profess religion be only a provisional precept frame to the time and watch for the opportunity to shake off the yoke all which notwithstanding I deal with such romane-catholiks by the rule and way of princely clemency their heinous and pernicious error in effect no less than the capital crime of high treason I use to call some disease or distemper of the mind last of all I believe my say brother of France will set down in his table as in record how little he stand engage to the lord cardinal in this behalf for those of the reform religion profess and proclaim that next under God they owe their preservation and safety to the wisdom and benignity of their king but now come the cardinal and he seek to steal this persuasion out of their heart he tell they in open parliament and without any go about bush that all their welfare and security stand in their multitude and in the fear which other conceive to trouble the state by the strict execution of law against heretic he add moreover note by the way that here the church of Rome be call a sect that in case a three sect shall peep out and grow up in France the professor thereof shall suffer confiscation of their good with loss of life itself as have be practise at Geneva against and in England against arrian my answer be this that punishment for heretic due and according to law convict be set down by decree of the civil magistrate bear rule in the country where the say heretic inhabit and not by any ordinance of the pope I say withal the l. cardinal have no reason to match and parallel the reform church with and the arrian for those heretic be powerful convict by God word and lawful condemn by the ancient general council where they be permit and admit to plead their own cause in person but as for the truth profess by i and those of the reform religion it be never yet hiss out of the school nor cast out of any council like some parliament bill where both side have be hear with like indifferency yea what council soever have be offer unto we in these latter time it have be propose with certain presupposition as that his holiness be a party in the cause and consequent to come under judgement as it be to the bar upon his trial shall be the judge of assize with commission of oyer and determiner it shall be celebrate in a city of no safe access without safe conduct or convoy to come or go at pleasure and without danger it shall be assemble of such person with free suffrage and voice as uphold this rule which they have already put in practice against John Hus and Hierom of prage that faith give and oath take to a heretic must not be observe now then to resume our former matter if the pope hitherto have never presume for pretend heresy to confiscate by sentence either the land or the good of private person or common people of the french nation wherefore shall he dare to dispossess king of their royal throne wherefore take he more upon he over king then over private person wherefore shall the sacred head of king be more churlish uncivil and rigorous handle than the hood of the mean people here the l. cardinal in stead of a direct answer break out of the list allege clean from the purpose example of heretic punish not by the pope but by the civil magistrate of the country but Bellarmine speak to the point with a more free and open heart he be absolute and resolute in this opinion that his holiness have plenary power to dispose all temporal estate and matter in the whole world I be confident say Bellarmine and I speak it with assurance Contr. Barclaium cap. 27. that our lord jesus Christ in the day of his mortality have power to dispose of all temporal thing yea to strip sovereign king and absolute lord of their kingdom and seignory and without all doubt have grant and leave even the same power unto his vicar to make use thereof whensoever he shall think it necessary for the salvation of soul and so his lordship speak without exception of any thing at all for who do not know that jesus Christ have power to dispose no less of private man possession then of whole realm and kingdom at his pleasure if it have be his pleasure to display the ensign of his power the same fullness of power be likewise in the pope in good time belike his holiness be the sole heir of Christ in whole and in part the last Lateran council fine a laic that speak blasphemy Sess. 9 for the first offence if he be a gentleman at 25. ducat and at 50. for the second it presuppose and take it for grant that the church may rifle and ransack the purse of private man and cast lot for their good the council of Trent dig as deep for the same vein of gold and silver it ordain that emperor Sess. 25 cap. 19 king duke prince and lord of city castle and territory hold of the church in case they shall assign any place within their limit or liberty for the duel between two christian shall be deprive of the say city castle or place where such duel shall be perform they hold the say place of the church by any kind of tenure that all other estate hold in fee where the like offence shall be commit shall forthwith fall and become forfeit to their immediate and next lord that all good possession and estate as well of the combatant themselves as of their second shall be confiscate this council do necessary presuppose it lie in the hand and power of the church to dispose of all the land and estate hold in fee throughout all Christendom because the church forsooth can take from one and give unto a other all estate hold in fee whatsoever as well such as hold of the church as of secular lord and to make ordinance for the confiscation of all private person good by this canon the kingdom of Naples have need to look well unto itself for one duel it may fall into the exchequer of the roman church because that kingdom pay a relief to the church as a royalty or seignory that hold in fee of the say church and in France there be not one lordship not one manor not one farm which the pope by this mean can shift over to a new Lord his lordship therefore have carry himself and the cause much better if in stead of seek such idle shift he have by a more large assertion maintain the pope power to dispose of private man possession with no less right and authority then of kingdom for what colour of reason can be give for make the pope lord of the whole and not of the part for make he lord of the forest in gross and not of the tree in parcel for make he lord of the whole house and not of the parlour or the dine chamber his lordship allege yet a other reason but of no better weight between the power of private owner over their good and the power of king over their estate there be no little difference for the good of private person be ordain for their owner and prince for the benefit of their commonwealth hear i now answer if this cardinal-reason have any force to infer that a king may lawful be deprive of his kingdom for heresy but a private person can for the same crime be turn out of his mansion house than it shall follow by the same reason that a father for the same cause may be deprive of all power over his child but a private owner can be deprive of his good in the like case because good be ordain for the benefit and comfort of their owner but father be ordain for the good and benefit of their child but most certain it be that king represent the image of God in earth and god place have a better and close seat in their chair of estate than any private person have in the saddle of their inheritance and patrimony which be daily see for sleight cause to flit and to fall into the hand of new lord whereas a prince be the head can be loose in the proper joint nor dismount like a cannon when the carriage thereof be unlock without a sore shake and a most grievous dislocation of all the member yea without subvert the whole body of the state whereby private person without number be enwrap together in the same ruin even as the low shrub and other brush-wood be crush in piece altogether by the fall of a great oak but suppose his lordship reason be somewhat ponderous and solid withal yet a king which will not be forget be endow not only with the kingdom but also with ancient desmenes and crowne-land for which none can be so simple to say the king be ordain and create king which nevertheless he lose when he lose his crown admit again this reason be of some pith to make mighty king more easy deposeable then private person from their patrimony yet all this make nothing for the derive and fetch of deposition from the pope consistory what he never confer by what right or power can he claim to take away but see here no doubt a sharp and subtle difference put by the l. cardinal between a kingdom and the good of private person good as his lordship say be without life they can be constrain by no force by no example by no inducement of their owner to lose eternal life subject by their prince may now I be of this contrary belief that a heretical owner or master of a family have great power and mean withal to seduce his own servant and child than a prince have to pervert his own subject and yet for the contagion of heresy and for corrupt religion child be not remove from their parent nor servant be take away from their master history abound with example of most flourish church under a prince of contrary religion and if thing without life or soul be with less danger leave in a heretic hand why then shall not a heretical king with more facility and less danger keep his crown his royal charge his land his custom his impost etc. for will any man except he be out of his wit affirm these thing to have any life or soul or why shall it be count folly to leave a sword in the hand of a mad bedlam be not a sword also without life and soul for my part I shall rather be of this mind that possession of thing without reason be more dangerous and pernicious in the hand of a evil master than the possession of thing endue with life and reason for thing without life lack both reason and judgement how to exempt and free themselves from be instrument in evil and wicked action from be employ to ungodly and abominable use I will not deny that a heretical prince be a plague a pernicious and mortal sickness to the soul of his subject but a breach make by one mischief must not be fill up with a great inconvenience a error must not be shock and shoulder with disloyalty nor heresy with perjury nor impiety with sedition and arm rebellion against God and the King God who use to try and to school his church will never forsake his church nor have need to protect his church by any proditorious and prodigious practice of perfidious christian for he make his church to be like the burn bush in the midst of the fire and flame of persecution he will provide that she shall not be consume because he stand in the midst of his church and suppose there may be some just cause for the french to play the rebel against their king yet will it not follow that such rebellious motion be to be raise by the bellows of the roman bishop to who pastoral charge and office it be nothing proper to intermeddle in the civil affair of foreign kingdom here be the sum and substance of the l. cardinal whole discourse touch his pretence of the second inconvenience which discourse he have close with a remarkable confession to wit that neither by the authority of holy scripture nor by the testimony and verdict of the primitive church there have be any full decision of this question in regard whereof he fall into admiration that lay-people have go so far in audaciousness as to labour that a doubtful doctrine may for ever pass currant and be take for a new article of faith what a shame what a reproach be this how full of scandal for so his lordship be please to cry out this break into the several and enclosure of the church this let in whole herd of heresy to graze in her green and sweet pasture on the other side without any such rhetorical outcry I simple affirm it be a reproach a scandal a crime of rebellion for a subject have his full charge and load of benefit in the new spring of his king tender age his king-fathers blood yet reek and upon the point of a address for a double match with Spain in so honourable a assembly to seek the thraldom of his king crown to play the captious in cavil about cause of his king depose to give his former life the lie with shame enough in his old age and to make himself a common byword under the name of a problematical martyr one that offer himself to faggot and fire for a point of doctrine but problematical handle that be distrustful and only by way of doubtful and questionable discourse yea for a point of doctrine in which the french as he pretend be permit to thwart and cross his holiness in judgement provide they speak in it as in a point not certain and necessary but only doubtful and probable the three jnconvenience examine the three inconvenience pretend by the l. cardinal to grow by admit this article of the three estate pag. 87. be flourish in these colour it will breed and bring forth a open and unavoideable schism against his holiness and the rest of the whole ecclesiastical body for thereby the doctrine long approve and ratify by the pope and the rest of the church shall now be tax and condemn of impious and most detestable consequence yea the pope and the church even in faith and in point of salvation shall be repute and believe to be erroneous persuade hereupon his lordship give himself a large scope of the reins to frame his elegant amplification against schism and schismatic now to mount so high and to fly in such place upon the wing of amplification for this inconvenience what be it else but magnifical to report and imagine a mischief by many degree great than the mischief be the l. cardinal be in a great error if he make himself believe that other nation will make a rent or separation from the communion of the french because the french stand to it tooth and nail that french crown be not liable or obnoxious to papal deposition howsoever there be no schism that import not separation of communion the most illustrious republic of Venice have embark herself in this quarrel against his holiness have play her prize and carry away the weapon with great honour do she notwithstanding her triumph in the cause forbear to participate with all her neighbour in the same sacrament do she live in schism with all the rest of the roman church no such matter when the l. cardinal himself not many year past maintain the king cause and stand honourable for the king right against the pope temporal usurpation do he then take other church to be schismatical or the rot member of Antichrist believe it who list I believe my creed nay his lordship tell we himself asleep little after that his holiness give the french free scope to maintain either the affirmative or negative of this question and will his holiness hold they schismatic that dissent from his opinion and judgement in a subject or cause esteem problematical far be it from his holiness the king of Spain repute the pope right arm never give the pope cause by any act or other declaration to conceive that he acknowledge himself deposeable by the pope for heresy or tyranny or stupidity but be well assure the pope stand in great fear of his arm than he do of the pope head and shoulder he never trouble his own head about our question more when the book of cardinal Baronius be come forth in which book the kingdom of Naples be decry and public discredit like false money touch the quality of a kingdom and attribute to the king of Spain not as true proprietary thereof but only as a estate hold in fee of the roman church the king make no bone to condemn and to banish the say book out of his dominion the holy father be content to put up his catholic son proceed to the cardinal disgrace never open his mouth against the king never declare or note the king to be schismatical he wait perhaps for some fit opportunity when the kingdom of Spain groan under the burden of intestine dissension and trouble he may without any danger to himself give the catholic king a bishop mate yea the l. cardinal himself be better see in the humour and inclination of the christian world then to be gross persuade that in the kingdom of Spain and in the very heart of Rome itself there be not many which either make it but a jest or else take it in foul scorn to hear the pope power over the crown of king once name especial since the venetian republic have put his holiness to the worse in the same cause and cast he in law what need the l. cardinal then by cast up such mount and trench by heap one amplification upon a other to make schism look with such a terrible and hideous aspect who know not how great a offence how heinous a crime it be to quarter not jesus Christ coat but his body which be the church and what need such terrify of the church with ugliness of schism whereof there be neither colourable show nor possibility the next ugly monster after schism shape by the l. cardinal in the three suppose and pretend inconvenience be heresy his lordship say for the purpose pag. 89. by this article we be cast headlong into a manifest heresy as bind we to confess that for many age past the catholic church have be banish out of the whole world for if the champion of the doctrine contrary to this article do hold a impious and a detestable opinion repugnant unto God word then doubtless the pope for so many hundred year expire have not be the head of the church but a heretic and the Antichrist he add moreover that the church long ago have lose her name of catholic and that in France there have no church flourish nor so much as appear these many and more than many year for as much as all the french doctor for many year together have stand for the contrary opinion we can erect and set up no trophy more honourable for heretic in token of their victory then to avow that Christ visible kingdom be perish from the face of the earth and that for so many hundred year there have not be any temple of God nor any spouse of Christ but every where and all the world over the kingdom of Antichrist the synagogue of Satan the spouse of the devil have mighty prevail and bear all the sway last what strong engine can these heretic wish or desire for the batter and the demolish of transubstantiation of auricular confession and other like tower of our catholic religion then if it shall be grant the church have decide the say point without any authority etc. i think the lord cardinal in the whole draught and course of these word do seek not a little to blemish the honour of his church and to mark his religion with a black coal for the whole frame of his mother-church be very easy to be shake if by the establish of this article she shall come to final ruin and shall become the synagove of Satan likewise king be bring into a very miserable state and condition if their sovereignty shall not stand if they shall not be without danger of deposition but by the total ruin of the church and by hold the pope who they serve to be Antichrist the l. cardinal himself let he be well sift herein do not credit his own word for do not his lordship tell we plain that neither by divine testimony nor by any sentence of the ancient church the knot of this controversy have be untie again that some of the french by the pope favourable indulgence be license or tolerate to say their mind to deliver their opinion of this question though contrary to the judgement of his holiness provide they hold it only as problematical and not as necessary what can there be any assurance for the pope that he be not Antichrist for the church of Rome that she be not a synagogue of Satan when a man assurance be ground upon waver and wild uncertanties without canon of scripture without consent or countenance of antiquity and in a cause which the pope with good leave suffer some to toss with wind of problematical opinion it have be show before that by God word whereof small reckon perhaps be make by venerable antiquity and by the french church in those time when the pope power be mount aloft the doctrine which teach depose of king by the pope have be check and countermand what do the french in those day believe the church be then swallow up and no where visible or extant in the world no very those that make the pope of sovereign authority for matter of faith be not persuade that in this cause they be bind absolute to believe and credit his doctrine why so because they take it not for any decree or determination of faith but for a point pertain to the mystery of state and a pillar of the pope temporal monarchy who have not receive any promise from God that in cause of this nature he shall not err for they hold that error by no mean can crawl or scramble up to the papal see so high mount but grant ambition can scale the high wall and climb the lofty pinnacle of the same See they hold withal that in a case of so special advantage to the pope whereby he be make king of king and as it be the paymaster or distributer of crown it be against all reason that he shall sit as judge to carve out kingdom for his own share to be short let his lordship be assure that he meet with notorious blocke-head more blunt witted then a whetstone when they be draw to believe by his persuasion that whosoever believe the pope have no right nor power to put king beside their throne to give and take away crown be all exclude and bar out of the heavenly kingdom but now follow a worse matter for they who the cardinal reproachful call heretic have wrought and win his lordship as to i seem to plead their cause at the bar and to betray his own cause to these heretic for what be it in his lordship but plain play the praevaricator when he cry so loud that by admit and establish of this article the doctrine of cake-incarnation and privy confession to a priest be utter subvert let we hear his reason and willing accept of the truth from his lip the article as his lordship grant of transubstantiation auricular confession and the pope power to depose king be all ground alike upon the same authority now he have acknowledge the article of the pope power to depose king be not decide by the scripture nor by the ancient church but within the compass of certain age past by the authority of pope and council then he go on well and infer with good reason that in case the point of the pope power be weaken than the other two point must needs be shake and easy overthrow so that he do confess the monstrous birth of the breaden-God and the blind sacrament or vain fantasy of auricular confession be no more convey into the church by pipe from the spring of sacred scripture or from the river of the ancient church then that other point of the pope power over king and their crown very good for be they indeed derive from either of those two head that be to say be they ground upon the foundation of the first or second authority then they can never be shake by the downfall of the pope power to depose king I be well assure that for use so good a reason the world will hold his lordship in suspicion that he still have some smack of his father discipline and instruction who in time past have the honour to be a minister of the holy gospel howbeit he play not fair nor use sincere deal in his proceed against such as he call heretic when he cast in their dish and bear they in hand they froward wrangle for the invisibility of the church in earth for indeed the matter be nothing so they free acknowledge a visible church for howsoever the assembly of god elect do make a body not discernible by man eye yet we assure believe and glad profess there never want a visible church in the world yet only visible to such as make a part of the same all that be without see no more but man they do not see the say man to be the true church we believe moreover of the universal church visible that it be compose of many particular church whereof some be better fine and more clean from lees and dregs than other and withal we deny the pure church to be always the great and most visible the four and last inconvenience examine the lord cardinal before he look into the last inconvenience use a certain preamble of his own life past and service do to the king henry the 3 and 4 touch the latter of which two king his lordship say in a strain of boast after this manner I by the grace of God or the grace of God by i rather reduce he to the catholic religion I obtain at Rome his absolution of pope Clement 8. i reconcile he to the holy See touch the first of these point I say the time the occasion and the foresay king necessary affair do sufficient testify that he be induce to change his mind and to alter his religion upon the strength of other manner of argument then theological school or the persuasion of the l. cardinal fluent rhetoric do usual afford or can possible suggest moreover who do not know that in affair of so high nature and consequence resolution once take prince be to proceed with instruction by a formal course as for the king absolution pretend to be purchase of Clement 8. by the l. cardinal good service it have be the part of so great a cardinal for the honour of his king of the realm and of his own place to have bury that piece of his notable service in perpetual silence and in the dark night of eternal oblivion for in this matter of reconcilement it be not unknown to the world how shameful and base he prostitute the inviolable dignity of his king when his lordship represent the person of his king and couch on the ground by way of sufficient penance be glad as I have note in the preface to my apology to have his venerable shoulder graceful salute with stripe and reverent worship with bastonado of a pontificial cudgel which graceful or disgraceful blemish rather it please pope Clement of his rare clemency to grace yet with a high degree of spiritual grace in give the l. cardinal than bishop of a certain quantity of holy grain cross and medal or little plate of silver or some other mettle to hang about the neck or to be bear about against some evil which treasure of the pope grace whosoever shall gracious and reverent kiss they shall without fail purchase unto themselves a pardon for one hundred year these feat and pretty gugawe for child be no doubt a special comfort unto the good king heart after his majesty have be handsome baste upon the l. bishop back but with what face can his lordship brag that he prevail with pope Clement for the king absolution the late duke of nevers not long before have solicit his holiness with all earnest and humble instance to the same purpose howsoever the king affair then seem desperate in the pope eye he be license to depart for France without any due and gracious respect unto his errand but so soon as the pope receive intelligence of the king fortune grow to the full and the affair of the league to be in the wane and the principal city the strong place of garrison through all France to strike top and top gallant and to hale the king then the holy ghost in good time inspire the holy father with a holy desire and tender affection to receive this poor wander sheep again into the flock of Christ and bosom of holy church his holiness have reason for he fear by his obstinate severity to provoke the patience of the french and to drive that nation as they have many time threaten before then to put in execution their ancient design which be to shake off the pope and to set up some of their own tribe or kindred for patriarch over the french church but let his lordship vouchsafe to search the secret of his own bosom and no doubt he will not stick to acknowledge that before he stir one foot out of France he have good assurance of the good success and issue of his honourable embassage now the hearer thus prepare by his preface the l. cardinal proceed in his purpose namely to make proof how this article of the three estate wherein doubtful and questionable matter be mingle and confound with certain and indubitable principle do so debilitate and weaken the sinew and virtue of any remedy intend for the danger of king as it make all remedy and receipt prescribe for that purpose to become altogether unprofitable and without effect he yield this reason take it forsooth upon my warrant a reason full of pith and substance the only remedy against parricide be to thunder the solemn curse of the church and the punishment to be inflict after death which point if they be not ground upon infallible authority will never be settle in man persuasion with any certain assurance now in the solemn curse of the church no man can attain to the say assurance if thing not deny be mingle with point not grant and not consent unto by the universal church by a thing not deny and not contest the l. cardinal mean prohibit and condemn of king-killing and by point contest he mean deny of the pope power to depose king in this whole discourse I find neither pith of argument nor course of proof but only a cast of the l. cardinal office by way of counsel whereunto I make this answer if there be in this article of the three estate any point wherein all be not of one mind and the same judgement in who lie all the blame from whence rise the doubt but from the pope and popish parasite by who the certainty of the say point have be cunning remove and convey away and must be restore again by public authority now the way to restore certainty unto a point which against reason be call into doubt and question be to make it up in one mass or to tie it up in the same bundle with other certain point of the same nature here I be force to summon the conscience of man to make some stand or stay upon this point and with i to enter into deep consideration how great and unvanquishable force be ever find in the truth for these two question whether king may lawful be make away by assassin wage and hire for the act and whether the pope have lawful power to chase king out of their throne be by the l. cardinal own confession in so full aspect of conjunction that if either be bring under any degree of doubt the other also be fetch within the same compass in which word he direct point as with a finger to the very true source of the main mischief and to the basilique and liver vein infect with pestilential blood inflame to the destruction of basilical prince by detestable parricide for whosoever shall confident believe that pope be not arm with power to depose king will believe with no less confidence and assurance it be not lawful by sudden assault to fly at their throat for be not all desperate villain persuade when they be hire to murder king that in do so damnable a feat they do it for a piece of notable and extraordinary service to the pope this maxim therefore be to be hold for a principle unmovable and indubitable that if subject desire the life of their king to be secure they must not yield the pope one inch of power to deprive their king of their throne and crown by depose their king the lord cardinal testify no less himself in these word if those monster of man and fury of hell by who the lifeblood of our two last king be let out have ever be acquaint with law ecclesiastical they may have read themselves adjudge by the council of Constance to express damnation for in these word the l. cardinal prefer a bill of indictment to cast his holiness who upon the commence of the leaguer war in stead of give order for the publish of the say ecclesiastical law for the restrain of all parricidal practice and attempt fall to the terror of his fulmination which not long after be second and ratify by the most audacious and bloody murder of king Henry 3 in like manner the whole clergy of France be wrap up by the l. cardinal word and involve in the peril of the say indictment for in stead of preach the say ecclesiastical law by which all king-killing be inhibit the priest teach vent and publish nothing but rebellion and when the people in great devotion come to pour their confession into the priest ear then the priest with a kind of counterbuff in the second place when their turn be come and with great devotion pour blood into the ear of the people out of which root grow the terror of those cruel war and the horrible parricide of that good King but let we here take some near sight of these ecclesiastical law whereby subject be inhibit to kill or desperate to dispatch their king out of the way the l. cardinal for full payment of all score upon this reckon lay down the credit of the council at Constance which nevertheless afford not one mite of true and current payment the truth of the history may be take from this brief relation John duke of Burgundy procure Lewis duke of Orleans to be murder in Paris to justify and make good this bloody act he produce a certain petimaster one call by the name of John petit this little John cause nine proposition to be give forth or set up to be discuss in the famous university of Paris the sum of all to this purpose it be lawful just and honourable for every subject or private person either by open force and violence or by deceit and secret lie in wait or by some witty stratagem or by any other way of fact to kill a tyrant practise against his king and other high power yea the king ought in reason to give he a pension or stipend that have kill any person disloyal to his prince the word of first proposition be these it be lawful for every subject Gerson without any command or commission from the high power by all the law of nature of man and of God himself to kill or cause to be kill any tyrant who either by a covetous and greedy desire or by fraud by divination upon cast of lot by double and treacherous deal do plot or practice against his king corporal health or the health of his high power in the three proposition it be lawful for every subject honourable and meritorious to kill the say tyrant or cause he to be kill as a traitor disloyal and treacherous to his King in the six proposition the king be to appoint a salary and recompense for he that have kill such a tyrant or have cause he to be kill these proposition of johannes be condemn by the council of Constance as impious and tend to the scandal of the church now then whereas the say council no doubt understand the name or word tyrant in the same sense wherein it be take by johannes certain it be the council be not of any such judgement or mind to condemn one that shall kill a king or sovereign prince but one that by treason and without commandment shall kill a subject rebel and practise against his King for John petit have undertake to justify the make away of the duke of Orleans to be a lawful act and call that duke a tyrant albeit he be no sovereign prince as all the above recite word of John petit do testify that he speak of such a tyrant as be in state of subjection rebel against his free and absolute prince so that whosoever shall narrow search and look into the mind and meaning of the say council shall easy perceive that by their decree the safety of king be not confirm but weaken not augment but diminish for as much as they inhibit private person to kill a subject attempt by wicked counsel and practice to make away his King but be it grant the council of Constance be flat and altogether direct against king-killer for I be not unwilling to be persuade that have the question than touch the murder of sovereign prince the say council will have pass a sound and holy decree but I say this grant what shield of defence be hereby reach to king to ward or beat off the thrust of a murderer weapon and to save or secure their life see the l. cardinal build upon the subtle device and shift of the jesuit have teach we out of their school that by king be understand king in not yet fall from the supreme degree of sovereign royalty for be once depose by the pope say the jesuit they be no long king but be fall from the right of sovereign dignity and consequent to make strip and waste of their blood be not forsooth to make strip and waste of royal blood these jesuitical master in the file of their word be so supple and so limber that by leave still in their speech some start hole or other they be able by the same as by a postern or backdoor to make a escape mean while the reader be here to note for well they may a trick of monstrous and most wicked cunning the l. cardinal contend for the bridle and hamper of king-killer by the law ecclesiastical now it may be presume that so reverend and learned a cardinal intend to make use of ecclesiastical law by virtue whereof the life of king may be secure will fill his mouth and garnish the point with divine oracle that we may the more glad and willing give he the hear when he speak as one furnish with sufficient weight and authority of sacred scripture but behold in stead of the authentical and most ancient word he propound the decree of a late-born council at Constance neither for the pope tooth nor any way come near the point in controversy and suppose it be pertinent unto the purpose the l. cardinal bear in his hand a fork of distinction with two tine or tooth to bear off nay to shift off and to avoid the matter with mere dalliance the short and near way in some sort of respect to establish a false opinion be to charge or set upon it with false and with ridiculous reason the like way to work the overthrow of true doctrine be to rest or ground it upon frivolous reason or authority of stubble-weight for example if we shall thus argue for the immortality of the soul with Plato in Phaedone the swan sing before her death the soul be immortal or thus with certain seduce christian the pope have ordain the word of God to be authentical all credit must be give to divine scripture upon the spurky or hook of such ridiculous argument and frivolous reason the l. cardinal hang the life and safety of king with like artificial device he pretend to have the infamous murder and appo cut of king throat in extreme detestation and yet by depose they from their princely dignity by degrade they from their supreme and sovereign authority he bring their sacred head to the butcher block for a king depose by the pope let no man doubt will not leave any stone unremoved nor any mean and way unattempted nor any force or power of man unlevy or unhire to defend himself and his regal dignity to repress and bring under his rebellious people by the pope discharge of their allegiance in this perplexity of the public affair in these tempestuous perturbation of the state with what peril be the king not besiege and assault his head be expose to the chance of war his life a fair mark to the insidious practice of a thousand traitor his royal person obvious to the dreadful storm of angry fortune to the deadly malice to the fatal and mortal weapon of his enemy the reason he be presuppose to be lawful and orderly strip of his kingdom will he yet hold the stern of his royal estate then be he necessary take for a tyrant repute a usurper and his life be expose to the spoil for the public law make it lawful and free for any private person to enterprise against a usurper of the kingdom in and ter. apol. cap. 2. every man say Tertullian be a soldier to bear arm against all traitor and public enemy take from a king the title of lawful king you take from he the warrant of his life and the weapon whereby he be maintain in great security then by his royal guard arm with sword and halberd through who ward and rank a desperate villain will make himself a easy passage be master of a other man life because he be prodigal and careless of his own such therefore as pretend so much pity towards king to abhor the bloody open of their liver-veine and yet withal to approve their hoist out of the royal dignity be just in the vain and humour of those that say let we not kill the king but let we disarm the king that he may die a violent death let we not deprive he of life but of the mean to defend his life let we not strangle the king and stop his vital breath so long as he remain king o that be impious o that be horrible and abominable but let he be depose and then whosoever shall run he through the body with a weapon up to the very hilt shall not bear the guilt of a king-killer all this must be understand to be speak of king who after they be despoil of regality by sentence of deposition give by the pope be able to arm themselves and by valiant arm do defend their sovereign right but in case the king blast with roman lightning and strike with papal thunder shall actual and speedy be smite down from his high throne of regality with present loss of his kingdom I believe it be almost impossible for he to warrant his own life who be not able to warrant his own kingdom let a cat be throw from a high roof to the bottom of a cellour or vault she light on her foot and run away without take any harm a king be not like a cat howsoever a cat may look upon a king he can fall from the lofty pinnacle of royalty to light on his foot upon the hard pavement of a private state without crush all his bone in piece it have be the lot of very few emperor and king to outlive their empire for man ascend to the lofty throne of king with a soft and easy pace by certain step and degree there be no stately stair to come down they tumble head and heel together when they fall he that have once gripe another kingdom think himself in little safety so long as he shall of his courtesy suffer his disseised predecessor to draw his breath and say that some prince after their fall from their throne have escape both point and edge of the tyrant weapon yet have they wander like miserable fugitive in foreign country or else have be condemn like captive to perpetual imprisonment at home a thousandfold worse and more lamentable than death itself Dyonisius the tyrant of Syracuse from a great king in Sicily turn schoolmaster in Corinth it be the only call and kind of life that as he think bear some resemblance of rule and government may recreate his mind as a image or picture of his former sovereignty over man this Dyonisius be the only man to my knowledge that have a humour to laugh after the loss of a kingdom and in the state of a pedant or governor of child merry to jest and to scorn his former state and condition of a King in this my kingdom of England sundry king have see the wall as it be of their princely fortress dismantle raze and beat down by name Edward and Richard both 2 and Henry 5 all which king be most cruel murder in prison in the reign of Edward 3 by act of parliament whosoever shall imagine that be the very word of the statute or machinate the king death be declare guilty of rebellion and high treason the learned judge of the land ground upon this law of Edward the three have ever since repute and judge they traitor according to law that have dare only to whisper or talk soft between the tooth of depose the King for they count it a clear case that no crown can be take from a king head without loss of head and crown together soon or late the l. cardinal therefore in this most weighty and serious point do mere dally and flout after a sort when he tell we the church do not intermeddle with release of subject pag. 95. and knock off their iron of obedience but only before the ecclesiastical tribunal seat and that beside this double censure of absolution to subject and excommunication to the prince the church impose none other penalty under pretence of which two censure so far be the church as the l. cardinal pretend from consent that any man so censure shall be touch for his life that she utter abhor all murder whatsoever but especial all sudden and unprepenced murder for fear of cast away both body and soul which often in sudden murder go both one way it have be make manifest before that all such proscription and set forth of king to port-sale have always for the train thereof either some violent and bloody death or some other mischief more intolerable than death itself what be we the better that parricide of king be neither set on nor approve by the church in their abominable action when she lay such plot and take such course as necessary do infer the cut of their throat in the next place be it note that his lordship against all reason reckon the absolve of subject from the oath of allegiance in the rank of penalty award and enjoin before the ecclesiastical tribunal seat for this penalty be not ecclesiastical but civil and consequent not triable in ecclesiastical court without usurp upon the civil magistrate but I wonder with what face the lord cardinal can say the church never consent to any practice against his life who she have once chastise with severe censure for can his lordship be ignorant what be write by pope Vrbanus can. excom. caus. 23. quaest 6. can. we take they not in any wise to be manslayer who in a certain heat of zeal towards the catholic church their mother shall happen to kill a excomunicate person more if the pope do not approve and like the practice of king-killing wherefore have not his holiness impose some severe censure upon the book of Mariana the jesuite by who parricide be commend nay high extol when his holiness have be please to take the pain to censure and call in some other of Mariana book again wherefore do his holiness advise himself to censure the decree of the court of parliament in Paris against John Chastell wherefore do he suffer garnet and Oldcorne my powder-miners both by book and picture vendible under his nose in Rome to be enroll in the canon of holy martyr and when he see two great king murder one after a other wherefore by some public declaration do not his holiness testify to all Christendom his inward sense and true apprehension of so great misfortune as all Europe have just cause to lament on the behalf of France wherefore do not his holiness publish some law or pontificial decree to provide for the security of king in time to come true it be that he censure Becanus his book but wherefore that by a captious and slight censure he may prevent a more exact and rigorous decree of the Sorbon school for the pope check to Becanus be only a general censure and touch without any particular specification of matter touch the life of king about some two month after the say book be print again with a dedication to the pope nuntio in Germany yet without any alteration save only of two article contain the absolute power of the people over king in recompense and for a countercheck whereof three or four article be insert into the say book touch the pope power over king articlc no less wicked and injurious to regal right nay more injurious than any of the other clause whereof just cause of exception and complaint have be give before if I will collect and heap up example of ancient emperor as of Henry 4 who dead corpse feel the rage and fury of the pope or of frederic 2. against who the pope be not ashamed to whet and kindle the sultan or of queen Elizabeth our predecessor of glorious memory who life be diverse time assault by privy murderer express dispatch from Rome for that holy service if I will gather up other example of the same stamp which I have lay forth in my apology for the oath of allegiance I can make it more clear than daylight how far the l. cardinal word be discrepant from the truth where his lordship out of most rare confidence be bold to avow pag. 97. that never any pope go so far as to give consent or counsel for the desperate murder of prince that which already have be allege may suffice to convince his lordship I mean that his holiness by depose of king do lead they direct to their grave and tomb the cardinal himself seem to take some notice hereof the church as he speak abhor sudden and unprepensed murder above the rest pag. 95. do not his lordship in this phrase of speech acknowledge that murder commit by open force be not so much disavow or disclaim by the church a little after he speak not in the tooth as before but with full and open mouth that he do not dislike a king once depose by the pope shall be pursue with open war whereupon it follow that in war the king may be lawful slay no doubt a remarkable degree of his lordship clemency a king shall be better entreat and more mild deal withal if he be slay by the shot of a harquebus or caleever in the field then if he be stab by the stroke or thrust of a knife in his chamber or if at a siege of some city he be blow up with a i then by a my make and a train of gunpowder lay under his palace or parliament house in time of peace his reason forsooth because in sudden murder oftentimes the soul and the body perish both together o singular bounty and rare clemency provoker instigator strong puffer and blower of parricide in merciful compassion of the soul become unmerciful and shameful murderer of the body this device may well claim and challenge kindred of Mariana the jesuite invention for he like not at any hand the poison of a tyrant by his meat or drink for fear lest he take the poison with his own hand and swallow or gulp it down in his meat or drink so take shall be find as the common lawyer speak or culpable of his own death but Mariana like better to have a tyrant poison by his chair or by his apparel and robe after the example of the mauritanian king that be so poison only by scent or by contact he may not be find guilty of selfe-fellonie and the soul of the poor tyrant in her flight out of the body may be innocent o hellhound o diabolical wretch o infernal monster do they only suspect and imagine that either in king there be any remainder of kingly courage or in their subject any spark leave of ancient liberty they dare as soon eat their nail or tear their own flesh from the bone as once broach the vessel of this diabolical device how long then how long shall king who the lord have call his anoint king the breathe image of God upon earth king that with a wry or frown look be able to crush these earthworm in piece how long shall they suffer this viperous brood scot-free and without punishment to spit in their face how long the majesty of God in their person and royal majesty to be so notorious vilify so dishonourable trample under foot the l. cardinal board we with a like manifest jest and notable trifle first distinguish between tyrant by administration and tyrant by usurpation then show that he by no mean do approve those profane and heathenish law whereby secret practice and conspiracy against a tyrant by administration be permit his reason because after deposition there be a certain habitude to royal dignity and as it be a kind of politic character inherent in king by which they be discern from person mere private or the common sort of people and the obstacle cross-bar or spar once remove and take out of the way the say king depose be at length reinvest and endow again with lawful use of royal dignity and with lawful administration of the kingdom be it possible that his lordship can speak and utter these word according to the inward persuasion of his heart I believe it not for admit a king cast out of his kingdom be sure to escape with life yet be once reduce to a private state of life after he have wound or wrought himself out of deadly danger so far he be from hold or retain any remainder of dignity or politic impression that on the contrary he fall into great contempt and misery then if he have be a very peasant by birth and have never hold or govern the stern of royal estate what fowl be more beautiful than the peacock let she be plume and bereave of her feather what owl what jackdaw more ridiculous more without all pleasant fashion the homely souter the infamous catchpol the base tinker the rude artificer the pack-horse-porter then live in Rome with liberty when Valentinian be detain captive by Saporas the persian king be more happy than that roman emperor and in case the lord cardinal himself shall be so happy I shall say so unfortunate to be strip of all his dignity and ecclesiastical promotion will it not redound to his lordship wonderful consolation that in his great extremity in the low of his bareness and nakedness he still retain a certain habitual right and character of a cardinal whereby to recover the loss of his former dignity and honour when he behold these print and impression of his foresay honour will it not make he the more willing and glad to forsake the back of his venerable mule to use his cardinal foot-cloth no long but ever after like a cardinal in print and character to walk on foot but let we examine his lordship consolation of king thrust out of their kingdom by the pope for heresy the obstacle as the l. cardinal speak be take away that be to say when the king shall be reform this habitual right and character yet inherent in the person of a king restore he to the lawful administration of his kingdom I take this to be but a cold comfort for here his lordship do only presuppose and not prove that after a king be thrust out of his throne when he shall repent and turn true roman catholic the other by who he have be cast out and by force disseise will recall he to the royal seat and faithful settle he again in his ancient right as one that rejoice for the recovery of such a lose sheep but I shall rather fear the new king will press and stand upon other term as a term of year for a trial whether the repentance of the king displace be true and sound to the core or counterfeit dissemble and paint holiness for the word the sorrowful and heavy look the sad and formal gesture of man pretend repentance be not always to be take to be respect to be credit again I shall fear the afflict king may be charge and bear down too that albeit he have renounce his former heresy he have stumble since at a other stone and run the ship of his faith against some other rock of new heretical pravity or I shall yet fear he may be make to believe that heresy make a deep impression and a character more indelible in the person then be the other politic character of regal majesty alas good king in how hard in how miserable a state do they stand once depose and ever bar of repentance as if the escape and error of king be all sin against the holy ghost or sin unto death for which it be not lawful to pray fall a private person he may be set up and new establish fall a king be a king depose his repentance be ever fruitless ever unprofitable have a private person a train of servant he can not be deprive of any one without his privity and consent have a king million of subject he may be deprive by the pope of a three part when his holiness will have they turn Clerics or enter cloister without ask the king leave and so of subject they may be make nonsubiect but I question yet further a king fall into heresy be depose by the pope his son stand pure catholic the regal seat be empty who shall succeed in the depose king place shall a stranger be prefer by the pope that be to do the innocent son egregious and notorious wrong shall the son himself that be a more injurious part in the son against his father for if the son be touch with any fear of God or move with any reverence towards his father he will diligent and serious take heed that he put not his father by the kingdom by who mean he himself be bear to a kingdom nor will he tread in the step of Henry v. emperor who by the pope instigation expel and chase his age father out of the imperial dignity much less will he hearken to the voice and advise of doctor Suares the jesuite lib. 6. cap. 4. papa who in his book write against myself a book applaud and approve of many doctor after he have like a doctor of the chair pronounce that a king depose by the pope can be lawful expel or kill but only by such as the pope have charge with such execution fall to add a little after if the pope shall declare a king to be a heretic and fall from the kingdom without make further declaration touch execution that be to say without give express charge unto any to make away the king then the lawful successor be a catholic have power to do the feat and if he shall refuse or if there shall be none such than it appertain to the commonalty or body of the kingdom a most detestable sentence for in hereditary kingdom who be the king lawful successor but his son the son then by this doctrine shall imbrue his hand in his own father blood so soon as he shall be depose by the pope a matter so much the near and more deep to be apprehend because the say most outrageous book fly like a furious mastiff direct at my throat and withal instill such precept into the tender disposition of my son as if hereafter he shall become a roman catholic so soon as the pope shall give i the lift out of my throne shall bind he forthwith to make effusion of his own father blood such be the religion of these reverend father the pillar of the pontificial monarchy in comparison of who religion and holiness all the impiety that ever be among the infidel and all the barbarous cruelty that ever be among the cannibal may pass henceforth in the christian world for pure clemency and humanity these thing ought his lordship to have ponder rather than to babble of habitude and politic character which to the common people be like the Bergamasque or the wild-irish form of speech and pass their understanding all these thing be nothing in a manner if we compare they with the last clause which be the close and as it be the upshot of his lordship discourse for therein he labour to persuade concern this article frame to bridle the pope tyrannical power over king if it shall receive gracious entertainment and general approbation that it will breed great danger and work effect of pernicious consequence unto king the reason because it will prove a introduction to schism and schism will stir up civil war contempt of king distemper inclination and motion to entrap their life and which be worst of all the fierce wrath of God inflict all sort of calamity a admirable paradox and able to strike man stone-blind that his holiness must have power to depose king for the better security and safeguard of their life that when their crown be make subject unto a other will and pleasure than they be come to the high altitude and elevation of honour that for the only warrant of their life their supreme and absolute greatness must be depress that for the long keep of their crown a other must pluck the crown from their head as if it shall be say will they not be strip naked by a other the best way be for themselves to untruss for themselves to put off all and to go naked of their own accord will they keep their sovereignty in safety for ever the best way be to let a other have their sovereign authority and supreme estate in his power but I have be ever of this mind that when my good be at no man command or dispose but my own than they be true and certain i own it may be this error be grow upon i and other prince for lack of brain whereupon it may be fear or at least conjecture the pope mean to shave our crown and thrust we into some cloister there to hold rank in the brotherhood of good king Childeric for as much then as my dull capacity do not serve i to reach or comprehend the pith of this admirable reason I have think good to seek and to use the instruction of old and learned experience which teach no such matter by name that civil war and fearful perturbation of state in any nation of the world have at any time grow from this faithful credulity of subject that pope in right have no power to wrest and lift king out of their dignity and possession on the other side by establish the contrary maxim to yoke and hamper the people with pontificial tyranny what rebellious trouble and stir what extreme desolation have England be force to fear and feel in the reign of my predecessor Henry 2 John and Henry 3 these be the maxim and principle which under the emperor Henry 4 and frederic the i. make all Europe flow with channel and stream of blood like a river with water while the saracen by their incursion and victory overflow and in a manner drown the honour of the christian name in the east these be the maxim and principle which make way for the war of the last league into France by which the very bowel of that most famous and flourish kingdom be set on such a combustion that France herself be bring within two finger breadth of bondage to a other nation and the death of her two last king most villainous and traitorous accomplish the lord cardinal then give these diabolical maxim for mean to secure the life and estate of king speak as if he will give man counsel to dry themselves in the river when they come as wet as a water spaniel out of a pond or to warm themselves by the light of the moon when they be starnaked and well near freeze to death the conclusion of the lord of perron examine after the l. cardinal have stout show the strength of his arm and the deep skill of his head in fortification at last he leave his lofty scaffold and fall to work near the ground with more easy tool of humble prayer and gentle exhortation the sum of the whole be this he adiure his auditor never to forge remedy never so to provide for the temporal safety of king as thereby to work their final fall from eternal salvation never to make any rent or rupture in the unity of the church in this corrupt age infect with pestilent heresy which already have make so great a breach in the wall of France will no doubt double their strength by the dissension division and schism of catholic if this infectious plague shall still increase and grow to a carbuncle it can by no mean poison religion without bring king to their wind sheet and woeful hearse the first ruler of that stone of offence aim at no other mark then to make a ignominious and lamentable rent in the church he think the deputy of the three estate have neither head nor first hand in contrive this article but hold it rather a new device and subtle invention suggest by person which be already cut off by their own practice from the body of the roman church have likewise inveigle and ensnare some that bear the name of catholic with some other ecclesiastic and under a fair pretence and goodly cloak by name the service of the king have surprise and play upon their simplicity these man as the cardinal say do imitate Julian the who to bring the christian to idolatrous worship of false god command the idol of jupiter and Venus to be intermingle with imperial statue and other image of christian emperor etc. then after certain rhetorical flourish his lord ship fall to prosecute his former course and cry out of this article a monster have the tail of a fish as if it come cut the narrow sea out of England for in full effect it be downright the english oath save that indeed the oath of England run in a more mild form and a more moderate strain and here he sudden take occasion to make some digression for out of the way and clean from the matter he enter into some purpose of my praise and commendation he courteously forsooth be please to grace i with knowledge of learning and with civil virtue he seem chief to rejoice in his own behalf and to give i thanks that I have do he the honour to enter the list of theological dispute against his lordship howbeit he twitch and carp at i withal as at one that sow seed of dissension and schism among roman catholic and yet he will seem to qualify the matter and to make all whole again by say that in so do I be persuade I do no more than my duty require but now as his lordship follow the point it stand neither with godliness nor with equity nor with reason that act make that statute decree and ordinance ratify for the state and government of England shall be thrust for bind law upon the kingdom of France nor that catholic and much less that ecclesiastic to the end they may live in safety and free enjoy their privilege or immunity in France shall be force to believe and by oath to seal the same point which english catholic to the end they may purchase liberty only to breath nay sorrowful to sigh rather be constrain to allow and to avow beside and whereas in England there be no small number of catholic that lack not constant and resolute mind to endure all sort of punishment rather than to take that oath of allegiance will there not be find a other manner of number in France arm with no less constancy and christian resolution there will most honourable auditor there will without all doubt and we all that be of episcopal dignity will soon suffer martyrdom in the cause then out of the super-abundance and over-weight of his lordship goodness he close couch and convey a certain distasteful opposition between i and his king with praise and thanks to God that his king be not delight and take no pleasure to make martyr all this artificial and swell discourse like unto puff-paste if it be view at a near distance will be find like a bladder full of wind without any solidity of substantial matter for the deputy of the three estate be never so void of understanding to believe that by provide for the life and safety of their king they shall thrust he headlong into eternal damnation their brain be never so much blast so far benumb to dream the soul of their king can mount up to heaven except he be dismount from his princely throne upon earth whensoever the pope shall hold up his finger and whereas he be bold to pronounce that heretic of France do make their benefit and advantage of this division that speech be ground upon this proposition that professor of the christian religion reform which be to say purge and cleanse of all popish dregs be heretic in fact and aught so to be repute in right which proposition his lordship will never sound and sufficient make good before his holiness have compile a other gospel or have forge a other bible at his pontificial anvil the l. cardinal undertake to read i a lecture upon that argument but ever since have play mum-budget and have put himself to silence like one at a nonplus in his enterprise there be three year already go and pass since his lordship begin to shape some answer to a certain writing dispatch by i in few day with form and reform with file and polish with labour and lick his answer over and over again with reiterate extraction and calcination it may be conjecture that all his lordship labour and cost be long since evaporate and vanish in the air howbeit as well the friendly conference of a king for I will not call it a contention as also the dignity excellency and importance of the matter long since deserve and as long since require the publish of some or other answer his lordship long silence will never be impute to lack of capacity wherewith who know not how abundant he be furnish but rather to well advise agnition of his own work and build upon a weak foundation but let we return unto these heretic that make so great gain by the disagreement of catholic it be no part of their duty to aim at sow of dissension but rather to intend and attend their faithful performance of service to their King if some be please and other offend when so good and loyal duty be sincere discharge it be for all good subject to grieve and to be sorry that when they speak for the safety of their king and honour of the truth it be their hard hap to leave any at all unsatisfied but suppose the say heretic be the author of this article prefer by the three estate what need they to conceal their name in that regard what need they to disclaim the credit of such a worthy act will it not redound to their perpetual honour to be the only subject that keep watch over the king life and crown that stand centinel and walk the round for the preservation of his princely diadem when all other have no more touch no more feel thereof then so many stone and what need the deputy for the three estate to receive instruction from foreign kingdom concern a cause of that nature when there be no want of domestical example and the french history be plentiful in that argument what need they to gape for this reform doctrine to come swim with a fish tail out of a island to the main continent when they have before their eye the murder of two king with diverse civil war and many arrest of court all tend to insinuate and suggest the introduction of the same remedy suggestion be needless from abroad when the mischief be feel at home it seem to i that his lordship in smooth and tickle the deputy for the three estate do no less than wring and wrong their great sufficiency with contumely and outrageous abuse as if they be not furnish with sufficient foresight and with loyal affection towards their king for the preservation of his life and honour if the remedy be not beat into their head by those of the religion repute heretic touch myself range by his lordship in the same rank with sower of dissension I take my god to witness and my own conscience that I never dream of any such unchristian project it have be hitherto my ordinary course to follow honest counsel and to walk in open way I never wont myself to hole and corner to crafty shift but evermore to plain and open design I need not hide my intention for fear of any mortal man that puff breath of life out of his nostril nor in any sort do I purpose to set julian the before my eye as a pattern for i to follow julian of a christian become a pagan I profess the same faith of Christ still which I have ever profess julian go about his design with crafty conveyance I never with any of his captious and cunning sleight julian force his subject to infidelity against jesus Christ I labour to induce my subject unto such term of loyalty towards myself as jesus Christ have prescribe and teach in his word but how far I differ from julian it be to be see more at large in my answer to Bellarmine epistle write to blackwell from whence the lord cardinal borrow this example it may well have beseem his lordship to borrow likewise my answer from the same place now as it move i nothing at all to be draw by his lordship into suspicion of this nature and quality so by the praise that he rock i withal I will never be lull asleep to commend a man for his knowledge and withal to take from he the fear of God be to admire a soldier for his goodly head of hair or his curl lock and withal to call he base coward fainthearted and freshwater soldier knowledge wit and learning in a heretic be of none other use and service but only to make he the more culpable and consequent obnoxious to the more grievous punishment all virtue turn to vice when they become the servant of impiety the handmaid which the sovereign lady wisdom call to be of her train in the 9 proverb be moral virtue and human science which then become pernicious when they run away from their sovereign lady-mistris and put over themselves in service to the devil what difference be between two man both alike want the knowledge of God the one fnrnish with art and civil virtue the other brutish barbarous and of a deform life or of profane manner what be the difference between these two I make this the only difference the first go to hell with a better grace and fall into perdition with more facility than the second but he become exceed wicked even threefold and fourfold abominable if he be his treasure and stock of civil virtue in persecute the church of Christ and if that may be lay in his dish which be cast in Caesar tooth that in plain soberness and well-setled temper he attempt the ruin of the commonwealth which from a drunken sot may receive perhaps a more easy fall in brief I scorn all garland of praise which be not ever green but be dry and wither for want of sap and radical moisture do flag about barbarous prince brow I defy and renounce those praise which fit i no more than they fit a mahumetane king of Morocco I contest against all praise which grace i with petty accessory but rob i of the principal that one thing necessary namely the fear and knowledge of my god unto who majesty alone I have devote my sceptre my sword my pen my whole industry my whole self with all that be i in whole and in part I do it I do it in all humble acknowledgement of his unspeakable mercy and favour who have vouchsafe to deliver i from the erroneous way of this age to deliver my kingdom from the pope tyrannical yoke under which it have lie in time past most grievous oppress my kingdom where God be now pure serve and call upon in a tongue which all the vulgar understand my kingdom where the people may now read the scripture without any special privilege from the apostolic see and with no less liberty than the people of Ephesus of Rome and of Corinth do read the holy epistle write to their church by s. Paul my kingdom where the people now pay no long any tribute by the poll for papal indulgence as they do about a hundred year past s. Petri vectigal Onu^phri in vit Paul 4. and math. Paris and be no long compel to the mart for pardon beyond the sea and mountain but have they now free offer from God by the doctrine of the gospel preach at home within their own several parish and jurisdiction if the church of my kingdom in the l. cardinal account be miserable for these cause and the like let he dream on and talk his pleasure for my part I will ever advowe that more worth be our misery then all his felicity for the rest it shall by God grace be my daily endeavour and serious care to pass my day in shape to myself such a course of life that without shameful calumniate of my person it shall not rest in the tip of any tongue to touch my life with just reprehension or blame nor be I so privy to i own guiltiness as to think my state so desperate so deplorable as pope have make their own for some of they have be so open-hearted and so tongue-free to pronounce that pope themselves the key-bearer of heaven and hell Onup Pontif. in vit. mar. 2. do testify that Marcel also after Adrian 4. use these word altiss can be save two pope reckon among the best of the whole bunch or pack namely Adrian 4 and Marcelline 2 have both sing one and the same note that in their understanding they can not conceive any reason why or any mean how those that sway the popedom can be partaker of salvation but for my particular ground my faith upon the promise of God contain in the gospel I do confident and assure believe that repent i of my sin and repose my whole trust in the merit of jesus Christ I shall obtain forgiveness of my sin through his name nor do I fear that I be now or shall be hereafter cast out of the church lap and bosom that I now have or hereafter shall have no right to the church as a putrefy member thereof so long as I do or shall cleave to Christ jesus the head of the church the appellation and name whereof serve in this corrupt age as a cloak to cover a thousand new invention and now no long signify the assembly of the faithful or such as believe in jesus Christ according to his word but a certain glorious ostentation and temporal monarchy whereof the pope forsooth be the supreme head but if the l. cardinal by assure and certain knowledge as perhaps he may by common fame do understand the horrible conspiracy that have be plot and contrive not against my person and life alone but also against my whole stock if he right know and be inly persuade of how many foul perjury and wicked treason diverse ecclesiastical person have be lawful convict in stead of charge i with false imputation that I suffer not my catholic to fetch a sigh or to draw their breath and that I thrust my catholic upon the sharp edge of punishment in every kind he will and may well rather wonder how I myself after so many danger run after so many proditorious snare escape do yet fetch my own breath and yet practice princely clemency towards the say catholic notorious transgressor of divine and human law if the french king in the heart of his kingdom shall nourish and foster such a nest of sting hornet and busy wasp I mean such a pack of subject deny his absolute sovereignty as many roman catholic of my kingdom do i it may well be doubt whether the l. cardinal will advise his king still to feather the nest of the say catholic still to keep they warm still to bear they with a easy and a gentle hand it may well be doubt whether his lordship will extol their constancy that will have the courage to sheathe up their sword in his king bowel or blow up his king with gunpowder into the neither station of the low region it may well be doubt whether he will endure that orator who like as himself have do shall stir up other to suffer martyrdom after such example and to imitate parricide and traitor in their constancy the scope then of the l. cardinal in strike the sweet string and sound the pleasant note of praise which fain he will fill my ear withal be only by his excellent skill in the music of oratory to bewitch the heart of my subject to infatuate their mind to settle they in a resolution to deprive i of my life the reason because the plotter and practiser against my life be honour and reward with a glorious name of martyr their constancy what else be admire when they suffer death for treason whereas hitherto during the time of my whole reign to this day I speak it in the word of a king and truth itself shall make good the king word no man have lose his life no man have endure the rack no man have suffer corporal punishment in other kind mere or simple or in any degree of respect for his conscience in matter of religion but for wicked conspire against my life or estate or royal dignity or else for some notorious crime or some obstinate and wilful disobedience of which traitorous and viperous brood I command one to be hang by the neck of late in Scotland a jesuite of intolerable impudency who at his arraignment and public trial stiff maintain that I have rob the pope of his right and have no manner of right in the possession of my kingdom his lordship therefore in offer himself to martyrdom after the rare example of catholic as he say suffer all sort of punishment in my kingdom do plain profess himself a follower of traitor and parricide these be the worthy these the heroical spirit these the honourable captain and colonel who virtuous part never sufficient magnify and praise his lordship propound for imitation to the french bishop o the name of martyr in old time a sacred name how be it now deride and scoff how be it in these day filthy profane o you the whole choir and holy company of apostle who have seal the truth with your dear blood how much be you disparage how unfit be you paragon and match when traitor bloody butcher and king-killer be make your assistant and of the same or to speak in mild term when you be couple with martyr that suffer for maintain the temporal rite of the pope empire with bishop that offer themselves to a problematical martyrdom for a point decide neither by the authority of your spirit-inspired pen nor by the ancient and venerable testimony of the primitive church for a point which they dare not undertake to teach otherwise then by a doubtful cold fearful way of discourse and altogether without resolution in good sooth I take the cardinal for a personage of a quick spirit and clear sight let his lordship hold i excuse then to persuade myself that in these matter his tongue and his heart his pen and his inward judgement have any concord or correspondence one with another for be very much against his mind as he do confess thrust into the office of a advocate to plead this cause he suffer himself to be carry after his engagement with some heat to utter some thing against his conscience murmur and grumble the contrary within and to affirm some other thing with confidence whereof he have not be otherwise inform then only by vain and lie report of which rank be that bold assertion of his lordship that many catholic in England rather than they will subscribe to the oath of allegiance in the form thereof have undergo all sort of punishment for in England as we have true give the whole christian world to understand in our preface to the apology there be but one form or kind of punishment ordain for all sort of traitor have not his lordship now grace i with goodly testimonial of praise and commendation be I not by his praise proclaim a tyrant as it be inebriate with blood of the saint and a famous engineer of torment for my catholic to this exhortation for the suffering of martyrdom in imitation of my english traitor and parricide if we shall add how crafty and subtle he make the king of England to hold of the pope by fealty and their kingdom in bondage to the pope by temporal recognizance it shall easy appear that his holy-water of praise wherewith I be so reverent besprinkle be a composition extract out of a dram of honey and a pound of gall first steep in a strong decoction of bitter wormwood or of the wild gourd call coloquintida for after he have in the begin of his oration pag. 10. speak of king that owe fealty to the pope and be not sovereign in the high degree of temporal supremacy within their kingdom to explain his mind and meaning the better he marshal the king of England a little after in the same rank his word be these when king John of England not yet bind in any temporal recognizance to the pope have expel his bishop etc. his lordship mean that king John become so bind to the pope not long after and what may this meaning be but in plain term and broad speech to call i usurper and unlawful king for the feudatory or he that hold a manor by fealty when he do not his homage with all suit and service that he owe to the lord Paramount do fall from the property of his fee this reproach of the l. cardinal be second with a other of Bellarmine his brother cardinal that Ireland be give to the king of England by the pope the best be that his most reverend lordship have not show who it be that give Ireland to the pope and touch John king of England thus in brief stand the whole matter between Henry 2. and the pope have pass sundry bickerment about collate of ecclesiastical dignity John the son after his father death renew undertake and pursue the same quarrel drive certain english bishop out of the kingdom for defend the pope insolent usurpation upon his royal prerogative and regal right show such princely courage and resolution in those time when all that stand and suffer for the pope temporal pretension against king be enroll martyr or confessor the pope take the matter in foul scorn and great indignation shut the king by his excommunicatory bull out of the church stir up his baron for other cause the king heavy friend to rise in arm give the kingdom of England like a masterless man turn over to a new master to Philippus Augustus king of France binds philip to make a conquest of England by the sword or else no bargain or else no gift promise Philip in recompense of his travel and royal expense in that conquest full absolution and a general pardon at large for all his sin to be short cuts king John out so much work and make he keep so many iron in the fire for his work that he have none other way none other mean to pacify the pope high displeasure to correct or qualify the malignity of the pope choleric humour by who he be then so entangle in the pope toil but by yield himself to become the pope vassal and his kingdom feudatary or to hold by fealty of the papal See by this mean his crown be make tributary all his people liable to payment of tax by the poll for a certain yearly tribute and he be bless with a pardon for all his sin whether king John be move to do this dishonourable act upon any devotion or inflame with any zeal of religion or enforce by the unresistible weapon of necessity who can be so blind that he do not well see and clear perceive for to purchase his own freedom from this bondage to the pope what can he be unwilling to do that be willing to bring his kingdom under the yoke of Amirales Murmelinus a mahometan prince than king of Granado and Barbaria the pope after that send a legate into England the king now the pope vassal and hold his crown of the pope like a man that hold his land of a other by knight service or by homage and fealty do fair homage for his crown to the pope legate and lay down at his foot a great mass of the pure gold in coin the reverend legate in token of his master sovereignty with more than usual pride fall to kick and spurn the treasure no doubt with a pair of most holy foot not only so but likewise at solemn feast be easy entreat to take the king chair of estate here I will fain know the lord cardinal opinion whether these action of the pope be just or unjust lawful or unlawful according to right or against all right and reason if he will say against right it be then clear that against right his lordship have make way to this example if according to right let he then make it know from whence or from who this power be derive and convey to the pope whereby he make himself sovereign lord of temporalty in that kingdom where neither he nor any of his predecessor ever pretend any right or lay any claim to temporal matter before be such prank to be play by the pontificial bishop be this a act of holiness to set a kingdom on fire by the flame brand of sedition to dismember and quarter a kingdom with intestine war only to this end that a king once reduce to the low degree of misery may be lift by his holiness out of his royal prerogative the very soul and life of his royal estate when begin this papal power in what age begin the pope to practice this power what! have the ancient canon for the scripture in this question bear no palm have the canon of the ancient church impose any such satisfaction upon a sinner that of veraigne and free king he shall become vassal to his ghostly father that he shall make himself together with all his people and subject tributary to a bishop that shall rifle a whole nation of their coin that shall receive homage of a king and make a king his vassal what! shall not a sinner be quit of his fault except his pastor turn robber and one that go about to get a booty except he make his pastor a feoffee in his whole estate and suffer himself under a shadow of penance to freeze naked to be turn out of all his good and possession of inheritance but be it grant admit his holiness rob one prince of his right and revenue to confer the same upon a other be it not a high degree of tyranny to finger a other man estate and to give that away to a three which the second have no right no lawful authority to give well if the pope then shall become his own carver in the right of a other if he shall make his own coffer to swell with a other revenue if he shall deck and array his own back in the spoil of a sinner with who in absolution he make peace and take truce what can this be else but run into further degree of wickedness and mischief what can this be else but heap of robbery upon fraud and impiety upon robbery for by such deceitful crafty and cunning practice the nature of the pontificial sea mere spiritual be change into the kings-bench-court mere temporal the bishop chair be change into a monarch throne and not only so but beside the sinner repentance be change into a snare or pitfall of cozen deceit and saint Peter net be change into a casting-net or a fly to fish for all the wealth of most flourish kingdom moreover the king a hard case be drive by such wile and subtlety to work impossibility to act more than be lawful or within the compass of his power to practice for the king neither may in right nor can by power trans-nature his crown impair the majesty of his kingdom or leave his royal dignity less free to his heir apparent or next successor than he receive the same of his predecessor much less by any dishonourable capitulation by any unworthy contract degrade his posterity bring his people under the grievous burden of tribute and tax to a foreign prince lest of all make they tributary to a priest unto who it no way appertain to have any hand in the civil affair of king or to distain and unhallow their crown and therefore when the pope dispatch his nuntio to Philippus Augustus request the king to avert Lewis his son from lay any claim to the kingdom of England Philip answer the legate as we have it in math. Paris no king no prince can abienate or give away his kingdom but by consent of his baron bind by knight service to defend the say kingdom and in case the pope shall stand for the contrary error his holiness shall give to kingdom a most pernicious example by the same be testify that king John become odious to his subject for such dishonourable and unworthy enthrall of his crown and kingdom therefore the pope right pretend to the crown of England which be nothing else but a ridiculous usurpation have long ago vanish into smoke and require not so much as the draw of one sword to snatch and pull it by violence out of his hand for the pope power lie altogether in a certain wild and wander conceit or opinion of man and be only a imaginary castle in the air build by pride and underprop by superstition be very speedy disperse upon the first rise and appear of the truth in her glorious brightness there be none so very a dolt or blockhead to deny that in case this right of the pope over England be ground upon God word than his holiness may challenge the like right over all other kingdom because all other kingdom crown and sceptre be subject alike to God word for what privilege what charter what evidence can France fetch out of the roll or any other treasury of her monument or record to show that she owe less subjection to God then England or be this yoke of bondage then bring upon the english nation be it a prerogative whereby they may more easy come to the liberty of the son of God or be the people of England persuade that for all their substance wealth and life bestow on the pope his holiness by way of exchange return they better weight and measure of spiritual grace it be ridiculous only to conceive these to yes in thought and yet with such ridiculous with such toy in conceit his lordship feed and entertain his auditor from this point he fall to a other bout and fling at his heretic pag. 105. with who he play no fair play before there be not one synod of minister as he say which will willing subscribe to this article whereunto we shall be bind to swear but herein his lordship shoot far from the mark this article be approve and preach by the minister of my kingdom it be likewise preach by those of France and if need be I assure myself will be sign by all the minister of the french church the l. cardinal proceed for he mean not so soon to give over these heretic all their consistory believe it as their creed that if catholic prince at any time shall offer force unto their conscience than they be dispense withal for their oath of allegiance hence be these modification and restriction toss so much in their mouth provide the king force we not in our conscience hence be these exception in the profession of their faith provide the sovereign power and authority of God be not in any sort violate or infringe I be not able to conceive what engine can be frame of these material for the bear of king out of their eminent seat by any lawful authority or power in the pope for say those of the religion shall be taint with some like error how can that be any shelter of excuse for those of the romish church to undermine or to dig up the throne of their king but in this allegation of the lord cardinal there be nothing at all which do not jump just and accord to a hair with the article of the three estate and with obedience due to the King for they do not profess that in case the king shall command they to do any act contrary to their conscience they will fly at his throat will make any attempt against his life will refuse to pay their taxation or to defend he in the war they make no profession of depose the king or discharge the people from the oath of allegiance tender to the king which be the very point or issue of the matter in controversy and the main mischief against which the three estate have be most worthy careful to provide a wholesome remedy by this article there be a world of difference between the term of disobedience and of deposition it be one thing to disobey the king command in matter prohibit by divine law and yet in all other matter to perform full subjection unto the King it be another thing of a far high degree or strain of disloyalty to bare the king of his royal robe throne and sceptre and when he be thus far disgrace to degrade he and to put he from his degree and place of a King if the holy father shall charge the l. cardinal to do some act repugnant in his own knowledge to the law of God I will religious and according to the rule of charity presume that his lordship in this case will stand out against his holiness and notwithstanding will still acknowledge he to be pope his lordship yet prosecute and follow his former purpose hence be those arm which they have oftentimes bear against king when king practise to take away the liberty of their conscience and religion hence be those turbulent commotion and sedition by they raise as well in the law-countryes against the king of Spain as in Swethland against the catholic king of Polonia beside he cast junius Brutus Buchananus Barclaius and Gerson in our tooth to what end all this I see not how it can be available to authorize the depose of king especial the pope power to depose and yet his lordship here do outface by his leave and bear down the truth for I can never yet learn by any good and true intelligence that in France those of the religion take arm at any time against their King in the first civil war they stand only upon their guard they stand only to their lawful ward and lock of defence they arm not nor take the field before they be pursue with fire and sword burn up and slaughter beside religion be neither the root nor the rind of those intestine trouble the true ground of the quarrel be this during the minority of king Francis 2. the protestant of France be a refuge and succour to the prince of the blood when they be keep from the king presence and by the over pour power of their enemy be no better then plain drive and chase from the Court I mean the grandfather of the king now reign and the grandfather of the prince of Conde when they have no place of safe retreat in regard of which worthy and honourable service it may seem the french king have reason to have the protestant in his gracious remembrance with other commotion or insurrection the protestant be not just to be charge but on the contrary certain it be that king Henry 3 raise and send forth several army against the protestant to ruin and root they out of the kingdom howbeit so soon as they perceive the say king be bring into dangerous term they run with great speed and special fidelity to the king rescue and succour in the present danger certain it be that by their good service the say king be deliver from a most extreme and imminent peril of his life in the city of Tours certain it be they never abandon that Henry 3. nor his next successor Henry 4. in all the heat of revolt and rebellion raise in the great part of the kingdom by the pope and the more part of the clergy but stand to the say king in all their battle to bear up the crown then totter and ready to fall certain it be that even the head and principal of those by who the late king decease be pursue with all extremity at this day do enjoy the fruit of all the good service do to the king by the say protestant and they be now disgrace keep under expose to public hatred what for kindle coal of question and controversy about religion forsooth not so but because if they may have equal and indifferent deal if credit may be give to their faithful advertisement the crown of their king shall be no long pin to the pope flie-flap in France there shall be no french exempt from subjection to the french king cause of benefice or of matrimony shall be no long citable and summonable to the romish court and the kingdom shall be no long tributary under the colour of annates the first fruit of benefice after the remove or death of the incumbent and other like imposition but why do I speak so much in the behalf of the french protestant the lord cardinal himself quitte they of this blame when he tell we this doctrine for the depose of king by the pope mace or verge have credit and authority through all France until Calvin time do not his lordship underhand confess by these word that king have be always before Calvin time the more dishonour and the worse serve item that protestant who his lordship call heretic by the light of holy scripture make the world then and ever since to see the right of king oppress so long before as for those of the low country and the subject of Swethland I have little to say of their case because it be not within ordinary compass and indeed serve nothing to the purpose these nation beside the cause of religion do stand upon certain reason of state which I will not here take upon i like a judge to determine or to sift junius Brutus who the l. cardinal object be a author unknown and perhaps of purpose patch up by some romanist with a wily deceit to draw the reform religion into hatred with christian prince Buchanan I reckon and rank among poet not among divine classical or common if the man have burst out here and there into some term of excess or speech of bad temper that must be impute to the violence of his humour and heat of his spirit not in any wise to the rule and conclusion of true religion right by he conceive before Barclaius allege by the cardinal meddle not with depose of king but deal with disavow they for king when they shall renounce the right of royalty and of their own accord give over the kingdom now he that leave it in the king choice either to hold or to give over his crown leave it not in the pope power to take away the kingdom of Gerson obtrude by the cardinal we have speak sufficient before where it have be show how Gerson be disguise mask and pervert by his in brief I take not upon i to justify and make good all the say of particular author we glory and well we may that our religion afford no rule of rebellion nor any dispensation to subject for the oath of their allegiance and that none of our church give entertainment unto such monstrous and abominable principle of disloyalty if any of the french otherwise persuade in former time Richerius now have alter and change his judgement do contend for the sovereignty of king against papal usurpation he doubtless for wind himself out of the labyrinth of a error so intricate and pernicious deserve great honour and special praise he be worthy to hold a place of dignity above the l. cardinal who have quit and betray his former judgement which be holy and just their motion be contrary their mark be opposite the one recline from evil to good the other decline from good to evil at last his lordship come to the close of his oration and bind up his whole harangue with a feat wreath of praise proper to his King he style the king the elder son of the church a young shoot of the lily which king Solomon in all his royalty be not able to match he lead we by the hand into the pleasant meadow of history there to learn upon the very first sight and view that so long so oft as the king of France embrace union and keep good term of concord with pope and the apostolic see so long as the spouse of the church be pasture and feed among the lily all sort of spiritual and temporal grace abundant shower upon their crown and upon their people on the contrary when they make any rent or separation from the most holy see then the lily be prick and almost choke with sharp thorn they begin to droop to stoop and to bear their beautiful head down to the very ground under the strong flaw and gust of boisterous wind and tempest my answer to this flourish close and upshot shall beno less apert than apt it savour not of good and faithful service to smooth and stroke the king head with a soft hand of oil speech and in the mean time to take away the crown from his head and to defile it with dirt but let we try the cause by evidence of history yea by the voice and verdict of experience to see whether the glorious beauty of the french lily have be at any time blast and thereupon have fade by start aside and make separation from the holy See under the reign of king Philip the fair France be bless with peace and prosperity notwithstanding some outrageous act do against the papal see and contumelious cry quittance by king Philip with the pope Lewis 12. in range battle defeat the army of pope julius 2. and his confederate proclaim the say pope to be fall from the popedom stamp certain coin and piece of gold with a dishonourable mot even to Rome itself Rome be Babylon yet so much be Lewis love and honour of his people that by a peculiar title he be call the father of the country great blessing of God great outward peace and plenty great inward peace with spiritual and celestial treasure be never heap upon my great Britain then have be since my great Britain become great in the great and chief respect of all to wit since my great Britain have shake off the pope yoke since she have refuse to receive and to entertain the pope legate employ to collect s. Peter tribute or Peter-pence since the king of England my great Britain have not be the pope vassal to do he homage for their crown and have no more feel the lash the scourge of base and beggarly monk of Holland Zealand and Friesland what need I speak yet a word and no more be they not a kind of naked and bare people of small value before God light the torch of the gospel and advance it in those nation be they not a ill feed and scrag people in comparison of the inestimable wealth and prosperity both in all military action and mechanical trade in traffic as merchant in mart as man of war in long navigation for discovery to which they be now raise and mount by the merciful blessing of God since the darkness of popery have be scatter and the bright sun of the gospel have shine in those country behold the venetian republic have she now less beauty less glory less peace and prosperity since she late fall to bicker and contend with the pope since she have wring out of the pope hand the one of his two sword since she have plume and shake his temporal dominion on the contrary after the french king have honour the pope with munificent grant and gift of all the city and territory land and possession which they now hold in Italy and the ancient earldom of avignon in France for a overplus be they not rude recompense and homely handle by their most ingrateful fee-farmer and copyholder have not pope forge a donation of Constantine of purpose to blot out all memory of pippin and charlemagne donation have they not vex and trouble the state have they not whet the son of Lewis the courteous against their own father who life be a pattern and example of innocence have they not by their infinite exaction rob and scour the kingdom of all their treasure be not the king of France drive to stop their violent course by the pragmatical sanction do they not sundry time interdict the kingdom degrade the king solicit the neighbour-prince to invade and lay hold on the kingdom and stir up the people against the king whereby a gate be open to a world of trouble and parricide do not Ravaillac render this reason for his monstrous and horrible attempt that king Henry have a design to war with God because he have a design to take arm against his holiness who be God this make i to wonder what move the l. cardinal to marshal the last civil war and motion in France in the rank of example of unhappy separation from the pope when the pope himself be the trumpeter of the same troublesome motion if the pope have be wrong and offend by the french king or his people and the kingdom of France have be scourge with pestilence or famine or some other calamity by foreign enemy it may have be take in probability as a vengeance of God for some injury do unto his vicar but his holiness be the root the ground the master-workman and artificer of all these mischief how can it be say that God punish any injury do to the pope but rather that his holiness do revenge his own quarrel and which be worst of all when his holiness have no just cause of quarrel or offence now then to exhort a nation as the l. cardinal have do by the remembrance of former calamity to curry favour with the pope and to hold a strict union with his holiness be no exhortation to bear the pope any respect of love or of reverence but rather a rub of memory and a call to mind of those grievous calamity whereof the pope have be the only occasion it be also a threaten and obtrude of the pope terrible thunderbolt which never scorch nor parch any skin except craven and meticulous body and have bring many great shower of blessing upon my kingdom as for France if she have enjoy prosperity in the time of her good agreement with pope it be because the pope seek the amity of prince that be in prosperity have the mean to curb his pretension and to put he to some plunge king be not in prosperity because the pope hold amity with king but his holiness use all device and seek all mean to have amity with king because he see they flourish and sail with prosperous wind the swallow be no cause but a companion of the spring the pope be no worker of a kingdom felicity but a wooer of king when they sit in felicity lap he be no founder but a follower of their good fortune on the other side let a kingdom fall into some grievous disaster or calamity let civil war boil in the bowel of the kingdom civil war no less dangerous to the state then fearful and grievous to the people who rise soon than the pope who rush soon into the trouble stream then the pope who thrust himself soon into the heat of the quarrel then the pope who run soon to raise his gain by the public wrack then the pope and all under colour of a heart wound and bleed for the salvation of soul if the lawful king happen to be foil to be oppress and thereupon the state by his fall to get a new master by the pope practice then the say new-master must hold the kingdom as of the pope free gift and rule or guide the stern of the state at his beck and by his instruction if the first and right lord in despite of all the pope fulmination and firework shall get the honourable day and upper hand of his enemy then the holy father with a cheerful and pleasant grace yea with fatherly gratulation open the rich cabinet of his jewel I mean the treasury of his indulgence and fall now to dandle and cocker the king in his fatherly lap who throat if he can he will have cut not long before this pestilent mischief have now a long time take root and be grow to a great head in the christian world through the secret but just judgement of God by who Christian king have be smite with a spirit of dizziness Christian king who for many age past have live in ignorance without any sound instruction without any true sense and right feel of their own right and power while under a shadow of religion and false cloak of piety their kingdom have be overburden yea overborne with tribute and their crown make to stoop even to miserable bondage that God in who hand the heart of king be poise and at his pleasure turn as the watercourse that mighty God alone in his good time be able to rouse they out of so deep a slumber and to take order their drowsy fit once over and shake off with heroical spirit that pope hereafter shall play no more upon their patience nor presume to put bit and snaffle in their noble mouth to the bind up of their power with weak scruple like mighty bull lead about by little child with a small twist thread to that God that king of king I devote my sceptre at his foot in all humbleness I lay down my crown to his holy decree and command I will ever be a faithful servant and in his battle a faithful champion to conclude in this just cause and quarrel I dare send the challenge and will require no second to maintain as a defendant of honour that my brother-prince and myself who God have advance upon the throne of sovereign majesty and supreme dignity do hold the royal dignity of his majesty alone to who service as a most humble homager and vassal I consecrate all the glory honour splendour and lustre of my earthly kingdom