to you most sacred and invincible emperor right high and mighty king right excellent free prince and state my love brother and cousin to you I say as of right belong do I consecrate and direct this warn of i or rather preamble to my reprint apology for the oath of allegiance for the cause be general and concern the authority and privilege of king in general and all supereminent temporal power and if in whatsoever society or corporation of man either in corporation of city or in the corporation of any mechanike craft or handiwork every man be careful to maintain the privilege of that society whereunto he be swear nay they will rather cluster all in one make it a common cause expose themselves to all sort of peril then suffer the least breach in their liberty if those of the base sort of people I say be so curious and zealous for the preservation of their common privilege and liberty as if the mean among they be touch in any such point they think it concern they all then what shall we do in such a case who GOD have place in the high throne upon earth make his lieutenant and vicegerent and even seat we upon his own throne to execute his judgement the consideration hereof have now move i to a case unto you which do not so near touch i in my particular as it do open a breach against our authority I speak in the plural of all king and privilege in general and since not only all rank and sort of people in all nation do inviolable observe this maxim but even the civil law by which the great part of Christendom be govern do give they a interest how much more than have you interest in this cause not be or to you but with you and indeed you all or at lest and since this cause be common to we all both the civil law and the municipal law of all nation permit and warn they that have a common interest to concur in one for the defence of their common cause yea common sense teach we with the poet awake then while it be time and suffer not by your long sleep the string of your authority to be cut in and one and one to your general ruin which by your unite force will rather make a strong rope for the enemy to hang himself in with Achitophel then that he shall ever be able to break it as for this apology of i it be true that I think good to set it first out without put my name unto it but never so as I think to deny it remember well my own word but take out of the scripture in the begin of the preface to the reader in my (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) that nothing be so hide which shall not be open etc: promise there which with GOD his grace I shall ever perform never to do that in secret which I shall need to be ashamed of when it shall come to be proclaim in public in deed I think it fit for two respect that this my apology shall first visit the world without have my name write in the forehead thereof first because of the matter and next of the person that I meddle with the matter it be a treatise which I be to write contain reason and discourse in divinity for the defence of the oath of allegiance and refutation of the condemner thereof I think it not comely for one of my place to put my name to book concern scholastic disputation who calling be to set forth decree in the imperative mood for I think myself as good a man as the pope by his reverence for who these my answerer make the like excuse for that his breve be so summary without yield any reason unto they my next reason be the respect of the person who with I meddle wherein although I short answer the pope breve yet the point I most labour be the refutation of Bellarmine letter I be never the man I confess that can think a cardinal a meet match for a king especial have many hundred thousand of my subject of as good birth as he as for his church dignity his cardinalship I mean I know not how to rank or value it either by the warrant of God his word or by the ordinance of emperor or king it be indeed only a new papal erection tolerate by the sleep connivance of our predecessor I mean still by the plural of king but notwithstanding of this my forbear to put my name unto it some ambassador of some of you my love brother and cousin who this cause do neerely concern can witness that I make present of some of those book at their first print unto they and that avowed in my own name as also the english paragraphist or rather perverse Pamphleter parson since all his desciption must run upon a p. have true observe that my arm be affix in the frontispiece thereof which use not to be in book of other man do whereby his malice in pretend his ignorance that he may pay i the sound be the more inexcusable but now that I find my spare to put my name unto it have not procure my spare by these answerer who have neither spare my person direct in name i nor indirect by rail upon the author of the book it be now high time for i no long to conceal nor disavow myself as if I be ashamed of my own deed and therefore that you may the better understand the nature of the cause I will begin at the first ground thereof the never enough wonder at and abhor powder-treason though the repetition thereof grieve I know the gentle heart jesuite parson this treason I say be not only intend against i and my posterity but even against the whole house of parliament plot only by papist and they only lead thereto by a preposterous zeal for the advancement of their religion some of they continue so obstinate that even at their death they will not acknowledge their fault but in their last word immediate before the expire of their breath refuse to condemn themselves and crave pardon for their deed except the romish church shall first condemn it and soon after it be discover that a great number of my popish subject of all rank and sex both man and woman as well within as without the country have a confuse notion and a obscure knowledge that some great thing be to be do in that parliament for the weal of the church although for secrecy cause they be not acquaint with the particular certain form of prayer have likewise be set down and use for the good success of that great errand add hereunto that diverse time and from diverse priest the arch-traitor themselves receive the sacrament for confirmation of their heart and observation of secrecy some of the principal jesuit likewise be find guilty of the foreknowledge of the treason itself of which number some flee from their trial other be apprehend as holy Gamet himself and Ouldcorne be and just execute upon their own plain confession of their guilt if this treason now clad with these circumstance do not minister a just occasion to that parliament house who they think to have destroy courageous and zealous at their next sit down to use all mean of trial whether any more of that mind be yet leave in the country I leave it to you to judge who God have appoint his high depute-iudge upon earth and among other thing for this purpose this oath of allegiance so unjust impugn be then devise and enact and in case any sharp law be then make against the papist that be not obedient to the former law of the country if you will consider the time place and person it will be think no wonder see that occasion do so just exasperate they to make severe law than otherwise they will have do the time I say be the very next sit down of the parliament after the discovery of that abominable treason the place be the same where they shall all have be blow up and so bring it fresh to their memory again the person be those very parliament man who they think to have destroy and yet so far have both my heart and government be from any bitterness as almost never one of those sharp addition to the former law have ever yet be put in execution and that you may yet know further for the more convince these libeler of wilful malice who impudent affirm that this oath of allegiance be devise for deceive and entrap of papist in point of conscience the truth be that the low house of parliament at the first frame of this oath make it to contain that the pope have no power to excommunicate i which I cause they to reform only make it to conclude that no excommunication of the pope can warrant my subject to practice against my person or state deny the deposition of king to be in the pope lawful power as indeed I take any such temporal violence to be far without the limit of such a spiritual censure as excommunication be so careful be I that nothing shall be contain in this oath except the profession of natural allegiance and civil and temporal obedience with a promise to resist to all contrary uncivil violence this oath now ground upon so great and just a occasion set forth in so reasonable term and ordain only for make of a true distinction between papist of quiet disposition and in all other thing good subject and such other papist as in their heart maintain the like violent bloody maxim that the powder-traitor do this oath I say be publish and put in practice breed such evil blood in the pope head and his clergy as come forth prohibit all catholic from take the same as a thing clean contrary to the catholic faith and that the take thereof can stand with the salvation of their soul there come likewise a letter of cardinal Bellarmine to blackwell to the same purpose but discourse more at length upon the say oath whereupon after I have enter in consideration of their unjust impugn that so just and lawful a oath and fear that by their untrue calumny and sophistry the heart of a number of the most simple and ignorant of my people shall be mislead under that fair and deceitful cloak of conscience I think good to set forth a apology for the say oath wherein I prove that as this oath contain nothing but matter of civil and temporal obedience due by subject to their sovereign prince so this quarrel therewith be nothing but a late usurpation of pope against the warrant of all scripture ancient counsel and father upon the temporal power of king where with only my apology do meddle but the publish of this book of i have bring such two answerer or rather railer upon i as all the world may wonder at for my book be first write in english a english oath be the subject thereof and the use of it proper belong to my subject of England and immediate thereafter be translate into latin upon a desire that some have of further publish it abroad it come home unto i now answer in both the language and I think if it have be set forth in all the tongue that be at the confusion of Babel it will have be return answer in they all again thus may a man see how busy a bishop the devil be and how he omit no diligence for vent of his poison ware but herein their malice do clear appear that they pay i so quick with a double answer and yet have never answer their own archpriest who have write a book for the maintenance of the same oath and of the temporal authority of king allege a cloud of their own scooleman against they as for the english answerer my unnatural and fugitive subject I will neither defile my pen nor your sacred eye or ear with the describe of he who ashame nay abhor not to rail nay to rage and spew forth blasphemy against the late queen of famous memory a subject to rail against his natural sovereign by birth a man to rail against a lady by sex a holy man in outward profession to insult upon the dead nay to take Radamanthus office over his head and to sit down and play the judge in hell and all his quarrel be that either her successor or any of her servant shall speak honourable of she curse be he that curse the anoint of God and destroy may he be with the destruction of Korah that have sin in the contradiction of Korah without may such dog and swine be cast forth I say out of the spiritual jerusalem as for my latin answerer I have nothing to say to his person he be not my subject he stand or fall unto his own lord but sure I be they two have cast lot upon my book since they can not divide it the one of they my fugitive to rail upon my late predecessor but a rope be the fit answer for such a historian the other a stranger think he may be bold both to pay my person and my book as indeed he do which how just either in matter or manner we be now to examine but first who shall be the true author of this book I can but guess he call himself matthaeus cardinal beauties chaplain a a a be a proper word to express the true meaning of throw evangelist indeed full of throward divinity a obscure author utter unknown to i be yet little know to the world for any other of his work and therefore must be a very desperate fellow in begin his apprentisage not only to refute but to rail upon a King but who will consider the carriage of the whole book shall find that he write with such authority or at the least so little spare either king in general or my person in particular and with such a greatness b b p. 46. and c c p. 63. as it shall appear or at least be very probable that it be the master and not the man labour especial in one place where he quarrel i for cast up his and unto he he there gross forget himself say pag. 69. thereby make this author to be one person with Bellarmine but let it be the work of a indeed and not of a personate cardinal yet must it be the cardinal deed since master be the cardinal man and do it in his master defence the errand then be the cardinal and do by his own man it can but be account as his own deed especial since the english answerer do four time promise that Bellarmine or one by his appointment shall sufficient answer it and now to come to his matter and manner of answer sure if there be no more but his unmannerly manner it be enough to disgrace the whole matter thereof for first to show his pride in his printer preface of the po^itan edition of this he must equal the cardinal greatness with i in every thing for though he confess this master to be a obscure man yet be the cardinal chaplain he be sufficient enough forsooth to answer a english book that lack the name of a author as if a personate obscure name for auhour of a cardinal book be a meet match for answer a king book that lack the name of a author and a cardinal chaplain to meet with the dean of the king chapel who parson with the cardinal have as it seem agree upon to entitle to be the author of my apology and not only in the preface but also through the whole book do he keep this comparative greatness he must be as short in his answer as I be in my book he must refute all that I have say against the pope second with equal brevity and upon one page almost as I have do i and because I have set down the substance of the oath in 14. article in just as many article must he set down that act of parliament of i wherein the oath be contain and yet have he content himself with his own pride by the demonstration of his own greatness without further wrong of i it have be the more tolerable but what cause give I he to farce his whole book with injury both against my person and book for whereas in all my apology I have never give he a foul word and especial never give he the lie he by the contrary give i nine time the lie in express term and seven time charge i with a falsehood which phrase be equivalent with a lie and as for all other word of reproach as of such like reproach I say I doubt if there be a page in all his book free except where he idle set down the pope breve and his own letter and in case this may only seem to touch the unknown author of the book who notwithstanding he know well enough as I show before he spare not my person with my own name p. 47. sometime say that pope Clement think i to be incline to their religion p. 98. sometime that I be a Puritan in Scotland and a persecutor of protestant in one place he conclude p. 87. in another place p. 98. in another place he say ibid. and in another place after that he have compare and rank i with julian the apostate he conclude p. 97. if this now be mannerly deal with a king I leave it to you to judge who can but resent such indignity do to one of your quality and as for the matter of his book it well fit indeed the manner thereof for he never answer direct to the main question in my book for whereas my apology handle only two point as I tell you before one to prove that the oath of allegiance do only meddle with the civil and temporal obedience due by subject to their natural sovereign the other that this late usurpation of pope over the temporal power of prince be against the rule of all scripture ancient counsel and father he never improve the first but by a false inference that the oath deny the pope power of excommunication direct since it deny his authority in depose of king and for the second point he bring no proof to the contrary but and and that no catholic ever doubt of it so as I may true say of he that he either understand not or at least will not seem to understand my book in never direct answer the main question as I have already say and so may I just turn over upon himself that doom of ignorance which in the begin of his book he rash pronounce upon i say that I neither understand the pope breve his letter nor the oath itself and as he delight to repeat over and over I know not how oft and triumph in this wrong inference of he that to deny the pope power to depose king (@) ^o deny the pope primacy and his spiritual power of excommunication so do he upon that ground of give the pope so ample a power over king to throne or dethrone they at his pleasure and yet only subject christian king to that slavery as I doubt not but in your own honour you will resent you of such indignity the rather since it concern so many of you as profess the romish religion far more than i for since he account i a heretic and like julian the apostate I be consequent and none of the pope flock and so be in the case of ethnic prince over who he confess the pope have no power but you be in the pope fold and you that great pastor may lead as sheep to the slaughter when it shall please he and as the ass ear must be horn if the lion list so to interpret it so must you be remove as scab sheep from the flock if so be the pope think you to be though your skin be indeed never so sound thus have he set such a new goodly interpretation upon the word of as if it be as much to say as depose christian king and that give the pope power to dispense with all sort of oath vow penalty censurer and law even with the natural obedience of subject to their sovereign lord much like to that new coin gloss that his brother a a Senten card. baron excom Venet. Baronius make upon the word in s. Peter vision that be say he to the pope go kill and confound the venetian and because I have in my book by cite a place in his controversy discover he to be a small friend to king he be much commove for whereas in his say controversy speak the lib. cler. cap. 28. he be so bold as to affirm that churchman be exempt from the power of earthly king and that they ought they no subjection even in temporal matter but only and in their own discretion for the preservation of peace and good order because I say cite this place of he in my book I tell with admiration that he free all churchman from any subjection to king even those that be their borne-subiect he be angry with this phrase and say it be a addition for breed envy unto he and raise of hatred against he for say he although Bellarmine affirm general that churchman be not subject to earthly king yet do he not insert that particular clause though they be bear and dwell in their dominion as if the word of churchman and earthly king in general import not as much for layick as well as churchman be subject to none but to their natural sovereign and yet do he not stick to confess that he mean it though it be not fit he say to be express and thus quarrel he i for reveal his print secret but who hatred do he fear in this be it not you who have interest but king in the withdraw of true subjection from king and when the great monarch among you will remember that almost the three part of your subject and of your territory be churchman and church-living I hope you will then consider and weigh what a feather he pull out of your wing when he denude you of so many subject and their possession in the pope favour nay what brier and thorn be leave within the heart of your dominion when so populous and potent a party shall have their birth education and livelihood in your country and yet owe you no subjection nor acknowledge you for their sovereign so as where the churchman of old be content with their tithe of every man good the pope now will have little less than the three part of every king subject and dominion and as in this place so throughout all the rest of his book he do nothing but amplify the pope power over king and exaggerate my unreasonable rigour for press this oath which he will needs have to be nothing but a renew oath of supremacy in more subtle and crafty term only to rob the pope of his primacy and spiritual power make his temporal power and authority over prince to be one of the chief article of the catholic faith but that it may the better appear unto you that all my labour and intention in this errand be only to meddle with that due temporal obedience which my subject owe unto i and not to entrap nor enthrall their conscience as he most false affirm you shall first see how far other godly and christian emperor and king be from acknowledge the pope temporal supremacy over they nay have create control and depose pope and next what a number of my predecessor in this kingdom have at all occasion even in the time of the great greatness of pope resist and plain withstand they in this part and first all christian emperor be for a long time so far from acknowledge the pope superiority over they as by the contrary the pope acknowledge themselves for their vassal reverence and obey the emperor as their lord for proof whereof I remit you to my apology and for the create of pope the emperor be in so long and continual possession thereof as I will use for my first witness a pope himself who in a a a Sigebert ann. 773. Walthram naumburg lib. Episc mart. Polon ann. 780. theod. privileg and jurib. Imper. and dist. 30. c. Hadrian 2. synod of a hundred fifty and three bishop and abbot do ordain that the emperor CHARLES the great shall have the right of choose the pope and ordain the apostolical seat and the dignity of the roman principality nay far he ordain that all archbishop and bishop shall receive their investiture from the emperor or else be of no avail and that a bishop want it shall not be consecrate pronounce a anathema against all that shall disobey this sentence and that the emperor assent to the pope election be a thing ordinary for a long time b b see Platin. in u^t Pel^g 2. Gregor. 1. and Severini Platina and a number of the pope own writer bear witness and c c lib. Bellarmine himself in his book of controversy can get it handsome deny nay the pope be even force then to pay a certain sum of money to the emperor for their confirmation and this last almost seven hundred year after CHRIST witness d d in Chron. ann. 680. Sigebert and e e in vit. agathon and Anast in vit. eiusd Agath. and herm. contract ann. 678. poster and Dist 63. c. Agatho Luitprandus with other popish historian and for emperor depose of pope there be likewise diverse example the emperor f f hist lib. 6 c. 10 11. Rhegino an. 963. and Platin in vit. joan. 13. Ottho depose pope John the twelve of that name for diverse crime and vice especial of lechery the emperor g g marianus scot. Sigeb abbas Vrsp ann. 1046. and Platin in vit. greg. 6. Henry the three in a short time depose three pope Benedict the nine Silvester the three and gregory the six as well for the sin of avarice as for abuse their extraordinary authority against king and prince and as for king that have deny this temporal superiority of pope first we have the testimony of diverse famous historiographer for the general of many christian kingdom as h h Walthram naumburg in lib. Walthram testify that the bishop of Spain Scotland England li^ invest Episc. ann. 1110. Hungary from ancient institution till this modern novelty have their investiture by king with peaceable enjoy of their temporality whole and entire and whosoever say he be peaceable solicitous let he peruse the life of the ancient and read the history and he shall understand thus much and for verification of this general assertion we will first begin at the practice of the king of France though not name by Walthram in this his enumeration of kingdom among who my first witness shall be that vulgar know letter of i i see annal Nicolai in philip. Pulchro Philip le Bel king of France to pope Boniface the 8 the beginning whereof after a scornful salutation be and likewise after that k k 1268 Senatus parisiens Lewes the nine surname sanctus have by a public instrument call sanctio forbid all the exaction of the pope court within his realm pope Pius l l joan. Maierius lib. Scismat and Concil. the 2 in the begin of Lewes the eleven his time great mislike this decree so long before make send his legate to the say king Lewes with letter patent urge his promise which he have make when he be dolphin of France to repeal that sanction if ever he come to be King the king refer the legate over with his letters-patent to the council of Paris where the matter be propound be impugn by joan. Romanus the king attorney with who opinion the university of Paris concur a appeal be make from the attempt of the pope to the next general council the cardinal depart with indignation but that the king of France and church thereof have ever stoken to their gallican immunity in deny the pope any temporal power over they and in resist the pope as oft as ever they press to meddle with their temporal power even in the donation of benefice the history be so full of they as the only example thereof will make up a big volume by itself and so far be the sorbonist for the king and french church privilege in this point as they be wont to maintain that if the pope fall a quarrel the king for that cause the gallican church may elect a patriarch of their own renounce any obedience to the pope and Gerson be so far from give the pope that temporal authority over king who otherwise be a devout roman catholic as he write a book not only from the power over king but even over the church and now permit all further example of foreign king action I will only content i at this time with some of my own predecessor example of this kingdom of England that it may thereby the more clear appear that even in those time when the world be full of darken blindness and ignorance the king of England have oftentimes not only repine but even strong resist and withstand this temporal usurpation and encroachment of ambitious pope and I will first begin at o o matt. in henr. 1. ^100 king Henry the first of that name after the conquest who after he be crown give the bishopric of Winchester to William gifford and forthwith invest he into all the possession belong to the bishopric contrary to the canon of the new synod p p ibid. ann. 1113. king Henry also give the archbishopric of Canterbury to Radulph bishop of London and give he investiture by a ring and a crosier staff also pope q q ibid. 119. calixtus hold a council at Rheims whither king Henry have appoint certain bishop of England and Normandy to go thurstan also elect archbishop of York get leave of the king to go thither give his faith that he will not receive consecration of the pope and come to the synod by his liberal gift as the fashion be win the roman favour and by their mean obtain to be consecrate at the pope hand which as soon as the king of England know he forbid he to come within his dominion moreover king Edward the first prohibit the abbot of r r Waltham and dean of Paul to collect a ten of every man good for a supply to the holy land which the pope by three bull have commit to their charge and the say dean of Paul compere before the king and his council promise for the reverence he do bear unto the king not to meddle any more in that matter without the king good leave and permission here I hope a churchman disobey the pope from obedience to his prince even in church matter but this new jesuited divinity be not then know in the world the same Edward i. implead the dean of the chapel of Vuluerhampton because the say Deane have against the privilege of the kingdom give a prebend of the same chapel to one at the pope command whereupon the say Deane compeered and put himself in the king will for his offence the say Edward i. deprive also the bishop of Durham of all his liberty for disobey a prohibition of the king so as it appear the king in those day think the church man their subject though now we be teach other seraphical doctrine for further proof whereof John of ibstocke be commit to the goal by the say king for have a suit in the court of Rome seven year for the rectory of newchurch and Edward 2 follow the footstep of his father after give out a summons against the abbot of Walden for cite the abbot of s. Albon and other in the court of Rome give out letter for his apprehension and likewise because a certain prebend of Banbury have draw one Bevercoat by a plea to Rome without the king dominion therefore be letter of caption send forth against the say prebend and Edward 3 follow likewise the example of his predecessor because a parson of Liche have summon the prior of s. Oswalds before the pope at Avignon for have before the judge in England recover the arrearage of a pension direct a precept for seize upon all the good both spiritual and temporal of the say parson because he have do this in prejudice of the king and crown the say king also make one harwoden to be declare culpable and worthy to be punish for procure the pope bull against a judgement that be give by the king judge and likewise because one enter upon the priory of Barnewell by the pope bull the say be commit to the tower of London there to remain during the king pleasure so as my predecessor you see of this kingdom even when the pope triumph in their greatness spare not to punish any of their subject that will prefer the pope obedience to they even in church matter so far be they then from either acknowledge the pope for their temporal superior or yet from doubt that their own churchman be not their subject and now I will close up all these example with a act of parliament in king Richard 2. his time whereby it be prohibit that none shall procure a benefice from Rome under pain to be put out of the king protection and thus may you see that what those king successive one to another by four generation have act in private the same be also maintain by a public Law by these few example now I hope I have sufficient clear myself from the imputation that any ambition or desire of novelty in i shall have stir i either to rob the pope of any thing due unto he or to assume unto myself any further authority then that which other christian emperor and king through the world and my own predecessor of England in especial have long ago maintain neither be it enough to say as parson do in his answer to the lord Cook that far more king of this country have give many more example of acknowledge or not resist the pope usurp authority some perchance lack the occasion and some the ability of resist they for even by the civil law in the case of violent intrusion and long and wrongful possession against i it be enough if I prove that I have make lawful interruption upon convenient occasion but the cardinal think the oath not only unlawful for the substance thereof but also in regard of the person who unto it be to be swear for say he the king be not a catholic and in two or three other place of his book he stick not to call i by my name very broad a heretic as I have already tell but yet before I be public declare a heretic by the pope own law my people ought not to refuse their obedience unto i and I trust if I be but a subject and accuse by the pope in his conclave before his cardinal he will have hard prove i a heretic if he judge i by their own ancient order for first I be no apostate as the cardinal will make i not only have ever be bring up in that religion which I present profess but even my father and grandfather on that side profess the same and so can be proper a heretic by their own doctrine since I never be of their church and as for the queen my mother of worthy memory although she continue in that religion wherein she be nourish yet be she so far from be superstitious or jesuited therein that at my baptism although I be baptize by a popish archbishop she send he word to forbear to use the spittle in my baptism which be obey be indeed a filthy and a apish trick rather in scorn then imitation of CHRIST and her own very word be that she will not have a pocky priest to spit in her child mouth as also the font wherein I be christen be send from the late queen here of famous memory who be my godmother and what her religion be Pius v. be not ignorant and for further proof that that renown queen my mother be not superstitious as in all her letter whereof I receive many she never make mention of religion nor labour to persuade i in it so at her last word she command her master-houshold a scottish gentleman my servant and yet alive she command he I say to tell i that although she be of another religion then that wherein I be bring up yet she will not press i to change except my own conscience force i to it for so that I lead a good life and be careful to do justice and govern well she doubt not but I will be in a good case with the profession of my own religion thus be I no apostate nor yet a deborder from that religion which one part of my parent profess and a other part give i good allowance of neither can my baptism in the rite of their religion make i a apostate or heretic in respect of my present profession since we all agree in the substance thereof be all baptize in the name of the father the son and the holy ghost upon which head there be no variance among we and now for the point of heretic I will never be ashamed to render a account of my profession and of that hope that be in i as the apostle prescribe I be such a catholic christian as believe the three creed that of the apostle that of the council of nice and that of athanasius the two latter be paraphrase to the former and I believe they in that sense as the ancient father and counsel that make they do understand they to which three creed all the minister of England do subscribe at their ordination and I also acknowledge for orthodox all those other form of creed that either be devise by counsel or particular father against such particular heresy as most reign in their time i reverence and admit the four first general counsel as catholic and orthodox and the say four general counsel be acknowledge by our act of parliament and receive for orthodox by our church as for the father I reverence they as much and more than the jesuit do and as much as themselves ever crave for what ever the father for the first five hundred year do with a consent agree upon to be believe as a necessary point of salvation I either will believe it also or at least will be humble silent not take upon i to condemn the same but for every private father opinion it bind not my conscience more than Bellarmine every one of the father usual contradict other I will therefore in that case follow s. a a lib. 2. con cap. 32. Augustine rule in judge of their opinion as I find they agree with the scripture what I find agreeable thereunto I will glad embrace what be otherwise I will with their reverence reject as for the scripture no man doubt I will believe they but even for the I hold they in the same account that the ancient do they be still print and bind with our bible and public read in our church I reverence they as the writing of holy and good man but since they be not find in the canon we account they to be or b b lib. 1. verb c. 4. which be Bellarmine own distinction and therefore not sufficient whereupon alone to ground any article of faith except it be confirm by some other place of canonical scripture conclude this point with Ruffinus who be no novelist I hope that the apocryphal book be by the father permit to be read not for confirmation of doctrine but only for instruction of the people as for the saint depart I honour their memory and in the honour of they do we in our church observe the day of so many of they as the scripture do canonize for saint but I be loath to believe all the tale of the legended saint and first for the bless virgin Marie I yield she that which the angel Gabriel pronounce of she and which in her canticle she prophesy of herself that be that a a luc. 1.28 she be bless among woman and b b ibid. ver. 48. that all generation shall call she bless I reverence she as the mother of CHRIST who of our saviour take his flesh and so the mother of GOD since the divinity and humanity of CHRIST be inseparable and I free confess that she be in glory both above angel and man her own son that be both GOD and man only except but I dare not mock she and blaspheme against GOD call she not only but and pray she to command and control her son who be her GOD and her saviour nor yet can I think that she have no other thing to do in heaven then to hear every idle man suit and busy herself in their errand while request while command her son while come down to kiss and make love with priest and while dispute and brawl with devil in heaven she be in eternal glory and joy never to be interrupt with any worldly business and there I leave she with her bless son our saviour and she in eternal felicity as for prayer to saint Christ I be sure have command we to come all to he that be load with sin matth 11.28 Colos. 28.23 and he will relieve we and s. Paul have forbid we to worship angel or to use any such voluntary worship that have a show of humility in that it spare not the flesh but what warrant we have to have recourse unto these or these courtier of God I know not I remit that to these philosophical neoterike divine it satisfy i to pray to God through Christ as I be command which I be sure must be the safe way and I be sure the safe way be the best way in point of salvation but if the romish church have coin new article of faith never hear of in the first 500 year after Christ I hope I shall never be condemn for a heretic for not be a novelist such be the private mass where the priest play the part both of the priest and of the people and such be the amputation of the one half of the sacrament from the people the transubstantiation elevation for adoration and circumportation in procession of the sacrament the work of supererogation right name the baptize of bell and a thousand other trick but above all the worship of image if my faith be weak in these I confess I have rather believe too little then too much and yet since I believe as much as the scripture do warrant the creed do persuade and the ancient counsel decree I may well be a schismatic from Rome but I be sure I be no heretic for relic of saint if I have any such that I be assure be member of their body I will honourable bury they and not give they the reward of condemn man member which be only ordain to be deprive of burial but for worship either they or image I must account it damnable idolatry I be no Iconomachus I quarrel not the make of image either for public decoration or for man private use but that they shall be worship be pray to or any holiness attribute unto they be never know of the ancient and the scripture be so direct vehement and punctual against it as I wonder what brain of man or suggestion of Satan dare offer it to christian and all must be salve with nice philosophical distinction as and they worship forsooth the image of thing in be and the image of the true God but the scripture forbid to worship the image of any thing that GOD create it be not a then that GOD forbid only to be worship neither be the brazen serpent nor the body of Moses a and yet the one be destroy and the other hide for eschew of idolatry yea the image of GOD himself be not only express forbid to be worship but even to be make the reason be give that no eye ever see GOD and how can we paint his face when Moses the man that ever be most familiar with GOD never see but his back part sure since he can be draawen to the vive it be a thankless labour to mar it with a false representation which no prince nor scarce any other man will be content with in their own picture let they therefore that maintain this doctrine answer it to CHRIST at the latter day when he shall accuse they of idolatry and then I doubt if he will be pay with such nice sophistical distinction but Christ cross must have a particular privilege say they and be worship but first we must know what kind of touch of Christ body draw a virtue from it whether every touch or only touch by faith that every touch of his body draw not virtue from it be more than manifest when a a Luke 8. the woman in the bloody flux touch he she be heal by her faith but Peter then tell he that a crowd and throng of many people than touch he and yet none of they receive any benefit or virtue from he judas touch he many and many a time beside his last kiss so do the villain that buffet and crucify he and yet I may safe pronounce they accurse that will bestow any worship upon their relic yea we can deny but the land of Canaan itself whereupon our lord do daily tread be so visible accurse be govern by faithless turk full of innumerable sect of heretical christian and the very fertility thereof so far degenerate into a pitiful sterility luc. 11.28 as he must be accurse that account it bless nay when a certain woman bless the belly that bare Christ and the breast that give he suck nay rather say he bless be those that hear the word of God and keep it except than they can first prove that Christ have resolve to bless that tree of the cross whereupon he be nail they can never prove that his touch it can give it any virtue and put the case it have a virtue of do miracle as Peter shadow have yet do it not follow that it be lawful to worship it which Peter will never accept of sure the prophet that in so many place curse those that worship image that have eye and see not that have ear and hear not will much more have curse they that worship a piece of a stick th^t have not so much as any resemblance or representation of eye or ear as for pugatorie and all the * * jubilee in dulgence satisfaction for the dead etc. trash depend thereupon it be not worth the talk of Bellarmine can find any ground for it in all the scripture only I will pray he to tell i if that fair green meadow that be in purgatory have a brook run through it lib. 2 cap. 7. that in case I come there I may have hawk upon it but as for i I be sure there be a heaven and a hell for the elect and reprobate how many other room there be I be not on God his counsel John 14. say CHRIST who be the true purgatory for our sin but how many chamber and anti-chamber the devil have they can best tell that go to he but in case there be more place for soul to go to then we know of yet let we content we with that which in his word he have reveal unto we and not inquire further into his secret heaven and hell be there reveal to be the eternal home of all mankind let we endeavour to win the one and eschew the other and there be a end now in all this discourse have I yet leave out the main article of the romish faith and that be the head of the church or Peter primacy for who deny this deny say Bellarmine that bishop ought to be in the church I ever maintain it as a apostolic institution and so the ordinance of GOD contrary to the puritan and likewise to a a Bellar lib. 4. rom. pont. cap. 25. Bellarmine who deny that bishop have their jurisdiction immediate from God but it be no wonder he take the puritan part since jesuit be nothing but puritan-papists and as I ever maintain the state of bishop and the ecclesiastical hierarchy for order sake so be I ever a enemy to the confuse anarchy or parity of the puritan as well appear in my (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) heaven be govern by order and all the good angel there nay hell itself can not subsist without some order and the very devil be divide into legion and have their chieftain how can any society then upon earth subsist without order and degree and therefore I can enough wonder with what brazen face this answerer can say page 98. that I be a Puritan in Scotland and a enemy to protestant I that be persecute by puritan there not from my birth only but even since four month before my birth I that in the year of GOD 84 erect bishop and depress all their popular parity I then be not 18. year of age I that in my say book to my son do speak ten time more bitter of they nor of the papist have in my second edition thereof affix a long apologetike preface only in and I that for the space of six year before my come into England labour nothing so much as to depress their parity and re-erect bishop again nay if the daily commentary of my life and action in Scotland be write as julius Caesar be there will scarce a month pass in all my life since my enter into the 13. year of my age wherein some accident or other will not convince the cardinal of a lie in this point and sure I give a fair commendation to the puraitnes in that place of my book where I affirm that I have find great honesty with the highland and border thief then with that sort of people but leave he to his own impudence I return to my purpose of bishop and church hierarchy I very well allow as I say before and likewise of rank and degree among bishop patriarch I know be in the time of the primitive church and I likewise reverence that institution for order sake and among they be a contention for the first place and for myself if that be yet the question I will with all my heart give my consent that the bishop of Rome shall have the first seat I be a western king will go with the patriarch of the west and for his temporal principality over the signory of Rome I do not quarrel it neither let he in God his name be and so it be no other wise but as Peter be but as I well allow of the hierarchy of the church for distinction of order for so I understand it so I utter deny that there be a earthly monarch thereof who word must be a law and who can err in his sentence by a infallibility of spirit because earthly kingdom must have earthly monarch it do not follow that the church must have a visible monarch too for the world have not one earthly temporal monarch CHRIST be his church monarch and the holy ghost his deputy luk. 22.25 CHRIST do not promise before his ascension to leave Peter with they to direct and instruct they in all thing but he promise to send the holy ghost unto they for that end John 14.26 and as for these two before cite place whereby Bellarmine make the pope to triumph over king I mean and the cardinal know well enough matth. 18.18 that the same word of be in another place speak by Christ in the plural number and he likewise know what reason the ancient do give why Christ bid and also what a cloud of witness there be both of ancient and even of late popish writer yea diverse cardinal that do all agree that both these speech use to Peter be mean to all the apostle represent in his person otherwise how can Paul direct the church of Corinth to excommunicate the incestuous person 1. cor. 5.4 whereas he shall then have say and how can all the apostle have otherwise use all their censure only in Christ name and never a word of his vicar Peter we read do in all the apostle meeting sit among they as one of their number and when choose man be send to Anti^chia from that great apostolic council at jerusalem act 15. act. 15.22 23. the text say it seem good to the apostle and elder with the whole church to send choose man but no mention make of the head thereof and so in their letter no mention be make of Peter but only of the apostle elder and brother and it be a wonder why Paul rebuke the church of Corinth for make exception of person because some follow Paul some Apollo some Cephas 1 cor. 1.12 if Peter be their visible head for then those that follow not Peter or Cephas renounce the catholic faith but it appear well that Paul know little of our new doctrine since he handle Peter so rude Galat. 2. ^ as he not only compare but prefer himself unto he but our cardinal prove Peter superiority gal 1.18 by Paul go to visit he indeed Paul say he go to jerusalem to visit Peter and confer with he but he shall have add and to kiss his foot to conclude then the truth be that Peter be both in age and in the time of Christ call he one of the first of the apostle in order the principal of the first twelve and one of the three who CHRIST for order sake prefer to all the rest and no further do the bishop of Rome claim for three hundred year after CHRIST subject they be to the general counsel and even but of late do the council of Constance depose three pope and set up the four and until phocas day that murder his master be they subject to emperor but how they be now come to be Christ vicar nay god on earth triple-crowned king of heaven earth and hell judge of all the world and none to judge they head of the faith absolute decider of all controversy by the infallibility of their spirit have all power both spiritual and temporal in their hand the high bishop monarch of the whole earth superior to all emperor and king yea supreme vice-god who whether they will or not can err how they be now come I say to this top of greatness I know not but sure I be we that be king have great need to look unto it as for i Paul and Peter I know but these man I know not and yet to doubt of this be to deny the catholic faith nay the world itself must be turn upside down and the order of nature invert make the left hand to have the place before the right Bellar. rom. pont. lib. 1. cap 17. and the last name to be the first in honour that this primacy may be maintain thus have I now make a free confession of my faith and I hope I have full clear myself from be a apostate and as far from be a heretic as one may be that believe the scripture and the three creed and acknowledge the four first general counsel if I be loath to believe too much especial of novelty man of great knowledge may well pity my weakness but I be sure none will condemn i for a heretic save such as make the pope their god and think he such a speak scripture as they can define heresy no otherwise but to be whatsoever opinion be maintain against the pope definition of faith and I will sincere promise that when ever any point of the religion I profess shall be prove to be new and not ancient catholic and apostolic I mean for matter of faith I will as soon renounce it close up this head with the maxim of vincentius Lirinensis that I will never refuse to embrace any opinion in divinity necessary to salvation which the whole catholic church with a consent have constant teach and believe even from the apostle day for the space of many age thereafter without interruption but in the cardinal opinion I have show myself a heretic I be sure in play with the name of Babylon and the town upon seven hill as if I will insinuate Rome at this present to be spiritual Babylon and yet that Rome be call Babylon 1. pet. 5.13 both in s. Peter epistle and in the Apocalypse our answerer free confess as for the definition of the Antichrist I will not urge so obscure a point as a matter of faith to be necessary believe of all christian but what I think herein I will simple declare that there must be a Antichrist and in his time a general defection we all agree but the time seat and person of this Antichrist be the chief question whereupon we differ and for that we must search the scripture for our resolution 2. thes 2. as for my opinion I think s. Paul in the 2. to the thessalonian do utter more clear that which s. ^ohn speak more mystical of the Antichrist first that in that place he mean the Antichrist it be plain since he say there must be first a defection verse 3. and that in the antichrist time only that eclipse of defection must fall upon the church all the romish catholic be strong enough otherwise their church must be daily subject to err which be clean contrary to their main doctrine then describe he he say that the man of sin verse 3 4. shall exalt himself above all that be call God psal 82.6 but who these be who of the psalmist say Dixi Dijestis Bellarmine can tell in old divinity it be wont to be king Bellarmine will add churchman let it be both it be well enough know who now exalt himself above both the sword and after that s. Paul have thus describe the person he next describe the seat and tell that he shall sit in the temple of GOD 2. thes 2.4 that be the bosom of the church yea in the very heart thereof now where this apostolic seat be I leave it to be guess and likewise who it be that sit there show himself to be God pardon sin redeem soul and define faith control and judge all man and to be judge of none anent the time s. Paul be plain of all for he call the thessalonian to memory verse 5. that when he be with they he tell they these thing and therefore they know say he what the impediment be verse 6. and who do withhold that the man of sin be not reveal although the mystery of iniquity be already work verse 7. that the roman emperor in s. Paul time need no reveal to the christian to be man of sin or sinful man no child doubt but the revelation he speak of be a mystery a secret it shall therefore seem that he dare not publish in his epistle what that impediment be it may be he mean by the translate of the seat of the roman empire and that the translation there of shall leave a room for the man of sin to sit down in and that he mean not that man of sin of these ethnic emperor in his time his introduction to this discourse make it more than manifest for he say fear they shall be deceive think the day of the lord second come to be at hand he have therefore think good to forewarn they that this general defection must first come whereby it well appear that he can not mean by the present time but by a future and that a good long time otherwise he prove ill his argument that the lord come be not at hand neither can the form of the destruction of this man of sin agree with that manner of spoil that the goth and vandal make of * * for so do call Rome when it be spoil by they though it be Christian many year before ethnic Rome for our apostle say a a verse 8. that this wicked man shall be consume by the spirit of the lord mouth and abolish by his come now I will think that the word of God and the preach thereof shall be mean by the spirit of the lord mouth which shall piece and piece consume and diminish the power of that man of sin till the brightness of the lord second come shall utter abolish he and by his express the mean of his work he do likewise in my opinion explain his meaning very much for he say Vers. 8.9 it shall be by a strong delusion by lie wonder etc. well what church it be that vaunt they of their innumerable miracle and yet most of they contrary to their own doctrine Bellarmine can best tell you with his hungry mare Bellar. lib. 3. Euchar. cap. 8. that turn her tail to her provender and kneel to the sacrament and yet I be sure he will be ashamed to say that the holy sacrament be ordain to be worship by thus have I prove out of s. Paul now that the time of the antichrist come and the general defection be not to be till long after the time that he write in that his seat be to be in the temple and church of God and that his action which can best point at his person shall be to exalt himself above all that be call god s. John indeed do more ample though mystical describe this Antichrist which under the figure of a monstrous beast with seven head and ten horn he set forth in the 13 chap. and then interpret in the 17 where he call she a whore sit upon many water Revel. 17.51 and ride upon the say monstrous beast Vers. 3. conclude that chapter with call that woman Vers. 18. that great city which reign over the king of the earth verse 5. and both in that chapter and in the begin of the next he call that great city cap. 18.52 Babylon so as to continue herein my former propose method of the time seat and person of Antichrist this place do clear and undeniable declare that Rome be or shall be the seat of that Antichrist for first no Papist now deny that by Babylon here Rome be direct mean and that this woman be the Antichrist do clear appear by the time of his work describe by 42. month in the 13 chap. Vers. 5. which do just agree with that three year and a half time which all the papist give to the reign of Antichrist beside that the beast itself with seven head and ten horn have one of her head wound and heal again be describe just alike in the 13 and 17 chap. be in the former prove to be the Antichrist by the time of her reign and in the latter Rome by the name of Babylon by the confession of all the papist so as one point be now clear that Rome be the seat of the Antichrist neither will that place in the 11 chap. serve to shift off this point and prove the antichrist seat to be in jerusalem where it be say that the corpse of the witness shall lie in the great city chap. 11.8 spiritual Sodom and Egypt where our lord also be crucify for the word spiritual be apply both to Sodom Egypt and jerusalem in that place and when he have name Sodom and Egypt he do not subjoin jerusalem with a single but with a and as if he will say and this antichrist abomination shall be so great as his seat shall be as full of spiritual whoredom and idolatry as Sodom and Egypt be nay and so bloody in the persecution of the saint as our lord shall be crucify again in his member and who have so mean read the scripture if he have ever read they at all that know it not to be a common phrase in they to call CHRIST persecute and slay when his saint be so use so do CHRIST say matt. 25.40 speak of the latter day and in the same style do he speak to s. Paul at his conversion act 9.4 and that Babylon or Rome since Bellarmine be content it be so call be that great city where our lord be crucify the last verse of the 18 chap. do also clear prove it for there it be say Revel. 18.24 that in that city be find the blood of the prophet and of the saint and of all that be slay upon the earth and I hope CHRIST be one of they that be slay upon the earth and beside that it may well be say that he be slay in that great city Babylon since by the roman authority he be put to death under a roman judge and for a roman quarrel for he can not be a friend to Caesar that be not his enemy this point now be clear of the antichrist seat as I have already say we be next to find out the time when the Antichrist shall reign if it be not already come in the 13 chap. s. John say that this beast with the seven head and ten horn cap. 13.3 have one of his head wound and heal again and interpret that in the 17 he say that these seven head be also seven king cap. 17 10. whereof five be fall one be and a other be not yet come and when he come he shall continue a short space and the beast that be and be not be the eight verse 11. and yet one of the seven by which beast he mean the Antichrist who be not then come I mean in the apostle day but be to come after so as between the time of the apostle and the end of the world must the time of the antichrist come be and with this the papist do also agree whereby it appear that Babylon which be Rome shall be the seat of the Antichrist but not that ethnic Rome which be in the apostle day for John himself profess that he be to write of nothing Revel. 1.1 and cap. 41. but that which be to come after his time nor yet that turn Christian Rome while she be in the convert which immediate follow the apostle time glorious by the martyrdom of so many godly bishop but that antichristian Rome when as the Antichrist shall set down his seat there after that by the work of that mystery of iniquity christian Rome shall become to be corrupt and so that deadly wound which the goth and vandal give Rome shall be cure in that head or king the Antichrist who thereafter shall arise and reign for a long space but here it may be object that the Antichrist can reign a long space since s. John say in two or three sundry place that the Antichrist shall work but the space of three year and a half sure who will but a little acquaint himself with the phrase and style of s. John in his Apocalypse cap. 7. shall find that he do ordinary set down cap. 9.16.18 so do he in his twelve thousand of every tribe that will be safe so do he in his army of two hundred thousand that be send to kill the three part of the man and so do he in diverse other place and therefore who will but remember that in all his vision in the say book he direct imitate the fashion of the prophet ezekiels daniel and zacharies vision borrow their phrase that prophesy before CHRIST to utter his prophecy in that be to speak of the last day shall find it very probable that in these three day and a half he imitate daniel week account for his week the time between Christ first and second come and make Antichrist to triumph the half of that time or spiritual week for as to that literal interpretation as all the papist make it of three year and a half and that time to fall out direct the very last day save five and forty before CHRIST his second come it be direct repugnant to the whole new testament for CHRIST say that in the latter day man shall be feast marry and at all such worldly finesse when the last hour shall come in a clap upon they one shall be at the mill. matth. 24.41 one upon the top of the house and so forth matth. 25. CHRIST tell a parable of the five foolish virgin to show the unlooked-for come of this hour nay he say the son of man nor the angel in heaven know not this time s. Peter bid we watch and pray ever await upon that hour and s. John in this same Apocalypse do a a Revel. 3.3 and 16.15 twice tell we that CHRIST will come as a thief in the night and so do CHRIST say in the b b matth. 24.44 evangel whereas if the Antichrist shall reign three year and a half before the latter day and that there shall be but just 45. day of time after his destruction then shall not the just day and hour of the latter day be unknown to they that shall be alive in the world at the time of antichrist destruction for first according to the papist doctrine all the world shall know he to be the antichrist both by the two witness doctrine and his sudden destruction and consequent they can be ignorant that the latter day shall come just 45. day after and so CHRIST shall not come as a thief nor the world be take at unaware contrary to all the scripture before allege and many more and thus have we prove Rome to be the seat of the Antichrist and the second half of that spiritual week between the first and second come of CHRIST to be the time of his reign for in the first half thereof the mystery of iniquity begin to work but the man of sin be not yet reveal but who these witness shall be be a great question the general conceit of the papist be that it must be Enoch and Elias and herein be Bellarmine so strong as he think he in a great error if not a heretic that doubt of it but the vanity of this jewish fable I will in few word discover the cardinal Bellar. rom. pont. lib. 3. cap. 6. in his book of controversy bring sowerplace of scripture for probation of this idle dream two in the old testament Malachi and and two in the new CHRIST in Matthew he may have add mark too and John in the 11 of the Apocalypse first for the general of all those place I dare bold affirm that there be not a word in they nor in all the rest of the scripture that say that either Enoch or Elias shall return to fight against Antichrist and shall be slay by he nor any such like matter next as to every place in particular to begin with Malachi I know not who can better interpret he then CHRIST who twice in Matthew chap. 11 and 17 and once in mark tell both the multitude mat. 11.14 and 17.12 mar. 9.13 and his own disciple that John Baptist be that promise Elias and herein do Bellarmine deal most unfaithful with CHRIST for his demonstration that Antichrist be not yet come because e^och and Elias be not yet return he for his probation thereof cite these word of Christ in the 17 of Matthew Elias shall indeed come and restore all thing but omit his very next word interpret the same that he be already come in the person of John Baptist nay whereby he take upon he to answer bibliander objection that CHRIST do by John the baptist understand the prophecy of Elias come to be accomplish he pick out the word in the 11 of Matthew immediate follow that purpose of Elias make of they a great mystery and never take knowledge that in the 17 by himself before allege CHRIST do interpret Malachy in the same manner without any subjoin of these word adjoin shameless hereunto a foul paraphrase of his own tell we what CHRIST will have say nay in my conscience he mean what CHRIST shall and ought to have say if he have be a good catholic set down there a gloss of Orleans that destroy the Text. thus you see how shameful he abuse Christ word who in three sundry place as I have say interpret the second come of Elias to be mean by John the baptist he likewise cavil most dishonest upon that word for CHRIST use that word but in the repeat their opinion but interpret it that he be already come in the person of John Baptist matt. 17.11 as if he have say the prophecy be indeed true that Elias shall come but I say unto you that mean of John Baptist and so he first repeat the word of the prophecy in the future time as the prophet speak they and next show they to be now accomplish in the person of John in the present time Malac. 4.5 matth 27. neither can these word of falsify Christ commentary upon he for if that day whereupon the saviour of the world suffer when the a a this obscure of the sun be so extraordinary and fearful that Dionysius only lead by the light of nature and human learning cry out at the sight thereof sun be total obscure from the six hour to the nine the veil of the temple rend asunder from the top to the bottom and the earth do quake the stone be cleave the grave do open themselves and the dead arose^ if that day I say be not a great and horrible day I know not what to call a horrible day which day no doubt have destroy the whole nation of the jew without exception by a just anathema Mala. 4.6 if the say John the fore runner have not first convert many by the doctrine of repentance and by baptism but why shall I presume any more to interpret Malachy since it be sufficient that CHRIST himself have interpret he so and since nay what mortal man dare interpret he otherwise nay direct contrary eccle. 48 9 now for that place of as the son of Syrach only borrow it from Malachi as appear by these word of he Mala. 4.6 of convert the son heart to their father which be malachies own word so do Christ commentary serve as well to interpret the one as the other it be no shame for that mortal jesus to be comment and interpret by the immortal and true JESUS though to the shame and confusion of the jesuit heresy herein but Enoch must be join to Elias in this errand only to bear up the couple as I think for no place of scripture speak of his return again only it be say in the 44 that Enoch please GOD and be translate to paradise eccles 44 16 or since they will have it so and what be this to say marry that Enoch shall return again to this world and fight against the Antichrist a pretty large comment indeed but no right commentary upon that Text. when Bellarmine be talk of Elias he insist that Elias must come to convert the jew principal but when he speak here of Enoch he must and not a word of jew belike they shall come for sundry errand and not both for one or like Paul and Peter the one shall be apostle for the jew and the other for the gentile what need such wild rack commentary for such three word will not the sense stand well and clear enough that Enoch please GOD and be translate to paradise that by the example of his reward the nation may repent and imitate his holy footstep for what can more mighty persuade the nation to repent then by let they see that holy man carry quick up to heaven for reward of his uprightness whereas all the rest of the people die and go to corruption and where scripture fail the cardinal must help himself with the father to prove both that Enoch and Elias be yet alive and that they shall hereafter die but with the like felicity as in his allege of scripture to use his own word of i in his a a p. 27. pamphlet for which purpose he cite five father irenaeus Tertullian epiphanius Hierome and Agustine upon this they all agree in deed that Enoch and Elias be still alive both which no Christian I hope will deny for Abraham Isaac and jacob be all still alive mat. 22 32. as Christ tell we for God be much more than be Enoch and Elias alive who never taste of death after the manner of other man but as to the next point that they shall die hereafter his first two witness irenaeus and Tertullian say the direct contrary lib. 5. for irenaeus say that they shall remain in paradise till the consummation now to remain there till the consummation and to see incorruption be direct contrary to their return to the world again and suffer of death lib. cont. cap. 2. Tertullian likewise agree hereunto say most clear that Enoch have never taste of death now he be ill privilege with eternity if he must die again as for his place cite out of the other three father they all confirm that first point that they be still alive but that they must die again they make no mention but here speak of the ancient father let i take this occasion to forewarn you concern they that though they mistake and understand not right many mystery in the Apocalypse it be no wonder for the book thereof be still seal in their day and though the mystery of iniquity be already work 2. thes 2. yet be not the man of sin yet reveal and it be a certain rule in all dark prophecy that they be never clear understand till they be accomplish and thus have answer his two place in the old testament by his three in the new testament contain Christ own word which be I need speak no more of they I be now to speak of the four place of scripture which be in the 11 of the Apocalypse for the two witness forsooth there mention must be Enoch and Elias Revelat. 11. but how this can stand with any point of divinity or likelihood of reason that these two glorify body shall come down out of heaven or paradise make it what you will preach and fight against the Antichrist be slay by he after many thousand year exemption from the natural course of death rise again the three day in imitation of Christ and then have wrought many wonder to go up again to heaven make a ordinary post betwixt heaven and earth how this I say can agree either with divinity or good reason I confess it pass my capacity and especial that they must be clad in sackcloth who body I hope have be so long ago so free from sin as I think they shall need no more such maceration for sin for they must be now either in heaven or paradise if in heaven as doubtless they be their body must be glorify for no corruptible thing can enter there Revel. 21.27 and consequent they can no more be subject to the sensible thing of this world especial to death but if they be in earthly paradise we must first know where it be gra. Bellarmine indeed in his controversy be much trouble to find out the place where paradise be and whether it be in the earth or in the air but these be all vanity the scripture tell we gene. 2. that paradise and the garden of Eden therein be a certain place upon the earth which God choose out to set Adam into and have thereafter for his sin banish he from the same it be a blasphemy to think that any of Adam posterity come ever there again for in Adam be all his posterity accurse and banish from the earthly paradise like as all the earth in general and paradise in special be accurse in he the second Adam have by grace call a certain number of they to be coheritor with he of the heavenly paradise and jerusalem and doubtless the earthly paradise be deface at the flood if not before and so lose all that exquisite fertility and pleasantness wherein it once surpass all the rest of the earth and that it shall be lift up in the air be like one of the dream of the Alcoran sure no such miracle be mention in the scripture and have no ground but from the curious fancy of some boil brain who can be content rom. 12.3 in heaven then for certain be Enoch and Elias gene. 5.24 for Enoch say the text walk with GOD and be take up 2. King 2.11 10. and Elias be see carry up to heaven in a fiery chariot and that they who have be the indweller of heaven these many thousand year and be free from the law of mortality that these glorious and incorruptible body I say shall come into the world again preach and work miracle and fight against the Antichrist be slay by he who natural death can not before take hold of as it be a fabulous invention so be it quite contrary to the nature of such sanctify creature especial I wonder why Enoch shall be think to be one of these two witness for CHRIST for it be Moses and Elias that be with Christ at the transfiguration signify the law and the prophet which will be the fit witness for convince of Antichrist but why they have exempt Moses and put enoch head in the yoke I can conceive but I have too much labour in the refute of this foolish and indeed childish fable which I be so far from believe in any sort as I protest in God presence I can hold any learned divine in our age now to be a Christian that will believe it but worthy to be rank with the scribe and pharisee that rave and dream upon the come again of Elias though CHRIST tell they the contrary as for some of the ancient that mistake this matter I do not censure they so hardly for the reason that I have already allege concern they and have now refute that idle fable that those two witness be Enoch and Elias it fall i next to guess what in my opinion shall be mean by they I confess it be far easy to refu^e such a groundless fable as this be contrary to all ground of divinity and reason then to set down a true interpretation of so high and dark a mystery and therefore as I will not presume to bind any other man to my opinion herein if his own reason lead he not thereunto so shall I propone such probable conjecture as I hope shall be free from heresy or unlawful curiosity in two diverse fashion may the mystery of these witness be lawful and probable interpret in my opinion whereof the one be that by these two witness shall be mean the old and new testament for as the Antichrist can choose but be a adversary to the word of GOD above all thing so will he omit no endeavour to disgrace corrupt suppress and destroy the same and now whether this book of the two testament or two witness of Christ have suffer any violence by the babylonian monarchy or not I need say nothing I will not weary you with recount those common place use for disgrace it as call it a nose of wax a dead letter a leaden rule and a hundred such like phrase of reproach but how far the tradition of man and authority of the church be prefer to these witness do sufficient appear in the babylonian doctrine and if there be no more but that little book with that pretty inscription Del' insuffisance del' escriture saint cardinal Peron it be enough to prove it and as to the corrupt thereof Luke 15.8 the corruption of the old latin translation must not be correct though it bid in stead of everrere for seek of a penny John 21.22 23. and though it say of in place of though it be know a plain lie and that the very next word of the text disprove the same nay so far must we be from correct it as that the vulgar translation must be prefer by catholic to the bible in the own original tongue and be it a small corrupt of scripture to make all or the most part of the of equal faith with the canonical scripture contrary to the father opinion and decree of ancient counsel and what blasphemous corrupt of scripture be it to turn throughout the whole psalm make by Bonaventura doctor and thus our lady psalter be late reprint in Paris be not this to confound Christ person with she and as for suppress of the scripture how many hundred year be the people keep in such blindness as these witness be almost unknown for the layick dare not be forbid and the most part of the clergy either will or can not meddle with they thus be these two witness of Christ who of himself say John 5.39 these a a reve. 11.4 two olive bring peace to all the believer even peace of conscience these b b ibid. two candlestick stand in the sight of GOD and give light to the nation represent by candlestick even in the very order of the roman mass see annex to Romanus set forth by g. Cassander thus be these two witness I say disgrace corrupt and suppress nay so suppress and silence as he be burn for a heretic that dare presume to look upon they keep close in a strange tongue that they may not be understand legend and lie wonder supply their place in the pulpit verse 8. and so do their body lie in the street of the great city spiritual Sodom for spiritual fornication which be idolatry spiritual Egypt Colos. 2.20 for bring the saint of God in bondage of human tradition verse 8. so do their body I say lie 3. day and a half that be the half of that spiritual week between Christ his first and second come and as dead carcase indeed do the scripture than lie without a monument be lay open to all contempt care for almost by none understand by as few nay no man dare call for they for fear of punishment as I have already say and thus lie dead as it be without life or vigour as the law of God do till it be revive in josias time 2 34.14 the inhabitant of the earth that be worldly man verse 10. rejoice and send gift to other for joy that their fleshly liberty be now no more awe nor curb by that two edge sword for they be now sure that to do what they will their purse will procure they pardon from so as man need no more to look up to heaven but down in their purse to find pardon nay what need any more sue to heaven or take it by violence and fervency of zeal when the pardon come and offer themselves at every man door and diverse spiritual man vaunt themselves that they neither understand old testament nor new thus be these two witness use in the second half of this spiritual week who in the first half thereof be clad in sackcloth verse 3. that be preach repentance to all nation for the space of five or six hundred year after Christ GOD make his word or witness so triumph Revel. 6.2 ride upon the white horse in the time of the primitive church as that they overcome all that oppose themselves unto it beat down every high thing 2. cor. 10.4 as Paul say exclude from heaven all that believe not therein as strong with the spiritual fire thereof convince the stiffnecked pride of unbeliever as ever Moses or Elias do by the plague of Egypt and famine convince the rebellious egyptian and stiffnecked israelite neither shall it be enough to disgrace corrupt and suppress they Revel. 11.7 but kill must they be at the last to which purpose come forth a a print at Venice 1562. and cut their throat indeed for the author ordain all translation but their own to be burn which be yet common practise nay he profess he come not to correct but to destroy they control and call every place of scripture heretical that disagree front their tradition with almost as many foul word and rail epithet as the cardinal bestow on my apology not rule nor interpret scripture by scripture but make their tradition to be such a touchstone for it as he condemn of heresy not only those place of scripture that he cite but lay the same general condemnation upon all other the like place wheresoever they be writin the scripture and yet praise be GOD we begin now with our eye as our predecessor have do in some age before to see these witness rise again and shine in their former glory GOD as it be verse 11. set they up again upon their foot 12. and raise they to the heaven in a triumphal cloud of glory like Elias his fiery chariot which exalt of the gospel again 13. have breed such a earthquake and alteration among many nation as a ten part or a good portion of these that be in subjection to that great city to wit Babylon be fall from she seven thousand that be many thousand have be kill upon the occasion of that great alteration and many other convert to the fear of GOD and give glory to the GOD of heaven this now be one of the way by which I think this place of scripture may be lawful and probable interpret the other be more common and seem more literal to agree with the Text. and this be to interpret not the word of GOD but the preacher thereof to be mean by these witness few they be that first begin to reveal the man of sin and discover his corruption and therefore well describe by the number of two witness Deut. 19.15 and in no great number be they that begin this work than the greatness of the errand do necessary require Revel. 11.3 they prophesy in sackcloth for they preach repentance that diverse of they be put to cruel death be notorious to the world and likewise that in the person of their successor in doctrine a a eccles they rise again and that in such power and efficacy as be more than miraculous verse 11. for where it be account in the scripture a miraculous work of GOD wrought by his holy spirit act 2.41 when the apostle s Peter convert about three thousand in one day these witness I speak of by the force of the same spirit convert many mighty nation in few year who still continue praise GOD that he have deliver we from the tyranny of Antichrist that reign over that great city and with a full cry proclaim go out of she my people Revel. 18.4 lest you be partaker of her sin and of her plague let therefore these miraclemonger that surfeit the world and raise the prize of paper daily with set forth old though new gild miracle and legend of lie (@) such I say consider of this great and wonderful miracle indeed and to their shame compare it with their paltry ware thus have in two fashion deliver my conjecture what I take to be mean by these two witness in the 11 of the Apocalypse there be no great difference between they in the one take it to be the word of God itself in the other the word of God too but in the mouth of his preacher it rest now that I come to the three point of the description of Antichrist which be anent his person that by the whore of Babylon that ride upon the beast be mean a seat of a empire and a successive number of man sit thereupon and not any one man do well appear by the form of the description of the Antichrist throughout all the say book for in the last verse of the 17 cap. 17. chapter the woman be expound to be that great city that reign over the king of the earth verse 18. which can signify the only person of one man but a successive number of man as I have already say who seat that great city must be like as in the same chapter verse 9 the seven head of the beast be two way expound first they be call seven hill which be plain and next they be call seven king which can be mean by the king that shall give their power to the beast verse 13. and be subject unto she which be immediate after express by the ten horn verse 12. but rather appear to be those seven form of government of that seat five of which have already be and fall as king consul dictator and the six be in the time of s. John his writing of this book which be the government of the emperor the seven which be not yet come and be to last but for a short space be the a a from the time of Constantine the great his remove of the empire from Rome to Constantinople t^ the time of Boniface the three to w^t ^bout 276. year ecclesiastical government by bishop which be to come upon the translation of the empire from Rome to Constantinople though their government be in a manner substitute to the emperor for though that form of government last about the space of 276. year yet be it but short in comparison of the long time of the reign of the Antichrist not yet expire which succeed immediate thereunto and the eight which be the beast that be and be not and be to go to perdition verse 11. be the Antichrist the eight form of government indeed by his absoluteness and yet the seven because he seem but to succeed to the bishop in a ecclesiastical form of government though by his greatness he shall make Babylon empire in glory like to that magnificence wherein that great city triumph when it most flourish which in s. john time be much decay by the faction of the great man the mutiny of the army and the unworthiness of the emperor and so that flourish state of that great city or beast which it be in before s. john time and be much a a not in respect of the extent and limit of the empire but in regard of the government thereof and glory of the city revel 18 verse 9 and 11. verse 10.16.19 decay be but in a manner in his time shall be restore unto it again by Antichrist who as he ascendteh out of the bottomless pit so must he go to destruction and likewise by that great lamentation that be make for the destruction of Babylon in the 17 chapter both by the king and by the merchant of the earth where it be thrice repeat for aggravate the pity of her desolation that that great city fall in a hour by that great lamentation I say it well appear that the reign of Antichrist must continue long than three year and a half or any one man time for the king that have commit fornification with she verse 9 and in behove to have have a long time for contract of that great acquaintance verse 12. and the merchant of the earth set she forth and describe she at great length as the very staple of all their riches which can not be so soon gather as in one man time and to conclude now this description of the Antichrist I will set down unto you all that be speak of he in the Apocalypse in a short method for the further explain of these three point that I have already handle the Antichrist be four time in my opinion describe by John in the Apocalypse in four sundry vision and a short compendium of he repeat again in the 20 chapter 1. description of Antichrist he be first describe by a pale horse in the vision of the seal in the six chapter revel cap. 6 verse 2. for after that CHRIST have triumph upon a white horse in the first seal by the propagation of the gospel verse 4. and that the red horse in the second seal be as busy in persecution as CHRIST be in overcome by the constancy of his martyr and that famine and other plague signify by the black horse in the three seal verse 5. have succeed to these former persecution verse 8. then come forth the Antichrist upon a pale horse in the four seal have death for his rider and hell for his convoy which rider fit well his colour of paleness and he have power give a a or they after other translation whereby be joint understand the say pale horse together with his rider and convoy death and Hell he over the four part of the earth which be Europe to kill with the sword and use great persecution as ethnic Rome do figure by the red horse and to kill with spiritual hunger or famine of the true word of GOD as the black horse do by corporal famine and with death whereby spiritual death be mean for the Antichrist signify by this pale horse shall afflict the church both by persecution and temporal death as also by allure the nation to idolatry and so to spiritual death and by the beast of the earth shall he procure their spiritual death for he shall send out the locust over who he be king mention in the nine chapter of this book and the three frog mention in the 16 of the same for entice of all king and nation to drink of the cup of her abomination that that description now of Antichrist end there verse 9 it be more than plain for at the open of the first seal verse 10. the soul and blood of the murder saint cry for vengeance and haste of judgement verse 12. which in the six seal be grant unto they by Christ come at the latter day signify by heaven depart away like a scroll when it be roll with a number of other sentence to the same purpose the second description but because this may seem a short and obscure description of the Antichrist he describe he much more large and specifike especial in the vision of the trumpet in the nine chapter verse 1. for there he say at the blow of the five trumpet heresy be first spread abroad in three of the four former blast to wit in the first three and four blast for I take temporal perecution to be only signify by the second blast he then see a star fall from heaven verse 2. to who be give the key of the bottomless pit which be open by he verse 3. with the smoke thereof come forth a number of locust who he large describe both by their craft and their strength and then tell the name of this their king who bring they out of the bottomless pit which be destroyer by this star fall from heaven be signify as I take it verse 11. some person of great dignity in the church who duty be to give light to the world as CHRIST say do contrary thereunto fall away like Lucifer and set up a kingdom matth. 5.14 by the send forth of that noisome pack of crafty cruel vermin describe by locust and so be the seat of the Antichrist begin to be erect who doctrine be at length declare in the second woe after the blast of the six trumpet where it be say verse 13. verse 20. that the remnant of man which be not kill by the plague repent not of the work of their hand that they shall not worship devil and idol of gold and of silver and of brass and of stone and of wood which neither can see hear nor go as for worship of devil lib. adoration lib. 3. disp. 1. cap. 5. look your great jesuited doctor Vasques and as for all the rest it be the main doctrine of the roman church and then it be subjoin in this text that they repent not of their murder verse 21. their sorcery their fornication nor their theft by their murder their persecution be mean and bloody massacre for their sorcery consider of their Agnus that will sloken fire of the hallow shirt and diverse sort of relic and also of prayer that will preserve man from the violence of shot of fire of sword of thunder and such like danger and judge if this be not very like to sorcery and incantation of charm by their fornication be mean both their spiritual fornication of idolatry and also their corporal fornication which do the more abound among they as well by reason of the restraint of their churchman from marriage as also because of the many order of idle monastike life among they as well for man as woman and continual experience prove that idleness be ever the great spur to lechery and they be guilty of theft in steal from GOD the title and greatness of power due to he and bestow it upon their head the Antichrist as also by heap up their treasure with their juggle ware and merchandise of the soul of man by jubile pardon relic and such like strong delusion that he end this description of Antichrist in the same nine chapter may likewise well appear cap. 10. ver. 6 by the oath that that mighty angel swear in the six verse of the ten chapter and after the blast of the six trumpet that time shall be no more verse 7. and that when the seven angel shall blow his trumpet the mystery of GOD shall be finish as he have declare it to his servant the prophet cap. 11 only in the eleven chapter he describe the mean whereby the Antichrist be overcome who reign he have before describe in the 9 chapter and tell we that the two witness verse 3. after that they have be persecute by the Antichrist shall in the end procure his destruction and in case any shall think that the Antichrist be only speak of in the 11 chapter and that the beast speak of in the 13 and 17 chapter do only signify ethnic room there need no other refutation of that conceit then to remember they that the Antichrist be never name in all that 11 chapter cap. 11 but where he be call in the seven verse thereof the beast that come forth of the bottomless pit verse 7. which by the description of the place he come out of prove it to be the same beast which have the same original in the 17 chapter and in the very same word so as it be ever but the same Antichrist repeat and diverse describe in diverse vision the three description now in the 12 and 13 chapter and so forth till the 17 he make a more large and ample prophetical description of the state of the church and reign of the Antichrist for in the 12 cap. 12 verse 6. chap. he figure the church by a woman fly from the dragon the devil to the wilderness and when the dragon see he can otherwise overreach she verse 15. he spew forth water like flood to carry she away which signify many nation that be let loose to persecute and vex the church and in the 13 chapter cap. 13 out of that sea of nation that persecute she arise that great city queen of all the nation and head of that persecution figure by a beast with seven head and ten horn verse 1. like a leopard verse 2. as well for the colour because it be full of spot that be defile with corruption as also use a bastard form of government in show spiritual but in deed temporal over the king of the earth like the leopard that be a bastard beast betwixt a lion and a pard have ^eete like a bear to signify his great strength and the mouth of a lion to show his ravenous and cruel disposition this beast who have his power from the dragon and have get a deadly wound in verse 3. one of his head or form of government by the goth and vandal and yet be heal again open his mouth to blasphemy verse 6. and make war against the saint nay verse 7. all the world must worship he which worship ethnic Rome never crave of any be content to call their neighbour king and whether worship or adoration even with that same title he use to pope at their creation our cardinal can best tell you but than come another beast up out of the earth verse 11. have indeed a more firm and settle original for she do visible and outward succeed to the true church and therefore she have two horn like the lamb in outward show represent the spouse of CHRIST and pretend CHRIST to be her defence but she speak like the dragon teach damnable and devilish doctrine and this apostatike I shall say apostolic church after that she have make her great power manifest to the world verse 12. by do all that the first beast can do in that be by show the greatness of her power to be nothing inferior to the greatness of the former ethnic empire she than be move with so great a desire to advance this beast now become Antichrist as she cause the earth and all that dwell therein to worship this former beast or roman monarch transfer so as it be her own power in his person yea even emperor and king shall be fain to kiss his foot and for this purpose shall she work great miracle wherein she great pride herself deceive man with lie wonder and efficacy of lie 2. thes 2.9 as s. Paul say and among the rest of her wonder verse 13. she must bring fire out of heaven which can dethrone prince verse 15. so that all that will not worship the image of the beast that be his unlimited supremacy must be kill and burn as heretic yea so peremptory will this beast or false prophet be so call in the 16 chapter of this book for the advancement of the other beast or Antichrist verse 17 as all sort and rank of people must receive the mark or name of that beast in their right hand or in their forehead without the which it shall be lawful to none to buy or sell verse 16. by the mark in the forehead signify their outward profession and acknowledgement of their subjection unto she and by the mark in their right hand signify their actual implicit obedience unto she who they think can err though she shall command they to rebel against their natural prince like that whereunto all the jesuit be swear and like those romish priest in this country that have renounce and forswear again that oath of allegiance ground upon their natural oath which think at their take it they confess they do it out of conscience and as oblige thereunto by their natural duty yet now must they forswear it again for obedience to the pope command to who will their conscience and reason must be blind captivate and who ever deny this absolute power may neither buy nor sell for no man be bind to keep any faith or observe any civil contract with heretic yea to equivocate and commit perjury towards they be a lawful thing in a catholic now as to the mystery anent the number of his name whether it shall be understand by the number compose of the letter in that greek word LATEINOS verse 15. which word well suit with the romish church irenaeus lib. 5. romish faith and latin service or whether in respect that in the text it be call the number of the man you will take it for the number or date of the year of GOD wherein that first man live that first take the title of the Antichrist upon he I leave it to the reader choice by that first man I mean bonifacius who first call himself universal bishop which s. Gregory that live till within three year of his time a a epistol lib. 6. cap. 30. foretell will be the style of the Antichrist or his Praecursor for though he die threescore year before the 666. of CHRIST yet be that title but full settle upon his successor sixty year after his time or if you list to count it from Pompey his spoil of the temple to this same man time it will go very near to make just up the say number 666. now the reign of the Antichrist be thus prophetical describe in the 13 chapter cap. 14 verse 3. his fall be prophesy in the 14 first by the joyful and triumphal new song of the saint in heaven and next by the proclamation of three angel verse 6. whereof the first have a everlasting gospel in his hand to preach to all nation the true armour indeed wherewith the witness fight against the Antichrist this first angel I say verse 7. proclaim fear and glory to GOD since the hour of his judgement be come verse 8. and the second proclaim the fall of Babylon verse 9 which be the destruction of the Antichrist and the three prohibit under great pain even the pain of eternal damnation that none shall worship the beast or receive his mark but though that in the rest of this chapter the latter day be again prophesy as a thing that shall come short after the reveal of the man of sin yet in the 15 chap. he tell of seven plague cap. 15 verse 1. under the name of vial that shall first fall upon the Antichrist and his kingdom which be particular set down in the 16 chap. 16 chapter hereckon among the rest in the five vial the plague of darkness verse 10. yea such darkness as the kingdom of Antichrist shall be obscure whereby at the pour forth of the six vial the way of the king of the east shall be prepare verse 12. the man of sin be begin to be reveal and so all impediment remove that may let the invasion of that monarchy even as that great river Euphrates that run by the literal Babylon guard it from the king of the east the mede and persian the time of the babylonian monarchy till by the dry thereof or unexpected passage make through it by Cyrus dan. 5.3 Babylon be win and Balthasar destroy and his monarchy overthrow even while he be sit in that literal Babylon corporal drunken and quaff in the vessel ordain for God service and so sit as it be in the temple of GOD and abuse the holy mystery thereof for remedy whereof at the pour forth of the six vial verse 13. three unclean spirit like frog shall then come forth out of the mouth of the dragon that beast and of the false prophet which I take to be as much to say as that how soon as the kingdom of Antichrist shalb^ so obscure with such a gross and a palpable ignorance as learning shall be almost lose out of the world and that few of the very priest themselves shall be able to read latin much less to understand it and so a plain way make for the destruction of Babylon then shall a new sect of spirit arise for the defence of that fall throne call three in number by reason of their threefold direction be raise and inspire by the dragon Satan authorize and maintain by the beast the Antichrist and instruct by the false prophet the apostatike church that have the horn like the lamb but speak like the dragon these spirit indeed thus send forth by this threefold authority for the defence of their triple crown monarch be well liken to frog for they be amphibion and can live in either element earth or water for though they be churchman by profession yet can they use the trade of politic statesman verse 14. go to the king of the earth to gather they to the battle of that great day of GOD almighty what massacre have by their persuasion be wrought through many part of Christendom and how evil king have speed that have be counsel by they all the unpartial history of our time do bear record and whatsoever king or state will not receive they and follow their advice root out must that king or state be even with gunpowder ere it fail and these frog have reason indeed to labour to become learn thereby to dissipate that gross mist of ignorance wherewith the reign of Antichrist be plague before their come forth verse 17. then do this chapter conclude with the last plague that be pour out of the seven vial upon the Antichrist which be the day of judgement verse 19 for then Babylon say he come in remembrance before God the four description but in the 17 chapter be the former vision interpret and expound and there be the Antichrist represent by a woman sit upon that many-headed beast cap. 17 verse 3. because as CHRIST his true spouse and church be represent by a woman in the 12 chap. so here be the head of his adulterous spouse or false church represent also by a woman but have a cup full of abomination in her hand verse 4. as herself be call a whore for her spiritual adultery verse 1. have seduce the king of the earth to be partaker of her spiritual fornication verse 2. and yet wonderful gorgeous and glorious be she in outward show but drunken with the blood of the saint by a violent persecution of they verse 6. and that she may the better be know he write her name upon her forehead agreeable to her quality a mystery that great Babylon that mother of whoredom and abomination of the earth a mystery be a name that belong unto she two manner of way one verse 5. as she take it to herself another as she deserve it indeed to herself she take it in call herself the visible head of the mystical body of CHRIST in profess herself to be the dispenser of the mystery of GOD and by her only must they be expound this great god in earth and head of the faith be a mist by his profession that be a priest and if the observation of one be true that he have of old the word mystery write on his mitre then be this prophecy very plain accomplish now that indeed she deserve that name the rest of her title do bear witness verse 5. that show she to be the mother of all the whoredom and abomination of the earth and so be she under the pretext of holiness a mystery indeed of all iniquity and abomination under the mark of pretend feed of soul devour kingdom and make Christendom swim in blood now after that this scarlet or bloody beast and her rider be describe by their shape garments name and quality the angel do next interpret this vision unto John expound unto he what be signify both by the beast and her rider tell he the seven head of the beast be seven hill verrse 9 mean by the situation of that city or seat of empire and that they be also seven king or form of government in the say city whereof I have tell my conceit already verse 12. as for the ten horn which he show to be ten king that shall at one hour receive their power and kingdom with the beast I take that number of ten to be even as the number of seven head and ten horn upon the dragon the devil can but be a uncertain number and that he also imitate in those ten horn the ten horn of the seven head beast in the seven of Daniel and therefore I take these ten king to signify all the christian king and free prince and state in general even you who to I consecrate these my labour and that of we all he prophesy that although our first become absolute and free prince shall be in one hour with the beast for great christian kingdom and monarch do but rise and receive their liberty by the ruin of the ethnic roman empire and at the destruction thereof and at the very time of the begin of the plant of the Antichrist there and that we shall for a long time continue to worship the beast verse 13. have one catholic or common consent mind in obey she yield our power and authority unto she and kiss her foot drink with she in her cup of idolatry and fight with the lamb verse 14 in the persecution of his saint at her command that govern so many nation and people yet notwithstanding of all this verse 16. we shall in the time appoint by GOD have thus fight with the lamb but be overcome by he that be convert by his word we shall then I say hate the whore and make her desolate and make her naked by discover her hypocrisy and false pretence of zeal and shall eat her flesh and burn she with fire and thus shall the way of the king of the east be prepare Revel. 16.12 as you hear in the 16 chapter and then do he subjoin the reason of this strange change in we verse 17 for say he GOD have put it in their heart to fulfil his will and with one consent to give their kingdom to the beast till the word of GOD be fulfil according to that sentence of Solomon prou. 21.1 that the heart of king be in the hand of GOD to be turn at his pleasure and have thus interpret the beast or empire he in a word expound that by the woman that ride upon she or monarch that govern she verse 18 be mean that great city that reign over the king of the earth by the seat of the empire point out the quality of the person that shall sit and there chap. 18 then be the greatness of her fall and the great lamentation that both the king and merchant of the earth shall make for the same proclaim by a other angel in the 18 chapter verse 9.10 the king lament her fall because they live in pleasure with she which no king can do with ethnic Rome who conquer they by her sword for she honour they with title and dispense with their lust and unlawful marriage and the merchant of the earth verse 11 15 16 17 18. and all shipmaster and traffiker upon the sea shall lament the fall of that great city which never have a fellow for the loss of their riches and traffic which they enjoy by her mean verse 12 13. and there he describe all sort of rich ware whereof that great city be the staple for indeed she have a necessary use for all such rich and glorious ware as well for ornament to her church and princely prelate as for garment and ornament to her wooden saint for the bless virgin must be daily clothe and deck in the new and most curious fashion though it shall resemble the habit of a curtizane and of all those rich ware the most precious be last name which be the soul of man verse 13. for so much bestow upon mass and so much dote to this or that cloister of monk or friar but most of all now to that irregular and incomprehensible order of jesuit shall both redeem his own soul and all his parent to the hundred generation from broil in the fire of purgatory and I hope it be no small merchandise of soul when man be so high delude by the hope and promise of salvation as to make a friar murder his a a Henry 3 k. of France sovereign a young knave attempt the murder of his next b b Henry 4. successor many one to conspire and attempt the like against the late queen and in my time to attempt the destruction of a whole kingdom and state by a blast of powder and hereby to play bankrupt with both the soul mention in the scripture but notwithstanding of this their great lamentation they be command by a voice from heaven to do two thing verse 4. one to flee from Babylon lest they be partaker of her sin and consequent of her punishment which warning I pray God that you all my belove brother and cousin will take heed unto in time humble beseech he to open your eye for this purpose the other command be to reward she as she have reward you verse 6 yea even to the double for as she do fly but with your feather borrow as well her title of greatness and form of honour she from you as also enjoy all her temporal live by your liberality so if every man do but take his own again she will stand up * * naked and the reason be give because of her pride for she glorify herself live in pleasure verse 7 and in her heart say she sit as a queen outward prosperity be one of their note of a true church and be no widow for her spouse CHRIST be bind to she by a inviolable knot for he have swear never to forsake she and she shall see no mourn for she can err nor the gate of hell shall not prevail against she but though the earth and worldly man lament thus for the fall of Babylon in this eighteen chapter cap. 19 verse 1. yet in the nineteen heaven and all the angel and saint therein do sing a triumphal cantic for joy of her fall praise God for the fall of that great whore verse 2. great indeed for our * * Bellar. in Resad Gerson consid. 11. cardinal confess that it be hard to describe what the pope be such be his greatness and in the end of that chapter be the obstinacy of that whore describe verse 19 who even fight to the uttermost against he that sit on the white horse verse 20. and his army till the beast or Antichrist be take and the false prophet or false church with he who by miracle and lie wonder deceive they that receive the mark of the beast and both be cast quick into the burn lake of fire and brimstone under like as in the end of the former chapter to describe the fullness of the antichrist fall not like to that reparable wound that ethnic Rome gate it be first compare to a millstone cast in the sea cap. 18.21 that can never rise and fleet again verse 22 23 and next it be express by a number of joyful thing that shall never be hear there again where nothing shall inhabit but desolation but that the patience and constancy of saint on earth and God his elect may the better be strengthen and confirm their persecution in the latter day be short prophesy and repeat again cap. 20 verse 2 after that Satan have be bind or his fury restrain by the world enjoy of peace for a thousand year or a great indefinite time their persecutor be name gog and Magog verse 8 the secret and reveal enemy of CHRIST whether this be mean of the pope and the Turk or not who both begin to rise to their greatness about one time I leave to be guess verse 9 always their utter confusion be there assure promise and it be say that the dragon the beast verse 10. and the false prophet shall all three be cast in that lake of fire and brimstone to be torment for ever and thereafter be the latter day describe again which must be hasten for the elect sake and then for the further comfort of the elect verse 11 12 13 matth. 24 22 and that they may the more constant and patient endure these temporal and finite trouble limit but to a short space chap. 21 22 in the last two chapter be the joy of the eternal jerusalem large describe thus have the cardinal shameless wrest of those two place of scripture and for prove of the pope supreme temporal authority over prince animate i to prove the pope to be the Antichrist out of this foresay book of scripture so to pay he in his own money again and this opinion no pope can ever make i to recant except they first renounce any further meddle with prince in any thing belong to their temporal jurisdiction and my only wish shall be that if any man shall have a fancy to refute this my conjecture of the Antichrist that he answer i orderly to every point of my discourse not content he to disprove my opinion except he set down some other method after his form for interpretation of that book of the Apocalypse which may not contradict no part of the text nor contain no absurdity otherwise it be a easy thing for Momus to pick quarrel in another man tale and tell it worse himself it be a more easy practice to find fault then to amend they have now make this digression anent the Antichrist which I be sure I can better fasten upon the pope than Bellarmine can do his pretend temporal superiority over king I will return again to speak of this answerer who as I have already tell you so fit his matter with his manner of answer that as his style be nothing but a satire and heap full of injurious and reproachful speech as well against my person as my book so be his matter as full of lie and falsity indeed as he unjust lay to my charge for three lie he make against the oath of allegiance contain and maintain in my book beside that ordinary repeat lie against my book of his omit to answer my lie trattle injurious speech and blasphemy one gross lie he make even of the pope first one lie of the puritan who he will glad have to be of his party and one also of the powder-traitor anent the occasion that move they to undertake that treasonable practice three lie he make of that act of parliament wherein this oath of allegiance be contain he also make one notable lie against his own catholic writer and two of the cause for which two jesuit have be put to death in England and he either falsify deny or wrest five sundry history and a print pamphlet beside that impudent lie that he make of my person that I be a Puritan in Scotland which I have already refute and for the better fill up of his book with such good stuff he have also five so strange and new principle of divinity therein as they be either new or at least allow by very few of his own religion all which lie with diverse other and five strange and as I think erroneous point of doctrine with s^n dry falsification of history be set down in a table by themselves in the end of this my epistle have their refutation annex to every one of they but as for the particular answer of his book it be both unnecessary and uncomely for i to make a reply unnecessary because as I have already tell you my book be never yet answer so far as belong to the main question anent the oath of allegiance the pick of advantage upon the wrong place of the figure in the citation or such error in the print by casual addition or omission of word that make nothing to the argument be the great weapon wherewith he assault my book and uncomely it must needs be in my opinion for a king to fall in altercation with a cardinal at least with one no more noble descend than he be that ecclesiastical dignity though by the sloth of prince as I say before it be now come to that height of usurp honour yet be in the true original and foundation thereof nothing else but the title of the priest and deacon of the parish church in the town of Rome at the first the style of cardinal be general give to all priest and deacon of any cathedral church though the multitude of such cardinal priest and deacon resort to Rome be the cause that after breed the restrain of that title of cardinal priest and deacon only to the parish priest and deacon of Rome and since that it be s. Gregory who in his epistle six hundred year after CHRIST make the first mention of cardinal and so these now elector of the apostolic sea be long and many hundred year unknown or unheard of after the apostolic age and yet do he speak of they but in this sense as I have now describe I hope the cardinal who call he the apostle of England can blame i that be king thereof to acknowledge the cardinal in no other degree of honour than our say apostle do but how they shall now become to be so strange exalt above their first original institution that from parish-priest and deacon priest inferior they shall now come to be prince and peer to king and from a degree under bishop as both a a lib. cap. 16. Bellarmine and b b lib. Onuphrius confess to be now the pope sole elector supply with he the place of a general counsel whereby the convene of general counsel be now utter antiquate and abolish nay out of their number only the pope to be elect who claim the absolute superiority over all king how this their strange usurp exaltation I say shall thus creep in and be suffer it belong all they in our place and calling to look unto it who be GOD his lieutenant in earth have good reason to be jealous of such upstart prince mean in their original come to that height by their own creation and now account themselves king fellow but the special harm they do we be by their defraud we of our common and christian interest in general counsel they have as I say utter abolish the same by roll it up and make as it be a monopoly thereof in their conclave with the pope whereas if ever there be a possibility to be expect of reduce all christian to a uniformity of religion it must come by the mean of a general council the place of their meeting be choose so indifferent as all christian prince either in their own person or their deputy commissioner and all church man of christian profession that believe and profess all the ancient ground of the true ancient catholic and apostolic faith may have thereunto all the incendiary and novelist firebrand on either side be debar from the same as well jesuit as puritan and therefore have resolve not to pain myself with make a reply for these reason here specify ground as well upon the consideration of the matter as of the person of the answerer I have think good to content myself with the reprint of my apology have in a manner correct nothing but the copier or printer fault therein and prefix this my epistle of dedication and warn thereunto that I may yet see if any thing will be just say against it not doubt but enough of my subject will reply upon these libeler and answer they sufficient wish you deep to consider and weigh your common interest in this cause for neither in all my apology nor in his pretend refutation thereof be there any question make anent the pope power over i in particular for the excommunicate or depose of i for in my particular the cardinal do i that grace that he say the pope think it not expedient at this time to excommunicate i by name our question be only general whether the pope may lawful pretend any temporal power over king or no that no church man can by his rule be subject to any temporal prince I have already show you and what obedience any of you may look for of any of they he plain forewarn you of by the example of Gregory the great his obedience to the emperor mauritius not be ashamed to slander that great personage christian humility and obedience to the emperor with the title of a constrain and force obedience because he may or dare do no otherwise whereby he not only wrong the say Gregory in particular but even do by that mean lay on a heavy slander and reproach upon the christian humility and patience of the whole primitive church especial in the time of persecution if the whole glory of their martyrdom and christian patience shall be thus blot with that vile gloss of their co-act and constrain suffering because they can or dare do no otherwise like the patience and obedience of the jew or turkish slave in our time clean contrary to s. Paul and s. Pe^^rs doctrine of obedience for conscience sake rom. 13.5 1 pet. 2.13 and as contrary to tertullians apology for christian and all the protestation of the ancient father in that case but it be good luck for the ancient christian in the day of ethnic emperor that this profane and new conceit be yet unknown among they otherwise they will have be utter destroy and root out in that time and no man to have pity they as most dangerous member in a commonwealth who will no long be obedient then till they be furnish with sufficient ability and power to resist and rebel thus may you see how upon the one part our cardinal will have all king and monarch to be the pope vassal and yet will not on the other side allow the mean of the pope his vassal to be subject to any christian prince but he not think it enough to make the pope our superior have in a late treatise of his call the recognition of his book of controversy make the people and subject of every one of we our superior for have take occasion to revisit again his book of controversy and to correct or explain what he find amiss or mistake in they in imitation of s. Augustine his retraction for so he say in his preface he do in place of retract any of his former error or any matter of substance not retract but recant indeed I mean sing over again and obstinate confirm a number of the gross of they among the which the exempt of all churchman from subjection to any temporal prince and the set up not only of the pope but even of the people above their natural king be two of his main point as for the exemption of the cleric he be so greedy there to prove that point act 25.10 as he deny Caesar to have be Paul lawful judge contrary to the express text and Paul plain appellation and acknowledge he his judge beside his many time claim to the roman privilege act 22.28 and avow himself a Roman by freedom and therefore of necessity a subject to the roman emperor but it be a wonder that these roman catholic who vaunt themselves of the ancienty both of their doctrine and church and reproach we so bitter of our novelty shall not be ashamed to make such a new inept gloss as this upon s. Paul text which as it be direct contrary to the apostle word so be it without any warrant either of any ancient council or of so much as any one particular father that ever interpre^s that place in this sort neither be it ever doubt by any christian in the primitive church that the apostle or any other degree of christian be subject to the emperor and as for the set up of the people above their own natural king he bring in that principle of sedition that he may thereby prove that king have not their power and authority immediate from God as the pope have he for every king say he be make and choose by his people nay they do but so transfer their power in the king person as they do notwithstanding retain their habitual power in their own hand which upon certain ocasion they may actual take to themselves again this I be sure be a excellent ground in divinity for all rebel and rebellious people who be hereby allow to rebel against their prince and assume liberty unto themselves when in their discretion they shall think it convenient and among his other testimony for probation that all king be make and create by the people he allege the creation of three king in the scripture Saul David and and though he be compel by the express word of the text to confess that God by his prophet Samuel anoint both a a 1. sam. 10.1 Saul and b b 1. sam. 16.12.13 David yet will he by the post-consent of the people prove that those king be not immediate make by God but mediate by the people though he repeat thrice that word of lot by the cast whereof he confess that Saul be choose and if the election by lot be not a immediate election from God act 1. then be not Mathias who be so choose and make a apostle immediate choose by God and consequent he that sit in the apostolic sea can for shame claim to be immediate choose by God if Mathias that be one of the twelve apostle supply judas his place be not so choose but as it be a blasphemous impiety to doubt that Mathias be immediate choose by God and yet be he choose by the cast of lot as Saul be so be it well enough know to some of you my love brother by what holy spirit or cast of lot the pope use to be elect the college of cardinal his elector have be divide in two mighty faction ever since long before my time and in place of cast of lot great fat pension be cast into some of their greedy mouth for the election of the pope according to the partial humour of prince but I do most of all wonder at the weakness of his memory for in this place he make the post consent of the people to be the thing that make both these king notwithstanding of their prepare inauguration and anointment by the prophet at God commandment forget that in the begin of this same little book of he answer one that allege a sentence of s. cyprian to prove that the bishop be judge by the people in cyprian time he there confess that by these word the consent of the people to the bishop election must be only understand nor will he there any way be move to grant that the people power in consent to or refuse the election of a bishop shall be so understand as that thereby they have power to elect bishop and yet do these word of cyprian seem to be far strong for grant the people power to elect churchman than any word that he allege out of the scripture be for the people power in elect a King for the very word of cyprian by himself there cite be cyprian lib. 1. epist 4. that the very people have principal the power either to choose such priest as be worthy or to refuse such as be unworthy and I hope he can never prove by the scripture that it have be lawful to the people of Israel or that it be leave in their choice to have admit or refuse Saul or David at their pleasure after that the prophet have anoint they and present they unto they thus you see how little he care even in so little a volume to contradict himself so it may make for his purpose make the consent of the people to signify their power of election in the make of king though in the make of bishop by the people consent their approbaven of a deed do by other must only be understand and as for his example of jeeroboam election to be king 1. King 12.20 he know well enough that be make king in a popular mutinous tumult and rebellion only permit by God and that in his wrath both against these two king and their people but if he will needs help himself against all rule of divinity with such a extraordinary example for proof of a general rule why be it not as lawful for we king to oppose hereunto the example of jehu his inauguration to the kingdom 2. king 9.2 ^ who upon the prophet private anointment of he and that in most secret manner take present the king office upon he without ever crave any sort of approbation from the people and thus may you now clear see how deep the claim of the babylonian monarch touch we in all our common interest for as I have already tell the pope nor any of his vassal I mean churchman must be subject to no king nor prince and yet all king and their vassal must not only be subject to the pope but even to their own people and now what a large liberty be by this doctrine leave to churchman to hatch or foster any treasonable attempt against prince I leave it to your consideration since do what they will they be accountable to none of we nay all their treasonable practice must be account work of piety and they be just punish for the same must be present enrol in the list of martyr and saint like as our new print martyrology have put garnet and Ouldcorne in the register of english martyr abroad that be hang at home for treason against the crown and whole state of England so as I may just with isaiah Isai 5.20 pronounce a woe to they that speak good of evil and evil of good verse 23. which put light for darkness and darkness for light which justify the wicked for a reward and take away the righteousness of the righteous from he for even as in the time of the great blindness in popery though a man shall find his wife or his daughter lie a bed in her confessor arm yet be it not lawful for he so much as to suspect that the friar ahadny errand there but to confess and instruct she even so though jesuit practise in treason be sufficient verify and that themselves can but confess it yet must they be account to suffer martyrdom for the faith and their blood work miracle and frame a upon straw when their head be stand aloft wither by the sun and the wind a public spectacle for the eternal commemoration of their treachery yea one of the reason that be give in the printer epistle of the colonian edition of the cardinal or his chaplain pamphlet why he do the more willing print it be because that the innocence of that most holy and constant man Henry garnet be declare and set forth in that book against who some he know not who have scatter a false rumour of his guiltiness of the english treason but lord what a impudency or wilful ignorance be this that he who be so public and solemn convict and execute upon his own so clear unforce and often repeat confession of his knowledge and conceal of that horrible treason shall now be say to have a certain rumour spread upon he of his guiltiness by I know not who with so many attribute of godliness constancy and innocence bestow upon he as if public sentence and execution of justice be rumour of I know not who indeed I must confess the book itself show a great affection to perform what be thus promise in the preface thereof for in two or three place therein be there most honourable lie mention make of that straw saint wherein though he confess that garnet be upon the foreknowledge of the powder-treason yet in regard it be as he say only under the seal of confession he stick not to praise he for his conceal thereof and will glad give he the crown of glory for the same not be ashamed to proclaim it as a principal head of catholic doctrine that the secret of sacramental con^ession ought not to be reveal not for the eschew of whatsoever evil but how damnable this doctrine be and how dangerous pre^udiciall to all prince and state I leave it to you to judge who all it most high concern for although it he true that when the schoolman come to be doctor in the church and to mar the old ground in divinity by sow in among they their philosophical distinction though they I say do maintain that wha^soeever thing be tell a confessor under the veil of confession how dangerous soever the matter be yet he be bind to conceal the party name yet do none of they I mean of the old schoolman deny that if a matter be reveal unto they the conceal whereof may breed a great or public danger but that in that case the confessor may disclose the matter though not the person and by some indirect mean make it come to light that the danger thereof may be prevent but that no treason nor devilish plot though it shall tend to the ruin or exterminion of a whole kingdom must be reveal if it be tell under confession no not the matter so far indirect disclose as may give occasion for prevent the danger thereof though it agree with the conceit of some three or four new jesuited doctor it be such a new and dangerous head of doctrine as no king nor state can live in security where that position be maintain and now that I may as well prove he a liar in in his narration of this particular history as I have show he to be in by this his damnable and false ground in divinity I will true inform you of garnets case which be far otherwise then this answerer allege for first it can never be account a thing under confession which he that reveal it do not discover with a remorse account it a sin whereof he repent he but by the contrary discover it as a good motion and be therein not dissuade by his confessor nor any penance enjoin he for the same and in this form be this treason reveal to garnet as himself confess and next though he stand long upon it that it be reveal unto he under the veil of confession in respect it be do in that time while as the party be make his confession unto he yet at the last he do free confess that the party reveal it unto he as they be walk and not in the time of confession but he say he deliver it unto he under the great seal that may be and so he take that he mean by the seal of confession and it have as he think a relation to confession in regard that he be that party confessor and have take his confession sometime before and be to take it again within few day thereafter he also say that he pretend to the party that he will not conceal it from his superior and further it be to be note that he confess that two diverse person confer with he anent this treason and that when the one of they which be Catesby confer with he thereupon it be in the other party presence and hear and what a confession can this be in the hear of a three person and how far his last word whereof our answerer so much vaunt he do disprove it to have be under confession the earl of northampton book do bear witness now as to the other party name that reveal the powder-treason unto he it be greenwell the jesuite and so a jesuite reveal to a jesuite this treasonable plot the jesuite revealer not show any remorse and the jesuit who to it be reveal not so much as enjoin he any penance for the same and that you may know that more jesuit be also upon the party owldcorne the other powder-martyr after the misgive and discovery of that treason preach consolatory doctrine to his catholic auditory exhort they not to faint for the misgive of this enterprise nor to think the worse thereof that it succeed not allege diverse precedent of such godly enterprise that misgive in like manner especial one of saint Lewis king of France who in his second journey to the holy land die by the way the great part of his army be destroy by the plague his first journey have likewise misgive he by the sultan take of he exhort they thereupon not to give over but still to hope that God will bless their enterprise at some other time though this do fail thus see you now with what boldness and impudency he have belie the public know verity in this errand both in avow general that no jesuite be any way guilty of that treason for so he affirm in his book and also that garnet know nothing thereof but under the seal of confession but if this be the first lie of the affair of this state which my fugitive priest and jesuit have coin and spread abroad I can charm they of it as the proverb be but as well the wall of diverse monastery and jesuite college abroad be fill with the paint of such lie history as also the book of our say fugitive be farce with such sort of shameless stuff such be the innumerable sort of torment and cruel death that they record their martyr to have suffer here some tear at four horse some sow in bear skin and then kill with dog nay woman have not be spare they say and a thousand other strange fiction the vanity of all which I will in two word discover unto you first as for the cause of their punishment I do constant maintain that which I have say in my apology that no man either in my time or in the late queen ever die here for his conscience for let he be never so devout a Papist nay though he profess the same never so constant his life be in no danger by the law if he break not out into some outward act express against the word of the law or plot not some unlawful or dangerous practice or attempt priest and popish churchman only except that receive order beyond the sea who for the manifold treasonable practice that they have kindle and plot in this country be discharge to come home again under pain of treason after their receive of the say order abroad and yet without some other guilt in they then their bare home-comming have none of they be ever put to death and next for the cruel torment and strange sort of death that they say so many of they have be put unto if there be no more but the law and continual observe custom of England these many hundred year in all criminal matter it will sufficient serve to refute all these monstrous lie for no torture be ever use here but the manacle or the rack and these never but in case of high treason and all sort of traitor die but one manner of death here whether they be Papist or Protestant traitor queen Mary time only except for then indeed no sort of cruel death be spare unexecuted upon man woman and child profess our religion yea even against the law of God and nature woman with child be put to cruel death for their profession and a live child fall out of the mother belly be throw in the same fire again that consume the mother but these tyrannous persecution be do by the bishop of that time under the warrant of the pope authority and therefore be not subject to that constant order and form of execution which as they be here establish by our law and custom so be they according observe in the punishment of all criminal for all priest and popish traitor here receive their judgement in the temporal court and so do never exceed those form of execution which be prescribe by the law or approve by continual custom one thing be also to be mark in this case that stranger be never call in question here for their religion which be far otherwise I hope in any place where the inquisition but have now too much weary you with this long discourse whereby I have make you plain see that the wrong do unto i in particular first by the pope breve and then by these libeler do as deep interest you all in general that be king free prince or state as it do i in particular I will now conclude with my humble prayer to God that he will waken we up all out of that lethargike slumber of security wherein our predecessor and we have lie so long and that we may first grave consider what we be bind in conscience to do for the plant and spread of the true worship of God according to his reveal will in all our dominion therein hear the voice of our only pastor for his sheep will know his voice John 10.27 as himself say and not follow the vain corrupt and changeable tradition of man and next that we may provident look to the security of our own state and not suffer this encroach babylonian monarch to win still ground upon we and if God have so merciful deal with we that be his lieutenant upon earth as that he have join his cause with our interest the spiritual liberty of the gospel with our temporal freedom with what zeal and courage may we then embrace this work for our labour herein be assure to receive at the last the eternal and inestimable reward of felicity in the kingdom of heaven and in the mean time to procure unto ourselves a temporal security in our temporal kingdom in this world as for so many of you as be already persuade of that truth which I profess though differ among yourselves in some particular point I think little persuasion shall move you to this holy and wise resolution our greatness nor our number praise be God be not so contemptible but that we may show good example to our neighbour since almost the half of all christian people and of all sort and degree be of our profession I mean all go out of Babylon even from king and free prince to the mean sort of people but above all my love brother and cousin keep fast the unity of faith among yourselves reject a a 1. tim. 1.4 question of genealogy and b b ibid. c. 4.7 as Paul say let not the foolish heat of your preacher for idle controversy or indifferent thing tear asunder that mystical body whereof you be a part since the very coat of he who member we be be without a seam and let not our division breed a slander of our faith and be a word of reproach in the mouth of our adversary who make unity to be one of the special note of the true church and as for you my love brother and cousin who it have not yet please GOD to illuminate with the light of truth I can but humble pray with that it will please GOD to open your eye that you may see what innumerable and invincible army of angel be ever prepare and ready to defend the truth of GOD act 26.29 and with s. Paul I wish that you be as I be in this case especial that you will search the scripture and ground your faith upon your own certain knowledge and not upon the report of other since every man must be saf^ by his own faith Abac. 2 4. but leave this to GOD his merciful providence in his due time I have good reason to remember you to maintain the ancient liberty of your crown and commonwealth not suffer any under GOD to set himself up above you and therein to imitate your own noble predecessor who even in the day of great blindness do diverse time courageous oppose themselves to the encroach ambition of pope yea some of your kingdom have in all age maintain and without any interruption enjoy your liberty against the most ambitious pope and some have of very late have a evident proof of the pope ambitious aspire over your temporal power wherein you have constant maintain and defend your lawful freedom to your immortal honour and therefore I hearty wish you all to do in this case the office of godly and just king and earthly judge which consist not only in not wrong or invade the liberty of any other person for to that will I never press to persuade you but also in defend and maintain these lawful liberty wherewith GOD have endue you for you who GOD have ordain to protect your people from injury shall be ashamed to suffer yourselves to be wrong by any and thus assure myself that you will with a settle judgement free of prejudice weigh the reason of this my discourse and accept my plainness in good part grace this my apology with your favour and yet no long then till it shall be just and worthy refute I end with my earnest prayer to the almighty for your prosperity and that after your happy temporal reign in earth you may live and reign in heaven with he for ever a catalogue of the lie of together with a brief confutation of they Edit. politan pag. 9 1 in the oath of allegiance the pope power to excommunicate even heretical king be express deny confutation the point touch the pope power in excommunicate king be neither treat of nor define in the oath of allegiance but be purposely decline see the word of the oath and the praemonition pag. 9 p. 10. 2 for all catholic writer do collect from the word of Christ whatsoever thou shall lose upon earth shall be loose in heaven that there appertain to the pope authority not only a power to absolve from sin but also from penalty censure law vow and oath confutation that all roman-catholic writer do not concur with this libeler in thus collect from Christ word mat. 16. to omit other reason it may appear by this that many of they do write that what Christ promise there that he do actual exhibit to his disciple John 20. when he say who sin you remit they shall be remit thereby restrain this power of lose former promise unto lose from sin not mention any absolution from law vow and oath in this place so do Theophylact Anselm Hugo cardin. and in mat. 16. so do the principal schoolman alexand. Hales in part 4. q. 79. memb. 5. and 6. art. 3. thom. in 4. dist. 24. q. 3. art. 2. Scotus in 4. dist. 19 art. 1. pope Hadrian 6. in 4. dist. q. 2. clavib pag. 302. edit. Parsien an. 1530. who also allege for this interpretation Augustine and the interlinear gloss p. 18. 3 I abhor all parricide I detest all conspiracy yet it can be deny but occasion of despair be give to the powder-plotter confutation that it be not any just occasion of despair give to the powder-traitour as this libeler will bear we in hand but the instruction which they have from the jesuit that cause they to attempt this bloody design see the praemonition pag. 127. and the book entitle the proceed against the late traitor p. 26. 4 for not only the catholic but also the Calvinist-puritane detest the take of this oath confutation the puritan do not decline the oath of supremacy but daily do take it neither ever refuse it and the same supremacy be defend by Calvin himself instit lib. 4. cap. 20. p. 28. 5 first of all the pope write not that he be grieve at the calamity which the catholic do suffer for the keep of the orthodox faith in the time of the late queen or in the begin of king james his reign in England but for the calamity which they suffer at this present time confutation the only recital of the word of the will sufficient confute this lie for thus write the pope the tribulation and calamity which you have continual sustain for the keep of the catholic faith have always afflict we with great grief of mind but forasmuch as we understand that at this time all thing be more grievous our affliction hereby be wonderful increase p. 28. 6 in the first article of the statute the law of queen Elizabeth be confirm confutation there be no mention at all make of confirm the law of q. Elizabeth in the first article of that statute p. 29. 7 in the 10. article of the say statute it be add that if the catholic refuse the three time to take the oath be tender unto they they shall incur the danger of lose their life confutation there be no mention in this whole statute either of offer the oath the three time or any endanger of their life p. 30. 8 in the 12. article it be enact that whosoever go out of the land to serve in the war under foreign prince they shall first of all take this oath or else be account for traitor confutation it be nowhere say in that statute that they which shall thus serve in the war under foreign prince before they have take this oath shall be account for traitor but only for felon p. 35. 9 we have already declare that the pope apostolic power in bind and lose be deny in that oath of allegiance confutation there be no assertory sentence in that oath nor any word but only conditional touch the power of the pope in bind and lose p. 37. 10 the pope themselves even will they will they be constrain to subject themselves to Nero and diocletian confutation that christian without exception not upon constraint but willing and for conscience sake do subject themselves to the ethnic emperor it may appear by our apology p. 23 24. and the apologeticke of the ancient father p. 47. 11 in which word of the breve of Clement the 8. not only james king of Scotland be not exclude but include rather confutation if the breve of Clement do not exclude i from the kingdom but rather do include i why do garnet burn they why will he not reserve they that I may have see they that so he may have obtain more favour at my hand for he and his catholic p. 60. 12 of those 14. article contain in the oath of allegiance eleven of they concern the primacy of the pope in matter spiritual confutation no one article of that oath do meddle with the primacy of the pope in matter spiritual for to what end shall that have be since we have a express oath elsewhere against the pope primacy in matter spiritual p. 64. 13 among other calumny this be mention that Bellarmine be privy to sundry conspiracy against Q Elizabeth if not the author confutation it be nowhere say in the apology that Bellarmine be either the author or privy to any conspiracy against queen Elizabeth but that he be their principal instructor and teacher who corrupt their judgement with such dangerous position and principle that it be a easy matter to reduce the general into particular and to apply the dictate which he give out of his chair as opportunity serve to their several design p. 64. 14 for he Bellarmine know that campian only conspire against heretical impiety confutation that the true and proper cause of campian execution be not for his conspire against heretical impiety but for conspire against queen Elizabeth and the state of this kingdom it be most evident by the judicial proceed against he p. 65. 15 why be h. garnet a man incomparable for learning in all kind and holiness of life put to death but because he will not reveal that which he can not do with a safe conscience confutation that garnet come to the knowledge of this horrible plot not only in confession as this libeler will have it but by other mean neither by the relation of one alone but by diverse so as he may with safe conscience have disclose it see the premonition p. 125 126 etc. and the earl of northampton book p. 71. 16 pope sixtus 5. neither command the french king to be murder neither approve that fact as it be do by a private person confutation the falsehood of this do easy appear by the oration of sixtus 5. p. 91. 17 that which be add concern Stanley his treason be neither faithful nor true relate for the apologer as his manner be do miserable deprave it by add many lie confutation that which the apology relate concern Stanley his treason be word for word recite out of cardinal allens apology for Stanley^s treason as it be to be see there p. 93. 18 it be very certain that h. garnet at his arraignment do always constant avouch that neither he nor any jesuite either be author or compartner or adviser or consent any way to the powder-treason and a little after the same thing he protest at his death in a large speech in the presence of innumerable people confutation the book of the proceed against the late traitor and our premonition pag. 125 126 etc. do clear prove the contrary of this to be true p. 97. 19 king james since he be no catholic neither be he a Christian confutation contrary I be a true catholic a professor of the true ancient catholic and apostolic faith and therefore be a true christian see the confession of my faith in the premonition pag. 35 36 etc. p. 98. 20 and if the report of they which know he most inward be true when he be in Scotland he be a Puritan and a enemy to protestant now in England he profess himself a Protestant and a enemy to the puritan confutation contrary and what a Puritan I be in Scotland see my (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) and this my premonition p. 44 45.  he falsification in his allege of history together with a brief declaration of their falsehood the word of p. 70. 1 it be certain that he hnery 4. the emperor die a natural death confutation it be not certain since sundry historian write otherwise that he die upon his imprisonment by his son Henry 5. either with the noisomeness and loathsomeness of the prison or be pine to death by hunger read at the year 1094. epitome universal histor c. 198. Paulus Langius in at the year 1105. and jacobus Wimphelingus epitome germanic c. 28. p. 83. 2 Henry 4. the emperor fear indeed but not any corporal death but the censure of excommunication from the which that he may procure absolution of his own accord he do thus demisse humble himself before Gregory 7. confutation that Henry 4. thus deject himself before the pope it be neither of his own accord neither upon any fear of the pope excommunication which in this particular he esteem of no force but upon fear of the loss of his kingdom and life as the record of antiquity do evident testify see Lambertus Schafnaburg at the year 1077. abbas Vispergen at the year 1075. the author of the life of Henry 4. bruno in his history of the saxon war Laziard in epitome universal histor c. 193. Cuspian in Henric. 4. Sigonius lib. 9 p. 83. 3 the truth of the history of Alexander 3 tread upon the neck of Frederick Barbarossa with his foot may be just doubt of confutation but no historian doubt of it and many do avouch it as Hieronym bard. in victor naval Bessarion Baro. ann. 1177. num. 5. Gerson consid. 11. jacob Bergom in supplem Chron. an. 1160. Gener 40. Petrus justinian li. 2. venetar papirius masson lib. 5. episcop who also allege for this gennadius patriarch of Constantinople beside Alphonsus Ciacconius vit. Pontif. in alexand. 3. and the jesuite instit moral part. 2. lib. 5. c. 43. p. 83. 4 what other thing fear Frederick Barbarossa but Excommuniticaon confutation that Frederick fear only pope Alexander his excommunication no ancient historian do testify but many do write that this submission of his be principal for fear of lose his empire and dominion see for this Martin Polon an. 1166. Platina in alexand. 3. Laziard in epitome universal c. 212. Naucler 40. jacobus Wimphelingus in epitome germanic c. 32. p. 88 5 add hereunto that Cuspinian in relate the history of the turk brother who be poison by Alexander 6. have not the consent of other writer to witness the truth of this history confutation the same history which be report by Cuspinian be record also by sundry other famous historian see Francis Guicciardin lib. 2. histor Ital. Paulus lib. 2. hist Sabellic Ennead. 10. lib. 9 at the year 1494.  the novel doctrine with a brief declaration of their novelty novel doctrine p. 9 1 it be agree upon among all that the pope may lawful depose heretical prince and free their subject from yield obedience unto they confutation nay all be so far from consent in this point that it may much more true be avouch that none entertain that conceit before hildebrand since he be the first broacher of this new doctrine never before hear of as many learned man of that age and the age next follow to omit other of succeed age have express testify see for this point the epistle of the whole clergy of liege to pope Paschal the 2. see the judgement of many bishop of those time record by Aventine in his history lib. 5. fol. 579. also the speech utter by Conrade bishop of Vtrecht in the say 5. book of Aventine fol. 582. and another by archbishop of Saltzburge ibid. lib. 7. p. 684. also the judgement of the archbishop of trier in constitut. Imperialib m. pag. 47. the epistle of Walthram bishop of Megburgh which be extant in Dodechine his appendix to the chronicle of marianus Scotus at the year 1090. Benno in the life of hildebrand the author of the book or the apology for Henry the 4. Sigebert in his chronicle at the year 1088. Godfrey of Viterbio in his history entitle Pantheon part 17. Frisingensis lib. 6. c. 35. and praefat. in lib. 7. Frederick Barbarossa lib. 6. gunther Ligurin and lib. 1. c. 10. of Raduicus vincentius in lib. 15. c. 84. with sundry other novel doctrine p. 51. 2 in our supernatural birth in baptism we be to conceive of a secret and imply oath which we take at our new birth to yield obedience to the spiritual prince which be Christ vicar confutation it be to be wonder at whence this fellow have this strange new divinity which sure be first frame in his own fantastical brain else let he make we a catalogue of his author that hold and teach that all christian whether infant or of age be by virtue of a oath take in their baptism bind to yield absolute obedience to Christ vicar the pope or baptize in any but in Christ novel doctrine p. 94. 2 but since that catholic doctrine do not permit for the avoidance of any mischief whatsoever to discover the secret of sacramental confession he garnet rather choose to suffer most bitter death then to violate the seal of so great a sacrament confutation that the secret of sacramental confession be by no mean to be disclose no not indirect or in general so the person confess be conceal for avoidance and prevention of no mischief how great soever beside that it be a position most dangerous to all prince and common wealth as I show in my premonition pag. 122 123. it be also a novel assertion not hear of till of late day in the christian world since the common opinion even of the schoolman and canoniste both old and new be unto the contrary witness these author follow alexand. Hales part. 4. qu. 78. mem. 2. art. 2. thom. 4. dist. 21. q. 3. art. 1. 1. Scotus in 4. dist. 21. q. 2. Hadrian 6. in 4. dist. Sacram. confess Paris 1530. pag. 289. dominic Sot in 4. dist. 18. q. 4. art. 5. Francis victor Sacram. n. 189. navar. in Enchirid. c. 8. joseph angle in Florib part 1. pag. 247. edit. Antuerp Petrus Soto lect. 11. confess the jesuit also accord hereunto Suarez tom. 4. disp. in 3. part thom. disp. 33. @ 3. Gregor. Valentia tom. 4. disp. 7. q. 13. punct. 3. who say the common opinion of the schoolman be so novel doctrine p. 102. 4 I dare bold avow that the catholic have better reason to refuse the oath of allegiance then Eleazar have to refuse the eat of swine flesh confutation this assertion imply a strange doctrine in deed that the pope breve be to be prefer before Moses law and that papist be more bind to obey the pope decree than the jew be to obey the law of God pronounce by Moses novel doctrine p. 135. 5 churchman be exempt from the jurisdiction of secular prince and therefore be no subject to king yet ought they to observe their law concern matter temporal not by virtue of any law but by enforcement of reason that be to say not for that they be their subject but because reason will give it that such law be to be keep for the public good and quiet of the commonwealth confutation how true friend the cardinal and his chaplain be to king that will have so many subject exempt from their power see my premonition p. 20 21. also p. 114 115. etc. but as for this and the like new aphorism I will have these cunning merchant to cease to vent such stuff for ancient and catholic ware in the christian world till they have disprove their own venetian who charge they with novelty and forgery in this point a apology for the oath of allegiance what a monstrous rare nay never hear of treacherous attempt be plot within these few year here in England for the destruction of i my bedfellow and our posterity the whole house of parliament and a great number of good subject of all sort and degree be so famous already through the whole world by the infamy thereof as it be needless to be repeat or publish any more the horror of the sin itself do so loud proclaim it for if those a a gen 4.10 cry sin whereof mention be make in the scripture have that epithet give they for their public infamy and for procure as it be with a loud cry from heaven a just vengeance and recompense and yet those sin be both old and too common neither the world nor any one country be ever at any time clean void of they if those sin I say be say in the scripture to cry so loud what then must this sin do plot without cause infinite in cruelty and singular from all example what proceed hereupon be likewise notorious to the whole world our justice only take hold upon the offender and that in as honourable and public a form of trial as ever be use in this kingdom 2. for although the only reason they give for plot so heinous a attempt be the zeal they carry to the romish religion yet be never any other of that profession the worse use for that cause as by our gracious proclamation immediate after the discovery of the say fact do plain appear only at the next sit down again of the parliament there be law make set down some such order as be think fit for prevent the like mischief to come among which a form of oath be frame to be take by my subject whereby they shall make a clear profession of their resolution faithful to persist in their obedience unto i according to their natural allegiance to the end that I may hereby make a separation not only between all my good subject in general and unfaithful traitor that intend to withdraw themselves from my obedience but special to make a separation between so many of my subject who although they be otherwise popish affect yet retain in their heart the print of their natural duty to their sovereign and those who be carry away with the like fanatical zeal that the powder-traitor be can not contain themselves within the bound of their natural allegiance but think diversity of religion a safe pretext for all kind of treason and rebellion against their sovereign which godly and wise intent God do bless with success according for very many of my subject that be popish affect aswell priest as layick do free take the same oath whereby they both give i occasion to think the better of their fidelity and likewise free themselves of that heavy slander that although they be fellow professor of one religion with the powder traitor yet be they not join with they in treasonable course against their sovereign whereby all quiet mind papist be put out of despair and I give a good proof that I intend no persecution against they for conscience cause but only desire to be secure of they for civil obedience which for conscience cause they be bind to perform 3. but the devil can not have devise a more malicious trick for interrupt this so calm and clement a course than fall out by the send hither and publish a of the pope countermaund all they of his profession to take this oath thereby sow new seed of jealousy between i and my popish subject by stir they up to disobey that lawful commandment of their sovereign which be ordain to be take of they as a pledge of their fidelity and so by their refusal of so just a charge to give i so great and just a ground for punishment of they without touch any matter of consy throw themselves needless (...) of these desperate strait (...) loss of their life and (...) their allegiance to the^^ (...) or else to procure the condemnation of their soul by renounce the catholic faith as he allege 4. and on the other part although disparity of religion the pope be head of the contrary part can permit no intelligence nor intercourse of messenger betwerne i and the pope yet there be no denounce war between we he have by this action break the rule of common civility and justice between christian prince in thus condemn i unheard both by account i a persecutor which can not be but imply by exhort the papist to endure martyrdom as likewise by so strait command all those of his profession in England to refuse the take of this oath thereby refuse to profess their natural obedience to i their sovereign for if he think himself my lawful judge wherefore have he condemn i unheard and if he have nothing to do with i and my government as indeed he have not why do he to meddle between i and my subject especial in matter that mere and only concern civil obedience and yet can in his great fury and avow quarrel against the late queen do no more injury unto she then he have in this cause offer unto i without so much as a pretend or a allege cause for what difference there be between the command subject to rebel and lose they from their oath of allegiance as do and the command of subject not to obey in make profession of their oath of their dutiful allegiance as this pope have now do no man can easy discern 5. but to draw near unto his wherein certain he have take more pain than he need by set down in the say the whole body of the oath at length whereas the only name of the title thereof may as well have serve for any answer he have make thereunto make that be the flat and general condemnation of the whole oath to serve for all his refutation therein have as well in this respect as in the former deal both undiscreet with i and injurious with his own catholic with i in not refute particular what special word he quarrel in that oath which if he have do it may have be that for the fatherly care I have not to put any of my subject to a needless extremity I may have be content in some sort to have reform or interpret those word with his own catholic for either if I have so do they have be thereby full ease in that business or at least if I will not have condescend to have alter any thing in the say oath yet will thereby some appearance or shadow of excuse have be leave unto they for refuse the same not as seem thereby to swerve from their obedience and allegiance unto i but only be stay from take the same upon the scrupulous tenderness of their conscience in regard of those particular word which the pope have note and condemn therein and now let we hear the word of his thunder pope Paulus the five to the english catholic well-beloved son salutation and apostolical benediction the pope his first the tribulation and calamity which you have continual sustain for the keep of the catholic faith have always afflict we with great grief of mind but for as much as we understand that at this time all thing be more grievous our affliction hereby be wonderful increase for we have hear how you be compel by most grievous punishment set before you to go to the church of heretic to frequent their assembly to be present at their sermon true we do undoubted believe that they which with so great constancy and fortitude have hitherto endure most cruel persecution and almost infinite misery that they may walk without spot in the law of the lord will never suffer themselves to be defile with the communion of those that have forsake the divine Law yet notwithstanding be compel by the zeal of our pastoral office and by our fatherly care which we do continual take for the salvation of your soul we be enforce to admonish and desire you that by no mean you come unto the church of the heretic or hear their sermon or communicate with they in their rite lest you incur the wrath of God for these thing may you not do without endamage the worship of God and your own salvation as likewise you can without most evident and grievous wrong of God honour bind yourselves by the oath which in like manner we have hear with very great grief of our heart be administer unto you of the tenor under write viz. the oath i a.b. do true and sincere acknowledge profess testify and declare in my conscience before God and the world that our sovereign lord king JAMES be lawful king of this realm and of all other his majesty dominion and country and that the pope neither of himself nor by any authority of the church or sea o^ Rome or by any other mean with any other have any power or authority to depose the king or to dispose of any of his majesty kingdom or dominion or to authorize any foreign prince to invade or annoy he or his country or to discharge any of his subject of their allegiance and obedience to his majesty or to give licence or leave to any of they to bear arm raise tumult or to offer any violence or hurt to his majesty royal person state or government or to any of his majesty subject within his majesty dominion also I do swear from my heart that notwithstanding any declaration or sentence of excommunication or deprivation make or grant or to be make or grant by the pope or his successor or by any authority derive or pretend to be derive from he or his sea against the say king his heir or successor or any absolution of the say subject from their obedience I will bear faith and true allegiance to his majesty his heir and successor and he and they will defend to the uttermost of my power against all conspiracy and attempt whatsoever which shall be make against his or their person their crown and dignity by reason or colour of any such sentence or declaration or otherwise and will do my best endeavour to disclose and make know unto his majesty his heir and successor all treason and traitorous conspiracy which I shall know or hear of to be against he or any of they and I do further swear that I do from my heart abhor detest and abjure as impious and heretical this damnable doctrine and position that prince which be excommunicate or deprive by the pope may be depose or murder by their subject or any other whatsoever and I do believe and in conscience be resolve that neither the pope nor any person whatsoever have power to absolve i of this oath or any part thereof which I acknowledge by good and full authority to be lawful minister unto i and do renounce all pardon and dispensation to the contrary and all these thing I do plain and sincere acknowledge and swear according to these express word by i speak and according to the plain and common sense and understanding of the same word without any equivocation or mental evasion or secret reservation whatsoever and I do make this recognition and acknowledgement hearty willing and true upon the true faith of a Christian so help my God which thing since they be thus it must evident appear unto you by the word themselves that such a oath can be take without hurt of the catholic faith and the salvation of your soul see it contain many thing which be flat contrary to faith and salvation wherefore we do admonish you that you do utter abstain from take this and the like oath which thing we do the more earnest require of you because we have experience of the constancy of your faith which be try like gold in the fire of perpetual tribulation we do well know that you will cheerful undergo all kind of cruel torment whatsoever yea and constant endure death itself rather than you will in any thing offend the majesty of God and this our confidence be confirm by those thing which be daily report unto we of the singular virtue valour and fortitude which in these last time do no less shine in your martyr than it do in the first beginning of the church stand therefore your loin be gird about with verity and have on the breastplate of righteousness take the shield of faith be you strong in the lord and in the power of his might and let nothing hinder you he which will crown you and do in heaven behold your conflict will finish the good work which he have begin in you you know how he have promise his disciple that he will never leave they orphan for he be faithful which have promise hold fast therefore his correction that be be root and ground in charity whatsoever you do whatsoever you endeavour do it with one accord in simplicity of heart in meekness of spirit without murmur or doubt for by this do all man know that we be the disciple of Christ if we have love one to another which charity as it be very great to be desire of all faithful christian so certain be it altogether necessary for you most bless son for by this your charity the power of the devil be weaken who do so much assail you since that power of he be especial up hold by the contention and disagreement of our son we exhort you therefore by the bowel of our lord jesus Christ by who love we be take out of the jaw of eternal death that above all thing you will have mutual charity among you sure pope Clement the eight of happy memory have give you most profitable precept of practise brotherly charity one to another in his letter in form of a to our well-beloved son m. George archpriest of the kingdom of England date the 5. day of the month of October 1602. put they therefore diligent in practice and be not hinder by any difficulty or doubtfulness we command you that you do exact observe the word of those letter and that you take and understand they simple as they sound and as they lie all power to interpret they otherwise be take away in the mean while we will never cease to pray to the father of mercy that he will with pity behold your affliction and your pain and that he will keep and defend you with his continual protection who we do gentle greet with our apostolical benediction date at Rome at s. mark under the signet of the fisherman the ten of the calends of October 1606. the second year of our popedom the answer to the first first the pope express herein his sorrow for that persecution which the catholic sustain for the faith sake wherein beside the main untruth whereby I be so injurious use I must ever avow and maintain as the truth be according to my own knowledge that the late queen of famous memory never punish any Papist for religion but that their own punishment be ever extort out of her hand against her will by their own misbehaviour which both the time and circumstance of her action will manifest make proof of for before his excommunication give she over for a prey and set her subject at liberty to rebel it be well know she never meddle with the blood or hard punishment of any catholic nor make any rigorous law against they and since that time who list to compare with a indifferent eye the manifold intend invasion against her whole kingdom the foreign practice the internal public rebellilion the private plot and machination poison murder and all sort of device daily set abroach and all these ware continual foster and foment from Rome together with the continual corrupt of her subject as well by temporal bribe as by fair and specious promise of eternal felicity and nothing but book upon book public set forth by her fugitive for approbation of so holy design who list I say with a indifferent eye to look on the one part upon those infinite and intolerable temptation and on the other part upon the just yet moderate punishment of a part of these heinous offender shall easy see that that bless defunct lady be as free from persecution as they shall free these hellish instrument from the honour of martyrdom 5. but now have sacrifice if I may so say to the mane of my late predecessor I may next with s. Paul just vindicate my own fame from those innumerable calumny spread against i in testify the truth of my behaviour towards the papist wherein I may true affirm that whatsoever be her just and merciful government over the papist in her time my government over they since have so far exceed she in mercy and clemency as not only the papist themselves grew to that height of pride in confidence of my mildness as they do direct expect and assure promise to themselves liberty of conscience and equality with other of my subject in all thing but even a number of the best and faithful of my say subject be cast in great fear and amazement of my course and proceed ever prognosticate and just suspect that sour fruit to come of it which show itself clear in the powder-treason how many do I honour with knighthood of know and open recusant how indifferent do I give audience and access to both side bestow equal all favour and honour on both profession how free and continual access have all rank and degree of papist in my court and company and above all how frank and free do I free recusant of their ordinary payment beside it be evident what strait order be give out of my own mouth to the judge to spare the execution of all priest notwithstanding their conviction join thereunto a gracious proclamation whereby all priest that be at liberty and not take may go out of the country by such a day my general pardon have be extend to all convict priest in prison whereupon they be set at liberty as good subject and all priest that be take after send over and set at liberty there but time and paper will fail i to make enumeration of all the benefit and favour that I bestow in general and particular upon papist in recount whereof every scrape of my pen will serve but for a blot of the pope ingratitude and injustice in mete i with so hard a measure for the same so as I think I have sufficient or at least with good reason wipe the a a etc. tear from the pope eye for complain upon such persecution who if he have be but politic wise although he have have no respect to justice and verity will have in this complaint of he make a difference between my present time and the time of the late queen and so by his commend of my moderation in regard of former time may have have hope to have move i to have continue in the same clement course for it be a true say that allege kindness upon noble mind do ever work much and for the main untruth of any persecution in my time it can never be prove that any be or be put to death since I come to the crown for cause of conscience except that now this discharge give by the pope to all catholic to take their oath of allegiance to i be the cause of the due punishment of many which if it fall out to be let the blood light upon the pope head who be the only cause thereof as for the next point contain in his concern his discharge of all papist to come to our church or frequent our rite and ceremony the intendment of this discourse I be not to meddle at this time with that matter because my errand now only be to publish to the world the injury and injustice do unto i in discharge my subject to make profession o^ their obedience unto i now as to the point where the oath be quarrel it be se^ down in few but very weighty word to wit that it ought to be clear unto all catholic that this oath can be take with safety of the catholic faith and of their soul health since it contain many thing that be plain and direct contrary to their faith and salvation to this the old say father upon the philosopher may very fi^ly be apply nay indeed for how the profession of the natural allegiance of subject to their prince can be direct opposite to the faith and salvation of soul be so far beyond my simple read in divinity as I must think it a strange and new assertion to proceed out of the mouth of that pretend general pastor of all christian soul I read indeed and not in one or two or three place of scripture that subject be bind to obey their prince for conscience sake whether they be good or wicked prince so say the people to a a Josh. 1.17 joshua as we obey Moses in all thing so will we obey thou so the b b jere. 27.12 prophet command the people to obey the king of Babel say put your neck under the yoke of the king of Babel and serve he and his people that you may live so be the child of Israel unto c c exod. 5.1 Pharaoh desire he to let they go so to d d ezra 1.3 Cyrus obtain leave of he to return to build the temple and in a word the e e Rome 13.5 apostle will all man to be subject to the high power for conscience sake agreeable to the scripture do the father teach f f augusi^in psal 124. Augustine speak of julian say julian be a unbelieve emperor be he not a a oppressor and a idolater Christian soldier serve that unbelieve emperor when they come to the cause of CHRIST they will acknowledge no lord but he that be in heaven when he will have they to worship idol and to sacrifice they prefer GOD before he but when he say go forth to fight invade such a nation they present obey they distinguish their eternal lord from their temporal and yet be they subject even unto their temporal lord for his sake that be their eternal lord and master g g tertul^ad scap. Tertullian say a Christian be enemy to no man much less to the prince who he know to be appoint of God and so of necessity must love reverence and honour he and wish he safe with the whole roman empire so long as the world shall last for so long shall it endure we honour therefore the emperor in such sort as be lawful for we and expedient for he as a man the next unto God and obtain from God whatsoever he have and only inferior unto God this the emperor himself will for so be he great than all while he be inferior only to the true God h h just. martyr apol. 2. ant. Imperat. justine martyr we only adore God and in all other thing cheerful perform service to you profess that you be emperor and prince of man i i amb. in cont. traden lib. 5. epist amb. Ambrose I may lament weep and sigh my tear be my weapon against their arm soldier and the goth also such be the weapon of a priest otherwise neither ought I neither can I resist k k Optat. Parmen. lib. 3. optatus over the emperor there be none but only God that make the emperor and l l greg. mag. epist. lib. 2. indict 11. epist 61. Gregory write to mauritius about a certain law that a soldier shall not be receive into a monastery militia the almighty God say he hold he guilty that be not upright to the most excellent emperor in all thing that he do or speak and then call himself the unworthy servant of his godliness go on in the whole epistle to show the injustice of that law as he pretend and in the end conclude his epistle with these word I be subject to your command have cause the same law to be send through diverse part of your dominion and because the law itself do not agree to the law of the almighty God I have signify the same by my letter to your most excellent lordship so that on both part I have pay what I ought because I have yield obedience to the emperor and have not hold my peace in what I think for God now how great a contrariety there be betwixt this ancient pope action in obey a emperor by the publication of his decree which in his own conscience he think unlawful and this present pope prohibition to a king subject from obedience unto he in thing most lawful and mere temporal I remit it to the reader indifferency and answerable to the father speak the counsel in their decree as the council of m m Concil. Arelatense Carolo mag. can. 26^ Arles submit the whole council to the emperor in these word these thing we have decree to be present to our lord the emperor beseech his clemency that if we have do less than we ought it may be supply by his wisdom if any thing otherwise then reason require it may be correct by his judgement if any thing be find fault with by we with reason it may be perfect by his aid with God favourable assistance but why shall I speak of Charles the great to who not one council but six several counsel Frankford Arles Tours chalons Ments and Rheims do whole submit themselves and not rather speak of all the general counsel that of Nice Constantinople Ephesus chalcedon and the four other common so repute which do submit themselves to the emperor wisdom and piety in all thing insomuch as that of Ephesus repeat it four several time that they be summon by the emperor oracle beck charge and command and betake themselves to his godliness a a conc. ephes August beseech he that the decree make against Nestorius and his follower may by his power have their full force and validity as appear manifest in the epistle of the general council of Ephesus write I also read that Christ say his b b John 18.36 kingdom be not of this world bid give to c c mat. 22.21 Caesar what be Caesar and to God what be god and I ever hold it for a infallible maxim in divinity that temporal obedience to a temporal magistrate do nothing repugn to matter of faith or salvation of soul but that ever temporal obedience be against faith and salvation of soul as in this be allege be never before hear nor read of in the christian church and therefore I will have wish the pope before he have set down this commandment to all papist here that since in he be the power by the infallibility of his spirit to make new article of faith when ever it shall please he that he have first set it down for a article of faith before he have command all catholic to believe and obey it I will then conclude the answer to this point in a dilemma either it be lawful to obey the sovereign in temporal thing or not question if it be lawful as I never hear nor read it doubt of then why be the pope so unjust and so cruel towards his own catholic as to command they to disobey their sovereign lawful commandment if it be unlawful why have he neither express any one cause or reason thereof nor yet will give they leave nay rather he shall command and persuade they in plain term not to live under a king who unto they ought no obedience and as for the vehement exhortation unto answer to the pope exhortation they to persevere in constancy and to suffer martyrdom and all tribulation for this cause it require no other answer then only this that if the ground be good whereupon he have command they to stand than exhortation to constancy be necessary but if the ground be unjust and nought as indeed it be and I have in part already prove then this exhortation of he can work no other effect then to make he guilty of the blood of so many of his sheep who he do thus wilful cast away not only to the needless loss of their life and ruin of their family but even to the lay on of a perpetual flaunder upon all papist as if no zealous Papist can be a true subject to his prince and that the profession of that religion and the temporal obedience to the civil magistrate be two thing repugnant and incompatible in themselves but evil information and untrue report which be carry so far as between this and Rome can but increase by the way may have abuse the pope and make he dispatch this so rash for that great city queen of the world and as themselves confess a a Eusebius Occumemus and Leo hold that by Babylon in 1. pet. 5.13 Rome be mean as the rhemist themselves confess mystical Babylon can but be so full of all sort of intelligency beside all complainer as the catholic here be be natural give to exaggerate their own grief and multiply thereupon so that it be no wonder that even a judge sit there shall upon wrong information give a unrighteous sentence as some of their own party do not stick to confess that be too rash carry upon wrong information to pronounce his thunder of excommunication upon the late queen and it may be the like excuse shall hereafter be make for the two breve which b b see the relation of the whole proceed against the traitor garnet and his confederate Clemens send to England immediate before her death for debar i of the crown or any other that either will profess or any way tolerate the professor of our religion contrary to his manifold vow and protestation and as it be deliver to diverse of my minister abroad profess such kindness and show such forwardness to advance i to this crown nay the most part of catholic here find this when it come to their hand to be so far against divinity the catholic opinion of the policy or natural sense be firm persuade that it be but a counterfeit libel devise in hatred of the pope or at the far a thing hasty do upon wrong information as be before say of which opinion be not only the simple sort of papist but even some among they of best account both for learning and experience whereof the archpriest himself be one but for solve of this objection the pope himself have take new pain by send forth a second only for give faith and confirmation to the former that whereas before his sin may have be think to have proceed from rashness and misinformation he will now wilful and willing double the same whereof the copy follow to our belove son the english catholic Paulus P.P. V belove son the second salutation and apostolical benediction it be report unto we that there be find certain among you who when as we have sufficient declare by our letter date the last year on the ten of the calends of October in the form of a that you can with safe conscience take the oath which be then require of you and when as we have further straight command you that by no mean you shall take it yet there be some I say among you which dare now affirm that such letter concern the forbid of the oath be not write of our own accord or of our own proper will but rather for the respect and at the instigation of other man and for that cause the same man do go about to persuade you that our command in the say letter be not to be regard sure this news do trouble we and that so much the more because have have experience of your obedience most dear belove son who to the end you may obey this holy sea have godly and valiant contemn your riches wealth honour liberty yea and life itself we shall never have suspect that the truth of our apostolic letter can once be call into question among you that by this pretence you may exempt yourselves from our commandment but we do herein perceive the subtlety and craft of the enemy of man salvation and we do attribute this your backwardness rather to he then to your own will and for this cause we have think good to write the second time unto you and to signify unto you again that our apostolic letter date the last year on the ten of the calends of October concern the prohibition of the oath be write not only upon our proper motion and of our certain knowledge but also after long and weighty deliberation use concern all those thing which be contain in they and for that cause that you be bind full to observe they reject all interpretation persuade to the contrary and this be our mere pure and perfect will be always careful of your salvation and always mind those thing which be most profitable unto you and we do pray without cease that he that have appoint our lowliness to the keep of the flock of Christ will enlighten our thought and our counsel who we do also continual desire that he will increase in you our belove son faith constancy and mutual charity and peace one to another all who we do most love bless with all charitable affection date at Rome at saint mark under the signet of the fisherman the x. of the calends of September 1607. the three year of our popedom the answer to the second now for this I may just reflect his own phrase upon he in term it to be the craft of the devil for if the devil have study a thousand year for to find out a mischief for our catholic hear he have find it in this that now when many catholic have take their oath and some priest also yea the archpriest himself without compunction or stick they shall not now only be bind to refuse the profession of their natural allegiance to their sovereign which may yet have be some way colour upon diverse scruple conceive upon the word of the oath but they must now renounce and forswear their profession of obedience already swear a double oath of every subject and so must as it be at the three instance forswear their former two oath first close swear by their birth in the natural allegiance and next clear confirm by this oath which do nothing but express the same so as no man can now hold the faith or procure the salvation of his sell in England that must not abjure and renounce his bear and swear allegiance to his natural sovereign and yet it be not sufficient to ratify the last year by a new one come forth this year but that not only every year but every month may produce a new monster the great and famous writer of the controversy the late un-iesuited cardinal Bellarmine must add his talon to this good work by blow the bellows of sedition and sharpen the spur to rebellion by send such a letter of he to the archpriest here as it be wonder how passion and a ambitious desire of maintain that monarchy shall charm the wit of so famous learn a man the copy where of here follow to the very reverend Mr. George Blackwel archpriest of the english Robert Bellarmine cardinal of the holy church of Rome greeting reverend sir and brother in CHRIST it be almost forty year since we do see one the other but yet I have never be unmindful of our ancient acquaintance neither have I cease see I can do you no other good to commend your labour most painful in the lord vineyard in my prayer to God and I doubt not but that I have live all this while in your memory and have have some place in your prayer at the lord altar so therefore even unto this time we have abide as s. John speak in the mutual love one of the other not by word or letter but in deed and truth but a late message which be bring unto we within these few day of your bond and imprisonment have enforce i to break off this silence which message although it seem heavy in regard of the loss which that church have receive by their be thus deprive of the comfort of your pastoral function among they yet withal it seem joyous because you draw near unto the glory of martyrdom than the which gift of God there be none more happy that you who have feed your flock so many year with the word and doctrine shall now feed it more glorious by the example of your patience but another heavy tiding do not a little disquiet and almost take away this joy which immediate follow of the adversary assault and peradventure of the slip and fall of your constancy in refuse a unlawful oath neither true most dear brother can that oath therefore be lawful because it be offer in sort temper and modify for you know that those kind of modification be nothing else but sleight and subtlety of Satan that the catholic faith touch the primacy of the sea apostolic may either secret or open be shoot at for the which faith so many worthy martyr even in that very England itself have resist unto blood for most certain it be that in whatsoever word the oath be conceive by the adversary of the faith in that kingdom it tend to this end that the authority of the head of the church in England may be transfer from the successor of s. Peter to the successor of k. Henry the eight for that which be pretend of the danger of the king life if the high priest shall have the same power in England which he have in all other christian kingdom it be altogether idle as all that have any understanding may easy perceive for it be never hear of from the church infancy until this day that ever any pope do command that any prince though a heretic though a ethnic though a persecutor shall be murder or do approve of the fact when it be do by any other and why I pray you do only the king of England fear that which none of all other the prince in Christendom either do fear or ever do fear but as I say these vain pretext be but the trap and stratagem of Satan of which kind I can produce not a f^we out of ancient story if I go about to write a book^ and not a epistle one only for example sake I will call to your memory s. gregorius nazianzenus in his first oration against julian the emperor report that he the more easy to beguile the simple christian do insert the image of the false god into the picture of the emperor which the roman do use to bow dawn unto with a civil kind of reverence so that no man can do reverence to the emperor picture but withal he must adore the image of the false god whereupon it come to pass that many be deceive and if there be any that find out the emperor craft and refuse to worship his picture those be most grievous punish as man that have contemn the emperor in his image some such like thing i think I see in the oath that be offer to you which be to so crafty compose that no man can detest treason against the king and make profession of his civil subjection but he must be constrain perfidious to deny the primacy of the apostolic Sea but the servant of Christ and especial the chief priest of the lord ought to be so far from take a unlawful oath where they may endamage the faith that they ought to beware that they give not the least suspicion of dissimulation that they have take it lest they may seem to have leave any example of prevarication to faithful people which thing that worthy Eleazar do most notable perform who will neither eat swine flesh nor so much as fain to have eat it although he see the great torment that do hang over his head lest as himself speak in the second book of the maccabee many young man may be bring through that similation to prevaricate with the Law neither do Basil the great by his example which be more fit for our purpose carry himself less worthy towards Valens the emperor for as Theodoret write in his history when the deputy of that heretical emperor do persuade saint Basill that he will not resist the emperor for a little subtlety of a few point of doctrine that most holy and prudent man make answer that it be not to be endure that the least syllable of God word shall be corrupt but rather all kind of torment be to be embrace for the maintenance of the truth thereof now I suppose that there want not among you who say that they be but subtlety of opinion that be contain in the oath that be offer to the catholic and that you be not to strive against the king authority for such a little matter but there be not want also among you holy man like unto Basil the great which will open avow that the very lest syllable of God divine truth be not to be corrupt though many torment be to be endure and death itself set before you among who it be meet that you shall be one or rather the standerd-bearer and general to the rest and whatsoever have be the cause that your constancy have quail whether it be the suddenness of your apprehension or the bitterness of your persecution or the imbecility of your old age yet we trust in the goodness of God and in your own long continue virtue that it will come to pass that as you seem in some part to have imitate the fall of Peter and marcellinus so you shall happy imitate their valour in recover your strength and maintain the truth for if you will diligent weigh the whole matter with yourself true you shall see it be no small matter that be call in question by this oath but one of the principal head of our faith and foundation of catholic religion for hear what your apostle s. Gregory the great have write in his 24. epistle of his 11. book let not the reverence due to the apostolic sea be trouble by any man presumption for then the estate of the member do remain entire when the head of the faith be not bruise by any injury therefore by s. Gregory testimony when they be busy about disturb or diminish or take away of the primacy of the apostolic sea then be they busy about cut off the very head of the faith and dissolve of the state of the whole body and of all the member which self same thing s. Leo do confirm in his three sermon of his assumption to the popedom when he say our lord have a special care of Peter and pray proper for Peter faith as though the state of other be more stable when their prince mind be not to be over come whereupon himself in his epistle to the bishop of the province of Vienna do not doubt to affirm that he be not partaker of the divine mystery that dare depart from the solidity of Peter who also say that who think the primacy to be deny to that sea he can in no sort lessen the authority of it but by be puff up with the spirit of his own pride do cast himself headlong into hell these and many other of this kind I be very sure be most familiar to you who beside many other book have diligent read over the visible monarchy of your own Saunders a most diligent writer and one who have worthy deserve of the church of England neither can you be ignorant that these most holy and learned man John bishop of Rochester and tho. Moor within our memory for this one most weighty head of doctrine lead the way to martyrdom to many other to the exceed glory of the english nation but I will put you in remembrance that you shall take heart and consider the weightiness of the cause not to trust too much to your own judgement neither be wise above that be meet to be wise and if peradventure your fall have proceed not upon want of consideration but through human infirmity and for fear of punishment and imprisonment yet do not prefer a temporal liberty to the liberty of the glory of the son of God neither for escape a light and momentany tribulation lose a eternal weight of glory which tribulation itself do work in you you have fight a good fight a long time you have well near finish your course so many year have you keep the faith do not therefore lose the reward of such labour do not deprive yourself of that crown of righteousness which so long ago be prepare for you do not make the face of so many you both brother and child ashamed upon you at this time be fix the eye of all the church yea also you be make a spectacle to the world to angel to man do not so carry yourself in this your last act that you leave nothing but lament to your friend and joy to your enemy but rather on the contrary which we assure hope and for which we continual power forth prayer to God display glorious the banner of faith and make to rejoice the church which you have make heavy so shall you not only merit pardon at God hand but a crown farewell quite you like a man and let your heart be strengthen from Rome the 28. day of September 1607. your very reverendships brother and servant in Christ Robert Bellarmine cardinal the answer to the cardinal letter and now that I be to enter into the field against he by refute his letter I must first use this protestation that no desire of vain glory by match with so learned a man make i to undertake this task but only the care and conscience I have that such smooth Circe charm and guild pill as full of exterior eloquence as of in ward untruth may not have that public passage through the world without a answer whereby my reputation may unjust be darken by such cloudy and foggy mist of untruth and false imputation the heart of unstaid and simple man be mislead and the truth itself smother but before I come to the particular answer of this letter I must here desire the world to wonder with i a great mistake of the state of the question and case in hand at the commit of so gross a error by so learned a man as that he shall have pain himself to have set down so elaborate a letter for the refutation of a quite mistake question for it appear that our english fugitive of who inward society with he he so great vaunt have so fast hammer in his head the oath of supremacy which have ever be so great a scar unto they as he think by his letter to have refute the last oath have in place thereof only pay the oath of supremacy which be most in his head as a man that be earnest carry in his thought upon another matter than he be present in do will often name the matter or person he be think of in place of the other thing he have at that time in hand the difference between the oath of supremacy and this of allegiance for as the oath of supremacy be devise for put a difference between papist and they of our profession so be this oath which he will seem to impugn ordain for make a difference between the civil obedient papist and the perverse disciple of the powder-treason yet do all his letter run upon a inuective against the compulsion of catholic to deny the authority of saint Peter successor and in place thereof to acknowledge the successor of king Henry the eight for in king Henry the eight time be the oath of supremacy first make by he be Thomas Moor and Roffensis put to death partly for refuse of it from his time till now have all the prince of this land profess this religion successive in effect maintain the same and in that oath only be contain the king absolute power to be judge over all person aswel civil as ecclesiastical exclude all foreign power and potentate to be judge within his dominion whereas this last make oath contain no such matter only meddle with the civil obedience of subject to their sovereign in mere temporal cause and that it may the better appear that whereas by name he seem to condemn the last oath yet indeed his whole letter run upon nothing but upon the condemnation of the oath of supremacy I have here think good to set down the say oath leave it then to the discretion of every indifferent reader to judge whether he do not in substance only answer to the oath of supremacy but that he give the child a wrong name i a b. do utter testify and declare in my conscience that the king highness be the only supreme governor of this realm and all other his highness dominion and county as well in all spiritual or ecclesiastical thing or cause as temporal and that no foreign prince person prelate state or potentate have or aught to have any jurisdiction power superiority pre-eminence or authority ecclesiastical or spiritual within this realm and therefore I do utter renounce and forsake all foreign jurisdiction power superiority and authority and do promise that from henceforth I shall bear faith and true allegiance to the king highness his heir and lawful successor and to my power shall assist and defend all jurisdiction privilege preeminence and authority grant or belong to the king highness his heir and successor or unite and annex to the imperial crown of the realm so help i God and by the content of this book and that the injustice as well as the error of his gross mistake in this point may yet be more clear discover I have also think good to insert here immediate after the oath of supremacy the contrary conclusion to all the point and article whereof this other late oath do consist whereby it may appear what unreasonable and rebellious point he will drive my subject unto by refuse the whole body of that oath as it be conceive for he that shall refuse to take this oath must of necessity hold all or some of these proposition follow that I king JAMES be not the lawful king of this kingdom and of all other my dominion that the pope by his own authority may depose i if not by his own authority yet by some other authority of the church or of the sea of Rome if not by some other authority of the church and sea of Rome yet by other mean with other help he may depose i that the pope may dispose of my kingdom and dominion that the pope may give authority to some foreign prince to invade my dominion that the pope may discharge my subject of their allegiance and obedience to i that the pope may give licence to one or more of my subject to bear arm against i that the pope may give leave to my subject to offer violence to my person or to my government or to some of my subject that if the pope shall by sentence excommunicate or depose i my subject be not to bear faith and allegiance to i if the pope shall by sentence excommunicate or depose i my subject be not bind to defend with all their power my person and crown if the pope shall give out any sentence of excommunication or deprivation against i my subject by reason of that sentence be not bind to reveal all conspiracy and treason against i which shall come to their hear and knowledge that it be not heretical and detestable to hold that prince be excommunicate by the pope may be either depose or kill by their subject or any other that the pope have power to absolve my subject from this oath or from some part thereof that this oath be not administer to my subject by a full and lawful authority that this oath be to be take with equivocation mental evasion or secret reservation and not with the heart and good will sincere in the true faith of a christian man these be the true and natural branch of the body of this oath the affirmative of all which negative do neither concern in any case the pope supremacy in spiritual cause nor yet be ever conclude touch the pretend council of Lateran see Plat. in Innocen 3 and define by any complete general council to belong to the pope authority and their own school doctor be at irreconcilable odds and jar about they and that the world may yet far see we and the whole state set down of this oath do not proceed from any new invention of our own the oath of allegiance confirm by the authority of ancient counsel but as it be warrant by the word of GOD so do it take the example from a oath of allegiance decree a thousand year ago which a famous council then together with diverse other counsel be so far from condemn as the pope now have do this oath as I have think good to set down their own word here in that purpose whereby it may appear that I crave nothing now of my subject in this oath which be not express and careful command then by the counsel to be obey without exception of person nay not in the very particular point of equivocation which I in this oath be so careful to have eschew but you shall here see the say counsel in their decree the ancient counsel provide for equivocation as careful to provide for the eschew of the same so as almost every point of that action and this of we shall be find to have relation and agreeance one with the other save only in this that those old counsel be careful and strait in command the take of the same the difference between the ancient counsel and the pope counsel of the catholic whereas by the contrary he that now vaunt himself to be head of all counsel be as careful and strait in the prohibition of all man from the take of this oath of allegiance the word of the council be these hear our sentence whosoever of we Concil. Toletan 4 can 47. ann. 633. or of all the people throughout all Spain shall go about by any mean of conspiracy or practice to violate the oath of his fidelity which he have take for the preservation of his country or of the king life or who shall attempt to put violent hand upon the king or to deprive he of his kingly power or that by tyrannical presumption will usurp the sovereignty of the kingdom let he be accurse in the sight of God the father and of his angel and let he be make and declare a stranger from the catholic church which he have profane by his perjury and a alien from the company of all christian people together with all the complice of his impiety because it behoove all those that be guilty of the like offence to under-lie the like punishment which sentence be three several time together and almost in the same word repeat in the same canon after this the synod desire that this sentence of they now this three time rehearse may be confirm by the voice and consent of all that be present then the whole clergy and people answer whosoever shall carry himself presumptuous against this your definitive sentence let they be anathema that be let they be utter destroy at the lord come and let they and their complice have their portion with judas Iscarioth amen and in the five a a Concil. Toletan 5. can. 7. 636. council there it be decree that this act touch the oath of allegiance shall be repeat in every council of the bishop of Spain the decree be in these word in consideration that the mind of man be easy incline to evil and forgetfulness therefore this most holy synod have ordain and do enact that in every council of the bishop of Spain the decree of the general b b synod Toletan 4. and syn. t^l 5. ca. 2. council which be make for the safety of our prince shall be with a audible voice proclaim and pronounce after the conclusion of all other thing in the synod that so it be often sound in their ear at least by continual remembrance the mind of wicked man be terrify may be reform which by oblivion and facility to evil be bring to prevaricate and in the six a a Concil. Tolet 6. can. 18 638. council we do protest before God and all the order of angel in the presence of the prophet and apostle and all the company of martyr and before all the catholic church and assembly of the christian that no man shall go about to seek the destruction of the king no man shall touch the life of the prince no man shall deprive he of the kingdom no man by any tyrannical presumption shall usurp to himself the sovereignty of the kingdom no man by any machination shall in his adversity associate to himself any pack of conspirator against he and that if any of we shall be presumptuous by rashness in any of these case let he be strike with the anatheme of God and repute as condemn in eternal judgement without any hope of recovery and in the ten b b Concil. Tolet. 10 can. 2. 694. council to omit diverse other hold also at Toledo it be say that if any religious man even from the bishop to the low order of the churchman or monk shall be find to have violate the general oath make for the preservation of the king person or of the nation and country with a profane mind forthwith let he be deprive of all dignity and exclude from all place and honour the occasion of the decree make for this oath be that the christian be suspect for want of fidelity to their king and do either equivocate in take their oath or make no conscience to keep it when they have give it as may appear by sundry speech in the a a Concil. Toletan 4. cap. 74. council say there be a general report that there be that perfidiousness in the mind of many people of diverse nation that they make no conscience to keep the oath and fidelity that they have swear unto their king but do dissemble a profession of fidelity in their mouth when they hold a impious perfidiousness in their mind and b b Concil. Tolet 4. cap 74. again they swear to their king and yet do they prevaricate in the fidelity which they have promise neither do they fear the volume of God judgement by the which the curse of God be bring upon they with great threaten of punishment which do swear lie in the name of God to the like effect speak they in the council of a a Concil. a. quisgran Ludou Pio and greg. 4. can. 12. 836. Aquisgran if any of the bishop or other churchman of inferior degree hereafter through fear or covetousness or any other persuasion shall make defection from our lord the orthodox emperor Lodowick or shall violate the oath of fidelity make unto he or shall with their perverse intention adhere to his enemy let he by this canonical and synodal sentence be deprive of whatsoever place he be possess of and now to come to a particular answer of his letter first as concern the sweet memory he have of his old acquaintance with the archpriest it may indeed be please for he to recount but sure I be his acquaintance with he and the rest of his society our fugitive whereof he also vaunt himself in his preface to the reader in his book of controversy have prove sour to we and our State for some of such priest and jesuit as be the great traitor and fomenter of the great conspiracy against the late queen give up father Robert Bellarmine for one of their great authority and oracle campian and hart. see the conference in the Tower and therefore I do not envy the great honour he can win by his vaunt of his inward familiarity with a other prince traitor and fugitive who unto if he teach no better manner than hitherto he have do I think his fellowship be little behold unto he and for desire he to remember he in his prayer at the altar of the lord if the archpriest prayer prove no more profitable to his soul than Bellarmine counsel be like to prove profitable both to the soul and body of Blackwel if he will follow it the author of this letter may very well be without his prayer now the first messenger that I can find which bring joyful news of the archpriest to Bellarmine be he that bring the news of the archpriest take and first appearance of martyrdom a great sign sure of the cardinal mortification that he be so rejoice to hear of the apprehension imprisonment and appearance of put to death of so old and dear a friend of he but yet apparent he shall first have be sure that he be only to be punish for cause of religion before he have so triumph upon the expectation of his martyrdom for first the cardinal charity by what rule of charity be it lawful for he to judge i a persecutor before proof have be make of it by the say arch-prieste condemnation and death what can he know that the say archpriest be not take upon suspicion of his guiltiness in the powder-treason what certain information have he then receive upon the particular whereupon he be to be accuse and last of all by what inspiration can he foretell whereupon he be to be accuse for at that time there be yet nothing lay to his charge and if charity shall not be suspicious what warrant have he absolute to condemn i of use persecution and tyranny which can not be but imply upon i if Blackwel be to be a martyr but sure it may just be say of Bellarmine in this case that our saviour CHRIST say of all worldly and carnal man who think it enough to love their a a mat. 5.43 friend and hate their enemy the limit of the cardinal charity extend no far then to they of his own profession for what ever he add in superfluous charity to Blackwel in rejoice in the speculation of his future martyrdom he detract as much unjust and uncharitable from i in account of i thereby as of a bloody persecutor and whereas this joy of his be interrupt by the next messenger that bring the news of the say archpriest his fail in his constancy by take of this oath he need never to have be trouble either with his former joy or his second sorrow both be alike false ground for as it be never my intention to lay any thing unto the say archpriest charge as I have never do to any for cause of conscience so be blackwel constancy never brangle by take of this oath it be a thing which he ever think lawful before his apprehension and whereunto he persuade all catholic to give obedience like as after his apprehension he never make doubt or stop in it but at the first offer it unto he do free take it as a thing most lawful neither mean of threaten or flattery be ever use unto he as himself can yet bear witness and as for the temperature and modification of this oath except that a reasonable and lawful matter be there set down in reasonable and temperate word agree thereunto I know not what he can mean by quarrel it for that fault for no temperateness nor modification in word therein can just be call the devil craft when the thing itself be so plain and so plain interpret to all they that take it as the only troublesome thing in it all be the word use in the end thereof for eschew equivocation and mental reservation which new catholic doctrine may far just be call the devil craft than any plain and temperate word in so plain and clear a matter but what shall we say of these strange country clown who of with the satire we may just complain that they blow both hot and cold out of one mouth for Luther and our bold and free speak writer be mighty rail upon by they as hot brain fellow and speaker by the devil instinct and now if we speak moderate and temperate of they it must be term the devil craft and therefore we may just complain with CHRIST that when we a a matth. 11.17 mourn they will not lament and when we pipe they will not dance but neither John baptist his severity nor CHRIST his meekness and lenity can please they who build but to their own monarchy upon the ground of their own tradition and not to CHRIST upon the ground of his word and infallible truth but what can be mean by allege that the craft of the devil herein be only use for subversion of the catholic faith and eversion of s. Peter primacy have need be comment anew by Bellarmine himself for in all this letter of he never one word be use to prove that by any part of this oath the primacy of s. Peter be any way meddle with except master Bellarmine his bare allege which without prove it by more clear demonstration can never satisfy the conscience of any reasonable man for for aught that I know heaven and earth be no far asunder than the professon of a temporal obedience to a temporal king be different from any thing belong to the catholic faith or supremacy of s. Peter for as for the catholic faith no decision of any point of religion in the oath of allegiance can there be one word find in all that oath tend or sound to matter of religion do he that take it promise there to believe or not to believe any article of religion or do he so much as name a true or a false church there and as for s. Peter primacy I know no apostle name that be therein name except the name of JAMES it be my christian name though it please he not to deign to name i in all the letter albeit the content thereof concern i in the high degree neither be there any mention at all make therein either or by any other indirect mean either of the hierarchy of the church of s. Peter succession of the sea apostolic or of any such matter but that the author of our letter do brave make mention of s. Peter succession bring it in comparison with the succession of Henry the eight of which unapt and unmannerly similitude I wonder he shall not be much ashamed for as to king Henry successor which he mean by i as I I say never do nor will presume to create any article of faith or to be judge thereof but to submit my exemplary obedience unto they in as great humility as the mean of the land so if the pope can be as well able to prove his either person all or doctrinal succession from s. Peter as I be able to prove my lineal descent from the king of England and Scotland there have never be so long ado nor so much stir keep about this question in Christendom neither have a a Bellar. rom. pont. lib. 4. cap. 6. ibid. lib. 2. ca 12 m. Bellarmine himself need to have bestow so many sheet of paper in his great book of controversy and when all be do to conclude with a moral certitude and a bring in the b b lib. 2. cap. 14. pope that be party in this cause to be his witness and yet their historical narration must be no article of faith and I be without vantrie sure that I do far more near imitate the worthy action of my predecessor than the pope in our age can be well prove to be simile Petro especial in curse of king and set free their subject from their allegiance unto they but now we come to his strong argument which be that he will allege upon i a panic terror as if I be possess with a needless fear for the cardinal weighy argument say the cardinal from the begin of the church first infancy even to this day where be it ever hear that ever a pope either command to be kill or allow the slaughter of any prince whatsoever whether he be a heretic a ethnic or persecutor but first wherefore do he here wilful and of purpose omit the rest of the point mention in that oath for depose degrade stir up of arm or rebel against they which be as well mention in tha^ oath as the kill of they as be all of one consequence against a king no subject be so scrupulous as that he will attempt the one and leave the other unperformed if he can and yet sure I can blame he for pass it over since he can not otherwise have eschew the direct belie of himself in term which he now do but in substance and effect for a a Bellar. rom. pont. lib. 5. cap. 8. and lib. 3. cap. 16. as for the pope depose and degrade of king he make so brave vaunt and brag of it in his former book as he can never with civil honesty have deny it here but to return to the pope allow of kill of king I know not with what face he can send so stout a denial upon it against his own knowledge how many emperor do the pope raise war against in their own bowel who as they be overcome in battle be subject to have be kill therein which I hope the pope can not but have allow when he be so far enrage at b b Gotfrid Vite^b Helmod Cuspinian Henry the five for give burial to his father dead corpse after the e e pascal 2. pope have stir he up to rebel against his father and procure his ruin but leave these old history to Bellarmine own book that do most authentical cite they as I have already say let we turn our eye upon our own time and therein remember what a Panegyrik a a see the oration of sixtus Quintus make in the consistory upon the death of Henry the 3. oration be make by the pope in praise and approbation of the friar and his fact that murder king Henry the three of France who be so far from either be heretic ethnic or persecutor in their account that the say pope own word in that oration be that a true friar have kill a counterfeit friar and beside that vehement oration and congratulation for that fact how near it escape that the say friar be not canonize for that glorious act be better know to Bellarmine and his follower then to we here but sure I be if some cardinal have not be more wise and circumspect in that errand than the pope himself be the pope own calendar of his saint will have sufficient prove Bellarmine a liar in this case and to draw yet near unto ourselves how many practice and attempt be make against the late queen life which be direct enjoin to those traitor by their confessor and plain authorize by the pope allowance for verification whereof there need no more proof then that never pope either then or since call any churchman in question for meddle in those treasonable conspiracy nay the cardinal own s. Sanderus mention in his letter can well verify this truth if he be alive and who will look his book will find they fill with no other doctrine than this and what difference there be between the kill or allow the slaughter of king and the stir up and approbation of practice to kill they I remit to Bellarmine own judgement it may then very clear appear how strange this author passion have make he forget himself by implicate himself in so strong a contradiction against his own knowledge and conscience against the witness of his former book and against the practice of our own time but who can wonder at this contradiction of himself in this point when his own great volume be so fill with contradiction which when either he or any other shall ever be able to reconcile I will then believe that he may easy reconcile this impudent strong denial of he in his letter of any pope meddle against king with his own former book as I have already say and that I may not seem to imitate he in affirm bold that which I no way prove I will therefore send the reader to look for witness of his contradiction in such place here mention in his own book in his book of a a Bellar justif lib. 5. cap. 7. justification there he affirm that for the uncertainty of our own proper righteousness and for avoid of vain glory it be most sure and safe to repose our whole confidence in the alone mercy and goodness of God b b contrary to all his five book the justificatione which proposition of he be direct contrary to the discourse and current of all his five book the justificatione wherein the same be contain God do not incline a man to evil neither c c Bellar. amiss gra. and s^at lib. 2. cap. 13. natural or moral present after he affirm the contrary that God do not incline to evil natural but d d moral all the father teach constant that e e Bellar. lib. 1. cap. ^4 bishop do succeed the apostle and priest the seventy disciple elsewhere he affirm the contrary that f f Bellar. lib. 4 cap. ^5 bishop do not proper succeed the apostle that g g Bellar. lib. 1. cap. ^2 judas do not believe contrary that h h b^llar ^ustif lib. 3. cap. 14. judas be just and certain good the keep of the i i Bellar. gra and lib. arbit. lib. 5. cap. 5. law according to the substance of the work do require that the commandment be so keep that sin be not commit and the man be not guilty for have not keep the commandment contrary k k lib. ^ap. 9 it be to be know that it be not all one to do a good moral work and to keep the commandment according to the substance of the work for the commandment may be keep according to the substance of the work even with sin as if one shall restore to his friend the thing commit to he of trust to the end that thief may afterward take it from he l l bell. pont. lib. 4. cap. 3. Peter do not lose that faith whereby the heart believe unto justification contrary m m bell. just. ^ib. 3. cap. 14. Peter sin be deadly n n bell. rom. Pontif. lib. 3 ^ap. 14. Antichrist shall be a magician and after the manner of other magician shall secret worship the devil o o ibid. Hypol. and cyril and cap. 12. contrary he shall not admit of idolatry he shall hate idol and re-edify the temple by the word of p p Bellar. lib. 1 ^e cap. 27 consecration the true and solemn oblation be make contrary the sacrifice do not consist in the word but in the q q Bellar. ^ss lib. 2. cap. 2. oblation of the thing itself r r Bellar. inim Christ 4. cap. 5. that the end of the world can be know s s Bellarm. pont. lib. 3. cap. 17. contrary after the death of Antichrist there shall be but five and forty day till the end of the world t t Bellarm. ^on lib 3. cap. 3. that the ten king shall burn the scarlet whore that be Rome u u Bellarm. ibid. contrary Antichrist shall hate Rome and fight against it and burn it 10 10 Bellarm. pont. lib. 2. cap. 31. the name of universal bishop may be understand two way one way that he which be say to be universal bishop may be think to be the only bishop of all christian city so that all other be not indeed bishop but only vicar to he who be call universal bishop in which sense the pope be not universal bishop contrary all ordinary y y Bellar. pontif. lib. 2 cap. 24. jurisdiction of bishop do descend immediate from the pope and be in he and from he be derive to other which few place I have only select among many the like that the discreet and judicious reader may discern for when ever he be press with a weighty objection he never care nor remember how his solution and answer to that may make he gainsay his own doctrine in some other place so it serve he for a shift to put off the present storm withal but now to return to our matter again since pope say he have never at any time meddle against king wherefore I pray you shall only the king of England be afraid of that whereof never christian king be or be afraid be never chistian emperor or king afraid of the pope how then be these miserable emperor toss and turmoil and in the end utter ruin by the pope for proof whereof I have already cite Bellarmine own book be not the a a Henry 4. emperor afraid who b b abbas Vrspergen lamb. Scaffin 1077. Plat. in vit. greg. 7. wait barefooted in the frost and snow three day at the pope gate before he can get entry be not the c c Frederick Babarossa emperor also afraid d d Naucler 4^ jacob Bergom in Supplem chron. Alsons Ciacon in vit. alex. 3. who be drive to lie agroofe on his belly and suffer another pope to tread upon his neck and be not another e e Henry 6. emperor afraid f f r H^ueden in rich. 1. Ranulph in lib. 7. who be constrain in like manner to endure a three pope to beat off from his head the imperial crown with his foot be not g g abba Vrsper ann. 1191. nauc gen. 40. Cuspin in Philippo Philip afraid be make emperor against pope innocentius the three good like when he break out into these word either the pope shall take the crown from Philip or Philip shall take the mitre from the pope whereupon the pope stir up Ottho against he who cause he to be slay and present go to Rome and be crown emperor by the pope though afterward the pope h h abbas Vrsper depose he too be not the emperor i i matth Paris in henr. 3. Petrus epist lib. 1. and 2. and Cuspin in Freder 2. Frederick afraid when innocentius the four excommunicate he deprive he of his crown absolve prince of their oath of fidelity to he and in apulia corrupt one to give he poison whereof the emperor recover he hire his bastard son Manfredus to poison he whereof he die what do k k Alexander the three write to the sultan that if he will live quiet he shall by some sleight murder the l l Frederick Barbarossa emperor and to that end send he the emperor picture and do not m m Paul histor lib. 2. Cuspinian in Bajazet 11. Guicciard lib. 2. Alexander the six take of the Turk Baiazetes two hundred thousand crown to kill his brother Gemen or as some call he Si^imus who he hold captive at Rome do he not accept of the condition to poison the man and have his pay be not our n n Hoveden pag. 308. matth. Parls in Henric. 2 Walsinga in Hypodig joan. Capgrave Henry the second afraid after the slaughter of Thomas Becket that beside his go barefooted in pilgrimage be whip up and down the chapterhouse like a schoolboy and glad to escape so too have not this french king his great grandfather king John reason to be afraid when the o o Gometius gest fran. Tolet lib. 5. pope give away his kingdom of Navarre to the king of Spain whereof he yet possess the best half have not this king his successor reason to be afraid when he be force to beg so submissive the relaxation of his excommunication as he be content likewise to suffer his ambassador to be whip at Rome for penance and have not the late queen reason to look to herself when she be excommunicate by her subject loose from their fidelity and allegiance towards she her kingdom of Ireland give to the king of Spain and that famous fugitive divine honour with the like degree of a red hat as Bellarmine be be not ashamed to publish in print a a a card. allens answer to stan. let anno. 1587. apology for Stanley treason maintain that by reason of her excommunication and heresy it be not only lawful for any of her subject but even they be bind in conscience to deprive she of any strength which lie in their power to do and whether it be army town or fortress of she which they have in their hand they be oblige to put they in the king of Spain her enemy hand she no more be the right owner of any thing but albeit it be true that wise man be move by the example of other danger to use providence and caution according to the old proverb yet be I much near summon to use this caution by the practice of it in my own person first by the send forth of these bull whereof I make mention already for debar i from entry unto this crown and kingdom and next after my entry and full possession thereof by the horrible powder-treason which shall have bereave both i and i both of crown and lif^ and howsoever the pope will seem to clear himself of any allowance of the say powder-treason yet can it not be deny that his principal minister here and his chief the jesuit be the plain practiser thereof for which the principal of they have die confess it and other have flee the country for the crime yea some of they go into Italy and yet neither these that flee out of this country for it nor yet Baldwine who though he then remain in the lowe-countreye be of counsel in it be ever call to account for it by the pope much less punish for meddle in so scandalous and enormous business and now what need so great wonder and exclamation that the only king of England fear and what other christian king do or ever do fear but he as if by the force of his rhetoric he can make i and my good subject to mistrust our sense deny the sun to shine at midday and not with the serpent to stop our ear to his charm but to the plain and visible verity itself and yet for all this wonder he can never prove i to be trouble with such a panic terror have I ever importune the pope with any request for my security or have I either trouble other christian prince my friend and ally to entreat for i at the pope hand or yet have I beg from they any aid or assistance for my far security no. all this wondredat fear of i stretch no further then wise to make distinction between the sheep and goat in my own pasture for since what ever the pope part have be in the powder-treason yet certain it be that all these caitiff monster do to their death maintain that only zeal of religion move they to that horrible attempt yea some of they at their death will not crave pardon at GOD or king for their offence exhort other of their follower to the like constancy have not we then and our parliament great reason by this oath to set a mark of distinction between good subject and bad yea between papist though peradventure zealous in their religion yet otherwise civil honest and good subject and such terrible firebrand of hell as will maintain the like maxim which these powder-man do nay can there be a more gracious part in a king suppose I say it towards subject of a contrary religion then by make they to take this oath to publish their honest fidelity in temporal thing to i their sovereign and thereby to wipe off that imputation and great slander which be lay upon the whole professor of that religion by the furious enterprise of these powder-man and whereas for illustration of this strong argument of he he have bring in for a similitude the history of a a nazianzenus in julian. julian the his deal with the christian when as he strait they either to commit idolatry or to come within the compass of treason I will wish the author to remember that although a similitude may be permit the disproportion of the cardinal similitude yet this be a very ill choose similitude which be lame both of foot and hand and every member of the body for I shall in few word prove that it agree in no one point save one with our purpose which be that julian be a emperor and I a King first julian be a one that have renounce the whole christian faith which he have once profess and become a ethnic again or rather a atheist whereas I be a Christian who never change that religion that I drink in with my milk nor ever I thank God be ashamed of my profession julian deal against christian only for the profession of Christ cause I deal in this cause with my subject only to make a distinction between true subject and false heart traitor julians end be the overthrow of the christian my only end be to maintain christianity in a peaceable government julians drift be to make they commit idolatry my purpose be to make my subject to make open profession of their natural allegiance and civil obedience julians mean whereby he go about it be by craft and ensnare they before they be aware my course in this be plain clear and void of all obscurity never refuse leave to any that be require to take this oath to study it at leisure and give they all the interpretation of it they can crave but the great dissimilitude of all be in this that julian press they to commit idolatry to idol and image but as well I as all the subject of my profession be so far from guilt in this point as we be count heretic by you because we will not commit idolatry so as in the main point of all be the great contrariety for julian persecute the christian because they will not commit idolatry and you count i a persecutor because I will not admit idolatry so as to conclude this point this old sentence may well be apply to Bellarmine in use so unapt a similitude jupiter and therefore his uncharitable conclusion do not right follow that it seem unto he that some such thing shall be subtle or fraudulent include in this oath as if no man can detest treason against the king or profess civil subjection except he renounce the primacy of the apostolic Sea but how he have suck this apprehension out at his finger end I can imagine for sure I be as I have oft say he never go about to prove it and to answer a improbable imagination be to fight against a vanish shadow it can be deny indeed that many servant of CHRIST as well priest as other have endure constant all sort of torment and death for the profession of CHRIST and therefore to all such his example as he bring in for verify the same I need not to give he any other answer save only to remember he that he play the part of a sophister in all these his example of the constancy of martyr ever take as if this our case be of the same nature but yet that the reader may the better discover not only how unapt his similitude be apply but likewise how dishonest he use himself in all his citation I have think good to set down the very place themselves cite by he together with a short deduction of the true state of those particular case whereby how little these example can touch our case nay by the contrary how right their true sense may be use as our own weapon to be throw back upon he that allege they shall easy appear and first for a a 2. macchabee cap. 6. vers^ 18. Eleazar if the archpriest his ground of refuse the oath be as good as Eleazar be to forbear to eat the swine flesh it may not unfit be apply by the cardinal to his purpose a answer to the Cardinal^ example of Eleazar for as Eleazar be a principal scribe so be he a principal priest as Eleazar example have a great force in it to animate the young scribe to keep the law or in his colourable eat it to have teach they to dissemble so have the archpriest either to make the inferior priest to take the oath or to refuse it but the ground fail the building can stand for what example be there in all the scripture in which disobedience to the oath of the king or want of allegiance be allow if the cardinal will remember that when the church make a law suppose to forbid flesh on certain day he that refuse to obey it incur the just censure of the church if a man then ought to die rather than to break the least of God ceremonial law and to pine and starve his body rather than to violate the church his positive law will he not give leave to a man to redeem his soul from sin and to keep his body from punishment by keep a king politic law and by give good example in his person raise up a good opinion in i of like allegiance in the inferior of his order this application as I take it will have better fit this example but let i remember the cardinal of another a a 1. sam. 14.15 oath enjoin by a king to his people whereby he endanger his own life and hazard the safety of the whole army when he make the people swear in the morning not to taste of any meat until night which oath he exact so strict that his elder son and heiere apparent jonathan for break of it by taste a little honey of the top of his rod though he hear not when the king give that oath have well nigh die for it and shall a oath give upon so urgent a occasion as this be for the apparent safety of i and my posterity forbid my people to drink so deep in the bitter cup of antichristian fornication but that they may keep so much honey in their heart as may argue they still espouse to i their sovereign in the main knot of true allegiance shall this law I say by he be condemn to hell for a stratagem of Satan I say no more but God lot in the oath of saul and Bellarmine verdict upon this oath of we seem not to be cast out of one lap now to his example of a a Theodorit lib. 4 cap. 19 a answer to the card. example of s. Basil Basil which be as he say so fit for his purpose first I must observe that if the cardinal will leave a common and ordinary trick of he in all his citation which be to take what make for he and leave out what make against he and cite the author sense as well as his sentence we shall not be so much trouble with answer the ancient which he allege to instance it in this very place if he have continue his allegation one line further he shall have find this place out of Theodoret of more force to have move Blackwel to take the oath then to have dissuade he from it for in the very next word it follow but that it may appear whether of we have great right to this place I will in few word show the author drift the emperor Valens be a arrian at the persuasion of his wife when he have deprive all the church of their pastor come to Caesarea where a a Theodorit lib 4. cap. 19 s. Basill be then bishop who as the history report be account the light of the world before he come he send his b b modestus as Nazianzen upon the death of Basil call he in his oration deputy to work it that s. Basill shall hold fellowship with eudoxius which c c look cap. 12. libr. eudoxius be bishop of Constantinople and the principal of the arrian faction or if he will not that he shall put he to banishment now when the emperor deputy come to Caesarea he send for Basil entreat he honourable speak please unto he desire he will give way to the time neither that he will hazard the good of so many church promise he the emperor favour and himself to be mediator for his good but s. Basill answer these entice speech be fit to be use to child that use to gape after such thing but for they that be thorough instruct in God word they can never suffer any syllable thereof to be corrupt nay if need require they will for the maintenance thereof refuse no kind of death indeed the love of the emperor ought to be great esteem with piety but piety take away it be pernicious this be the truth of the history now compare the case of Basill with the archpriest Basill be solicit to become a arrian the archpriest not once touch for any article of faith Basill will have obey the emperor but that the word of GOD for bid he this man be will to obey because the word of GOD command he Basill high esteem the emperor favour if it may have stand with piety the archpriest be exhort to reject it though it stand with true godliness in deed to embrace it the cardi. assimilate of the arch pr. case to s. Peter and marcellinus consider but that he may lay load upon the archpriest it be not sufficient to exhort he to courage and constancy by Eleazar and basils example but he must be utterty cast down with the compare his fall to s. Peter and marcellinus which two man case be the most fearful consider their person and place that be to be find or read of either in all the book of divine scripture or the volume of ecclesiastical history the one deny the only true God the other our lord and saviour JESUS CHRIST the one sacrifice to idol with the profane heathen the other forswear his lord and master with the hard-hearted jew unless the cardinal will drive the archpriest to some horror of conscience and pit of despair I know not what he can mean by this comparison for sure I be all that be not intoxicate with their cup can but wonder to hear of a oath of allegiance to a natural sovereign to be liken to a apostate deny of God and forswear of his saviour but to let pass the disdiapason of the case as his ill-favoured couple s. Peter the head of their church with a apostate pope I marvel he will remember this example of a a look Platina in marcellinus since his brother cardinal Baronius and the late edition of the counsel by b b Concil. tom. 1. pag. 222. look Baronius ann. 302. num. 96. Binnius seem to call the credit of the whole history into question say that it may plain be refute and that it be probable to be show that the story be but obreptitious but that he will not swerve from the common receive opinion and if a man may have leave to conjecture so will his cardinalship too if it be not for one or two sentence in that council of sinuessa see tom. 1. Concil. in act. Concil. sinew which serve for his purpose namely that and but to what purpose a great council as he term it of three hundred bishop and other shall meet together who before they meet know they can do nothing when they be there do nothing but like cuckoo sing over and over the same song that and so after three day sit a long time indeed for a great and grave council break so blunt up and yet that there shall be seventy two witness bring against he and that they shall subscribe his excommunication and that at his own mouth he take the anathema how these untoward contradiction shall be make to agree I must send the cardinal to Venice to padre Paulo who in his a a apol. pat. Paul opposite card. Bellar. apology against the cardinal opposition have handle they very learned but from one pope let we pass to another a answer to the place allege out of s. Gregory for what a principal article of faith and religion this oath be I have already sufficient prove why he call s. b b greg. lib. 11. cap. 42. Gregory our apostle I know not unless perhaps it be for that he send c c beda Ecclesi hist gen. ang. lib. 1. cap. 25. Augustine the monk and other with he into England to convert we to the faith of Christ wherein I wish the pope his successor will follow his pattern for albeit he send they by divine revelation as he say into England unto king ethelbert yet when they come they exercise no part of their function but by the king leave and permission so do king d d beda ecclesiast hist gen. ang. iib. 1. cap. 4 Lucius send to his predecessor and he send he diverse bishop who be all place by the king authority these convert man to the faith and teach they to obey the King and if the pope in these day will but insist in these step of their forefather than will they not entertain prince fugitive abroad nor send they home not only without my leave but direct against the law with plot of treason and doctrine of rebellion to draw subject from their obedience to i their natural king nor be so cruel to their own as return they with these ware put either a state in jealousy of they or they in hazard of their own life now to our apostle since the cardinal will have he so call I persuade myself I shall do a good service to the church in this my labour if I can but reap this one fruit of it to move the cardinal to deal faithful with the father and never to allege their opinion against their own purpose for this letter of gregorius be write to John bishop of a a greg. lib. 11. cap. 42. Palermo in Sicily to who he grant to be wear in such time and in such order as the priest in the i will of Sicily and his predecessor be wont to use and withal give he a caveat that the reverence to the apostolic sea be not disturb by the presumption of any for then the state of the member do remain sound when the head of the faith be not bruise by any injury and the authority of the canon always remain safe and sound now let we examine the word the epistle be write to a bishop especial to grant he the use of the pall a ceremony and matter indifferent as it appear the bishop of Rome take it well at his hand that he will not presume to take it upon he without leave from the apostolic sea give he that admonition which follow in the word allege out of he which doctrine we be so far from impugn that we altogether approve and allow of the same that whatsoever ceremony for order be think meet by the christian magistrate and the church the same ought inviolable to be keep and where the head and governor in matter of that nature be not obey the member of that church must needs run to hellish confusion but that Gregory by that term hold himself the head of our faith and the head of all religion can stand with the course of his doctrine and writing for first when a a a John of Constantinople see greg. lib. 4. epist 32. other will have have this style to be call he say b b lib. 6. epist 30. I do confident avouch that whosoever call himself or desire to be call universal bishop in this advance of himself be the forerunner of the Antichrist which notwithstanding be a style far inferior to that of and when it be offer to himself the word of s. Gregory be these refuse that title c c greg. lib. 4. epist 32. and 36. none of my predecessor bishop of Rome ever consent to use this profane name of universal bishop none of my predecessor ever take upon he this name of singularity neither consent to use it we the bishop of Rome do not seek nor yet accept this glorious title be offer unto we and now I pray you will he that refuse to be call universal bishop be style unless it be in that sense as I have express which sense if he will not admit give i leave to say that of Gregory which himself say of a a Bellar. rom. pont. lib. 2. cap. 10. or which he elsewhere say of Chrysostome b b lib. 2. cap. 10. to redeem therefore our apostle out of his hand and to let he remain we and not his in this case it be very true that he say in that sense he speak it when you go about to disturb diminish or take away the authority or supremacy of the church which rest on the head of the king within his dominion you cut off the head and chief governor thereof and disturb the state and member of the whole body and for a conclusion of this point I pray he to think that we be so well persuade of the good mind of our apostle s. Gregory to we that we desire no other thing to be suggest to the pope and his cardinal than our apostle s. Gregory desire a a greg. lib. 7. epist 1. Sabinian to suggest unto the emperor and the state in his time his word be these one thing there be of which I will have you short to suggest to your most noble lord and master that if I his servant will have have my hand in slay of the Lombard at this day the nation of the Lombard have neither have king nor duke nor earl and have be divide asunder in utter confusion but because I fear God I dread to have my hand in the blood of any man a answer to the authority out of leo. and thus have answer to s. Gregory I come to another pope his apostle s. leo. and that he may see I have not in the former citation quarrel he like a sophister for contention sake but for find out of the truth I do grant that the authority out of b b in die assume Pontif. sermon 3 Leo epist 89. add epist ibid. cap. 2 Leo be right allege all three the word true set down together with his true intent and purpose but withal let i tell he and I appeal unto his own conscience whether I speak not true that what Tully say to c c Cicero in hor. Hortensius when he do immoderate praise eloquence that he will have lift she up to heaven that himself may have go up with she so his s. Leo lift up s. Peter with praise to the sky that he be his a a for so he call himself in serm. 1. in die heir may have go up with he for his s. Leo be a great orator who by the power of his eloquence redeem Rome from fire when both b b Ex^reviario Romano Attilas and will have burn it some fruit of this rhetoric he bestow upon s. Peter say the lord c c epist 89. do take Peter into the fellowship of the indivisible unity which word be couple to the sentence allege by the cardinal that he have no part in the divine mystery that dare depart from the solidity of Peter shall have give he I think such a scar as he shall never have dare to have take any advantage by the word immediate precede for the benefit of the church of Rome and the head thereof since those which immediate follow be so much derogatory to the divine majesty and again my d d epist 52. writing be strengthen by the authority and merit of my lord most bless s. Peter we e e epist 89. beseech you to keep the thing decree by we through the inspiration of God and the apostle most bless s. Peter if a a in serm. 2. in die anniver any thing be well do or decree by we if any thing be obtain of God mercy by daily prayer it be to be ascribe to s. Peter work and merit who power do live and authority excel in his own Sea he b b ser. 3. in die assump. be so plentiful water of the very fountain of all grace that whereas he receive many thing alone yet nothing pass over to any other but he be partaker of it and in a word he be so desirous to extol s. Peter that a messenger from he be a c c epist 24. embassage from s. Peter d d epist 4. any thing do in his presence be in s. Peter presence neither do he use all this rhetoric without purpose for at that time the patriarch of Constantinople contend with he for primacy and in the council of e e Concil. ch^lced act. 16. and c^n. 28. chalcedon the bishop six hundred and more give equal authority to the patriarch of that sea and will not admit any privilege to the sea of Rome above he but go against he and yet he that give so much to Peter take nothing from Caesar but give he both his title and due give the power of call a council to the emperor as it may appear by these one or two place follow of many if it may please your a a epist 9 Theodosio godliness to vouchsafe at our supplication to condescend that you will command a council of bishop to be hold within Italy and write unto the bishop of Constantinople because the most clement b b epist 16. emperor careful of the peace of the church will have a council to be hold albeit it evident appear the matter to be handle do in no case stand in need of a council and again albeit c c epist 17. Theodosio my occasion will not permit i to be present upon the day of the council of bishop which your godliness have appoint so as by this it may well appear that he that give so much to Peter give also to Caesar his due and prerogative but yet he play not fair play in this that even in all these his wrong apply argument and example he produce no other witness but the party themselves bring ever the pope sentence for approbation of their own authority now indeed for one word of he in the midst of his example I can but great commend he that be that martyr ought to endure all sort of torture and death before they suffer one syllable to be corrupt of the law of God which lesson if he and all the rest of his own profession will apply to themselves than will not the sacrament be administer direct contrary to Christ institution the practice of the apostle and of the whole primitive church for many hundred year then will not the private mass be in place of the lord supper then will not the word of the a a Bellar. eucharist lib 4. cap. 14. canon of the mass be oppose to the word of s. Paul and s. Luke as our adversary himself confess and can reconcile they nor then will not so many hundred other tradition of man be set up in their church not only as equal but even prefer to the word of God but sure in this point I fear I have mistake he for I think he do not mean by his the word of the god of heaven but only the canon and law of his otherwise all his primacy of the apostolic sea will not be so much upon have so slender ground in the word of God and for the great fear he have that the suddenness of the apprehension the bitterness of the persecution the weakness of his age and other such infirmity may have be the cause of the archpriest fall in this I have already sufficient answer he have declare as the truth be and as the say Blackwel himself will yet testify that he take this oath free of himself without any inducement thereunto either Precebus or minis some of sanders his worthy say remember but among all his citation he must not forget holy Sanderus and his who person and action I do already a little touch and sure who will with unpartial eye read his book they may well think that he have deserve well of his english roman-church but they can never think but that he deserve very ill of his english sovereign and State witness his own book whereout I have make choice to set down here these few sentence follow as flower pick out of so worthy a garland a a sand. visib monar. lib. 6. cap. 4. Elisabeth queen of England do exercise the priestly act of teach and preach the gospel in England with no less authority than Christ himself or Moses ever do the supremacy of a a a sand. David lib. 6. cap. 1. woman in church matter be from no other then from the devil and of all thing in general thus he speak the b b sand. visib Monar lib. 2. cap. 4. king that will not enthrall himself to the pope authority he ought not to be tolerate but his subject ought to give all diligence that another may be choose in his place assoon as may be a king that be a c c heretic aught to be remove from the kingdom that he hold over christian and the bishop ought to endeavour to set up another assoon as possible they can we do constant d d affirm that all christian king be so far under bishop and priest in all matter appertain to faith that if they shall continue in a fault against christian religion after one or two admonition obstinate for that cause they may and aught to be depose by the bishop from their temporal authority they hold over christian e e bishop be set over temporal kingdom if those kingdom do submit themselves to the faith of Christ we do just f f sand. David lib. 5. cap. 2. affirm that all secular power whether regal or any other be of men. the g g anoint which be pour upon the head of the king by the priest do declare that he be inferior to the priest it be altogether against the will of a a sand. David lib. 5. cap. 4. CHRIST that christian king shall have supremacy in the church and whereas for the crown and conclusion of all his example the cardinal paice of martyr weigh he reckon his two english martyr Moor and Roffensis who die for that one most weighty head of doctrine as he allege refuse the oath of supremacy I must tell he that he have not be well inform in some material point which do very near concern his two say martyr for it be clear and apparent to be prove by diverse record that they be both of they commit to the tower about a year before either of they be call in question upon their life for the pope supremacy and that partly for their backwardness in the point of the establishment of the king succession whereunto the whole realm have subscribe and partly for that one of they to wit fisher have have his hand in the matter of the holy b b call Elizabeth barton see the act of parliament maid of Kent he be for his concealment of that false prophet abuse find guilty of misprision of treason and as these be the principal cause of their imprisonment the king rest secure of his supremacy as the realm stand then affect but especial trouble for settle the crown upon the issue of his second marriage so be it easy to be conceive that be thereupon discontent their humour be thereby make apt to draw they by degree to further opposition against the king and his authority as indeed it fall out for in the time of their be in prison the king lawful authority in case ecclesiastical be publish and promulge as well by a general decree of the clergy in their synod as by a act of parliament make thereupon they behave themselves so peevish therein as the old coal of the king anger be thereby rake up of new they be again bring in question as well for this one most weighty head of doctrine of the pope his supremacy as for the matter of the king marriage and succession as by the confession of one of themselves even Thomas Moor histor ann. 1550. be evident for be condemn he use these word at the bar before the lord that be I be not ignorant why you have adjudge i to death to wit for that I will never consent in the business of the new marriage of the King by which his own confession it be plain that this great martyr himself take the cause of his own death to be only for his be refractory to the king in this say matter of marriage and succession which be but a very fleshly cause of martyrdom as I conceive and as for Roffensis his fellow martyr who can have be content to have take the oath of the king supremacy with a certain modification which Moor refuse as his imprisonment be neither only nor principal for the cause of supremacy so die he but a halt and a singular martyr or witness for that most weighty head of doctrine the whole church of England go at that time in one current and stream as it be against he in that argument diverse of they be of far great reputation for learning and sound judgement than ever he be so as in this point we may well arm ourselves with the cardinal own reason where he give among other note of the true church universality for one we have the general and catholic conclusion of the whole church of England on our side in this case as appear by their book set out by the whole convocation of England call the institution of a christian man the same matter be likewise very learned handle by diverse particular learned man of our church as by Steven Gardiner in his book with a preface of bishop Boner adjoin to it publish by m bishop Tonstals sermon bishop longland sermon the letter of Tonstall to cardinal Poole and diverse other both in english and latin and if the bitterness of fisher discontentment have not be feed with his daily ambitious expectation of the cardinal hat which come so near as Calis before he lose his head to fill it with I have great reason to doubt if he will have constant persevere in endure his martyrdom for that one most weighty head of doctrine and sure these two captain and ringleader to martyrdom be but ill follow by the rest of their countryman for I can never read of any after they be of any great account and that not many that ever seal that weighty head of doctrine with their blood in England so as the true cause of their first fall in trouble whereof I have already make mention be right consider upon the one part and upon the other the scant number of witness that with their blood seal it a point so great account of by our cardinal there can but small glory redound thereby to our english nation these only two Enoch and Elias serve for witness against our antichristian doctrine and I be sure the supremacy of king may the supremacy of king sufficient warrant by the scripture and will ever be better maintain by the word of God which must ever be the true rule to discern all weighty head of doctrine by to be the true and proper office of christian king in their own dominion than he will be ever able to maintain his annihilate king and their authority together with his base and unreverend speech of they wherewith both his former great volume and his late book against Venice be fill in the old testament king be direct a a 2. Chron. 19.4 governor over the church within their dominion b b 2. sam. 5.6 purge their corruption reform their abuse bring the c c 1. Chron. 13.12 ark to her rest place the king d d 2. sam. 6.16 dance before it e e 1. Chron. 28.6 build the temple f f 2. Chron. 6. dedicate the same assist in their own person to the sanctification thereof g g 2. King 22.11 make the book of the law new-sound to be read to the people h h Nehe. 9.38 David Solomon renew the covenant between God and his people * * 2. King 18.4 bruise the brazen serpent in piece which be set up by the express commandment of God and be a figure of Christ destroy i i 1^ king 15.12 all idol and false god make k k 2. Chron. ^7 8 a public reformation by a commission of secular man and priest mix for that purpose depose l l 1 king 2.27 the high priest and set up another in his place and general order every thing belong to the church-goverment their title and prerogative give they by God agree to these their action they be call the m m 2. sam. 7.14 son of the most high nay god n n psal 82.6 and Exod. 22.8 themselves the o o 1. sam. 24 1^ lord anoint sit p p 2. Chro. 9.8 in God throne his q q 2. Chron. 6.15 servant the angel r r 2. sam. 14.20 of God according to his s s 1. sam. 13.14 heart desire the light t t 2. sam. 21.17 of Israel the u u isa 49.23 nurse father of the church with innumerable such style of honour wherewith the old testament be fill whereof our adversary can pretend no ignorance and as to the new testament every soul be command to be subject unto they even for 10 10 rom. 13.5 conscience sake all man y y 1. tim. 2.2 must be pray for but especial king and those that be in authority that under they we may lead a godly peaceable and a honest life the a a rom. 13.4 magistrate be the minister of God to do vengeance on he that do evil and reward he that do well you must obey all high power but b b 1. pet. 2.13 especial prince and those that be supereminent give every man his due fear c c rom. 13.7 to who fear belong and honour to who honour give d d matth. 22.21 unto Caesar what be Caesar and to God what be god e e John 18.36 f f Luke 12 14 g g Luke 22.25 if these example sentence title and prerogative and innumerable other in the old and new testament do not warrant christian king within their own dominion to govern the church as well as the rest of their people in be not by make new article of faith which be the pope office as I say before but by command obedience to be give to the word of God by reform the religion according to his prescribe will by assist the spiritual power with the temporal sword by reform of corruption by procure due obedience to the church by judge and cut off all frivolous question and schism as a a euseb lib. 3. Constaetini Constantine do and final by make decorum to be observe in every thing and establish order to be observe in all indifferent thing for that purpose which be the only intent of our oath of supremacy if this office of a king I say do not agree with the power give he by God word let any indifferent man void of passion judge but how these honourable office style and prerogative give by God to king in the old and new testament as I have now cite can agree with the brave style and title that Bellarmine give they I can hardly conceive 1. that king be rather slave than lord 1. cap. 7. 2. that they be not only subject to pope 2. pont. lib. 1. cap. 7. to bishop to priest but even to deacon 3. 3. that a emperor must content himself to drink not only after a bishop but after a bishop chaplain 4. 4. and cler. cap. 28. that king have not their authority nor office immediate from God nor his law but only from the law of nation 5. 5. p. nt lib 3. cap. 16. that pope have degrade many emperor but never emperor degrade the pope nay even * * rom. Pont lib 5. cap. 8. bishop that be but the pope vassal may depose king and abrogate their law 6. 6. cap 8. that churchman be so far above king as the soul be above the body 7. 7. pont. lib 5. cap. 18. that king may be depose by their people for diverse respect 8. but pope can by no mean be depose 8. pont. lib. 2. cap. 26. for no flesh have power to judge of they 9 that obedience due to the pope 9 pont. lib. 4 cap. 15. be for conscience sake 10. but the obedience due to king 10 cap. 28. be only for certain respect of order and policy 11. 11. that these very churchman that be bear and inhabit in sovereign prince country be notwithstanding not their subject and can be judge by they although they may judge they 12. 12. and that the obedience that churchman give to prince even in the mean and mere temporal thing be not by way of any necessary subjection but only out of discretion and for observation of good order and custom these contrariety between the book of God and Bellarmine book have I here set in opposition each to other and thus far I dare bold affirm that whosoever will indifferent weigh these irreconcilable contradiction here set down will easy confess that CHRIST be no more contrary to Beliall light to darkness and heaven to hell than Bellarmine estimation of king be to god now as to the conclusion of his letter which be only fill with strong and pithy exhortation to persuade and confirm blackwell to the patient and constant endure of martyrdom I have nothing to answer save by way of regret that so many good sentence draw out of the scripture so well and so handsome pack up together shall be so ill and untrue apply but a evil cause be never the better for so good a cloak and a ill matter never amend by good word and therefore I may just turn over that craft of the devil upon himself in use so holy-like a exhortation to so evil a purpose only I can have wish he that he have a little better observe his decorum herein in not let slip two or three profane word among so many godly mortify scripture sentence for in all the scripture especial in the new testament I never read of Maximus and the pope must be content in that style to succeed according to the law and institution of Numa Pompilius and not to s. Peter who never hear nor dream of such a office and for his which I remember before the apostle I be sure never give that style to any but to CHRIST so as these style whereof some be never find in scripture and some be never apply but to CHRIST in that sense as he apply it have be better to have be leave out of so holy and mortify a letter to conclude then this present discourse I hearty wish all indifferent reader of the breve and letter not to judge by the speciousnes of the word but by the weight of the matter not look to that which be strong allege but judicious to consider what be just prove and for all my own good and natural subject that their heart may remain establish in the truth that these foreign enticement may not seduce they from their natal and natural duty and that all aswell stranger as natural subject to who eye this discourse shall come may wise and unpartial judge of the verity as it be naked here set down for clear these mist and cloud of calumny which be injust heap upon i for which end only I hearty pray the courteous reader to be persuade that I take occasion to publish this discourse