


IRELANDES IVBILEE, OR IOYES IO PAEAN.



1. Chron. Chap. 29. Vers. 20.21.22.

20 And David sayd to all the Congregation, Now blesse the Lord your God. And all the Congregation blessed the Lord God of their fathers, and bowed downe their heads, and worshipped the Lord and the King.
21 And they sacrificed sacrifices unto the Lord, and offered burnt offrings unto the Lord on the morrow after that day, even a thousand Bullockes, a thousand Rams, and a thousand Lambs, with their drinke offrings, and sacrifices in abundance for all Israel.
22 And d^d eate and drinke before the Lord on that day with great gladnesse, and they made Salomon the sonne of David King the second time, and annoynted him unto the Lord to be the chiefe Governour, and Zadok to be Priest.



SECTIO. I. The Preface or Prologomena to the whole.
AS we have heard by true, certaine, and infallible report, the newes of the Prince his arrivall, which we most delighted, most desired to heare of all others; in which before time we were wonderously devided and distracted betwixt hopes and feares, as a Ship driven too and fro with contrary windes and waves, by reason of the uncertainty of rumors and flying, (lying)Fama malum quo non velocius ullum. fame: every man speaking as he would have it, rather then as the truth was, as they were well affected or infected,

demonstrating themselves (as the Damosell told Peter) their very tongues bewraying them,Mark. 14.17. as Shibboleth and Sibboleth, distinguished betwixt Ephramites and GileaditesIudg c. 12.5.6.: as the proverbe is, As the man is thinking, so is the Bell still ringing. As now (I say) it is certainely writ, and fixt on the columnes of truth, that the Prince is prosperously and safely (in the outward and inward man) arrived out of Spain, to the English Court: of which we have so many testimonies from such a cloud of eye and eareOculati and au riculares testes. witnesses, as the Apostles and Disciples had (to the exhilerating of their formerly saddedMath. 27. v. 7.8.9. Mark. 16. v. 1.2.6.7. Luk. 24.36.41. hearts) of the resurrection of their Saviour. he now being more incredulous then that Didymus,Iohn. 20 v. 25. which will not beleeve his eare, in that which is vox populi, without the sight of his owne eye. So as we already have solemnized his arrivall with our heartiest gratulations; we are here againe assembled to resolemnize it and to renue our commemorations, by the addition of another succeeding (exceeding) mercie; the mercifull, marvailous, and miraculous protection and preservation of our Soveraigne King, our now Illustrious Prince, our Noble Peeres, the reverent Prelats, the Gentrie, the Cleargie, the Commonaltie, the whole body of the Kingdome, our lives, our wives, our Children, together with the Gospell and Religion, who all at one blowe had perishedWe had lost, rem Regem, gregem legem, Regimen Religionem. in the Powder Treason, had that fatall blowe beene given, that was intended: which blowe the Lord Protector of great Brittaine, the Watchman, Centinell and Shepheard ofPsal. 35. v. 1. our English Israel prevented, by putting a manacle on the bloudy Traytors hand by a speciall and peculiar providence, even in an instant, as once a hooke in the nosthrils of Sannacharib,2. Kings. 19.28. in the like exigent, a halter about the necke of HamanEsth. 7. v. 9., a gagg and a boult on the tongue of Balaam,Numb. 23. ve. 7.8. a moussell on the mouth of Tobiah, and Shanballat,Neh. 6.14. and a dart from heaven into the bowels, of the Apostate Iulian,In his warre with Sapor the Persian King, wounded with an arrow from heave^, he threw his bloud into the aire crying, vicisti Galilee, vicisti. Thou hast overcome, o Galilean. apud histor. tripartit. when they in their damnable resolutions, intended mischiefe to the Church and people of God. To teach all the proud, pestilent, and perverse spirits of the world, what it is to kick against the pricke,Act 9. v. 5. swim against the streame, for flesh and bloud, to contend against God,1 Cor. 10.22. who sitting in the heavens, knowes in a trice how to confound them, and their devices, to crush their Cockatrice egges, to sweepe down their Spiders webs, to breake them as a potters vesselPsal. 29., as easily as a brasen head breakes in fitters a head of glasse;Impar congressus apud Al, ciatum in suis Emblem. all their Counsels, plots,

projects and conspiracies, perishing as an Embrio, withering as the grasse on the house topp, dissolving as the waxe before the fire,Ps. 58 6.7.8. as the snow before the Sunne, and scattering as the dust and chaffe before the winde.Psal. 1.4. There being neyther power nor strength against the Almightie, who can turne even the wisedome of a Friarly and Iesuited Achitophell2. Sam. 15.31. into folly, and the curses of the great Balaam of Rome against his Christian Sion,Numb. 23.20 into blessings: he that rules in heavenPsal. 2.4. laughing all the enemies of himselfe and his Church to scorne, the holy one of Israel (as appeares in the experience of this day) having them in derision. It being as probable, as possible, for that Antichristian man of Rome, according to his projects and the Thrasonicall bragges of his Canonists, and Gnatonicall claw-backes, to depose Kings, dispose kingdomes,The Pope Sycophants make him beleeve, that hee may deponere Reges, as Iehoida did Achaliae, and disponere regna as whe^ he proudly deposed King Papin of France, with Petrae dedit Petro, Petrus Diadema Rodulpho with such pranks as these. unlesse the Lord first depose them, as he did Saul,1. Sam. 15.26. Balthazar,Dan 5 26. and Nabuchadnezar,Dan 4.34. using him as he did Tamberlaine, and Ashur,Esai. 10. v. 5. and now the Turke, as the rod of his wrath; as the Iudge and the Shiriffe may use a hangman to execute follons, as God himselfe hath used the Divell to torment the first King of Israel.1 Sam. 16.14 I say, unlesse God let loose his chained mastives whether Turke or Pope, to the punishing the sinnes of the King, or of a Kingdome, all their attempts against the Lords annoynted are but to fight against God, as the Centaures and the old Gyants in the fable, were said to wage warre against Iupiter.Apud Lucianu^ in Dialogis. They may aswell endevour to turne the Sea to dry land, to turne Iordan backward,Vt olim Elisha 2. King 2. v. 14. to plucke the Sunne out of the firmament, yea, God himselfe out of heaven, as to pull any Christian King, Gods Lieutenant and Vice-gerent, (of Gods setting and planting) out of his throne, unlesse they have (as the Divell sometimes hath, but the Pope never had) a speciall commission or permission from God, as a tryall of a righteous Prince, or the punishment of the reprobate. Oh well may Traytors, like them, undoe themselves by their doings, as did Absalon2. Sam. 18.14. Adoniah,1. Kings. 2.25 A^halia,2. King. 11. v. 1.14.15. Sheba,2. Sam. 20. v. 22. the Romane Cateline,Apud Salust. Seianus,Apud Plutarchum. the FrenchSee both their tragedies polished in our English tongue. B^ron, Lopus, Ravillack, the Belgicke B^rnwell, our English Squire, Parry, Babington, the Romish Garnet, Campian, and these unfortunate English Gentlemen, as their owne call them, Digby, Catesby, Winter, Faux; bringing as did Ioab, the bloud upon their owne head, which they thought to

shed from others, falling into that pit which they digge for others,Nec lex aequior ulla est, quam necis artifices arte perire sua. scorching themselves like the fond Flea PyraustaDe Pirausta, vel Pyrali, vel Pyrogono. Plin. libr. 11. nat. hist. c. 36. Aelian. lib. 2. cap. 2. at those flames they thought to quench; shooting, like him that shootes up at the Sunne, arrowes to fall on their owne pates: the wild-fire balles of their treasons, as cast against an Iron wall, rebounding backe againe upon themselves, to their breaking or burning as he that gripes thornes or the prickling Vrchin, or the edge of a sharpned steele, pricks his owne fingers and bloods himselfe, but hurts no man else. Themselves comming to their immature and unglorious ends; like Haman, cum cede and sanguine, as is usually seene, with that bloud and slaughter upon their owne nocent heads, which they intended against the innocents and innocuous: like the inuentor of Perillus his Bull, first hanzelling and acting in that tyrannie which their treachery intended and invented against others: So let thy enemies perish o Lord,Iudg. 5. v. 31. so let them perish that rise up against thee, and against thine annoynted, that draw the sword of warre (as did Ioab against Abner2. Sa. 3.27.28 and Amasa2. Sa. 2.20.10 in the time of peace. Let them perish with the sword that strike unlawfully with the sword:Math. 26.52. if any rebell against God and Cesar, let him be Anathema Maranatha, execrable and accursed; let him die ungloriouslyIer. 22. v. 24.28. like Iechonia, let none say Alas my brother, as the old Prophet did for the young:1. King. 13.30 let his name here stinke, as a Fox or a Poulcat, or a Carrion, after and rott with his carkas, buried in the Leth of oblivion; let him like1. King. 21.20 Ahab,1. King. 16.26 Ieroboam,Gen. 4.14.15. Caine, BalaamIohn. 17. v. 12. Iudas and our English Banister,Servant to the Duke of Buckingham, trecherously betraying his distressed Lord to Richard the 3. Speed and Hollinshed in Chronicis. never be remembred, but with some brand and marke of obloquie, some addition of infamie; Let his wife be a widdow (as David sings of his, and Christs enemies prophetically) his children vagabounds,Psalm. 22. his seede fatherlesseIudg. 8.7. and his house desolate, yea let them perish like smoake, and the, untimely fruite of a woman. Let them be like Zeba, and Zalmunna, and them of Penuell whose flesh Gideon tore with the bryers of the wildernesse; or as the ungratefull Ammonites,2. Sam. 10.19 whom David brought under with Iron Sawes: as Pharaoh and his Egyptians, that were drowned in the redd Sea;Exo. 14.25.26 as Iabin and the hoste of Sisera,Iudg. 5.21. whom the river Kyshon swept away, yea that auncient river, the river Kyshon: But let them that love and feare thee, say alwayes (as we this day) The Lord be

praysed: Praysed be the Lord out of Sion, which dwelleth at Ierusalem.
And sure the concurrence of these two extraordinary mercies: the reflecting on the one as by past; his Majesties preservation: the present fruition of the other; the generally welcommed reduction of our Illustrious Prince kept safe by that Bonus Genius, or good Angel, who went along with him, as once with Iacob,Gen. 28. v. 16 and 48.26. with Abrahams Steward,Gen. 24.7. and that Apocryphall Tobiah, and those Easterne Magi,Matth. 2.9. Bosquier in his Eccho concionu^ disputes, that the starre was some good Angel, but concludes, that it was stella de novo creata. in all incident perils by Sea, and by Land, in the Spanish expedition; These two mercies, I say, meeting in one Center, as Chrystalline brookes in one Torrent, running to that Ocean and Sea of mercie, from whence they flow, should so water (as NilusDe Nilo, Aelianus hist. lib. 10 cap. 44. Seneca natur. libr. 4. c. 2. Plin. lib. 5. c. 9. doth Egypt,) all the Israel of God; that they should cause even the most barren heart to be abundant in blessings, and fruitefull in thankesgivings.


SECTIO II. The division, or Logicall Analysis with the Theologicall explanation of the Text.
BVt not to make in these preparatory prologues, the dore too great for the house, nor the gates for the city, for some CynickVt olim Diogenes. to scoffe at and deride, from these prefacing generalities, I come to the strict particular inclosures of my Text: which being the expression of those Eucharisticall Gratulations of David and the Elders, and people of Israel, for a double mercie received from the Lord, as wee have already intimated. that I may, according to my tallent, as God shall give the doore of utterance, speake by it and from it unto your braines and understanding part, by explanation: and, (in which the chiefe Soule and Genius of preachingVide Kickermannum in sua rethorica Eccles. Perkins. nostru^ de arte prophetandi. Hunnium and Zepperum de Methodo concionandi. consists) unto your hearts and affections, by usefull applications, fitting it (as I may) as the Shooe for the right foote, and the Glove for the right hand, to the solemnization of this day. Because Method is the mother of memory,Methodus memoriae mater. to lay downe some Basis and foundation to build upon: observe with me the fountaine of this Scripture, running into these five

streames, or Tree-like budding and spreading into these five maine Branches, with some sprigs of divisions, or subdivisions.
First, the subjects of these Eucharisticall gratulations, and those be:
1. and Primarily, David; as appeares both here, and vers 10.11.12.13. where both the Matter, Manner, Method, and partes of his thankefulnesse is laid downe.2. Secondarily the whole Congregation, moving after his motion, consisting
1. Of the heads.2. The Captaines of thousands, and of hundreds.3. The Rulers of the Kings workes: vers. 6.4. The whole body of the Congregation, blessing the Lord: vers. 20.
Secondly the expression of this their Gratitude, and Thankefulnesse: and that foure wayes.

1. By blessing the Lord:
2. Worshipping.

1. The Lord: as internally in their hearts, so externally by bowing downe their heads. God: as creating, preserving, saving, redeeming; so requiring both Bodie and Soule in his worship.
2. Worshipping the King: not by any Religious or superstitious adoration, such as the Listrians would have given to Paul,All. 14. v. 12, 13. Cornelius untoAct. 10.25. Peter,Revel. 19.10. Iohn to the Angell. which as the Divell exacted of Christ:Math. 4.9. so the Pope, that Saul or Paul of Rome, that pretended Peter, Sathans Lieutenant, exacts, expects, and accepts of the Kings and Rulers of of the earth: as Alexander once of Fredericke in Saint Marks Church. Its no such Idolatrous worship as our popish Proselites, give to their dead Saints, Antichristian man of sinne, dumbe Images, painted shrines, erected Crosses, carved Crucifixes, feined Relicks, and breaden God: All which they would salve with their worne-eaten, threed-bare distinction of Latria and Dulia, which by often cashiering is shaven more bare and balde, then any of their Fryers Crownes. But (that I may scoure the passages, and explaine and

pave the way as I goe: By worshipping the King, is meant that Civill reverence and veneration, which the ancient Persians, Turkes, those of Morrocho, China, and of the country of Prester Iohn, and the great Mogull, give to their Emperours and Kings to this day: Such as we also give to our Princes and Rulers that are Christians, even such veneration and reverent respect as Abraham gave to the Hethites,Gen. 23 7. as Iacob to Pharaoh,Gen. 47.7. and to his brother Esau,Gen. 33.3. as Abigail1. Sam. 25.23. the woman of Tekoah,2. Sam. 14.4. Bethshebah, and Nathan1. King. 1.23. gave to David.
3. They testified their gratitude by Sacrifices and oblations, described.

1. For their Nature: burnt offrings and drinke offrings.
2. Their Matter, Bullockes, Lambes, Rams,
3. Their Number and Measure.

1. Generally, in abondance.
2. Particularly: a thousand Rammes, a thousand Lambes, a thousand Bullockes. They did not (as we now) scant Gods part: they thought nothing, (as we the least things) too deare for God.
3. They had Faith to beleeve, that though they offred thus much, yet God could and would still increase their store, as indeed it was unto them as they beleived: for it comes home with the holiest happiest interest, multiplying as the widdowes oyle2. King. 4.5.^. that's given or lent to the Lord.
4. The end of their sacrificing is expressed; and that's for all Israel.
4. The fourth expression of their gratitude is by feasts and festivities: they did eate and drinke: which is not meant of the ordinary use of the creatures, but more fully and freely, as in their solemne feasts.
Thirdly, the object of all this Blessing, Worshipping, Sacrificing, Feasting is layd downe; and that's before the Lord, for so the Text runnes.
1. They blessed the Lord, with his added attribute, the God of their Fathers.
2. They Woorshipped the Lord.
3. They Sacr^ficed to the Lord. 1. There was not a Pagan amongst them, that worshipped any strange God, as did Ionas, his Marriners.Ionas. 1.5. neyther Iupiter, Iuno, Mercury, etc. the hoste of heaven, or any created nature, in the heathenish, divelish diversified Idolatries; 2. Neyther any Idolatrous Iew, to worship Baall Asteroth, or any of the Gods of the Nations; 3. Neyther was there any Papist hatched in these dayes. Popery is a Cockcatrice egge of an after clecking: it was asNilus incertis orius fontibus Plin. libr. 5. c. 9. Et Seneca natur. lib. 6. c. 8. Petrus etiam Alvares de origine Nili. lib. hist. 18. Nilus his head, unknowne, unshowne, as that Terra incognita, or the Phylosophers Stone, unfound out; there was not so much talke of it, as wee of old Brasil, or Guianahs gold. but no sight nor apparitions of it in Davids daies, nor in the daies of Adam and Abraham, Patriarkes or Prophets: how ever they gull the credulous world-deluded ignorants with their old Religion, old Religion, old Law, etc. as the Gibeonites deceived with their old Shooes and old Bottles.Iosu 9.12.13 There was not a Cananite, an Aegyptian in all this goodly-godly Company, that offred to any God save Iehovah: There was not a Papist in the whole Congregation, that offred any sacrifice to any Angell or Archangell, except to Iacobs Angell,Genes. 48.16. the great Angell of the Covenant,Iud. 9. Michael that overcame the Dragon, Christ the head of Angels: there was not a prayer made to any departed Reall or Imaginary Sainct: there was not a Dirge sung, nor a Masse, to fetch any Soule out of Purgatory. These knew, that sacrifices eyther for the dead, or to the dead, were vaine, that Abraham was ignorant of them, and thatEsai. Israel had forgotten them.
4. They eate and drunke before the Lord; which Heluobs and Gluttons doe not: for they eate and drinke as didLuk. 17.28. Sodom and the old worldlings,vers. 27. as though, besides their Belly,Philip. 3.19. there were no God to eye them, spie them, and to revenge their abuse of themselves, of the creatures, yea even of the Creator himselfe.
Fourthly the qualifications of these subiects, thus Blessing, Worshipping, Sacrificing, Feasting: and that was joyfulnesse

and gladnesse of heart; the Text gives an Emphasis to their joyes, even great gladnesse: for the godly have their Sun-shines as well as clouds, their calmes as stormes; they are not alwayes (nay, never but physically for their soules good) dieted with the bread of affliction. Besides, they have their affections, their passions; they are notSee the book of humaine passions, translated out of French, pag. 63.64. to pag. 76. Proving learnedly against the Stoicks, that passions are to the mind as the sinews to the body. Stoicks or stocks, but sensible of the causes of joy, and of sorrow: how ever, their affections are sanctified that they are not infectious; their passions seldome turne such perturbations, to the eclypsing of Reason and Religion, the forgetting of God, and themselves, of duties Morall and Theologicall, as it is in the wicked. But of all other affections, the godly have most cause of gladnesse.Psa. 32.11. On which see Master Taylors co^ment. Sic Lorin. Iesuita, and Musculus in locum. the Saints most occasion to sing, to triumph, and to rejoyce,See a sermon of M. Rogers on Philip. 4. v. 4 as here Gods people.
Fiftly and lastly, the occasion of all this Iubilee and gratulation, was a double blessing; to which Ianaus-like it lookes, as both wayes.
1. To the Cordiall free-heartednesse of the whole Congregation, head and foote, Princes and Plebeians: so liberally, largely, lovingly, contributing to the building of the Temple; ten thousand, eighteene thousand tallents (according to their states) of Gold, Silver, Brasse, Iron, together with aboundance of Pearles, and precious stones: vers. 7.8.9.
2. To the renued and seconded more solemne Investing, and Inauguration of Salomon to be Prince and Governour over Israel, (as Zadok to bee Priest) to which worthy, and wise Prince (as wee this day to ours) their loves were so linked, and hearts united, and of whose graces, and excellencies in himselfe, and good to them by his governement, their hopes, and perswasions (in which wee also sympathize) were so strongly grounded and fixed.
These are the Logicall parts, with some Glosses and Paraphrasticall clearing of the Text, as wee have gone: which I have done the rather thus laconically, and succinctly, because perhaps like some Father that hath many Children, and is not able to give Portions and Dowries to all, or not willing to give all alike, but (as didGen. 25.5.6. Abraham, andGen. 48.7.22. Iacob, to some more, some lesse, as reason or affection leades him; so I, in likelyhood

having many pointes to prosecute, (like Legacies, or promised pensions to pay,) may give some of them little more portion of paines, then setting them thus on a cleare ground. how ever, dissipating thus briefly some cloudes of doubts, removing some stumbling blockes of error, in every part and passage, we may proceede without perill, scruple, or disturbance. Now as to shew a large countrie in a little Mappe; all these may briefly be epitomized in these three parts, which we will orderly prosecute:
1. Davids Devotion.2. Israels Gratulation.3. Our English-Irish Application.


THE FIRST PART.

CHAP. I.

SECT. I. Davids devotion.
ANd first to begin with the eldest and best, the chiefe and choise subject of this gratulation, King David. The consideration and serious animadversion of his practise in manie both substantiall and circumstantiall points, speakes to our understandings and affections in manie pleasing, profitable, and usefull observations, for our instruction, edification, imitation, resolution, and redargution: In whom, still for methods sake and memories sake (ere we come to see how the Peeres and people insist in his steps) let us view David, not to scoffe his zeale as Micholl,2. Sam. 6.20. but to imitate him as Christians, acting his gratulatorie parts, in these sixe pees or particulars.

1 Piously.
2 Personally.
3 Publickly.
4 Primarily.
5 Perswasorily, or prescribingly.
6 Powerfully or politically.

First I say (Piously) he prayseth God, and religiously: for in the linking and connexing of graces, a thankefull heart is alwayes the inseparable companion of a holy, humble, and sanctified

heart Iacob,Gen. 32.10. Moses,Iosuah 1.2. IoshuaIosh. 22.6. the sonne of Nun, the servants of the Lord; Samuel the faithfull Prophet1 Sam. 3.20. of the Lord, Simeon,Luk. 1.28, 29 Zachary,Luk. 1 68. yea Elizabeth,Luke 1.44, 45 the Virgin Mary, and all that looked for the redemption and consolation of Israel: Peter, Paul, Iude, Iohn, the holy Apostles and Disciples of Christ Iesus: the two Anna's, the mother of Samuel and the Prophetesse; yea Augustine, Ambrose,vers. 46.47. 1. Pet. 13. 1. Cor. 15.57. rom. 7.25. 1. tim. 1.17. 2. tim. 1.3. Iude, vers. 25. 1. Sam. 2. Luk. 2.38. Psal. 148.11, 12, 13. Iohn 12.13. and these famous lights in the primitive Church (as we shal see more at large hereafter, in particularizing what we now epitomize) with all the faithfull that ever have beene from the beginning of the world, men and women, old and young, yea even children and babes, out of whose mouthes God hath ordained strength, so soone as they are able in the powers of reason and religion to pronounce Hosanna, glory to the highest; have been found thankfull. There was never heart full of grace but full also of gratitude, as inseparable the one from the other as heat is from the fire orAccidens inseperabile. light from the Sunne: that David penning his Psalmes practically, and experimentally, unites oft in one line the service of God and the praise of God, in severall Psalmes; as Psal. 104. v. 1 psal. 134. v. 1.5. psal. 135. v. 1. with many mo. He calls upon the servants of God, to blesse and praise the name of the Lord: he calls upon the Israel of God, the Zion of God, psal. 149. v. 2.3. the Saints of God, ver. 5. those that dwell in the Sanctuary of God, psal. 150. v. 1. to be joyfull in God, to praise their King with Timbrell and Harpe, with sound of Trumpet and Psalterie. As if they only, and none but they that are the servants of the Lord, Saints by calling, would (could) doe this taske: as he makes it plaine, psal. 145. v. 10. Thy Saints, saith he, shall blesse thee, they shall speake of the glory of thy kingdome, and talke of thy power. They only indeed can doe it; they will doe it. As unpossible for a heart possessed, a spirit replenisht with grace, not to blesse God, as for a man to have a living soule and not to breathe, a sound heart and yet never to move nor work: there being (unlesse 1. in some sickish fit of weakenesse; 2.2. Sam. 12.9. 2. sam. 24.1. 1. chron. 21.1. 1. King. 19.4. 2. Chron. 32.24, 25. in some dead swoune of temptation, as once in our David; 3. some distemper of impatiencie, as once in Elias; 4. some surging oppressing overflowing humor or tumor of spirituall pride, some Tympanie of inflation, as once in Ezechiah; 5. some Lethargie

of securitie and forgetfulnesse,psal. 106. v. 13 21. as in Israels prosperitie; 6. some brawninesse or fatnesse, as indeut. 32.15 Iesurun) I say, unlesse in such cases; there being as swift, as nimble, as enargetical and operative a motion in a sanctified heart to move spiritually to the praysing of God, as for a naturall and fleshie heart to move in any naturall motion: yea as the lesse grace, the more ingratitude (it being impossible that an Esau should be truely thankefull for his birthright,gen 25.33.3.4 math. 26.23.47. Luk. 12.18.19. 1. Sam. 25.10.11, 15. which he sells for broth; a Iudas for such a master as he sells for silver; a churle for his full barnes and bagges; a Nabal and a Laban (which is Nabal backward) for any blessing of sheepe and goods they receive from God, or for anie kindnesse from a David,Gen. 31.7. or a Iacob, or anie man the instrument of their God, so long as they carrie about them these their poysoned, cankred, serpentine hearts, unpurged, unpurified from the venom of originall and actuall sinne: as for a dead man to walke, a dead trunck to talke, or a leaden Organ-pipe to make any musick without blowing, they wanting the best bellowes and breath of the spirit of God) so, on the contrary, the more grace there is in any man, the more his heart and tongue abounds (redounds) with the prayses of God. even as the greater the fire, the greater heate, and the fuller the fountaine the freer flow the streames. This holds both in the Saints in earth and heaven, and in the Angels; who as they are most holy, so they are most heavenly in sounding and singing their continued Hallaluiahs,Rev. 5.8, 9, 10, 11, 12. to the glorie of the Lamb upon the Throne.


SECT. II. Further prosecuting Davids gratulation.
YEa, as it holds in the nature, humane, and angelicall men and Angels,Mark. 14.32, 35 so it holds in Christ himselfe, the head of the Angells: who in the daies of his flesh, as he had the spirit without measure, so, as sparkes from his heavenly fire, ascending upward, as he did pray continually, he did rejoyce evermore, and in all things give thankes;1. Thess. 5.16, 17, 18. Luke 10.17, 18, 19, 21. as for the propagation of the Gospell, the subjugation of Sathan, the faith of his elected ones, yea (as a shame to unthankefull Christians, who as Hoggs and

swine trample the best blessings under their feet,Iohn 17.24, 25. Iohn 6.13. luke 9.16. Luke 22.17. 2. cor. 11.24. 1. Kings 19.14 iohn 2.17. 2. Sam. 17.10. and 16.10. iob. 1. ult. iam. 5.11. Num. 12.3. 2. Sam. 14.7. 2. Sam. 11. never elevating tongue, nor eye, nor heart to the donor and giver of their food and life) he never used the creatures, eyther bread common or sacramentall, but first he blessed them. But to pretermit all other instances, and to keepe mee close to this excellent president in my Text of a gracious and gratefull heart: we shall see this holy Prophet David, for zeale another Elias, for courage a Cure de Lyon, for patience another Iob, for meekenesse another Moses, for wisedome as an Angell of God, for sinceritie a man after Gods owne heart (not so mainly vainly culpable in anie thing, except in the matter of Vrias:) we shall see this David never wanting to his God in gratitude, as God was never wanting unto him, in pouring out his benefites and blessings. For as a patterne of a pious Prince, to all Princes, of a holy and heavenly heart; looke in the first and second bookes of Samuel, in the bookes of Kings, and of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel, and you shall see (beneficium postulans officium) a dignitie requiring a dutie: that God never had a mercie in store for David, of adornation or preservation, temporall or spirituall, generall to the Church and Common-wealth of Israel, or speciall to himselfe; but he had a holy Hymme, an Eucharisticall song, a spirituall Psalme againe, as a gratulatorie retaliation, to the glorie of the donor. like these Euchonnastick Verses, usually in our Colledge Chappels, in the praise of the Founder. Above all other places,2. Sam. 7. ponder and peruse the second of Samuel and seventh chapter: where David resolving with himselfe to build a Temple for the Arke of God, dwelling within Curtaines, ver. 1.2. and revealing this resolution to the Prophet Nathan, and receiving a placet, and an approbation againe from Nathan, vers. 3. but they both reckoning without their Host, God contradicting the execution of this resolution in the subject, because David had beene a man of warre; but yet not in the matter, appointing that to be performed by Salomon his peaceable sonne, which was projected by his martiall father. yet the Lord accepting in David, as in all his children, theEst aliquid voluisse, si non voluisse. will for the work, the affectionApud Deum affectus cordis, pro effectu operis. Gen. 22.15, 16. Luke 21.3. 2. Cor. 8.12. for the action (as he did in Abrahams sacrificing of Isaac, the poore widdowes myte, the almes of the poorest Corinthians as well as the richer Achians, the Goats hayre and

Badgers skins of the meanest, as well as the gold and purple of the mightiest, to the building of the materiall (as spirituall) Temple) he sends David a comfortable message by Nathan, in such a gracious acceptance, what mercies both temporall and spirituall the Lord will accumulate both upon David and Salomon, vers. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. that David surprised, in an extasie of joy and gladnesse, and ravished in spirit, not able longer nor further to conceale his hidden flames, he resolvedly sets himselfe before the Lord, and offers there with his heart, soule, and spirit, and tongue and all (as he professed in somePsal. 111. v. 1. Et 136 ver. 1. Et 148. vers. 1. Et psal. 103. v. 1. Gen. 8. v. 21. Iohn. 12 v. 3. Psalmes) such an Eucharisticall and gratulatorie sacrifice, as (like Noahs offering) smelt as a sweet perfume, or savour of rest (or as that boxe of Alabaster, broke by gratefull Mary Magdalen, on Christs head) in the nosthrils of the Almightie, for, as you may see, vers. 18.19.20, to the end of the chapter (as one saith of the Epistles of Cyprian,Referunt pectus ardore plenum. Erasmi ce^sura.) everie word is emphaticall, and shewes a wondrous ardent and inflamed affection. But especially peruse all the Psalmes of David (so denominated of him, because he penned the greater and better part ofDenominatio, sequitur maiorem partem. them, though some were pen'd by Moses,Vide prafat. Lorini ante Comment in psalmos. Asaph, and others) and you shall see, besides those that are doctrinall, precatory, deprecatory, propheticall, penitentiall, as they are distinguished by the learnedVide Musculum, Mollerum, and Bellarm. praefationib. ante Comment. in psalmos David., more then halfe of them are Eucharisticall, or Psalmes of gratulations, now, for this mercie positive in good receaved; or privative, in evills prevented, or removed: yea throughout the whole Booke of Psalmes, the whole Syntagma or body of it, almost in every psalme (in the beginning, middle or end of it) Davids thankefull heart, runnes all along (as the bloud within the veines, the marrow within the bones and the waters within the Crannyes of the Earth.) Ponder and peruse, with Davids heart and spirit, for thine owne edification and consolation in the serious Soliloquies of thy Soule, Psalme 9.18.23.31.33.34.40.57.66.81.89.95.96.103.104.105.106.107.108 113.116.118.135.144.145 146.147.148.149 150 together with manie moe which I purposely pretermitt, and thou shalt finde by comfortable experience the veritie of that which I have observed.



SECTIO III. Still urging Davids thankefulnesse.
YEa indeed, the whole life of David, is nothing else but a practicall Comment, of that which is prescribed byIames. 5.13. Saint Iames, and which should be practised of every Christian, namely, Is any one afflicted? let him pray. Is any man merrie? let him sing Psalmes. For is David afflicted in his outward man by1. Sam. 24. v. 11.14. Saul pursuing (as the Hauk the patridge,) by2. Sam. 15.30 Absalons rebellingvers. 31. Achitophels complotting? or moved or grieved in his spirit by2 Sam. 6.20. Michols mocking,2. Sam. 16.7.8. Semeis rayling,1. King 2.5. Ioabs murthers,2 Sam. 3.33. Abners death2. Sam. 1.23. Ionathans untimely fall, his2. Sam. 13.21. daughters deflowring,vers. 14. Ammons works and wages, incest andvers. 29.30. death? or, by the like crosses. Is hee in spirit perplexed,Ps. 38.5.6.7.8 roaring as a Lion by his anxieties? first, for his filthie pollutions.Psal. 51.3. secondly, bloudie murther.vers. 14. thirdly, presumptuous pride in numbring his people.2. Sam 24 10. fourthly, his rash vowes against1. Sam. 25.22. Nabal. fiftly, his partialitie and injustice toward Miphishbosheth,2. Sam. 16.4. syding with sycophantizing Ziba,2. Sam. 19 29. sixtly, dissembled madnesse in a heathenish Court.1 Sam. 21.13. seventhly, and for like transgressions, slips frailties and infirmities, to which Sathans temptations, his owne corruptions, and sinning condition subjected him. In these exigents (upon these causes) and in these afflictions in the outward and inward man, he powred out his Soule to the Lord, (as appeares in his penitentiallPsa 6. psal. 38. Psal. 51.1. Vide Vegam in psalm. Poenitentiales. Psalmes) in humble, heartie, faithfull, fervent, penitent Prayer: hee supplicates, intreats, pleades for pardon, as a guilty selfe-accusing fellon, before his strict Iudge: he takes that course whichExod. 14.15. Exod. 17.11. Numb. 16.22. Moses, Aaron, Iacob,1 Sa. 1.13.14 Anna,2. Chro. 1^.11 Asa2. King. 19.15.16. Ezekiah,Da. 6.10 and chap. 2.16 17. DanielEsth 4 16. EstherNehem 2.4. Nehemiah,2. Cor. 12.8.9. Paul, yeaLuk 22.41 42 Christ, himselfe tooke, with all hisvers. 46. Saints, namely to call vpon God, in the time and day of his trouble: in the depths of his miseries he hath recourse to the throne of grace, and ofPs. 5.1. ps 7.2 and 17.1. et 22.2 et 28.1. et 31.7. mercie, as hepsal. 32.5. professeth, and prescribeth tovers. 6. others. On the contrary, (as an excellent patterne of right imitation, vertuous emulation, to all great men, to all good men) doth the Lord loose his bonds,Ps. 116. v. 16. free him from his troubles, take him out of the Nett, free him from the snares of these Fowlers,

the gins and traps of these bloudie hunters, which pursue his soule, envious bloud-thirstie1. Sam. 24. 1. sam 26. v. 21. 1. sam. 23.27. Saul, matchavillian2. sam. 17.14 Achitophell, dogged1 sa. 22.9.10 Doegg, the factions of the sonnes of2 sam. 16.10. and 19.22. Zerviah, the treachery of the1. sam. 26. v 1 Ziphites, etc? Doth the Lord rid him of his enemies domesticke and forreine? bring under the2 sam. 5. v. 20 and 25. Philistins? cast out theibid. v. 6.7.8. Iebusites? subdue the nations? bring him backe to Ierusalem, after he1. sam. 19.13.14.15. was exiled by his owne unnaturall bowels (that fayre (foule) viperous Absolon?) yea, doth the Lord every way hedge and inviron him in with his mercies? advance him from the dust? bring him from the sheepe-hooke to the2. sam. 12.8. Scepter? set a Crowne of pure gold upon his head? let him see his desire uponpsal. 54.7 his enemies? sweepe away their plots, as Spidersps. 58.6.7.8. webs; confounding them that come about him, like Bees and Hornets? Doth he make his sword ever victorious against the Philistines, Ammonites,2. sam. 8. per totum and cap. 10 Amalekites, etc? Doth he recover Ziglah, with his wives and1. sam. 30.17 18. children? doth he blesse him with the rarest of Iewels, so faithfull a friend as1. sam 20.42. Ionathan? But especially, Doth he ponder the mercies of God, of adornation or preservation, to his Church, his Sion, his people Israel, over whom hee was Prince? doth the Arke returne safe from the2. sam. 6. Philistines? is there a stone directed to the forehead of blaspemous1. sam. 17.49 Goliab, the terrour ofv. 24. Israel, (as Tamberlaine once to the Turke, and Tawbut to the French?) doth hee see the Temple likely to go forward, by the large contributions of the Peeres and1. chro. 29.8.9 people? doth he see the willingnesse of his Subjects, to goe up to the house of the Lord? doth hee see, with his owne eyes, and (as in my Text) his sonne Salomon, on whom were all the eyes and hopes of all Israel sixt, the second timeHee was invested once before. 1. King 38.39. more solemnely and publickely, by the united hearts, votes and desires of all, invested into his owne Legall, Regall, Royall Throne? Oh in the experience of these and all other his mercies, generall and speciall; how is he vocally, cordially, really, thankefull! with his heart, tongue, minde, soule, spirit, affections, blessing, lauding, praysing, magnifying, extolling, glorifying the great and glorious Name of Iehovah his God: acknowledging him hispsal. 18 1. Rocke, his refuge, his Asylum, his Sanctuary, his King, his God, his

guide, his leader, hisPsal. 23.1. and per totum* shepeheard, his sure salvation; leading him to the pure pasture, spreading his Table, Crowning him with mercie, protecting him in all perils, causing his lott to fall in a faire ground, giving him a goodly heritage. He attributes nothing, (like the proud, presumptuous, foolish, profane men of our age, who sacrifice to their owne Nets) eyther to his owne sword and speare or to the valour of his owne men, the thousands of his Israel, the prowesse of hisAdiuo the Eznite Eleazar the Ahobite Shammah the Hararite, Abishat, Benaiah, Asahell, and other of Davids worthies: 2. sam 23 equalizing Hector, Achilles, Hercules, Thesius, Caesar, Pompey, etc or any amongst the heathens. worthies, the pollicies of his Counsellors; much lesse to that heathenish IdolTe facimus fortuna deam caloque locamus. Fortune, the Chymera of ignorance, and the addle egge ofSo crusht in fitters by S. August. in his boks de Civitat. Dei, by Vives his co^mentator and Lactantius in his Institutions. Folly, nor to chance and good lucke, those serpents bred in the braynes of unthankefull men, whereby Gods glorie is stung and wounded: but (as tutoring us) as the Rivers which come from the Sea, returne to the Sea, from whence they flow; and as the beames which come from the Sunne, reflect backe againe from the Earth up towards the Sunne; as the clouds which are extract in their uapours from the earth, being dissolved, fall againe upon the Earth: so all the mercies which David received, hee did thankefully reflect them backe againe, to the honour and glory of the giver; the Lord himselfe, the Mecenas of the Church, the greatEzek. 36.25.26. Ier. 31.33. Zach 12.10. Patron of all the Adwovsons of his giftes of Grace, unto the sonnes of grace. Oh vade, and tu hac similiter; whosover thou art, high or low, that hast received thy tallentsMath. 25. from thy master, from thy maker, goe, and do thou the like that David did: blesse that God who blessed thee, thou so shalt be blessed (by the happiest usury) as David was. Blesse God, I say, as you should: doe not (as too many gracelesse godlesse men doe) blaspheme him, as you should not.



CHAP. II. David prayseth God personally.
SEcondly, as discharging my next Bill: David blesseth God; as Piously, so Personally, in his owne person* though a King, he is not ashamed to doe his homage, and fealtie, and service to the King of Kings: even as some other pettie Kings

(as once inSee Stowes chronicle epitomized, pa. 44. England; and in Persia, toEsth. ch. 1. v. 1 Assuerus; in Babylon,dan. 4.22. to Nabuchadnezzar; in Greece, to Alexander) have yeelded their tributarie subjection to greater Kings, (as at this day to the great Turke, and the great Mogull:) So David, as once that SaintIn aurea Legenda, made by a man plumbei cerebri, as one of their owne notes. Christopher, in the Legendarie Fable, will serve the greatest: hee will heere in the Earth, as the Angels and Saints in heaven,revel. 4.10. throw downe his Crowne and his Scepter before the Lambe: he will fall downe, and worship before the Lords footestoole.psal. 95 6. Though he have a heart like2. sam. 17.10. a Lion, yet he will bowe like a reed, melt like waxe, weepe like a whipt Child, bleat and crie out, like a forsaken Lambe, when for some sinne to be corrected, or physically prevented, he is under Gods Ferula, dieted with the bread of affliction. Though he be as a Lion Rampant, when hee is in the midst of his and Gods enemies; yet hee is couchant when hee is before the Lord. So againe; though he be a wondrous wise man, an Oracle (as his Sonne Salomon, a miracle) of wisedome, as an Angell of God, to discerne cases and causes, as the woman of2. sam. 14 17 Tekoah told him: yet at the returne of the Arke of God from the Philistines, hee is so overjoyed, that forgetting himselfe, or rapt beyond himselfe; in zealous gratitude to God, wrapt in a Lynnen Ephod, as a Child before a Pipe, or as a Morrice Dancer (as Micholl thought) hee daunced before it, withall his might. But it was not in a vaine, profane, promiscuous daunce, as amongst us; such as the worst of theDe diversis saltationibus and tripudijs Ethnicorum. Lege Iul. Pollucem libr. 4. Onomast. c. 13. c. 14. Atheneu^. lib. 1. c. 8. li. 14. c. 12 and libr. 4. c. 24. Syntaxeon artis, li. 12. c. 19. p. 207 heathens used, from whence wee borrow it, and the best haveInter Patres, Chrys. hom. ult. in Col. ho. 2. in Gen. hom. 49. in Math de filia Herod. et Amb. l. 3. de virginis. Aug. contra Petil. c. 6. and in psal. 32 inter nostrates Petrus Martyr in locis. Viret. Instit. in praecep 7. Taffin of amendment of life, li. 2. c. 18. inter ethnicos Cicer. pro Murena. erat. 25. Seneca, Plat. Plutarch. reproved: but it was before the Lord (as he told that ill egg of a worseMali corvi, mau^m ovu^, est in equis, est in filijs paterna virtus, and paternu^ virus Crow, that mocking daughter of a persecuting Father) who had elected him, and rejected Saul, and all his house. Thus punctuall, thus personall, is David in his services, his sacrifices: David is neyther so proud, nor so prophane, as all the Morall men of our times, that cannot, will not, serve God themselves; but if at all, by a Deputie: who, even at their full Tables (sometimes at their rich and ryotous Naball-like feastes, as I have seene and observed both in England and Ireland,) eyther gracelessely pretermit Grace, or saying (rather then praying) of Grace as they say; using, abusing the creatures, without ever sanctifying them more by

Tit. 1.15. Prayer then the Oxe doth his hay, the Horse his provender, or the Swine his draffe or ackorns: sitting downe and rising up, asgen. 25.34. Esau did, when he ate his deere-bought broth, for which, his sold Birth-right was the shott, without ever blessing God, like a carnall carelesse wretch as hee was. Or if this dutie, for forme and fashion sake bee performed, it is put to a Schoole-boy, a yong Sonne, a little Gyrle, as the mouth of the Table, to speake to God for them, to intercede as their deputie: though the parents can be content sometimes (to the robbing of Levie, andMal. 3.8. God in Levie,) to play the Parsons part, and to take tythes; yet their Children, forsooth, must play the Vicars, to say Grace, and give thankes. Not that I absolutely condemne it, as unlawfull, for Children to be by degrees trayned to this taske, when by Catechizing in the groundes of Religion, they come to exceede Parrats, by understanding what they say: or that I denie, but that at their owne repasts, and meales, they are to be taught to give thankes; even as to pray, when they rise and lye downe, as Abell fromgen. 4.4 Adam, Sem and Iaphet fromgen. 8.20. Noah, Isaac fromgen. 22.7.8 Abraham, were taught how to sacrifice; Timothy taught from his Mother and2 tim. 1.5. and 3. vers 15. grandmother; as was ConstantineApud Eusebium in vita Constantini. of his mother Hellen: Or I denie not, but that they, at the same time, the same Table, may give thanks when their parents or tutors precede, and begin first; then, I praesequar, they may well follow, as the little Cock-boat swimes in the same streame, after the great Ship, and the little tantling Bell, that rings sometimes after the great Bow-bels, in some Church, or Cathedrall. But for the Father to take all the burthen from his owne shoulders, and to lay it on the Childes, (as to take the Saddle ftom a strong Stallion, and set it on a young Colt;) to make his Childe his Atturney for him in Gods service, as though he were ashamed to doe what David, our Saviour Luke 9.16. Christ, theVt antea ch. 1 sect 1. Apostles did, in their owne persons: is not onely a breach of thedeut. 8. v. 10. Commandement, that the greater shall blesse thehebr. 7. v. 7. lesser, as Melchisedech didgen. 14.19. Abraham, and Iacob hisgen. 49. Sonne; but shewes a dead or a profane heart and a maine, a vaine contempt of God.
So for another dutie; Family-prayer, singing of Psalmes,

praysing of God, practised by the2 Sam. 6.20. Saints, injoyned, (as the observation of some penall Statutes) by the denuntion of a great and greivousIer. 10. v. 25. curse, an Anathema, as terrible as the Thunder or thunder-bolt, which hangs over that house and family where God is not invocated (even as the naked sword of Dyonisius did hang over the head of that flattering Damocles; yea as the cloud of fire and brimstone over Sodom and Gomorrah: as sure to fall one time or other, (unlesse prevented by practicall repentance,) as that flying booke ofZaec. 5. v. 1.2.3 vengeance shall fall, and hath falne, as histories and experience relate, upon theHe that reads the Theater of Gods iudgme^ts in 40. M Perk. of the Gouernme^t of the tongue, in fine. M. Knewstubs his abuses of Engl. M. Foxe in diverse passages, and his abridgeme^t of the ends of blaspemous persecutors, Minerius, Ioh. de Roma, Eccius, Laton Bomel, Card. Cres. fol. 380. 382. 383 Lonicer. in his examples in 3. praecep. The histories of our time in 4. p. 319 320. 321. 322. 323. shall see gods heavy ha^d on blasphemers persons and places, where God is blasphemed; even as sure, as the Chamber called Ierusalem fell on the head of that Nicromanticall Sylvester, and as Dagons house hath now twice falne on the heads of Idolatrous Philistines.) I say, even this dutie; how many eyther wholly, (unholily) pretermit it, or post it off to their servants, prentices, Iourneymen, deputies, atturneys, they must pray for them, the inferior must be the mouth of the superior, the man, must be the tongue of his master, by reading or praying, or (as they call it) saying a few prayers Morning and Evening: directly against that Apostolicall Canon, Hebr. 7. vers. 7. thus making an Historon proteron of all Religion. Others againe, are so proud or so profane that wanting the spirit ofzach. 12.10 Rom. 8. v. 26. praier, the Heart or Art to pray, they onely desire others to pray for them: some good man, or Preacher (as Pharaoh intreates Moses andExod. 8.8. etc. 8.2^. Aaron, Simon Magus requestsAct. 8.24. Peter) to pray, for them: but for themselves, they have joynts (unlike theElepha^t. enim Rege^ adorant. genua submittunt. ceronas porrigu^, test. Plin. l. 8. c. 1 Arist. lib. 9. c. 46. Albert. l. 8. tract. 5. c. 2. et Aelian. hist. l. 13. c. 22. Hi aute^ profani, gennua non flectunt Psal. 14. v. 4. An Ovidean, or Virgilean fiction, or Pythagorean dreame, as Master Perkins drawes Purgatories pedegree in his Problemes. Elephant) that cannot bow; hearts like Gaddes of steele that cannot bend; tongues, and speake not as Idols: the mute or dumbe Divell is in them, (as in some unpreaching Ministers*) they pray not for themselves, they will not, they cannot. Others againe more foolishly and preposterously, trust all to the prayers, dirges, and suffrages of others when they are departed, to sing and bring them out of their Europaean purgatory; indeed, reall hell: as though they hoped a Physitians physicke should revive them after death. These are as preposterous in theyr

prayers, as those that thinke to satisfie for all their usuries and extortions by almes, and elymosinarie workes after their death, by their executors. I would not be mistaken; I know its lawfull to desire the prayers of others; as Paul did of all theCol. 4.3. 1. Thes. 5.25. and 2. Thess. 3.1. Churches, as Ezeckiah did from2. King 19.2. Esaiah, as Esther desired the prayers ofEst. 4.10. Mardocheus, and the Iewes; Daniell of his threeDan. 2.17.18 Companions, and so Luther, Calvin, Grineus; the Martyrs, Ridley, Latimer, Bradley, intreat the mutuall prayers of their friends in their zealous Letters. I know also its lawfull, laudable for noble men to have their Chaplaines for Preaching, Praying in their families: their Nathans, their Levites may be imployed, yet so, as high and low, great and small, every Individuum that will be saved, must with David personally worship God; as the Scriptures injone duties particularly, andAct. 2.22. Heb. 3.12. and 4. 1. Esa. 55.1. Psal 2.10, 11. and 148.10, 11, 12. personally.


CHAP. III. David prayseth God publickly.
THirdly, let it not passe our animadversion, that David doth not only praise his God religiously, piously, personally, but also publickly before all the Congregation of Israel. He is not ashamed to serve that God before all Israel, that in the sight of Israel and of the Sun, had so served his turnes and needs; saved and preserved him in his exigents and dangers by so many and severall meanes, improving his power, his justice, his peculiar and speciall providence so oft, for Davids deliverances and his enemies destruction, (or at least distractions) seeing God so marvellously, so miraculously fight for David, as oft before, in the dayes of Moses and Deborah, he fought for Israel, againstExod. 17.11. Amaleck, Moab andIudg. 5.20. Iabin; for Constantine, Theodosius, Athanasius, and Chrysostome against the Pagans andPassim apud Centuriatores, Magd. and Osiand. epitom. Arrians: for England in the yeareOh fortunate nimium cui militat aether, and coniurati veniunt ad Classica venti. 88 for Rochell (as once for Ierusalem, in the dayes of Ezekiah) when strictly besieged: for Grineus, against the plots of FaberApud Manliu^ in suis Calloquijs. Stapulensis: for Luther, against that roaring Leo, that barkingApud scriptores vitae Lutheri, and apud Sleidanum. Eccius, and all the malignant fry of the Romish Synagogue. Now, as Davids preservations were publique, so, proportionably, were his praises and benedictions: as God honors David, so mutually and reciprocally, in the sight and eye of all

Israel, David honors God againe: So did Moses the servant of theDeut. 32. Deut. 33. Lord, Ioshuah the sonne of Nun, advanced to be leaders ofIosh. 24.1. Israel; Samuel,1. Sam. 3.20. called to be the Lords chiefe1. Sam. 12. per totum. Prophet; Ioseph,Gen 41.41.42 honoured in the Court of Egypt; Mordocheus, in theEster 6.11. Persian, Daniel in the BabylonianDan. 2.47, 48. Court; Nehemiah, preferred to be theNehem. 13. per totum. Prince, Ezra to be the chiefe ScribeEzra 11. and 12. in Israel; Iacob, advanced from a poore Shepheard, to be a mighty manGen. 32.9. in meanes; Othniel, Iudah, Iephte, and other religious Iudges in Israel; Asa, Iosiah, Iehosaphat, Ezekiah, and other religious Kings in Israel: to omit Constantine, so praised byIn vita Constantini. Eusebius; Theodosius, byIn vita Theodosij. Ambrose; Alphonsus of Aragon, by PanormitanIn vita Alphonsi. the Canonist, with all other religious Kings, Kesars, Tetrarches, Monarches, Princes, Peeres, Legifers, Rulers, Governours recorded and renowned by the unerring pen of the holy Ghost in Scripture, by Civill or Ecclesiasticall Historians in former or latter times. As they have received their Crownes, dignities, diadems, rodds of magistracie, rule and superioritie fromRom. 13.1. Tit. 3.1. God, by whom KingsProv. 8.5. raigne, and the poore are fetcht from the dust, to sit withPsal. 113.7, 8 Princes: so by their speeches, tongues, actions, wholsome lawes established and executed, their planting of religion, their supplanting of Idolatry, and Idolaters, their discountenancing of sinne and sinners, their gracing of the sonnes of grace, the upright in the land (as outward demonstrations of their inward inflamed thankefull affections;) they have beene ever studious to improve, what honour, dignitie, glory, authoritie, they have received from God, even before the whole world to honour, glorifie, dignifie, and extoll that great and glorious God with it againe. This hath beene their marke, ayme, desire and endevour, to magnifie the grace, to propagate the glory of that God, from whose free mercie, without their demerits, they have received their lives, their honours, their tallents, their places, their graces: A Glasse wherein all Rulers may see their owne faces. In which, as the best may have occasion to rejoyce, if they finde their actions and affections to answer these recited, as face answers face: so manie Athisticall persecuting, Popish, profane, carnall, carelesse, sleepie, secure Magistrates of the former, and in these present evill times, may, in the consciousnesse of their guilts, seeing

their spots, hang down their heads, being ashamed (as the hugeDe magnitudine Elephantis. Plin lib. 8. ca. 1. Arist. lib. 2 ca. 1. and lib. 3. cap. 9. Elephant, that's sad when he reflecteth upon the hideous vastnesse of his owne bulke, in the cleere waters,) chiefly such as even publickly fight againstAct 5 39. Acts 7.51. God, (as once the NimrodianGen. 11.3. Gyants) opposing and persecuting the Gospell and all Gospellers as they call them; by their lawes and edicts suppressing religion and the religious, defacing, mangling, mingling, poysoning, with their owne dreggs and druggs of superstitious traditionarie vanities, toyes, blasphemies (if not quite abolishing) the pure and sincere service and worship of God; so wounding God in his glorie, his Saints, his servants, his Ministers, members, even with his owne weapons, these swords and rodds of authoritie,Fasces magistratus, apud Livium, and Fanestellam. which he hath put into their hands. In the numbers and rankes of these, were Ahab and Iesabell that persecuted1 King. 19.2. Elias, imprisoned1. Kin. 22.26. Michay, fed and maintained (as too many Popish Princes their whipping Baalites, and fatt Abby-lubbers, since) at their owne tables the Prophets of1. Kin. 18.19. Baal: as also Ieroboam the son of Nebat, that caused Israel to1. King. 14.9. sinne; Salomon, that by permission (if not approbation) so long as he was in his adulterous and Idolatrous slumber, as too uxorious in pleasing his wives, built Temples and Altars, for the Gods of the1. King. 11.5, 6, 7, 8. Sidonians, Ammonites, and Moabites, with other Idolatrous Kings of Iudah and Ierusalem. And such as these (omitting Nero, Commodus, Decius, Severus, Traian, etc. and other bloudie butchers of millions ofSee the Acts and Monume^ts, of the Church epitomized, fol. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. martyrs, as Pagans that know not God) were Valens, Constans, Constantinus, and other ArrianHist. tripart. passim. and apud Euseb and Socr. Emperours, opposing by their swords the Dietie (as Arrius, Aerius, Eumonius, Nestorius, Paulus, Samosatenus and other blasphemousDe quibus omnibus, apud August. and Epiphan. de haeres. Hereticks; some the Divinitie some the humanitie, some the will, some the two natures, some the person, some the offices) of our Lord and Saviour Iesus Christ. And not to wade further then our owne times, and times of our forefathers: that French Henry the second, slaine by tilting in midst of jollities; with that Apostate of Navarre, who from a seemingly religious Protestant turned (as another Iulian) by the perswasion of the Duke of Guize, and the Cardinall of Lorraine his brother, a professedSee the French Chronicles of Hen. 2. Also the Acts of the Church abridged, fol. 385. Papist: that Duke de Maine, and the Guizian faction, that bound themselves by a sacramental oath,

to ruinate and roote out the Protestants, whom disgracefully they stiled Lutherans and Hugenotes: that Duke d'Alva, who by crueltie and treacherie, so raging as an evening Wolfe, in the low Countries, by his bloudy massacres; and Farnestius, that vowed to make his horse swim up to the belly, in the bloud of theApud Sleidanum. Lutherans: that Iohn Miners,President of the Councel of Aygues. that so heartily and desiringly executed thatActs of the Church abridged, fol. 203. decree, writ (like Dracoes lawes) with bloud, which went out from the French King, by the procurement of the Bishop of Aix, and other bloud sucking horseleeches, against those of Cabriers and Merindoll (as the decree of Asuerus, against the Iewes in Persia, by the meanes of Haman that cursedEst. 3.9. Amalekite) whereupon the poore Merindolians, their wives and children, were as poore sheep slaughtered pell mell, hunted into the woods as wilde beasts, torne and devoured by Mastives, fired out of some caves (into which they crept) like the firing out of Foxes: with such barbarous butcheries, as have not beene heard of amongst Turkes and Pagans. as also their succeeders (exceeders) in bloud-thirstinesse, Gardner, bloudie Bonner, Weston, Story, Hopton, Morgan, Tonstall, Steward, who used, abused, not only Peters keyes of strictest discipline, but (as onceThis Iulius threw Peters sword into Tyber, and tooke Peters sword for the warres. Iulius a Pope of theirs, andThis Iulian caused the yong Polonian King to breake his faith with the Turke, by which he perished Knoll^ hist. of Turkes. Iulian a Cardinall) even Peters pretetended (usurped) sword, to smite unlawfully. not for Christ, but against Christ, kicking against theAct. 9.6. prick, persecuting and prosecuting him, with fire and fagots in his members maliciously, as once the Pharisees (not ignorantly, as once1 Tim. 1.13. Paul) for five yeares together, in that quinquennium Mariae, bloudie raigne of Queene Mary; effusing, in that short space, more Protestant bloud (as is plaine by computation) then there hath beene for Religion, effused (unlesse for Treason) Popish bloud, these threescore yeares, in our Albion. I say these, and all such as these (which might infinitely be enumerated) as birds of that black, base, and bloudy feather, Eagles, Crowes, Vultures, Harpies, flocking from Rome, to be drunke and drunke againe with the bloud of theRev. 17.6. Saints, (as drunke before with the cup of the WhoresRev. 14.8. fornications:) I say, did such as these give any demonstration, that they were ever possessed with Davids heart, Davids spirit, affection, resolution, to advance publickly before men, the glorie of that God

who had advanced them? By the best retaliation to stirre up Gods glory, who had set up them; to honour God by their graces, who had honoured them by their great and eminent places? Nay verily. If persecuting of Christ, in the Church his bodie, be the praising and lauding of Christ their head: if (as did once persecutingActs 22.3. and Gal. 1, 13.14. and Acts 26.11. Paul their predecessor in blinde bloudie zeale) the causing of the Saints toActs 26.11. blaspheme, as much as they could by their exquisite tragical tortures; If this be in the sight of the sunne, and of all Israel with David to blesse God, then I shal unweave what I have woven, recant and recall these apostulatorie taxations. And if these things were not plaine and undeniable, they might hold them (as we hold their Popish Bulls, excommunications and execrations) evenSee the book in octoavo, called Brut. Fulme^. Bruta fulmina, as meere squibs and paper bullets: yea, they might account these imputations (as I hold their Masses, Trentalls, Dirges, Purgatories, Limboes, but chiefly their satanicall accusations of our doctrine and Doctors,See their railings in G^ffords Calvin. Turcism. in Kellisons survay in Feuerdentius upon Iude; their hellish slanders in Coccius Bolsterus writing the life of Luther: chiefly their calumnies, laid downe in our Wallets Tetrast. Papismi, and answered in D. White his way to the true Church in fine libri; and by his apologizing brother (since his lamented death) al. o, in fine libr. Luther, Melancton martyr, and other our famous English and Belgick lights) meere toyes, trickes, chimeraes, fictions, and fables.

SECT. II. Davids profession, animating and directing professors and profession.
BVt that which I further urge, is this: That David publickly and purposely prayseth God. I say, professedly, that I may from Davids practise and president, honour this word and tearme of Profession, which is almost verbum obsoletum, worne out of request, banished (like zeale and conscience, to whom it professeth friendship and affinitie) well nye out of the country, (as was once Themistocles, and some well-deserving Romane Patriots) as it were by ostracisme; or at least entertained and welcommed of most, as water into a ship, or raine in harvest: I am sure strangely and sternely entertained; examined (like some outlandish disguised man) whether it be the kings friend or no. Others whoot at it as at an Owle or an Arabian Monster: others flying from it, (as some roving Orators, from their

Theames and Texts) as though the very plague were in it, or on it; standing aloofe from it, as Iobs friends fromIob 2.13. Iob, as though it were so distressed and persecuted, they might get much prejudice by their acquaintance with it. Well, what strange conceits and imaginations soever we have of this profession; the tearme of a Professor being to every moralist and profaner amongst us distastfull (as was the tearme of a Galilean to Apostate Iulian; of a Christian or Cruciferian, to the Pagans; of an Orthodoxe, to the Arrians: of a Protestant, held a Lutheran, a Hugenote, a hereticke, to a professed Papist; of a disciplinarean Brownist, or Anabaptist, to a conformitant; of a Calvinist, to a ridgedSuch as was Hunnius, Huberus, Eccardus: in Thessibus and in Fasciculo controversiarum, and other such hot spurrs, who more raile upo^ and revile the Calvinists, as they terme them, then they doe the very Papists or the Turkes. Psal. 1.9. per totum. Lutheran.) yet neverthelesse David is a Professor; herein my Text, he professeth and proclaimes by his tongue and act, his words and practise, the service and worship of the true God: he Heralds and trumpets out the praise of Iehovah, in the eye and eare of all Israell. The like profession he makes elsewhere, chiefly in the 116. Psal. v. 16. Oh Lord, saith he, truely I am thy servant I am thy servant; with an ingemination, and resolution not to flinch from that he had said, but to stand to it to the verie death: with a gratefull acknowledgement of some honourable favours he had received from the best Master; Thou hast loosed my bonds, freed me as a bird from the snares of these bloudie hunters, which by their plots and stratagems thought and sought to intrap me. Yea what are all the Psalmes, penned and published to be sung by Asaph and the chiefe Musitians, before the thousands of Israel in the great Congregation; but loud proclamations to the Church, to the whole world, to present and after times, of that neere and deare necessitude, union and relation betwixt his God and him: he receiving the influence of mercies from God, he returning tribute of prayses againe unto God? Chiefly in the 119. Psalme, which of all the rest, for matter, manner, method, quantitie, qualitie, is as the Eagle or Phenix amongstThe Commentators exceedingly extoll that Psal. both for the matter, Davids love to the word; and manner, there being in it as many parts as letters in the Hebrew Alphabet, every part being an octonary, consisting of eight verses, begins with an Hebrew letter. Observatio Lorini Musculi, Molleri, Strigellij, and Cowperi scoti. Birds, as the Sunne amongst Starres, or Lillies amongst Flowers; in everie line, verse, staffe in a wondrous elegancie, and emphaticall expression of himselfe, he professeth and protesteth his love to the Word, to the Law, to the Precepts, the Iudgements, the Statutes, the Testimonies, the Commandements of his Lord.

which as in his judgement, he prizeth, and in his affections he loves above thousands of gold andPs. 119.127. and 72. silver; they being to him (as they ought to be to us) sweeter then the honny and the honnyvers. 103. combe: so he resolves to stick and stand to them, (as the Martyrs did in the primitive, and our moderne times) notwithstanding all the might and malignitie of his persecutingvers. 95.85.16.23. enemies. Yea and he will not onely meditate of themvers. 12, 15. privately, for his owne edification and consolation, in the soliloquies of his ownevers. 14.24.47.54. soule, as the chiefe balme and oyle to all hisvers, 143.162.165. affections: but even before Kings and Princes, and the great Potentates of the earth, he will (what we will not, list not or dare not do before the meanest vulgars and plebeans) speake of them, and not bevers. 46. ashamed. Oh David (as bullets of one mettall, cast in the same mould) was possessed with the same spirit as the type, that was in Christ his antitype, who witnessed a good profession before1. Tim. 6.13. Pontius Pilate: Davids beames came from that Sunne, his sparkes from that fire, his streames from that fountaine which was in his Saviour, hee was as bold as a Lion, to testifie his love, fealtie, and obedience to the Lion of the Tribe ofRevel. 5.5. Iuda: withRom. 1.1. and Phil. 1.1. Paul,2. Pet. 1.1. Peter,Iude, vers. 1. Iude,Luke 2.29. See my Sermons extant on this Text, called Simeons dying Song. Simeon he professeth his Master; hee sheweth as it were his liverie, coate, and cognizance, and pinneth the very badge of his profession upon his sleeve, to be viewed of God, men, and Angels. He cares not who view and review him, in cute and in corde, in the inward and outward man, turning his very inside outward; which no hypocrite nor formalist can endure. And herein Davids regular practise, blames and shames our irregularities. There needs no other meanes to make a foule woman blush, that's conceited of her beautie, but to set a faire woman (indeed) besides her: nor to make a selfe-conceited foole keepe silence (as Roscius did in Catoes companie) but to bring a solid wise man into the presence. I need not redargue our times: Davids profession confutes and confounds our claudications, in which we are so heteroclite and deficient, for matter and manner, in what David both professed and practised as
First, David here is not indifferent what Religion he is of; whether he serve the gods of the Ammonites, Moabites, and Philistines, or the true Iehovab: whether Baall, Astaroth, Dagon,

or the true God: whether he prayse the Gods of gold and of silver, as the Pagans did, even shrines, Crucifixes and Images, as our Papists doe; or the living God: But hee resolves withIosh. 24.15. See M. Bernard on this text called Ioshuahs resolution prefixt before his Catechisme. Ioshua, that hee and his house, he and his heart will serve the Lord. He knowes there's but oneVna via, veritas, and vita. way, one truth, one life, one God, as but one Sunne, one soule in man, and one Phenix in the world.
Secondly, David keepes not his Religion to himselfe, in hugger mugger, as a miser keepes his gold from the sight and light of the Sunne: as the great IndianMagnitudine canum secundum Melan. li 3. c. 4. eadem Solinus: ^ Isidor. li. 12. c. 2. Vicent. lib. 20. c. 134. dubitat tamen Albert. lib. 26. at asserit Aelianus etiam li. 3. c. 4. Ants, and Gryphons are said to keepe some Mines, that none can discover them: as many Key-cold carnalists, or luke-warme nevtrall Laediceans, and Machiavillian pollititians amongst us, that lurke so close as Serpents under the greene grasse, that none can discover them, whether they be Ephramites or Gileadites, Israelites, or Canaanites, hot or cold, Protestants, Papists or nevters; hanging as feathers in the ayre as poyzed in equall scales, fit to be cast with the least sway of the Times up or downe: to be fish or flesh; to cast their old sloughes and Bills, with theTheologice applicat Aug. ser. 4. ad fratres (si sint Augustini) and Chrys. hom. 34. in Math. tom. 2. Serpent and theMistice haec etiam applicat August. in ps. 66 and in psal. 102. Eagle, to peerenize and pinibletonize, turning their old Coates and notes, their Tones and Tunes with the Times: meere Hermophradites, changing readily their unresolved Religion, as theApud Aelian. lib. 13. c. 12. Mas Lepus praegnans suit. Hare or Hyena, change their Sexe: meere vertumnian weather-cockes.
Thirdly, David here is not ashamed to prayse God publikly: Hee hangs not downe his head, nor blusheth at the businesse, as many shame-faced (shame Grace) men of our generation, that are not any whit ashamed of the service of sin and Sathan: their Oaths are heard as loud as thunder, they breath or bellow out curses and execrations in their anger as Dragons spit fire. In their drunknesse they are not ashamed to be seene toying as Apes, or mad as Tygers, spewing as Dogges, or as Crowes that have eate Nux vomica; reeling in the streetes, as Horses that have the staggers, Calves that have the sturdy, yea perhaps, wallowing as Swine in the channell etc. Yet these men, are ashamed to serve God, ashamed to be heard, or overheard (in which predicament too, are all our Civill, Morall honest men, till Grace come with power

to their hearts) singing a Psalme, or reading a Chapter in their families; but above all to weepe at a Sermon, which the penitent Iewes did so plentifully, so publickly in the dayes of theIudges. 2.4.5.6.7. Iudges ofEzra. 10. v. 1. Ezra, and of1. Sam. 7. v. 4.5.6.7. Samuel.
But fourthly, David though he were once mockt before by his Sawlite2. Sam. 6.20. wife Michell for his profession, yet hee desists not here for that: hee is neyther daunted nor discouraged though then distasted; nay hee was and is more more zealous, according to the nature of true Grace, to rise like the Palme-tree, the moreNititur in podus sic Arist. 7. problem. and Plutarchus in septimo Symposaicorum, and Aulus Gellius noct. atticis lib. 3. c. 6. supprest; to burne and breake out like the fire, the more prestQuo magis premitur eo maegis aestuat ignis. downe; to spread like the Camomile, the more spurnd and trod: as it was with the Apostles and Disciples, the more Pharisaicall beating and threating they were restrained, the more by the spirit they were constrained to preachAct. 5. v. 17.18.19.20.21. sic vers. 28.29. Christ. As in the primitive times, the moe that suffered by the Pagans and Arrians, the moe like spirituall Souldiers, stood in their rankes, and doubled their fyles, as their fellowesApud Euseb. and Centuriatores passim, sic sanguis Martyrum seme^ Ecclesiae. fell. And though they were mockt and branded with the nicke-names of Cruciferians, in derision of Christ: (for Hell and irreligion had not then hatcht the names of Puritanes and precisians) yet, (though they met not in the nights, as one wellLorinus Comment. in cap. 2. Actuum. notes, to avoyde scandall, and construction) they desisted not eyther for bloudie or unbloudie persecution by tongue, or sword, to meete in theirPreter Tertull. in apolli. sub finem de Corona Militis, asserunt Euseb. libr. 3 cap. 26 Orosius libr. 7. cap. 12. Nicephorus lib. 3. cap. 17. Cyprian. de Orat Dom. Cyrillus Catechismus 6. Imo Plinius Secundus libr. 10. Epist. 97. ad Traianum. Temples earely in the morning, even in Tertullians time, and before. Oh where's this zeale, courage profession, in the milkesoppes and mole-harted Christians of our Time; who having by the Ministery and the spirit, sometimes some good sparks kindled in them, the least disgracefull word from a Father, a Mother, a brother, a husband, a Naball, a neighbour, a nebulo, quencheth all againe? As Snailes they plucke in their heades againe in the least storme of opposition: they looke back againe with LotsLuke. 17.32. wife, and returne againe to the flesh-pots ofExod. 16.3. Aegypt, to open professed profanenesse in the least lett and disturbance they have to the heavenly Canaan.
Oh that we could be heated with Davids fires, to professe

and practise everie man in his place as David did. Oh even this outward profession, if in sinceritie (else its Pharisaicall and doubleSimulata sa^ctitas, duplex iniquitas. iniquitie) what glory would it bring toMath. 5.16. God? what an adamant to draw on the weake? what a reall confutation of the1. Pet. 3.16. wicked? what a gagg and muzzle to the mouthes of1. Pet. 2.15. blasphemers? what an argument of the fire ofPsal. 116.10. and Ro. 10. v. 10. faith and inward Grace, if it would shew it selfe thus in outward heats and smoakes? whereas the want of this heat outwardly, shewes our hearts but dead coales. Yea joyning profession and practise together, leaves and fruites, words and workes (else our estate were no better then Cains, Sauls Herods Iudas his,See Doctor Wakemans sermon called the true professor. or Demas his) we should inwardly rejoice in life here withRom. 8. Paul, have more peace in death with2. King. 20.3.4. Ezekiah, andNehem. 13. Nehemiah, and in judgementMarke. 8.38. Christ would not be ashamed of us, no more then we here of him.



CHAP. IIII.

SECT. I. David prayseth God Primarily.
FOvrthly, David doth not onely thus Piously, Personally, Publickely blesse God; but Primarily* he begins himselfe to leade this heavenly dance, and by example and his authoritie, (to unite these two in one) provokingly and procuratorily, he excites and stirres up others; even the whole Congregation to doe the like, to move after his religious motion: he (as a patterne still to all zealous Magistrates, faithfull and fruitefull Ministers) like unto theGallus vigilantis Magistratus typus apud Rensner. et Alciatum in suis emblem ac, etiam Episcopi: apud Maiolum in diebus canicularib. col. 6. pag. 210. Cocke, by the clapping of his owne wings, first awakens and stirres upDe Gallo haec vid. apud Plin. l. 10. c. 22. and apud Albert. libr. 23. Litera, G. himselfe from sleepe, saying, Awake Lute andPsal. 108. v. 2 Harpe, awake my Heart, awake my Tongue, my Glory: I my selfe will awake right earely, etc. And then by his Crowing, his Heraulding, Trumpetting and proclayming the mercies of God; he awakensPsal. 32.5.6. others, as here and in severall Psalmes, Come ye Children saith he, hearken yee untoPsal 66.16. me, and I will tell you what God hath done for my Soule: as Moses tould Iethro his Father in-law, what God hath done forExod. 18.8 Israel in their eduction out of Aegypt, and preservation in the red Sea. Thus ought wee that are publicke persons to

have heate in our selves, and to inflame others; to have salt in ourMath. 5.13. selves, and to season others; to have light in ourvers. 14. ibid. selves, and to lighten others; to bee as Candles on the Tables, as Beacons on a Hill, to illuminate the Countries where wee preach, chiefly the Places, Parishes, Houses in which we live; to shine tovers. 15. others as starres in a darke night, as Lots inGen. 19.7. 2. Pet. 2. v. 17 Sodom, asDan 4.8.9 Daniels amongst Babylonians, as Iobs amongst theIob. 1.8. Vzzites, as Abrahams amongst theGen 23.6 Hevites, as Isaacs amongst theGen. 26.28. Philistines. We must be as the Northern Pole to the Sea-man, as the Card and Compasse to the Mariner: yea, as the Steare-men in Ships, as Centinels amongst an Armie, to give ayme to the rest, and to have an eye over all, and every one of those that depend on our charge; as a father over every Childe old and young; a Captaine over every Souldier, trayned and untrayned; a Schoole-master over everie scholler, apt or unapt; as a goodBonus magistratus pastor populi, ut olim, Homerus de Agamemnine: frugi pastor vt Suetonius de Tiberio: plura autem de officio Patris, praeceptoris, magistratus, vide apud Alstedium part. 2. pag. 711. 721 732. in suae Theologia naturali. Sheepheard over everie sheepe weake, and strong, Rammes, and Lambes: not willing that anie should perish by the craft of the Foxe, or their owne default, in eating Rot-grasse; yea, we should bee as the lovingDe amore gallinae circa pullos vide Glossam in Math. 23. v. 37. Arist. Palludiu^ and Berchoriu^ reductorij, libr. 7 pag. 202. Hen, who having a naturall storge to everie chick, both fights for it against the Hawke and Kyte, and clockes it, with the whole brood, after her.
Thus David stirres up all and every man of the Congregation, from the heads and the elders to the youngest and meanest, to blesse God; as he oftPsal. 134.135.147.149.150. chiefly 148. per totum. excites in the Psalmes He would have high and low, young-men and maydes, old-men and babes, all and every one to performe this taske; yea, the Creatures animate, inanimate, sensitive, vegetative, celestiall, terrestriall, to joyne together with all the servants of the Lord, to praise the Name of the Lord. And sure as the Romaine Scipios, the Carthagenian Haniball, the Greeke Meltiades, and of latter times, the Turkish Bashawes and other valiant Generals; by their Orations and exquisite speeches of incouragement, (oft viewing and ryding through their Armies themselves, as did that resolute French Henry theSee the book of his warres in 4. extant in English. 4. of famous memorie, Charles thePaulus Iovius and Thuanus de Carolo Quinto. 5. Henry the 7. ofSee his exact historie in folio, pend by our English Tully Sir Frances Bacon. England, with

other vigilant and valiant worthies) put vigour and courage in their Armies, vivacitie and spirit in the feeblest souldier, and according to the pollicies of warre, by sounds of Trumpets and Shalmes, beating of Drummes, and other Martiall instruments sought to inkindle sparkes of valour, even in those that were as naturall Cowards as that Clineas, or Dametas in the Arcadia: So a good and godly Superior by his expostulations, as onceNehem. 13. v, 17.18.25.26. Nehemiah,Ezra 8.17. Nehem. 8.4.5. Ezra, and thatIudges. 2. ver. 3.4.5. Angell that was sent from Gilgall to the Iewes: 2. by his exhortations, asIosh. 24. per totum. Ioshua, and2. Chro. 20. v. 15. Iehosaphat to the Israelites: 3. by his provocations and excitings, as David here, and oft elsewhere, ought to stirre up all and every one of their depending inferiors, to fight the Lords battles, not to yeelde cowardly to sinne and sathan; to march valiantly, like2. King. 9.20. Iehu: to use dexterously all the parts of that spirituall compleat furniture, prescribed by theEph. 6.13. Apostle: to goe forth against that triple Cerberus, the alluring flesh, deceaving world, deceitefull Devill; daily arm'd, as David against1. Sam. 17. v. 45. Goliah, Abraham against the fiveGen. 14. v. 14.19. Kings, Ioshuah againstExod. 17. v. 9.10.11. Amalek, with the power of the might of God Almightie* and when wee have got the least victorie, to be unfainedly thankefull as were the Israelites in the dayes ofibid. v. 15.16. and Exod. 15. per totum. Moses,Judg. c. 5. per totum. Deborah,1. Sam. 11.15. cum Isralitis. Saul,2. Sam. 6.5. David,In apocryphis Holoferne occiso. Iudeth, to the Lord of hosts, the God of battles; testifying this thankefulnesse in our words, workes, lives and loves, as Davids Congregation testified theirs in my Text, by blessing God, and by offering Sacrifices and oblations.


SECTIO. II. Application of the premisses to Magistrates, Ministers, and Masters of Families,
IN which duties, as we prescribe and perswade them, so wee must precede in practise: Kings in their Courts, Magistrats in Cities and Corporations, Bishops in their Diocesses, Ministers in their Churches, Cures and charges, Masters, Mistresses and Dames in their houses, and families; must goe before, as the greatest maleEuntes, velnatantes in Cypru^, and in Corcyram fortissimi praecedu^t secu^du^ plin. li 8. nat. hist. c. 32 Solix. 21. and Aelian. li. 5. c 56 Deare before the Heard; as the bel-weather

before the flocke; as the couragious Captaine before the Souldiers: giving the first onset. The superior in every place, in every case which concernes Gods glorie, the spirituall, corporeall, publicke, politicke or private good of anie; must say to the Governed, as Abimelecke in anotherIudges. 9. vers. 49. sence, As you see me doe so doe you: and that Apostle of the Gentiles, Estote imitatores, Be yee followers of me, as I of Christ Wee in the Church, you in the Common-wealth, and familie, in every dutie, Moral and Theologicall, must set a good paterne, write a good copie, draw a faire sample to those that are under us, even in our owne particulars, for their writing, imitating, and following: Yea, we must also lend them pennes, pluckt (like the quils of Turkeys and Porcupins,) even out of our owne wings; we must by our right lines, rule their bookes, and by our right lives, lead their hands; yea, their hearts: we must lend them also working silkes, extracted like the silke-wormesDe hac Bombice vel ver^t Indico, multa Albertus libr. animal. 26. and Vicent. lib. 20. cap. 138. pracipue quae retulis Vincent. c. 67. prater Basilium in exem. hom. 8. applicat Ambrosius pie and Theologice Laemeron. l. 5. cap. 23. clew, out of the bowels of our practise: we must excite, exhort them by our word; but chiefly allure or lare them by our workes: drawe them, though iron-hearted, by theDe vi and us^ Magnetis nigra, habes apud Plin. lib. 6. hist. c. 22. apud Vicent. nati. li 8. cap. 2 and apud August. de Civit. Dei li. 21. c. 4 etc. ut magnes: sic magnus. adamant of our practise, to every dutie commanded in the word, commended by the practise of the Saints, as David here by speaking, as an Orator pleades, but by his example, as an exorator, prevailes with the whole Congregation to blesse the Lord. Wee in the Ministerie, as wee are called lights (as Christ called hisMath. 5.14 Disciples, and as the Iewes called Iohn theLucerna ardens, etc. vide apud Pontanum in Bibliotheca concionum and apud Bosquier. in Marcum, c. 6. v 20. in his eccho concionum in initio de laudibus Iohannis. Baptist, and the primitiveOrbis terrarum Doctor, oculus Ecclesia, and atlas fidei dictus ab antiquis: ut August. alius mallens haereticorum, etc. cum alijs. times, Athanasius) so wee must by our lives and learning (like those lights that are hung up in some tradesmens shoppes, which inlighten those without doores, aswell as the journeymen and prentices within) both have light within our selves, and shine to others. We must be like those lightes or lanthornes, hung out in some Havens in a darke night, to give the Marriners ayme, (every

passenger over theMundus mare, Christiani viateres (ut cursores in cursu) Ecclesia navicula: de quibus eleganter alludu^t, Pontan. tom 3. Bibl. Gord. in postill. Dom. 4. post Epiph. praecipue. Hugo de Sancto Vict. in postillis, part. 1. p. 297. and 359. cum alijs. Sea of this world,) how to steare from the rockes of sinne, and to come safe to the port of Grace: you in the Magistracie, and you masters (petty Kings to rule, Priests to pray, and to sacrifice prayses, Prophets to instruct in yourRev 1.6. vid. expositionem loci apud. August. de Civit. Dei, lib. 20 cap. 10. families; as Divinitie rightly tearmesDe spiritualibus hostijs nostris, Id. August. passim, praecipue Serm. 152. de Tempore, and in quest. vet. et. nov. Test. q. 112. Lege Bachmad. in qu. Theol. Centur. 1. quast. 57. pag. 136.137. sint ne omnes Christian. Sacerdotes. you.) You, I say, must be like the first moving wheele in a Clocke rightly ordered, after whose motion the rest of the depending wheels move right or wrong, true or false, regularly or irregularly. Which particulars to presse a little further, since wee have brought the point to this perfection alreadie, ayming at a perfecter peryod; I offer to our considerations only these specials.
1 What honour or dishonour we may doe unto God.
2 What good or what evill to the soules of the people.
3 What credite or discredite we reape with men.
4 What peace or terrour we bring to our owne soules.
5 What blessings or what judgements from God, upon our selves or seed, as we are rightly tuned with the hand of grace, or untuned by corruption; rightly affected, with Davids heart and spirit, to do as David did; or infected or leavened so with the world and her wayes, that Davids duties are posted off, and sleighted, or pretermitted, as though they nothing concerned us, in these secure and sinfull times.
To give you these as severall pills, or as simples compounded together (perhaps, as physically) I would have this seriously pondered: first, That the common people move after our motion, that are the heads; insist in our steps, and write after our copies, whether right or wrong, in which, it stands us in hand to looke to our selves, and to our station, which way we draw or incline; because, as generally we leade millions after us, eyther to victory, as David led his men in the recoverie of1. Sam. 30.17, 18, 19, 20. Ziglah, and Abraham his house-trayned-servant-souldiers, in the rescue ofGen. 14.16. Lot: or else (as2. Sam. 20.1. Sheba,2. Sam 18.7. Absolom, our once NorthrenEarles of Westmerland and Northumberland, rebelling anno 12. Elizah. EarlesAnno 1 Maria, Ian. 25. Wyat, Drury,Conspiracy in Norffolk, anno 12. Eliz. de quibus omnibus, vide apud Hall, Hollinshed, Speed in Chron. and in libre dicto. Anglorum praelia. Iack Straw, Tyler, and

other Traytors) we leade the common people as deluded followers, even to their slaughters, as beasts to be butchered. We are like greatAllusio Geminiani in sua summa exempl. and similitudinu^. pillars, or great stones in great columnes: if we fall, we bring downe and ruinate a great number of pibble stones, common stones, coble stones, with all the fillings of lime and morter. We are as great Cedars of Libanon, or the great Oakes ofZach. 11.2. Bashan: if we be blowne downe, oh how manie low shrubs, what a piteous deale of rubbish and under wood doe we shiver and crush and spoyle all to fitters! Wee are as guides to an armie, thorow desarts and thickets: if wee goe wrong, how manie disperse and scatter? how many fall by thirst and famine, or the jawes of wilde beasts? If Cato compared the common people of Rome toApud Plutarchum. sheep, who if once one breake out and leape wrong, all the rest follow (as in the Kentish rebellion, after Iack Straw and Tyler; in the Southerne, once afterWho called himselfe the poore mans protector, slain in Bow church in London. vid. in Chron. William Longbeard; in the Scythian, after TamberlaineSee the book extant in 4to, of the life of Tamberlaine.; in the Sarazen, after Mahomet, when they once turned theeves and pyrats: as in the bloudie rustick Belgick warsVide apud Calvinum and Bullingerii contrae Anabaptist. See the booke called Bellum Rusticanum: but chiefly of the issues and effects of these Rusticks, reade the second volumne of Simon Maiolus, de dieb. canicular. tom 3. coll. 3. pag. 467, etc. Also reade the history of Iohn of Leiden, in the moderne Histories, exta^t in fol translated out of Du Verdiers, Sansovino, and others. after these phantasticks, Iohn of Leyden and Knapperdolim) I say, if one common man have power sometimes over a multitude, to draw together such ryotous routs as wee have read: one Scythian Shepheard to manie shepheards oneOf the originall and impostures of Mahomet, besides Bodin, Voleteran, and Arab N^b in confutat Aleor. reade chiefly the preface before the Alcoran, in the Italian edition, with our painefull Purchas in his pilgrimage, lib. 3. c. 3. pag. 199, 120. Impostor by the helpe of one Monke, so many millions; one Simon Magus to poyson with his doctrine, Act. 8.9. one Demetrius to disturbe by his faction, even great and populous cities, Act. 9.24. what power then is there in publicke persons to leade vertuously to heaven, or vitiously to hell, so manie soules, as some Popes have done?
Besides, when I consider how much good hath beene done sometime by one private man, or woman; as one Philip, Ioh. 1.45, 46. by one exhortation, wins Nathanael to Christs acquaintance: one Andrew calls his brother Peter to Christ, Ioh. 1.40, 41. one Samaritan woman brings the whole citie to heare and see Christ, and so to beleeve in Christ, Ioh 4.28, 29.

one little silly damosell, 2. Kin. 5.3. perswades her Master Naaman to seeke Elisha the Prophet of Israel, whereby he is healed both of his corporeall and spirituall Leprosie: one Ethiopian Eunuch (if Histories beBrevitatis causa, vide authores, citatos per Lorinum Comment in Act. Apost. c. 8. pag. 390. in folio. true) preaching and planting the Gospell in Ethiopia: one Paul, the Apostle of theGal. 2.7. Gentiles, planting the Gospell amongst the Romanes, the Corinthians, the Thessalonians, the Ephesians, the Philippians, the Macedonians, Achaians, Galathians, the Collossians and diverse other2. Cor. 10.16. regions, even from Ierusalem to Illyricum: one Iohn founding most of those Asian Churches of Smyrna, Pergamus, Thiatyra, etc (which are now, by their heresies in doctrine, corruption in life, pride, ambition and emulation of theirDe hu^ passim Osiand. in epitom Centuriatorum Magdeb. Teachers, given up to the bodily and spiritual power of Mahumetisme:) one Peter converting and building up so manie thousand Iewes, dispersed in Asia, Pontus, Bithinia,1. Pet. 1.1, 2.^ Cappadocia, etc. one Thomas, planting the Gospel in India: one Matthew in Egypt, and in Ethiopia: one Marke in Mentz, and Trevers: one Ioseph of Arimathea, or, asNiceph. hist. ecclesiast. lib. 2. cap. 4. Nicephorus thinkes, one Simon Zelotes in this our Great Brittaine, even before the times of Lucius or Elutherius; as othersOf the lives, deaths, graces and severall places, where the Apostles, Evangelists and Disciples dispersed the Gospell, reade various authors, recited by Aresius, in locis, tit. de Cruce, de Evangelio, de persecutione Ecclesiae, etc. chiefly in Lorinus, in his comment on the Acts, ca. 1. pag. 40. 42, 43, 44. 45, 46, 47. elsewhere. One man the meanes of the conversion of whole housholds, as Peter converting the household of Cornelius, Act. 10.44. Paul the houshold of the Philippick Iaylor, Act. 16.31, 32, 33, etc. of1. Cor. 1.14, 16. Crispus, Stephanas, and the rest: yea, one man by one Sermon the meanes of the conversion of some thousands, Acts 2.37, 38, etc. Yea when I consider, how much good one mans endevours hath done in the Church, in suppressing and supplanting Idolatries and Idolaters, heresies and heretickes, either by the authoritie of the sword, as did Constantine, Theodosius, and other Christian Emperours in their time; or by the power of the word, as Athanasius did the Arrians, Augustine theCalled malleus hareticorum, the hammer of heretickes. Manichees and Pelagians: Epiphanius the Nestorians, Eutichians, and the rest of that hellish rabble: as Iames the Apostle is said to confute Philetus andApud Abdiam, in eius vita. Hemeneus: Iohn, Appolonius,Apud Lorinuni, en Dorithee, locis ^itati^. Tyaneus (besides what Peter by his Apostolicall authoritie did against Simon Magus, and Paul against Elymas

the sorcerer; recorded by EcclesiasticallSimon as a second learu^, attempting to fly, at the prayer of S Peter fell, and broke his neck, as is testified by Irenaeus, lib. 1. cap. ac. by Tertull. in Apologes c. 13 Cyrill. Cateches. 6. by Euseb. hist. lib. 12. cap. 13. yea by Sueton. in Nerome, cap. 12. by Lucian in Philopseud. by Dio, and other heathens. writers.) Yea, when I ponder how one man, even a private man, as that Waldo orDe istis Waldensib. Aeneas Sylv. hist. Bok. et Concilium Toletan. an. dom. 355. Waldus of Lyons, by reading the Scriptures comming to the knowledge of the truth, catechizing and instructing, not only his owne family, but even his neighbours (as Chrysostome counsailes, according to the best use of his tallent: by this meanes propagated the Gospell through the whole Realme of France. Oh when I seriously thinke, that one man may be the organ and instrument of another, though even a lay man, as S. Iames tells us: Oh, thinke I againe, what good might be planted, what sinne rooted out and supplanted! how much might God be glorified, the Church increased, Sathans synagogue ruinated? Were many lay men, but chiefly manie Ecclesiasticall men, learned men, great men, publick men sanctified with this spreading grace, and seasoned with the salt of the Sanctuarie.


SECTIO III. The blessing or bane of inferiors, the pietie or profanenesse of the superiours.
MOreover, when I consider, how much mischief somtimes one man hath brought to the Church: oneFax and Fex Ecclesia. Nestorius, being the fire-brand of the world: one Arrius, so spreading his damnable Arrianisme, that in S. Ieromes time, the whole world groaned, that she was anTotus mundus conquestus est, sefactum esse Arrianum. Arrian: one Nicholas, so farre spreading his impureFactum eius ut recitatur, excusatur a Clemente Alexand. stromat. 3. c. 15. ab Euseb. lib. 3. c. 23. a Theodor. de Fab. Graecor. and a Neceph. l. 3. c. 15. attamen ab eo multi impuri Nicolaitae, de quibus, and contra quos Iren. lib 1. cap. 27. Epiph har. 15. Tertull. de prescrip. cap. 46. Hilar. can. 25. in Matth Hieron. epist 1. et 48. Nicholaitinisme: Eutiches, his Eutichisme: Manes, his Manichisme: Mahomet, his Mahumetisme, as in latter times that smoothe and strict Arminius, hisCondemned by the late Synod at Dort, by our Aimes, and the learned French Moulins, confuted. Arminianisme, etc. When I consider how one Boniface, by taking to himselfe that proud title of Vniversall Bishop (as they say, the voyce from heavenHodie venenum effusum est in ecclesia, vid. Morneum de progressu papatus. affirmed) brought such poyson to the whole world: one Dominicke, one Francis (superstitious Fryers) so multiply their disorderly Orders, that from their spawnes are proceeded

so many croakingRevel. 16.13. Froggs, so many swarmes of Grashoppers and Locusts, as eate up all the greene leaves, the fattest and best things in every land, whereon they come: how from one Ignatius Layola, are issued so manie ignified fiery Iesuites, Iebulites,See the face and forme of these Iesuites in the Iesuites Catechisme, and in Watsons Quodlibets: made by the faction of the opposing priests. Iudasites, world-disturbingDavus es, non aedipus apud Comicum. Davisses, as they bragg of their numbers andVide praefationem Pelargi, in suo Iesuitismo: de domibus and Collegijs Iesuitarum in India, Peru, alijsque Insulis, Regnis, Provincijs. powers; their names, like the Divels in the possessed, being called Legions. I say, pondering these things I have justly thought, That as some good and gracious men (such as formerly I have specified) being eminent in gifts and graces, have been the organs and instruments of the glorie of God, of the true information of mens judgements, the reformation of their mindes and manners; by their paines, endevours, authoritie, preaching, ruling, doctrine, discipline, chiefly their life and example, drawing the plebeians and common people, to vertuous and holy living; withdrawing them from vice: so on the contrarie (as it was in Ierusalem, of which the Lord so oft complaines) from the Rulers and theEsai. 5.13. esai. 10.3. Ier. 5. v. 5. et 17 20.21. etc. and 26.10.11. Ezech. 33. etc. Prophets, the corrupt magistracie, the carnall, carelesse and unprofitable ministerie in most places in Christendome, (as armed Greekes out of the TroyanVirg. aneid. Horse, as did diseases out ofLucianus in Dialogis. Pandora's boxe, have proceeded all those vices and enormities, which as Gan-grines and Leprosies spread, and as plague sores infects the whole bodie of the common people. The vices or vanities of the rulers, tending (as the folly of thatOv^d. Metamorph. Phaeton,) to the combustion and confusion of the whole universe: vices, like malignant Planets, moving in the Spheares of superioritie, having ever a pestilent and poysoned influence upon these inferiors of the observing apishly imitating Laytie the commonaltie (as the bodie after the head, the shadow after the bodie) ever moving after their rulers; the bodieDe sympathia inter Naturam, and Politiam, lege totam Epistolam Alstadij, Senatui Reip. Norimb. conscripta^, and praesi^am ante Theologiam suam naturalem polliticall as in other things, so in this sympathizing with the bodie naturall. Of which, that wee may still give further demonstration, let us observe, and pervse all histories, reflect upon times past and present, historically, experimentally: and we shall see, that in these three States of the Church, Common-wealth, Oeconomie; the governed have beene ever (and still are) cyphers or figures in Gods Arithmetike, seales or blanckes in Gods account, well affected to peace and Religion;

infected with faction, divisions, or Idolatrous superstition: according to the temper, qualifications, and dispositions of their governours, Civill, or Ecclesiasticall; they receiving, as soft waxe, usually their impressions from these, of good or of evill, seasoned sweete or sower, ever asQuo semel est imbuta recens, servabit odorem, testa di^. Horat. Caskes from their liquor. Yea, it being betwixt the heads of the Church, and the Common-wealth and familie, and those bodies of people that have depended on them, as betwixt the head of a great fish and the bodie of theSic alludant Geminianus in summa exempl. lib. 4. de nat. and volat. and Petrus Berch. reductorij Moralis lib. 9. c. 1 fish: for if the fish-head smell well and sweet, the bulke and bodie of the fish smels well too, be it never so great: if the head stinke and be corrupt, the bodie doth so too. The application is obvious to everie one, with halfe an eye: demonstration seales it. For first, looke upon the state of Iudea, in the dayes of1. King. 18. v. 21.30. Ahab,1. King 14. v 9.16. Ieroboam the sonne of Nebat,2. Chro. 33.6 7, 8.9. Manasses,2. King. 1.16. Ahaziah,2. King. 3.1. Iehoram,2. King. 13, v 1:2: Iehoahaz,2: King: 15: vers. 8.9:10:11:12 Zachariah, and other Idolatrous Princes, and you shall see Gods Altars broken downe, the true Prophets banished, or butchered, altars to false gods erected, the worship of the true God defac'd: why so? in a promptu causa: their rulers were Idolaters, Baalites; the fishes head stunke. Againe, looke upon the state of the Church in the daies of2. King: 14 vers: 3 Ioash,2: Chro: 30.31 32, Chapters. Ezekiah,2 King: 22:1, 2, Iosias,1 King 22: v 43: Iehosaphat,1. King: 15 vers: 3 Asa, and this our David; you shall see the Groves of Baal burnt, his altars demolished, his worship and worshippers abolished, his Priests sacrificed, Religion planted, Gods Altars repayred, the Temple purged, the people conformed, Priests and Levites for preaching and teaching instituted, the Passeover solemnely kept and observed: why so? the Magistrates were religious, the Scripture gives this testimonie of them (how ever with many mixtures of infirmities, in which the good God be mercifull to all his Children) they did that which was right in the sight of the Lord.2: Chron: 30. vers: 18:19 Such force you see hath example, that Regis ad exemplumRegis ad exemplum totus componitur orbis, the whole world followes the example of Kings, which held even amongst the verie heathens: for in the times of Alexander and of Iulius Cesar, (as the Macedonians, so) the Romaines were warriours: in the times of peaceable Augustus (as in the dayes of Salomon) men were studious ofPacem te poscimus omnes. peace, Ianus his gates were set open: in

the times of Commodus, Heliogabalus, Nero, and other such luxurious Goates, Rome was asObservatio Guavarrhi in suis Epistolis familiaribus, sic and Cassianei Iurisc. in suo Catalogo gloria mundi. a stewes: in the dayes of Marcus Aurelius the philosopher, all were studious of Philosophie; as in the Ecclesiasticall histories, in the daies of religious Constantine, the Court, (yea the Campe) was as a Church, a center of zealous divines: in the dayes of Iulian that accursed carelesse Apostate, his Court was full of Apostolicall turncoates. So are the common people blowen asIgnobile, and mobile vulgus. weathercockes, even as the windes come from their governours; East, West, North, South, changing (as thatQuo te queram mutantem protea nodo. Proteus,Colorem mutat Polipus piscis, ad similitudinem loci: sic Arist. li. 9. de anim. c. 37. Solin. c. 32. Olaus lib. 21. c. 21. Polipus, orDe Camelione, haec Plin. hist. li. 28. c. 8. and Aelian. li. 2. hist. c. 14. Camelion, even as theDe Hyena, haec Aelian li. 1. c. 26 Hyena is said to change sex) according to their rulers coloures, being ever, as our common peoples proverbe is, and as their practise hath beene, and ever will be on that Religion which the King is of: as wee say of dogges, ever taking the better side. If David blesse God, as in my Text, the people blesse God too. IfCalling Christ in derisio^ a Galilean, the carpenters sonne, with the like vituperations, apud Theodoretum. Iulian the Apostate, Rabshakah2. King. 19. v 10.11. and Senacharib blaspheme God, and preferre the gods of the Gentiles before him; so will the people blaspheme him too. If PharaohExod. 8. v. 15 harden his heart, and distaste Moses and Aaron, his Courtiers and the Aegyptians will harden their hearts too, as the nether milstone pursuing after Israel, till they sinke like a stone in the midst of the Sea. If the popish Princes persecute those of the reformed Religion, the Prelates are more malignant, (as theLuk. 22. v. 2. luk. 23.13.18 et c. 24. v. 20. Pharisees were more spitefull against Christ, thenLuk. 23 v. 20 22. Pilate himselfe: and if Princes and Prelates prove dragons, to devoure the poore Saints, the plebeians will be at least serpents to sting. The Bishop of Aix with the president Cassane, the Archbishop of Arles; with others, had no sooner apprehended a Book-binder, for selling of Bibles, which they vilified and undervalued, below some lascivious pictures, (which themselves had bought) but presently the commonActs and monuments of the Church abridged, by M. Mason, folio 203. people crie, (like the howling of so many wolves, like the barkings of so manie dogges,) A Hugenote, a hugenote: a Lutheran, a Hereticke, to the fire with him, to the fire with him; let him fry a faggot: An invincible Achillean argument, concluding in ferio, which Christ himselfe and his Apostles, could never have answered, had these men had them in their power. Such impressions,

the ring-leading examples of the superiors worke in the common people, even more monstruous and hideous, then those that are wrought by the force of imagination: of which wee have so many wonders related byLodov. Vives, in his 3. booke of the Soule, speaking of feare from imagination. Lodovicus Vives,Libr. 6. Des. Richerthes de la France, cap. 8. Pasquier,In Comment. de monstris c. 17 Winrich, the frenchIn his first book of his Essayes in folio, chapter 21. sic in lib. 3. Montaigne, andVives in Comment. in c. 25. lib. 12. de Civitate Dei, sic Ambros. Part. in praedict. Comment. Winrichi. cap. 17. others both Physitians and Historians. Come fro^ the generalitie to particulars: looke into our countrie Townes and Villages, in that reference and relation betwixt Land-lords and Tenants; and you shall easily see them drawe both in one yoake, to good or evill, Religion or superstition, pietie or profanesse. We neede no other witnesse of this, but our eyes and eares, in this our Ireland; in which we that are Protestants, are planted as some handfuls amongst such swarmes of Papists, as Israelites amongst Egyptians, as Iacobs seed in the lightsomeGen. 47.27. Goshen of the Gospell, it being popishExod. 10. v. 23. darkenesse round about us, horrid and fearefull, more then Aegyptian, orCimmor. oppidum, in Bosphoro secundum Plin. lib. 6. c. 6. c. 11. c. 13. velinter Baias and Cumas in Jtalia, secundum festum, and Ciceronem academ. 8. vbi raro aut nu^quam Sol splendescit, vel secundum Solinum c. 21. ibid. Sex me^ses perpetua nox una, die una nocte, totus volvitur annus: Oiaus, li. 1. c. 1. Hinc adagium Erasmi mutuatu^ a Mela, Plinio, and Lactantio lib. 4. Iustit. Cimmeriae tenebrae, sic Ponticae tenebrae, at magis formidabiles papisticae. Cimmerian: See we not our selves in respect of them, like the armie of Israel, in the time of Ahab, as some little flocks of Kyddes here and there scattered; they being as those Syrians that filled the1. King. 20.27. countrey? hath there not beene meanes used, both by Word and Sword, to purge their popish leaven, to bring them (as once the Gentiles) out of the power ofAct. 26.18. darkenesse, to annoynt them withRev. 3.18. eye-salve, to plucke them as brands out of theIud v. 23. fire, to bring them to the knowledge of the2. Tim. 2.25 truth, but all in vaine? have wee not lost our oyle and labour? are they not setled worse then Moab in their popish dreggs? are they not like BabellSee M. Crashawes zealous and learned sermon on that Text and subiect. incurable? doe they not yet (as if they were possest with deafe Devils) stop their eares with the deafeIn psal. adder, and will not heare the voyce of the Charmer, charme he never so wisely? Doe they not fly our Churches and congregations, worse then the serpent flieth the Ash; or as Moses fled from hisExod. 4.3. rod, as though there were some serpentine venom in our doctrine or discipline? can they be brought into our spirituallLuk. 14. v. 23. feasts, by any reasonable

compulsion? are not their hearts (like clay in Summer) growen harder and harder, even asExod. 10.20, Phraohs? as their eyes moreMatth 13.13, 14. ex Esa. 9. blind? their wils more perverse? their mindes moreRom. 11.8. malignant? Now from whence growes all this obstinacie? obduracie? refractorie perversenesse? Besides the common plea, which, as a payre of Shipmens hose, or as a nose of waxe, fits them at all assayes, That they must doe, and will doe (for wickednesse is everIer. 18.12. Psalm. 12.4. wilfull) as their predecessors, fathers, and forefathers have done, (Poperie, like frenzie, madnesse, and some lethargicall sicknesses, running in a bloud, and being like their intaled lands, hereditary.) As thogh some northren blew-cap borderer, should argue, My father was a taking man, and never died in straw, but went up Hemp-street, and down Gallowes gate; and therefore Ile goe that way too. Or as though some young Dalilah should argue, My mother was a good Catholicall universall woman, and did good service in the Stewes, both to the Seculars and Clergie of Rome; and therfore Ile do so too. Besides I say, this pestilent and peevish plea; the chiefeEchineis piscei qui sistens navigio, detinet; adversus and ventot, and velas. Aelian. li. 1. cap. 27. Plin: li. 32. c. 1. Albert. lib. 24. anim. ex Arist. hist. anim. lib. 2. cap. 14. recitat. and Basil. in Exemero, hom. 7, Instat. Plin. in praioria navi Anthonij. Remora, that holds them from obedience to God and Caesar, the chiefe block in their way to Religion, the chiefe filme and scumme which is over the eyes of the multitude (even that fax fex populi, the promiscuous common people) is the practise of their superiors, the example of their Landlords: for so they vent and reveale themselves in plaine termes. And so wee see indeed in their practise, that if their Landlords go to the Church, the tenants will go too: even as Baruch said to Deborah, If thou wilt go to the Battell, I will go too; if thou wilt stay I will stayIudges 4.8. too, (as Ruth said toRuth. 1.16. Naomi: as Ittai2. Sam. 5.21. said to David.) Surely whithersoever they go, these will go too; they cleave like burrs to their Landlords: so that bring them to Church that are heads, and the commonaltie follow, as the shadow the bodie: the practise of the great ones (as the needle drawes on the threed, as the aule or bristle drawes on the shoomakers tach) draw on the meane ones; yea (for ought that I see) our common Irish depend on their Landlords, for their bodies and estates (as on their Priests for their soules) for religion or superstition, heaven or hell, more then on the Word, on Moses, the Prophets, the Apostles, more then on Caesar, or on God himselfe. Eyther of

The Seminarie Priests, and their La^dlords wholly sway the bodie of our Irish Papists. these, are asMagus dictus, non quia scrutator naturae; qualis magus fuit Apollonius Tyanaeus, apud Iustin. q. 24. and Philastrat. in eius vita, quaies and magi perfici, apud Philon. lib. de legibus. apud Proclum, lib de Magia qualis magus noster Cardanus (inno ipse Salomon) Alverius Magn. cum alijs, sed Magus Demoniacus, ut olim Elymas, Acts 138. Iannes and Iambres, Exod 7.11. Faustus, Cornelius Agrippa, and diverse Fryers. Simon Magus to the Samaritans, as Diana to the Ephesians, Act 19.28. as the Penates or houshold-gods to the Gentiles, even all in all, Instar omnium, their DelphickDe Delphico, vel Dodonei Apollonius oraculo, cum responsionib. ambiguis Creso, Cambysi, Agamemnoni, Amilcari, Epimanondae, Eschilo, Philippo, Dionysio, cum alijs. vide apud Valerium lib. 1. cap. 8. Pauson. in Arcadicis Heroditum. lib, 3. Diodorum, lib. 20. lib. 15. apud Ciceronem de Fato, Suidam and Plutarchum in Alexandro, praecipue apud Maiolum in diebus canicularibus, part. 2. coll. 2. pag 96 97. 98, 99, etc. Oracle, speaking ex tripode, their Pythagoras, their ipseA^tos epha. dixit, their Domine (dic) factotum, on whose sleeves they pin their soules, to carry them whither they please; eyther to heaven, as the Angels didLuke 16.12. Lazarus; or to hell, as Mephastophilus did their Doctor Faustus; or to Purgatory, as they thinke the Paganish TraianHelpt out by the prayers and suffrages of Gregory the great. went. So that, get the Landlord to the Church, as he that pulls but one linke of a chaine drawes all the rest, wee shall draw our (otherwise obstinate) Irish to our Church, as if chained and linked by the eares: but without removeall of their Priests which poyson them, and by mulcts or what else, moving their Landlords to conformitie; all our paines, preachings, perswasions, impositions upon the Comminaltie, is but with the Dolphin and Salmon, to swim against the streame, to wash anIerem. 13.23. Ethiopian, to white a Blackmore, to take out a Leopards spots, and by water to cleane a peece of clay; (as Gardner said in his policies, in anotherHe meant, La: Elizabeth should rather have beene cut off, as he and Bonnet laboured: the meaner people martyred. Foxe Mart. case) to strike off the branches and to leave the roots; according to the allusion of Anacharsis, to seeke to catch the little flyes in the webs of our lawes, and to suffer the great ones to breake through.


SECT. IV. More speciall application to Masters of families.
LEaving them, looke into private families, and we shall see, like Master usually, like man; like father, like sonne; like crow, like egge: yea of (as in Ahab and1. King. 19.1. and 21.8. Iezabell, Ananias andActs 5.1, 2 3, 4. Saphira) like husband, like wife; eyther combined in evill, (as Simeon and LeviGen. 49.5. in bloud) or, as Zachary and Elizabeth,

Luk. 1. v. 6. Aquila andAct. 18. v. 2. Priscilla, united in good. Yea generally, such a governour, such a family: if Abraham beleeve, his whole houshold, at Gods commandement, areGen. 17. v. 23 circumcised: if he sacrifice, Isaac of a child is acquainted withGen. 22.7. sacrificing, and is able to discourse of it: if Adam sacrifice, Abel offers up too, the best of hisGen. 4.4. lambes: if the Iewes spread the high wayes with boughes, in the honour ofIoh. 12.13. Christ, the children will cry Hosanna to the highest: if the father blesse and praise God, and sing Psalmes in the family, as Praecentor beginning the quire, the rest (yea the least) follow in their holy anthems; even as the Congregation here follow David their first mover, who sets the rest on work, as thePhilomena, sic dictus a Philos quod est amor, and mene, defectus, quasi deficiens amore cantandi etc. De tuius cantilenis vide apud Plin. lib. 10. cap. 29. and cap. 42. Theologice applicat Berchorius reductorij moralis: li. 7. c. 30. fol. 199. Nightingall by her prick in her brest, first awakens her selfe, and then by her carrolling sets a worke the Marle, the Finch, the Linnet, the Larke, and all the quiristers of the woods and fields: Where on the contrarie, where the Governors or Masters, usually make no bones of oathes, no not of the wounds and bloud of Christ, which in their madnesse sometimes they teare, as Doggs doe Kydds or Lambes; you shall heare the servants, yea the children, as the croakings of so manie Toads, the hissings of so many Snakes, casting out of their mouthes squibs and firebrands against the Almightie: the young Cocke learning, as the old crow; as the young Nithingales are said to repeate and crowd such tunes alone, as they learne from their males. So that you shall as easily discerne by the tongues of children abroad, how their parents are affected at home, to Religion, to the Word, to the Preachers, the Ministerie, yea whether Protestants or Papists; as you shall discerne fire in the house, by the smoake of the chimney: For why doe those forty children (deservedly devoured by two Beares) blaspheme the Prophet2. King. 2.23.24. Elisha, with Come up thou bald pate (as some profane impes abase and abuse the Ministers of these dayes,) but that their irreligious parents had given them a preceptorie practicall lecture of imitation? So for servants: Abraham hath a servant as faithfull unto him as his owneGen. 24. pertotum. soules, why so? Abraham himselfe is faithfull to God, and traines him, and the rest, inGen. 18. v. 18 religious (as well as militarie) disciplineGen. 14. v. 14. The Centurion hath his souldiers obedient untoMath. 8.8.9. him, its no marvell for he himselfe is

obedient to Christ, even in the obedience ofvers. 10. faith. Cornelius hath his souldiers fearingActs 10.7 God, whom he sends to Ioppa for Peter: but the Encomium of himselfe is first, That he was avers. 1.2. devoute and religious man. So on the contrary: Is Pharaoh churlish against Moses andExod. 10.28. Aaron? his Courtiers thrust them out of his presence. Is Absalon bloudie hearted against2. Sam 13.22 Ammon? his servants upon the leastvers. 28.29. motion, are bloudie handed. Is that rich churle cruell against Lazarus, giving more to his hounds and spannels, then to the poore? we shall see his servants so too: there's more mercie in the medicinable tongues of theLuke 16.21. Dogges, then in eyther Master or men. Yea lastly, doth Ioshua serve the Lord? then all his houshold will serve theIosh. 24.15. Lord. Doth Zacheus beleeve? then salvation (because justification and sanctification) comes to his wholeLuk. 19.9. house. The convert Iaylor baptized? then is his whole houseActs 16.31, 32, 33. baptized. There's a Church said to be in the house of Chrispus, Stephanas,Philem. v. 2. Philemon, in respect of religious duties: why so? their masters are religious, whereas in some houses there's no more shew of religion, then in the house of a Turke, a pagan, or a savage Barbarian (unlesse idle and vaine jangling, rybauldrie talke, hellish contentions, ThebaneInvented at the siege of Thebes, and co^de^ned, in their eyther superstitious abuse, as lotts, or covetous abuse, in getting and gayning, both by Cyprian, and our Daneus, in tractates writ expresly against them: as also by the civill and common law, as appeares in the Digests, lib. 11. tit. 5. lib. 1. and Cod. lib. 3. tit. 43. and C epist. 35. c 42.43. carding and dycing, racketting and bandying of blasphemous oathes, be religion.) Why so? There's no life in the head, no heate in the heart, no zeale, no grace in the Governours: therefore the governed be eyther luke-warmeRev. 3.15, 16. Laodiceans, or key-cold, even altogether, godlesse and gracelesse. Not that I denie, but that an Abraham may have to his sonne anGen. 21.9, 10. Ismael; an Isaac anGen. 26.34. Esau; a Iacob an incestuousGen 35.22. and 49.3. Reuben, a bloudyGen. 34.25. Simeon; a No^haGen. 9.22. Cham nor that I am ignorant that an2. King. 5.26. Elisha may have servant a lying Gehezai; aPhilem. v. 11, Philemon a runna-gate Onesimus; the best Master the worst servant, even Christ himselfe aIohn 6.71. Iudas: or that the worst Master may not sometimes beGen. 29.20. blest in, and by aGen. 30 27. good servant; as Laban in Iacob: or that a Nabal may have such about him, as are honestly affected to1. Sam. 25.14, 15. David, and to such as feare God. Which instances

prove thus much only: That God is a free spirit, and gives his grace freely, to whom he will, as heRom 9.15.16. will; neyther tyed toReade my Origins repentance, extant, in fine libre. bloud, affinitie, consanguinitie, nature: and that the worke of grace can no more be hindred, then the shining of the Sunne, the motion of the heavens, or the flowing of theOh quam velox sit spiritus sancti gratiam sriba non egens tempore, ut predicant patres. sea, in those that are his servants; though they may perhaps by the hand and tongue-persecutions of carnall masters (as too many religious servants and prentices in our cities, townes, and corporations experimentally and bleedingly feele) be too too much oppugned, opposed, discouraged, clouded, and eclipsed. It holding true in the generall and in most particulars for all this; notwithstanding that in every state and condition (some few rarely excepted) the Governours and those under their charge, eyther in good duties, as David here, and his subjects: or in mischiefe and wickednesse, as did Absolon and2. Sam. 15.12. Achitophell against David; the elder and youngerGen. 19.4. Sodomites, against just Lot; the Priests and theIer. 18.8. and 20.1.2. and 28.1. and 37.15. et 38.4. people against Ieremie; the Scribes, Pharisees and Synedrini of the Iewes againstMatth. 27.1.39.41. Mark 15 11, 13 Christ; Abimelech and the men ofIudg 9.4, 5, 6, 16, 17.18. Sychem, against the seede of Gideon; Iezabell1. King. 18.20. and her Idolatrous Prophets, against Elias;1. Reg. 22.8. Abab andvers. 24. Zedekiah against Michay; Ephraim and Manasses against Iudah; the Seminaries and the Iesuites against the strictest, and greatest, and sincerest of the Protestants; Gardner, Bonner, with their Officers, Officials, and bloudie Bayliffes, Summoners, Sheriffes, and Sargeants (such as Sheriffe WoodrooffeOf the tragicall ends of both these, as also of Geffrey, Clarke, Dale, Coxe, Beard, Browne, Baulding, Bradway, Foxford, Pauy, Long, Honer, Elerker, Capon, Sardine, with many moe persecuters. See at large in Martyrol. and in briefe, in the Acts epitomized, fol. 378, 379. and the Bayliffe of Crowland) against the slaughtered Martyrs in the time of Queene Mary.


SECTIO. V. How the godly or ungodly Minister leades many to heaven or to hell, by his life and doctrine.
BVt of all the rest, as we have showne in the Magistracie and private Families, this holds most authentique in the Ministry: that, according to the Prophets phrase, Like Priest, likeIer. 2.8.26. people; like Pastors, like parishioners. Seldome shall we see a flocke thrive under a carelesse Pastor, who feedes and cloathes

Ezech. 34.2, 3 himselfe with their milke and wooll, leaving them to the Lyon and Wolfe. However I know that God can worke, as by weake meanes, so in and by wicked meanes; feeding Elias even by a1. King. 17.6. Crow, as not tyed to any instrument, worthy or unworthy; bringing water even out ofExod. 17.6. Rocks, good out of evill, and causing a prophesyingNum. 23.18, 19. and 24.1.2.3. Balaam, even whether hee will or no, to blesse a people: yet neverthelesse in all probabilitie, he that is ignorantly blinde and cannot see, a dumb Dogge that cannot (will not) open his mouth (as being full, fatt, and crambd with Steeples and tot quots) a cloude withoutIude, v. 12. rain, seldome dropping, a drie nourse without milke, a mute fish, a tonguelesse Embassador, a blinde leader of theMatth. 15.14 blinde, a dark Lanthorne in a darker night: adding to ignorance or idlenesse, a dissolute life; sitting in Moses chayre, but neyther preaching nor practising the doctrine of Moses, or of the Messias; ayming at the bagge,Iohn 12.6. with Iudas; seeking silver, not soules; the fleece, not the flock; the place, not the grace of a Minister; (praeesse, non prodesse) his ownCuius sedes prima, vita Ima. Greg de pastore. preeminence, not the peoples profite; (otium cum honore) a lazie life, a large command (which Luther taxeth in the Popish Prelates, and more then he,Passim in Colloquijs. Erasmus.) It is as probable (I might say, possible) that such a guide as this, should worke grace in a depending people, thus gracelesse himselfe; as to bring water out of a flint, oyle out of a stone, light out of darkenesse: to excite to praise God, when our owne hearts are as hard as adamants, as congealed as yee, without any spirituall life or motion: to exhort others, as David here this people, to blesse God and yet wee in every Alehouse and Taverne, to belch out most horrible blasphemies against God, as some doe; I speake it to theirPhil. 3.18.19 shame: to thunder out woes and anathema's, against the drunkennesse of others,Esa. 5.11, 12. and 20.5: See M. Downa^ against drunkennes, in is foure treatises by which God is dishonoured, the creatures profaned, Gods Image * defaced; and yet our selves to make the Alehouse, or Taverne, or Tobaccho-shop our studie, the Cardes our bookes, the Indian weed our Inke, the pipe our pen, extracting our Sermons from the fume of the grape, the froth of the tap, the smoake of the quiffe. This makes us worse, and more monsters, then ever Affrica bredde, thenIn his Cosmography. Munster,Mandevill in his travells. Mandevill, orTextor in sua Officina, finished by Zwinger, and inlarged, sic Lycosthenes de prodigijs, multa and mira narrat de monstris, Textor ever writ of: to be even all voices,

likeHeptaphon Eccho, apud Plin. lib. 36. cap. 15. Ecchoes, all tongues, Stentor-like, to cry and command; no hands, no hearts, to execute ought. And sure when we say to our people, as theMatth. 8.9. Centurion to his servants, Do this, but do nothing our selves: when, like Church-bells or Inn-keepers signes, we direct and call others in, to feast with Christ, as did his Disciples at the marriage feast,Ioh. 2.2. and yet hang out our selves, as markes and crosses by the high way: when we direct others how to journey towards Syon, and yet stand still, as the Iewes at the corps of2. Sam. 20.12. Amasa, and never march foote forward our selves: when we set true notes to others, yet sing jarring notes our selves: seeming to steere from the rockes of sinne, yet making daily shipwrack our selves: giving caveats and cautions against these sinn-poysons, which we gulp downe our selves, the people, which looke at the lives which we leade, more then at the doctrine which we teach; our lives being to them,Plus oculatus testis, quam auriculares decem. ocular and reall Sermons, our words but verball: thinking we speake but for our pensions (as Lawyers for their fees) but practise according to our hearts perswasions; seeing us to have Esau's hands, though they heare us to have IacobsGen. 27.12. voyce, as though we our selves knew another way to heaven then what we teach them, (like some Vintner, that keepes a better cup of wine for his owne tooth, then that he drawes out to his customers) they are so farre from being moved with our doctrine, which they see crossed and contradicted by our doings, that in their hearts ever (somtimes with their tongues) they bid us Physitians,Luke 4.13. Cure our selves, and then they will follow our prescripts: otherwise they wil neither be phlebotomized by such Quacksalvers, nor be dyeted by such Empericks. And indeed, to looke more curiously into the point, is it likely that we should draw others unro good, when our selves are so bad? is he probable to be a good steward to another, that never knew how to thrive himselfe? (nemo dat quod non habet) can he beare others on his back, as Aeneas his fatherApud Virg. AEneid. Anchises out of the Trojan flames, that like Mephiboshe^h2. Sam. 9.3. or Asa, is lame or1. King. 15. gowtie himselfe? can he guide others amongst Cole-pitts or Lime-pitts, that's blinde himselfe? can he, in whose affections there's death to any good, and in whose life dissolution, kindle in others devotion? can a dead coale kindle greene wood? can any light

his candle at a stinking candles snuffe, that hath onely (like hell fire) heate withoutSee Master Green-woods tormenting Tophet, but chiefly B Bilson of Christs descension into Hell, in folio alledging the Fathers, and scholemen co^cerning hell fire. light; stinke to offend, no light to delight? can one drinke pleasingly at a puddle? can one bring that which is cleane, from that which is uncleane? can the poore people gather theMath. 7.15. figges of nourishing edification, or the pressed grapes of right application, from the thornes and thistles of an unholy and vaine conversation; or not rather the grapes of Sodome, the gall ofDeut. 32.32. Gomorrah, such unsavorie rottenIer. 24.2. figges, as will surfet the soule, and such sower grapes as will set the teeth on edge? Therefore, to conclude this point, these premisses considered, let all us, whom God hath fixed in higher orbes, move regularly, that we may have a sweete and gracious influence upon these inferiours, that our perswasions joyned with our practise, may fall, as the first and latterDeut. 32.2. raine, upon the tender hearbes, yea, as the dew of Hermon, upon the fruitefull Vallie. Oh, we know, that masters worke goes best forward, which saith not onely to his servants, Doe yee (for so his trust and credulitie way bee abused) but, Doe wee such and such a businesse; that sets his owne hand to the worke. The wals of Ierusalem are like to bee reedified, and their decayed houses rebuilt, by the remainder of the captivitie, when there is such a superintendent asNehem. 7. vers. 1.2.3.4.5. Nehemiah: and when the Princes, and Peeres, and Elders contribute so largely andvers. 70, 71. liberally, as here in this Chapter, in Davids time, the worke is likely to go forward: so when the great Architects, the maine master builders, in the Church, Common-wealth, and familie, set to their hands and hearts, to the building of Gods spirituall Temple, to the setting forward of Gods plough, to the planting of Religion, supplanting of profanesse, and superstition; then are wee likely to have many spirituall Temples erected, Dagon, and Baal dejected; then may wee hope to see, as in the dayes of David and Salomon, a flourishing Church, and weale-publike; then may wee hope for Ioviall and Saturnall times, a golden age, not an age for gold, Halcyon dayes; expect a happie harvest of peace, mixt with grace, when we have such seeds-men. When there is such light in the eyes, the whole body is like to beMath. 6.2^. inlightned; yea this triple bodie, Oeconomicall, Polliticall,

Ecclesiasticall inlightened, inliv'ned: chiefly, we in the ministerie, when our lights shine before men. This tends to the glorie of the FatherMath. 5.16. of lights; this shewes others, the way out of the darkenesse of Poperie, and profanesse: Oh our light of holy life, and learning, like the piller of fire in theExod. 40.38. wildernesse, leades many out of the desarts of Zin, of sin, to their celestiall Canaan; as an adjunct to the light of Grace, taking light from the word ofVerbum praedicatum. light, or that wordVerbum incarnatum. Iohn. 1. v. 1. Christ, who is thevers. 4. light; as the Moone from theHaurit lucem a sole, ut spongia aquam: Melichius in lib. 2. ca. 9. Plinij ergo ab Arist. libr. 4. de gen. anim. c. 10. alter Sol dictus. Sunne: as the Starre did the EasterneMath, 2, 10, 11. Magi, wee lead many to Christ. Oh when such a man as Moses, and Aaron goeExod, 13, 18, 19. before, what Israelite will not follow after, and come cheerefully out of the Aegyptian bondage of sinne, and the power of the spirituall Pharaoh the Devill, to the constant resolved service of the true God, in the wildernesse of the world? When the generall is a Lion, it will put valour into the Souldiers, though but Harts and Hares. The name of a Scipio, or Cesar, doth Romanize, and Masculine the most effeminate spirit. Oh, when such an Angell orRevel, 2.1, and 3.1. Scarre, is fixt in a setled Ministerie, of whom the hearts of Gods people can give such testimonie, as Saint Luke doth ofAct, 11, 24, Barnabas, Paul ofTit. 1, 4. Titus and2. Tim, 1, 5 Timothy, Augustine and Chrysostome ofDe landibus Pauli hom. Paul, Possidonius ofIn vita Augustini. Augustine, Basill ofIn orat, funebri. Nazianzen, Beza ofIn vita Calvini, Calvin, Melancthon of Luther, the Church of Geneva of Beza, Virell, Faius, and Farrell Zunch of Zuinglius, Tygare of Gualter, and many Churches and Common-wealths of that zealous Zanchy, learned Peter Martyr, solid Bullinger, acute Bucer, with other laureatAs that deep Whitakers, learned Raynolds, zealous Perkins, eloquent Humfrey, quicke Fulke, melifluous Playfere, holy Greenham, deering Dent, painefull Willet, etc. cum multis alijs, English, Germaine and Belgicke lights, shining in illumination of knowledge and sanctification of life: Such a man, such a Phoenix, such a messenger one ofIob. 33.23. a thousand, shall declare unto man his righteousnesse, binde up the brokenEsay, 61, v, 1. hearted, speake a word in due season to him that is wearie, turne the hearts of the Fathers to the Children, as was said of IohnLuke, 1, v, 17. Baptist. Where such a one is, his verie fame, as an oyntment powredCant, ch, 1, 2. out, gives a sweete perfume, drawes hearers to him as the Adamant, Iron; as the Caecian windes the

Plin. lib. 2. ca. 43. and Aulus Gellius ex Arist. noct. Attic. lib. 2. cap. 22. clouds: yea, as Orpheus his Harpe drewSyntax. artis mirab. li 11. c. 18 pag. 206. Trees, and Arious thePlin. li. 9. c. 8. Dolphine. Yea as the sent, and odour, and beautie of the speciousAelian. libr. 8. cap. 40. Panther drawes the admiring beasts to admiration, imitation: the majestie of vertue being such, that even the vitious that cannot attaine her, yet admire her,Si videretur mirabiles amorea excitaret sui. Cicero and Plato. as the Greekes did Hellen and gaze on those vertuous ones her favorites, which are in eminent places, as the Owles and Beetles upon the Sunne. There needs no other Cummin-seed, to bring the Lords Doves to the Coates and windowes of Gods house; yea to build in the sanctuarie, then Gods voyce uttered by a sanctified organ. Yea whereas a wicked life, (as the smoake, and Rats, and Mice, and stinke drives Bees from their hives,) drives men from our assemblies, and makes them withdrawe, to their owneHeb. 10.39. perdition: On the contrarie, there should neede no other law, nor compulsion, nor Ecclesiasticall discipline, to bring to the meanes, whether Popish or Prodestant, Athisticall or Papisticall refusants, or recusants; if there were in all our ministerie, which (hinc illae lachrymae) in manie places there is not, mortification and sanctification. Oh if such a one as Iohn the Baptist, which was a burning light, preach even in the desert, in the obscurest corner of a countrie, hee shall not want hearers, even the proud Scribes, the Iustitiarie Pharisees, the sinfull Publicanes,Luk. 3.7.8.9. Math. 3.5. and the verie souldiers (thogh verie seldome too zealous) flocke to him, as the Ants to the Barne, and the Bees to flowers. And sure, (at last to conclude) he that in the eminencie of his place, can with Davids heart and spirit, exhort others to blesse the Lord, and himselfe begin this spirituall song; shall have the hearts of a religious people to answere againe, as an eccho, as the Congregation here did David, They blessed the Lord.



CHAP. V. David prayseth God as a Prince: Politically, and enioyneb others.
LAstly (as the discharge of my last Bill) David as we have heard, doth not onely praise God, Personally, Publikely,

Primarily, Perswasorily: but to expresse my selfe in the most significant phrases I can excogitate; Politically or Princely. For as he was Gods Lievtenant, and Vice-gerent here on earth, as hee had received his Crowne, his Scepter, his Diademe fromAs he acknowledgeth, psal. 21 l cum multis alijs. God: So hee knowes it doth belong to his Regall office, and function, to establish, ratifie, confirme, and propagate, what did belong to the service and worship of God. He knew (what we know and acknowledge, as Christians; and as true Protestants, professe, and protest, with all the reformedSee the Harmony of Confessions in 8to. Churches in France, Bohemia, Germanie, Saxonie, Scotland, Geneva and the whole Christian world,) that the Kings Majestie is within his Realmes and Dominions, in all causes, aswell Ecclesiasticall as Civill, and over all persons, aswell Ecclesiastickes as Laickes, next and immediately under Christ Iesus, supreame head and governour. There was no contradiction of this point in Davids time, except2. Sam. 20.21 and 2. King. 12.16 Sheba,2 Sam. 15.13 Absolon, and some such like traytors, as would have made David officiperda, devoyde of all rule, and regencie, eyther in things spirituall, or temporall. Nor is there any question made of it in our time, except byDe visibili Monarchia. Sanders,In his principles, and in promptuatio Catholico passim. Stapleton,In his Libels and letters to diverse discontented spirits. Cardinall Allen, libellingIn his Dolma^ Parsons, the late Eudemon, (or Cacodemon) Becan, and other moderneChiefly the opposers of the oath of allegeance. Iesuites and Fryers; who more then in the former Schoole-mens times, beate their braines, in hatching this addle-egge: which produced, hath proved the most dangerous cokcatrice or killingDe mortifero aspectu Basilisci. Isid. li. 12. cap. 3. Aelian. li. 2. c. 5. Basilisk, to the depriving of Kings of their Crownes and lives namely, that the power and authoritie of Christian Princes is subordinate to the Pope; in spirituall things absolutely, as to Christs Vicar, his Legatus a latere, his Substitute on earth, the head, yea the Husband and Brid-grome of theSee all their blasphemous titles, they give their Pope, with their several authors quoted, by Pelargus in his Iesuitismus, tit. de Pon. Our D. Sutcliffe de Pon. Rom. M. Powel de antich. Church: and in temporall things too, in ordine quoadDist. Bell. de Pontif. Rom. Deum, as they have relation towards God, (as their great Goliah distinguisheth,) And that Kings, Emperours, and Monarches, are to receive their Crownes and Diadems from the Pope, as the Moone her light from the Sunne, as Innocent the third verie innocently, or rather nocently, collecteth from a corruptedGen. 1.16. co^^^r^^g the Pope to the Sun, the Emperor to the Moone. Text, (which as his Fryers doe with other Texts, he wrings, as a man doth bloud from his nose, or rather playes with, as a Childe

with a Rattle; as though they made Gods sacred Bible, but a bable.) So that the managing of these Crownes, the use and exercise of these swords is limited to the Church, and by the Church, (as the Sea that's kept within her bounds) disposed to the sonnes of their Antichristian Synagogue (which falsely they call their Church: as the Harlot in Salomons time pleades for the1. King. 3.21.22. Childe that's none of hers) who must have their direction in the improvement of their authorities: yea and their corrections too, (as had the FrenchSee Sledan in his chronicles, as also Charions Chronicle, finished by Melancthon. Henries, the Germaine,His neck was trod upon in S. Marks Church in Venice, by Alexander the sixt Fredericke, our English KingHe resigned his Crowne to Randolph the Popes Legate, Anno Dom. 12 13 See Stowes, and Speeds Chronicle. Iohn, with hundreds moe) from his Holinesse, their spirituall father: With whose eyes they must see, with whose hands they must act, from whose mouth, as their oracle, they must speake: by whom, if they bee not as schoole-boyes prompted, yea as Hoppes and Vines, in their whole regencies propped, and supported; their Crownes, yea their heads, (as the Turke with his Bashawes) must be lopped shorter by the neckes, and they wasted, and transported by Charons ferrie-boate to Hell, or Purgatorie, or some such odde place, God knowes whether, to answere their disobedience before Aeacus, Minos, Radamanthus, or some such odde fellowes. Thus these Papall Princely cyphers, being meerely some thing or nothing, as they are joyned or disioyned to or fro their Deified Pope (the true figure and forme of Antichrist, as he isBy D. Downa^ B. of London-Detry: M. Powel, the Germaine Sonnius, in their learned Treatises, de Antichristo. proved) they must doe little in te^porall things in spirituall things, nothing, without their light and ayme from Peters pretended usurping successor: to whom they are in submission and subjection, as a wife to her husband, as a childe to his Father, as a pupill, to his tutor, as a schoole-boy (foole-boy) yea I say further, as a servant, or prentice to his Master; or which is yet more servile, as a Warde to his Guardian, or a Captive to his Conquerour; without whose placet, they must eyther sit still, or rise and fall. Such a yoake of Romish bondage by their owne grosse superstition, with which they are both blinded and bewitched, have Christian Princes layd upon their owne neckes; more intollerable then ever those Aegyptian, Moabitish, Midianitish, Cananitish Caldean, and Babylonian yoakes, which for their sinnes, or trials, the Lord successively layd on the necke of that untamed

Deut. 32.15. Heyffer Iesurun, rebellious Israel. David was wiser then thus; he was not as seduced Israel, as a Dove without a heart: he sends not to Rome for either leave or light, (though leave be light) to manage what belongs, either to his Civill, or Ecclesiasticall jurisdiction, (as the Councell of Trent, that could not proceede in anie of their superstitious, blasphemous conclusions, without posting, and reposting to fetch the holy Ghost fromSee the book in folio called, the Councell of Trent, set out by the well deserving paines and perils too, of M. Breut. Rome; as a Bee in a boxe, as the jest was, who came at last, and frighted, in the forme of a black dogge, one of their chiefe (e) agents out of his wits.) Or if David had inquired for a Pope in his dayes, unlesse he had found out the PaganAnnius Rex hominu^, Phoebique Sacerdos. Virgil. Pontifex, or some high Priest amongst the Iewes, hee might as well have sought for a man in the Moone, with a bush of thornes on his backe, or for a Needle (which had beene needlesse) in a bottle of Hay: for we cannot say, as Polycarpus said of Marcion, that the Pope was the first begotten sonne of theNovi te primogenuu^ Sat^anae. Devill, nay, as they speake of some Toades or Serpents, that breede in the braynes andPlin. li. 10 hist. c. 66. Isidor. c. 4. et Aelian. li. 2. c. 53. marrowes of dead men; hee was hatcht since, by the warmth of that cockatrice the Devill, in the poysoned and corrupted braines of men living, or rather, as it's said of Gnats and Insects that breed of bloud, dung andCardinal Cres^ence, writing letters to the Pope, March 25 was affrighted by the Devill, in forme of a blacke Dogge, Sle^da^. Coment 23. He died at Verona. See G^uiar^ french history translated, pag. 197. Vt Scarabens in pila, ex fimo facto, masculum gignit. Aelian li. 9. ca. 16. and Aug. de morib Manic. c. 17. and retract. 2. cap. 7. putrifaction; bloud was his first breeding, (as since feeding,) for from the bloud of Mauritius the Emperour, unjustly effused by that trecherous Phocas, some gnats of a stinging conscience, gnawing and vexing the Traytor, (as onceGen. 4.13. Cain, and most murtherers,) he having in this perplexitie reference to Boniface the Bishop of Rome, asMath. 17.1.2 Iudas had to the Pharisees, after hee betrayed Christ, as to his spirituall physitian: and being superficially baulmde, and his wound skind over by this Quak-salver, he in requitall gave him (what the Devill tempted Christ with, and what hee most gaped after) worldlyMath. 4.8.9. honours, and glories, even this glorious Title of Vniversall Bishop of the whole world; his Diocesses extending as farre as the Devills. Thus crept he first out of his shell, in which he had beene long inclosed: the mysterie of iniquitie, being long a working, by degreesVide Morneu^, de progressu Papalus in folio. commencing, and sitting in the Chayre of pestilence But in Davids time, and in the time of the Patriarks, Prophets, Apostles, yea and the first sixe hundred yeares after, (called the Primitive

times) as weBishop Iewell his challenge, in his apology for the Church of England. offer the triall; a man might as soone have seene a mil-stone fly in the ayre, as eyther Pope or point of Poperie, as now it stands (for all their vociferations and false lap-wings cries, of their Old Religion, Old law, Mother Church, and I know not what.) Nay David here askes not leave, eyther of Gad, or Nathan, or Abiathar, or Zadok, though hee were now Gods high Priest; for the institution of this solemnitie, and for the Congregating of Israel, to performe these gratulatorie sacrifices, and oblations in my Text. David knew hee was sui iuris, free of himselfe, and stood on his owne legges, and that in all things that hee lawfully commanded, in God and for God (which limits indeed, both the power of Princes and the obedience of subjectsAugust. serm. 6. de verbis dom. and epist. 666. and in Psal. 124. Basil. reg 7. ex Brev and 114. and 202. and 204. and in Decreto 11.9. ch. 92.93.94.95. habetur ex patribus, restitere ergo illicitis Magistratuu^ mandatis Daniel, and tres puers, Dan. 3.19. Ambrosius Theodosio, and Christianus quidam Iuliano, apud Theodor. l 3. cap. 22. active, though not passive, as the learned discusse and determine,) Nathan and Zadok were to be obedient and subordinate to him, not hee to them; which had beene a grosse confusion, and a historen proteron in Theologicall rhetorick. Indeed David consultsSam. 7.2.3. with Nathan about building the Temple (as Saul and1 Sam. 14.8. Samuel about sacrifizing): and indeed it's an excellent harmonie, and the most Lidian consort, to see a Moses and anExod. 4.14. and 5.1. Aron, a Iehoash and a2. King. 12.2. Iehoiada, a David and a1. King. 2.32. Nathan, a Baruck and aIudg. 4.8. and 5 1. Deborah, a Iosias and a2. Reg 22.14. Huldah, a Salomon1. Chron. 29 22 and a Zadok, an Ezekiah and anEsa. 7.21. Esay, a Nehemiah and anNehem. 8 9. Ezra, an Ambrose and a Theodosius, the Word and the Sword, Magistracie and Ministrie, the Prince and the Prophet, consult together; as his Majestie at this day, as in the high Court of Parliament, and occasionedly since, with his Lords Spirituall aswell as Temporall, about even matters Ecclesiasticall, as Politicall, about building, or repayring, or purging, or perfecting Gods spirituall Te^ple, establishing, ratifying, rectifying his true and sincere worship. And if this liberty were not given to Christian Princes, to consult with their Clergie, that are made of their privie Councell; they should be straighter tyed, then the very heathenish Romanists, that usually advised with their Augurists and Flamins, and the Persians and Chaldeans, that advised with theirApud Cellium Rhodiginum, Aulum Gellium, Alexandrum, ab Alexandro, Plutarchum, cum alijs. Magi, and other Pagans with their wise men and Philosophers, both in warre and peace, upon all occasions. But David knowes his owne strength, how to stand on his owne bottome in this

businesse, though Nathan had beene (which hee was not) of such a Popish, proud, usurping Iesuited spirit, to have contradicted this gratulatorie festivall (as Zedekiah1. King. 22.24. in the dayes of Michay; Hananni, PashurIer. 20.2. and other false Prophets in the dayes of Ieremy, crossed these best projects and proceedings which were for the welfare of Israell.) David knew, that a lawfull king, as he is calledPsal. 82. God, is solo Deo minor, onely lesse then God; and that everie soule is to be subject to the higherRom. 13.1. powers; (and so consequently, Popes, Cardinalls, and all Prelates, if they have soules) and that every Christian Magistrate, as he is custos utriusque Tabulae, a keeper of both the tables of the Law: so he must looke that Gods plough goe forward, in duties religious towards God; as Caesars, in duties righteous betwixt man and man. And therefore as Ezekiah will ordaine and institute a2. Chr. 30.1, 2, 3. Passeover to the Lord, send and encourage the Priests and Levites to teach the thousands ofvers. 22. Israel, as2. Chr. 23.1, 2. Iosiah, and Nehemiah, andNeh. 8.4, 5. Ezra will cause the book of the Law to be read, expounded and interpreted in the eares of all Israel; and so other religious kings of Iudah and Ierusalem, sitting at the Helme of the Church, as well as of the Common-wealth, steere both aright: So David here, besides the managing of manie worthy and memorable morall acts, for the good of Gods flock and heritage, over whom he was superintendent; he also out of his discretion (or rather devotion) institutes this solemnitie in my Text, in which he exhorts and excites the people to holy and religious gratulations, for mercies temporall and spirituall. Oh, as the practise is lawfull and laudable, against all Antichristian contradiction, as our English Such as have writ against Becan, Eudemon, and the oppugners of the K. booke, and of the Oath of Allegeance. worthies have convinced it, from Scriptures and all Histories, in Christian Kings that have setled religion, rooted out heresies and hereticks, placed and displaced Bishops and Ministers, put Zadoks in the place of Abiathars, called, ratified and approved generallSee D. Sutcliffe de Concilijs, contra Bedar. and provinciall Councells: so I desire it might have, what it deserves; as the approbation, prayers, and prayses of all Christian subjects, so the zealous imitation of all Christian Princes. that so with Davids heart, doing Davids work, they might receive Davids wages, double blessings; from God, from man; in earth, and in heaven.




SECOND PART. Israels gratulation:

CHAP. I. From Davids spirit.
THus wee have seene David act his part Piously, Publickly, Primarily, Personally, Perswasorily, Politically, and independantly as a Prince (on which I reflect, for memories sake:) now let us see briefly and succinctly, how the Congregation here act their parts; and that is obsequiously, readily, universally. For as they obey Davids motion for the matter, blessing God: so for the forme and maner; they obey willingly, speedily, without demurring, contradicting, procrastinating, even at first motion. and for the extent, universally, all the Congregation blessed God (as may be hoped too) cordially and without hypocrisie: their practise in all, and every of the points, as tutoring and teaching us what to doe in the like cases; so redarguing and reproving what we do not. First then, eye and apply the first act: As David sets them a good copie, they write after it; they wade, where he breakes the yce; they daunce after his pipe: he is as the primus motor, the first mover in these visible heavens; they, as depending planetarie bodies, move after his motion; they receive spirituall sparkes, from his fires; they are enlightned, heated by his example. This is well, when the people are truely religious, truely zealous, for the qualification and forme of grace, as is their Prince or their Pastor; though they should come short, as the people did here in respect of David, of their measure of grace: for its something to be in the second and third place in a run race,As in the Olimpick games; est aliquid prodire tenus, si non detur ultra. though one cannot attaine theThere was difference in the valours of Iashobeam, Eleazar, Abishai, Baniah, and other of David, worthies; yet all valiant, 1. Chr. 11.10, 12, 15, 22, etc. first: its something for the widdow to offer her mite, Luke 21.2. though she have no more; for a proselite Iew to bring Goats hayre, or Cammels hayre,Exod. 25.9. or Badgers skins, to the building of the Temple, though (as wanting gold, and silver, and purple) he can bring no better: its something to shoot

neere the marke, and to ayme the white, though it be not hit: its accepted, though poore Ioseph, poore Mary, offer up but a paire of youngLuke 2.24. Pigeons, or turtle-doves, when their povertie will not affoord Kydds, and Lambes. All are not strong men in Christs family; some areHeb. 5.12. Babes: all are not great Graduates in Christs Colledge; some are Tyroes, and but newly admitted: all have not grace in the like measure; There is one glory of the1. Cor. 15.41. Sunne, another of the Moone, and another glory of the Starres: for one Starre differeth from another in glory, as one man from another in grace. There are diversities of gifts, but the same1. Cor. 12.4. spirit. All have not one faith alike, there's a weake faith in the oft doubting,Matth. 8.26, Luke 24 38. oft discussing Disciples in the FatherMark 9.24. of the possessed childe. There's a strong faith in Peter, walking on the waters; in the CananitishMath. 15.27. woman, theMatth. 8.10. Centurion, the woman with the sanguinolentLuke 8.49. issue: all sonnes and daughters of beleevingGal. 3 9. Abraham. There's a wondrous gift and measure of the spirit inDan. 6.10. Daniel, praying three times a day: this ourPsal. 17.1. and 51.1. and 55.17. David, with that perplexed Anna,1. Sam. 1.15. upon everie occasion effusing and pouring out his soule in prayerVt Psal. 4.1. and 5.1. and 6.1. and 28.1 and 38.1. abundant; also redundant in the praises ofVt in Psalm. antea recitatis. God: his heart ever meditating of good matters, his tongue the pen of a readiePsal 45.1. writer: his inward (f) fires breaking out, in outward flames; not contenting nor conteyning himselfe, but even at midnight he must rise, what to do? not to light and smoake a Tobacco-pipe (as some that are besotted and bewitched with the weed) but to praise the name of thePsal. 119.62. Lord: Yea early in the morning he will rise,Ps. 5.3. and 8^.13. sic Iudei Ose. 5:15. and Christiani ^lim, ut test. Plin. Iun. epist. ad Traianum. preventing the morning watch, what's the businesse? not to follow drunkennesse,Esa. 5.11. till he be inflamed; but as spiritually drunke with the wine ofEbria Anna ^st vino devotionis. devotion, as was said of Anna* to call upon God, to prayse him for his mercies, to offer sacrifices, asIob 1.5. Iob did, for him and his. All come not thus farre, all have not Davids measure: yet its well, if we come thus farre as this people here. He that hath a heart to pray, a heart to blesse God; let him blesse God even for giving him such a heart, non cuivis contigit, etc. Its a mercie above all mercies, to have such a heart; a blessing above gold and pearles, the earth and all her treasures, pleasures, doth not equalize it: as it is the greatest plague and spirituall judgement,

to have aExod 8.15. Pharaohs heart, a1. Sam. 25.37. Nabals heart, a hardned, a sluggish, a sensuall, a sottishEsa. 6.10. Matth. 13.14. heart, chiefly a grudging, a murmuring, a blasphemous heart, as the carnall Israelites had. If thou hast rather heart then Art, how to expresse thy praises, be not altogether discouraged: a sparke of fire is fire, and a sparke of grace isSee M. Perkins his graine of Mustard seed his Dialogues. M. Greenham his consolatory letters. M. Howard his strong help, chap. 19, 20, 21. M. Downam his Christian warfare, and quastiones Bachman Cent. 1. q. 55, 56. pag. 131, 132, 133. grace, but fuellize this sparke; grow in this and other graces, in the use of the meanes. For as a dead coale that burnes not, is no fire; as a dead trunck that sprouts nor growes not, hath in it no lively sap: so grace that growes not, that moves not more then a dead child in the womb, is no grace, more then a painted fire is true fire, its meerly imaginay, eutopean and conceited, the verie Idea of the braine, ungrounded in the heart. Therefore strive for perfection; get thy heart, soule and spirit in tune, to praise thy God. Oh there's no greater argument of the sinceritie of any grace, then that it is of a growing nature: as the childe, that growes in the womb, from an Embrio to perfection; as the corne, that growes from the seed to a blade, from the blade to the eare, from earing to a ripening harvest. It must not stand still, like Ioshua'sIosh. 10.12.13 Sunne; nor go back, as in Ahaz2. King. 19.11. Dyall: but forward, as in the firmament. Everie Christians motto, must be that which was Charles the fift's; Vlterius, still forward. And for this cause, imitate (as Sempsters) the best patterne, write after the perfectest copie. He that will have a pleasing object for his eye, had better view the Sunne then any Starre: he that will Poetize, will rather imitate Virgil or Ovid, then Bavius orQui Bavium non amat, odio tua. Menius: he that would be a good Rhetorician, will imitate Tully,Vid. Institut Quintil. Demosthenes, or Osorius, rather then an obsolete and barbarousSuch as Menos, Bartlet, discipulus de tempore or such whose Latin is as barbarous as their matter oft fabulous. Fryer. Oh as we imitate the best in Nature, in Art, let us be as wise for grace. Now (excepting Christ himselfe) I know not a better patterne of imitation, of meere men, then David: therfore as Thesius is said to be restlesse in spirit, in his emulation ofApud Cassaneum, in catalogo gloriae mundi. Hercules; Achilles, in imitation of Thesius; Alexander, in imitation of Achilles; Caesar, in imitation of Alexander. And as Themistocles is said to take no rest, after that hee had heard of the Trophees of Miltiades: so I wish that wee, in consideration of that excellent spirit of zealous devotion, gratulation, sanctified affections in David; might be stirred up to pray (as2. King. 2.9. Elisha once

for the spirit of Elias) that it might be doubled, or at least singled upon us: that with this Congregation (David preceding us) we might in some good measure, some sanctified manner, blesse God, as David did; since not one of us in a multitude, but for one mercy or other, we have occasion in particular (besides generalls) as David had. Oh that we would not suffer our eyes to sleepe, nor our eye-lidds toPsal. 132.3.4.5.6. slumber, neither the Temples of our head to take any rest; till we found our hearts the Temple-house and habitation of that spirit, which would cause us to doe as David did.
Expostulation.But alas, my doubts and jealousies be, that we have frozen and congealed hearts, turned as hard as crystall, by aDe generatione Christalli, lege apud Plin. li. 36. cap. 22. Vincentium lib. 5. ca. 80. Arist. li. Meteor and vigitabilibus. continuall freeze; that, as Nebuchadnezzars Image, though we have many excellent heads ofDan. 2.32.33 gold, both in the Magistracie and Ministry, abounding in this and other graces: yet the feet of our Commonaltie be of meere clay, hardned rather for breaking, then dissolved as waxe, melting as did once Davids mollified heart, by the Sunne of2 Sam. 12.7.8.13. vers. mercies.

SECTIO. II. Israels obedience, in duties Morall, Theologicall.
AGaine see the obedience of this people, how flexible, how docible: David no sooner exhortes them to prayse and blesse God, but all the Congregation blessed God: David prevailes with one word, with one motion. This people (a patterne of all good subjects, in obedience to the Magistracie; of all good Auditors, in their obedience to the Ministerie) are to him as the Centurions servants in the Gospell: Hee bids them do this, and they doeMath. 8.9. it: yea I may say, without exception I hope, or construction; they are to him as the creatures unto God, in their first production, dixit and factumGen. 1. v. 11. est. Such quarters Davids people keepe with his prescript, that his will (nay his word) is their worke: there is you see, as it were an Identitie of will, betwixt this best Prince, and these good people, as in perfect friendship, unum cor, una anima:As amongst the Disciples ^ct. 2. v. 45.46. ^nd primative ^hristians, in ^hat measure ^nd maner vide ^nd Lorinum in ^cum, fol. 142. 1^3. etc. one

heart, one minde, or (as should bee in all Christians) unitie, and amitie. They did walke by the same rule, minding the same, thing, as Saint Paul prescribes his Philippians, Philip. 3. vers. 16. No sooner is the counsell out of Davids mouth, but consent in an instant, in puncto temporis, even in a trice, is in the peoples hearts. Their mindes concurre with his motion; even as Naptha, it suddenly takes fire, at sight of fire. Oh the love, the loyaltie, the obsequious obedience of this people! worthy of living admiration, loyall imitation, of all good subjects. Much is writ of that subjection, which the Turkish Begler-begges, Bashawes, andOf all these Turkish Officers with their subiection, see the Turkish historie, passim, and Purchas his pilgrimage, lib. 3. cap. 9. pag. 244 248. in principio Timorites, yea even his Mutes and Asaphi, or Plebeians, yeelde to their Ottoman tyrant: as, that at his command, they will leape into waters, (as some of Zerxes nobles, are said toApud Brusonium, tit. de obedientia. doe, when the fishers boate in which he fled, was over ballanced) to save their Kings life; they will kill themselves, as an acceptable sacrifice to Mahomet, fill up pooles and ditches, at the siege of some Citie, for his better scaling the wals. Which hests, as it's pride in him to injoyne, so it's superstitious follie, in them to obay: against the light of grace and nature, any man to bee felo de se, a selfe murtherer. So, as wondrous strict rules of subjection, are prescribed by that Frances, and Dominicke, andDe regulis Francisci, Dominici, Benedicti, and aliorum, vide apud Hospinianum, de origine Monochatus. Benedict to their novelists, and young Fryers of their Orders, to be performed to their superiors: so hee that reades Cassianus hisIn Collat. Cassiani, multa and mira habentur exempla passim, imo vix crede^da de subiectione Iuniorum, erga inferiores. collations, and other of their recollections, shall see these Iuniors performe such subjection to their Seniors in some strict taskes, injoyned, as for my part,Saepe risum, saepeque bilem vestri movere tumultus. Horat. saepe risum, saepeque bilem movere, I have sometimes laught at, sometimes pitied these deluded ignorants. But quis requisivit? who ever required such things, either in the active commanding Fryer, or in the passive observant Foole, excepting blinding and bewitching superstition? But in true, and religious, and rectified obedience, who doe we reade more forward, and prompt then this people?Exod. 32.3. Aaron indeed, as afterIudges 8.24. Gideon, cals for the peoples Iewels and eare-rings; and they as readily part with them, as the Aegyptians did depart withExod. 11.2.3. theirs: but to what ende and purpose? To make a Calfe, to erect an Idoll to worship: As what will not an Idolatrous people part with, as is seene at this day, amongst our

commonOf the force of superstition, eve^ above true Religion, in Iewes, Turkes, pagans, papists. See hu^dred examples in Gorlicius his Theologicall axioms circa medium lib. in 4to. papists, for such a purpose? not their gold, nor their silver, is deare to them: it flies as freely as from Michahes mother, though it be eleven hundredIudg. 17.3.4.5. shekels, to the making of a graven Image, a Shrine, a Crosse, a Crucifixe. The Priests neede but aske and have, if it be the bloud out of their veines, much more their silver out of their purses; which, to the impoverishing of themselves, to the wronging of their tateredWee see to our grief al this verified in our Gentrie, and superstitious Irish Laytie. backes, I am sure the wringing of their bellies, the wrangling of their hunger bitten babes; they part withall as willingly, to the maintenance of Idolatrie, and superstition, as these Iewes here in my Text, (as also in the dayes of Moses, andEzra. 7.14. Nehemiah) contributed freely to the service of the true God in true Religion. So wee have reade, and seene (besides the dammaging and indangering of their soules and blouds, the everlasting blotting, and branding of their houses, and names) how prodigall, how profuse, even to a marvell, some traytors have beene of their goods, their lands, their moneys, their meanes (as might be particularized in Winter, Peercy, Digby, and our late digging powder Pioners, besides all others) for the effecting of their sanguinolent and bloudie plots: when the same parties perhaps are tenacious enough, and as hard to be drawen and hewen as rockes, to any good duties. But Davids Peeres, and people here are as propense, and readie, upon Davids first motion, to part with thousands, and ten thousands of their tallents of gold and silver, lead, and brasse, to the best imployment; the edification of a1. Chro. 29. v. 7.8.9 Temple, more famous, for worke, then the ArthemesiahsDe isto Maufoleo Marlinus libr. 6. cap. 18. Mansolum, the Sunnes Colosse, the AegyptiansDe structura Pyramidum. Mela. lib. 1. cap. 5. Plin. lib. 36. c. 12. Stabo lib. 16. Sic de Colosso Solis, Strabo lib. 11. Isidor. lib. 14 cap. 6. Pyramides, BabylonsMira de istis Muribus, Grosius lib. 2. c. 6. Q. Curt. lib. 5. Eus. de prapar. Evang. lib. 9. cap. 4. wals, DianasDe te^plo Diana, prater Strab. lib. 14. Plin. libr. 36. c. 14. Aug. de Civit. Dei, lib. 21. cap. 4. Temple, or the best buldings that everOf the excellencie of Salomons Temple, vide Ruffin. apud Euseb. lib. 11. cap. 23. Chrys. hom. 86. Senen (Bibl. lib. 6. Maiolum part. 1. Coli. 24 pag. 736. praecipue Mogdonetum in Monte Caluaria, cap. 4. pag. 2. were: but more famous for the end, as it was to bee a habitation for the mightie God of Iacob. Yea they part not onely with their gold, but with their goods, with a thousand Rams, a thousand Lambes, a thousand Bullockes; yea they are obsequious in a greater nature then ail this. For alas the power and life of Religion, consists not in the abdication of those outward things, in profession

of voluntarie povertie, no, nor in abstinence and fasting from the creatures, nor in afflicting and whipping the bodie, as the Papists make it: for then wee should have formed the verie pith and life of Religion in Diogenes, Thales, Milesius, Cleanthes, Fabritius; the Indian Bragmans, and Cymnosophists, who in austeritie and strictnesse of life, in abdication of these externalls (to omitt the whipping1. King. 18.28 Baalites) did live as strictly, as any Papist of them all, as any Monosterian; yea, perhaps as any Hermite whom historiesOf the strictnesse, and austeritie of S. Anthony, Paulus Simplex, Pambe, Macarius, and other Hermits, reade in Zozum. lib. 4 c. 23. in Socrates lib. 4. hist. c. 23. in Cassian. l. 2. Gastrim. c. 26 and ca. 40. chiefly Hospinian de origine Monochatus. dignifie, for their wondrous abstinencie and continencie. But the power is in the inward life of faith, of the life of grace; the life of the spirit, moving, stirring, animating the very inwards of the soule, to blesse and magnifie the Lord in the inward man: rejoycing in the Lord, and expressing these hidden flames, by hearts breaking out, in sudden extasis raptures, Eucharisticall thanksgivings, Hymnes, Songs, Psalmes, as David in the Psalmes: as hee and his people here, and as Augustine, Bernard, Anselme, in their meditations, and soule-soliloquies. This is that pith, that marrow, that luster, that life of Religion, that power of godlinesse,See this particular largly and soundly discussed, and convicted, by M. Bolton his discourse of true happiness, on Psalm. 1. and M. Dike of the deceitfulnesse of mans heart, and M. Negus, his Posthumus booke of mans active obedience. which a naturall man, a Civill, a Morall honest man, an Hypocrite, a Pharisee, a meere out-side Christian, a Ceremonious observant Papist, never attained to by many degrees; never knew it, never felt, never found it in his owne soule. It's a riddle harder then Sampsons, a mysterie, an Aenigma, which they know not, because they plow not with the best heyffer, the spirit: It's a marke they never hitt, a Note above Ela this, which never anie sung, but the Lords true Nathaniels. And this sacrifice of true praise, Davids Princes and people, offer up to the Lord joyntly and mutually, with David: which argues they were possessed with the same spirit, which workes the verie same effects in severall subjects, Gods severall servants, how ever diversified and differenced in respect of age sexe, state, or condition of life; yea how ever, separated in respect of times, or place: as the same Sunne hath the same power, heate, light, influence, (how ever differing in degrees, in severall Climates.) on the scorched Negro, the tawnie Muscovite, the remote Indian, the Russian, Persian, Turke, Christian, Barbarian, and who ever it reflexeth upon.



SECTIO III. Obedience to God and Cesar, in God and for God, inioyned every Christian.
THat which concernes our selves, as grapes pressed for our physicall drinke, by application, is this: That we should sympathize with Davids people as we that are the heads and eyes, must be studious by governing and teaching; to go in and out before you wisely and worthily, carrying our selves as David1. Sam. 18.30. did, as being on a publick stage: God, men, and Angels being our spectators: our eclipses and slips being too soone discerned, and too fatally presaging evils to our selves and others, like the eclipses of the materiall Sunne. AsVide apud Lycostenem de prodigijs. we, I say, for many reasons premised, must doe famously and worthily inRuth 4.11. Ephratah, where we are planted, and our candlesticks placed: so you, that are the Commonaltie, the Laity and bodie of the people, must be obsequious to whatever you are legally and warrantably prescribed, and perswaded by us: first, you must, like this people, be flexible and tractable to what you are moved in religious duties of pietie to God: such as 1. hearing the word; 2. receiving the sacraments; 3. sanctification of theSee D Bound of the sabboth. M. Dod on the fourth Commandement. Sabboths, you and yours; 4. frequent and fervent prayer, in your owne hearts, in your owne houses, such asIosh. 24.15. Ioshuah,2. Sam. 6.20. David, and other religious families used: 5. humiliation for sinne, such as is prescribed byIoel 2.12.17. Ioell,Zach. 12.12. ZacharyApud Johan. cap. 3.7, 8. Ionas,1. Pet. 5.6. Peter, and was practised byPsal. 6.6. 2. Sam. 16.12. David,Neh. 1.4. Nehemiah, theIoh. 3.20. Ninevites,Esth. 4.16. Ester, Mordocheus,2. Chr. 32.25. Ezekiah: 6. catechizing your children, as David and Bethshebab didProv. 4.5. Salomon; Eunice and Lois,2. Tim. 1.5. and 3.16. Timothy; Abraham hisGen. 18.19. c^ 22.7. Isaac; Hellena herEuseb. in vita Constantini. Constantine: 7. praising of God, in the observation of solemne Feasts, and thankefull commemorations of mercies received, and judgements prevented; as for the coronation of our soveraigne Lord the King, the safe reduction of our Prince, his Majesties preservation from the Gowries conspiracie, from the powder Treason; as the Iewes solemnized their Purim upon the likeEsth. 9.26. occasion: 8. or it be the observation of publicke or private Fasts, as the King of

Ninevie enjoyned his Ninevites, Ion. 3. Secondly, you must be morigetous and obsequious, to duties of charitie enjoyned you to your brethren: such as giving to the needie, as didIob 29.12, 13 Iob,Acts 9 36. Dorcas,Luke 19.8. Zacheus; forgiving your enemies, as did Stephen theActs 7.60. protomartyr, and Christ himselfe, theirLuke 23.34. persecuters; David, reviling2. Sam. 16.11. Shemei. Thirdly, being hospitable to poore strangers; such as here in aboundance come over, fat and full, likeRuth 1.20. Naomi, but go back again marah, poore and bitter, lanck and leane, as purse-purged: Oh relieve such asGen. 18.1, 2. Abraham andGen. 19.1.2, 3 Lot, the pilgrim Angels in the formes of men; as the good old man of Gabes-gileadIudg. 19.20, 21. lodged the distressed Levite, as Gaius the HostEpist. Iohan. ad Gaium. v. 5. of the persecuted Saints. Oh you that are as Iosephs here, well planted, doe not forget your English brethren,Amos 6. Gen. 43. whom necessitie drives hither to seeke for corne and coine, thinking here be golden grapes, but deceived, as Christ by the promising leaves of the barrenMat 21.19. figge-tree. Fourthly, feed the hungry: let the backes and bellies of the poore blesseIob 29.12, 13. you; let Lazaras have theLuke 16 21. crummes in your feasts, still remember the afflictions ofAmos 6.6. Ioseph. Fiftly, be engaged for those that are approved honest, though poore; that have willing hearts to pay all creditors, though weake hands: support them, as Aron and Hur did weariedExod. 17.18. Moses. Salomon condemnes not allProv 6.2. See the Sermon extant on this Text, called a caveat for suerties. suretiship, but onely gives caveats, that a man ensnare not himselfe for carnall and carelesse companions: charitie both beginning at home, and standing with providence and discretion; otherwise, circumstances swaying. Its an act of charitie and Christianitie, to undertake for some; as Paul did forPhilem. v. 18. Onesimus, as Reuben for his brotherGen. 42.37. Beniamin, as the good Samaritan for the woundedLuke 10.35. Pilgrim Sixthly, comfort the sad hearted; as Beaz didRuth 2.13. Ruth, as the Iews did mournfull MarthaIohn 11.31. and Mary; as Christ himselfe comforted the weeping widdow of Nain, the disconsolate daughters of IerusalemLuke 23.28., and his owne dejectedIoh. 16.20, 21. Disciples: chiefly, if their mourning be for sinne, poure oyle into their wounds, binde up the brokenEsay 61.1. hearted, speake a word to the wearie in due season, declare unto them theirIob 33.23. righteousnesse, revive them out of their dead swoune, by application of that true aqua vitae, the waters of life, the promises of grace, made to theEsay 55.1. Matth. 5.6. thirstie.

Its more mercie, as the object is more excellent, to comfort a sicke soule; as Christ did sorrowingIoh. 21 15, 16 Peter, weepingLuke 7.50. Mary Magdalen, Paul the penitent2. Cor. 2.6, 7. Corinthian, Ananiaes humbledActs 9.17. Paul, Peter the heart-prickedAct. 2.37, 38. Iewes, Paul and Silas the affrighted and afflictedAct. 16.30, 31 Iaylor: then to helpe and heale a sicke bodie. Seventhly, pray for all men; 1. chiefly for Kings and1. Tim. 2.2. Rulers, as the Iewes did for the Princes of Chaldea, in their captivitie, Ier. 20. the primitive Christians for the Emperours: 2. for Ministers and Preachers, as the Churches of Colossia, Thessalonica, Rome, Corinth, andRom 15.^0. Coloss. 4.3. 1. Thess. 5.25. 2. Thess. 3.1. others, did for Paul: 3. for thy wife and children, as Zachary for hisLuke 1.13. Elizabeth, Isaac for hisGen. 25.21. Rebeccha, Abraham for hisGen. 17.18. and 18.23. Ismael, David for his sick2. Sam. 12.16. childe 4. for thy houshold and servants, as the Ce^turion for his, Matth 8.5. and Abraham for hisGen. 24. Steward: for thy enemies and persecutors, as Stephen for those that stonedActs 7.60. him, Christ for those that crucifiedLuke 23.3. him, Samuel for those that rejected1. Sam. 12.19. him, Moses forExod. 8. so for rebelling Israel, Numb. 16 22. for Miriam, Numb. 12.13. Pharaoh that opposed and hated him, lastly, for all men, even Iewes, Turkes, and Pagans, except for those that sinne unto1. Iohn 5.16. death, as did Iudas,See D. Deuisons Sermon of the sin against the holy Ghost. Iulian, and the wilfull maliciousMarke 3.28. Pharisees; yea for our enemies, as isMatth. 5.44. Luke 6.28. Rom. 12.14. 1. Pet. 3.9. commanded, and hath beeneGen. 20.17. Num. 16.22. and 21.8. 1. Reg. 13.6. Psal. 109.4. Ier. 11.13, 19. 1. Cor. 4.12. Exemplo Mosis, Davidi^, Ieremiae, Pauli, etc. practised. Lastly, you must submit your selves, even to performe these dueties morall and politicall, that are prescribed you: Masters to servants, servants to masters: Husbands to wives, wives to husbands; Parents to children, children to parents; Magistrates to subjects, subjects to magistrates, paying scott and lott, taxes and subsidies, homage and honour, tribute to whom tribute belongeth. All which, because they are very manie, and numerous in their particulars, I referre you to such as have generally intreated of them: onely in all these speciall and specificall duties, I enjoine your submissive obedience this day. As Davids people yeelded themselves to one, so doe you to one and every one of them: To day if you will heare the Lords voyce, harden not your hearts, as in theHeb. 3.15. provocation. Be not clay, lest you be crusht asunder; but melting waxe, taking the seale and impression of grace: draw like silver threeds in the furnace: bow your neckes to God: take on you the yoake ofMatth. 11.29. Christ that is easie, and his burthen which is light; which wee, as his mouth and messengers,

impose upon you. If you consent and obey, you that are here planted shall eate the good things of theEsay 1.19. land: but if you refuse and rebell, you shall be devoured by the sword, or famine, or other plagues; for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it. you shall be spewed out and disgorged, as theIudg. 1. and 2. etc. Cananites, and wiped as a man wipeth a dish, turning it topsi-turvie, upside downe. I set life and death before you, this day: chuse life:Deut. 30.19. chuse whether you will be Oakes, stubbornly resisting God and his ordinances in the Magistracie and Ministrie, as did theIer. 3.15. and 18.12. 1. Sam. 8.19. Iewes; or Reedes, bowing, bending, flexible, docible, obedient to whatever the Lord in and by us, shall enjoyne you: as this people were here unto David. Knowing that the despising and resisting of us, is the despising, yea despiting of GodLuke 10.16. 1. Thess. 4.8. himselfe: as the contempt of Ezekiahs2. Chr. 30.10. Posts, and of Davids Embassadors, were2. Sam. 10.6. revenged as the contempt of these two Kings.


SECT. IV. Obedience Civill, Ecclesiasticall, Theologicall, the life and soule of Religion.
OH let us know, that as disobedience is as the sinne of witchcraft, yea plaine treason and rebellion against the1. Sam. 15.25 Lord: so obedience is the very life, and genius, and soule of Religion. 1. If a weeping eye did speake a man religious, thenHeb. 12.16. Esau, Israel, at her worst, had teares atDeut. 1.43, 44. command: like theVincentius ex Physiologo, nat. hist. ii. 17. c. 606. Crocodile orDe Astuia, Hyena, lachrymantu, lege Arist. lib. 8. c. 5. Vincent. lib. 19. c. 61. Aelian. l. 6. c. 13. Hyena, even when bloodshed and fratricide was hatched in the heart of the one, and flat rebellion purposed in the heart, practised by the hand of the other. 2. If a hearing eare did speake and proclaime a religious man, we have Herod hearingMark. 6.20.28. Iohn, yet beheaded Iohn; hearing him as a Saint, living still in his lust as a beast, butchering the Baptist as a Divell: we have the Scribes and the Pharisees Iohns auditors, yet a generation ofMatth. 3.9. Vipers. 3. If a confessing tongue did alwayes demonstrate a religious heart, we have Cain bellowing out hisGen. 3.13. murther, Iudas roaring out his own treason,Matt. 27.3. in the languishing anguish of their soules; Saul himselfe, with much adoe, bleating out, I have1. Sam. 15.23.24. sinned, yet the first

branded for a1, Ioh. 3.12. Reprobate,Gen. 4 12. Runnagate: the second, for the sonne ofIoh. 17, 12. and 6.70. perdition: the third, for a man ejected, rejected of1. Sam. 15.26, 28. God, vexed by1. Sam. 16.14. Sathan; in all probabilitie, as certainly damned as Salomon wasDe salute Saelonionis l^gatur Soto maior, praef. in Cantic. and Lorinus in Eccl. c. 1. allegantes Patres and argumenta producentes. saved: though some Scepticques question both the one and thePraecipue Bellarm. confut. a Zanchio de preservatione Sanctorum, and nostrum Will^tt in fine Synopsis Papismi. other, as if they would finde a knot in a2. Sam. 7.13. Bul-rush. 4. If praying did alwayes prognosticate piety, we have the PhariseeLuke 18.10. prayers, preying upon the poor; under pretext of Fasting and prayer, devouring widdowes houses: we have the worst of the Iewes, like evening Wolves, in their extremities howling upon their bedds; yea the proudest Pharisee that ever shewed to the Lord all the Pedlars pack of the trumpery of his owne Iustitiarie workes, we have him in the Temple, as busie as a Bee, praying, or prating at the least: Yea that Papist that will eate his breaden god, upon a bargaine ofThe speech of Northampton extent in print, against the powder traytors. bloud, even when he goes (by a plot as deepe as Hell) to blow up the Parliament house as high as heaven, will pray over and over his Rosarie, roule out a hundred Aves and Pater nosters, sollicite every hee and shee saincted friend, that he hath in the court of heaven, to prosper his bloudie project; yea this meritorious act must be committed (and commended too) to the prayers of their Church. So a profane man, whose mouth runnes over (as the scumme of a seething pot) with the froth of all lewd and vitious speeches; banding and darting moe damnable oathes and blasphemies, in the very face of God, in one houre, then there be pores in his spongie tongue, or teeth in his jawes, or joynts in his hand: this blatrant beast (for God holds him noWicked men in the Scriptures are oft compared to beasts. Psal. 57.4 and 58.4. Esa. 1.4 Matth. 7.6. Luke 13.32. Tit. 2.12. better) will have sometimes such a fit and good mood come on him, that he will dribble, or ratherMatth. 6.7. babble, out a prayer or two; nay you shall have the swinish drunkard, in midst of as much profanation asDan. 5.1, 2, 3. Baltazar, ordinarily jeast out such a prayer, God forgive me my sinnes, etc. As usually is this in his mouth (but when it is countercrossed with an oath) as the cough or the flegme, in the mouth of some consumed old man. 5. Yea generally, if the outward profession of religion, to knit up all in one word; did speake and prophesie a man to be truly religious, wee should have moe wayes to heaven, then to anie town or citie in Christendom: for the Belgick Dany, Gorgean Anabaptist, Brownist, Familist, Arminian; as in former

ages, the Arrian, Aerian, Monotholite, Nestorian, Lutichians, with all the rest of the hereticall rabble, profest themselves (as our Papists now) the onely true Catholickes: they had manie as blindedly zealous in their kindes, as Paul for hisAct. 22.3. Pharaisisme. Nay, to keepe within the bounded mount, the limits of the Scriptures: Have we not the worst of sinners, professing like Saints? CainGen. 4 3. sacrificing, BalaamNumb. 23.7. prophesing, the HarlotProv. 7.14. vowing, IudasLuk. 9.1.2. preaching* Simon MagusAct. 8.13. baptized, Demas a companion to2. Tim. 4 10. Paul himselfe, yea Ananias andAct 5.1.2.3. Saphira as forward in outward formalities, as any of the rest: yea wee have the carnall Israelite, loading Gods Altars with sacrifices, wearying him with his Sheepe, and Calves, and Bullockes, hisEsai. 1.11. Psal. 50.8.9. Sabaoths, and his new Moones. All which, with the rest of the formall sacrifices of theIer. 6.20.21. wicked, God protests, his soule hates, loathes, and abhorrs, as hee doth the offring up of Swines bloud, or the cutting off a doggsEsai. 66.3. necke. the howlings and bellowings of profane spirits, being to him no more, then the hissings of so manie Snakes, the croaking of so manie Frogges: all their sacrifices, with their persons, being execrable, and abominable to the Lord, yea stinking as Carrion in his nosthrils. Why so? because they wanted the true salt of the Sanctuarie, the life and soule of all, which should vivificate and animate these their observances, and oblations: and that's in one word, Obedience, as God himselfe reveales1. Sam 15.22 Psalm 50.23. Esai. 58.3.4.5.6. himselfe. Therefore I say to thee, to conclude this point; As the Israelites here in my Text, even before they offered their burnt offrings, and drinke offrings, their Oyle and their Wine, their Rammes, and their Lambes, they first offer, as the best Vsher and prologue of acceptance, their obeysance externall: yea better, their obedience internall, to God, and the King: So doe thou; otherwise, as Peter said to SimonAct. 8.20. Magus, though baptized, Thou and thy money perish together: I say to thee, though a professor, if a profaner, in sinnes committed (in such duties omitted) as formerly prescribed, Thou and thy praying, thy blessing, thy hearing, thy Sacramentall receiving, (deceiving,) and all thy professing, confessing, profaning, disioyned from the obedience of the Law, legall from the obedience of faith, Evangelicall; perish together. A ^rotestant

was once in Popish crueltie, unjustly burnt with a Bible about hisSee M. Masons abridgement of the acts and Monuments, pag. 203. Gen. 42.20. necke: but thou maist in Gods justice justly burne in hell with Bible in thy mouth, and profanesse in thy heart and life. Therefore as Ioseph said of bringing * Benjamin; I, of sincere obedience; Bring it, or else, never stand before the Lord anie more in his holy Temple, unholy, unhappie man that thou art.
I cannot pretermit another observance, without bringing by application, some of their Honie into our owne Hive: These people are not onely obedient to the jussions, and summons of their Prince: but as the grace of this Grace, as a pearle in gold, their obedience is speedie; as quicke as thought, as lightning. Davids word, is the watch-word; they are in a readinesse: his command gives fire, they discharge presently a whole volly of blessings. Which promptnesse of theris, justly blames, and shames the refractorie obstinacie of manie Christians in all degrees and professions: for manie inferiors, wives to their husbands, Children to their Parents, servants to their Masters, subjects to their Governours; as they give their Superiors an absolute negative by their words or practise, that they will not doe such and such duties injoyned, morall, matrimoniall, naturall, Theologicall, but rather crosse and contradict, as Ziphorah did the circumcision of herExod. 4.25. Sonne: So when at last, though long first, they are perswaded, it is with such a haling, and pulling, and drawing, as the Beare to the stake, the Bull to the ring, the Asse to his burthen. What they doe, is haled and extorted from them, as almes from an Vsurer, prece, andNihil car^^^^ emitur, quam quod precibus. precarie. they are either as Haukes, lured to it by faire words, and promises; as theLaudando saltant, onera gravissima portant, (...) turres armatat, Atlia. etc. li. 4 cap. 23. Basilius exem. hom. 9 Albertus lib. 22. Elephantes, to draw great burthens, by the praises or flatteries of their keepers; like Wind-mils, grinding nothing, nor once wheeling about, without the winde of applavses: or wonne by gifts, (as Children to their Bookes, by Nuts and Apples) or whipt and beat to it, as trewantly boyes to their schooles, or lazie prentices to their workes. How ever; what they doe in anie prescribed dutie, goes against the haire invita Minerva, as the proverbe is, against Gods forbid. Hence it is, that we see manie wives as stuborn against their husbands as Oakes, in stead of drawing in the same yoake, (as when an Israelite,

and a Cananite (chiefly) match together) like two Sparrowes I have seene tied at the two ends of a packe-threed; the one drawes one way to the Church, the other, to a Masse; the one to a Sermon, the other to a play; their wils mixing together, as oyle and water: or if Lots wife, post varios casus, after much parlee and pleading the case, bee at last haled out of Sodom, to a savingGenes. 19.20. Zoar, yet it's neither with heart, nor good will: shee lookes backe againe with an aspect, to what shee doth respect:Gen. 19.24. aspexit, respexit: vide Parreum in locum. her heart hath no heart to travell with her bodie: she hath a months minde to her Masse againe:2. Peter. 2.19. Canis ad vomitum, etc. So for children: How many do we see perverse and stubborne against their Parents, not to be bowed more then cold Iron or steele, as hard waxe, unyeelding to anie good impression, uncapable of counsell, either from father or friend; swimming withoutNatare, fine Cortice. Erasmus. a Corke, disposing of themselves how, when, and where they please, be their Parents willing or nilling; walking and jetting up and downe, as Iacke-gentleman, or as Masterless hounds, meere Individuum vagums, without any calling, wandringIud. 13. Planets, spending and mispending their monyes andLuk. 15.13.14.15. Vide Bosquerum de filio prodigo parte secunda in locum. meanes as the Gospels prodigall, without anie hoe,Hic and vbique here, or there: having so manie homes (as a hedge-hogge hath nests, or a Foxe, starting holes,) that they have no true home, no honie Hive! yea which is worst of all, some of them so wedded to theirStat pro ratione voluntas, aut voluptas. will, that they will wed where they will, be their Parents pleased or displeased: like that profaneGen. 26.32.35 Esau, that will marrie with daughters of Heth. though to the griefe of old Isaac, the heart-breake of Rebecca. So for servants: How manie be there which stirre like posts at their Masters bidding (nay at their Masters beating!) How manie hasten about their businesse, as the Oxe to his yoake, as swift as snailes; with as good wils as captives to their Turkish gallies, or fellons to the gallowes! like Miphibosheth his servant, (more lame in his love and obedience, then his master was on his legs) stayes so long in fetching his Masters Mule, till the tyde was past, the opportunitie lost of meeting David, to his no small prejudice, by the scycophantizing of2. Sam. 19.26.29. Ziba. Most servants being so carelesse, negligent, sluggish, and secure now a dayes, that what they doe in their Masters occasions, is commonly

undone; being by their negligence oft unseasonable, as Raine in Harvest, or a pardon after an execution: their obedience at last, shewing it selfe, like exquisite Musicke, in the right managing of occasions; yet being too long in tuning, which disgraceth all. So for subjects in the Common-welath: How manie millions in manie Christian kingdomes (to passe by Iewes, Turkes, and Pagans) are as unlike this people here specified in my Text, as Crowes to Eagles, as Tygers to Lambes! who being commanded by their governours, and injoyned these things, that immediately concerne the worship of God; as to breake down Altars, pull downe Images, consecrate their hands to the Lord, as Moses commanded the Levites in hisExod. 32.29. time, executing Idolaters (as1. King. 18.40 Elias, and2. King. 10, 24 Iehu commanded the suppressing of the Priests of Baal, and2. King. 11.15 Iehoida the slaughter of that usurping Athalia,) or injoyned, as our Irish at this day, to come to our Church, to joyne with us in conformitie, uniformitie of worship, as sheepe of one folde, with the like particulars: they prevaile as much with their injunctions, mulcts, impositions, (yea in some measure, in former times, compulsions) as Lot prevailed with his sonnes inlaw, to leaveGen. 19.14. Sodom, or Ieremie with the Iewes, to submit themselves to the King ofIer. 37. and cha. 38.2.3.4. Babell. Nay, what ever the Magistrates prescribe, or wee perswade in publicke, or private with them about the worke; what ere wee can say or doe, it moves them, as colours affect a blinde man, or Musicke a deafe man. Yea (as theAct. 17.32.33 Athenians did with Paul,) when wee perswade them to leave these unknowen gods, which they worship; Saints, Angels, Shrines, Images, Relickes, Crosses,These seven kindes of Idolatries, are imputed to them by M. Powel, li. 2. de Antichristo by D. Raynolds, de Idolatria Romana Ecclesiae. Crucifixes, and to worship the true God in spirit and truth: they now worshipping, like theIohn. 4.22. Samaritanes, they know not what. exhorting them (as Ezekiah by his Poasts and messengers exhorted his people) at last to awaken out of their Idolatrous2. Chro. 30.6 7.8 9. slumber, and to keepe a spirituall Passeover to the true God: wee reape the same harvest from this seede, which Paul and these Poast-men reaped; scorne, contempts, scoffes, and derisions.
So againe, lawes being established against this biting usurie, against profaning of the Sabaoth, excessiue pride in apparell,

ingrossing of Corne, against thefts, robberies, rapes, and other breaches of Civill and religious peace, in sinnes against God and man: all which are so many Edicts, Statutes, Proclamations, revealing the will and mindes of Christian Kings. Alas how are they observed, notwithstanding all the annexed mulcts, and penalties against the infringers (besides the sins, and threatnedPsal. 11.^. Psalm 50.18.20 21. Iob. 20.12.13. 1. Cor. 6.9. plagues in respect of the soule?) If I should anatomize our times, and rippe into particulars, I could more then Mathematically demonstrate, that our Commonaltie grow worse by restrainte; like the fire, that more breakes out, the more it is supprest; as some running brooke, that more swels, roares, and rageth, the more it is stopt; as Cammonmile, which they say more spreades, the more it is trod downe or as some stearne Colt, and unruly unbroken Stallion, which more friskes and flings, and plungeth, the more he is curbd and kept in.Ruimus in vetitum nefas, cupimusque negata. and yet the restrainte of the lawes is not the cause of the increasing irregularities, no more then fire is cause of colde, or then the Scripture is cause of heresies, or the chiefe good, of the chiefe evill: but onely perverse rebellion, and native hereditarie corruption, breaking out by opposition.
I might here also expostulate, how farre differing from this people are these, which are not onely refractorie in things spirituall, to Christian Princes, having in verie truth no King, nay hardly anie God but their Pope, whom they make an other God onTu es alter Deus in terris, nec Deus nec homo, sed medium inter utrumque, Leo de Tribu Iuda: Such like blasphemous titles, their Canonists, and Sycophants, give to the man of sinne. earth; with other blasphemies: (as the Iewes said when Christ should have beene received their Messias, Wee have noIoh. 19.12.15. King but Cesar) but are stearne and stuborne also, if not rebellious in denying subjection in things temporall, as namely, Taxes, Subsidies, Tenthes, or the like: (which even the whole world in a manner gave to Augustus) About the exactings, and collections of which; by some factious ring-leading fire-brands, it's wondrous to observe in histories, what mutterings, murmurings, mutinies, rebellions, factious insurrections have beene in manie Christian kingdomes; to the effusion of seas of bloud, the breach of the publicke peace, the weakening and wasting of manie States, besides private mens estates, and the losse of so manie Collectors lives: as happened to Adoram, the gatherer

of Roboams tributes, whom all Israel stoned with stones, 1. Kings, 12. vers. 18.


SECTIO. V. Expostulation with our refractorie, and rebellious times; disobedient to God, to Man, to Ministerie, to Magistracie.
BVt leaving these, and to expostulate with the multitude of our common people. How farre hetroclite, and defective are they, in respect of this people, in respect of their Christian obedience to the Ministerie, as well as to the Magistracie? David as a Prince, as a Prophet, prescribes, perswades here the people to blesse God; they blesse him: to sacrifice; they sacrifice, Rammes, and Lambes: to rejoyce before the Lord; to eate and to drinke with gladnesse of heart: to contribute, to the Temple; they bring tallents of Gold, Silver, Lead, and Iron, in aboundance. Hee no sooner speakes, but they performe: hee prescribes, they practise; they worke, what hee wils. Oh this harmonicall Musicke, betwixt a zealous tongue, a circumcised eare, a yeelding will, a consenting heart, an active hand! where shall this consort be heard, or seene amongst our plebeians? Oh what occasion have wee, that are Pastors, and preachers, to complaine, declaime yea exclaime, against the refractorie perversnesse of our people; that we speake (as Orpheus sung) to stockes, and blockes? that we crie (as Diogenes begd) to meere images ofSee Staffords Diogenes, as also one of Guevaras extant Epistles of Diogenes. men, without spirituall motion? that wee doe surdo canere, sing to deafe men, put meate in the mouthes of dead men, washJer. 13.23. blacka-moo^es, spend our breath in vaine, sowing amongst stones andMath. 13.6.7 thornes, beating the ayre, plowing (asApud Homer. that Vlysses) the sands, casting our seede into bogges and quag-mires; yea dispersing our lost labours, into the winde, and reaping theOperam and oleum perdere. whirle-winde, verba periunt cum sonitu, our words (eccho-like) perishing with the winde; returning, as some Embassadors, from great Princes, in some land, or sea expeditions, without anie performance? Our people to whom we call, and crie for the practicall performance

of many duties, seem to be like the Baalites Baal, either a sleepe, or1. King. 18.27 wearie, or their wits gone, a wooll gathering, that they neither heare us, heede us, nor understand us. Convince their conscience wee may, as Christ oft convinced the Scribes and Pharisees, Paul the false Apostles, Augustine the Manichees and Pelagians, Beza some learned Papists in his disputes before the Cardinall ofWho wisht one day, that Beza had no tongue, or his Auditors no cares. Loraine: but till God give the grace, wee cannot convert them. Wee may by motions perswade them toMark. 1.15. repenance, from dead workes, (as did our Saviour himselfe, Iohn hisMath. 3.1.10 predecessor; the Scribes, Pharisees, Publicanes, Sinners, Souldiers, of their time) to humiliation for sinne, to familie duties; to which theZach. 12.11.12. command, yea the comination ofIer, 10.25. God, and practise of theGen. 18.18. 2. Sam. 6.20. Ioshuah, 24.15. Saints, injoyns them: to sanctification of the Sabaoth, they and theirExod 20.8. Esai, 58.13. husholds, in publicke, in private: to elimosynarie workes of mercie; to leave their brutish and beastly drinkings, their Germaine quaffes, their drunken,A conttrario ut bellum, quos^ minime bonum, lucus quasi minime lucen: being such Clie^ts to Bacchus, that they are beholden to Esculap^ut. unhealthfull healths, their good, bad fellowship, their Goatish, Swinish lusts, their Lionly oppressions, their Fox-like frauds, their grinding extortions, biting usuries, shiftings, sharkings, colloguings, cousenings, cony-catchings, mony-catchings, chiefly their vain, profane, divellish, damnable swearings, forswearings (wch they may aswel spare, as the dirt or parings from theirPsal. 25.3. nayles, the smoake from their Chimneyes, as inexcusable) affording (what other lusts promisse,Gen. 29.25. Laban-like, without performance) neither profit, nor pleasure: with mortification of all other sinnes, as prejudiciall to their soules, as Ratsbaine in their meate, poyson to their stomackes, a dagger or a dart, transfixt to their heart; setting the best edge wee can, upon their affections (by all the preaching rules of Ecclesiasticall Rethoricke, prescribed by theHunnius de Methodo concionandi, Kickerman in Rhetorica Ecclesiastica, Perkinseus de arte prophetandi. learned) in our exhortations, to Morall or Theologicall vertues, or dehortations from vice. Yet, like him in the Comedian, though they be perswaded, they will not beEtiamsi persuaseris non persuadibis. perswaded, being, as it were, mad withCum ratione insanire. reason; shutting their eyes against the Sunne, kicking against theAct 9.5. prickes, worse still for the Physicke: as in a consumption of grace, languishing more and more, even when they seeme to have good stomackes to their meate; this spirituall Manna dwining away, as some children that

have inward diseases, even whilst they seeme hungeringly and affectingly to sucke the milke of the1. Pet. 2.1. Word, from the dugs of the two Testaments; perishing spiritually for want of digesting practise, even whilst this meate, this milke, this Manna, is in their mouthes: as the carnallNumb. 11.34 Israelits, with their lusted Quailes, even in eating fild the graves of lust Insomuch, that when I reade what authors have writt ofMela, Solinus, Gellius, Plinius, Orosius, Lycosth. monsters, some with their great hugeSciopedes sunt apud Indos Maiolus col. 2. pag. 81 and Hippopodes, Mela. lib. 3. c. 63. Plin. lib. 4. c. 13. feete, great heads, greatOculis in pectore, (...) fixis Plin. li. 5. c. 8 li. 7. c. 2 Aug. li. 16. c. 8 de Civitat. Dei. Sic Monoculi, and Agriophagoi, apud Solin. c. 19. c 32 c. 53. and Cyclopes apud I^ido. li. 11. cap. 3. eyes, greatMela. li. 3. c. 3 eares, great teeth, great lips, greatMela. lib. 3. c. 4. Solin. cap. 32. Plin li. 6. cap. 30 cum alijs. tongues; me thinkes our common people, the greatest monsters: some of them being upon our Sabaoth and Lecture dayes, all eares, to sucke and spunge up our Sermons; yet (as other monsters or Serpents, creeping on all foure) in their practise, as drunken men, disgorge againe presently in the Churchyard, what they seemed to gulph downe in the Church: or as Lead and Iron, instantly cooling, as soone as they come out of the fire of the Ministerie, and feele the cold ayre of the world blowing upon them: though seemingly washed, when they are in the waters of the sanctuarie, stirred by the preachingIohn. 5.4. Angel; yet soile againe as soone as ever the infected dust cleaves to their feete. Wee whip them by Legall terrours, as parents their young children with rods, when wee get them in Gods house, for soyling, spoyling, dabling their garments (their flesh their natures, their soules) with filthy sinnes; yet as soone as ever they are out of our sight, in everie Ale-house, and Tap-house, they are swatling and dabbling againe, in the quags, and myres of pollutions, as little Gooselings, and Ducklings, in their boggy ponds. We in the Church give them Antidots, Mithridates, Preservatives, and Curatives against sinne; and the world, with her Circean cups, poysons them still a fresh againe. Wee, with the belowes of our breaths for the time, kindle in them some sparkes of good desires and motions, as Paul did inAct. 26.28. Agrippa, Christ in the carnallIohn. 6.28.34. ch. 7.46. Iewes, Peter inAct. 8.24. Simon Magus,Luk. 3.12. Iohn in the Publicanes andMath. 3.6.7 Pharisees: but theRevel. 12.4. Dragon, the Devill, with the helpe of his agents, the flesh and world, presently quench them againe. they are shorter lived thenDe quibus apud Mela. l. 3. c. 4. Solin. c. 15 53 Plin. l. 4. cap. 11. li. 5. c. 29. Aug. de Civ. Dei, l. 16. c. ^ Pigmeyes, yea, thenPiscis Ephemero^, vn^ die ortus, and adultus, and mortuus, Albert. li. ^4 and Vincent. hist. li. 17. c. 47. Maiolu^. col. 9. pag. 36^. Ephemerons. Thus what we

weave, the spiritual enemies chiefly our corruptions, Penelope-like, unweave againe. Thus wee runne with them, as in a circle, in amaze, in a Meandrian Labyrinth; never the neerer, (like him that followes a seather, or butterfly) then when wee begun. Wee roule, as the phrayses are, Sisiphus his stone, and turne Ixions wheele: they give us the hearing, as this people did David, but only the hearing, without the heeding in which this people did more then they. Oh my bretheren, what mould be our hearts of? of what mettall be wee made? how are we hewen out of Caucasus? what flintie hearts have wee? what PumiceOculos habeo pumiceos, no^ possum vna catorquere lachrimulam, etc. apud Plautum. eyes? When I compare the docibilitie, the tractablenesse of this and other people, with our Lyon-like steamnesse, our Adamantine obduracie; mee thinkes, I compare againe, not worthies, with worthies, as in Davids1. Chro. ch. 11 v. 11.12.13.18.20, 22. time; (asIn Plutarkes lives, now Englished by Doctor Holland. Plutarch the Greekes with the Romaines) but worthies with wretches, with wicked ones: I seeme to poyze, and paralell againe Venus with Vulcan, Achilles with Clineas, Vlysses with Thirsites: yea Saints with Sinners, Devoute Proselites, with Incarnate Devils.


SECT. VI. Israels zeale and readinesse approved: our remissenesse in good dueties iustly redargued and reproved.
VVHen I consider how forward some have beene, even like Angels to do the will of God, immediatly from God, asGen. 12 4. Gen. 22.3. Abraham,Gen. 6.22. Noah,Exod. 4.18. Exod. 5.1 c 14.27 Moses,Iosh. 4. vers. 4. cap. 5.3. Ioshua,Iudg. 6.27. chap 7.6. Gideon, this our David, etc. and mediately from man, in God and for God, as here this people: withall, how froward and backward wee; blockish, in not knowing, like the Horse andPsal. 32.9. Mule; more beastly, in not acknowledging, with the Oxe andEsay, 1.4. Asse, our owne Master, our Maker: when I reade and ponder Abraham sacrifizing his owne, his one, his onely childe, loving beloved Isaac, the sonne of blessing, the blessed seed, typicall Christ, even with onceSee Parreus, Parerius, Calvin, and Marlorate in their Comments on Genesi^. exemplifying all the circumstances of Abrahams faith, and obcienc, in this intended act. bidding; and we not to sacrifice one lust, the least sinne, a tongue-oath, etc. with manie biddings: how Noah prepares the Arke, with one word; we prepare no Arke, no spirituall

Temple, no Tabernacles fit, no upper roume for ChristsMark. 14.14. Passeover no chamber of presence for the great King, no inner closet of the heart, for Gods spirit to inhabite; after manie words, manie woings, pulsations, sollicitations, pollicitations, and promises unto us, upon hisRevel 3.20. entrance. How readily Samuel answers the call of God, once1. Sam. 3.10. perceived: how carelesly we neglect it, though discerned a hundred times. How speedilyLuk 5.8.9.10 11. Ioh, 1.39 42. Peter, Andrew, and Iohn leave their ships and netts (the world with her snares)Math. 9 9. Matthew his Receit (deceit) of Custome, following Christ, as his docible Disciples, even at first call; as did alsoLuk. 19.6. Philip, Bartholomew,Luk. 19.6. Zacheus, with some others, embracing the first motion of his mercie, call of his word and spirit: we neglecting, rejecting so manie calls; frozen in our dreggs, as unwilling to leave our shippes, our netts, profites, pleasures, and insnaring lusts, to exchange them for Christ, for his grace, his Gospell, his spirit, his glory: asGen. 19.6. Lot or hisLuk. 17.32. wife to leave Sodome, Israel his EgyptianExod. 16.3. Onions, yea as the Mole to forsake the earth, the fish the waters, the childe his dugge, the foole his bable, though upon promises of farre better things. How soone Philip wonIohn. 1.45.46 47. Nathanael to know Christ the true Messias: how that Samaritan woman, upon once conference with Christ, perceives him, and receives him herIohn. 4.20.29. Saviour: how upon one testimonie, from that one single (odd) woman, the whole Citie upon the first mention, first motion, entertaine and receive him as their desiredver. 40.41.42 salvation: how upon one Text, opened and explaned by Philip, the Aethiopian Eunuch beleeves in Christ, isAct. 8.35.36 in Tom. 6. Bibl. Patrum, tota est historia largius. baptized; yea as a true (new) Proselite preacheth Christ, and plants the Gospell amongst his Nigroes, as isIren. li. 3. c, 12. and l. 4. 40. Euseb. li. 2. c. 1. Niceph. 1. c. 1. Hierom. c 3 Esai, and epistola 103, vbi Sanctu^ vocat, and apostolum Aethiopum, recorded: how in one Sermon of Pauls, Lidia's heart isActs 16.14, opened; one admonition from Paul and Silas, the Iaylor, with his whole houshold, isvers, 30, 31, 32 converted; one Sermon from Peter, Cornelius is confirmed, the holy Ghost, by his friends and houshold,Acts 10, 44 received; by another Sermon three thousand, even Christ-crucifying Iewes, touched in heart, wounded inActs 2, 37, 38, soule and conscience. Yea (still to keepe to my grounds, though I run descant never so oft, never so farre) how all this people, as heavenly Queristers, in my text are ringing and singing the prayses of God, upon the first begun

straines of David their Precentor. Comparing all these with our secure, and sensuall, and sinfull times, that are not wrought upon by anie meanes: not reclaimed (more then theDe feritate huius animalis Pli. l. 28 c. 8. and lib 8 c. 17. tametsi, si cu^ hedo assuefiat, domescit, instat. Aelian. lib. 6, c. 2 Panther can be tamed.) by any mercies: not to be turned from our vaine courses, discourses, more then the Seas out of their channell, by many (by any) motives* our hearts so crustie, so brawny; not to be pierced and penetrated, more then the scales of a Dragon, by any edge of the word, the sword of the Spirit: our diseases so desperate, so dangerous; not to be balmed, salved with any balme ofIer. ^.22. Gilead: our hearts so foule, like that AugeanOne of Hercules his workes to clense it, moralized by Maiolus, col. 1 part 1. pag. 13. And by Natales Comes in his Mythiologies. Stable, not to be rensed, clensed, with all the waters of the sanctuary. Yea more; when I seriously ponder (what some Historians pen) how docible, how pliable, how teachable, how tractable, even some brute creatures have beene toAs a Hart to Sertorius: Maiolus, Colloq. 7. pag 276, a Panther to the father of Philin. Plin. libr. 8. cap. 17. man: asB^tephalus Alex. Solin. c 46 Isidor. lib. 12. c. 16 Sic alij aequi alijs apud Diod. libr. 12. Ael^an. libr. 16. cap. 23. Horses,De docilitate Canum multa Plin. lib. 8. cap. 40 Aelian. 8 c. 30 and lib 6, c. 61. li. 5, c. 26. and li. 7. 10. 18 and Zonaras in Tiberio. Dogges, Apes,Mira de docilitate Elephantis, Aelian lib 4. cap. 9. and 7.39. Arist. lib. 9. cap. 46. and Albert lib. 8. tract 5 cap. 2 Sic de Camelo, Plin. lib. 8 cap. 18. and Leonius p 8. Elephants, Crowes; yea, if we beleeve some writers, how officious even Wolves andDe Leone famulante Androdium apud Gillium de noct. Attic. lib. 5. cap. 14. Aelian. lib. 7. cap. 43. Sic de Leonibus and Lupis, and Corvis famulantibus, Sanctos quosdam apud Surium com. 6. and in prato spir. cap. 107. Et in vita Sanctorum pag, 3, cap. 7, Lyons have beene to man, their acknowledged Lord: and yet that man himselfe should be so hardly tutored and trayned (without strayning and constrayning by the Iron rodds, and whip-cords of manie crosses and afflictions, inward and outward, as Gods last and best Physick) to yeeld homage, fealtie, honour, and service, submission, and subjection, and all the tributary duties of invocation, humiliation, gratulation, etc. to his maker, Lord, protector, preserver, and redeemer. Yea lastly, and to conclude all; when I ponder how easily wee are perswaded by any indiffere^t friend, to ought that concerns our morall good, as Moses by his Father in-law Iethro, to admitt of a helpe in hisExod, 18, 24. Magistracie,2. King, 5, 13, 14. Naaman to wash in Iordane: or disswaded from what is prejudiciall to us as theActs 16, 29, 30, Iaylor from killing himselfe, David from killing1, Sam, 25, 32, 33, ^^ Naball, chiefly how inclinable to our Lawyer, or Counsellor, laying our Case or Action, thus, or thus: moving in this Court, or removing to that, as may be to our best advantage, but especially to our

Physition, that by his prescript, wee take druggs, and pils and potions, though never so bitter as Aloes, Rubarb, and the like: be content to be dieted, to abstaine from what we love, as from Wine, in the Goute, Milke, in a Feaver, Eeles, Porke goose, etc. such stirring meates, in case of a greene wound, for feare ofSee Gales chirurgery, and the Generall practise of physicke in these cases. Impostumation, yea and for the preservation of health; prevention of sicknesse, to part with the bloud of our veins. I say pondering these, (and laying all these preceding paralels in one ballance) with the present condition of manie millions, that carelesse of their soules, (as Esther once of her life, If they perish, theyEsth. 4.16. perish.) are so hard to be drawen by God, or man, by the Word, or Sword, by preaching or beseeching, threatning or intreating, either from the leaving, or loathing of committed sinnes, or constant and conscionable performance of omitted duties: I say in the serious meditation, and consideration of these premisses, I cannot but lament the sinners follie, mans native and naturall stupiditie,Ierem. 8.6. inconsideration and miserie, our English Irish sensualitie, securitie, impietie, impenitencie; that though we have moe meanes, moe mercies moe cals to grace, then ever Iudea, or these formerly recited; yet we make lesse use of them then they, eyther in the Theorie, or Practise, of such gracious, such gratulatorie duties, as the Peeres and people, after the prescript and patterne of their Prince here performed.


SECTIO VII. The universalitie of Israels gratitude, with our universall ungracious ingratitude; paralelled, and compared.
MOreover to examine our grounds a little further: this first spring of my Text, abounding, you see, with spirituall waters to refresh the Israel of God; there being no word, letter, syllable, or hebrew pricke superfluous, or unsignificant in the language of Canaan: (as in Tully, Demosthenes, Eschins, Hortensius, and other following Orators humane) as the learned in the Originall tongues haveDrusius in suis annotationibus. Ren^etius in suae Pantheologia: Lelius, de expresso Dei verbo: Merneus de veritate Religionis, Zanthius de sacra Scriptura. observed, and from thence argued, the infallible veritie and excellencie of the

Scriptures, above all humane authors as aqua vitae, and distillatorie waters above conduit waters. It's verie remarkable here the generalitie of their gratulations, the conformitie, unity, uniformitie of their worship, their sacrifices; it's sayd all the Congregation though great and populous blessed God, all worshipped, all sacrificed, all feasted before the Lord. There was not a man of them of a contrarie minde, heart, spirit, judgement, will: in the best of workes they all drew as in one yoake, walked as by one rule or line, sung one note, kept one tune; there was not one crosse refractorie spirit that is taken notice of in the whole multitude, but they joyne together, their hearts and voyces to the blessing of God: Oh here was a blessed object to Davids eare and eye. I wish our David could see the like, according to his travails and desires; that all those differences, divisions, contentions, betwixt Prelacie and Presbetery in our English Israel, about blacke and white, and square and round, and sitting, and kneeling, with such ceremonies, so hotly controverted by the tongues and pennes of so many zealists, on both sides, pro and contra, in our Churches, Pulpits, Houses and private (as sometimes publicke) Tables; that all this might meete as right drawne lines in one Center ofRead the extant Treatises of our moderate Cassanders, as D. Sparkes, M. Sprint, M. As^aew his brotherly reconcilement. peace: that as wee agree in doctrine with all reformed Churches, notwithstanding all papisticall cavils, and calumnies to the contrarie: so we might agree also in discipline, in the circumstances as well as in the substance of Religion; not dissenting in the colour, forme, or fashion, shape, lace of the garment, when wee consent in the choyce goodnesse of the cloath. Oh that as we professe, confesse one God the father of all, one Christ the redeemer of all, oneEph. 4 4.5. Spirit the sanctifier of all the Elect: yea one Faith, one Baptisme, one Hope, one Life, one way to this life, as one Sunne, but one Soule in man, oneDe Phoenice, etiamsi multi dubitant, asseru^t tamen, Mela li. 3. cap. 4 Herod. li. 2. c. 5. Solin. c. 35. Imo describit Ruffinus enpos. Symbol Isodor. li. 12. c. 7. Aug. ser. 18* allegantur, etiam quaedam, in Concil. Aquisg. c. 112 113 Phoenix in the world, etc. so that wee would as one, in one minde, by onePsalm. 3.16. rule, worship this God inIohn. 4.24. Spirit, in truth, in unitie, in uniformitie of judgement and affections! And surely this harmonie I desire to see, to heare, as earnestly as Augustine desired in his time a Timothy, or Paul againe in theAugustin desired to see Christum in carne, and Paulum tonitruantem. Pulpit to effect with best mentall musicke. Oh that those strings, what ever they be, which are put out of Tune, would come up to these

that are in Tune: yea (if I may speake it without offence to God or man) as Paul in some cases wisht himselfe cutRom 9.3. off, and Moses his name blotted out of the booke ofExod. 32.32. life, for the zeale of Israel, I wish even my mummiamized earth and dead ashes might quench at last these unnaturall flames and fires in our English Church about these adiaphora, these indifferentAdiaphorists. things, as they are call'd, that like Aetna and that Vetruvius, the f^ogges and smoaks of scandals and offences, might no more breake out, to the choaking and smothering of the unsetled, ignorant and unstable. But, as was the meditation once ofD. Hall, our English Seneca, in his meditations, quem honoris causa nomino, another, I feare as theDe mirabili amore Pellicani sanguine proprio, pulloi resusscitatis, Aelian. lib. 15. Vincent. libr. 16. cap. 127. Et applicant ad Christum, Aug. enarrat. in Psal. 101. Gregor. in Psalm. 6. Pellican in love to her young (about whose nest the Indian shepheards make fires) thinking to quench the flames, doth but scorch her owne wings by which shee is taken: so in too much intermedling, by the scorching tongues of censure, I prejudice my selfe, without profiting the publike cause. Therfore stearing from these rockes. I desire to reflect upon this meditation, That all are here well affected to God, and the King, all thankefull, for mercies, all worshippers, all sacrificers. There was not one notified specified Cham in the Arke, not one Iudas amongst these docibles, (if not Disciples) not one at this feast, without the weddingMath. 22.11. garment, not a Tobiah and Sanballat that counterfeited their helpe to the TemplesNeh 4.1.2.3. building, not a Sheba, not an Achitophell, not a Popish Kerne, not a rebellious spirit amongst them all, not a Corab, orNumb. 16.12.13. a Dathan in this goodly (we may hope godly) Congregation, despising Iude, vers. 8. governement, resisting authority, not a tongue wagges as in former times; We have no parte in the Sonne of2. Sam 20.1. Isai, shall this man raigne over1. Sam. 10.27 us? to thy Tents oh Israel; not one that preferred a forraine Bramble,Iudges. 9.15. before their owne Cedar; not a man of them Iesuited, but if the oath of allegeance had beene put to them, would have subscribed with heart and hand; not one Recusant amongst all these that refused in the same religious maner to worship God, as his King worshipped; not an infected sheepe amongst all this flocke; not a string out of Tune in all this musicallMultitude is eyther an instrument Musicall, or that Bellua multorum capitum. multitude: not a contradicting superstitious Cananite, an Idolatrous Egyptian, amongst all these Israelites; but all of them (for as much as man could judge) with one heart, voice, and spirit, as the rushing of so

many waters, as the sound of so many Trumpets, as the noyse of so manie Cornets, so many Cymbals, and loud Cymbals, with united spirits (as Organs and instruments of Gods glory rightly tuned) resonate, and resound the prayses of the Almightie. Oh that I might be an auditor, a spectator, of such mentall Musicke in these dayes! Many musicall men have writ Boetius lib. 5. Musices c. 1. Glareamus li. 1. Dodechacordon c. 1. Athan. libr. 14. Dipnos. cap. 5. and cap. 14. Iulius Pollux libr. 4. Onomast. cap. 8. and 9.10.11. etc. ^elius Rhodig. Antiq. lect. lib 5. cap 23 25.26. Ottom Luscivius, libr. 1. Musurgia. Plato lib. 3. de Rep diversas numerans Musicae species, variaque instrumentoru^ genera. very curiously and exactly of the varieties, excellencies, and excellent effects ofDe admiranda vi Musices co^s^^^e, Arist. Iob. 8. polit. 5. and Plato dial. 6. de Legibus, Galenum li. 3. cap. 5 de M^pocrate, Amatum lib. 2. in Dis. or. ^.50 Gellium noct. Attie. lib. 1. cap. 10. Atheneum li. 14. Di^nos. c. 11. and lib. 1 c. 7. Infistento, in Ter^^dro Thaleto, and pheo Amphion. and in Cythar Agamemnon Musicke; and have distinguished it, into Vocall, Instrumentall, Lidian, Doricke, Naturall, Artificiall, Elementary, Celestiall, Regular, Choreall, Gregorean, Figurall, Mensurall: disputing about the preheminence of one of these before another; most preferring vocall, which they call solemnization, before instrumentall: But for my part, as much as I preferre the Soule before the bodie, I preferre the musicke of soules and spirit, uno animo, una voce; with one unanimous concord and consent rightly tuned in the best key, by the finger of the spirit, with holy hearts (rather the^ musicall Harps) singing, as once the Angels and the BethelemLuk, 2, 14, Shepheards, Moses andExod. 14, Miriam, Augustine andThey are said to be the Authors of that holy hymne, which call Te Deum, Ambrose, David here and his people, their holy hymnes, gratulatorie prayses, Io Paeans, (as our plantations this day) to the glory of the God of glorie, the giver of all grace. And sure, if ever I saw heaven upon earth, it is when a religious Pastor and a zealous people, are assembled together in Gods house upon the Lords Sabaoths (or a religious familie as a private or pettie Church) hearing, and preaching the word; as in Pauls time, continued the wholeAct, 20, 7 day, expounding Scriptures; as in EzrasNeh, 8.5.6, 7, 8 time, in publicke prayers early in the morning; as in Tertullians dayes, and the PrimitivePliny the Iunior testifies so much of them, in epistle to Traian apologizing for Christians, times, in some places and Churches in our times, singing of Psalmes, as our Saviour with his Disciples at his last Supper. Oh sure here is an Image indeed, of heaven; here is, in some parts of Gods worship, vita coelestis, vita celitum, the life of the Saints, in earth and in heaven: here is Bethell, Gods owneGen. 35, 7, house, the place is holyExod, 3, 5, ground, God himselfe here is present,
Marke 14, 26

walking in the middest of theRevel. 2.1. golden Candelstickes; (as he was with Sydrach, Mysaach, andDan. 3.24.25 Abelenago, singing in the Babylonian flames; and with these joyfull Saints, Saunders,Apud Foxum in Mart. ^ilogi^. Gl^ver, and others, who rejoyced and triumphed in the middest of that Romish Babylonian flames, in which the Martyres were tortured in Queene Maryes dayes:) here Christ himselfe is present and president too, as hee was with his Disciples after hisLuke 24. Resurrection and Ascension, in the dayes ofAct. 2.1.2.3 Pentecost, according to his promise. Whether there be naturall Musicke in nerves, arteries and sinewes, the simularie or dissimularie parts of the bodie ofOpinio: Heripinli Medici, Albere^, Durer^. and Tyurdei, l 2. Musices, vide and Tolosaeuum Syntax. ar^is Mirabil^, l. 12 c. 8 pag 189 man; or whether elementarie musicke in the elements, asIn Tymeo, and in Platonem Marsil. Ficinus. Plato,In sonno Scip. and Macrob. in Ciceronem lib 2. c. 1 Tully, Matrobius thought; or whether celestiall and heavenly musicke in the Spheares, as Py^hagoras firstApud Athen. lib. 14. cap 14. imagined, and to which manie learned men since in all ages, have in someVt inter Philosophos, Plat. li. 10. Reip. pa. 670. Macrob. lib. 2. de somn. Scip. c. 3. p. 90. Plutarch. de musica tom. 2 pa. 707. Inter Poetas Aristoph. in nubibus act. 1. scan. 3. pa 169. Virgil. Aeneid. pag 167 Manilius l. 1. pa. 25. Iuter Theologes Anselm. demundi magine, ca. 24. tom. 3. pag. 300. Beda de musica practicit, tom. 1. p. 417. Ma^imus T^ius, serm. 21. p. 256. and ser. 23. pag. 280. sense subscribed, though by others contradicted, others disputed, others doubted: these musicall controversies to me are not much materiall. Here is that musicke which as David said of Goliahs sword,1. Sam. 21.9. ther's none like unto it: Here is the musicke of musickes, as Salomons Canticles are called, the song of songs, to which the Quier of heaven, joynes with the Chorus of Saints in earth. At this the Angels rejoyce,Luke 15 vers. 10. as at tht conversion of sinners; With this God himselfe is delighted, his spirit ravished, refreshed, more then ever Alexander, or any other was wrought upon, by modulations of anie earthly man. Where on the contrarie (to make application to our owne times) if ever I saw the verie image, and picture of hell; it is when a carelesse Emperick of Soules, a doltish Sir Iohn-lack Latin a blinde Pholypheme, a profane Esau, one of Ieroboams priests, 1. King. 12. vers. 31. is placed over a people of Sodom:Isay 1. v. 10. as a Wolfe over goats; whereupon Gods owne Saboths, which should be consecrated as glorious daies to the Lord,Ier. 17.27. are perverted and profaned rather to the service of Bacchus, Priapus and Venus, as once the heathenish Floralia, and Bacchanalia, etc. that the Devill should so rule and raigne in the popish or profane parish, keepe such a rackett, as the chiefe steward, both with Pastor and people; that neyther barrell being better Hering in stead of preaching, there

should be pyping, or idle prating, playing, as the Israelitish wantons once with the Moabitish women: Numb. 25. in stead of Devotion; dauncing in stead of singing of Psalmes, discharging of oathes, like vollies of shott, and roarings of Canons, with full, foole, foule mouthes, even in the very face of the Almightie. Oh the difference betwixt Davids dayes and ours, those Ioviall, Saturnall golden dayes, in which he lived; and our Iron irefull times! Davids people, had they acted, such publicke parts of Gods prayses in our dayes; worshipped God, so seriously, so solemnely, so sincerly now; they had beene counted and called Puritans, Precisians, every mothers sonne of them: many anGen. 21.9. Ismalite would have scoft them: manie a2. Sam. 20.6. Micholl mockt them; yea had but part of this Congregation assembled in the night, as the persecuted Christians were sometimes occasioned for their securitie, and the Disciples after ChristsActs 12. v. 12 Ascension; had there beene any religiousChiefly a Damosell Rhoda, as Act. 12.13 Shee would be counted and called too, an ^^rodias. women amongst them, though Mary Magdalens, Salomees or Susanas. they should all have beene taxed, and traduced to have beene of the Family of love, or lust; Adamits or Anabaptists; they had beene censured everie one; their devotions had been turned on the tipp of malignant tongues, into promiscuous daunces; they had escaped no better then the Primitive Christians, or then the sincerest in those dayes: at least they had beene counted more precife then wise, more hypocriticall then holy, thus publicke to prayse, and worship God, which they might have done well enough in private, without this Heraulding, and Trumpetting Gods prayse (and in his, their owne) perhaps they had not escaped the imputations, which Festus gave untoActs 26.24 Paul, and2. King. 9.11 Iehues consort Captaines to the annoynting Prophets, even of mad men.


SECT. VIII. Davids times, and ours, further ballanced; inrespect of multitudes, then Religious, now Irreligious.
THus David and his people were, as in a plurifie or burning feaver of zeale, carried up, as2. King. 2.11. Elias, as in a fiery Chariot: we are now in a cold palsie, frozen as Esops snake, yea, as

De frigiditate Salamandri, Discorides lib. 2. c. 5. Galenus de Temper. lib. 3. cap. 4. Et Aug. de Civit. Dei, lib. 21. cap. 4. Salamanders not to be heated, extinguishing all sparkes and fires that are put in us by good motions from God, or put to us by good motives from man. Oh the difference betwixt their blessing Shibboleths and our smoakie, stinking, blaspheming,Iudges. 12.6. Sibboleths! Reflect on my Text, and at first blush you see al this numerous and populous Congregation, blessing and worshipping God, to be blessed and praysed for ever: reflect on our times, and it would make anie true Nathaniel, that hath but a glimpse or dram of grace; his face to blush, his heart to bleed, his eares to tingle, to heare in thousand Parishes, and Congregations in England and Ireland (except some few, which feare an oath) the most part, chiefly in Ale-houses, Taverns, Innes, and Tippling houses, when the Devill and strong drinke is in, and the wit's out, not onely with tongues poysoned, as Aspes, blaspheming the best of men, as the drunkards, that made songs of David: but even setting their mouthes against heaven, barking against the soveraigne Majestie of the Almightie, as the Egyptian dogge against the Moone, tearing (as the Lion a Kydde, or the flesh Wolfe a sheepe) the heart, wounds, bloud, yea nayles, feete, guts, yea all the parts of Christs humanitie, as though like Cannibals, they would eate his verie flesh againe (not as our Masse Priests and Papists in a blinde devotion, but) even in despight, as though with the Iewes they would Crucifie againe the Lords glorified bodie, and wound his wounds a fresh. Oh, the blasphemies of the multitude (in stead of blessings) for which the land mourns! Can a man come to any publike assembly (unlesse in Assises, Sessions, and such Courts where silence is injoyned) and, as I have purposely observed, at Horse-races, Dogge-races, Men-races, in Markets, Fayres, Marriages, occasioned Feasts, and all publike meetings, from Nobles to Pages, from Knights to Plow-men, ther's not a man amongst Ten (to speake, which swearers doe not, within compasse) that makes conscience of an oath (chiefly of their faith and troath, which pawne they upon every triviall occasion) more then an Ape, as they say to cracke nuts? And as it holds in other places, so chiefly (as I see too experimentally in these our Plantations, in my observance) great men, Knights, Gentlemen, Yoemen, Husband-men, Servants, Serving-men,

Prentices, Pages, yea Women and Children, Matrons and maydes, and old wives too (whose tongues wanting the garrison of Teeth, hang as loose as the rest) have no oftner the use but the abuse of their tongues in this needlesse, unpleasing, unprofitable sinne, chiefly when heated with wrath, and words, or in the bickerings of contestations, how doe not onely great, but even base spirits, revenge themselves upon God himselfe? wreaking their Teene by oathes upon the Creator, when they are any way provoked, by the creature; as if a spirited mastife, being whipt by another, should fly in the face of his master? as King Henryes foole, that being struck by any is said to stricke againe, ever his next fellowe, whether he hurt him or no? But come now to our rascalitie, or riffe-riffe of the route, of the basest of the commonMobile and ignobile vulgus. people, and you shall heare them, in their ordinarie talke, conference, commerce, working or walking together (besides what they act upo^ the Tribunall of their Ale-bench, in which these Serpents turne then Dragons) rapping, darting, yea laughing out, moe oathes in an houre, then ever they did good deedes all their dayes, croaking like so many Frogges, barking as so manie Dogges, as so manie Adders spitting their verie venome and poyson so in the very face of God, as a man would thinke he were amongst so many Devils, and Hell-hounds. I pretermit the curses, execrations, imprecations of our people, blasphemings, dallyings, jestings withIte procul, ite profani. Scriptures and Sermons as with edgeNon est bonu^, ludere cum Sanctis. tooles, mutterings, murmurings against God, as once rebellingExod. 16. Numb. 11. Numb. 16. Israel, gruntling as Swine, if but toucht with the least crosses, hissing like Snakes and Serpentes, in the least fire of afflictions: Oh this is to speake the language of Ashodd, as accursed Cananites, whereas we should speake the language of Canaan, as these blessing Israelits. If I should presse the practise of this Prince, and people further, and lay ours to it, in an equall ballance comparing what they did with what wee doe not, as blacke compared to white, seemes moreContraria iuxta se opposita, magis ^lucescunt. blacke; as the Heathens Vulcan, compared to their faire Venus, seemes more foule: so our Congregation and Commonaltie, seeme as more sinfull, compared with these Saints, in Davids dayes; They are all dutious, devout* obsequious,

thankfull, religious, at least in the outward man (for God onely knowes the heart and searcheth theIer. 17.9.10 Reines and knowes, whether there were amongst this Congregation (as amongst ours) any guildedLuke, 11.39 40.41.42. Posts, painted Sepulchers, SodomsSolinus cap. 36 Tacitus libro vltimo animalium, Aegisippus lib. 4 ca. 18. Imo de his Pomis Sodomiticis, Mira refert Tertul. apol. cap. 39. O^osius lib. 1. cap. 6. August. de Civitate Dei, lib. 6. cap. 30. and 21. cap. 5. Praecipue Cyprianus de excidio Sodomae. Apples, rott at the Core, hollow hearted Hypocrits. But hoping the best, when wee can onely suspect, (not detect) the worst: even the generalitie of our plebeans, our vulgar people come short of these, in that they have hardly so much as shewes; they come not so neere heaven, as did sacrificingGen. 4.4.5 Cain, weepingHebr. 12.16 Esau, the vowingProuerb. 7 Harlot, the carnallEven Doeg himselfe, 1. Sam 22. will offer a sacrifice. Israelite, prophesingNumb. 23.8.9 Balaam, preachingActs 1.23.24. Iudas, the prayingLuke. 18.13 Pharisee, the foolishMatth. 25. Virgins, the fastingEsay 58. Iewes, the humbled1. King. 21 vltimo. Ahab, the Herodian hearer, the devoute Iewish women, the temporizing Hypocrite, and other retchlesse reprobates; for these had at least shewes of religion, as hadColl. 4.14. 2. Tim. 4.10. Demas,1. Sam. 11.15 and chap. 14. v. 33 Saul himselfe, and many moe; a name at least to live, like the Church ofRevel. 3.1. Sardis, how ever, like those wanton widdowes in1. Tim. 5.6. Timothy, dead whilst living in sinnes andEphes. 2.1. trespasses; yea buried and stinking in Gods nosthrils, asIohn. 11.39. Lazarus in mans: But our common Christians, for the most part, their courses are so lewd, that pleasing God, as a common woman doth her husband, they have not so much as a shew to live; they haue not so much as figg-leaves of outward profession, much lesse the fruite of practise; they want both stocke, and that which (as they say) shewes any substance of grace; they doe not so much as seeme religious, they have not even shadowes, their whole profession is profanation. I know God hath his elected ones in every place and people, chiefly where the meanes be planted (as where also they be unplanted or corrupted) I know God had his Lot inGenes. 19.2. Pet 2. Sodom, his Noah amongst theLuke. 17.26. Genes 6.8. worldlings, his Elias and seven thousand moe unseene amongst the1. King. 19 18. Baalites, his Sydrach, Mesach, and Daniell inDan. 3.13. Babylon, his Ezekiell amongstEzek. 2.6. Scorpions, his Abraham inAct. 7.2. Mesopotamia, his Davids in the very Tents of Kedar andin Psalmis, Mesek, his Ioseph in the Court ofGenes. 41.45. Pharaoh, his Israel inExod. 3.7. Egypt, yea such as

hated the Babylonian whoore, and by their pennes and tongues discovered her filthinesse, even in the darkest times ofSee them expressed and nominated, by that learned worke of the B. of Meath, De statu and successu Ecclesiae, out of all Records and authors, ancient and Moderne. Poperie. I know, as the Lord had aIohn 1.44. Philip in Bethaida, a Nathaniel inIohn 21.2. Cana, a Lazarus, a Martha, a Mary, even in that littleIohn. 11.5.18. Bethania, a Simeon, a Ioseph, a Zachary, a Ioseph of Arimathea, that looked for the Redemption and Consolation Israel, even in the middest of a bloodie and sinfull Ierusalem; a Cornelius, a devouteAct. 10.1. Centurion, even amongst the bandes of Romane souldiers; yea, a thundering Christian Legion in the campe of a heathenishOf this legio^ who obtayned Raine to the saving of the Emperours armie, and how from the power of prayer, they were called Legio fulminatrix, we read in Text ad Scapul. and in apol. ca. 5. in Eus. l. 5. c. 5. in Iustin. apol. 2. ad Auto. ad finem in Alsted. Theol. ^^t. sect. 3. pag. 731. Emperour, even a Church in the house of Nero himselfe: so in the profanest Places, Times, Cities, Townes, Parishes, yea sometimes Families, there be some that feare God, that keepe themselves free from the contagions of the times, hate the garmentIude 23. polluted by the flesh, save themselves in the midst of a sinfull generation, stand in the gappe, as Moses and Aaron byNumb 16.22 prayer, to prevent deserved plagues; yea, I say, even in the profanest housholdes there be sometimes some holy ones, sometimes aGen. 39.1.2. Ioseph in the house of Putiphar, a Iacob in the house ofGen. 29. Laban, a religious young mayde in the house of Naaman the2 King. 5.1.2. Syrian. I say there be even still some come amongst chaffe; but alas these Godly ones are thinne sowne, here one, and there one, as vnious; here one of a Tribe, and two of aIer. 3.14. Citie, as pearles amongst pibbles, compared with the multitude of blasphemous swearers, Goatish adulterers, Swinish drunkards, biting usurers, Theeves, profane Sabboth-breakers, and others, given over, like Ahab and Iezabell, to commit all wickednesse with greedinesse. Alas, the true Nathaniels, compared with these Nabals, these sensuall, sinfullPs. 14.1. prov. 7.7. Proverb 8.5. Luk. 12.20. fooles, as God cals, and accounts them, which swarme as the Locusts and Grashoppers in everie place, as Egyptian frogges in Court, Countrey, Citie; they are so few, that thus shine as Starrs in this our darke night of Poperie and profanesse, so manie are carried away to all sinfull courses, with the verie streame and torrent of the times that we may say (as we see) that all are not so much; as seemingly religious, as here in Davids Court and Campe: But as David complaines in thePsal. 14.1.2. Rom. 3.10.11.12 Psalmes, we may say our Congregations comment, That all are gone out of the way, all, for the

generalitie, are corrupt and become abominable: their throat is an open sepulcher, their feete readie and swift, to shed bloud. So little doe our multitudes paralell these people, so praysed in my Text, for praysing God and other religious duties.




THE THIRD PART.

CHAP. I. Application of all, to our English-Irish Israel.
HItherto wee have seene David act his part; in his Gratulatorie prayse, on the publicke stage; Piously, Personally, Publickely, Primarily. The people theirs, Innitiatorily, Propensly, Obsequiously, Vniversally, after their Prince his patterne, and jussion the severall points and passages have beene made ours, by application: but as the marrow, and quintessence of all, that may be extracted, which concernes our meeting, and the solemnization of these dayes; take this for the conclusion of all, as my aymes and ends, in all that's spoken, without which, there's but a confusion of all; That where God blesseth, hee must bee blessed againe: a dignitie requiring aBeneficium postula^ officium. dutie, a benefit from God, a blessing of God: all that hath beene sayd (as the hand in the Dyall to the houre) pointes to this point; everie part opened alreadie, and applied, being commixed as severall drugs, that in joynt operations they may purge our ingratitude. Which because it is as a humour viscous and glutinous, (like Duodecim filij superbia, vide inobedientia, ostentatio, ^nri^fitas, and cum cateris, ingratitudo, lege apud Bernardinum de B^stis, in concioribus, Titulo de Superbia. Pride the mother of it, and like the Devill the father of it) hauing once gott deepe possession in the hearts of our Nation, is heard to be dispossessed, pleading manie yeares prescription; since also as a Rebell and Traytor against God, being unconfronted and not incountred, it daily waxeth stronger, and stronger, and gets head more and more; to the ruine of Kingdomes and Realmes, and supplanting of all where it gets dominion (as the usurping Turke with hisHee that raignes puts the rest to death, as Amurath. dispached his five brethre^, and Maho^^et had murthered Ze^^s; had he not f^ed; of which and many moe. Hee that will bee satisfied, let him reade the history of Scanderbeg, the Turkish historie, Pl^^thi^f^ his Pilgrimage, lib. 3. cap. 8. and Mi^ha^l ab Iss^l^ Comment. Anno 1555. brethren, as Athalia

with the Kings seed) putting to death everie grace, keeping out especially (as a Tyrant in an usurped Throne,) the true King, this Regall and Royall grace of gratitude: therefore for the suppressing of this Hell-bred Tyrant, and for the inthronozing this Tetrach, this Heaven-bred Monarch into his true seate, his legall Throne, the heart of man; chiefly to helpe it to regaine his Monarchie in the spirits of our Britanicall Nation, and of us their off-springs here Hybernified; I will not be wanting, according to my tallent, to cast this Cananite out of our borders; to crush the head of this Serpent, this viperous ingratitude; and to bring backe againe joyfully, (as the Iewes their exiled David from Hebron to2. Sam. 5.2.3. Ierusalem) this true grace of gratitude; as the Athenians at last, reduced their worthie Themistocles, and the Romanes their Tully, from their ostrocisme, etc. which that I may effect, as my heart desirously affects: I will use motives, as my chiefe spirituall weapons; Secondly, prescribe meanes, as the ordering of my Ranckes; Thirdly, removeQuod primum in intentione, ultimum in executione. I have not fully prescribed the meanes, nor removed the lets or remoraes as I intended; because the booke contrary to my first project swels so great alreadie: but quod defertur non aufertur, I promise them God willing, if ever these bee thought worthy reprinting: otherwise, satis est voluisse, and vl^ru posse, non est esse. impediments, as the discoverie of Ambushments. and these will we doe, as God and your patience shall permit.
First for the motives, (as ayming still method,) take them eyther generall, or more especiall, 1. Generall, as they concerne all Christians to be thankefull, of what sort, sexe, qualitie, conditions soever they bee; for all mercies, of what nature soever, reiterated, or renewed, to their soules or bodies; and above all things, to steare from this rocke, of ingratitude eyther to God the principall author and agent: or to man, the mediate organ and instrument of any good, to them or theirs. 2. Speciall, as they concerne the solemnization of these late mercies, in which we promise, and purpose to commemorate, and congratulate (as David and his subjects here in their times) the mercies of adornation, or preservation, to our English Israel, in which even we, now English-Irish, have deepely shared, 1. For the first; if any soule here present, or to whom soever these presents shall come, finde himselfe infected with this leprous disense of ingratitude; which as a fellon or gangreen, hath spread over the whole bodie almost of our Nation, and as poyson corrupted the blouds of so many.

Let him take these physicall purgatives for the cleansing and purifying of his infected spirits, the killing of the humor and tumour of pride, (the originall of it,) together with some Iulupps, and Cordials to corroborate his heart against it, and to breed and increase in him this good spirit, this good vitall bloud of true gratitude, the fayre daughter, of a fruitefull mother true grace.


CHAP. II. Motives to thankefulnesse.
FIrst let him know that this thankefulnesse hath his speciall mandate, and injunction from God in severallPsalm. 50.15 Psalm. 107. 1. Thess. 15.16.17. Scriptures; it hath his warrant and signe in the great Court of heaven; it comes from the great Monarch of the world, to every Microcosme, and little world; it is enacted in the highest Parliament, as Gods Statute law, and upon penaltie to the contrarie to be executed, by everie one. It's that taxe, and Subsidie and spirituall tribute imposed, and exacted upon everie subject, not denied crossed or contradicted by any, unlesse by some that like stuborne Forts, and Castles, stand in opposition, or as Kearnes come out in rebellion, against the supreame and soveraigne Majestie of God himselfe, The King of Kings yea this must be payd in our owne persons, of high, low, rich, poore, learned and unlearned, Prince, Peere, Potentate, Duke, Marquesse, Earle, Baron, Knight, Gentleman, Yeomen, Husband-man, Labourer, Plebeian, Common-beggar; wee cannot doe this dutie by a deputie or atturney, none can make affidavit one for another, as in our Civill Courts; even David a King is not exempted from this homage, neyther other Kings, much lesse the vulgars, if not Senatours, Magistrates and Patritians.
Secondly the easinesse of this taske if neglected, and unperformed, admits no apologie, no plea, nor excuse: great Subsidies and Customes imposed, as appeares in our Chronicles, and all Histories, have occasioned mutterings, murmurings, mutinies, rebellions in the Subjects as perplexed Israel against perverse1. King. 12.18 Robeam, and so inSee Stowes and Hellinsheds Chronicles. England about paying of Poll-money:

and Peter pence. But this imposition of gratitude to God (if God give grace) is as easily performed, as injoyned What great inconvenience was it for Naaman the Syrian, to wash in2. Kings. 5. Iordan? for the halt to wash in the Poole of Iohn 5 4.5. Bethsaida? for the Leaper to goe shew himselfe to the Luke, 17.14. Priest? for the poore widdow to throwLuke, 21.2. a mite into the Treasurie? for a man to open his mouth, and the doore of his lippes, or rather of the heart to God, (as the Marry-gold opens to the Sunne) and shewforth his prayses? if the Prophet had commanded thee some great thing, say the servants to that Syrian, thou oughtest to have done2. King. 5 ^^. it: So if the Lord should command us, in requitall of all his mercies, to give to the poore, not onely halfe withLuke 19.8. Zacheus, but (as he tryed that young Iustitiarie in theMath. 19.11. Gospell) even all our goods: wee ought to give all to him (for him) that hath given all to us: If he injoyne us to sacrifice our sonnes, as onceGen. 22.1.2.3. Abraham; to give our bodies to be burned, as once the Martyres in the Paganish, Arrian, and Popish persecution; wee should not grudge the Lord our goods, our blouds, our sonnes, yea our verie soules; as was once the case ofExod. 32.32. See D: Willes his Comment. in his Comment. in his Hexapla: in L^cadum in locum. Moses, and of Rom. 9. Paul himselfe, to vindicate and redeeme the glorie of God, to which every creature, in heaven and earth must be subordinate: but now he injoynes us a more facill and ready way, which wee may honour, and glorifie him, and that's by our Thankefulnesse, our Cordiall and heartie acknowledgement of his mercies: a yoake that is not heavie, but easie; a burthen not laborious, butMath. 11.29. Psalm. 33.1. light: a thing not unseemely but seemly, a thing not incongruous any way or undecent, but exceeding good: Psal. 92.1. Yea pleasant and comely: Psal. 147.1 Now how can wee be wanting to this Eucharisticall, spirituall dutie, that hath in it all the requisites of the Pagans morall Vtile honestu^ in^undum, Cicero in Offic. E^ omne tuli^ pu^ctum, qui miscuit utile dulci. good, being honest, pleasant, profitable, unlesse we will be a wanting to Gods glorie and our owne goods? 1. had God commanded us onely to sacrifice our eyes, blinde Bartimeus and such as had beene borne blinde, (as he in the 9. of Iohn) could not have offered this sacrifice. 2. or onely our eares and tongues: the deafe, and the dumbe had beene excluded his service: 3. or our wealth and full bagges, the poore had beene

to seeke for his sacrifice (as that poore Persian for hisApud Alexandrum, de Alexa^dro, Fusius. gift, when suddenly he met with his King) But now since the Lord requires neyther thousand Rammes out of the flocke, nor the Goates from the hills, nor the Bullockes from the stalles, nor such Hecatombs;Psalm. 50. nor the eare, nor the eye, nor tongue; for these the hypocrite and temporizer give him: but onely a cordiall and a gratefullDeut. 5.24. Prover. 23.26. heart, actively, passively, constantly, conscionably, universally obedient to God, (the verie life and soule of all gratitude) since Christ the princelyAelian. 6. hist. cap. 28. Doctores autem, ut Ambr. in Math. 24. ho. 49. August super Iohan. tract. 36. in principio, and Jsidor. lib. 12. ca. 7. Aquilam applicant, ad Christum, and ad Christianos. Eagle ascended, (as it is writ of naturall Eagles) chiefly delights to pray upon the heart; he that gives not this, gives nothing as God would, nothing as he should.
Thirdly there be many gracious promises made to the thankefull, as goads of the sanctuarie and prickes, to excite and stirre up to this dutie; as golden cordes to draw and allure us to it: as also manie threats and menaces, as so many thunderbolts against the unthankefull, besides other Scriptures the whole 28. Chapter of Deuteronomie, and 26. of Leviticus is spent in this argument.


CHAP. III. Further motives to thankefulnesse, from the blessings it brings and continues.
FOvrthly, let us consider the blessings and good things which gratitude brings or continues, with the inconveniences and subsequent prejudices of ingratitude, as arguments which not onely Divinitie but even heathenish oratorie, hath used; both perswasive, and disswasive fromA pre^^io a periculo. rewards andOderunt peccare boni virtutis amore. Oderunt peccare mali, formidine poenae. punishments. First, to begin even with the least; the mightie and mercifull God, takes this gratitude, exceedingly kinde at our hands, gives manie encomions and commendations on the gratefull, as he did on Salomon: 1. Kings 3. v 6.7 8. (even as a man that hath but a glimpse and sparke of that justice and mercie, which are attributs essentiall inQuicquid est in Deo, est Deus. Zanchius, de attributis Dei. God, wonderously approves and applaudes a thankefull person where ever he meets with such, as a black Swan, or whiteRara avit in terris, nigroque simillima Cygno vera gratitudo. Crow, in

any condition) whereas againe God sharpely and severely taxeth and redargueth, not only the ingratitude of theIerem. 5.7 Iewess, ofRevel. 2.22. Iezabell, ofRev. 3.15.16 17. Laodicea, as to bee such indeed which his soule loathes and abhorrs, and his stomacke cannot digest, more then luke warme water; preferring even the verie brute beastes, the Oxe, and the Asse beforeEsai. 1.4 them: but even layes open detects, (and detests) the ingratitude of the very Gentiles themselves, that had no guidance but the dimme sparke ofRom 2.22.23.24. nature. Now if a Courtier would be in disgrace with his King, asEsther. 7.9. Haman once with Assuerus; a childe with his father, asGenes. 9.25. Cham and Canaan with Noah; a servant with his master, asIoh. 6 70.71. Iudas with our Saviour Christ; and sycophantizing treacherous Ziba with2. Sam. 19.26 27 Mephib^seth; a friend with his great friend, as Davids treacherous companions were deservedly in disgrace withPsalm. 41.9. David. If we would live in Rome, as the Proverbe is, and contest and contend with the Pope (if that impostor may be named in that line, where God is named) then let us continue still (as we doe) in our obstinate rebellion and viperous ingratitude.
Secondly, let us consider and lay to heart, that gratitude and thankefulnesse, is the verie meanes to perpetuate and continue mercies, of what nature soever in anie measure received; yea intayle them as it were surer then our lands, and revenues to us, and to our heires for ever, if they walke worthy of them: God being the God, not onely of Abraham, but of his seede Isaac andMath. 22.32. Iacob; oft in mercie, remembring distressed Israel, the off-spring of that Patriarchall roote, even for his Covenant sake with Abraham, for his servant Davids1. King. 11.34 sake; as indeed to speake my thoughts and opinion freely, if not judgement, if without touching or prying into the1. Sam. 6.19. Arke, entring into Gods secrets intruding to be of his privie Counsell, from which rockes I steare; we may make any scrutiny or search into the reasons of Gods progresse and proceedings with a nation, the Lord being holy in all his wayes and righteous in all his workes; his judgements, though secret, yet neverSecreta esse possunt iudicta Dei, ^uinsta esse on possunt. unjust: Considering great Brittaines many and manifold mervailous and miraculous deliverance, pluckt oft (as in the yeare 88. especially, and the Powder treason and

plot prevented (as abrand out of the fire as Lot out ofGen. 19.16. Dan. 6. Sodom, as Daniel out of the mouth of Lions, yea and of digging Foxes too, who though they digg nye us, yet they digg by us; preserved, as David and his companie, from Saulites, Nymrodian bloudy-hunters, together with other positive mercies, as the reshining once againe according to that zealous Latimers (our English LuthersHee used in his prayers and ejaculatory mentall desires to reiterate this Iterum Domine, iterum Domine: once againe, once againe, send the Gospel to this untha^kfull land. prayers) of the Gospell, breaking as the Sunne out of that darke Popish cloud, of conglomerated EnglishIn that Quinquenium Mariae. bloud; the continuance of it still, the going forward of our spirituall Temple, notwithstanding the disturbances, scoffs, and plots of so many libelling, lying Popish Tobiahs, andNeh. 4.1.2.3. Sanballats; the reduction of our Illustrious Prince amongst us, better beloved of us thenwhose death was so lamented that in anie disaster which befals the Turk it's proverbiall: Mortuus est Mustapha. Mustapha, amongst his Ottomans; with as much joy rewelcomed as Israels returne fromEzra 1.5. and 3 Chaldea, as Isaacks birth was to laughing2. Ezr. 10.12 Sarah and rejoycing Abraham: together with that which I cannot pretermit (least if wee hold our tongues, and be silent the very stones should speake) that visible and remarkeable judgement, to speake in veritie and charitie both at once, if fame (Battus like) doe not babble, which lately befell upon the adversaries of our Iudah; the Lords owne immediate hand, (for as tryall hath experimented, it cannot be fathered as the powder plott should have beene upon any Puritane as they impurely call them, no Sampson, no Protestant Nazarite, their pestilent pollicies may perhaps give out having eyther hand in, or heart to this tragedie:) But I say Gods owne hand which shot from heaven againstThrowing his bloud into the ayre with vicisti Galileo, vicisti, thou hast overcome o Galilean, thou hast overcome. Theodoret. Iulian, fought from heaven against Amaleck andIudges 5.20. Iabin, cast a thunderbolt from heaven against that ArrianSee in the end of Zegedins Tables in folio: Gods judgement against severall hereticks. Anastasius, threw the chamber called Ierusalem upon the head of thatApud Manserium and Bergemensem in supplemento Chronicetum. Nicromancer Silvester the second, drowned Pharaoh in theExod. 14.16. Sea, smit proud Herod withAct. 12.23. wormes, devoured Hatto of Mentz withRecitat historiam Sifridus prasbiter lib. 1. Epitomes anno Dom. 923. Et Maiolus de diebus Canic^l. col. 7. pag. 254. quanquam author Chronologia computationi, sub Ann^ Deut. 914. non M^^i^^s tribuit sed Damonibu^. Rats, that hand which oft as a shiriffe apprehends, and as a generall by Martiall-law executes wrath on the wicked ipso

actu in the verie act of sinne, as on the blindedGen. 19.11 Sodomites, presumptiousDan. 4.30. Nabuchadnezzer, the GospelsLuke. 12.20. carnalist, that hand pulling down Dagons house upon the head of these Philistines, these Dagonites, in the very midst of their Idolatrous sacrifices, by a visible sermon, and as by an audible voice from heaven, I say speaking to us, how much hee honours that Arke of his truth fixed amongst us; and to them how much he detests their abominations, paying home at last their provocations: by this fall also prolonging the fall of their Bell, their Babell, tutoring them also in their bloudie projects, as once Saul, what it is to kicke against the pricke; to contest with the Lord Protector of Israell; I say in all probabilitie, leaving Gods secret justice, or mercie wee are in a great part to attribute, the continuation and succession of these mercies, to our English Israel, as partly even to the pietie, constancie, patience zealous prayers, and teares of our Queene MaryesIn that quinquenniu^ Maria, as it is called. Martyres: so more specially and particularly to the gracious humiliations, fasts and teares of the faithfull of the land, in our distresses and dangers and feares in the absence of our Prince, as also to their cordiall and heartie gratulations, for his joyfull and triumphall reduction, both the positive blessings we injoy, and the privitive evils that have beene kept from us, both the one, and the other are to be ascribed more to the prayers and thankesgivings of the upright in the land, then to all the powers and pollicies of man, or the arme of flesh: for as God blesseth even private families, for the cause of some one, as the house of Laban for IacobsGenes. 30.27 cause, the house ofGen. 39.5. Putiphar, the Iaylers,Ibid. vers. 23. prison, yea the Court of Pharaoh for IosephsGen. 47. v. 25 cause: preserved by raineAntonius his army, being ^. daies without water, on the mountaines of Germany, by the prayers of a Legion of Christian souldiers was relived by Raine from heaven, whereupon as we have already alledged from Iustin Martyr, Tertul. Eusebio, it was called the thundering legion. sent in a wondrous drought, the whole armie of an heathenish Emperour, for the cause of one Christian Legion: saved all that were in the Ship with Paul, Acts 27.24. for Pauls cause, how much more doth the Lord powre both precious mercies, and reprive a land from deserved plagues, depending judgements for the cause of manie Noahs, Davids, and Daniels that are upright in the land, who upon all occasions, are both humbled for judgements, and thankfull for mercies, herein God imitating man, who is willing ever to doe most good where hee findes the recipient parties

most thankefull, casting like the husband-man ever his seede most willingly, in that ground which hath recompenced his former laboures and paines in former yeares, with the most gratefull interest: thankefulnesse for one mercie, ever drawing on another, as one circle in the water makes another, that a third, and that a fourth, as one lincke in a chaine drawes on another, lincke after lincke; as indeede why did Iehouah accumulate so manie mercies upon David, one after another, as one beame of the Sunne reflecting after another, making his cup to overflow, his lott to fall in a fayre ground, giving him a goodly heritage, Crowning him with long life, spreading his Table, leading him still into the greenePsalm. 23. and per totum in alijs Psalmis. pastures, but because he was ever so thankefull to his Shepheard? As for further instance; David is preserved from a raging Beare, a ramping1. Sam. 17.34.35.36. Lion, he is thankefull for this deliverance: after hee is rescued from1. Sam. 23. ch. 24. chap. 26. Saul, more raging, roaring, ramping then theyHomo homini Lupus: Imo homo homini Daemon. both. After from the Iebusites, after from Achitophell, from Absalon, after from Sheba: hee is thankefull whilst hee raigned in Hebron, as a pettie King; therefore God inlargeth his Territories, and plants him in2. Sam. 5.1.2.3 Ierusalem (as Gods high Stewart now among us) being found faithfull in governing the younger Scotland, espoused him at last to the elder sister England; as Iacob after his faithfull service prudence and patience, at last injoyed (joyed in) his fairestGen. 29.28. Rachell; as that good servant in the Gospell, that was faithfull in a few Tallents, was made ruler over manyMatth. 25. v. 20.21.22.23. Cities: thus Ioseph also delivered out of a pitt byGenes. 37.28. Ruben, no doubt being thankefull for that, God delivered him out of a deepeProv. 23. v. 27 ditch, a more dangerous pit (the traynes of a whorish Mistresse) the prison of an ungratefull Master: So Moses being thankefull, for his deliverance fromExod. 15. per totum. Pharaoh and the pursuing Aegyptian host, God after takes his part againstExod. 17.11. Amalek, against Moab, and vindicates his cause against his sisterNumb. 12.6.7 Miriam, aeiuulating Aron, being ever readie at all essayes, as a friend at neede to bestead him in all his exigents.
Thirdly thankesgiving sanctifies unto us every blessing, yea every creature, every action, every calling, yea what ever wee set our hands too, our meates, our drinkes, our exercise, recreations,

studies, mariages, journeyes, rests, primacies, companies, yea what not: as it is a speeies and part ofVide Sculteth de Oratione, vel precatione, pag. 2.3. prayer without which, every thing we intermedle with, is like our selves impure and1. Tim. 4.1.2.3 uncleane. Wee handle them, (as Colliers or Smiths sometimes eate their meate) illotis manibus, with unwashen hands, yea, wee use, abuse every blessing, as usurpers, incrochers, yea purloyners, where we have no right, nor title, more then a theefe to a true mans purse; leave is light, but without thankefulnesse we take leave, wee aske none, wee are not onely unmannerly, but without question more bold with God then welcome.


CHAP. IIII. Ingratitude a sinne against grace, and nature, condemned by the very heathens.
FOurthly a thankelesse heart is an evident signall and demonstration of a gracelesse heart, where ther's no gratitude, it's certaine ther's no grace: for as thankefulnesse is conjoyned with other graces, as with prayer and spirituall1. Thes. 5.16.17.18. rejoycing, as the inseparable companions and adjuncts: so as Hypocrates twins, they live and die together, as relatives, they depe^d one upon another, as it is oft with some woman and her conceived childe: the death or life of the one, is oft the death or the life of both. And indeede, as this is a true rule in the aggravation of anie sinne, that the more unnaturall that anie sinne is, the more odious, horrible, and unmeasurable sinfull, it is; as fratricide and brother butchering (such as Cains against Abell, Absalons against2. Sam. 13.3^ Ammon, Alphonsus hisA proctour in Rome that came very farr, to performe a meritorious act, the murther of his brother in bed with a hatcher, because he was a protestant. brother Diazius, is worse then homicide or man-killing; as incest such asGen. 35.22. Rubens with his mother in law, Ammons with his sister2. Sam. 13.4.^ Thamar, and that of the incestuous2. Cor. 2.5.6. Corinthian is worse then adulterie or simple fornication, because more unnaturall: so it is with ingratitude the hagg is more ugly, and deformed, in that shee is a monster-bred against the very light course, and kinde of nature, much more against the Sun-shine of grace.
Fiftly to illustrate this a little further, as another motive, to set an edge upon our affections towards this beautious Helena, this excellent grace of true gratitude, and to hate that foule Thirsites, that Atae or hellish hagg ingratitude, to make that positive which wee have made comparative: Let it not passe our animadversion, and consideration; that (to the shame and obloquie of ungratefull ungracious Christians) even Pagans and Heathens have beene found thankefull, yea by the erecting of Tropheys, Images, Statues.De istis flatuis and imaginibus multa habemus, apud Ciceronem, and Tranquillum Perseum, and Iuvenalem, sic de Corona Murali, Castrensi Nav. li, ovali oleagnia. Civica obfilionali, populea, etc. Reliquisque honoribus datis bellic^sis, lege apud Plin. lib. 10. c. 22 apud Guevat. in monte. Caivariae, and Cassaneum in Caetalogo part. 1. pag. 8. Praecipue apud Iosephum in 3. and 4. antiq. and apud Cel^^ Rhod. lect. antiq. lib. 13 cap. 6. Pictures, they have expressed their gratitude to their Eupaters, Patriots and Benefactors of their countries, as the Romanes to their Sciptoes, Decians, Horatians, Curtians, the Athenians to their Codrus, the Aegyptians to their Ptolomees, for freeing their countries of enemies, themselves of feares, preserving their peace, their goods, wives, children, and such blessings received by their meanes.
Yea they have thankefully honoured the memoriall of those that by their prowesse and valour have rid them of poysonous and noysome Serpents, Lions, Dragons, fierce and ugly destroying monsters; thus they gratefully honoured their Hercules for subduing Cacus the robber; Sph^nx, Cerberus and Gerion: Perseus for killing the snakie Medusa: Bellerophon for conquerin that Chymera: Regulus for destroying that great and terriblePlin. nat. hist. lib. 4. cap. 14, serpent at the flood Bragada: Capadox for quelling the Affrican snake, Corebus for overthrowing that Grecian monster: Alcon for shooting the Dragon of Creete: Meleager and Acastius for killing the Calidonian Bore: Cadmus, and diverse others for subduing other Serpents, Dragons, Minotaures recorded in histories, as much honoured by them, as our S. George, Bevis of South-hampton, Guy of Warwicke, and others amongst us, whose fabulous stories in such exploits as these, are received as Gospels truth by the credulous Popish (I doubt too much too of the Protestant) Laytie.
So these Pagans have honoured such living by erecting their pictures to living, lasting glorie; deified them dying amongst their gods: placed them above the starres, by whom Artes and Sciences for their experimented good have beene invented or perfected, as Ceres Triptolemus, Saturne, the invention of Corne by tillage, Bacchus for planting Vines, others for other inventions,

particularized by PolidorLibris de inventione rerum. Virgil, no lesse prodigall and profuse have they beene gratefully distributing large honours to those, by whom Letters were first found, and invented, or good lawes have beene acted, and established: Thus to this day Lycurgus amongst the Lacedemonians Zele^chus amongst the ^ocrensians: Mynos amongst the Cretians, Philo amongst the Corinthians: Zalmosis amongst the Scythians, as once Romulus amongst the Romanes, with other legifers and law-givers or interpreters of their Lawes, in other nations, as the Druides amongst the Gaules, Mahumet to this day amongst his Saracens: the Brachmans and Gymnosophists amongst the Indians, the Magi amongst the Persians have their names praysed and perpetuated even to these times, in which honours also Menno the first founder of Letters amongst the Egyptians, Rhadamanthus amongst the Assyrians, Nicostrata amongst the Romanes, Phenices amongst the Grecians have deepely and deservedly shared.
Yea these heathens have beene in their kinde, not onely thankefull to their best deserving men; which they have counted their Heroes, yea as semedians, or halfe Gods, but they have beene more thankefull to the multitude (stultitude) of their imaginarie gods, whom in their blinded superstition they have acknowledged as authors of their good, preservers of their safetie, preventers of their evills, or as appeares by their owne Authors, theirApud Poetas Virgil lib. 1. Georg. li. 5.6. aneid. Ovid. lib. 4. Fast. and li. 6. Metam. H^mer lib. 22 in fine Tibul. eleg. 1 5. libri primi, Pro pertius li. 4. eleg. 9. and Juvenal. Satyr. 2. Poets,Cicero de Divinat. and Vat. li. 4. linguae Latinae Orators,Livius lib. 2.3 4. and 22. Herod. li. 7. Festus Pompeios, li. 14. Halic. li. 4. Cato rei rust. li 41. Plin. li 35 cap 15 Cyprian. li 5 belli Civilis. Historians,Proclus de sacrificijs, Plutarc. in Brut. and Mac. li. Saturn. 1. and 3 Philosophers,Gal. l. 1 de sanit. tuend c. 7. Avice. l. 1. fen 3. and Alsar. l. 2. pract. tit. 26. cap. 2. Physitians, as they had diverse and different lustrations and purging sacrifices, for their Cities, Campes, Fields, Courts, Houses, Ships, Families, Functions, after different wayes and ceremonies: so had they Eucharisticall and gratulatorie sacrifices, wherein to honour their Gods the more, they caused their Priests to sing solemne Hymnes, and Sonets to their prayses as Io^ Pa^n to Apollo, amorous songs to Venus, martiall hymnes to Mars, others toCereri Iulos. Ceres,Dianae hipingo^ Diana,Dionys. Tythir. Maiol. de diebus canic. part. 2. col. pag. ^6. Dionysius, etc. And as they placed and assigned them (as our Popelings this day their deified adored Saints) their severall functions, as tutors and guardians over severall things, as Ceres over fruites,Idem par. 2. col. 1. pag. 23. Triptolemus over Corne, Bacchus over Vines: Ch^orus over flowers: Vertumnus over apples: Aristaeus

over hony, their Lares and Paenates over their housholds, etc. as also over severall places assigned their powers, as Iupiter in the Heavens: Iuno in the Ayre: Neptune in the Seas: Pluto in the infernall hels: the Fawnes and Satyrs over the Woods: the Driades over Trees and Mountaines: their Naides over fountaines: as also (in which still ourSee a conceited Booke called the Beehive of the Romish Church, one M. Emerod his picture of a papist, chiefly D. Sutcliffe his Turcopap^smus, against Giffords Calvino Turcismus. Papists sympathize) over severall professions and functions Liberall, Illiberall, Military, Physicall, Mechanicall, as Minerva over the learned: Phoebus over the Muses: Aesculapius over physicke and Physitians: Vulcan over smiths: Venus and Cupid over love and lovers: Mercury over Cheaters, and Cuni-catchers: Mars and Bellona over warres, and warriours: Lucina over women in childe-bed: and so of the rest: So when they perceived or but conceited, that any thing prospered better, or any feared or felt evill was prevented, by the tuition and protection of their titulary gods: So (in imitation of the Iewes, in their sacrifices to the true Iehovah) they have shewed their thankefulnesse by their Eucharisticall oblations andDe diversis sacrificijs Romanorum, vide apud Fenestellam, and passim apud Livium and Graecorum, and Aegyptioru^ apud Maiolum de diebus canicular. part. 2. col. 1. pag. 55. sacrifices, yea by the presenting of gifts unto them (as our Papists still loading, the Altars, before Images, and Shrines) and by significant Emblems and symbols, representing their powers, inclinations and operations, as appeares, by the assigning unto Vulcan a hammer: to Pan a pipe: to Sibill a Bell; to Bacchus a Tyger: to Venus a Swan; to Saturne a Serpent: to Aesculapius a Snake: to Minerva an Owle: to Mars a Wolfe: to Mercury a Caducean wand: to Diana a Hart, and doggs: to Phoebus a Crow: to Bacchus a Panther: to Pallas a Speare: to Iupiter an Eagle: to Cupid bow and arrowes; to Iuno a Peacocke: to Hercules a club, etc. and so the rest. Now shall superstition be more thankefull to her false Gods, then true religion to the true God? Shall the Devill deluding these Pagans, (as at this day our Papists) by his sleights, and operations, working (as by once speaking in Edens Serpent, Dodons oake, Apolloes Oracle, and oft in Images) by and in these imaginarie dieties, his owne ends? Shall he (which as Gods Ape, and emulator, he above all things desires) obtaine more honour of these Idolaters, then the true God of us, his professed servants? Shall Pagans be more thankefull then Christians? (as purposely, by more paines I have expressed) sure,

as the Ninivites, the Queene ofMatth. 12.41 42. Sheba: and the Sodomites themselves against the ungratefull ungracious Iewes: so these Pagans shall testifie against us at the great Tribunall, in our omissions of these gratulatorie duties to the true Iehovah: which they blindly gave to their ImaginarieQuomodo Gentiles gratias egerunt dijs suio sacrificijs vide apud Mercurium Trismegistum, in Pimandro cap. 1. Gale. de usu partiu^, and apud Alsted. in sua theologia natural. Gods, their well deserving deified men.


CHAP. V. Chrstian and Heathenish ingratitude exemplified.
SIxtly as these heathens, have beene themselves gratefull and thankefull to their gods, and to their best meriting men; so they have from the light and sparke of nature, wondrously distasted, detested, and declaymed against the ingratitude of others: holding an ungratefull man, the veryest viper, the ugliest monster in theIngrato homine, terra peius non creat. world; the most unprofitable bulke, and burthen of the earth: the Center of all injustice, the compendium, and abstract of all that can be called ill inSi ingratum dixeris omnia dixeris. a man: yea as the best Moralists, chieflyIn Moralibus. Plutarch,De beneficijs l. 4. c. 21. and 27. and libr. 5. passim. Seneca,Libr. 1. Officiorum, sic plurima apud Stobaeum, tit. de beneficijs. Tully, have given many rules and motives to gratitude, telling us that for the benefits wee receive eyther from God or man, we must in imitation of the fertile ground, render more then wee have received: no more grudging to repay thankes backe againe, for good turnes done, then to redeliver backe againe, the pledges, and pawnes we have had in our custodie; not forgetting the good, that from any, we have received, but the good we have done: with many such particular counsells, cautions, and caveats. So these with other grave and learned Historians, have severely censured, and branded with a perpetuall blot of obloquie, and infamie such persons, yea such Provinces, Nations, and Kingdomes as have beene unthankefull, to well deserving men, much more to their gods, making ingratitude the canker in the Rose, the Cantharides in the oyntment, the soyle and staine of many other excellent gifts and parts, of such as otherwayes excelled in Armes or in Arts: Thus they Satyrically,

and sharpely taxe the ingratitude of that Paris (or Alexander Phrygius) in stealing away the wife of Menalaus, and treacherously killing the King of Sydon, of both whom hee was courteously entertayned, against the lawes of nature, of Nations and hospitalitie, thus alsoAppian. lib. 2. de bello Civili. Appian, and all Romane historiographers since lay loade upon the vile ingratitude of Cassius and Brutus Caesars sonne inEt tu mi Brute, cries Caesar whe^ he was stabd in the Senate house. law, Domitius Trebonius, Tullius Cymber, the two Servilij, Casca, Hala, with other confederats, in bewitching stabbing Iulius Caesar, with bodkins in the Senate house (as dispitfully, as Gerson was stabbed by his ungratefull schollers, by the instigation of emulating-Fryers, or as Fulvia Tyranized over Tullies tongue with her needle) notwithstanding this worthie Caesar had pardoned some of them with many others of the Pompeyan faction, out of that clemencie whichOratione pro Roscio, pro Rege Detotaro, and alibi. Tully every where so commends: So, who can with patience reade in Livie, and Plutarch, the ingratitude of the Romanes toward the two Scipioes, the Affrican and the Emilian, the first whereof, though hee were their fortresse in so many fights, perished in Leviterium? The second for all his Conquests over the Carthagenians and Numantines, found in Rome a murtherer but notPlutarchus in vita Scipionis occisorem invenit non iudicem. a revenger? The ingratitude of the Athenians towards their Theseus, and Solon, and Themistocles whom they banished? towards Miltiades, whom in remuneration of freeing them from the Persians in the expedition against Darius, they imprisoned and famished? as also towards their Ten Pretors, whom in stead of deserved and expected honours after their victories over the Lacedemonians, they condemned to death: The ingratitude of the Carthagenians towards their eloquent Hamilcar, whom in guerdon of his well performed Embassage with Alexander the great, they butchered at hisDe his and alijs pret^r Fulgosum, Bruson. exempl. libr. 3. pag. 8. in quarto. returne? So hee that reades, how that faire famoused Tully, was stung with ungratefull vipers, as banished by Aulus Gabinius, being Consull, whom he had so fairely cleered from many great and greiuous imputations, Secondly emulated and opposed in all his aymed dignities by P. Vatinius, whom he defended and brought of with credit in two publik judgements which else had past against him, Thirdly, but chiefly detruncate, and beheaded by that Popilius, for whose life

he had so pleaded and prevailed, in a capitall and criminall cause: he cannot but be driven to commiseration and admiration; so I confesse when I consider the ingratitude of diverse others, both Christians and Pagans, as that bloudy Caligula; the sentencer of the death of Macro and Eunia; by whom he was chiefly holpe in theDe his omnibus vide apud Fulgosum, Valerium Maxim^^, Diogenem La^^tium, tit. de gratitudine, and ingratitudine. Empyre of Maxaninus the Thracian, the murtherer of Alexander Severus, from whom he was advanced to so manie honours: Plantianus his favorite, who attempted (though being revealed executed not) so much as the other, hi^ heart as bloudie as theReade Guevarah, that eloquent Ch^onologer, of the life of Severus c. 16 pag. 319. others; of Macrinus the butcherer of his Lord and good Master Bassianus, who had preferred and intrusted him as generall of hisIdem, in vita Bassiani, pa. 369. cap. 16. armie of that pestilent Tuncius: and the pretorian Souldiers in killing that excellent Pertinax so pertinaciously, by whom they were so wellIdem cap. 10. pag 245. regarded, garded and rewarded.
Of Sextilius that was the onely betrayer of C. Caesar the Orator, by whom hee had before beene so stoutly protected against the accusation and faction of the Scyllaneans: of Callias Antisthenes, that in requitall shamefully kild a Barbarian, that shewed him a great Mine of gold, so for ever curing the jealousie which he had of his blabbing and venting untoBrusonius lib. 3. exemp. pa. 189 in quarto. others of Zerxes; who in stead of deserved and expected preferment, cut of the hopes of that boate-man upon the shoare, shorter by the head; whose care and providence prevented the otherwayes inevitable shipwracke, in that unhappy expedition which hee made intoIdem ibidem. Asia: of that treacherous Ptolomey, who sent the head of his poore perplexed friend Pompey to Caesar, as a present, flying to him for shelter, as the Sheepe into the jawes of the Wolfe, or the hunted Hare into the fangs of the shepheardsVide apud Zwingerum in Theatro humana vita, titul. de ingratitudine. dogge: But chiefly when I reflex upon Christians, reading and revolving how beastly Michael Thranlius, deprived his good Master Leo the Emperour both of life and honour: how that bloudy Phocas (that great PapallApud Morneum, Fusius in suo progressu Papatus. friend and founder) dealt with the Lord and Emperour Mauritius, from whom hee had received some undeserved favours: how Iustinian the Emperour dealt with that heroicke Bellisarius, the very Hercules and Atlas of Italy and Lumbardy, who had freed them, (as the Sorkes some Cities of froggs

and the Dogges some countries of Wolves) from the invasion of the Gothes and Vandals, over whom he was so oft victorious, by the emulation of a woman (chiefe actors, that sexe, in the Tragedies of the greatest spirits) depriving him in a trice of all his offices and honours, putting out his eyes, exposing him to the misery or mercie of the mercilesse world, constrayning him for pure neede to begge a halfe penny to buy bread to hisDate obelum Bellisario. Procopuis de bello Go^torum, libr. 2. and Kramzins de bello Vandalorum. belly; as that Tygresse Empresse would have served the valiant Eunuch Narses with the same sauce, but that the curst Cow having short hornes, hee did countermine her mischiefe. Besides in our owne Chronicles, pondering how that viperous Banister betrayed his Lord the Duke of Buckingham, for which he is as deservedly branded, as infamous as ever was Z^pirus for betraying Babylon, Sinon for betraying Troy, Iudas for betraying Christ. When I reflect upon these and other examples amongst Christians and Heathens of such ungratefull persons, as have beene as the Iuy to the Oake, killing those by whom they have beene propped andP^rima exempla recitata, lege apud Bartholomeum Cassaneum, Catalogo gloria mundi, parte prima, folio 41.42. prospered; asDe hoc partu Viperino, Plinius libr. 10. cap. 62. Aelianus libr. 1. cap. 25. Isidor. li. 12. cap. 3. Arist. libr. 5. cap. 34. Imo Divus Basillus exemp. hom. 9. and Chrysostom. in 3. Cap. Math. homil. 12. approbant and Theologicae haec applicant. vipers, gnawing out the very bowels of those that have bred them: I cannot but lament that this monstrous and hideous hagge, ingratitude, hath got a regiment over so many, and hath inlarged her Territoryes further then the Turkish Ottoman: Prestber-Iohn, the Cham of Cathay, or the great Mogul. But chiefly when I consider how like the Centaures in the fable, and like these Gygantean Nimrodian hunters in theGenes. 11.2.3. Scripture, shee hath mantayned fight so fiercely and furiously against the Majestie and mercie of the great God of heaven, to her owne destruction, and the ruine of these Subjects in which shee is resident, it's lamentable and deplorable: Oh the massacres and tragedies shee continually makes more ruefull and piteous then these of the Romane Sejanus, the French Byron: our English King Leir: the Arrian Valens: the Italian Iulio: the Iewish King Saul: the Machabean Antiochus: or what ever else most commands a passion, alwayes as fatall to her possessors, as that Sejanus his horse to hisC^e^, Seio, Antonio, Casiio Dolobella, Sciano fatalis: Aulus Gellius no^t A^tis. libr. 3. cap. 9. Simon Maiol^s col. 7. pag. 287. Masters.



CHAP. VI. Ingratitude blamed and shamed, even from the thankefulnesse of Brutes and Beastes to their Benefactors.
BVt to leave the beastliest of men, ungrafefull persons, detected you see as detested, contemned and condemned of the very Pagans, as Schoole-masters and Tutors to degenerate man: wee may be taught gratitude and thankefulnesse to our God for all his blessings and benefits past and present, even from the very brute beasts; who as they have beene found verie thankefull unto man, theirPsal. 1.6.7.8 Lord and superior, of whom they have had their dependance, and from whom they have received their food and reliefe: so they teach and tutor man to be thankefull to that Superior Essence, on whom he depends, in whom he lives, moves, and hath hisAct. 17.28. being; and from whom hee receives foode and rayment, health, life, libertie, peace, plentie, protection, and what ever is needefull for his being or wellAdesse and bene esse, omnia ad victum caliumque necessaria. Cicero in Officijs. being.
Thus to inlarge my notions and motions historically: when I consider how the verie brute beasts have beene faithfull and loving to their Masters, in their brutish kinde, more then one man to another: as those three famous Horses: AlexandersPlin. lib. 8 ca. 42. Solin. cap. 46 Bucephalus: Caesars horse, and the horse of Antiochus King of Syria, who (as Emblemes of faithfull wives) would suffer none to intermeddle with them, but their owne Masters. Yea the very dogges (to the very shame of all temporizing sycophants: treacherous Zibaes: trencher Parasites: false hearted Ioabs: viperous Iudasses: hollow-hearted friends, that have the Ave of hony in their mouths, but the gall of Cave in theirMultis annie iam transactis: nulla fides est in pactis: Mel in ore verba ^actis: Felin corde fraus in factis. Sphinx philosophica. hearts, that are unthankefull to their professed friends, as many millions, and my selfe amongstIonathan and Iudas ere long to be printed. many, can give a probatum est:) I say the very dogges that have beene faithfull to the very death to those Masters whom they have loved and followed: as the dogge of Vlysses that was to him in his kinde, as firme as his Penelope, knowing and acknowledging him when he returned home from the Troyan warre. The dozen dogges

of Masinissa the Numidian King, as safely guarding him, as the French, or Scottish, Guard their King: The Athenian dog Caparus, that kept the treasurie in Aesculapius hisAelian. hist. li. 7. cap. 13. Temple, better then the gagling Centinels the Romane Capitoll: The dogge of Lysimachus cald Druides, that died with his MasterPlin. lib. 8. c. 40 Lysimachus, as the dogge of Hiero, that (like an Indians best belovedThe beloved wives of the Indians, burne themselves quicke in their husbands funerals, Mazius and Acosta in histor. Iud. wife) leapt into the same slame, which burnt his Master: The dogge of Titus Sabinius, who never forsooke his Master, no, not in prison; nay that brought meate to his Masters mouth when he was dead, and fetcht the dead bodie of his Master out of Tyber, into which it wasPlin. libr. 8. ca. 40. and Zonaras in Tiberio. cast: The dogge of Darius, who (in his fight, and flight from Alexander, being murthered by his treacherous servant Blessus) stayed with the dead corps of his slaughteredAelian. lib. 6. cap. 24. Lord with other dogges, which as wee know by histories and experience, have eyther died with their Masters, as Aelianus Instances in the dogges of Polus the tragedian, and of Theodorus the Musitian, who leapt into the funerall flames of theirAelian. libr. 7. cap. 33. and 35. Masters, like loving curres as they were: or else for their masters, famishing themselves upon their Masters graves, as did the dog ofEupolide mortuo in aegina cauis media, extinctus est. Aelian. lib. 9. cap. 42. Enpoldes, and some in ourSee some instances also in this kinde in M. Topsell, our English Gesner, de Quadrup. in ^^l. De Cunibus. Also the booke called the Pilgrimage of Princes in quar^o, pag. 103. times. These, and all these faithfull, gratefull brutes, to their breeders, to their feeders, crie shame upon ungratefull man, that for all mercies hee hath received to his bodie, to his soule, is not so loving, so loyall, so thankefull to his maker, his heavenly Master, his Creator, preserver, Redeemer, as horses and dogges for Grasse, Hay, Oates bones and crusts, have beene to mortall man.
Againe when I consider how submissive and obedient not onely domesticke and house creatures; but even these that have beene more sylvane and wilde, have beene unto man, once wonne and trayned and lured by meate or musicke, or by teaching made docible and tractable: as namely when I read how a Nightingall would ever sing at the command ofDe his omni^^s apud Zwin^er^^, in Thea^o vitae hu^ianae, ^lin. Anl. Gell. ^lexand. ab A^^xandro, Celium ^hodigin. Camer. (...) Maiolum* etc. Stenchorus onely to pleasure him: of Marthes his Crow, if wee credit Celius Rhodiginus that would carrie letters which way soever the King directedSic de Columbis and Hirundinibus literis portantibus, lege plutima enempla apud ^i^ce^t. l. 16. c. 54. Plin. l. 10. c. 37. etc. 24. apud Fabium Pictorem in annalib. Et ^rantium Vand. l c. 7 her: Of the Dragon that attended Hera^lides

the Philosopher: Of a Serpent that wayted upon Aiax in Locresia a Thrush on Agrippina the Empresse: a wilde Bull on Pythagoras at Tarentum: Of another Bull, as also a trayned Doue, that would come at a call, to that impostor Mabomet: Of a Lion, that as a Page followed that manumitted Androdius, his whilom Physition up and downe the streetes of Rome: Of a Seale fish, that would come at a call from the Sea to the shoare, and take meate of a man dwelling at the Shieldes; as I credibly heard when I lived, (where myAs Queene Mary is said to say of Callis, that if she were dead, it would be found writ in her heart. etc. heart still lives) at Newcastle on Tyne: me thinkes man, is more brutish (as Esay himselfe, or God inEsai. 1.4. Esay complaines on him,) then the most savage and sylvane of brutes, that's disobedient to his God, that's more refractory then the wildeIob 39.6. Asse that snuffes up the winde, then the wildeNec vult Panthera domari: semel tamen cum Hoedo domestice fuit educatae Aelian. li. 6. hist. c. 2 Heyffer that will not admit the yoake, then the wilde Panther that will not bee tamed.
Even as when I consider the mercies of some beastes to man, more then of one man to another; (as of that sheeBergomensis histor. libr. 4. Coepella tractat. de Imper. Milit. elig col. 12. Cassaneu^ Catalogo gloriae mundi parte prima, pag. 45. Wolfe, which fostered Romulus the first King of the Romanes: that shee bitch which fed Cyrus when he was exposed by his cruell grandsireApud Zenophontem in paedag. Astyages: that shee Beare, which sustayned Prince Alexander, when destined to death by his father Priamus: those Bees which fed Plato with hony: those Ants which are said to feed Midas with graines, when they were in their cradles: those Ravens which fed Elias the persecuted1. King. 17.6. This bite: with theDe alijs per creaturas mirac^ lose praeservatis, lege apud Procopium de bello G^thorum lib. 2. apud Lugerum, in epistola ad Ri^fridum, cap. 10. apud Surium 10.2. like,) comparing these with the cruelties of a Nero, a Domitian, a Dionysius, a Caligula and others such, which Canniball-like feede upon man, (as birdes and beastes and fishes of pray,) the greater upon the lesse, the stronger upon the weake, I have thought that one man is a wolfe toHomo homini Lupus. another, yea a Devill toHomo homini aut Deus aut damon another; and that there's more mercie in beastes then in beastly men. So I say comparing the subjection, submission, subordination of even the worst of brutes and beastes, to man their superior (everie creature by a naturall instinct fearing the very face ofObservatio Magiri in sui^ Comment. man, as their deputie King, and superintendent under God) with the rebellious and indomable heart of man himselfe, to the soveraigne Majestie of his maker, whose Image he beares: I finde more obedience in beasts to man, then in man to God.
But to come still more punctually to my proposed pointes when I consider, how not onely loving, faithfull and mercifull, but even gratefull Birdes, Beastes, and Fishes have beene to their breeders and feeders, their friends and benefactors; and how ungratefull man is to his God, in walking unworthy of his mercies: in turning his grace into wantonesse, in sinning presumptuously, and proudly that grace mayRom. 6.1. abound, abusing the patience and long suffering of God that leades toRom. 2.5.6.7 repentance, heaping sinne upon sinne, as once the feined Centaures, Pelion uponApud Lucianum in Dialogis. Ossa: And so consequently, wrath upon wrath, God giving him as he did toRevel. 2.19. Iezabell,Ionas. 1. Ninive, andMatth. 23.27. Ierusalem, a space of repentance, in this day of grace and of the Gospell, yet hee not knowing the day of hisLuke 19.42. visitation, neglecting Gods call, hardens his heart as the neather milstone, makes his brow of brasse, and his spirit ofIerem. 5.3. flint: I say comparing and paralelling the gratitude of beastes to man, whose pride and lust, yet subjects them toRom. 8.20. vanitie, (The Horse by his travelling, the Oxe by his toyling, the Cow by her milke, the Sheepe by her mike, wooll, flesh and dung, the Bee by herSic vos non vobis mellificatis aves: Sic vos non vobis vellera fertis ov^^. Virg. hony, recompencing and gratefully remunerating the petty costs and paines of man towards them, with a full and a fertile usury, such as the fieldes yeeld the husband-man, for his plough, his paines and his seede,) with the ingratitude of man, to God, whom God hath made little lower then thePsalm. 8.5.6. Angels, crowned him with glory and worship, made him ruler over the workes of his hands: that he should yet be, by sinfull rebellion as unthankefull as the very Devill and damned spirits: Oh hinc illa lachrymae, this thought confounds my thoughts! plungeth and perplexeth my soule, makes me evenQuoties cogito, toties contremisco ut in alia meditatione olim Cyprianus. Planet-strucke: Oh it's mans miserie, by an unwise an unworthy walking, thus to abase, thus to abuse Gods mercie!
Oh whenPsalm. 8.4. David considered the priviledges and prerogatives of man, he breakes out emphatically, Lord what is man that thou art so mindefull of him, etc. But when I consider mans dignities, of which some have writ wholeSee the fre^ch Academie, in fol. praefa. in partem primam, in the french Author in octavo. See pag. 1.2.3.4.5. (...) per totum lib^um. Et apud Cassantum in catalogo pa 51. 52. Tracts, paralelling this Microcosme with thatApud Alsted. pulchra image in Theolog natural. p. 2. pag. 643. 644 Megacosme, mans perfections with the whole world: with mans neglected dutie of

gratitude. I say by an inversion from mans perversion, Oh ^an what is God that thou art so unmindefull of him, or the Sonne of God, that thou so little regardest him? So vainely, so mainely forgetting him and all his benefits and bounties, his workes and wonders, as oncePsal. 106.21. Israel, as the Ostridge forgets herIob. 39 14. Plin. lib. 10. c. 1. egges, and as some have forgot their owneVt Messala Corvinus Orator apud Plin^^em li. 7. hist. cap 24. and apud Solinum, cap. 6. names, thou forgets the great and glorious name of the Lord thy God. Oh doe I beleeve mine eyes and eares, that Lions, Eagles, Panthers, yea Dragons, Elephantes, Aspes, Dogges, Wolves, Apes, have beene thankefull to their Eupaters and Benefactors, and shall man their pettie soveraigne, be claudicant and heteroclite? Is he made of a worse mettall, his minde cast in a worse moulde then the rest, then the best, (yea then the worst) of beastes? To adde (according to my renued readings and meditations) something to my former instances, shall there (asIn exem. ho 9 Basil andApud Maiol. col. 7. p. 1. pag. 228 Ambrose themselves have observed) be for some few crusts, or crummes, such gratitude in dogges to their Masters, to a marvaile if not a miracle; such fidelitie that they have kept their houses, theirApud Aelian libr. 7. cap. 13. and lib. 9. cap. 42. treasuries, yea their very wives, as if they had beene Turkish Eunuchs: Have they found the lost Treasures of their Masters? Have they defended it from the incursion of theeves? Have they layd, by their Masters lost purses or wares, till they have famished, as once the dogge of a ColliphonianAelian. lib. 1. cap. 30. Marchant? Have the revealed the wrongs done to their Masters by their adulteresse Mistrisses, as the little curr of a Sycilian by whrining and scraping at a secret doore, is said to discover a hidAelian. libr. 7. cap. 21. adulterer an armed intended murtherer? Have they revealed murthers? Have they knowne and flowne upon their Masters murtherers? where they have after found them even in publicke Markets, till they have caused their apprehension and execution? as instances are inIdem lib 7. c. 13. Plin. libr. 8. ca. 40 Authors and some in experience in our times.
So for Lions, those heroicke creatures, it is certaine, that a Romane slaveHanc historiam Fusius recitat A^lus Gellinoct. Attic. lib. 5. cap. 14. Aelian. li 7. cap. 43. Androdus, flying from a cruell Master into the woodes, meeting with a Lion, whose foote he leached, and paid out the thorne, after both hee, and the Lion being taken; and he according to that bloudy sport of the Romanes when his turne came, as his deserved punishment being exposed

to fight with even that Lion: found his enemie so favourable and friendly, that knowing him that was his former surgeon, in requitall of his surgery, he licks his hand, fawnes on him; a spaniell of rampant to others, is of a suddaine couchant to him: to the astonishment of the Emperour, and all the plebeians spectators? Did another Lion shew the same gratitude, to Elpis the Samian Mariner: that he every day hunted for him, and brought him a pray to the shoares, for the good turne hee received from him, in pulling a bone out of hisPlin. lib. c. 16. throate?
So for Panthers, did a Panther shew her selfe so thankeful to the father of Philo the Philosopher, for pulling one of her young ones out of a pit, that she would not leave him till she had safely convayed him out of the woods from the danger of otherBruson. lib. 1. exemp. pag. 54. in 4to. beastes?
Was a Dragon so thankefull to Thoas a boy, who had brought him up at home and and fed him: that afterwards this feeder falling into the hands of theeves in a desert, the Dragon knowing his voice, with winged speed rescues and delivers him? Was an Eagle so loving to a virgin at Sestos, that at her buriall, shee threw her selfe with her into the funerallIdem ibidem flames? as a Robbin-red-breast as wee call him, would needes flly into the grave of one Hopkinson the clearke of Hutherfield in the West of Yorke-shire, (as there be yet living witnesses) who in his life had used him to his hand and fed him in the Church withIt was credibly related to me, by my worthy and worshipfull friend, Sr. J.R. at my last sojourning at Longly. bread.
Was even an Aspe so thankfull for the good entertaynment shee had, being fed at the Table of a certaine Egyptian, that one of her young ones ungratefully stinging to death a Childe of her hosts, shee was so just and respectfull, that killing that young murtherer, shee layd it dead before them at the Table, and was never after she nor hers seene more to haunt theApud Bruson. ibidem. house?
AreHaec omniae, and his maiora, non solum Soli. c. 43. and Plin. libr. 10. c. 23. Sed and Basil memorat de Cicorijs in exem. ho. 8 applicans parentibus and filijs. Storkes so thankfull, that (to the shame and confusion of unnaturall Children) they feede their aged parents, when they are unfeathered and unplumed, (which things the Crowes likewise are said to doe) yea, cover them, brooke them, and keepe them warme with their own feathers in the stormes

and coldes: and as tradition is, (as good Emblemes both of gratefull guests, and just tythers) doe they in requitall of their house-roome, throw one young one out of their nest, as their hosts part, to the Germaine Bower in whose house theyMirae etiam de gratitudine huius avis, erga benefactores Aelia. lib. 8. cap. 21. builde?
Yea have even Wolves (whether naturally or supernaturally, I dispute not) beene found so respective and indulgent to humane nature that (ifTom 2. meuse Aprili. Surius be not unsure, andGuagnin. libr. 10. and Gregor. Turon. histor. Fran^. lib. 2. c. ^4 Guagin deserve no gagg, for fabling,) even young children, as they instance in some, have beene suckled with their milke, fed with flesh and restored againe to their own mother, in their wolvish courtesie? Nay from beastes and birdes to come to fishes. (that I may speake nothing traditionarily, or legendarily of that thankefull Ape, who when hee could nothing else, skips up into Trees and knaps downe boughs to the speedy loading of a poore old man who lived by selling of wood in requitall of his pulling one of her cockered young out of the pit.) Even Dolphins have beene so enamoured on boyes that have fed them with bread, that at the call of Sinion, in which name Pliny saith, they delight; they have come to the shoare, and in gratefull sport as sea horses, (as once thatArionis fabulam, memorat Olaus Magnus lib. 20. cap. 12. Sic Albertus anim. cap. 24. cum multis alijs. Dolphin did musicall Arion,) they have swim with them into the Sea, brought them backe againe to land: one of them above the rest drowning his over burthening burthen in a suddaine storme, in revenge of himselfe layes and dyes on the shoare, and would never more returne to the Sea againe: asAnimal. libr. 9 cap. 48. Aristotle, AlbertusAnimal. cap. 24. in Delphinis. Magnus,Parte prima, colloq. 9. pag. 325 Theophrastus,Libr. 9. histor. cap. 8. Simon Maiolus, (e) Pliny the elder, and Pliny the younger Instance in manie particulars at Hyppo, Puteolum, Tarentum, Naupactum, and other places where such pageants were playd.
Oh? have beastes beene thus gratefull to men, even the irrationall creatures by an instinct of Dame nature? and shall man, indued with reason and understanding above the brutes, (the very Sunne irradiating his Microcosme and little world,) be so destitute both of grace and good nature, as we say, as to be unthankefull to well deserving men, but chiefly to the all meriting mercie of God?
Yea I say more as beastes have beene gratefully respective

to man, so have men shewed a kinde of gratitude to beasts: as Alexander (though heathenishly) bestowed buriall on his deadPlin. libr. 8. cap. 8. Bucephalus, as a Masse priest did once on his dogge, as isThe french Stephens in his Apologie for Herodotus called (as translated) the world of wonders. related; yea lamented his death, as Crassus did the death of hisM^crob. lib. 3, cap. 15. Murena, as I have seene some, and heard of moe, that have fed their old horses, and eldest dogges even Mastives, Greyhounds, Spaniels, setting dogges, Hounds, Braches, Beagles, when they have beene spent and done, as old Almanacke^ past date: yea of some, that have bequeathed not onely their rationall, but irrationall old servitors, legacies, pensions and portions to keepe them, even after their old masters deaths for the good service which they have done: Some being of a better mould, then to cast of their old friends and favorits, (as Bawdes, Panders and Whores doe prodigals) when they have spungd and suckt them dry; as a man casts of his cloake after raine, and the spaniels shake of the waters on the shoare, when they have no more use of them, and have served their needes turnes and ends by them, and with them: Like a man that cares not for the best dish of meate, when as a helluoh, he hath glutted himselfe with it: no; some mens respect is as the^yome virescit and nascitur in marirubro Plin. libr. 13. cap. 25. lawrell greene even in Winter: shrinkes not like some ill wrought westerne cloath in wetting: but is more to them that have once well deserved, more at the last, then at the first. Now shall there be such mutuall gratitude from beastes to men, from men to beastes, as we have heard? and shall not man be thankfull to man, for benefits received? and all and every one thankfull to God; from whom, as all blessings flow, so all kinde of reciprocall blessings backe againe are as due, and deserved, as exacted and injoyned? Oh shall man be like the horse and mule withoutPsalm. 32.9. understanding? nay worse; so dull, so dead hearted, so stupid, so blockish, that hee hath no shew, no demonstration, no expression of thankefulnesse to God, eyther vocall, reall or cordiall, as is seene in too many Miriades, and millions of men? Which unlesse Swinish drunkenesse, So domitish uncleanesse, Esaus profanesse, Iewish usury, Cannibal-like crueltie, execrable and horrible blasphemies, against emulatitions, against all that have any shew of religion, with other transgressions, perpetrated and resolvedly committed against

God and man, be thankefulnesse: (all which indeede, with the like, shew and speake an unthankefull tongue, heart, and life, as the Ivy bush shewes the Taverne, the blew spots the plague, biles and carbuncles and ploukes in the bodie and face, the inward infection of the Liver: and the smoake and sulphur the inward brimstonely matter, that's in Etna, and in Pliny choakingDe Vesuvio Solinus cap. 40. and de eo nihil Plinius, praesaga forsan mente, iude sibi exitium futurum, de modo mortis. Lege in epistola Plinij Iunioris, ad Cornel. Tacitum hostoricum. Vesuvius, and the like, etc. I say unlesse this may stand for thankefulnesse, (as if counterfeit coyne shall stand for pay,) there's no further glimpses and sparks of further thankefulnesse, in our promiscuous multitudes: though we see here the inflamed zealous fires, of David and his Congregation.


CHAP. VII. Gratitude to God for all his graces pressed from the practise of all the Saints in the Church Militant.
THus as Salomon sends the sluggard to the Aunt or Proverb. 16. v. 6. Pismire, to learneDe cuius prudentia and dilige^tia tam Mira, vide apud Plin. libr. 2. cap. 41. and lib. 11. cap. 30. and Arist libr. 9. cap. 38. and Basilium in exem. homil. 9. providence and diligence: to the Connyes, the Locusts and the Spider, to learne wisedome, andProv. 10. vers. 25.26.27.28. prudence: to the Lion, the Greyhound, and the hoc Goate, for constancie andCh. 30. v. 31. courage, as Ieremie sends the Iewes to the Almanacke of the Storkes: The Turtles, and the Swallowes to learne the circumspect observation of times andIerem. 8. v. 7. seasons, as Christ himselfe our Saviour sends his disciples, (and in them us) to theMath. 10. v. 16 Dove, to learne simplicitie, to the Serpent, to learne (not matchavillian) but religiousDe mira serpentis solertia, pracipue in capitis custodia, and in pollis (...), vide Plevius Plinium libr 8. cap. 27. Aristot. lib. 8. cap. 17. August. de Civitat. Dei libr. 8. cap. 15. Et Theologice applicant idem Augustin. serm. 4. ad frat. in Eremo, and Chrysost hom. 34. in Matth. tom. 2. pollicie: So I have according to my Tallent sent this ungratefull age, according to my ministeriall mission, and commission from God, as to the Pagans, so even to Birdes, Beasts, Fishes and Fowle, to learne that gratitude to God for all his graces, which as I have prescribed: David and his people here in my Text, piously, publikly, (much more privately) practised. Now the effecting of this grace, being that which purposely premeditatingly, projectingly, I doe affect, that I may roule everyOmnem movere lapidem. stone, touch every string, attempt every meanes, use every motive, to bring our English-Irish Israel paralell, with Davids Israell:

changing my forme of speech, modulating now in another Tune and Tone, I desire that every man that desires to have an Israels heart, to be a true IsraelitedIohn. 1.47. Nathaniel indeede, to consider, that if the practise of the worst of men the Pagans, the worst of beastes too, yea the worst of animate creatures (except the very Devils, and infernall spirits) shame not his ingratitude; yet that hee would be lured and allured, by the imitation, vertuous emulation of the best that are or ever were of created natures eyther in earth, or in heaven, to the performance of this tributary taske, which God imposeth upon every soule that hath the organes and instruments of reason, rightlyFor God requires no praise of fooles, naturals, mad-men, young infants, such as have yet no use of reason: nor may be admitted to the Eucharisticall Supper. fitted even to prayse his great and glorious Name, (as David and these Davidicans did here) as they will answere the contrary to their perill at the great day of audit and great Court of Parliament before the King of Kings.
And herein first to begin on earth, and then by a Theologicall Climax or gradation to ascend up as high as heaven: let us looke to the Saints militant here on earth, and wee shall see a cloud of witnesses, like the cloud and the piller of fire, going before Israell toExod 40.38. Canaan, as the new created starre, or the Angell moving in the starre, or in forme of a starre, going before the Easterne Magi, as their conduct and convoy untoDe hac stella, ut de Magis ipsis multa disp^ at Bosquerus in eccho conom. in locit Math. 2, 1.2.3. Christ, preceeding and going before, in this (never to much pressed, till practised) dutie; inviting inciting us to insist in their steps. Repetens ab origine prime: to begin (as they say) from the beginning: wee haveGenes. 4. v. 4. Abel in true gratitude to God; surpassing ungratefull Cain, as the Sunne exceeds the pitchy cloud) sacrificing the best of his Lambes the first fruites, the chiefe and choyse of hisSacru^ pingue dab^ no^ macru^ sa ^rificabo. Sphinx Philosophica. Theologica. flocke, as a free-will offring for a blessing upon the rest: though I know too, it have a speciallSee Moses unvailed in octavo extant. reference to the oblation of Christ, the true PaschallIohn. 1. v. 29. Lambe. so Genes. 24. vers. 17. wee have Abrahams servant blessing the Lord for his mercies to his master Abraham, and for making his journey prosperous, vers. 26.27. so Genes 32. vers. 10. wee have Iacob, acknowledging himselfe unworthy of the least of the Lords mercies which hee specifically and specially enumerates: So in token of gratitude for renued mercies, as an everlasting testimonie to them and their seede for ever

in all succeeding generations, how much they poyzed and prized (as Courtiers from their King) the least mercies, and favours from God; and to oblige them and theirs in an eternall indissoluble bond of obedience, Abraham, Isaac, Iacob, and the rest (the best) of the Patriarkes, where ever they came, built Altars, set up stones and pillers to the honour of the Name of theSir Abraham Gen. 11.8. Gen. 22.14. Isaac Ge. 26. v. 25. Gen. 28 17. Iacob Gen. 31.13. and v. 53. Gen. 35.1. v. 7. Lord, as the Egyptian Kings in theirMela de his li. 1. c. 5. Strabo lib. 16. praecipue Pli. l. 36. c. 12. describit and deridet ut vanas and etiosa^. Pyramides, Nabuchadnezzar in hisDan. 4. v. 30. Babel, the Nymrodians in theirGen. 11.1.2. Tower, Absalon in his2. Sam. 18.18. piller, Cyrus in his sumptuousDe hac demo non meminit Pli. ut observat Aldus in Indicae ad Plin. naturalem histor. describunt tamen alij authore^ apud Maiol. col 23. tit. morabilia pag. 703. house, and other proude and ambitious spirits erected monuments, and memorials to the glorie of their owne names. So in the fifteenth of Exodus, wee have Moses, Aron, Miriam, and all the Elders and people of Israell, triunphing and gratulatorie rejoycing before the Lord, (as wee this day, for the preservation and reservation of our King and Prince) for their safe eduction out of Egypt, reduction from tyrannizing Phraoh production and protection thorow the red Sea, which was to them a walking garden, to their enemies a devouring grave. In the 33. of Genesis, we have the same Moses, when he had received the gracious summons of his blessed dissolution, as a second Simeon, singing his Cygnean and Swan-likeCantater Cygnus funeris ipse sui. song, blessing the Lord, and the thousands of Israell in their severall Tribes, the people of the Lord. To proceede in the first of Samuell, Chap. 2. wee have that devout Annaes gratulatory song for her Samuell, as BathshebaesProve. 31. v. 2. Lamuell, the sonne of her desires: yea in his corporeall birth, as Augustine was to his mother Monica in his spirituall, the sonne of herVt olim Ambr. Monica de Aug. Manicheo, etc. non potest perire filius ta^taru^ praecum and lachrymarum. prayers, and of her1. Sam. 1.13. and vers 26.27. teares: So in the fifth of Iudges, wee have Deborah and Baruch and all Israell tripudiating and triumphing before the Lord of Hostes, the God of Battles, for the overthrow of the Troupes of Iabin and Sisera, whom the river Kishon swept away, yea that ancient river, the riverIudg. 5.20.21, Kishon, the starres also fighting from heaven as once the Sea for our English Eliza, and for a Brittaine Drake, that gave an overturne to a swelling Dragon, as once also for Theodose the like, as the Sunne too for Ioshuah. So in the first of Kings Chap. 3. vers. 6.7 when God appeared unto Salomon in Gibeon, as he sacrificed before the Lord, as a prologue to his fervent prayer for a wise

and understanding heart, he first thankefully acknowledgeth the unspeakeable mercie of God to his Father David, as also (by a corollary and consequence) unto himselfe: and not to enumerate all particulars which are infinite for this our David, besides the Booke of the Psalmes, which are in their golden chayned linckes, continuated prayses, (as one cals the very lives of just men like the almes ofAct. 10.1.2. Cornelius, if seasoned with grace, and not soyled with sinnes, perpetuallBona vita perpetuae preces. prayers.) So in the second of Samuell Chap. 7. vers. 18.19.20.21. etc. omitting all other places, to fixe on this: when God sends to David by Nathan, the acceptance (as in Abrahams sacrificing ofGen. 22.16 17 Isaac, and in the desires of all his Saints and Servants of his will for the2. Cor. 8.12. worke, hisRespicit Deus affectum cordis pro affectu operis August. affection for the action in building of the Temple, reiterating and renuing many large and loving promises concerning Salomon his sonne, in what privacie and neerenesse he should be to God, even as a sonne is to a father: David upon this Embassage, as a second Niobe melting and dissolving, his heart wholly liquifying as waxe and Ice before the Sunne of these mercies, in the most zealous and fervent expressions of his soule, as fire breaking out long smothered in the soliloquies of his soule, (such as wee reade proceeding from Augustine, Bernard, Basill, and other zealous spirits in imitation of David) hee thus bespeakes his God: Who am I Lord, and what is my house that thou hast brought me hitherto, and this was yet a small thing O Lord God, but thou hast spoken also of thy servants house, for a great while to come, and is this the manner of man O Lord God? and so goes forward to the end: everie word having an emphasis, every phrase, as is said of the Epistles ofReferunt pectus ardore pleum Cyprian shewing a heart brimfull of grace of gratitude. So come to the new Testament indited by the same spirit, what ere the blaspemous Manichees blatter to theContra Manicheos, praeter August. and Patres erudite scripsit Granatensis in suo symbolo: and Bernardinus de Bustis, in concionibus and postillis in quarto in Initio libri pen^. contrary, the Saints pertaking of the same grace, have expressed the same in their gratulations. To begin with Simeon he had no sooner Christ that expected, incarnate Shiloh in his armes, as his spirit in his heart, but he breathes out his gratulatorie (blessing) blessed, NuncLuke. 2 28.29 dimittis.) So Zachary being long struckeLuke. 1.20. dumbe, as the fruite of his incredulitie, had no sooner his imprisoned tongue unjaled, but he improves the

first fruites of his speach to GodsLuke. 1.63.64 65. prayse: darting out as a pellet out of a Gun in the suddaine flashes of the spirit, the inward conceptions of his soule, by the outward modulations of his mouth. I might instance in thatLuke. ^.36. Anna, in the two best mothers of the two best sonnes that ever were borne of woman, the Virgin mother Mary, and her cousin Elizabeth: who visiting one another, in the most warrantable journyes, (not gadding to a trotters feast as our common Gossups) and for the best ends: (not to tattle and talke, and prattle and prate like Parrats and jangle like jayes, and chatt like Dawes and Pyes on this subject and that abject, not to calumniate and vilipend the absent) but to comfort and corroborate one another in the mercies of God; at first incounter, as two instruments rightly tuned in the best key by the finger of the spirit, in a holy and heavenly harmonious melodie, resonate and resound the prayses ofLuke. 1.42.45 46.47. God, as did also all the rest which looked for and expected, the now exhibited Patriarke-promised prefigured Messias, the consolation of Israel: which pretermitting without further inlarging, view the Apostle Paul, the inspired Doctor of the Gentiles, and wee shall see that as hee had as holy, and as sanctified a heart, (except his crucified Master) as ever was inclosed and included in a body of flesh, he hath, as so many Epistles, (yea in some places as so many leaves and lines) so many breathings, yea breaking out and eructations in the prayses of God. Yea in everyRom. 1.8. Rom. 16.27 1. Cor. 1.4. 2. Cor. 1.3. Ephes. 1. v. 3 Phil. 3. v. 20. Col. 1.3. 1. Thes. 1.2. 2. Thes. 1 3. 2. Tim. 1.3. Epistle it's observable, that the Alpha and Omega, the beginning and end of it is prayer and prayse, oftimes both in the antecedent and concluding consequent: the subject or matter of which petitions and thankesgivings, being the happy successe of the Word, the propagation of the Gospell, the faith and patience of the Saints, their grouth in grace, their forwardnesse in zeale their readinesse to distribute, their constancie in profession, their perseverance in the truth, together with Gods merciefull proceedings with himselfe in turning him in his name and nature, from a Saul to a Paul, from a Wolfe to a Sheepe, a persecuter to a professor, a Preacher, a Canniball to a Christian, a blasphemer to a blesser of1. Tim. 1. vers 12 13.14.15.16 17. Christ, yea from a Cater-piller to be like Iames Iohn and Cephas a piller, from a confounder

a founder, from a supplanter, a planter of the Church of Christ. These mercies together with that Tallent of preaching of tongues, of knowledge above his fellowes, of parts, of2. Cor. 9. 2 Cor. 10. Paulus de ipso per totum paines, of patience, in doing suffering more then the rest, that doore of utterance opened to him so abundantly, were (as they should be, to all in Pauls place, of Pauls spirit) the ground, not of Thrasonicall ostentation, luciferian pride and presumption, (as inIerem. 20.1.2. Pashur Hanany,1. King. 22. v. 24. Zedekiah, the Romish Iesuites and Baalites, as formerly inThe intollerable of Arrius, Samosaetenus, and other hereticks Gent. Magd. where Caesar as Pelargus our Iesuites praefat. ante suum Iesuitismum. Arrius, Nestorius, Paulus Samosetenus, and all other Pseudoprophets, Pseudopostles, Pseudomartyres, Pseudochristians, Heretickes and Schismaticks) but of holy and humble thankefulnesse. I might inlarge my meditation in this point, if I would wade into ancient and moderne historie, from the practise of all other Saints and holy men of God, that ever were, chiefly millions of Martyres, Confessors, recorded by Eusebius the Tripartite, and the rest of Ecclesiasticall historians: Foxe in his Martyrologie nominated by name and described by their states and callings, whose faiths, like theArist. libr. 5. cap. 19 Etiamsi Discorides libr. 2 cap. 50. and Galenus lib. 3 de tempor. cap. 4. contradicant Salamandrum in ignem vivere and ignem extinguere: asserit tamen Plinius libr. 10 cap. (...) Plin. (...) Civit. Dei lib^ 21. cap. 4. Salamander and that Pyralis or Ce^astia living even in the fires and hotest persecutions, even in the midst of flames (as Paul and Silas in the lower prisons) have sent out the sparks of holy prayses in hymnes and Psalmes, and spirituall songs, etc.
But above all, which is instar omnium in stead of all, as the best president to us Christians, we have the un-erring as precept, so practise of Christ, every action of his humanitie being ourOmnis Christi actio nostra est instructio. instruction, as he prayed continually, rejoyced evermore in all things, gave1. Thes. 5.16.17.18 thankes, chiefly for the propagation of the Gospell, the subjugation of spirits to his disciples, the falling downe of Sathan like lightning: yea in the very benediction of the creatures, abounding with prayses to his heavenlyMatth. 11.25 Matth. 26.30. father: so should wee, if wee be Christians in truth and sinceritie as in name and profession, imitate our Christ as members of his bodie, branches of his Vine, and docible disciples to that best of Masters: otherwayes as Augustine once noted, that it was incongruous under a thorney head to looke for soft and delicate and effeminate^ub spinoso capite, non debe^t membra esse mol^a. Augustinus. members; it's as incongruous under a blessed blessing head, to have (as many Christians have) execrable execrating, cursing accursed blasphemons members.



CHAP. VIII. Gratitude further proved and pressed from the Saints and Angels in the Church triumphant, with thunderbolts against this blaspeming in stead of blessing Age.
BVt if the examples of the Saints on earth move us not, I wish that sursum corda, wee would lift up our hearts and eyes a little higher, (paulo maiora canentes) unto the Saints and Angels in heaven: looking to the soules and spirits of the just, in the nature Angelicall and humane, we have a fairer coppie to write after, a more resplendent white to shoote at in the Church Triumphant, then wee can have in the Church Militant, where the whitest Swan hath his blacke feete, the purest gold his drosse, the fairest face of grace his moale, the most eminent light his cloud, or eclypse; as may be instanced besidesGen 19. v. 36. Lot,Gen. 9.21. Noah,Iohn 10. v. 25. Thomas,Math. 26.70.72. Peter, etc. Patriarks, Apostles; even in two of the best, for great men, good men, the world ever had; in David and Hezekiah, the one committing such2. Sam. 11. 2. Sam. 24.1.2.3. 2. Sa. 16.1.2.3.4. sinnes, the other omitting such2. Chron. 3^.24.25.26. a dutie; as both soyled their graces, and put them to wash away those tinctures and staines with penitentiallPsal. 6. v. 6. 2. King 20.3.4. teares, by the heate of renued love, drawne out of the best distillatorie limbeckes of broken hearts and compunct spirits: so that it's dangerous to imitate the best men that ever were, (except the sanctifier and Saviour of men) in every point of their practise, least like the motion of thatMateria compacta in instina acris regione, noctis frigore constipata, vent^rum vi aliquando a malo Angelo agitata. Simon Maiolus de diebus caui^. p. 1. c^ll. 1. pag. 9. ignis fatuus or transient fire, cald in my countrie: Maude with wispe, they leade us wrong in the darke night of some errors into the Devious by pathes of irregularities. But to imitate the Angels and soules and spirits of the just in heaven, their example is the right cynosure, the streight line of our actions and affections, the right Carde and compasse of our conversation, the very Pole according to which to steare our practise in our manifold fluctuations, and dangerous aberrations in the Sea of this world: because they being inseperably united unto God, to be like unto them is to be like unto God: even partaker of the divine2. Pet. 1.4. nature; they are fixt in their port, and haven, (their heaven,) not subjected now (like us in our surges) to any shipwracke of faith or1. Tim. 1.19. conscience; therefore it's good for us to cast anchor as

neere them as wee can, to build our Tents andMath. 17.4. Tabernacles as neere theirs as we may, to ascend up the Mount, to them by meditation, contemplation, imitation, as in other things, so especially in this dutie, in singing and ringing forth here below, as they above, the prayses of their God and our God, in joyning our quire to theirs in this holy Anthem, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabaoth, Heaven and earth are full of the Majesty of thyIn Te Deum. glory. If wee looke into that mysterious revelation, wee shall see what the very life of the Angels is: in what the spirits of the glorified Saints are eternally uncessantly imploied; namely in standing about the Throne of the LambeRevel. 5. v. 15 12.13.14. E^ch. 7. v. 9.10.11.12. Christ, clothed with white robes and Palmes in their hands, (as Emblemes of victorie over that triple C^rberus the flesh the world the Devill,) and crying with a loud voyce, Salvation to our God which sits upon the throne, and unto the Lambe, Blessing and glory, and wisedome, and thankesgiving, and honour, and power, and might be unto our God, for ever and ever. Amen. This is the continuated voyce of the Saints, of the Elders that serve God day and night in his Temple: Thus they sing Haleluiah in heaven for the judgements upon the great RomishRevel. 19. v. 1.2.4. whore which hang over her head, for avengment of the blood of so manie of Gods servants, innocent Martyres, which causelessely shee hath effused: Thus they rejoyce too, at the marriage of the Lambe, and for the graces alreadie given to the Bride the Church, chiefly the Iewels of the Gospell, by which shee is daily fitting her selfe for the solemnization of her espousals inVide Bright-mannum nostrum in locum. heaven: This indeede is vita celitum, vita coelestis the heavenly life, their life in heaven, who are ever standing before the Lambe: yea according to the distinction ofZanch. de sex operibus, de Angelis. Distinguit, in ministrantes, and assistentes. Zanchie andCasmannus in sua Angelographia. Casman, this is the life too, of these that are ministrantes, ministring from God: For as the Devils where ever they be whether limitted or confined to the earth, or dispersed in the Ayre, or in the fire, or in the waters, or in the Mines, or cranneyes under the earth, or in the Center of the earth, or below the center, (as some thinke ther's locall hell, as most probable, because most remote from heaven) or confined to some climate, some Province, some Towne, some Circuite of ground, some mountaine, some fountaine, some Court, some Pallace, some

chamber, some Nunnery, or Monastery where they have played reakes andInstat Cardan. in lib. 4. de parie^ c. 176. Langius li. 1. epist. an. 1539 Wier. de prastig. l. 4 ca. 9.10.11. pranckes, yea or to the bodies of some men, as once in theCald ventriloquisis by Text contra Marrion. c. 25. by Chrys. in 1. Cor. 12. by Oecumens in Act. 16. v. 16. because the devill spoke within their bellies, as once in the Serpent. Pythonists and ordinary in the dayes of Christ, and extraordinarie now: where ever according as the learned discusse and determine theseAs Delrius discus. Magicar. lib. Tyareus de locis infestis. W^er. de praestig. daemonu^, Perer. de Magia. Laur. Ananias de natur. daemonu^ cum alijs. intricates, he bee permanent or transient, he carryes still his Hell about with him, as murtherers, traytors, adulterers and blasphemers his darling sons, carry their petty Hels in the gnawings of their consciences: So on the co^trary, the good Angels where ever they be, whether in Bethle^s fields with the Shepheards, or in DanielsDan. 6. v 22 den, with Daniel, or in the fiery furnace with Sydrach, Misaach andDan. 3. v. 25. Abednego, or in Sodom withGen. 19. v. 15. Lot, or in the doore of the Tent withGen. 18.2.3. Abraham, or whether with Manoah and hisJudg. 13.9. wife in the fields, or with the Virgin Mary in herLuk. 1.26.27. Closet, or where ever else, they ever carrie their heaven about with them, they are still in heaven, or heaven in them, in respect of GodsLuke. 1. v. 19. presence which fils them, as the Moone is filled with the light of the Sunne: and in this fulnesse of joy, which they have in and from God, they cannot but resonate and resound backe againe their prayses to God: for even when these heavenly souldiers are on earth with BethlemsLuk 2.13.14. Shepheards, as if they had beene in these highest Emperyall heavens into which Paul was2 Cor. 12.2. rapt, they sing Glory to God on high, on earth peace, and amongst men good will. Now to act our parts, as we pray in that best ofThe Lords prayer preferred by Cyprian, by Daneus de Orat. Dominica, and by Alstedius in Theolog. Catech. prayers in respect of the Author, matter, manner, and method: Thy will be done in earth of us mortall men, readily, promptly,Math. 6.10. See Brimsley and lately M. Bernard in their plaine paraphrases upon the Lords prayer. sincerly, etc. as it is in heaven of the immortall Angels* so (unlesse wee meane to prate and prattle rather then pray, as did theMath 6.7. heathens, and our vulgar^n their Tantologies, Battilogies, Latin prayers. Papists, unlesse we will take Gods name inAbuse of prayer by M. Perkins in his Golden chayne, by Alsted. Theol. Catech is made a maine breach of the third Command. vaine, and abuse this primary and principall part of GodsGen. 4.26. Vide Scultetum de praecatione, pag. 4 5. etc. worship, unlesse wee will verba dare, dally with, deceive and delude the Almightie,) we must straine and studie, desire and indeavour to practise as wee pray: wee must blesse God on earth, as the Angels doe in heaven, we must not blaspheme on earth, the God of heaven,

which the Angels doe not, dare not, cannot doe: wee must prayse God, not pinch God, (as the angry Curre may the stoutest Lion) Wee must magnifie God as the Angels doe, not martyr God, murther God, teare and crucifie over and over againe (as Augustine alludes) the glorified humanitie of Christ, worse then the Iewes on the Crosse, as hellish and profane spirits doe: not sparing his wounds, his bloud, his heart, his head, nay not his feete, his nayles and his guts, as our roarers, our rake-hels, our rascalities and ragga-muffins doe: such as in their practise have turnd just renegadoes, Iulianists, Oecebolians, Apostaites, worse then Turkes and Mahumetans, forsaking Christ (nay opposing Christ) more fearefully then Witches and Conjurers. Oh this is indeede to be like unto the Angels, like unto the Gods, as the Devill IesuiticallyThe Devill first taught the doctrine of equivocation: the Iesuite in it is not a scholler to Iesus: non cu^ Iesuitis, qui iti^ cum Iesuitis, etc. equivocated with Adam andGen. 3.5. Eritis sicut d^ ludit deludit in hoc verbo d^, id est, eritis sicut Angeli dij dicti: sicut daemones, id est, sicut mali angeli dij vel daemones dicti a scientia. Eve. But what Gods? What Angels? even Angels of darkenesse, not Angels of light. For surely to curse teare, blaspheme God, is the very life, course, practise of damned spirits, the tortured ghosts of Devils, and men, reprobate Angels and reprobate men: Cain, Iudas, Esau, Saul, Pharaoh, Nero, Caligula, Heliogabalus, Holofernes, Apostate Iulian, whorish Pope Ioane, Nicromanticall Sylvester, Alexander the sixt, athisticall Caesar, Borgias, treacherous Absalon: serpentine Achitophell: soule poysoning Mahumet, blasphemous Arrius, MichaelBurned in Geneva, vide in fine Aretij locor. communium. Servetus with millions moe. Would you know what they are now doing? Their bodies are jayled and imprysoned in the grave till Gods generall assises. But what of their soules? Thus in the middest of their exquisite tortures in hell, (unlesse God gave speedie grace to some to die, better then they lived) even with their father the Devill (whom they sympathize, as in sinnes so inMath. 25, 41 sufferings) they rave, they rage, they fret, they fume, they revile, they blaspheme, they execrate, they curse the Majestie of the Almightie, they wreake their Teene and wrath on God, as that madded Baiazet cope't up in an iron Cage, did uponSee besides Knels his Turkish historie, the history of Tamb. extant in quarto. Tamberlaine, even by raging and reviling like madded dogges tyed up in iron chaines, they barke and fome at the mouth and belch out blasphemies (as the condemned miscreant that curseth the Iudge, the Iurie and the Bench:) when their malignant

malice and mischiefe can proceede no further. And indeed as wicked men are by the spirit of God cald the sonnes of1. Sam. 1.16. and 1. Sam 9.27. Beliall, the children of the veryIohn. 8. v. 44. and 1. Ioh. 3. v 10 Devils, so, Doe they not patrizare? are they not as like their father, as if they were spit out of his mouth? Do they not look as like him, as egge toNon ^v^^m ev^ similius. egge, snow to snow, or rather pitch to pitch? Do they not resemble him as face answers face in a glasse? Hee blasphemes God in hell, they blaspheme God here on earth: He is the oldRevela 12.9. Dragon, they are as yet butRev. 16. v. 9. Serpents, yet growing to be Dragons, and as full of venom for their measure as he is whose names they beare, whose nature they have. Should such die in this state and condition blaspheming the name of God, as so many thousands doe in the world, especially if they be never so little crost or toucht by the hand of God, or tongue, or hand of man, then letting their oath-pellets fly from their hell-heated mouthes as did MichaesIudg. 17.1.2. mother, the contesting Isralite in the dayes ofLev. 24.10.11 Moses, and these accursed carnalists prophecied of in theApoc. 16.9. Apocalypse? I pray you, to let such reflect a little on their case and condition,Math 5 35.36 and August. ad consentium de mendac. cap. 15. and Chromat. in locum.Iames 5.12 Psal. 25. v. 3. Zachar. 5.3. Deut. 28.58 and in Apocryph. Eccles. 23. v. 11. if God would please to open their hood-winckt eyes, besides the Scripture that's infallible true, firme above heaven andMatth. 5.18. earth irrevocable above the decrees of the Meedes andDan. 6.8. Persians, to be verified in every letter, title and syllable according to qualifications of objects in workes of justice, as of mercie: I say besides the verdict of the word, which must in due time be verified, else God were noNumb. 23.19. God, and the word but a fable like these of Esopes or Lucians, (which were blasphemy to imagine) I say yet againe and againe, besides the thunderbolts from Gods own mouth that strikes the swearer as low asPsalm 9.17. hell, the center of profanesse, nothing keeping him out of it, but a small twine threed of life, every day and night as a blacke worme and a white, gnawing this threed, and at last a blatrantM. Perkins allusiue simile, in one of his Legall motives, in his Treatise of repentance. beast cald death perhaps suddenly lopping, and cropping this threed, and sends the customarie swearer into the lower pit without ever bayle, or maineprize, remission or redemption: If there were no word, or if the word were, as carnall (life) (heartPsalm. 14.1. Athists account it, of no more certaintie, then mother Hubbardes tales, BebeliusBebilij facetiae extant in octavo jeasts, or MelandersAlelandri Iocoseria extant in decimo sexto, jocoseria, yea then the lying

legend of the (k) Papists, their Limbo Patrum, and picke purse Purgatorie: yet even in reason, let me expostulate with an impious and profane spirit, and whisper but some few wordes into the eare of a blasphemous swearer, how fit he is for hell, and how unfit for heaven if he should die suddenly as some of his predecessors have done? and be swept away as dust andPsalm. 1.4. chaffe in an instant, as were reveiling Corah, Dathan andNumb. 16.32.33. So Anastasius, the blasphemous Arrian Emperour was struk with a thunderbolt from heaven as also Olympius the Arrian (like Ioab) with three darts, blaspheming the Trinitie. See in the end of Zegedine his Common places in folio, de his cum multis alijs. Abiram, for alas what should he doe in heaven being conditioned and qualified as he is? what worke is there for him that he could doe, that he would doe? In heaven there is perpetuall sempiternall blessing of God, as we have proved, which taske he is as fit for as yet, as an Asse forAsinus ad Lyram, Sus Minervam. Erasmi chiliad. a Harpe, a Sow for a Sack-bot: he that cannot sequestrate one minute of an houre, one houre in a day, one moment of time to prayse God, hee that hath as much heart to this or any other spirituall dutie, as a Beare to the stake, the Bull to the ring, the coward to the battle, or the Asse to the race, he that's wearie in the Church or in a religious familie to beare one part or burthen in a Psalme (which is indeede his burthen) or chayned but to a Sermon or a Sacrament for an houre, hath his eares taken up as by commission, sore against his will, his heart beingAs Ezechiels auditors. EZche. 33. vers. 31.32. a wooll-gathering, rogeing and stragling like Dinah perhaps in theGen. 34. v. 1. fields, in the Towne, in the Taverne, in the Theator, the tappe-house, the Tobacco shop, the brothell-house, perhaps in his baggs, in his Barnes, in his coyne, his counting house, his corne-heapes: or amongst his sheepe and brutes; Is it probable or possible (judgement finding a man just as death leaves him, the Tree lying as itEcclesiastes fals) that this man, should dying in this tune and temper, be fit to joyne his untuned spirit with the heavenly Quire of Angels, to blesse and laud the Lord, for ever and ever? Oh lesse fit is this man for this spirituall motion, then Saul to be amongst theEstne Saul inter Propheta^. 1. Sam. 19.24. Prophets, then drunken Philoxenus to bee in the schoole of Soler, Socrates, then Iudas to bee at the LordsIohn. 13.26.27 Supper, or Cham in theGenes. 7. v. 7 Arke, yea lesse fit then for a Iayz to sing amongst Nightingals, for a foole to sit on the bench with Iudges, for a Quacke-salver to consult in the Colledge of Physitians, or the rurall fidler to joyne his Pans pipe, or Oaten reede, with the Quire of the Muses, the chorus

of the musitians, or (to adde one more,) as thoughQui Bavium non amat, odit tua carmina Mevi. Bavins or Mevins, or a ballating Poetaster should intrude amongst the heave^lyEst Deus in nobis, agitante calescinius illo. inspired spirits of a Virgill, an Ovid, a Homer, a Hesiod, a Chaucer, a Spencer, a Ben-mont, and such lettered Laureates, etc. Alas what delight hath a plow-boy, a Cow-boy to handle a penne, that knowes not a B. from a Buls foote as the phrase is? What delight should I take to be amongst the Dutch or Welsh, or wilde Irish,1. Cor. 14.11 whose language I understand not, to whom I am as a Barbarian, and they to me? and so, what a good yeare should a swearer doe in heaven, where there's nothing but blessing God with everlasting Hosannahs and Halelluiahs; with which he is altogether as unacquainted as a poore pre^tice with the mysteries of of his trade, the first day of his admittance, or a childe with Greeke and Hebrew the first day that ever he handled booke? how to speake the language of Ashdod, the language of hell, cursing, swearing, swaggering, ryoting, reveilling, etc, a profane spirit knowes well, (or rather ill) enough, It's naturall to him, as for the fire to burne the Sea to fome, etc. He swims withoutSine co^ti^e natare. a Corke, hee takes these (as some doe the the Art of cunny catching) at his owne hand, he needes no tutor, no prompter but the Devill and corruption: But for the language of Canaan the language of heaven, the tongue of1. Cor. 13.1. Angels, how to blesse God, how to expresse with the inspired Apostles magnaliaAct. 2. v. 11. Dei, the wondrous workes of God, how to set forth the glory of God, as did Augustine and Ambrose, when in heavenly responsories is said, one answering another, as Cherubin, Cherubin, they alternatly inAlterius vicibus: amant alterna Camenae canentes amenae. etc. courses compiled that holy hymne called Te Deum, or We prayse thee O God, etc. I say though a profane person should have moe tongues thenKing of Pontus thats said to have spoke 22. languages. Mithridates, Scaliger, orWhose dictionarie consists of eleuen languages. Calepine, yet till God scrape or wash his tongue from oathes and blasphemies, give his mouth a physicall, (or rather a metaphysicall) purge, heate his tongue as the Disciples with celestiallAct. 2. v. 3. fire, asEsay 6 v 6.7. Esay, with a coale from the Altar, he never can speake to any purpose, except in hypocrisie as didIohn. 12 4.5.6.7. Iudas,2. King. 9.32. Iezabell, and2 Sam. 14 v 3 Ioab, (like a horse that goes a forced pace) any thing Theologically good, tending to Gods glory, and the good of others. And if hee be as a fresh man untrayned for any

part of Gods service, as he is, (or should be) a souldier militant here on earth: is it probable that he is fit for a higher office and place to serve the Lord joyntly with Saints and Angels in heaven?

SECT. I. The blasphemer fitted for Hell.
BEsides the profane blasphemer, is not so unfit for heaven, but he is on the contrarie as fit for hell, as a cut purse is for the Pillory, or a traytor for Tyburne: yea as a good Grammer Scholler is fit for a higher schoole, even the Vniversitie: for Sathan by the helpe of native and hereditarie corruption, as a wily nurse, having herein earth trayned up the blasphemer in the language of Ashdod and other abominations, (as sinne never goes bird alone) like some father that teacheth his sonne, his owne trade, and makes him more expert and exquisite then himselfe, his purpose is, to preferre him to a higher (or rather to a lower place) even to be a free denizen in the low countries, the nethermost hels, his owne Dukedomes, and Demaines, where whensoever the earth by a commission from the God of heaven is wearie ofTelluris inutile futile pondus, Horat. him, and casts him out, as once shee did theIudg. 1. and Ge. 15. vers. 16. Cananites (as the Sea casts out her froth) there he may as free as any in great Belzebubbs territories, in a trice set up, (or set ope) his mouths shop, and have free vent for all his blaspemies, were they tenne times moe and more abominable: yea and he shall have too, such pension and pay as they deserve: abundance of fire and brimstone, storme and tempest shall be his portion toPsalm. 11.6. drinke; And sure as hee that knowes the language, and the fashions of a countrie makes lesse bones at it, to travaile thither, and hath more hope of entertaynement in France, Italy, Germany, Polland, Hungary, Slavonia, if hee can speake well and perfectly the French, Italian, Germaine, Polonian, Hungarian, Slavonian tongues: So he that speakes, in his horrid oathes, imprecations and execrations the language of hell, (as I perswade my selfe were the Devill himselfe (as he assumes shapes) truely and really metamorphized into the heart, the habit and speach of some man, hee could not act worse pageants then some doe, slaunder more maliciously

blaspheme more boysterously, etc.) such a man when ever God by his sergeant death sends him a passport, may travell in a trice into the Devils Dominions, and have worke at will, and aboundant wages, even more then he desires, but large as much as he deserves; yea me thinkes as by a mans speech it's easie discerned what countrie-man a man is, English, Irish, Scottish, a Germane or the like: so a man, (a Minister chiefly) may even here this day give a great guesse at thousands as infallibly, as the two Damosels did ofMath. 26.72. and Rhoda: Act. 12. vers. 13.14. Peter, what countrie you as yet belong to: and whither you set your faces to Sion, or to Sathan; even your tongues bewray you whether you speake Sibboleth orIudges 12. vers. 5.6. Shibboleth as Ephramites, or as Gileadits, as Angels or Devills. Oh as I begun this pressed point I end it. If ever you desire to be like the Angels in glory, sympathize with them, (though you cannot equalize them) in grace: chiefly consecrate as they their whole powers, you your least member to the glory of God, else that part unreformed, all yourIames 1. v 1^. Read all these excellent means and motives against swearing forswearing M. Down^^^ foure Treatises: pag. 26.27.28.29.^^ 49. etc. Religion is in vaine. And know further, what I have heretofore more inlarged, that a man begins eyther his heaven or hell, in thisHic vita aeterna tenetur, a^^ amutitur. life: Here he is in the suburbs of one of the two of Saint AugustinesAug. de (...) vit. Cities, eyther Ierusalem which isGal. 4.26. above, or Sodom whcih is here below: Here by grace a man hath Charter and interest after liverie seisure and possession of glorie. Here it's easily seene which way he walkes, even by what heLoquere ^t t^ videam. Socrates ad Ephebum quendam. talkes. A man neede not wish with Momus a window into a mans heart let him looke into his mouth, there he hath the best prognosticatum of his minde, as the un^erring truth it selfe hathMath. 12. ver. 32.33.34.35.36 determined. Figges never grew from Thistles, nor Grapes ofIam. 3.12. Thornes: nor sweete streames ever came from a poysoned, corruptedIam. 3.11. fountaine: let us make the inside cleane then all is cleane So shall we be able in earth as the Angels in heaven, in sinceritie, without hypocrisie, in filiall love not in servile feare (incident to theIam. 2.19. Devills and reprobates) with purged and in good measure purified spirits, even here on earth inchoatively, and after in heaven perfectly, to make one Quyre with the Angelicall spirits, to the ever blessing and praysing the God of spirits.



SECT. II.
I Doe not denie indeede but a wicked and a gracelesse man may sometimes speake good wordes, not onely savouring of Morall wisedome, of experience and deepe observance (as the sentences sayings and Apothegmes of Socrates, Solon, Bia^, Thales, etc. and the Greeke and the RomaneRecorded by. Valerius Maximus, Diogenes, Laertius, Brusonius, Lycosthenes and others. Sages, yea the expostulations of2. King. 9.31. Iezabell with Iehu, the disswasives of2 Sam. 24 3. Ioab to David, the speaches of some, even of the unbeleevingIohn. 7.40.46 Iewes, the censure of Gamahel concerningAct. 5.35.36. Paul, the counsell of Pilates wife concerningMath. 27.19 Christ, which many such specialties doe demonstrate) but he may speake wordes even in outward shew and appearance savouring and relishing of grace, as appeares in BalaamsNum. 23.10. wish, AgrippaesAct. 26.28. flash; the first to die, the second to be a true Christian, besides the PhariseesLuk. 18.11. prayer, the foolish Virgins cryingMatth. 25.11 Lord, Lord, the carnall Iewes desiring theI^hn. 6.34. bread, the adulterous Samaritane desiring the waters ofIohn. 4.15. life, with many moe: It cannot be denied also, but the best men may sometimes speake wordes at first blush savouring of a carnall spirit, such as have hardly the prints and impression of grace; as appeares in AbrahamsGenes. 12.13. simulation, or dissimulation, Ioseph his swearing by the life ofGen 42.15. Pharaoh, Eves tempting ofGenes. 3 6. Adam, Iudahs solliciting of his incestuousGenes. 38.16. Thamar, Davids murtherous vow against1. Sam 25.22 Naball, his folly in commanding his people to bee2. Sam. 24.1.2 numbered, his bloudie jussion in the slaughter of2. Sam. 11.15. Vria^, his unjust verdict against2. Sam. 16.4. Mephibosheth, in PetersMath. 26. Luk. 23. deniall, his disswasion of ChristsMath. 16.22. passion, the culpable request of Iames andMark. 10.35 Iohn, the incredulitie of SaintIohn. 20.25. Thomas with many moe, verifying that of SaintIames. 3.2. Iames, that he is a perfect man indeede, which offends not with his tongue: yet neverthelesse that is true in Divinitie which the eternall truth hath revealed, that wordes justifie orMath. 12.37. condemne, that the mouth speakes the man eyther good or bad, as it eyther blesseth or blasphemeth God, orIames. 3 9. man: For first this is to be presupposed, that usually the just and pure, have pureProverbs. words, their hearts, their consciences and their spirits beingTitus 1. v. 15. pure.

Abraham prayes forGenes. 18.25. Sodom, for IsmaelGenes. 17.18. Isaac, forGen. 25.2^^ Rebeca, Moses blesseth the children ofDeut. 33.1. Israell, Iacob blesseth hisGenes. 49. and 48.15. sonnes, and the sonnes ofGen. 48.20. Ioseph, Samuel and Ioshuah exhort to the service of the true1. Sam. 12.13. Ioshuah. 24. God, Lot exhorts theGenes. 19 7. Sodomites, Boaz comfortsRuth. 2.11.12 Ruth, Eli reproves his1 Sam. 2.23. sonnes: Gideon pleades againstIudg 6 31.32 Baall: the Prophets pray and prophecie, the Disciples preach, all that looked for the consolation of Israell, blesse with Zachary the God of Israell, for the incarnation and exhibition of Iacobs Shiloh, the promised Messias, as David cals his tongue hisIn psalmi^. glory. So all the godly have made, doe make, (except in some temptation or the breaking out of hereditary sinful corruption) their tongues, organs and instruments of the glory of God: as againe the wicked when they speake, usually (unlesse when they faine and straine to the contrarie pronouncing Parrat-like such wordes, of which they have no feeling, against the heart and against the haire, coldly comming from them, as from sicke men, or are over ruled by a speciall hand asNumb. 23.5. Balaam, andIohn. 18.14. Cayphas in his prophesie, Pharaoh Neco in that which hee told2. Chro. 35.21. Iosias, or out of common gifts as Iudas in his preaching, Saul in his1. Sam. 10.6. prophecying, (the wise men amongst the Heathens from Morall Philosophie, or the verie Ethickes, of nature) I say usually, except in these specified cases, when the wicked speake, their wordes speake them wicked, even as what bitter streames the fountaine sends forth, these streames speake the fountaine no better, then bitter: since nemo dat quod non habet none can give what he hath not, or shew better stuffe, then he hath within him: the mouth of a good man being as the opening of heaven, which never opened, but there was alwayes some remarkeable good thing happened, as eyther ChristAct. 1.11. ascending, or the spiritIohn. 2.32. descending or the like: the mouth of a wicked man, being as the opening of hell, out of which never proceeded, as into which, never entred ever ought that good was, or it is as the opening of the Tryoan Horse, in which were armed Greekes, fatall to Ilium, or as the opening of Pandoras boxe, out of which flew all leprosies and diseases, or as the opening of Curtius his gulfe of the SicilianPlin. lib. 2. cap 106. August. de Civit. Dei, lib. 3. cap. 31. Aetna, or that Plinie choakingOrosius, lib. 7. cap. 9. Procopius. lib. 2. Bel. Got. Nicepher. libr 3. cap. 12. Vesuvius, out of which proceeded nothing

but filthie foggs, and sulphurious stincking streames: as appeares in IsmaelsGenes. 21.9. scoffing, (or as the Apostle cals it) tongueGal. 4.25. persecuting, Michols2. Sam. 6.20. mocking, Rabsakees2. King. 18.28 29.30. rayling, Simeibs2. Sam. 16.5 6.7. revilings, the sonnes of Belials disdainings and dispisings of2. Sam. 20 1. David, and of Saul,1. Sam. 10.27. Sauls profane execration and1. Sam. 14.39. swearing, Senacharibs and Goliahs1. Sam. 17.36. defying. The cursing of that carnallLevit. 24.11. Israelite, and MichaesIudg. 17 2. mother, CorahsNumb. 16.3. dispiting, the ungratefull Israelites rebelling andNumb. 11.1.4. murmuring against God Moses and Aaron: to omit the PhariseesMarke 3 22.28.29. blaspheming against the holy Ghost, their vilifying and vituperation ofIohn 9.24. Christ, Ananias and SaphirasAct. 5.3. lying, Gehezies2. King. 5.25. dissembling, the old Prophets hypocriticall1. King. 13 18. haulting, Simon Magus hisAct. 8 9. Magicke, and monstruous mistakings in hisver. 19.20.21 stakings, Elimas the sorcerersAct. 13.8. disswasions of Sergius Paulus from Pauls preaching, and as is manifest by the multitude of oathes and blasphemies, which as thicke as the the Atomie or Sunne moathes, (besides talke wholy composed of rebauldrie, folly, dissimulation, and treacherie) come from the multitude, which testifie that there's no grace in their hearts, since ther's no good in their wordes: they rule not the least member, how much lesse the greater? therefore all their religion and profession isIames. 1.26. vaine. Therefore as thou wouldst be perswaded that with the tongue of Angels thou shalt glorifie God hereafter, get a cloven tongue, a fierie tongue (not from hell as theIam. 3.6. most, but fromAct. 2.3. heaven as the best, to be an instrument of Gods glorie here: which if thou attaine, thou maist infallibly conclude that here thou art holy in the Church Militant, and art tending and bending to be happie in the Church Triumphant: else know that a swearing, a blaspheming, an execrating and cursing tongue shewes an unholy heart, as corrupt streames shew a corrupt fountaine, as sower fruite shewes such sapp, and suchIam. 3.11. roote, as vlcers in the bodie and fierie ploukes in the face shew an unsound or inflamed Liver. Yea as the blacke spots shewes the Poxe, and the blew spots the plague, fristed haire, mannish attire, a rouling eye, gaddingProver. 7.10.11. feete, a tempting tongue, painted face, naked breastes, and uncovered dangling duggs (the Ivie bushes, that proclayme what Wine within is to be had for love

or money) not more demonstrating a very whorish2. King. 9.50. Iezabell, then a tongue which makes a daily trade of evill and cursed speaking shewes an evill and accursedMath. 12.35. heart, a sensuall and unsanctified soule, yea that the very Devill speakes in and by such men, (as he did once in theVide Pareum and Parerium in Genes 3.1.2 Serpent, in ApollosDe ludebrijs, and illusionibus diabolicis in hoc oraculo, vide apud Herodot. lib. 1. and 3. apud Valerium lib. 1. and 9 c. 12. Et apud Maiolu^ de vaticinijs, col. 2. pag. 99. Oracle) in manyVide apud Delrium disq. Magie. and apud Lorinum Commentarijs in Act. 16. pag. 628. 629. Ex Hieronymo. Pythonists and possessed persons (even as Gods spirit speakes in and by the elect, as once in and by his Prophets, or Evangelists and disciples:) and so for thee, in this state, fate and condition possessed (or rather plunged, poysoned and pestered) with such a filthie heart and foule mouth, that's altogether as unfitted, untuned and unprepared for holy Hymnes and songs, Divine Anthems, and heavenly prayses, as an Asse for an Harpe, as the adageTanquam Afinus ad Lyram. is: For thee I say to imagine in this predicament, to die and not be damned, but to passe without any change or conversion in heart or life, wordes or workes from a sathanicall life, to an Angelicall life in heaven, is a sweete deluding slumber, a brave golden dreame, a bewitching conceit, an Eutopaean Paradise, a meere Castle in the ayre, without any warrant, foundation,2. Pet. 1.21. from the God of truth, from the Scriptures of truth.



CHAP. IX.

SECT. I. Motives here to begin the life of the blessed.
I Still desire to adde more fuell to this Celestiall fire of true Gratitude which I labour, (as I have I hope already instrume^taly kindled) further to inflame in the hearts of our English-Irish Israell, (like that once materiallApud Maiol. col. 22. de eleme^to ignis. Vestall fire) never to die, or extinguish, but to live and last, to burne and blaze, even when the sparkes of nature are quenched, and the radicall moysture of all and every one of you drunke up and consumed. Oh I desire that when your earthly, and elementarie part is dissolved, your dust turnd to dust, and to mummiamized earth, that then your better part, your soules more pure and subtile then eyther fire or ayre, may with the Angels and theReve. 5.11. Revel. 7. ver. 11. Elders, clothed in pure white before the throne of the Lambe, yea with theVide de ordine, and natura Cherubin and Seraphin, apud Cassantum in Catalogo gloria mundi, par. 5. p. 79, 80. Cherubins, and Seraphins, wholy

fired and inflamed with the love of God, (as inchoatively and initiatorily here on earth, so) perfectly, constantly, perpetually in the Emperyall heavens, laude, and prayse, and blesse, and magnifie and glorifie that great Tetragrammaton, the mightie Iehovah,De his nominibus cum significationibus, vide apud Zanchium de tribus Elohim, and de attributis Dei. El, A donay, Elohim, etc. in all his great and glorious titles, names and attributes for ever; and for ever, without any persecution of the world, opposition of tongues, scoffing of Ismaelites, flouting of Michols, or any externall interruption, and disturbance from the sonnes of Beliall, which labour the extinguishing of all the sparkes of spirituall zeale in any devoute Proselite of the house of David, of the newZach. 12.10. Ierusalem, yea without any internall suggestions and temptations from Sathan, but above all, without any distraction of minde, division, or divulsion of thoughts, alienation by these externalls, or any other molestation in the outward or inward man from your selves: as having there a full and free exemption, and infranchizing manu-mission from all this dulnesse of flesh, deadnesse of heart, lumpishnesse of spirit, corruption of nature, pressures of crosses and losses, exigents and straites for these outward things, cares and distractions of families, incumbrances from your callings, and what other lets, disturbance, impediments and remoraes whatsoever, which doe everie way in this your warfare here, imbondage and inthrall you, from the performance of this or any other spirituall duetie, in that measure and perfect manner, that you would or should, of which you daily complaine with theRom. 7.23. Apostle and all the faithfull, and against which, you daily strive and fight, in the Christian conflict, and bickeringGal. 5. v. 17. duell, betwixt grace and nature, the flesh and the spirit. Oh let it be your living dying, (yet never dying) comfort, that you that begin cordially and Christianly to blesse God here, after this short life is ended, which is as brittle asEsai. 40 6. 1. Pet. 1.24. glasse, as wavering as the winde, as frayle as the Ice, as swift as a poaste, or a weavers shittle, as melting as snow, as fading as smoake, or the fields flower, as vanishing as a dreame, you shall joyne your spirits, to the spirits of the just, to sing and ring forth your everlasting Hosannahes and Haleluiahs to the God of spirits: for which end, as Pauls wish and hearts desire was that Israell might beRom. 10.1. saved, so my wish

and hearts desire is, that all of you might here be so farre sanctified, that innitiated in this life as prentices to this heavenly science, or as journey-men or journing men (even strangers and pilgrimes with1. Chr. 39.15. David, the Patriarkes andHebr. 11.13. 1. Pet. 2.11. Prophets) travelling and peregrinating in this vaile of miserie in your few and evillGenes. 47.9. dayes ere you sleepe with your1. King. 2.10. fathers, you would so learne to speake the language of Canaan with the tongues and Tones of Angels, that at the last as free Denizens, free Citizens infranchized and priviledged in all the liberties of grace, and glorie, you may keepe a perpetuall Iubilee, an everlasting Sabbath, of prayses and holy expressions in that heavenly Canaan, celestiall Ierusalem, Mount Sion, which isGal. 4.26. above: to which my hopes be, that you are, (my desires be that you may be) travelling, breathing and aspiring.


SECT. II. Motives further urging here to begin the l^fe of Grace, after of Glorie.
OH suffer the word of exhortation. I beseech you as heavenly Quyristers begin even here, even now, even this day, the Quyre on earth: It's not thanke worth to be eternally thankefull in heaven, you must doe it, you can doe, no otherwayes, if you once come there: It's as naturall (if I may use that word) for the blessed spirits to blesse and prayse the Lord, as for the fire to burne, the Sunne to shine, the waters to move, the Seas to ebbe and flow,Aelian. hist. li. 10. c. 44. Plin. li. 5. cap. 9. Nilus to overflow, or any other creatures celestiall or sublunary, animate or inanimate, to move and worke, and produce effects according to their natures, and severall proprieties. But to prayse God here, joyfully, cordially, constantly, to breake here through all impediments, as Davids three worthies through the Garryson of the Philistines, to fetch the desired waters of1. Chr. 11. vers 18. Bethlem, to strive here against all discouragements, as in the OlympickeDe his ludis multa apud Celium Rhodignu^ historicos, and Poetas sunt quos curriculo pulverem Olympicum collegisse iuvat. etc. Horat. games for Masteries, to swim against the streame (of all oppositions) as is said of theArist anim. lib. 9. cap 48. Dolphin and Samon, to be resolute against all repugnances of the false and flattering flesh (that bids the spirit as Peter bade Christ, favour it selfe.) The tempting Devill,

the persecuting world, who by the imputations of hypocrisie, humorousnesse, fantasticalitie, singularitie (at least of Puritanisme and Precisnesse) seeke to quench in every zealist, all sparkes of Devotion, as soone as ever kindled; yea asMath. 2.16. Herod, andExod. 1.22. Pharaoh, to drowne and murther even Christ and Christianitie in all the Israell of God, as soone as ever new borne, I say those that can thus digest all those bitter pilles, as physicall, and can be (as was Davids2. Sa. 6.21.22. case with Micholl,) more zealous in this, and all other duties, the more they are opposed, like the fire that burnes the more, the more it isQuo magis premitur, eo magis astuat ignis. supprest: this indeede is prayse worthy: everie inferior birde can chippe and croude it in the spring, and can sing in the Sunne shine; that is a birde indeede, that can sing in the storme, and charoll it in the Winter: every fish can play in the calme, the Dolphin and some moe can play in the tempest: everie man can blesse God in the Sunne-shine of his prosperitie with full bagges, full barnes, full bellies, and clothed backe: But to blesse God in adversitie, in the stormes of affliction with Iob on theJob. 1. v. 21. dunghill, Daniel in the LionsDan. 6.21.22 den, with the three companions ofDan. 3.23. Daniels in the furnace, with the Martyres at theMany had that strength and grace given them, in the paganish Arrian popish persecution nominated in the Martyrologie, but chiefly by him who hath epitomized all the booke of Martyres, fol. 3.4.5.6 7.8.9.10. to fol. 18. etc. stake to sing songs of Sion, here in a strang land, this is that which is most acceptable to the Almightie. Oh then, that my words might prick and fasten like the goades and nayles of the sanctuarie, that I might plead and prevaile with you: Even now with NoahsGenes. 7.9. Dove to enter into the Arke, to leave the carrion and fleshly lusts of the world, on which the worlds Crowes, Dogs and Vultures prey and glutt themselves: here to be at rest in God, and on God. Oh let my counsell beDan. 4.24. acceptable, here strive to enter into the Bride-gromeMath 25.10. chamber, to rejoyce as Paranymphs and friends of theMath. 9 15. bridegrome, to sing with Salomon a divine Epithalamium, in honour of the spirituall espousals, betwixt Christ and his Church Oh that you could here sleepe in quiet rest and tranquilitie of the soule, in heavenly contemplations, (as that Endimion is said to have slept with theApud Natalem Comitem in Methiologijs. Moone in the phylosophicall speculations) here be conversant in the mount with God asExod. 19.3. Moses, get a glimpse of the glorie of Christ in the mount, with Peter, Iames andMath. 17.4.5. 2. Pet. 1.17. Iohn for in the mount of high and heavenly thoughts and meditations

God will bee seene, Christ will bee found inLuk. 2.46. Ierusalem, which is the vision ofVisio Paci^. peace: Oh that we could ascend up from earth to heaven with2. King. 2.11. Elias in the fiery chariot of zeale, that we could strive even in this life, to enter at least the suburbs of the heavenly Citie, that we had ourPhil. 3.20. conversation even in Heaven, our Heaven begun here on earth: Sursum corda, that being risen withCollos. 3.1.2. Christ, we might seeke those things that are above, placing and planting our affections, not on things in earth, but on things in heaven, that we could send our hearts, as the Disciples their hearts andAct. 1.11.12. eyes after Christ that is ascended, thatA man in his incarnation, a Lambe in his passion, a Lion in his resurrection, an Eagle in his ascension Eagle high mounted at least, that we could soare up to his Crosse in Golgotha, in the meditation of his passion, not to breede compassion towards him who now from suffrings is entred intoLuk. 24.26. glorie, (as the superstitious Fryers as may be seene inIn his mount Calvarie. Guevara, Lodowicke deIn his Soliloquies grounded from severall Gospels. Ponte, andHis meditations. Granado, etc. make that the chiefe end of their mentall meditations, of his sufferings, and of their Idolatrous crucifixes) but to resolve to suffer with him, that we may be glorified with him; to feele the power of his death, to die to sin; the power of hisRom. 6.8.9.10 resurrection, to rise againe to newnesse of life, to blesse and prayse theApoc. 5.9. Lambe, because he hath redeemed us from all the nations and kingdomes and kinreds of the earth. If for this end we tract, and trace our incarnate crucified saviour, from Ierusalem toMatth. 27 Luk. 23. Marke 15. Iohn. 19. Golgotha, with his sword pierced weeping mother, the dolefull daughters of Ierusalem, Ioseph of Arimathea and the Centurion, and for this end looke upon him whom our sinnes haveZach. 12.10. pierced with the Eagle eye of our faith, as the Antitype of the Brazen Serpent whom Moses erected in theNumb. 21.9. Iohn. 3.14.15. wildernesse, looking on him also in the glasse of the Gospell, where we may see him as the Apostle of the Gentiles, tels the convert Corinthians, even crucified amongst us, if by this sight of him, we can get unto him by savingIohn. 1^.3. knowledge, into him byEpi^^. 3.16. faith we grow up with him as planted inIo^^. 15.4. him by the sappe of the spirit, we make a blessed speculation of his passion. Oh that besides the fruite of his passion, we could get here some glimpse of his transfiguration, a true type of his glorification, some glimmering and reflection of the heavenly Canaan, as Moses a perfect

view and Synopsis of theDeut. 34.1.2.3. earthly, here seeke some glimpse of heavenly light, (as the prisoner the gleames or beames of the Sunne, through some crannie in the walle or doore or keyhole) through the vaile of thy flesh, as the spouse in the Canticles, that had a glimpse of herCant. 5.4.5.6. welbeloved, looking through the hole of the doore, and her heart was affectioned to him: Here in thy greatest pressures of bodie soule and spirit get some refection by reflection, with that primitive ProtomartyreAct. 7.56. Stephen, and the rapt2. Cor. 12.4. Apostle on Christ crucified and glorified, and of the glorie of Christ, prepared purchased, layd up as revealed: Here get some warmth and heate in your hearts as the Apostles and the two disciples that went toLuk. 24.32 Emaus, by oft talking and communing with Christ, by the word, andOratio oris ratio: vel colloquium cum Deo. Isidore. prayer, and by that meanes receiving from Christ that best new-yeares gift, that love token, promised by Christ to all hisIohn. 14.17.18.19. elect, and exhibited as once in theAct. 2.3. forme, ever in the effects ofThe Spirit like fire, etc.
1. Illuminates with knowledg2. Heates with zeale and love.3. Mollifies the heart.4. Causeth sparkes of praier.5. Purgeth drosse of sinne.6. Purifies the heart.7. Changeth with, what it meetes with, in to it owne nature. Geminianus in summa exemplorii and similit. fire. Oh that we could breake off companie and societie with man, (chiefly wicked men) so much as our callings and charge to be discharged will permit, that in our meditations and soule Soliloquies in innitiation of Saint Augustine, Bernard, Anselme, and other heavenly minded men, we might be more conversant with God. Oh why doe wee not retire our selves asGenes. 24.63. Isaac into the fields, as Augustine and Alixius into theLibro Confessionum: related fully and applied in Parsons Resolution. orchard, as Ioseph of Arimathea into ourIohn. 19 41. Garden, or immure our selves (according to ChristsMath. 6. vers. 6. precept, and his VirginLuk. 1.28. mothers practise) into our private closet, or chamber, for some sequestrated time, there to meditate of the mercies of God, of the merits of Christ, of the priviledges of grace, of the Christians dignitie, of the joyes of a better life, etc there to exhilerate our selves according to the Apostolicall counsell, and command, and according to the president set us in my Text by David, and his nobles, and to rejoyce, before the Lord, and in the Lord, more then the carnalists, and the moralists of our times in their Corne and Wine, and OylePsal. 4.7. increased: more then Laban in hisGen. 29.2. sheepe, Naball in his1. Sam. 25.36. feast, Balthezar in hisDan. 5.2. drinke, Herod in hisMark. 6.17. Herodias,

Saul in his1 Sam. 16.16 23. Harpe, Nero in hisSuet^nius in Nerone, qualis artifex pereo. Musicke, the carnall Iewes in theirAmos. 6. v. 6. Minstrelsie, then the Philistines in theirIudges 16.23 Dagon and madding mirth: or any other licentious libertines in their luxurious and sabaritish delights. Oh why doe wee not retire and sequestrate our soules, our thoughts, our actions, our affections, from all carnall delights and desires, more fully, more freely to converse with God? setting times a part even for the verie nonce to prayse God, as didPsal. 55.17. David, as Daniel did forDaniel 6.10. prayer, arising with that man after Gods owne heart, even at midnight to give thankes unto the Lord? Oh that my wordes, like spurres, and goads, (like the pricke under the Nightingals breast, that is said to awaken her in the night from sleeping to singing) might excite and stirre you, to this neglected and too much pretermitted dutie! And for this purpose, I wish we might here use this world, as though we used it not, (as the Marriner the Seas and his Ship, as the Souldier his armes, as the traveller his Inne, as the Student his recreation, as the Spaniell the waters, for our turnes, and times, for a time,) for meere necessitie, and conveniencie, not giving it our hearts nor affections, shaking it of, when we have done with it, forSeeking only, quae ad vict^^ cultumque necessaria. Cicero. meate drinke and clothes, and imbracing in the inwards of our soules more pure, spirituall contentive, and satisfactorie delights, and desires: Oh be as much as thou canst in the mount of spirituall speculation, rather then in the vallie of externall actions, rather in the lightsomeGen. 46.34. Exod. 10. ver. 23 Goshen, with Gods Israell, then in the darkesome Egypt with the uncircumcised; rather suffer affliction as Moses with GodsHeb. 11.24.25 people, then injoy the pleasures of sinne for a season; rather desire with David, to be a doore keeper in Gods house, then to live in the Tents of Kedar, as Lot inGenes. 19. 2. Pet. 2.7. Sodom, Ezekiah amongstEzek. 2. ver. 6 Scorpions; rather fast with Gods children; the mourners in Sion, as Esther with herEsther. 4.16. maydes, Mordocheus with the distressed Iewes,Ezra 10. v. 1.2 Ezra,Dan. 10. v. 2.3 Daniel, andNehem. 1. v. 4 Nehemiah, then feast with the profane Balthezars, and drunken Nabals of the world; rather sing songs of Sion, with Moses, Deborah, Miriam, Zachary, the two Annas, and the spirituall Israell of God, to the laude and praise of God, then songs of Sodom to the Lute, and Tabret, and Harpe, to the dishonour of God, with that carnallAmos 6.6. Esay. 22. vers. 13 Israell.

Avoyd the companie of the wicked, fly from their societie, (as Manes the Calcedon Bishop did from Iulian the Apostate, Iohn from Cerinthus, Origen from Paulus Samesetenus, Polycarpus from Marcion, Athanasius, Chrysostome, and theOf all these there is ample mention made by Socrates, Eusebius, the Germaine Centuries, etc. As I have alledged them already in my Origens repentance. Orthodoxes Alexandrians and Antiochians, from the blaspemous Arrians) as from a dogge, aCane poenis and angue. adagium. snake and a devill. Come no neerer them, then to the plague, who have hot mouths like Armenian Dragons; hot as Ovens with fire from hell, spitting, burning venomous sparkes of blasphemies in the face of Heaven. For, to converse with such, is to have our Hell on earth: but to praise God, with the Saints, yea withall the creatures, magnifie him in all his glorious attributes, this is to have heaven onVita celitum, vita caelestis. earth. Oh happie (as holy) is that soule, who (in imitation of the Larke, and the singing Quyristers of the Ayre) hath his chiefe delight to be mounting upwards, and singing above as neere to God, as he can get, and useth this grosser earth but onely for foode and meere necessaries: making no stay below, till it soare up againe, that it be intrapped (as these incautelous birdes) in the lime-twigs of lustes, in the gins of temptations. Oh happie he, that not contented with ordinarie duties, with our common Protestants, materially and cursorily performed, such as their stinted tasks, of saying, (rather then praying) Prayers: reading of Chapters: singing of a Psalme, saying Grace, before and after meate (as they use to say) by themselves, or children their atturneys; running daily in these (unlesse by carnalite or profanesse omitted) as in a Laborynth or Circle: like a Milne-horse, ever in one pace, without ever quickening their motion, what extraordinarie occasion soever come, eyther of prayer in humiliation, or praysing God in true Gratulation; those that besides these ordinaries can sequestrate times, to dedicate and consecrate their very soules, and spirits to the very God of spirits, extraordinarily, in manner and measure, as occasion is offered, eyther of mourning, (such as was in the dayes ofEsay 22. v. 13. Esau,Osee. 6 v. 1.2. Osee,Dan. 9. v. 1.2.3.4.5. Daniel,Ioel. 1. v. 5.8.11.13. and cha. 2.15.16.17. Ioel,Ezra 10.3.5. Ezra,1. Sam. 1.10. Anna,Iob. 3.24. Iob,Ierem. 9. v. 1.2 Ieremie,) or of rejoysing, such as in the dayes of David, both herein my Text, and elsewhere when David penned his Eucharisticall Psalmes, sung publickly in the Church, he and the Elders of Israell: (as also

in the dayes of his sonne Salomon, Ezekiah, and Iosiah after him) exulting and triumphing before the Lord. Oh happie he, that can marry as some Fathers (besidesStella and Bona ventura in Lucam. Fryers) have alluded, both Martha andLuke 10. vers. 41.42. Mary Rachell and Leah, can unite and so conjoyne, the fruitefull thoo-bleare eyed life of action, as lesse faire, with the more beauteous life of contemplation, that in his generall calling, as he is a Christian can make holy and spirituall duties, the unbending of his bow, sauce to his meate, his verie recreation, and best preparing to the duties of his speciall, and particular calling, as he is a man; such a man is indeede a Phoenix amongst men, Rara avis in terris as the Hevites said ofGen. 23. v. 6. Abraham, even a Prince of God amongst men: yea he that can be a regular, observant of these few rules, by blessing the Lord with his heart, and mouth, the members of his bodie and faculties of his soule, here in grace, shall inchoate and begin even in the vallie of the world, in the vaile of his flesh, the life of glorie, such an one shall attaine, to more Evangelicall perfection, then ever did Iew, Papist, or Pelagian in the meere observation of Moses his Legals, whether Morals, Cerimonials, or Iudicials: Yea by these rules he shall come neerer God, shoote neerer heaven, walke more in the light of the Sunne, as every way more perfect: Yea I say further, he shall inherit and injoy sweeter extasies of soule, raptures of spirit, comforts of conscience, peace of heart, joy in the holy Ghost, then ever any superstitious popeling, regular Fryer, or Monasterian in this earth had, (notwithstanding all their Thrasonicall bragges, and boasts to the contrary, of ther feined revelations, apparitions, and enthusiasmes) by their strictest observance of the rules of their Saint Francis, Benedict, Dominick, etc. or these that are forged and fathered on Basill,De regulis Francisci Basilij, Augustini, etc. vide Fusius apud Hospinianum de origina Monocatus. Augustine, or any other, recorded byVide Cassiani collationes Suriu^, Lippomanum, Pomerium de sanctis, Marulum, Abdiam, and Gregorium in dialogis. Cassianus, and their owne writers. Oh could we trie how good and gracious the Lord is, had we but a spirituall gust of the comforts of grace; If wee did but once eate, the spirituall Manna that's hid from the world; Could wee turne the bread of life, in succum and sanguinem into bloud and moysture; Could wee be weaned from the world, to be fed as children truely newly1. Pet. 2. v. 2 borne, with the milke of the word; Could the world with her bewitching delights

prove bitter unto us, that Christ and his comforts might beeCum mundus dulcescit Christus amarescit, Cum mundus amarescit Christus dulcescit. August. sweete, that wee could be as content to sacrifice our false joyes as Abraham his belovedGenes. 22.6. Isaac, as the repenting Israelites their Idols; Could we pray1. Thes. 5. v. 16. continually, rejoyce eververs. 17.18. more, etc. In all things give thankes, whether wee eate or drinke, or whatsoever we doe or excogitate reserving all to the honour of God. Oh could wee attaine retaine thisMath. 5. v. 48 perfection, commended and commanded; Could wee thus keepe our spirituall Passeover withLuk. 22. v. 15 Christ, wee should experimentally finde as much difference betwixt the comforts and contents, of Christianitie and carnalitie, of the joyes of the flesh and the spirit, as betwixt the cleare fountaines ofExod. 15. v. 27 Elim, and the bitter waters of2. King. 2.19. Iericho, betwixt Hony and Aloes, or as the auncient Pagans found betwixt their formerly used Gland, and Akornes, and that Corne which was first sowen by Ceres, orPolydor. Virgil. de inventione rerum. Saturne, or as the Prodigall sonne found betwixt the husks of the Swine, that had almost starvedLuk. 15. vers. 16.17. him, and that bread in his Fathers house which aboundantly fed him: wee would confesse with that goodIn confessionibus. Augustine, that wee found God too late: wee would say with that otherIgnatius. zealist, Deus meus and omnia, my God and all things, wee would resolve with David, rather to bee doore keepers in the house of God, or to nest there with the very Sparrowes, then to be the Monarchs of the world, without the Word: Oh could wee make melodie to the Lord in our hearts, if the Harpes of these hearts of ours were rightly strung and prepared, to sing and give thankes, this Musicke Mentall, we would as much preferre it before all the vaine vicious profane maddingEccles. 2. v. 2. mirth of the world, as an exquisite Lutenist or Organist preferrs the Organs, theAn instrument so called, in which are diverse instruments in one. Multitude, Orpharian, Bandora, Lute or Cytharin, etc. before the roaring of a rurall Bag-pipe, in which the countrie-swaine delights, because hee is apprehensive of no better. Oh wee glut our selves as Vultures and Kytes with these carrions delights, sensuall because wee know not, nor trye not those that are more pure, andIgnoti nulla cupido and quod non videtur non concupiscitur. spirituall, as the stomacke that feeds on winde and corrupt humours, when it wants better meate. (*) (*)



SECT. III. Blessing God, the meanes to supplant blaspheming and other tongue sinnes.
OH if once our hearts like golden Organ-pipes, were blowne with the best Favonian winde, that blessed breath of the spirit, (without which they make no heavenly modulation) that they could resonate and resound with David the glorie of God, that wee could say with that Princely Psalmograph, Awake my tongue, a wake my glory, a wake Lute and Harpe, I my selfe will a wake right earely. If wee could thus Cant and charroll out the prayses of God. If wee could say with faith and feeling, Prayse thou the Lord, Oh my soule, yea all that is within me, prayse his holy Name, This one Grace would shew that we had gracious hearts, formed and framed in a holy and heavenly moulde. And sure as it is in the two scales, in a Ballance or the opposite spokes in a running wheele, when the one is up, the other goes downe, as is feined of Castor, and Pollux, that when the one riseth, the other sets: So if this grace of true gratitude, did possesse thy heart, how soone would all gracelesse and profane carriage vanish and avoyde out of it, as the mists before the Sunne, as the darkenesse and dampishnesse of a lower roome yeeldes to the light of a Candle, and to the better smell of sweete odours and perfumes which are suddenly brought in? All thy oathes and blasphemies, thy curses, and execrations, would bee purged out of thy ulcerous and uncleane mouth, as the grosse and viscous humours out of the bodie by Aloes or Rubarb; Christs wounds, and heart should no more be chewed, and champed in thy teeth, as thou doest the bones of a Larke: all these tongue sinnes against the pietie of speech, the justice, the equitie, the wisedome, the honestie, the sinceritie, the veritie of speach layd downe by someIn number 30. as they are layd downe by Peraldus in his summes virtutum and vitiorum de peccatis lingua, and by Reneccius in his Panoplia. Authors, which once more publickly IAt Pauls crosse Anno Dom. on that Text. Iames. 3. vers. 6. inlarged, all these I say will vanish as the morning mists, yea fall downe, as Dagon before the1. Sam. 5.4. Arke: nay I darke say, not onely shall this horrible sinne of swearing (whether Civill and Morall oathes, as by Faith and Troath, this Light, thisMath. 5.33.34 Iames. 5.12. Money, etc. or greater and grosser

not onely by the creatures, but by the Creator, I say it shall not onely turne to blessing God, thy selfe like Iordan turned backeward, but thou wilst no more indure to heare or beare the bellowings and blasphemies of the multitude, the roarings of the vociferations of the sonnes of Beliall, without zealous though discreete reproving of them according to circumstances of times, places andM. Perkins in his cases of co^science. persons, at least without grieving and mourning for them in thy heart, then Lot could indure the abhominations of the2. Pet. 2.7. Sodomites, Elias the1. King. 18.40 Baalites, or our SaviourMarke 11.15. Christ the Simoniacall buying and selling in the Temple, (orVenalia Romae Templa Sacerdotes. now of Temples) thou wilst be affected to such soundes, as to the roaring of a Cannon: nay, thou wouldst with as much patience heare the howlings and yellings of the damned spirits in Hell, they will bee as welcome to thee, as the gruntling of the Swine to the Aelian. libr. 3. cap. 8. Ignis, Mures, Sues illorumque grunnitus Elephanti terrori sunt. Maiol. ex Basilio colloq 7. pag. 252. Elephants, which so moves them that some battles have beene disordered, and lost by this swinish stratagem. I say more, were this grace truely eradicate, and grafted in thee, that tongue of thine, that's fired (and oyled too) from hell, and made glibb with oathes, as the wheeles of a Coach, or a Clocke, to runne more nimbly, till it have strucke all, venting and foming out thy tongue sinnes, thicke and three-fold, as Winters haile, to Gods dishonour, the Churches scandall, thine ownIude v. 13. shame, and thy soulesExod. 20 7. Psalm. 25.3. Zach. 5.3. destruction. Time may come, that rather then thou shouldest blaspheme God with it, as thou hast done, in the least particular, thou wouldst bite it off, more freely, then the hunted Beaver hisApud Plinium stones: thou wouldst spit it out of thy mouth (as once a primitive Martyr upon anApud Osiandrum in Epitom. Centuriatorum occasion spit his, in the face of a Tyrant. Yea thou wouldst suffer it to have more tortures here, then that rich churles inLuke 16.24. hell to be sod in bloud, as Tomiris did the tongue and head ofApud Iustinum historicum. Cyrus, to be prickt through and through with Needles, asVxor Anthon^ inimica Ciceroni, vt olim Eudoxia Chrysostomo, Herodias, Iohanni, Iezabell Eliae. Fulvia did Tullies tongue, rather then it should pricke and stabb, and torture the humanitie of thy once painefully crucified, now glorified Saviour: Nay with that good Hilarion were the choyce offered thee, thou wouldest rather die the death againe and againe, then once to blaspheme that God, who hath beene so good, so gracious and so propicious unto thee. What shall I

say more? what stone shall I further roule? what string shall I touch? what arguments shall I further use, to plant this blessed grace of blessing, to supplant this accursed plant of the Devils owne planting, in the ground of thy corruption, of blaspheming the God of heaven: which is so usuall in the mouthes of all sexes and sortes of men, women and children, from the heads to the tayle of our people, to the shame ofRead Master Downam in his foure Treatises against this abhominable swearing, sect. 8 9. 10. 11. 12. etc. pag. 21. 22. 23. 24. 25. etc. As also M. Phillip Knew-stubs his Abuses of England, and a Sermon of little M. Gibbins: on this Text, The land mournes, because of Oaths. Christianitie, the just scandall to the Gentiles, who more respect their feined Iupiter and Hercules then wee our Christ, and as the stumbling blocke before the Iewes, who by our little respect of our Christ, and by Popish Idolatrie (which they daily see, for which their forefathers so smarted) are kept mainly from being Christians? Oh, (that I may still harpe on this tongue string till it be in tune) inure thy selfe to blesse God, thou wilst, by dissuetude, then cease to blaspheme him; learne to speake the language of Canaan, thou wilst forget the language of Ashdod, even as the children that are Spanish, or of the Natives here, our Irish, if once they live amongst the English, and are Anglified, they forget for want of use their owne tongue, as Pharaohs daughter forgot her fathers house, andPsal. 45 10. people. Oh as one nayle drives out another, one passion drives out another, one burning, heats out another, (according to some surgery) so the fire of the spirit were it once in thee, would eate out all that hellish fire, that Ignis fatuus in thy tongue, all that filthy and stincking matter, that foames out at thy mouth, as froath from a Boare, as the sulphurious smell from Aetna, or Vesuvius, which steames and stinckes in the nosthrils of God, and all good men, as the stirring of Aiax, or the raking of a buried carrion: all this I say would be washed, rensed and clensed, (as were once the uncircumcised Corinthians in their wordes and workes) from this filthy and putrified matter, (as sore mouthes are washt by Allum and Sage) by the waters which flow from the sanctuarie: the healing waters of the word and1. Cor. 6. vers 10.11. spirit.



CHAP. X. To blesse God, the onely way and meanes to be blessed of God.
AS Abraham said in another case toGen. 18. v. 32 God, I say to man, let me speake once more, so have I done my motives to

this Gratitude, so prest and urg'd, ayming my conclusion with some diss^vasives further against ingratitude, this all positively I have to say in this point, that by this blessing of God, as did David and his Israelites in my Text for matter, and manner, thou takest the best way, the most compendious course, Gods owne prescribed method, to blesse thy selfe, to procure blessings to thy selfe and thy seede, to perpetuate, and intayle as didGe. 12.2. cha. 15. vers. 18. Abraham,Gen. 17.19. Isaac and Iacob, even blessings to thy posteritie, walking in thy holy wayes and steps, (even as wicked men, cursed spirits propagate (as some doe their frenzies, their leprosies, and hereditarie diseases corporeall) this dangerous and damnable disease spirituall, of lincked and chayned curses, even to their seede bloud and families, (sympathizing with their cursed sinnes, and accursing judgements) Oh the blessed interest and happie usurie of blessing God! it brings blessings redoubled and multiplied by Gods Arithmeticke upon our selves, even as he that in the best imployment of his preaching talle^t in Divinitie, or teaching tallent in Humanitie, reading Arts and Authors to others, gets and gaines by Gods blessing more knowledge toQui docet indocto^, etc. Ipse brevi reliquis doctior esse queat Et scire tuum nihil est, and te scire hoc sciat alter. himselfe, both Theologicall and Morall, by causing others toHabenti dabitur. Math. 25.29. know: and as he, that withIob. 29.15.16 17. Iob, as a good Steward in the right dispensing of the unrighteous Mamon, makes the backes, and bellies of the poore to blesse him, causeth also God to blesse him, in the increase of his store, as the Harvest to: that seede that's cast upon theEccles. 11. v. 1 waters; as the2. King. 4.7. oyle, and the1. King. 17 16 meale of the two poore widdowes were multiplied, that were so respective to the two goodElisha and Elias Prophets, as Abedmelech the Ethyopian saved his owne life, by saving IeremiesIer. 39.15.16.17. life, as a rich man, even in pietie and Christian pollicie, increaseth his stocke of money, when conscionably without any usurious contract, orIt's the compact this pactu^, this covenant to gaine, (how ever the other lose) a certaine summe which makes the usury and that which bites too See D. Fentons Treatise on usurie. compact, of biting interest, (securing onely the principall) he sets up or helpes the trafficke of honest and conscionable poore tradesmen, participating in equitie some of their gaine, as God gives a blessing to their getting, thus in helping them, not hindering but helping himselfe, doing good to himselfe, as experience hath shewed, when he does good to others: so in the fittest application, according to my first proposition, a man by

blessing of God, blesseth also himselfe by a necessarie consequence, even as he that lookes upon the Sunne, by the light, sees light; even as is veryfied in all histories, which are the hostages of speach, that they which honour God. God will honour them, as he told1. Sam. 2.^0 Samuel, as hee honoured beleevingGen 12. Ge. 17 Gen. 18.17.18. Abraham in Chaldea and Mesopotamia, Isaac amongst theGe. 26.12.28 Philistines, Ioseph inGenes. 41.39.40.41 42. Egypt,Esth. 6.10.11. Mordocheus,Esth. 2 9 Esther,Dan. 2.46 48. Daniell, Sydrach, Mysaach, andDan. 3.28. Abednego in Babylon,1. Sa 18.7.16 David1. Sam. 3.19.20.21. Samuel and2. Chro. 35.18 24. Iosiah in Israell, Boaz and Ruth inRuth. 4.11. Bethlem, the beleevingMath. 8.10. Centurion, the CananitishMath. 15.28. woman, the weepingLuk. 7.44 45. Penitent, the fluxe curedMarke 5.34. Patient, Devoute MaryIoh. 12.7. cha. 20.16. Magdalen, patientJob. 1.8. Iob. 42.16.17. Iob, meekeNumb. 12.7.8 Iosuah. 1.6. Moses, publikely before the sonnes of men heraulding their prayses even in the face of their maligning or contesting enemies, yea against even Sathan himselfe, and his accusing sathanists. On the contrarie shaming and dishonouring them that dishonour him, as he veryfied as well as threatned, against Hophney and1. Sam. 2.33 34. Phineas, and the house of Israell, against the Sodomites, burning them with stinckingGen. 19.24. sulphure, as well as fire, as their sinnes stuncke against the proud rebelling Nymrodians, whose Tower he overthrew, and confounded theirGe. 11.7.8.9. language, against wicked Haman all whose honours were in one houre strangled at theEsth 7.10. Gallowes, in his dogge-like death, against rebelling2. Sam. 18.14.17. Absolon, whose name now stinckes as foule, as his face was once2 Sam. 14 25 faire, against proudeAct 12.23. Herod whom the wormes eate, proude Nabuchadnezar, who usurping more then a man in his imagination, for seven yeares was worse then a beast, in state andDan 4 30 See how this transforming was in D Willes Hexapla in this place fate, yea verifying this against his owne Israell who for their owne rebellions, though they were the head, yet were rhey made the tayle of other people, as they were given over to the power of theIere. 39.9. Chaldeans,Iudges 6.2. Midianites,Iudges 3 14 Moabites,Iudg 13.1. Philistines at severall times but chiefly in Iehoiakim, who as hee lived wickedly, he died wretchedly, and dishonourably, having the verie buriall of anIere. 22.18.19. Asse, none lamenting him: As it was also with that blasphemous Arrius and otherOf Gods judgements against Arrius, Nestorius and other heretickes and apostates. See in the end of Zegedines tables in folio. heretickes, with Iulian and

other accursed apostates, with Cain,Act. 1.24.25. Iudas and other bloudie murtherers,2. Sam. 20.22 Shebah,1. King. 2.31.32. Ioab and other Traytors, with Iezabell, Cleopatra, Messalina,2. King. 11.16 Athalia, our English Rosamond, and Iane Shore, and all other impenitent profane ones, who as they lived without grace and holinesse, died in disgrace without honour a debaushed life, being usually accompanied with a dishonourable death: even so (that from this circumference I may conclude the point in the right center) that soule that is active in truly blessing God, is also passive in receiving blessings from God; he is that truly blessed man which is described in thePsal. 1. ps. 112. psalm. 119 1. Math. 5.3.4.5. Psalmes, and in other Scriptures; all those blessings shall accrew unto him, and come upon both him and his seede, which Moses bothDeut. 28.1.2.3 Levit. 26.3.4 5. conditionally andDeut. 33.6.7.8.9. absolutely pronounceth upon the Israell of God: even as on the contrary he that loveth cursing, the curse shall come upon him, even as a stone or pellet of Lead that's throwne up in the ayre, may fall upon the head of the thrower and crush it, (as did that stone which an Eagle let fall upon the head of Eschylus the Poet,) or as a ball that's throwne against an Iron-walle rebounds backe againe on the breast or face of the thrower, as the curses of2. King 1^. Rabsakah, of2. Sam. 16.7.8. Semei, of Balaake redounded on their owne heads, not on the heads of Ezekias, of David, and of the Israelites, as the Popes curses at thisSee the book called Brutum ^ulmen. day against the Orthodoxe Protestants, whom he execrates under the names of Calvinists, Lutherans, Hugenotes, Heretickes, fall patt upon himselfe, and the declining Sea of the Papall Hierarchie, who begins to ebbe, by the just revolting of Kings, and Christian kingdomes from Babylon, as fast as ever by the mysterious working ofReade that noble French Morney, now Englished in folio, of the progresse of popery since it was first hatcht Sathan it had a time to flow, the causelesse curse as an arrow shot to no purpose in the ayre, ever returning in vaine: So that to draw this point to a further head, as the Lord is Iust lege Talionis, by a justPana and culpa protionata. retaliation in other particulars to punish sin; so to curse the cursers as mostSee Gods hand upo^ those that used to curse and imprecate, instanced by Kellay lib. 8. and Guicardine lib. 17. in the death of Charles Duke of Burbon: by Crantius libr. 6. chap. 45. by Wierus lib. 4. de Magia cap. 10. by Iohn le Gast in his Table-talke volum. 2. pag. 131. by Benso, in his historie of the new World lib. 2. cap. 17. by Philip Camerarius, hist. Med. cap. 86. in the Tragicall ends accustomed cursers. accursed, according to that of the Psalmist, As he loved cursing, so let it come unto him, as he delighted

not in blessing, so let it be farre from him, as he clothed himselfe with cursing as with a garment, so let it come into his bowels like water, and like oyle into his bones, let it bee unto him, as the garment which covereth him, and as a girdle wherewith he is girdedPsal. 109. ver. 17.^8. continually, so why may we not argue, that by a retaliating proportionable mercie, (seeing both in mercie and justice the Lord keepes an Arithmeticall or Geometricall proportion, in rewarding as revenging) he blesseth those that blesse him, and that blesse his; for if he told Abraham that those who blessed him he wouldGenes. 12. v. 3. blesse, and hath ever verified this promise, in blessing and prospering the friends of the Church, the spirituall seede and sonnes of Abraham: (as some of ourGorlicius in axiomatibus theologicis ex Mela^cthone, Sarigelli^, and alijs Neotoricis. Modernes instance, in the two Theodosij in Constantine, in Gratian, in Valentinian, and other Christian Emperours, who as they were nursing fathers and nursing mothers to the Church, the Lord went out and in with them, and was present with them in all their affaires, in warre and in peace, as hee was present withIoshuah 1.5. Ioshuah,Iudg 6.12. Gideon,Gen 39.2.21 Ioseph,1. Sam. 18.12. David,Dan. 4.5 chap. 5.12.14. Daniell, and other his serva^ts) ever also according to his threat cursing those that cursed Abraham, and were malignant enemies and opposites to the trueGene. 12. v. 3. Church, his Israell (veryfying and sealing all the curses in his flying booke of vengeance, uponReade the curses threatned against Egypt, Moab, Ammon, Edom, Tyre Sidon, Medea, Arabia, and all wicked Provinces and people: in Ieremie th. 25 vers. 15.16.17.18.19. Moab, Ammon, Amalech, Ieconiah, Ahab, Iezabell, Haman, Nero, Caligula, Iulian, Antiochus, Maximinus,Reade the Theater of Gods judgements in quarto, written by D. Beard, on which in the Titles of Apostates, and bloudie persecuters, these named with many moe, are spectacles of vengeance. Maxentius, and of latter times on Iohannes de Roma, Minerius, Gerson, Cassaneus, Weston, Bonner, Story, Gardiner, and other bloudy butcheringSee Master Foxe in his Booke of Martyres, but especially, in a booke epitomizing the Actes of the Church, where you may see the ends of these named with many moe: folio 377. 378. 379. 380. 382. 383. etc. See also Andrew Husdore in his Theater of examples on the 3. and 4. Commandement in Latin in quarto. persecutors ancient and moderne) then sure (as the argument holdes much more, from the lesser to the greater affirmatively, both Logically and Theologically) the Lord will blesse those, that blesse him, as he will curse those that curse him: If he will blesse those that blesse Abraham, much more will he blesse those that blesse the God of Abraham, since indeede none can blesse God cordially and sincerely, but such as

the Lord first inspires with his grace, and spirit, even as the instrument makes no sound, till it first be tuned and touched with the hand of the Musitian, as the Organ-pipe is not musicall, but dead till it be filled with the windy bellowes from the Organist, for none can say that Iesus is the Lord but by the spirit of God. So that the blessing of the God of spirits, with upright hearts and spirits, as David and his Israelitish Elders did here, being but as a sparke of the spirits fire, as streames from that fountaine, as reflecting beames from that Sunne: it is an evident demonstration, that such are truly, actually, really blessed already, and (as a preparative beaver to a greater Banquet, at the supper of theRevel. 19.7. Lambe) potentially to be further blessed of God, in the highest heavens, the throne of God, the bosome of Abraham, the prepared mansions and seates of the blessed.
All which affirmatives me thinkes, have their corroboration from this Theologicall axiome, that as the seale leaves the impression in the waxe, be it gold or silver, etc. as the Sunne by reflection leaves his shaddow on the opposite cloude; so what mercie soever the Lord bestowes on us, as a dignitie, hee workes in us the same grace, demonstrating it selfe in some proportionable dutie as for instance. 1. Hath the Lord elected me to life from eternitie? He gives me grace to elect and chuse him again to be my God. 2. Hath he called me to the knowledge of his truth? He gives me his spirit to call him AbbaRom. 8.15.16. father, in spirit and truth. 3. Hath Christ died for me, and my sinnes and risen againe for myRom. 5.6. justification? He hath mutually given me power to die unto sinne, and to rise againe to holinesse and righteousnesse of life, mortification of my fleshlyColoss. 3.5. lusts, and crucifying my affection by the power of hisGal 5.24. death, and vivification and quickning of the spiritEphes. 2 v. 1. by the power of his resurrection 4. Is he ascended into heaven really for me? He virtually causeth me to ascend thither after him in myColoss. 3. v. 1.2 heart and affections. 5. Is he my high Priest to pray for me? He as his legacie to his Church bequeaths unto me the spirit of grace andZ^ch. 12 10. Rom. 8.26. prayer to pray againe unto him, 6. (So for conclusion) Doth hee blesse me with all blessing in heavenly things? He gives me the heart by the same grace to blesse him againe, as all his Saints have done, such print and impression the seale of his

spirit leaves in my heart as answerable to it selfe, as face answeres face in a glasse. Oh then, as ever thou desires to be blessed, blesse God here, be not so ignorant on idle, as to dreame of the kernell without breaking theQui vult nucem, nucleum frangat. shell; of eating the meale without grinding in the milne of theBeneficium postulat officium. dignitie, without the duetie: of ever being blessed but cursed, without blessing God. Oh thinke on all these motives in generall, everie one in particular, and let them be as goades and spurres to excite thee to this pressed duetie. At least let all and ever of them be so many Bittes and Bridles, curbs and remoraes to restraine and keepe us from ingratitude, the bane of every grace, yet the ulcer and spreading leprosie and Gangreene of every place, yea of this Province, and our English here planted, if I might digresse by expostulations.


CHAP. XI. The application of all: by comparing as and our times with Israell in all times.
ANd now for speciall and specificall application of all that hath beene said unto our selves, to reape the harvest of all this seede, and to drinke the Wine from these pressed grapes, that I may (Bee-like) bring all these rapsodicall collections home to the English-Irish Hive of our owne Church, and Common-wealth (all these generall motives being but preparatives to prolong and prepare the way to my intended scope, or as a foundation to a subsequent building:) If ever Nation and people under the cope of heaven, had cause and occasion, to act the part of David and his worthies, since they left the stage of life, in blessing the Lord, (as the very wordes of my Text are) wee are the people; for in the blessings and benefits we have received from God, both of adornation and preservation, Spirituall and Temporall, externall and internall, generall and speciall, our mother Albion, and wee here Hybernified, layd in an equall scales (I will not so undervalue us to say) ballanced with all the inhabitants of the Christian, Pagan, Papall, Octoman world compared with the famousest kingdomes European, Asian, Affrican, and American, not excepting the

Cham of Cathy, the great Mogull, the Souldan of Egypt, Prester-Iohn, the Kingdomes of Fez, and the most flourishing that are, or ever were, but equally poyzed with the best people (in their prime) in Davids and Salomons time, that ever were, taken even in their best, as answering all their priviledges and prerogatives given them by the inspired1. Pet. 2.9. Apostles, of a royall Priesthood, a holy Nation, a chosen generation etc. To whom were the Oracles of whom came Christ according to theRom. 9.4. flesh? wee doe not onely weigh and paralell blessings with them, layd in equall ballance, but all things duely pondered, wee as farre (mee thinkes) exceede them, as they exceeded once the invironing Nations; and this will plainely and perspicuously appeare, if wee and they; Britam mans and Iewes, be compared together (asIn his lives. Plutarch compared the Greekes and the Romanes) both in our best and worst: our dignities received from God, our obliged (yet neglected) dueties, that wee owe to God: wee shall bee found to beare the bucklers from them. Repetens ab origine primo, to begin then from the beginning, etc.
First wee know the Lord of his meere mercie and Philanthropie entred into covenant with the Iewes, gave them the seale of the covenant Circumcision (initiated with their fatherGen. 17. v. 1.2 7 9.10.11.12. Rom. 4.11. Abraham, he by thisIoshuah. 5. ve. 5.6. Deut. 5. v. 1.2.3. covenant elected and selected them from all the Nations, Kingdomes and kinreds of the earth to bee a peculiar people to himselfe, of them and amongst them, he had his Church: instituted prescribed and established his owne worship: gave them lawes and ordinances Morall, Ceremoniall, Iudiciall, as farre exceeding the lawes of Solon, Numa Pompilius, Mercurius Trismegistus, Adraco, or any other Legifers amongst men in equitie, puritie, and perfection, as the Gold exceedes the Brasse or Tynne, by these hee hedged and limited them within their bounds: all that he exacted of them againe in reciprocall requitall of his mercies was onelyDeut. 5.40. obedience to his lawes and statutes. His love he first set uponDeut. 5 v. 34.35.36.37.38. them and choose them, (not they him) not for any merit or worthinesse that was in them, but of his meere mercie and paternall good will, adopting them unto himselfe, repudiating and in a manner rejecting for a time, all

other people whom hee shut up in unbeleefe, in respect of them, as Moses oft times urgeth unto them.
So to reflect upon our selves, for this our English Israell, hath not the Lord sequestrated and separated us from Pagans and Heathens, yea even from Turkes, (and Iewes themselves,) whom for a time he hath rejected for theirRom. 11.20. unbeliefe, to be a Church unto himselfe, a people zealous of good workes? were we not once, as wee may see our faces in the glasse of theRom. 1.29.30.31. Romanes,1. Cor. 6.9.10.11. Corinthians, Thessalonians,Ephes. 2. v. 2.3. vers. 11.12. and Tit. 3. vers. 3. Ephesians, in their pristine estate before their conversion) in the uncircumcision of the flesh, serving lusts and vaine Idols, without God in Christ, strangers from God, and Aliens from the Common-wealth of the true Israell, in the power ofAct. 26.18. death, in the power of darkenesse, having our very understandingsEphes. 4.18. darkned, as ignorant of the true God, and of the way and meanes of life, and salvation? were wee not once even darkenesse it selfe, an obscure people even to the world, devided and cast out as it were, into an unknowne corner andDivisos ab orbe Britannos, etc. Virgil. angle (though now as a Candle on a Table, as a Beacon on a Hill, as a Citie on a Mountaine that cannot bee hid, giving light and luster to the gazing and admiring world, whose eyes are upon our eminencie)De laudibus Angliae nostrae, lege apud Cassaneum in Catalogo par. 12. pag. 348. and Beromensem in Chronicis lib. 4 but in respect of our spirituall estate, wee were like other Gentiles, walking in the vanities of our mindes, children of disobedience, in whom the Prince of the Ayre ruled, wildeRom. 11.24. olives ere wee were ingrafted? But even when we were thus in our blouds, the Lord past by us, and said we shouldEzech. 16. ver. 3.4.5.6. live by the light of his word, (whether by Ioseph of Arimathea, or who else, or in the dayes ofThe Papists contend that this Isle, first received the faith in time of Lucius Anno Dom. 180. And in time of Augustine sent by Gregory Anno 600. but as appeares by some passages out of Bede and Peter Cluanensis, yea by Tertullian contra Iudaeos, and Origen. homil. 4. in Ezech. we received the Gospell long before the time of Eleutherius, eyther by Ioseph of Arimathea as Gildas thinkes, lib. 4. de Victoria, or by Simon Zelotes, as Nicephorus affirmes, libr. 2. cap. 4. Lucius or else when, I dispute not now) I say by this light, by blessed organs and instruments, we were brought first from Paganish, and after from Popish darkenesse, more hideous then the Egyptian, or theDe tenebris Chymerijs: in Oppido illo in Bosphoro sito Multa, Plin. lib. 6. cap. 6. c. 11. c. 13. Et Mela li. 1. c. 4. Chymerian, and reduced into the lightsome Goshen of the glorious Gospell, called to be a people that before

(as it were) were no people, gathered to be a Church, yea a glorious Church, as any in Europe or in Christendome, besides for the continuation of the Gospell, the propagation and profession of the true Religion, the zeale and sinceritie, knowledge and answerable practise of preachers and professors, puritie of Gods worship, freed in a great measure from the leaven of Popish and Paganish Idolatrie and superstition, holinesse of life, and illumination of judgement, shining in many eminent members, as pearles in Gold (notwithstanding the nevy, and warts and spots and blemishes in this of ours, as ever have beene in the best reformed Churches, by open profane ones, and secret hypocrites, as wooden legges to the bodie, as rotten boughes to the Tree, in the true Church, like corrupt humors in the bodie, rather then of our Church.) I say Churches ofRevel. 24. vers. 14.20. Revel. 3.15. Asia, of1. Cor. ch. 3.3 ch. 5. v. 1.5. ch. 6. v. 1. ch. 11. v. 1^ Corinth, and the best that are or ever were Militant on earth, till they be Triumphant in heaven, for the number of, (for the sinceritie and measure of Grace in) our present and pristine Proselites, true Nachaniels, zealous professors and confessors, constant and couragious Martyres, since the dayes of that Belgicke Elias Luther, who have, and upon tryall I am perswaded still would answere their names of Protestants, protesting and co^fessing for the faith till death, sealing the truth with their bloud, reflecting on those, I may well say according to my hearts perswasion, that our English-Scottish Sion, our Church of great Brittaine, of all other Churches, is as the Dove amongst the Birdes, as the Lilly amongst the flowers, as the Sunne amongst the Planets, Christs owne Spouse, thoughCant. 1. v. 4.5 blacke, yet faire, yea if comparisons were not odious, I would say as faire as any of those wee call reformed in France, Helvetia, Bohemia, Saxony, Denmarke, etc. or any other inSee the book extant in octavo of the Confessions of the reformed churches. Belgia, yea I except not Geneva, and we may put in for the armour of Aiax, with Amsterdam it selfe.
Secondly, as in the Church of the Iewes, multitudes and millions of carnall Israelites, yea the whole generalitie, except some few whom the Lord reserved (as a few names inRevel. 3.4. Sardis, a few cornes in chaffe, as some few of Elias his1. King. 19.18 Rom. 11.4. spirit amongst Baalites) broke and infringed this covenant of God, by apostaticall revolting, and backe-sliding, as the Lord

expostulates with them by his Angell sent fromIudg. 2. vers. 1.2.3.4. Gilgall, by Samuell in1. Sam. 7.56 and 1. Sam. 12.6.7.8.9.10. Mizpeth, and by all the Prophets, after the death of Moses andIudg. 2. vers. 8.9.10. Ioshuah, and those Elders of Israell who saw the miracles in Egypt, the wildernesse, and the redd Sea, forgetting theSee Psal. 78^ throughout. Lord, that bought them and brought them into that good land, flowing with milke and hony.
So hath not the God of Israell, as just a quarrell and controversie with the commonaltie and generalitie of our Nations, for breaking our covenant in Baptisme, by which we were as strictly obliged to his service and worship, to faith, and obedience, as ever they by their Circumcision? For were ever any Nation more perfidious, or fedifragous one to another the Carthaginians to the Romanes? theCretenses semper mendaces. Titus 1.12. Cretians,Creta fides. Grecians or worst dissemblers, yea even the verySee their perfidiousnesse in Knols his Turkish historie. Turkes to Christians: then Christians unto God? How many miriades, and millions at this day (to goe no further, to former times) by their pledges and sureties, their God-fathers as they are called, or fathers for God, in the publicke Congregations, in the presence of God men and Angels, calling heaven and earth to record, have promised and protested, to forsake the flesh, the world and the Devill, to serve and worship the true Iehovah, when they were initiated and matriculated as it were into the Church by Baptisme, admitted into Christs Colledge, the number and ranke of Christians as souldiers sworne to their Generall, who yet have hardly kept their covenant so well, as Regulus with theApud Plutarchum. Carthaginians, and other Pagans, even in things morall? For, if I may in briefe lance, and cut and discover the ulcers and diseases of the times: How many as yet even serve the verie Devill, as really, as once that S. Christopher fictitiously, in the Popish fable? How many wicked Pseudochristians, by their lives testifie, that as the Scripture cals such as they, theIohn. 8.44. 1. Iohn. 3.8. sonnes, theRom. 6.16. 1. Iohn. 3.8. servants, and the1. Tim. 6.10. 2. Tim. 2.26. slaves of Sathan, so they are at his command and obeysance, as the servant ofGen. 24.10. Abraham, andAct. 10.7. Cornelius, yea of that otherMath. 8.9. Centurion to their earthly Masters. He bids them goe, and they goe, doe this, and they doe it: lye, steale, murther, sweare, blaspheme, they are obsequious their spirits and natures as Tynder and powder take presently the fire of everie temptation. 1. He rules them

as the rider, the horse, he rules over them as a Tyrant in an usurped Kingdome, they obey him as the Iewes, that Idumean Herod. Yea he rules in them inthronized in their hearts, as once in the treacherous heart ofIohn. 13.27. Iudas, the hypocriticall heart ofAct. 5.3.4. Ananias, the envious hearts of theMath. 9.34. Marke 3.22. Luke 11.15. Pharisees, at the least he takes totall possession of their whole man, by his deputies and Lieutenants, some one or moe deare darling sinnes, ruling and raigning in them, yea he doth not onely set them a worke, (as he did Iudas in betraying, the Iewes in crucifying Christ) but he even speakes in their hearts athistically, in their mouths blasphemously, as once in the bodie of someEx Imo ventre vox prodit, secundum Originem lib. 7. contra Celsum, and Chrys. in 1. Corin. 10. Et exinde damonem Pythonem ventricosum, vocat Origenes libr. 3. Peryarch. cap. 3. and ventriloquu^ Tertull. contra Maro. c. 25. aut infra cutem da^on se ostentat, and per pectus loqui videtur, qualem Celius Rhodiginus se vidisse memorat Ant. Lect. lib. 8. cap. 10 Pythonists, and within that Serpent, which he used (as he useth Serpents, Foxes and Vipers still, in every countrie, Citie, and almost Village) as the organ and accursed instrument of mans seduction, intended destruction. So the world, for all our covenant and obligation to forsake it: how many swarmes of earth-wormes, carnalists, and coveteous Phylargurists have wee, not onely ever rooting in the earth, as Moales and Swine without ever an eye, to looke upwards, but as trunckes and Trees, even rooted and eradicated in the earth, turnd all into earth, even lumps of earth (asSuetonius in vita Caligulae. Caligula was, called a lumpe of clay and bloud conjealed) being all for earth, even for white and redGold and Silver. dust, which per fas, and nefas, by hooke or crooke, right or wrong, Lionly force, or Foxely fraude, they scrape and rake together (as greedie Harpyes, or snatching Eagles, their desired prayes) all being fish, that comes to the net, though it breake the Net, or like the Eagles coale in theApud Aesopum. fable, set all on fire, though they gaine by their ill-gotten goods, as Achan by his stolneIoshuah. 7.1.21.25. wedge, as Iudas by his Saviour sellingMath. 27.3.4 5. silver, as that Mydas, (like our coveteous Alchumistes since:) by his badWhat he toucht turnd into Gold, ant mentinutur Poeta. Alchumy, by which they, and all such, in all ages haveInfunditur aurum a Mithridate ere Aquilij ducis Romani. Plinius hist. 33. c. 3. perished, as if all that's ill got were TholousePer aurum Tholosanum, periere Q. Cepio Consull M. Crassus cum multis alijs: Aul. Gel. noct. attic. c. 9 Gold, carried on Sejanus hisEquus Scianus omnibus possessoribus infanstus videlicet Scio Cascio, etc. Gellius ibid. Horse, for a sumpter horse?
So for the flesh and fleshly lusts, how many are given, over to all voluptuousnesse, lovers of pleasures more then lovers of2. Tim. 3.4 God, serving diverse lustes andTit. 3. v. 3. pleasures, as if they were yet in their naturall estate, fleshly minded men, walking after theRom. 8.2. flesh, savouring the things of theRom. 8.5. flesh, as the dogge savours carrion, verie Epicures andPhil. 3.17. belly-gods, wallowing in every obsceane lust, as the Eele in the mudd, the swine in the mire, etc? Thus as a waterie glimmering Sunne ends in raine, our profession of the service of the true God, the Triune Iehovah, ends in profanation: in stead of the blessed Trinitie, which we should worship, wee have an accursed Trinitie which wee doe worship, though we promist to repudiate and cashire it.

The flattering Flesh, vaine World, deluding Devill
It'sHac tria pro trino numine mundus habet. Sphiux Philosophica. Trinitie ador'd, by worldlings evill.

In not serving one Lord, contrarie to our first covenant, wee serve manyOb quam multa Domines habet, qui unum non habet. Aug. Lords as an adulterous woman, that forsakes her first Husband, (as God oft complaines ofIer. 3.1.2.6.8. Israell) and followes after many strangers, and unlawfull lovers.
Thirdly the Lord used many meanes to recall and reclaime these Israelites, and to reduce them to the performance againe of the covenant which so blamefully and shamefully they had infringed, sending his Prophets unto2. Chro. 36.15, them, speaking earely and late, and pleading about this very message and embassage, yea to make the word to worke more physically, visiting in paternall love, their sinnes with roddes, and their offences with scourges, and when gentler admonitions and castigations would not serve, using more severitie, whypping them for their refractorie rebellions with roddes of whip-cord, yea with wire and iron, sending upon their Cattle Murraine, upon their bodies diseases, leprosies and consumptions, into their Tents fierieNumb. 21.6. 1. Cor. 10.5. Serpents, sweeping many of them away with plague andNum. 16.49 and chap. 25.9. Iudg. 2.15. pestilence, yea cutting them off by famine at home, or the sword of the enemie abroad, according to the verification of his severe and vehement Cominations against their sinnes andLevit. 26.26.27.28.29. etc. transgressions.
So to paralell us also in this point, hath not the Lord in mercie used as many and sundry meanes, to recure and recover our

spirituall maladies, as ever he used towards his Iewish Israell, to receive us out of our dead sownes? to awake us out of our Lethargicall slumbers? to quicken us in our first love? to bring us againe to the observance of our first covenant? to restore us by a new covenant of grace, after we have so fearefully broke the first covenant of workes? for which end, he hath sent us his word, more powerfully, plentifully and continuedly, then to any Nation, he hath given us hisIn Psalmis word, great are the numbers, of the Preachers, as the Psalmist is verified: This word he hath sent to our Cities, our Corporations, yea to our countrie-Townes, and Villages, as water to wash us, as fire to purifieIerem. 23.29 us, as physicke to purge us, as a hammer to breake and bruse us, as Manna to feede us, as milke to nourish1. Pet. 2.2. us, as a lanthorne to our steps, as in the darke night of sinne to illuminate us, as a sword to lopp off our Hydra-headed sinnes, as a weeding hooke to weede out our corruptions, yea as the wisemensMath. 2.9 starres to leade us to Christ, and as Israels cloude and pillar ofExod. 40.38 fire, to conduct us to our heavenly Canaan. But since the word hath not come to us, as once to the convert1. Thes. 1.5. Gentiles, in power and efficacie, but hath beene received in vaine, since the preachers have spent their strength in vaine, amongst the generalitie and the multitude, prevailing no more then Lot with theGenes. 19.9 Sodomites, then Moses withExod. 7, 11, v. 23, Exod, 8, 15 Pharaoh, then Ieremie withIerem. 34, 2, 3. etc. 17, 18, and chap. 35.15 Zedekiah, then1, King, 22, 26 Michay with Ahab, but have beene laught at by some, as Ezekiahs2, Chro. 30, 10 posts, scoft at by others, as Paul by theAct. 17, 32 Athenians, derided as the young Prophet by Iehues2, King. 9, 11, comrades, yea persecuted, as Paul by the unbeleevingActs 14, 2 Acts 17, 5, Iewes, and abused in many profane places as Davids2, Sam, 10, 4 Embassadors by the Ammonites, since like theIerem, 13, 23 Blacka Moore wee have beene no better, but like the clay much worse for washing: Since we have beene more sicke and unsound for our physicke: Since the word was sowne seede, falne into stonie and thornyMath, 13, ver 20, 21, 22, Luke 8, 13, 14 ground, hath beene choakt with the lustes of the world, since our corrupt hearts, like a corrupt stomacke hath changed his spirituall foode into bad humours and made it the favour of death unto2 Cor, 2, 16 death: therefore to this rodd of beautie, God hath added the rodd ofZach, 11, 7 bands, he hath layd roddes in steepe for us: more deepely

(as our best Physitian,) he hath Phlebotomized us, in our ranckest veines, let us bloud in the tympanie of our pride, and plurifie of our sinnes, dieted us with the bread of affliction and waters of teares, turnd our Hony into gall and Aloes: hee hath come as neere us, as to Israell, in drawing the furie and brandished sword of his wrath, not onely hanging it over vs, (as that Dionysius, once a drawne sword over the naked head of a flatteringVide apud Brusonium, de adulatione, Damocles, by a twined threed) but even smiting with it, for sometimes with the keenest edge, cutting off many millions, (as the lopping and pruning of our English Vine, least wee grow too rancke in this our peace and plentie) and that not onely by ordinarie, but (as hee dealt with Israell in the wildernesse, for their grievous provocations) by extraordinarie deaths, causing the carkasses of our people to fall, at sundrie times, in great numbers, sometimes by gnawing dearths, and biting famine, sometimes by suddaine and turbulent inundations ofOf the b^eakings out of the sea and the damages by these overflowings, Bookes are extant. waters, in our chiefe Shires, (as the River Kishon that swept away Iabin, and hisIudg, 5, 21 Midianites, yea that ancient River, the River Kishon,) Sometimes by lightnings, thunders, and earthquakes, sometimes by strange and uncouthAs the sweating disease, etc diseases, of which Physicke and Surgery was oft ignorant, both of the cause and cure, as appeares by ourLet him that will be satisfied when these severall judgements were se^t upon our Land and how farre they raged, and how long they continued, with their effects, and in the raignes, of what Kings since, or before the conquest, consult with Stowes, Hollinsheds, Speedes, and Lanquets Chronicles: Since the margent will not beare the expression of everie particular which I purposed to insert. Chronicles and Chronologers, but chiefly by that be some of his wrath, the all devouring plague and pestilence, the arrow raging and destroying at noone-day, as he did with Israel in the dayes of1. Chron, 21, vers, 14. David, and of1. Corinth, 10, 8 Moses, and with other countries since, in Italie, Austria,Grossius in his Tragicall histories in quarto, about the beginning of his Booke, reckoning the greatest plagues in the Christian world, saith of Italie, and Vienna, that the dead were moe then the living. Viena, and elsewhere he hath layd his verie Axe to the rootes of our English Trees, and hath cut downe and lopt off, by many hundreds in one weeke, tall Cedars, loftie Pines, greene Poplers, strong Oakes of Bashan, white Almond Trees, of all sorts, from the Peeres to the plowman, high and low, young and old, even in our chiefe Cities,

our Metropolitanes, our mother Citie, Troynovant, our corporate Townes, our countrie Villages, yea even in our private houses and Cabbins: the pestilentiall feaver as a raging torrent of water, carrying all along with it, that stood in the way.
Fourthly, as Israell was not reclaymed for all these proceedings of God with them, eyther in mercie or justice, but still grieved the Lord not onely for fortie yeares in the wildernesse, but even in the land of Canaan, when their sinnes like ours did increase, in the land of plentie (like weedes and bryers in a fat moyst ground, and as fleas and vermin in the hot Summers Sunne) eyther not repenting at all, hardning their hearts as that EgyptianExod. 7.13. Pharaoh, upon the message of his Prophets and summons of his judgements, or else repenting superficially, dissembling with a double heart, shedding CrocodilesDe his lachrimis, and de proverbio: vide apud Vicentium nat. hist. libr. 17. cap. 606. teares, and fasting for a fashion as once1. King. 21.29 Ahab, and another of their irreligious Israelitish2. King 6.30 Kings, teares being in their eyes and rebellion in their hearts, both at oneDeut. 1.44.45 instant, like Esau that wept for theHebr. 12.17 blessing, yet intended the murther of hisGen. 27.41 brother, all with one breath, howling and crying like wolves; when Gods hand was upon them confessing their sinnes as traytors on the rack, when they were oppressed by the Moabites, Midianites, Ammonites, and otherIudg. 3.9.13 chap. 4.3. Cananites, but as soone as ever delivered, by such temporarie saviours (types of the spirituall Messias) Othniell, Gideon, Iepthah, Baruch, Sampson, as he sent for their rescue, (as he stird up Abraham to rescueGen. 14.15. Lot, they returning againe to their former Byas, Idolatrie, extortion, oppression, as the dogge to his2. Pet. 2.19. vomite, the sow to her mire, provoking him as much as ever by their rebellions, like the Ice seeming to be thawed, yet freezing and conjealing againe in their dregges, in which, like Moab they setled, they could not be removed.
Thus it is with us, their case is ours, we, like some impatient Patients, have beene rather worse then better for Gods physicke, our sores by our inveterate, and wellny uncurable corruptions, have beene increased by our salves, the Lord would have healed us, but like the Babell wee would not bee healed: our disease is epidemicall, generall, and continuall, the fluxe of our sinnes like the bloudieMark. 5.26 issue of that woman in the Gospell,

is not to be stopped, it's vulnusVulnus insanabile ense resecandum insanabile, past cure as it seemes, and so past care. As the land hath long mourned by reason of oathes and other sinnes, so wee have mourned for a time when Gods hand hath beene upon us, wee have proclaymed generall fasts, as onceJam. 3. v. 6.7. Ninive besides many an Esther, and a Mordocheus, many a Daniell and a Nathaniell that have mourned alone, besides the house ofZach. 12. v. 12 13.14. Nathan, the house of Aron, and the house of Levi, many religious families that have mourned a part, theIoel. 1.11. Husband-man, the Vine-dresser, and the tender Virgin, thevers. 13. Priests and the Elders, yea the bride and theIoel. 2.16. bride-grome that have fasted mourned and lamented before the Lord, as once2. Sam. 12.16 David did in the case of his sicke childe, when wee have eyther felt or feared the heavie hand of God: chiefly when the land hath beene whipt with his rodd and ferula for her transgressions, when judgements have beene threatned, or executed, when as once Elias in another case wee have seene the1. King. 18.44 cloudes, or felt the storme of showred or powred downe vengeance, then; as theDe cruentis Ethnicorum sacrificijs, immolationibusque homine virginu^ and puerorum Marti Saturno, Iovi ira to, vide apud Plutarchum, libellum de superstitione, Heroditum in Melpomine, Strabonem libr. 11. Ovidiu^ in 2. Fast. Dionys Halycarn. libr. 1. and Euseb. libr. 4. praeparat. Evang talibusque sacrificijs usi sunt Iulianus Apostat. Heliogabalus, vt testantur Hedrenus Godfridus, and Celius Lampridius Heathens, the Savages, and theDe quibus Benso, Mazius and Acosta in suis libris, and Purchasius noster, in sua perigrinatione and Lilius Giraldus in historia deorum Syntagmate 17. Indians at this day, and in former times, have offered sacrifices in some common plague to appease some angrie Nemesis, some exasperated imaginarie God, so have we offered sacrifice to the true God, but (excepting some few, some true Nathaniels) hardly in truth we have abstained from meate, but not from sinne, fasted from the creatures as the carnallEsay. 58.3.4. Iewes, and dishonoured the Creator, we have not losed the bonds of thevers. 6.7. poore, relieved the cause of the fatherlesse and widdow, made restitution of goods ill got, asLuk. 19.8. Zacheus, and the Iewes in the time ofIerem. 34.10. though after they revolted, vers. 16. Ieremie, chiefly we have not (as a man from a whorish wife) given a bill of divorcement, to those sensuall sinnes and belluine lusts, which have made a separation andEsay. 59.2. Ierem. 5.25. sequestration betwixt the Lord and us; and occasioned his hand to bee upon us, etc. Yet wee have had many a Moses, an Aron and a Phineas to stand in the gappe, betwixt Gods judgements and

our sinnes: Such Phoenices our lands have afforded. Thus have we sympathized with Israell in these particulars in her blessings received, her sinnes renued, and her gratitude neglected.


CHAP. XII. Many mercies recited Temporall and Spirituall, in which we farre exceede the Iewes by many degrees.
BVt to hoyse up my sailes a little higher, and to looke our faces in the glasse, or theirs in ours both in Gods glasse, the Sacred Scriptures, glossed and commented by experience, and to paralell the Brittanicall and the Iewish Church and Policie, in many specialties; the Lord hath come neerer unto us, then ever to them, and hath beene as a kinde father both more liberall in his portion of blessings, and more indulgent in sparing and pitying our sinnes and delinquences: and first for the largenesse of his mercies, wee receive as Isaac fromGen. 25. v. 5.6 Abraham, as Ioseph fromGen. 48.22. Iacob, as Benjamin fromGen. 43.34 Ioseph, a double, yea a trible portion as it were; wee seeme Iacob like, even to carrie away theGen. 25.32 33 blessing and theGen. 27.30. birth-right too from them, and that in these specialties both of temporall and spirituall blessings, in mercies of adornation and preservation, as they come to hand, with pretermission of innumerable moe.
To begin with the best first, To them God gave the law, in the hand ofGal. 3.19. a mediator, to us he gave the Gospell by the mediation ofLuke 2.9.13.14. Angels; now in how many degrees the Sun exceedes the Moone, our Messias exceedes their Moses: our Iesus, their Ioshuah: our High Priest, theirHeb. 7. Heb. 8. Heb. 9. per totum sic Hebr. 10.10.11 12.13. etc. Aron: the bloudy one, and onely propitiatorie sacrifice of his bodie; the Annuall sacrifices of their high Priests, the Typicall sacrifices of their beastes and Bullockes: our Heaven, their Canaan, so farre our Gospell which is a quickening spirit exceeds their law, which without Christ is but a killing Letter. To them indeede saith the Apostle were the holy Oracles committed, they had the Law and the Testament, Moses, and the Prophets, but wee have the Gospell more plainely, more perspicuously then ever they had. I denie not indeede, but in their Law there was the Gospell included (besides personall Types) in their Ceremoniall law, Christ was shaddowed,See the li^tle Booke called Moses unvailed. prefigured, and in their

severall oblations of all sorts typified, and represented, as hee was promised toGenes. 3.15. Adam, the promise renued toGen. 12.3. Abraham and theGen. 28.14. Patriarkes, and prophecied of by all the Prophets, from Moses toDeut. 18.^5. Malachy, so in their severall ages and generations he was expected to be exhibited by all that looked for the consolation of Israell, longed for, desired, that hee would breake the heavens and comeEsay. 44.1. downe, as they strongly beleeved that he should come. Hence according to Theologie, the Patriarkes and Prophets before, and under the Law, in the Old Testament, were saved by beleeving that IacobsGen. 49.10 Shiloh, the promised Messias should come, as we now in the times of grace are saved by beleeving that hee is come: there being but oneEphes. 4 5. Christ, but one faith, (as but one Sunne to the world) both to Iew and Gentile, oneActs 4.12. Act. 10.43. Acts 13.39. Rom. 10.4. Gal 3.22. meanes of life and grace, to all that are justified, sanctified and saved. Hence Christ is sayd to be that Agnus occisus in Gods decree and infallible promise, that Lambe ofIohn 1.26. God, slaine from the beginning of the world, to take away the sinnes of the wholeIohn 1.26. world, of the elect (asRom. 11.12.15. 2. Cor. 5.19. and Iohn 1.2. v. 2. Scriptures andDistinguit Augustinus inter mundum electorum, ^ and damnatorum, Tract. 87. in Iohannem: sic per mundum intelligitur sol^^ modo mundus credentium, per Rupertum in Iohannem, lib. 3.5. 3. Et Comme^s. in 2. Corinth. 5. and mundus regenerationum: pro quibus Christus mortuus, per Augustinum serm. 20 serm. 44. serm. 109. de verbis Apostoli per Haimonem in Rom. 5. per Prosperum libr. 1. Re^p pro Augustin. obqui. De quo vide plura apud Augustinum de corrupt. and gratia cap. 12. Tract. in Iohan. 2.77. K^midentium de R^demptione, and Perkinstum de Praedestinatione. fathers limit that universall.) Hence also is the Theologicall axiome, that Christ who is the verie end of the Law to which it points, as once Iohn the Baptist, as the hand in the Dyall pointes to the Sunne, and to which, as a sharpe Schoole-master itGal. 3 24. drives and directs, that this Christ is typified in the OldChristus in Veteri Testamento velatus, in Novo revelatus. libricus in Clavi script. Testament, and revealed in the New. Hence it is also, that Abraham (and so consequently all the beleeving Patriarkes, the sonnes of Abraham by faith) is said to have seene the day of Christ, and to have rejoyced But how was Christ seene? darkely, obscurely, as under a vaile, as the prisoner sees the Sunne through a little chincke or grate, as the Spouse in the Canticles had a glimpse of her beloved through the hole of theCant. 5.4. doore; So was Christ seene of them: but wee now see him plainely, perspicuously, as walking amidst the GoldenRevel 2. vers. 1. Candlestickes, as

we see the Sunne in his solstitium, or at noone-day, in the plaine and powerfull preaching of the Gospell, wee see him not duly and deadly as the Papist in a stone, or a piece of brasse, pictured in a Crosse or Crucifixe, Idolatrously worshipped: but as Paul tels the Corinthians, even crucified as it were amongst us in the plaine evidence of the spirit. Therefore saith the same Apostle, The Grace of God hathTit. 2.11.12. appeared; this Gospell of grace hath appeared, the phrase is observable, even as the Sun that peepes and breakes from under, and appeares from the obscuring cloude, yea the day Starre from an high hath visited us saithLuke 1.78. Zachary, yea light is come into theIohn. 3.19. vvorld, saith hee, that is himselfe theIohn. 1. v. 4.5 life, and the light, even to inlighten those, that like Zebulon andLuke 1.79. Nepthaly sate in darkenesse, and the shadow of death. Here is our priviledge above the Iew.
Secondly, Besides as a Corolarie to this point, God at sundry times, and in diverse maners spake in timeHebr. 1. v. 1. past unto these Iewish Fathers byIere. 35. v. 15 the Prophets, yea and byGen. 18.1.2 Genes. 19.1.2 Iudg 13. v. 3. Angels too, by Oracles, by dreames andNumb. 12 7. visions, by Vrim andExod. 28. v. 30 Thummim: but in these last dayes, he hath spoken to us by hisHeb. 1. v. 1. Son, whom hee hath appointedvers. 2. c Exod. c. 3. c. 4. cap 13. Heire of all things, by whom also he made the worlds.
Thirdly, Moreover to them he stirred up temporarie and typicall Saviours and Iudges, who delivered them out of the hands of those that spoyled them, Iudg. 3. vers. 16.vers. 2. c Exod. c. 3. c. 4. cap 13. Moses, andExod. 34.9. Ioshuah, andIudg. 1.2. Iudah, andIudg 3.9. Othniell,vers. 15. Ehud,Iudg. 4.4. Deborah,Iudg. 4.10. Baruch,Iudg. 6.12. Gideon,Iudg. 11.5. Iepht^ah,Iudg. 16.31. Sampson, were raysed up upon theirIudg. 3.9 15. and chap. 4, 3. etc. cries in their greatest exigents, to deliver them from the Egyptians, the Mesopotamians, the Ammonites, the Moabites, the Amalekites, the Philistines, and uncircumcised Cananites: but to us, (as to the rest of the beleeving Gentiles) he hath raisedLuke 1.69. up, a spirituall Saviour, to deliver us out of the hands of our spirituallvers. 71.74. enemies, more deadly, more dangerous, as the soule is more noble and excellent then the bodie.
Fourthly, Againe they were helde as children in their Nonage, under the rod and ferula, the burthen and the bondage ofGal. 4.1.2.3. Coloss. 2.20. ceremonies in their Iewish Pedigogie, as touch not, tastevers. 21. not, handle not, etc. This creature is cleane, this isLevit. 11. per totum. uncleane:

but wee now as children that are come to riper yeares, to full and perfect age, as no longer under Tutors andGal. 4.3.4.5.6. Governors, are now infranchized and set at libertie by saith in Christ, and freed from the yoake and pressure of MosaicallGal 5.1. Ceremonies, which neyther they, nor wee were able to beare, unlesse with our Papists and late Threskites we will resolutely put our neckes under the yoake againe of these beggarlyGal 4 9 Rudiments in an unsupportable bondage.
Fiftly, The Lord exacted and required of them, more cost and paines in his service and worship, then he doth of us. For costs, wee know their worship was exceedingly costly in their dailyOf all these offerings, and sacrifices, Levit. chap. 1 2.3.4.5.6 7. vide Theses Senuij de sacrifi. sacrifices, their Holocausts, their whole burnt offrings, their free-will offerings (as once thevide Maiolum de cultu and oraculis deorum, colloq. 1. pag. 55. Heathens in their Hecatombs, their Hostiae, their Lupercalls, Armilustrals, Orgyes, Ferrcations, Vinilians, Quirinalials, Bacchanals, Saturnals, Vertumnalians, Hyacinthians, Novendinalians, Laurentalialls, Solitaurilialls, and other feastes and festivals in honour of their imaginarie Deities, which it seemes they had in an apish and superstitious emulation andSee Mourney of the truth of Religion. imitation from the Iewes) Gods Altars were loaden with Oxen, Buls, Sheepe, Goates, Rams, and Bullockes in great abundance, in their solemne and daily oblations; as somtimes in one peace offring, (as at the dedication of Salomons1. King. 8.64 Temple) were offered twenty thousand Oxen, and a hundred and twentie thousand Sheepe; another time (as in Ezekiahs2. Chron 29.32.33 Passeover,) were offered threescore and ten Bullockes, a hundred Ramines and two hundred Lambes: besides sixe hundred Oxen, and three thousand Sheepe consecrated: as in the verse after my Text in the Inauguration of Salomon, and the preparation for the Temple, there was offered in burnt offerings in one day, a thousand Bullockes, a thousand Lambes, and a thousand1. Chro. 29.21 Rammes: In so much that, but that Gods extraordinarie blessing increast (as the Corne and Oyle and Wine.) so the Cattle of that little countrie of Iudea, and Palestina, which now being under the Turkish Ottoman, by a secret curse, is as barren as otherI have heard travellers honest and judicious so relate it. countries, a man would as much wonder, from whence they had a continued fresh frye and supply of Cattle for sacrifices, besides other offices as hee would wonder, of their fresh seminarie and supply of men, so

many being cut off at sundrie times, by civill and forreineIn one battle of Abiah k. of Iudah against Ieroboam king of Israell, there was in Abiahs Armie 400000. chose^ men, on the other partie 8. hundred thousand, whereof were slaine five hundred thousand, 2. Chro. 13. v. 3.17 Yea one Tribe sometimes afforded 40 thousand valiant men, as Ashur, 1 Chron. 36. Nephtaly 1000. Captains 37. thousand warriours, v 34 warre, as we reade of in the greatest Armies of Caesar, Pompey, Alexander, Scypio, or the greatest Martialists amongst theWe reade not of any such army, as 12 hu^dred thousand, as this in Iudah and Israel either in Iustine, Livie, Theucidides, etc or amongst the numerous Turkes since. Heathens, and sure for my part I perswade my selfe, should wee in England or Ireland be injoyned to offer up, Monethly, Weekly, or daily, but the tenth Sheepe, Beeve or Goate, which they offered, (which sure would amount to more, then to the Levites grudged tyth throughout the land:) Gods altars would stand unfurnisht of the fire of the Altar, and the Lampes of the Sanctuarie would die out, the one for want of fuell, the other of Oyle: for he that is now a Naball, a coveteous Cremes, full handed for Gold, but emptie hearted for Grace, that hath not now a shilling to spare to the mantayning of a stipendary preacher, for the setling of a preaching Ministerie to Gods glorie, the conversion, and consolation of his owne soule, the present and future good of himselfe and others, him, and his seede after him, without churlish grudging, swinish gruntling, muttering, murmuring (as once Israell against Moses and Aaron) or if ought be wrong from him, t^is as the wringing of the bloud out of the nose, the wresting of Hercules Club out of his fist, or the paring of his nayles to the very quicke, at least going against the haire and the heart, as when a man eates the meate, which his stomacke loathes; I say he that is as willing to part with his right hand, or to plucke out as Naash once perswaded the Gileadites, his right1. Sam. 1.^^. eye, as part with his pence for preaching, in that bad exchange, as he imagines, when the same man will spend and mispend pence and pounds, as oyle and fuell to his lusts, in carding, dycing, drinking, drabbing, till hee be devoured by these lustes, as Acteon was of his owneOvid ^^eta. doggs: Is it probable (possible) that ever he would make God beholden to him for a Bullocke or a Sheepe at once, should hee injoyne him such a sacrifice as did the Iewes?
See Moses unvailed in 8.So for paines, aswell as costs, we know that after the building of Salomons Temple (which was typicall in a greater mysterie) the Iewes were injoyned foure times a yeare, at the 4. solemne feastesAt the feasts of Passeover of Penthecost of Tabernacles, of Dedication. to make their personall appearance there before the Lord, old and young men, women and children that were fit for travell (as we know even the childeLuk. 1^.41.42 Iesus went with

his foster father Ioseph and the Virgin his mother, to worship atPsal. 84.67. Ierusalem,) yea how ever farre distant in place, they must appeare even from Dan to Beershebah, leaving for the time all their morall affaires to hazard of invasion of forraine enemies, or of domesticke casualties, as carnall good husbandrie would conceit. What inconveniences in the eye of flesh and bloud did this subject them unto, in respect of their outward estate, besides the paines and perils, the trouble and toyle and tediousnesse of the journey?
Now there is no such taske, no such burthen imposed on our shoulders, for how ever wee are not strict, (according to the good pollicie in first dividing and distinguishing people into severall Churches, Parishes and Congregations) to tye a man perpetually to his owne Church, as to his owne wife, or wife to her owne husband, her owne house, as a tradesman to his owne shop, or a bird that constantly keepes her owne Nest, or as a beggar that still keepes his owne stand, (his owne circuite, as the Milne horse,) not so jayling or imprisoning men to an ignorant and profane Ministerie, (as some Land-lords strictly tye their Tennants to grinde at their owne Milnes how ever abused in their grinding or moulter, by the ignorance or knaverie of the Milner) though I say, I see neyther reason nor religion tying any man so constantly to the Ministery of his own Parish Priest, to sucke at drie dugges, to drinke at drie brookes, to seeke foode or fruite at a barren tree, but that if Iacob and the house of Iacob, any true Israelite, want foode in his owne Canaan, hee may seeke for corne inGen. 42.2. Egypt elsewhere, as the beggar that hath no bread at home seekes abroad else people should be in worse case for their soules, and stricter laced, then for their bodies, since in free libertie, if they wholy want, or have but the outcast and refuse of any commoditie in anie Mart or Market, they may seeke further for better, or what drugge or physicall receite one Apothecary shop yeeldes not, may be sought in another; and from an Empericke and Quacksalver they may commit their health and life to a learned Physitian, yea else Gods people, should be in worse case for their soules, then Israell once for their Iron tooles, who when there was no smith inSee the Sermon extant on that Text, There was no smith in Israell 1. Sam. 13.19. Israell; yet went to the Philistines to make

or mend their plough-shares, and other iron workes, yea in worse case then the Horse and Mule, who if hee wants water, seekes up and downe the pasture, though never so large and wide. The waters of life, though they be not at home, being better worth our search, then those which Ahab and Obediah sought from one end of the land to the1. King. 18.5.6. other, or those waters of the Well of Bethlem which David so1. Chro. 11.17, desired: yet neverthelesse though we may go further from home, for better foode in christian liberty ere we starve, or eate meate ill cook'd; for all this we are not so punctually, precisely, and ceremoniously obliged and tyed to any one speciall place of Gods worship, to this Church or that Chappell, this Cathedrall or that Temple, as the Iewes were tyed to Salomons Temple, (though the Papists, who in this as in other things runne against the haire, and swim crosse against all Gods Ordinances, will needes in their superstitious folly, lay on their owne neckes a Iewish yoke, in worshipping at this stone, and that shrine, this roode, and that altar, this Crosse, and that Chappell, rather at Rome or Loretto, in Italie, in Compostella, in Spaine, at the Roode of Yoghell in Ireland, etc. yea still in their blinding bewitching superstition, as if they were turn'dRead a book in 4. called the picture of a papist, you shall see it proved that Papisme, is a meere mixture of Iudaisme, Turcisme, Paganisme. Turkes or Iewes, even in Mahumitanized Ierusalem:) But now as our Saviour tels the Samaritane woman is the time, that wee shall (neyther Iew nor convert Gentiles) worship the Father in this mountaine, or that, nor at Ierusalem, but in spirit andIohn 4. ve. 20, 21.22.23. truth, in everie place lifting up pure1. Tim. 2.8. hearts, and pure hands to the Almightie, whether in our owne houses withDan 6.10. Daniell, or in the fields withGen. 24.63 Isaac, or in the garden with Augustine andConfessionum lib. 8. Alixius, or in our beds withPsal. 6.7. David, and2. King. 20.3. Ezekias, or on the Sea withIonas 1.6. Ionas, or on the shoare withAct. 20.36. Paul, or in prison withAct. 16.25. Silas,2. Chronic. 33.10.11. Manasses,Ierem. 38.6. Ieremie, and our moderne Martyres, or in our private clossets, as the blessed Virgin, or in and with our families, asIosh. 24.15. Ioshuah, and that sweete singer of2. Sam. 6 20. Israell, or in the publicke Congregation, as once1. King. 8.22. Salomon: it matters not for the place, if wee have the grace to worship God aright, for matter and maner, in which our Papists and all Moralists, Hypocrites, and profane men are so grossely defective.
And indeede this is a greater mercie, a greater priviledge,

then we conceive at the first blush, for should those that trot and trudge, and drudge up from all the Shires, and countries in England and Wales, everie Terme time, to Westminster or Ludlow, or from all the Counties and Provinces in Ireland to Dublin, to follow the plough of contention, prosecuting wrangling suites, de lanaAdagium e^ Haratio. Caprina, about matters triviall and of no moment, but only that such waspes must shoote their stings, discharge their squirte gunnes, in forma pauperis, sometimes charged onely with paper pellets, these creckets andArist. lib. 5. c. 19. per ignem ambulat Salamandra, and ^^tinguit. Salamanders, not being able to live out of the fire of contention; should these I say be injoyned (as the Iewes toBefore the building of the Temple, the Iewes worshipped where ever the Arke was: Deut. 12.13.14. Exod. 25.22 1. Sam. 7.5. 2. sa. 6.2. chiefly in Silo, in time of Iudges, and Samuell, after in mount Sion. 2. Sam. 6.12. But after the Temple built, thither they were confined. 2. Chr. 7.12. 1. Reg. 9.3 Luke 19.46. Ierusalem) by God, or Caesar, I will not say foure times a yeare, but annually once a yeare, they or theirs all Sam, to come up, to Pauls Crosse, or the Spittles in London, or to Yorke-minster, or to Lincolneminster, or to Christs-Church in Dublin, or any such remote place in any Kingdome, or Province, meerely to worship God, by hearing Sermons, and presenting their prayers before the Lord, and offering their spirituall oblations, (as oft the Iewes in the dayes of Samuel, Ezra, Salomon, etc. there corporeall) Oh this would be thought durum opus; a hard taske, as the Disciples said in another case, durusIohn. 6.60. sermo, this were a hard imposition, indeede worse then the tribute that1. Reg. 12.16. Rehoboam exacted of the Iewes, or Augustus taxed from theLuke 2. v. 1. world. They would make hardly such haste as the Beare to the stake, as the coward to the battle, we should finde few Tribes goe up with joy: Nay should none but such as come from farre, visite these Temples, we should have (as in some streetes, in some long devouring plague,) the very grasse to grow in the verie porches for want of trampling.
And indeede those that are so idle or profane, so perverse, athisticall, irreligious, that on Gods owne Sabaoths, which they are so strictly injoyned, they and theirs to sanctifie, by motives fromEsai 58.13 14 rewards andExod. 20.8. Gal. 3.10. threatnings, that love God, his word, his worship, and their owne soules so little, that having health and limbes and legges, and no restraint but theAct. 13.8.10. Devil and corruption, they will not goe twelve score to heare a Sermon, (though twelve miles perhaps to a wedding:As appeares in the hoppings in Northumberland, to which there is such resort everie Sabboth throughout the Summer. hopping drinking, feasting amongst good fellowes, or to make merry

with comrades and carnall friends, or further, even from one Shire to another, a set match of bowling, shooting, hunting, mans race, horse race, dogges race, or any such vanitie,) but for any stirring more then a stock, or block, to any part of Gods worship in publike or private, their feete are goutie as2. Chro. 16.21 Asaes, lame as2. Sam. 9.3. Mephibosheths, eyther they keepe home as Droanes in their Hives, as Hogges in their Styes, or if they finde legges, it is to the Taverne, not to the Temple, to Bethaven, not to Bethell, the Ale-house (sometimes Hel-house) not Gods house, or else with straglingGenes. 34.1.2 Dinah to walke or wander, as wafe or strafe in the fields: would such ever travell as farre as Ierusalem to worship, were they as neere it perhaps asLuke. 24.13. Emaus, orIohn. 11.18. Bethania, a Sabboth dayes journey? much lesse, would they ever saddle their horses as the Sunammitish2. Kings. 4.22.23. woman to ride to the Prophet upon the Sabboth or new Moone? or if they were great personages, they would not use theirBosquier in his E^cho alledgeth authors, affirming that the Magi used Dromedaries. Dromedaries to travell halfe so farre, as the wife men from the East to Ierusalem to worship Christ: or use their Coaches as that noble AethiopianAct. 8.27. Eunuch, to come out of one coast or countrie to worship in another, they would not goe so farre as the Queene of the South to heare the Gospels wisedome greater then1. King. 10. Salomons, nor travell so farre for divine Plato and Pythagoras for humane learning.


CHAP. XIII. The Iewes and we Brittaines in other blessings poyzed and compared.
TO paralell us againe with them in blessings of a mixt nature, partly temporall, partly spirituall.
First, as they were brought out of the land ofExod 20.2. Egypt, with a mightie hand and stretched out-arme, by the meanes of Moses whom God stirredExod. 3. Exod. 4. up, and sent as the instrument: So, are not we reduced and brought out of that spirituall Egypt, that mysticallReve. 14.8.16 9. and cha. 18.10. Babylon, that uncleaneRevel. 11.8. Sodom, the seate and nest ofRevel. 18.9.9 19.2. fornications spirituall and corporeall, by the meanes of that worthie and zealous instrument Martine Luther,

thatSo called oftentimes by Eccardus Huberus in his Theses, Hunnius and other rigged Lutherans. Melander, that Belgicke Elias, as some call him, whose eyes being first opened, to see cleerely into the mysterie of justificatio^ by faith, which he so perspicuously cleeres in his Comment chiefly upon the Galatians, he being converted likeLuke 22.32. Peter, co^verting his brethren, as the Sun breaking through the overshadowing cloude; hee being himselfe inlightned, inlightens others, and as anotherAct. 26.18. Paul, is made the meanes to open their eyes, to bring collyrium and eye salve to Saxonie, Germanie, Denmarke, us in England, yea to Belgia and whole Christendome, which was in a manner inveloped and covered with the fogges and mistes, and cloudes of Popish ignorance, yea wholy overspread with darkenesse more then Egyptian or Chymerian, so grosse and palpable that it might be felt* Onely herein further is the proportion: Moses a weake olde man, arm'd onely with hisExod. 4.17. rod and staffe against all the repugnance and resistance of Pharaoh, the juglings and Magicall practises of Iannes andExod. 7.11. Iambres, the might and malignitie, power and pollicie of Egypt, brings the thousands of Israell out of the house of bondage; Luther arm'd onely with power from above, with his tongue and penne, brings as many by degrees though not all at once, by preaching, writing and disputing, out of the tyranizing slavish subjection of that man of sinne, that Antichristian Pharaoh, that BabylonianSee the Sermon called, Nabuchadnezzar of Rome.As once the D^i^i^^ and Rebeca, with the Idols of Michay and Laban Iudg. 18.24. and Genes. 31.34. Nabuchadnezzer the Pope, notwithstanding all the ragings of that Romish Lion, the juglings and colouring, plots and traynes of his foxes the Fryers, and Iesuites, the props of his Hierarchie (as the Ianisaries to the Turkes) together with the disputes of Ecchius the invectives, Philipicks and libells of Monckes (with whose bellies hee too much intermedled, as Erasmus once scoft) yea against all the powers and pollicies of Cesar, the Romane Emperour with the confederate Princes, affected to the whore. yea against not onely the might of man, but the malice of devils, the very gates of hell, and the powers of darkenesse, which did as much resist him, as these badd Angels, the Prince ofDan. 10. vers. 13. vers. 20. Persia, and Prince of Grecia, resisted that Angell which by the helpe of Michaell the great Archangel, the Angel of the covenant, brought the children of Israell out of their Chaldean, and Babylonian captivitie.
Secondly, as when Moses was tooke away by death, and gathered to his fathers, the Lord stirred up aIosh 1. ve. 1.2. Ioshuah to succeede him, (in some maner to exceede him) in bringing the Israelites intoIosh. 4.19.20. Canaan, which he did not: So when Luther concluded his holy life with a happie and blessed death, (notwithstanding the calumnies of all RomishCocleus, Bolsecu^ de vita Luthert. Simeis, and reviling Rabsakeis to the contrarie) God multiplied his spirit, as the spirit of2. King. 2.15. Elias upon Elisha, upon other successours; Melancthon, Iustus, Ionas, Capito, Oecolampadius, Calvine, Bullinger, etc. and other worthie and renowned instruments; according to his owne prophesie, to finish and perfect that which he had begun, even as he finished that in Saxonie which according to another prophesie, Ierome of Prage, and Iohn Husse, had begun in Bohemia many yearesHusse when he was burned told them they onely burned a goose, (as husse signifies in the Bohemian tongue) but out of his ashes God would raise up a swan which was verified in Luther before, and sealed with their bloud at that unconstant, unconscionable Councell of Constance. Thirdly, So to proceed further, in respect of the co^monwealth, as when Deborah the prophetisse died, that nursing mother, or nurse and mother in Israell, there was left yet a worthie Baruch. So whe^ the Lord deprived our English Israel of a virgin Queen Virgin mother, that Phoenixe of her sexe, for Artes and vertues the worldes wonder, the farre famoused Elizabeth, the Laureate PoetsSpensers Eliza, or his fayrie Queene. Eliza, Omnia nec secum ventus and undarapit, all was not lost and gone, as our friendes feared, our enemies gapingly expected, our sinnes deserved: out of the dead ashes of that Phoenixe, the Lord stirr'd us up another such, a nursing father, a wiseBonum nomen b^num omen co^veniunt rebus no mina sape suis. Steward, to goe in and out, (as once zealous) and judicious1. Sam. 18.16 David before his people, to leade us on from the Tents of Moab, from the Gates of Babylon, against which hee hath marcht with the best picke of hisIn his Majesties printed Bookes extant. pen, and blowne a Trumpet to all Christian Princes to come out ofRevel. 18.4. Babylon, least they pertake, as of her sinnes, so plagues: keeping us by this meanes from all apostacie and backe-sliding. Chiefly totall and finall, that those who have the least measure of grace, with a sound judgement and discerning spirit, may never dreame of the unions of the Romish Egypt any more. or with Lots wife to looke backe with any affection towards spirituallGen. 19.26. Sodom. And herein is the mercie the more, that this Faithfull, Regall, Royall Stewart, as faithfull over little, (as

it was with the Tallents) being intrusted withMath. 25. v. 21.22.23. more, was not only, (as is evident by a speciall providence, in which there is digitus Dei? Gods owne finger) preserved amongst us in one treason, but purposely in Gods store-house, reserved for us in anotherFrom Gowries conspiracie treason, as a prologue to the powder Tragedie onely, as the Queene of Shebah said of1. King. 10.^ Salomon, because the Lord loved this our English Sion.
Fourthly, yea and yet more, the mercie relisheth (as the Rose smels sweetest that's gotten from the prickes, and the Lilly from the inclosing thornes, as Sampsons and Ionathans honie tasted the sweetest, because hardest come by where it was never expected out of the LionsIudg. 14.8. bellie, and the1. Sam. 14.27. wast desart) when in our expectance the times were probable to prove most turbulent, when most mens hearts fayled them for feare, when we were even at our wits end, and knew not which way to turne us, when at the desired death of our Deborah, the enemies of our Iudah, cryed up, Moab, and to the spoile, victoria, the day is ours, there goes the game, even so would we have it, hoping to fish in a troubled water: and to build on our ruines, I say when factious spirits and malecontents looked for stirring times, yea when we our selves being such cloudes, might justly feare stormes (yea some expecting no other, but thatOvid. Metam Phaeton-like, all would have been in a confusion and combustion, that stearne Mars, and bloudie Bellona would have raged in our streetes, that there would have beene as much bickering about the English Crowne, as about Aiax his Armour, Paris hisApud Virgil. and Homerum. Ball, or the Grecian Helena, when thus wee thought the Sunne of all our peace and prosperitie, had set in the night of her bewayled death, whom living we accounted as the breath of our nosthrils, and dying lamented, as the Iewes did2. Chro. 35.25. Iosias and Ioshuah, her name with her Princely vertues, yet perpetuated in the mindes and mouthes ofVivit post funera virtus. men, more then in all the monuments of Brasse or Marble: In these feares, in these exigents, divisions and distructions of ours, when wee looked for a Histeron proteron, a disioynting of all in the Church and Common-wealth; so Gods mercie exuperant above mans miserie, mans demerits, see Gods greatnesse, what hee can, his goodnesse what he will doe, turning, yea bringing (as at the

(n) first creation, still) light out of darkenesse: on a suddaine in a trice a Northerne starre arising in this our Albion, prognosticating good, as Pollux appeares at the setting of Castor, the Lords high Stewart, by the Lords free donation, his owne Lineall and Legall succession, the Peeres election, the Popular approbation with united hearts and heads, votes and voyces, being reduced or produced, as David once from2. Sam. 5.1. Hebron to Ierusalem, with the consent and to the content of all our English Israell, from one part of great Brittaine to the other, from the lesser to the greater Island, from the North to the South, to be the ruler and governour over Gods Heritage. As this dasht all the hopes of everie Iesuited Tobiah and Sanballat, as a squib that brusts and ends in smoake, yea eclypsed all their joyes, and made them, (as some even now) hang downe their working heads like bulrushes, with quanta de spe decidi: So all our feares, upon the rising of this new Sunne of comfort, vanished as a Northerne mist, or the Southerne dew: our sighes were turn'd intoTempora mutantur and nos mutantur in illis. songs, our teares into Trumpets, our swords into Sythes, our speares into Mattockes, our Tragedies imaginarie into reall Comedies, our sorrowes into Iubilees, as the sound of so many Trumpets, all the Land with united mindes and mouthes, as one man upon the Proclamation of his Majestie, as Israell at the investing of Salomon, cryed till the ayre ecchoed and resounded Vive de la Roy, God save the King: the very field and wood quyristers, in the spring, ringing out and rejoycing for our then springing, and since our more then twentie yeares budding peace and blossoming prosperitie, conjoyning their well tuned Trebles to our excellent Tenor, to the mending of our Musicke. This is the Lords doing, and it is wonderous in our eyes.
Fiftly (and to set a fuller, and a freer edge yet upon our affections,) as our peace I say begun a fresh to spring, with all other concomitant blessings upon his Majesties investing, and marrying as it were with this eldest and fairest sister, our beauteous Albion, so (if our sinnes be not those Davusses to interrupt it,) it's probable to continue in him and his seede, those royall blossomes, which so abundantly to the joy of all Christendome that are not Romanized) have proceeded, from his

RegallIn the royal issue of Lady Elizabeth Princesse of the Palatinate. stemme even so long, as the Sunne and Moone shall continue, since all pleas and pretences of any Idumean, any forreiner, or usurper is by this blessing of bounteous hymne cut off, notwithstanding the plots and projects of that Dolman, that Devill man, that virParsons vir multorum nominum vi^^bom nominis. dolosus, or any other Spiders webs that are spunne, or Cocatrices egges that are hatcht by any such like Iesuited Ignatian, fierie spirits whatsoever.
Sixtly herein still the torrent of mercie runnes towardes us; more clearely, more delightfully, more cheerefully, compared with the bloudie and sanguinolent streames that runne in other countries, our neighbour Regions round about us; for as a mercie of mercies, never to be forgotten, as it is calme in one Citie when it raines in another, as lightsome in Goshen when darke in Egypt, as Manna in the Tents of Israell but none in Moab, so doe not wee injoy, and joy, in the serenitie of peace in these our Halcyon dayes, when both in former times, and at this instant (or within these few Moneths) there is and hath beene warres, and rumors of warres (according to our Saviours Math. 23.6. prophesie prognosticating the end,) round about us bloudy Bellona invironing us round, as the circumference and wee still at peace in our resting center? How hath faire France the most fruitefull ample and fertile countrie inVide Bartholomeum Cassaneu^, Catalogo gloriae mundi, de laudibus Franciae, par. 5. consider. 30 and par. 16. consi. 17 p. 297. 298. 299. 300. ad pag. 306 and Textur. in Epithesis in verbo Galli. Et Mant. lib. 7. Ionea meus Gallis, etc. Et La Ziardum in Epitome: historia cap. 17. in fine. Christendome, as a Kingdome devided in it selfe, beene rent and torne in the late Civill warres, by these vipers bred within her owne bowels, chiefly, by that hellish league of the Guizian faction, by the Duke deSee the book called the Historie of France in quarto, as in a Diary expressing the daily events betwixt the Duke de Maine, and the Prince of Navarre, after Henry the fourth of France. Maine, and his confederate Catilinarians? How hath shee long wallowed (like a Boare that's stickt) in her owne conglomerate bloud her men bleeding as freshly, as her Vines, by the prunning knife of unnaturall warres? How hath fruitefull Italie beene over-runne by the Gothes and Vandales, those truculentThe Gothes and Vandals, under Gensericus, Attalus Ton^as, subdued by Bellisarius at last and Narses forreiners, by the faction of the Guelphs and Gibelines, the ambition of the houses of the Medices, the Matchavillian stratagems of Casar, Borgias, the Luciferian pride of some contesting Popes, (the verie firebrandes of Europe) who like that Iulius theN^nclerus, and Bergomensis de Iulio secundo. second, having more

affection to Peters sword, then to Peters keyes or Pauls parchme^t, which they have made floate in Tyber, having unlawfully used the sword, and made millions perish by the sword, the ambition of some few Popes, as Chronicles testifie, shedding more Christian, then ever the ambition of Alexander, Caesar, or Rome Pagan shed heathenish bloud? So for Bohemia how hath she like a virgin been ravished and then slaughtered? And the like, I may say too of the Palatinate, How have her young men perished with the edge of the sword? Her old men and wise Senators beene massacred? Her fieldes and vines rooted by warre, that wilde Boare? Her Cities and fortified Townes like Ierusalem, low levelled with the ground, and left desolate? the warres there in many places leaving such monuments of her Tropheis as in this our Ireland, in which (as the greatest object of passion or compassion my eyes ever beheld) iam seges ubi Troia, etc. where many goodly Townes, if not Cities have stood, as appeares by their ruinated relickes; there's eyther corne or grasse, or (as they say now in Ierusalem, some few Tents for pilgrims) some smoakie Irish cabbins, standing as little urchins with their bristles up betwixt great old outwalles, orReliquiat Graium, atque immitis Achillis relickes of Castles, or as Pigmyes that sleepe in the midst of the guard of great Gyants: whilst wee Britanians, all this while (yea even wee Britanicall Hybernians,) in our long continued peace, hang up our Targets as at Hercules his pillers, set ope the gates of Ianus, as in the dayes of Augustus, nay make Bee-hives, as once the Romanes of our helmits, let our guns rust, our speares rot, and our swords canker for want of imployment, hurt by no enemie as yet unlesse by our owne lethargicall sensuall and supine securitie (which, if ever any thing will be our ruine, as it was toLuke 19.42. when Titus besieged it, they were so secure in the strength of their walles (as once Babylon and Thebes in the like case,) that they said if the Romanes had wings, they could not flie over them Ioseph Ierusalem, to the men ofIudg. 18.7. Laish, to theIn ^adunt urbem somno vinoque sepultum, Virgil. Troians, theIn their pride and securitie they contemned the Romanes and the valour of Scipio. Carthaginians,When the Turkes surprized a Castle at the mouth of Hellespont, (the prologue to their Tragedie,) they made light account of it and said it was but the losse of a hogges stye, as it signified in the Turkish tongue Knels his Turkish historie. Constantinople,Iudg. 16.19. Sampson, and diverse others:) yea wee fit as Israell under our owne Vines

quietly and peaceably, as in the dayes of Salomon, as Bees in their Hives, Aunts in their caverns, feeding on the hony and oyle, and wheate of plentie, the daughter of peace, under the shelter and shaddow of his Majesties wings, our soveraigne Salomon who deserves (as desires) the title of Rex pacificus the peaceable King, as well as the title of the defender of the faith, more justly clayming both, then the French King the name of the most Christian, the Spanish, the name of the most Catholicke King: yea better then Augustus or Polycrates the name of fortunate, then Adrian the name of good, then Titus the name of generous, then Alexander the name of great, munificent and magnificent. Thus, though we may justly feare the sparkes to flie over Sea, having by our sinnes inkindled the fire of that wrath, which may kindle the fire of our warre, both with God and man: (our owne houses being in danger of fire or plague, when our neighbours isIam tua res agitur paries cum proximus ardet. burning with the flame, or with the feaver,) yet, as yet we doe but looke on, (though with more pitie and pietie thenSuetonius in vita Neronis. Nero when Rome was on fire, and he singing his tragicke verses in representation of Troy, or thenApud Plutarchum in vita Scipionis. Scipio beheld the universall conflagration of the perverse, as well as resolute Numantines) as commiserating spectators, rather then actors of (or in) their tragedie: which, how ever it be to them justice (or tryalls for good ends) I am sure this long bearing, forbearing us in mercie, the instrument and organ of thisDulce bellum inexpertis: a^t pacem te poscimus omnes. mercie is his Majestie, who by his admired prudence and providence as truly effecteth, as lawfully and laudably affects the appellation, and deserved cognomination of the peaceableSee the book extant called the Peace maker, printed Anno Dom. 1619 not only of the blessed peace wee have by meanes of his Majestie, not only with Spaine Scotland, France and Ireland, our once opposite neighboures: but of the peace concluded by his Majestie betwixt Denmarke and Suevia, Suevia and Polland, Cleve, and Brandemburg. Prince.
Seaventhly, as a mercie equalizing the former, as much to be marvailed at, and I admired, as magnified though our sinnes have exasperated the Lord as much, if not more, then ever Israels, as sinning against a greater light, a greater measure of Grace, a greater knowledge and illumination, a brighter Gospell then ever they received, in our sinnes Evangelicall, as well as Legall, against the Messias, as much as against Moses, in sinnes omissive

by impenitencie, as well as by sinnes co^missive of impietie: yet neverthelesse, the Lord hath not beene so strict with us, as with them; in giving us over as the greatest judgement, and the severest punishment of former sinnes, (as hee did the unbeleevingPsalm 81.12 Iewes, andRom. 1.28.29. Gentiles,) to the vanities of our own mindes, and to the lustes of our owne hearts; for how ever there be many rot members in our Church, such as with1. King 21.20 Ahab, andIob. 20.12.13 Iezabell, even sell themselves to worke wickednesse, commit sinne with greedinesse, drinke up iniquitie as water, make their members weapons ofRom. 6.13. unrighteousnesse, turne the grace of God into wantonnesse; how ever many an Athist which saith in his heart there is noPsalm. 14.1. God, many an open professed, many a secret concealed Church Papist, that with the Ha^e runnes one way, (as the Marriner rowes) and lookes another, his tongue with the times, but in his belly he hath a Pope, though there be many (yea moe then a good many) rootes of gall and bitternesse amongst us, unpurged by our States Physitians, many stringes untuned as the discord in our Church-musicke, the spots in ourIude, vers. 12 feastes, the Gangreenes, and plague sores in our bodie Politicall and Ecclesiasticall, theIudg. 1. per totum. Cananites in our borders unremoved, the cankers in our roses, the Droanes in our Hives, the unsavorie salt that offends, and scandalize the little ones, uncastMath 5.13. out by the severest censure of excommunication; yet for the generality and universality, we are still a Church, as Rebecha was still a holy and a chaste spouse, though she had an Esau in herGe. 25.24.25. wombe, as Noahs Arke was GodsThe Church was sometimes confined to Abrahams family Noahs Arke, the chamber in which the Disciples were Act. 2. Church, notwithstanding there wasGen. 7.13. a Cham in it: we have not made a totall defection and apostacie as Israell, from our first husband, to follow after Idolatrous and adulterousIerem. 3.8. lovers, wee serve not yet Bell, nor Baall, nor Baalim, nor Ashtaroth, nor1. King. 11.5.7. Chemosh, nor Milchom, nor Dagon, the abhominations of the Sidonians, Moabites, and Cananites, for the bodie of our Church we yet bow not downe to Shrines and Idols, Crosses and Crucifixes, our kneeling communicating gesture, (though scandalous perhaps to the weake) is farre from Idolatrie orBread worshipped, see the satisfactorie Resolutions of Master Hooker his Ecclesiasticall Pollicie: Master Hutton explayning our Lithurgie, Bishop Morton his learned defence of the Ceremonies with others. Artolatrie, adoring or imploring the breaden God. Let our Amsterdammians

then prove that wee retaine eyther the head or tayle of the Dragon, that we have so farre played the Harlot, that the Lord hath given us a bill of divorce to be cut off totally (though not finally) from being a Church, as hee hath done with the Iewes: giving them over (till the fulnesse of the Gentiles beRom. 11.25. come) for a time to the hardnesse of their owne hearts, and blindnesse of their ownevers 9.10. mindes. For though there bee amongst us (as many open profest profane ones,) so manie clancular and secret Papists (as in France, Italie and Spaine, there be manie secret Protestants, and would be moe, if it were not for the severitie of lawes, and the strictnesse of the Inquisition) yet as in the corruptest times, there have been alwayes some that have discovered and detested the abhominations of the scarlet whore, and with Elias have not bowed their knees to Baall: (as Iohn Husse and Ierome of Prage in Bohemia with their Hussites; Waldo with his Waldenses, and Hugenotes in France: Ioachim Abbas, Bertram, Berengarius, Ierome Savanoriola in Italie and elsewhere: Wickeliffe with other learned lights in Oxford, Luther in Saxonie, as they are expressed and nominated by our moderneSee D Abbot, that late Bishop of Exeter, in his preface before his defence of M. Perkins, D. Vsher the Bishop of Meath de statu Ecclesiae, M. Gabriell Powell, in his preface before his learned booke, de Antichristo. writers,) so for the generalitie of our Kingdomes of great Brittaine at this day, the marke of the beast, of the most, and the best, is not received: and though there bee blemishes and infirmities, and corruptions in our Church, as in the best that ever were, yea erros in judgement and life in the best members (as the Sunne is subject to her eclypse, the Moone to her overshaddowing, the best and healthfullest bodie to some anguish fittes, or other distempers:) Yet the Church may be said to bee sound, and so may her members be said to bee living, as a man may bee said to be sound at the heart, though hee have some ploukes in his face, or biles and carbuncles on his bodie, as the fruite of worm-eaten, as a Lawyer, a Physitian, a Musitian, a Logician, a Rhetorician, may bee said to bee exquisite Artists in their professions, though the first misse it in some cases, in judging or pleading; the second in some cures: the third in some straines; the fourth, in some disputation: the last in some declamation: And how ever there bee some differences about some Ceremonies, andSee Master Powels little booke de a ^^aphoris. a Diaphorists, as there have beene differences

and disputes amongst the best, as appeares in ourAs there were differences betwixt Chrysost. Theophilus, and Epiphanius: betwixt Cyrill and Theodores, Gregory the great and Eutichius, Bernard and Peter of Clunes, yea amongst the chiefe Bishops of Asia, about the celebration of Easter: as appears in Ecclesiasticall histor. Yea how ever it is excused by Chrys. hom. 6. de laudibus Pauli, and by other fathers, Paul and Barnabas disse^ted. Act. 16.37. Margine: Yet since wee all hold the foundation against Papist, and Pelagian, and Armenian, and who ever else, which is justification freely by faith in Christ, without the workes of the law, according to the Scriptures, thus building on the rock: though there may be amongst us doctrinall or personall errors, we are still a Church, wee have not totally and apostatically revolted as the Iewes.
Eightly, and yet see still a further mercie to us then to these Iewes, though Gods owne peculiar people, (as indeede, as when by a stone throwne in the waters one circle begets another; and as in a golden chaine, one lincke succeedes (exceeds) another; so in the cordes of a man, in the cordes ofOsee 11.4. love, one mercie drawes another) though our provocations and rebellions haue every way equalized theirs, and though in paternall love, by fatherly castigations and corrections, the Lord hath visited our sinnes with roddes, and our offences with scourges, as he threatned2. Sam. 7.14 Salomon, and as he hath dealt with2. Sa. 12.10.11. David,2. Chr. 32 25 26. Ezekiah,Ionas. 1.3.4 Ionas, and all his transgressing children; yet he hath not beene so strict and severe with us, as with them for manie ages and generations, to scourge us, with any Ashur, or Assirian, any rod of hisEsay 10.5. wrath, any forreine power. For how ever in our first planting in this Island, we have been subjugated and subdued verySee Lanquets Chronicle, lib. 2 per totum, and de Gestis Romanorum in Anglia, libr. 3. per totum, ^t testatur pag. 136. often by the Pictes, by the Danes, by the Romanes, and since the time of William the Conqueror, as appeares in the raignes of severall Kings wee have had bloudie bickerings with neighbouring Kingdomes, chiefly the Normans, the French and the Scottes (now our brethren our neerest and deerest Allies, they and we meeting in his Royall Majestie, as in the Royall center of love (as the Tyrians and the Syrians in one Aeneas,) and how ever in the Raignes of everie King, our Edwards, Richards, Iohns, Henries and the rest, since (as before) the Conquest, our land hath beene shaken, as with a feaver, rent and devided as with the teeth and fangs of madd dogges, in Civill warres, more or lesse by the factions and rebellions, of turbulent, malignant, humerous, proud, ambitious and discontented spirits: Yet within our memorie, or the memorie of our forefathers, our great grand-fathers, (which is

a singular mercie, both to us their successors and our predecessors) wee have not beene brought under any forreine power, no externall yoke hath beene layd on our neckes, (excepting the Romane yoke on the soules of our forefathers) as theExod. 1.13. Egyptian, Chaldean,Esay 10.6. Ierem. 50.33. Assirian,Ierem. 51.34. Babylonian yoke was layd upon the Iewes, for many yeares together in grievous pressures; wee have not beene subdued in our times by anie forreine enemie, as the Israelites were kept under, sometimesIudg. 3.8.14. twentie, sometimes thirtie, fortie yeares, by the Midianites, Moabites, Ammonites, Philistines and other enemies, which the Lord stirred up against them: Our land in our time, as was once sayd of Venice, is a Virgin unconquered, unsubdued: We have obtained2. Sam. 24.14. Davids desire, to fall into the hands of God by plague and famine, and other afflictions, but not into the hands of man, as Sampson did, to be mocked of theIudg. 16.21.25 1. Sam. 31.4. uncircumcised, which was Sauls feare, as Abimelech was ashamed to die by the hand of aIudg. 9.54 woman, quod omen avertat Deus.
Lastly, which is the summe and substance, and shutting up of all the rest, comparing our selves still with them, not onely in positive mercies, but in privative, in respect of our evills ofMalum culpa malum poena. sinnes, and evils of sufferings, wee shall finde though, as hath beene said and proved, that our provocations are as many, as monstrous, our demerits as great as theirs: all circumstances considered, wee having walked as unworthie of Gods mercies as euer they, that the Lord hath beene to us, in respect of them, a mercifull and indulgent father, and to them in respect of us, a just, a severe and unplacable judge; to us a father of mercies, to them a Iealous and zealous God, visiting the sinnes of their fathers upon the Children unto the third and fourthExod. 20.5. Generation. When I consider not onely the judgements of God upon their soules, even to this day, in giving them over according to hisDeut. 28.28 threate, to madnesse, blindnesse of minde, astonishment of heart, to grope as at noone day, their hearts being made fatt, their eares heavie, their eyesEsay 6.10. shut, least they should see with their eyes, and heare with their eares, and understand with their hearts, and convert and be healed, God giving them over to the spirit of slumber, their eyes being darkened, the vayle2. Cor. 3.15. unremoved, blindnesse in part hapning

toRom. 11.8. ve. 25. v. 9. v 32. them, untill the fulnesse of the Gentiles be come in: their Table being made a snare and a trap, and a stumbling blocke, and recompence unto them: God shutting them up so farre in unbelife, that when their Messias came amongst them, as his owne, his owne received himIohn 1.12 not, but crucified the Lord ofAct. 2.36. glorie, rejecting him that came in his fathers name, their promised Shiloh, but receiving to their inevitable ruine and destruction both of bodie and soule, imposters and deceivers for their Messias, as Herod entertained of hisSome thinke the Herodians were so called, in that they thought Herod that Idumean the Messias. Herodians two Bens or Barcosbas, the sonnes of lying, as their owne writersSanhedrim. li. c. Helech. Rabb. Moses Ben. Maimon. That place of Haggai c. 2 7.8. being applied to the one, by Rab Akiba, tract Meghala, and Iacobs scarre, Num 23. unto the other Talmud Ieros. L. Taanith testifie, being received even of their great Rabbyns, and the propheticall Scriptures applied unto them, the one immediately after the Passion of Christ, the other in the dayes of Adrian, besides that Egyptian Moses, that Devill in the shape of aSocrat. eccles. hist. libr 7. c. 37. man, who drowned so manie of them in the Sea, in the Isle ofAnno 434. Creete, with other birds of that blacke feather, as that Pseudo-Moses inNicephorus Arabia with others moe. Thus (as our Papists and other heretickes at this day) not beleeving the truth, the Lord giving them over to strong delusions, to believe2. Thes. 2.9. lyes persecuting after the death of Christ, theAct. 5.18. chap. 7.58. Apostles, chiefly SaintAct. 9 23. cha. 14.2. Paul throughout the Acts, that preached the true Christ unto them with such virulencie, that putting away the Gospell from them, and judging themselves unworthy of eternall life, Act. 13.46. their golden Candlesticke was removed, their vineyeard let out to other husbandmen, The halt, and blind, and lame, wee sinners of the Gentiles were called in to that marriage feast of mercie, by that Gospell which theyMath. 22.8.9.10. refused.
But when I consider againe, (as consequent upon the former) Gods judgements upon their very bodies and outward man, upon them and their seede and posteritie, in all ages since the death of Christ, and in all places where they are as the dust dispersed, that curse and fearefull execration, his bloud be upon us and our children, so fullyMath. 27.25. verified, that hee that reades their Tragedies byIosep. de bell. Iudaico and antiq. Iosephus, andIosippus Heb. Iosippus, (both Englished in our tongue) writ as it seemes not with inke, but bloud, and prosecuted since, by Eusebius, Nicephorus, Dion Nicetus, Caesar Baronius, Ioseph Scalliger, Peter Galatinus, Damianus

a Goes, Iohn Renclin, our Master Foxe in his Martyrologie, and many moe Authenticke Authors that in all times since, have observed Gods heavie hand upon them, and his strict proceedings with them in all countries where they are scattered: (if he have not a heart of flint, or marble, hewen out of Caucasus) hee cannot but relent. But more particularly, when I ponder and seriously consider, those infinite slaughters and massacres, that were made of them by Titus Vespasian, (after that by divine Oracle the Christians were warned to flie toEuseb. hist. eccles. lib. 3. cap. 5. Pella, as Lot out of Sodom, the Magi and Ioseph out of Iudea) as first eleven hundred thousand of them perishing in the sacking of their Citie. Secondly, the rest eyther killing themselves, or being sold forIoseph. de bello Iud. reckons of slaves 97000. l. 7. cap. 17. Petrus Gal. de arcanis l. 4. ca. 21. recensit 200000. accounting all as slaves, under 17 yeares. slaves, or, after the Romane custome reserved for triumph. Thirdly, besides the murther of their Priests, the ruination of their Temple, (like the wals ofIosh. 6.26. Iericho, never to be reedified, though attempted by cursedHist. Tripart. and Greg. Nazia. orat. 4 in Julio. Iulian, in despight of Christs prophesie) for which they had a Sect and Order ofIoseph. Scalig. Elench. trihar. ser. cap. 13. Mourners, Heraclitus his offspring, which solemnely did nothing else but weepe and lament it. Fourthly, and besides, the spoyling of their sacred vessels, or profanely (as once beforeDan. 5.2 3 etc Balthazar) imploying them to the adorning of the heathenish Temple of peace. Fiftly, besides, the slaughters that at severall times Adrian the Emperour made ofIoseph. de bello Iud. lib. 7. cap. 24. them, some eight and fortie yeares after their first overture by Vespasian for their rebellion, under their impostor Benchochab or Barcosba, cutting off by Severus his Lieutenant 580000. by theDion. Nicei. Adrianus. sword, besides those that perished by famine, sickenesse and fire, or (as others number them) killing at Alexandria in Egypt 700000. of them, in such multitudes that if we may beleeve their owneLib. Echa rabbethi. writers, the bloud reached to the horses mouths, and runne downe from the place of effusion foure miles to the Sea, it coloured and made swell twoLib. Massechith Ghittin. Rivers, yea served the Heathens seven yeares after to fatten their ground with it: as their bones stood Adrian in good stead to hedge in a Vineyeard of manie miles compasse, those that revived being prohibited from ever comming neere Ierusalem, or looking towards it, saithEuseb. Eccles. hist. libr. 4. cap. 6. Eusebius, out of Ariston Pelleus, with manie otherPlurima vide apud Niceph. lib. 3. cap. 24. punishments

and vexations together with the wondrous massacres the Emperour Trajan made of the^, Adrians predecessor, who for their rebellions in (g) Egypt and Cyrene under their Captaine Luke, or Andrew as Dion cals (h) him by the meanes of Martius Tubo cut off many thousands of them, but moe by Lucius Quietus, (that made them ever quiet) who destroyed them utterly in Mesopotamia.
And more, when I consider how every way miserable they are at this day in their inward, and their outward man, their bodies and their soules: how they are a mocke and derision to all Nations as they mockt and derided Christ: how they have beene sold for slaves, yea thirtie of them for one peece, (as they bought Christ of the traytor Iudas for thirty peeces:) how they are held under, as slaves in every Nation, without Vrim, without Thummim, without Temple or true Priesthood, Ministerie, or Magistracie, Office, place, or Government, as made the tayle and not the head where ere they come, their names smelling as a fowmart or Foxe, the name of a Iew, being as odious as the name of aAt zante they are so hated that from Mo^day, Thursday, till Saturday noone, they come not abroad least the people stone them. Purchase libr. 2. cap. 10. Iudas, everie place in Europe, Affricke and Asia, being wearie of them, (exceptingThey have built them in Rome five Synagogues, See the Relation of Religion in the West partes. Rome that makes use of their tollerated usurie, (as of their Stewes and curtizans meerely for gaines:) how everie countrie, after a time, hath eyther held their nose to the grindstone, miserably afflicting them, as they were used here in England in the dayes King Richard the first, Edward the first, and King Iohn, as our Chronicles mention: or extreamely pilling and polling them, by taxes,Iohn the second king of Portingall, made the^ pay 8. Crownes for a poll: Emmanuel did the like Ann. Dom. 1497. with manie moe. impositions and confiscations of goods, (as they pill and poll Christians by their biting, yea bloudie usurie:) fleeting them as the Turke useth to doe with his Bashawes, and phlebotomizing their full purses to prevent a plurisie, or else banishing them and casting them out, as the Sea casts her froth to the shore, as they were used by the three Phil^pps, but chiefly by Ferdinand and Isabella inAnno Dom 1592. it's thought they were banished 120000. families of them: or 420000 persons as are computed by Io^annes Re^clinus Cabal. lib. 1. Spaine, by some Popes also inAs Paul the fourth, and Pius (or impious) the fift, though received againe, as loth to forgoe such good customers by Pius the fourth and Si^ius the fift. Rome, by some of our Kings in England: or else

massacring them with the sword, or stoning them to death by the rage of the people, chiefly (as some histories instance,) for their sanguinolent, devilish and malignant disposition, in using to crucifie some children, as upon our good friday, still in derision of our Messias when I see how all nations are weary of the^, as a tender stomack of unholsom meate, ready to disgorge the^, how as th'Apostle speaks of the^ even to this day, God they please not, and are contrarie to all men, 1. Thes. 2 15. How as is said ofGen. 16. v. 12. Ismael, like Ismalits rather then Israelits, their hand is against every man, and everie mans against the^, how even the Turkes detest the^ above any nation, for killing their own Prophet Christ, the best Prophet they say that ever was, excepting Mahomet, and will not admit any amongst them, except he first turne Christian, and then a Turkish Renegado: In their reproach also using a kinde of imprecation, if this be not true, would God I might die aM. Purchase in his pilgrimage. Iew, (as our perverse Irish use a worse, when I doe such, or such a thing Ile turne Protestant, and goe to Church,) I say laying to heart, and desiring all and everie of us, to lay to heart these premisses, this strict and severe, though just and legall proceeding of God, with these his owne people, in these specified particulars, together with his multiplied, accumulated, renued mercies to us, in giving us so many blessings, forgiving or forbearing us still, after all our rebellions and provocations by which even wee racke and stretch his patience, as cloath on the tentor hookes, not cutting us off as hee might doe, (and hath done them) roote, and bough and branch, but giving us a large space of repentance as hee did toAll the time that ^o^ lived amongst them. Sodom, to the oldAll the time the Arke was in building. world, toRevel. 2.19. Iezabell, not fortie dayes as toIonas. 3. Ninive, but fortie yeares in the pure and powerfull preaching of the Gospell under a gracious Deborah, and more then twentie yeares added since, under so wise and worthie a King, all this while manuring and managing and pruning us, as once his IsraelitishEsay 5. vers. 1.2 3.4.5. Vineyeard, hedging us in, and invironing us with so many mercies of adornation and preservation as would stretch Arithmeticke to number them, and Geometrie to measure them, making us as famous over the whole world, as they are infamous: us as much feared, as was Ioshuah of the Cananites, Alexander of the Indians, Taubut

of the French,A Drumme was made of his skin to terrifie his enemies, when hee was dead, teste ^ran^zio in Va^dalia, libr. 11. cap. 9. Maiol. colloq. 7. pag. 270 Et Akiat^ in Emblem. sic c^te detracta Ziseas, etc. Zoenus potuit vincere Pontifices. Zisca of the Popish; amongst the Bohemians, Constantine amongst the Pagans: and Bellisarius and Narses amongst the Gothes and Vandals, yea as much loved, and admired of our friendes and confederates, and awefully feared of our enemies, as they all are of all hated and detested with an Anathema Maranatha, till the vayle be removed, that they love and receive: yea beleeve in the Lords Christ, their expected Saviour. Yea, when I consider how the Lord by the word preached, by the inward motions and suggestions of his spirit (which sometimes in some flashes, knockes at the doore of the heart of aNumb. 23.10. Balaam, a carnallIoh. 6.34. Iohn. 7.46. Iew, aIohn. 4.15. Samaritane, aPilate. Math. 27.23.24. Iohn. 18.38. Heathen, anAct. 26.28. Agrippa, by crosses, by afflictions which wrought on2. Chron. 33.10.11. Manasses, and the GospelsLuk. 15.16.17. prodigall, yea sometimes on these IewesHos^^ 6. v. 1.2. themselves by fatherly castigations and corrections, paternall admonitions and expostulations, legall Cominations and redargutions, Evangelicall promises and consolations: yea even by mercies and judgements, nay even by signes and wonders, from the earth, from the heavens, from the ayre, by Comets, blazing starres, visions and apparitions, (as often to these Iewes before theirSee the book extant called Doome, forewarning to judgement where at large is recited the voice commanmanding some to goe to Pella: the crying of one Iesus, woe, woe to Ierusalem: with manie visions and wonders. destruction, as prodigious, and prognosticating as anie recorded byTexter in Officina de Miraculis. Textor, orLycosthenes hath write a great booke onely de Prodigijs. Lycosthenes: How I say by all these, the Lord hath lured us unto him, laboured to weane us from our sinnes, as the childe from the desired dugge, that iniquitie bee not ourEzek. 18.30. destruction as it was to these Iewes: etc. when I see hee hath rowled everie stone, touched everie string, used all meanes for our conversion to prevent our confusion: chiefly drawne us with the cordes of love, using to us the rod of beautie, as our indulgent Shepheard, to them the rod of bands: making us above any Nation in the World, patternes and presidents of his mercie, as they of his justice to present times, and to all posteritie: making them exemplarie markes of justice to us, not us to them, as our sinnes deserved, I say thus comparing mercies and judgements together, (as white with blacke, as the Heathens Venus

with Vulcan) our mercies this day ballanced and poy^ed with their miseries, have such a luster, that if we see them not wee are blinde, if with David and his people we blesse not the Lord for them, wee are as much past grace, as past gratitude.


CHAP. XIIII. Speciall deliverances of our Princes, Peeres and people from Romish Treasons.
THus have wee opened the Boxe, and seene the pearles, the blessings of great Brittaine, comparing Nation with Nation, our English with the Iewish Sion; but to come neerer still to my scope and ayme, and to instance in moe specialties, the priviledges and prerogatives, that wee have had, even in our owne memories (to omit former times) equall with the Iewes, in the happie and prosperous Regiments of our Kings and Governours, may notably serve as a further pricke and goade to true gratitude, so pressed and prescribed: for in some particulars wee shall have the ballancing, if not the casting scales. I cannot enumerate all (as hee that comes into a garden pluckes not everie flower, but some choyce ones:) compare our late Deborah, our mother in Israell, Queene Elizabeth of famous memorie, with their David, our present Liege Soveraigne with their Salomon, not onely in the propagation and continuation of true Religion, together with the two goodly Daughters of so gracious a Mother, Peace andReligio peperit divitias, ast filia devoravit matre^ Plentie, in which wee sympathize with them, nay farre exceede them: (for as our times have not beene so turbulent, so truculent, so bloudie and boysterous as Davids, that was a man of warre and shed much bloud, as hee was to farre occasioned and provoked, both by forreine warres a broad with the Iebusites, Ammonites, Philistines: and domesticke broyles at home, wee having not heard Bellonas Drumme, (except in a prudent provident Martiall trayning in our Cities asGenes. 14.14 Abraham once in his familie) but for these manie yeares,

chiefly since his Majesties Raigne, seene NoahsGenes. 7.11. Dove flying amongst us, with the Olive branch of peace: so for that greater and better blessing, the Sunne of Religion in our Hemispheare, hath shin'd more comfortably, more constantly then in the dayes of Salomon, neyther hath it beene, nor I hope ever shall be clouded, and eclypsed by Idolatrie, as it was in his dayes, till it did reshine againe upon his certaine and assured (though needlessely questioned)He that questions Salomons repentance, let him reade S^to Maior his preface before his Comment on the Canticles, and Lorinus his Comment on ch. 1. of Eccles. as also a booke in quarto, called Salomons solace in medi^ libri. repentance: But in one particular (purposely to avoyde feared prolixitie) to instance, how we doe agree and (s) meete as in one Center of blessing: as their Princes have beene mervailously preserved in immediate and immanent perils; so the preservation of ours, (and of us in them, since the bodie Politicall and Ecclesiasticall is safe, in the safetie of the head) hath even in our memories, and the memories of our fathers, beene marveilous if not miraculous. For, as Davids life (as before hath beene fully specified, and now shall be but epitomized) was hunted after by Saul, and such as hee set a worke; the1. Sam 23.19. Ziphins,1. Sam. 22.9 Doeg, and such bloudie dogges, emulating courtiers, yea Wolves and Foxes in sheepes cloathing, his pretended friendes as hee complaines, making Nets and Gunnes to intrapp him by fraude, when they could not prevaile by force, (using with it, pollitickeApud Brusonium titul. de Astutia. Lysimachus the Foxes craft, when the Lions courage fayled.)
So to reflect a little upon Queene Elizabeth of famous memorie, and as I promised and purposed, to paralell that Deborah with their David, besides what wee have in Chronicles in Master Foxe his Martyrologie: Are there not some yet living, that can relate, how the life of that famous virgin Queene, was persecuted and prosecuted, by the bloudie Romish Saulites, from the first houre of her Crowning to the last of her death? For besides the plots and projects, layd against her innocent life by sanguinolent Wolves in the Raigne of her unsisterly Sister, Queene Mary, her unjust taxations about the businesse of Sir Peter Carew, in the West, but chiefly about her confederacie with Courtney, in

Wiatts conspiracie. The second, her inhumane apprehension, when shee wasShee was taken sicke out of her bed at her house at Ashredge, by the Lord Ta^ne, Sir Iohn Williams, and other two Lords. sicke in her bed. The third, her transportation in that case from place to place. The fourth, her uncivill usage, by her churlish Taylor Beinfield. The fift, her guarding as a Traytor by aThe retinue of these Lordes were two hundred and fiftie, of which there was a troupe of horsemen: after a hundred northern souldiers added in white Coates yet, as her blacke guarde: After at Woodstocke threescore souldiers marcht everyday with in the walles and without. band of Souldiers. The sixt, her hurrying to the Tower without permission eyther to speake or write to the Queene. The seventh, her landing at the verie traytors stayres. The eight, her strict usage in the Tower, worse then some ordinarie prisoners. The ninth, The restraint of her men, the imprisoning of her Ladies, her tossing from poast to piller, as from Scilla to Caribdis, from danger to danger, when in her owne apprehension and preparation, as her Motto was, shee was tanquam Ovis, as a sheepe to the slaughter. The tenth, the examinations of Sir Iames Acroft, and the rackings of many poore men, to finde out the knife to cut her throate, The eleventh, the gapings of the Lords of the Cleargie, chiefly Steven Gardner, Bishop of Winchester, and Lord Chancellor, after the day, in which they might wash their white Rochets in her innocent bloud as much as ever Saul gaped after the bloud of David. After all, which stormes, and tempests, lightnings and thunders, her Sunne from under all these cloudes, gloriously reshined, in her triumphall Crowning, with such celebritie, prayers, wishes, welcommings, cryes, acclamations, shoutes, verses, pageants, enterludes, as symptomes of affections, together with such gratulations from forreineAs from Zuricke, Geneva, Basil Berne, Wertenbridge, Argentine, Franckford. places, as the like hath not beene seene: Her enemies byAs Poole, Hopton Bishop of Norwich, Christopher of Chester, Weston^ the chiefe disputer against Cranmer, Latimer, and Ridley, as also Bonner and Gardiner. death together with their plots, as mistes being suddenly dispersed: leaving these dangerous accidents and occurrents, these complotments with many moe, To cut off that head, which after as gloriously as ever any of her sexe wore a Crowne: How hath shee sympathized with David, in these her marveilous and miraculous preservations after shee came to the Crowne, from both publicke rebellions and private treasons that were comploted against her, (and so consequently against us and our safetie) both by ambitious

and factious spirits, as in the Norfolke and KentishSee Anglorum praelia extant in octavo. rebellions, insurrection of the Commons, under the conductes of their turbulent leaders, which had not Gods providence, and mans prudence (and prowesse prevented,) might have proved as fatall (as that rustickeDe quo bello rusticano more dialogi, multa habes erudite explicata per Simonem Maie^lum, de diebus Canicul. volum. 2. in fine colloq. 3. pag. 466. warre to our neighbor Germanie) both to this land in generall and to her Royall person in particular: But especially, by spirits that were Iesuited, and leavened from Rome, from whence as arm'd Greekes out of the Troyan horse, and as diseases out of Pandoras boxe, have issued all these treasons and rebellions publicke and private, that as Cocatrice egges, have by mans malice beene hatched, and by Gods mercie crushed amongst us: To reflexe upon some of them (as a man may looke upon a dangerous Serpent or vast monster, or his malignant enemie when hee is flaine, as the Israelites upon Goliah, and the Greekes upon Hector) with gratulation and admiration: How dangerous was that conspiracie in the North by the Earles of Northumberland andIn the conspiracie were Dacred, Digby, Hulthorp; Penyman, Bishop, and many moe, great Esquiers and gentlemen Westmerland, kindled by the Bull of Pope Pius, (or rather impius) the Fift, in the yeare 1569. and blowne by Doctor Nicholas Morton, Story Felton, the Nortons, Plumtree, (hang'd justly at Durham on a crosse-tree) and other dangerous spirits justified by that boysterousIn his sixt motive fol. 31. and in his forty motive. Bristow, andDe visibili Monarcha lib. 7. pag. 730. he prayseth the attempts of these Noblemen: pag. 744. Hee prayseth Felton for an honourable Martyr. Sanders, yea applauded and approved by many Seminarie Priests, chiefly by Campian (their chiefeAs appeares by his ten Reasons in his Oxford Oration, confuted learnedly by Doctor Humfrey. champion) who for all his cunningThe Deane of Pauls and Windsor disputing with him, found him verie subtile. sophistrie, was found to have a hand and a heart for treason: and suppressed by these wise and Martiall worthies which her Majestie imployed in that behalfe; as also to survey againe that other conspiracie, intended Norfolke, but discovered, and crusht in the shell, and the the chiefe agents executed: as also the treason of the Duke of Norfolke, and after of the Earle of Northumberland, who (as hee had a hand in the Northerne rebellion as well

as his brother, which by the Queenes mercie was remitted) entred into a new plot of invading the land, as an agent in Throgmortons treason, a conspirator with Charles Paget, an intended assistant to the Duke of Guize, to bring in a forreine Catholicke Prince, of which the Popes holinesse had a principall care; as also (si fas dicere) not to be so unmindefull of Gods former mercies, (no more then David was of his preservation from a Lion and a1. Sam. 17.34.35. Beare, or Moses for the overture of Israels Egyptian enemies in the redExod. 15. Sea, or Deborah of Iabins drowning in the RiverIudg. 5. Kishon, as to pretermit the discomfiture of that CatholickeAnno 15^8. fleete, which the pride of Popish Proselites called the invincible Armado, by one onelySir Francis Drake. Drake, with some principallAs Charles, Lord Howard high Admirall, Lord Thomas Howard, the Lord Sheffield. with other brave spirits. besides, swiming amongst them with his wooddenSo are Ships called. walles, with the helpe of the windes and waves of the Sea, which from the God of the Sea, fought against them, as the Sunne once fought against theIosh. 10.12. Amorites, and the starres againstIudg. 5.20. Sisera, and for us, as once for that goodOh ^timium dilecte Deo ^ui militat aether, and coniurati vaniun^ ad classica venti, etc. Theodosius, with no lesse glorie to our English then that valourous Greeke had, who with his handfull of a few hundreds overthrew that numerous river-drinking, cloude-threatning Armie of the Persian Zerxes. I say to pretermit these publike dangers, (with our deliverances) managed by all the might and malice, prowesse, and pollicie of the arme of flesh: as also these Priests and Romish Proselites, that were deservedly cut off at Tyburne, and their treacherous hearts cut out, as denying the Queenes supremacie, and so consenting unto, (if not contriving the most horrible treasons; amongst the which, were Iohnson, Forde, Shert, Kirby, Filby, Cotton, Richardson, so to leave others, as unworthie naming, pestilent vermine, or croaking frogges crawling out of the Romish Tyber, or as Locusts from the bottomlesse pit, to disturb our peace, or indanger our Princesse: how odious the naming (as of a Iew or Iudas? how horrid the remembrance (as once of him that burned Dianas Temple) of these men monsters, inhumane Canibals, yea generation of vipers, that besides strangers and forreiners) attempted,

(as by the Devill and Priests first tempted) to gnaw the very bowels that bred them, yea to lay their bloudie hands on the Lords anoynted, a Princesse the most free from vices, the most famous for Artes, partes, and vertues, that these moderne admiring times, ever look't upon: amongst the which, that smooth Parasiticall Parry, whose sparkes of treason, being kindled by the words and writings of the carnall, (Cardinall) Como, and inflamed by a Booke of one Doctor Collins, sent him out of France, in which there were as many warrants for treasons as words: and discovered partly by his owne tongue to an Esquire, one Nevill, and partly by the wisedome of someThe Earle of Leycester, and Sir Christopher Hatton. counsellours, they were quenched, smothered, and strangled at Westminsters Pallace, where hee was executed: and another bird of the same feather, Francis Throgmorton, who by the encitement of one Ienny, at the Spaw, in the countrie of Leige, and Sir Francis Englefield in the Low-Countries, with the^ confederacie of one Charles Paget, (alias Mope, alias Spring,) was made an agent and instrument of discoverie of the most fit and convenient Havens for the landing of such forreine forces, (as if the great Lord Protectour of England, had not prevented and restrained) had supplanted us and planted themselves with all the tayle and traish of their Idolatrous worship.
In the third ranke (as rancke Traytors as the rest,) were Anthonie Babington, the head of his confederates, asAct. 1.16. Iudas was of those that apprehended Christ, who with thirteene (ungentle) young Gentlemen moe, bound themselves by Oath, as those fortie Iewes that vowed the death of SaintAct. 22.13.14. Paul, that by murthering the Queenes Majestie, they would eyther settle their Pope againe in his former estate in England, or else, (as deservedly they did, reckoning without their hoste, even the God of hostes, and swimming against the streame,) even die the death.
In the same predicament was ourBorne in Tonlerton neer Yorke. Yorke-shire Weldon, Sutton, Hartley, priests, like Simeon andGen. 49.5.6 Levy brethren in bloud, hearted like the rest for the invasion of

the land, the surprizing of the Tower of London, the firing of the Citie, the killing of some privieChiefly the Earle of Leicester was assigned to the pot. Counsellors, and other such like Catholicall meritorious deedes: all drinking of that bloudie cup, (as freely asApud Instin. Satiate sanguine quem sitists. Tomiris caused Cyrus) which they had brewed for us. The same poysonous bloudie cup was attempted to be brewed, mixed, and administred by Doctor Lopez, the Queenes Physitian, with his confederates Stephano de Ferrara de Gama, Manuell Lewis Tivaco, Portingals, with his pension of fiftie thousand Crowne; promised for poysoning the Queene, by Count Fuentes, and Secretario Ibarra, as Iudas was promised thirtie peeces of silver, for betraying of Christ, and Ecchius promised a Bishopricke, or greatOf which missing he raved and died. benefice, for disputing (at least rayling) against Luther. Neyther was the treason of Yorke, and Williams, lesse dangerous, lesse monstrous, lesse malicious: who by the Consultation holden at Bruxels to murther the Queene, whereof the Devill that murtherer from the beginning was president, (as these holy Fathers, in the Councell of Trent consulted how to poyson soules, and their forefathers the Pharisees, how to murther Christ, and their holy brethren of the Inquisition, how to murther his Protestant professed Christians:) these, with one Owens an English rebell, were thought the fittests agents; of which bloudie purpose fayling with their hopes of the promised fortie thousand Crownes, they lost their treacherous bloud, out of their veines. I might here further exemplifie great Britaines dangers, and deliverances, as the marke that I shoote at, by the foolish (and at his death truely repented,) attempt of Heskith, a gentleman of Lancashire, who at the soliciting of Cardinall Allen, Sir William Stanley, and Worthington, our unnaturall countreyman, perswaded Ferdinand, the LordWho as a naturall subject revealed the Counsell of this Achitophell. Strange, Sonne and Heire to the Earle of Derby, to clayme to himselfe the title to the Crowne of England, that so these turbulent spirits might by this meanes fish in a troubled water. As also of that viper Squire, who by the soliciting of the same venemous brood beyond sea, to kil the Queen, did co^plot the poysoning of the pu^mell of her saddle, that laying hand on it, the poyson might disperse over her whole body, which plot also came to light by the eye of that vigilant Ce^tinell

the Shepheard ofPsal. 23.1. Israell, as also of that Irish kern, Patricke Cullen, who by the perswasion of that ever factious Stanley, and one Iacques his Lieutenant, together with Sherewood and Holt, to come into England about the same bloudie errand, that formerly his brethren, was surprized by the high way, and he and his plot supplanted: So let thine enemies O LordIudg. 5.31. perish, be they English, Irish, Romish, hellish whosoever, whatsoever and wheresoever: and let us and all that love thee rejoyce in thy salvation. And since we have entred into this our Ireland, it's worth our animadversion, how the Lords hand, hath been as just and heavie, even against Irish traytors, as English, in cutting off them and their bloudie hopes, and plots ever, by one meanes or another: Such is his mercie to us, his justice to our enemies, as appeares (if I may without offence reflect upon them) in Iames-fitz Morice, one of the first Traytors (as I am informed) in this our Ireland, who was cut off shorter by the head by an Irish young Gentleman, as he went to burne his fathers countrie.
Secondly, such a stearne bloudie treacherous verlet as this, was one Morrogh Ogue (or Rogue) who after his effusion of abundance of English bloud in the Province of Munster, being apprehended, and executed at Corke, and his bones broke with a smiths sledge, his onely repentance was, that he might not live to murther moe English. His bloudie villanies would fill a Volume.
Thirdly, so for the Earle of1. King 2.34. Desmond, that was a prince, and principall agent in these rebelling stirring times; Was not his end proportionable to his life? Did he not come to his grave as2. Sam. 18.17. Ioab, Absolom, and other traytors, cum cede and sanguine, with bloud and slaughter, wandring as a beggar? Was he not taken by one of the Irish in his Cabbin, and his head dissevered from his body? So Desmond brother to this Earle, a notable Traytor (as was said of Caesar Borgias, a faithlesse and perfidious butcher, as well of his friends as enemies, who any way stood in his way to hinder his ends: wandring as a hungrie Wolfe in the woodes to seeke some prey, as he had beheaded others in a proportionable retaliating justice, was taken and beheaded himselfe, notwithstanding all his Coate-armour

of the Popes Buls, and Agnus Dei, and the Ring that the Pope sent him from his owne finger, (as a love token to a Traytor dearely beloved) hanging about hisOf these and other Irish kernes, and rebels, see at large the discoverie of Ireland by Sir Iohn Davis. necke. So Doctor Sanders, the great Goliah of rebells, by hand and head, tongue and pen, animating and incouraging them as one of the best active factors that ever the Pope had, by his agencie, and one of the best Proctours, the Romish Hierarchie ever had, by his workes and writings, this not only firebrand, but trumpe of rebellion, the Popes Legate, the Commander and Treasurer for the late warrs, wandring in the Mountaines without succour or reliefe, died (as is credibly reported) ravingly and in a frenzie. Sic necis artifices arte perire sua. So let all perish which eyther themselves unlawfully, or by animating and incouraging, cause others to attempt to strike treacherously with theMath. 26.5. sword against the Lords Vicegerents, who as deputies under God carry not the sword in vaine.


CHAP. XV. More speciall applications of our preservations, and other blessings, of which wee are eye, and eare witnesses.
THus have we compared our Deborah, (for to this terme I still cleave) with Israels David, his and in him their) deliverances, with ours, hee was delivered and preserved from a Lion, a Beare, Saul, the Zephims, the Iebusites, Goliah, the Amalekites, the Courtiers of the King of Achish, Absolom his owne rebellious bowels, Achitophell, that Matchavillian Politician, and Shebae: Our deliverances have been moe for number, greater in respect of danger, by the inventions, and intentions of our enemies domesticke and forreine: as hath appeared in the particulars, and therefore (which is still my ayme and scope,) our Gratulations should be answerable.
I could inlarge my selfe further, in paralelling the deliverances of our wise and peaceable Salomon, our Soveraigne Lord the king, with their Salomon, in this one point of preservation in a double deliverance: For, as the Lord had elected Salomon, not onely to Grace, notwithstanding his fearefull (but not finall) fall, but also to the place of a2. Sam. 7.12. Prince of God, so dearely beloved as his name2. Sa. 12.24.25. imports, that as hee was his

Father, and hee his2. Sam. 7.14. Sonne, so hee promised him the inheritance of a spirituall Sonne, as fromvers. 15. God, of a naturall Sonne, as from David, even the throne of his father: which Nathan and his mother1. Reg. 1.17.2 knew, and David himselfe bothvers. 30. promised, and performed when time served: so wee know the^e were some ^ubbes and blots and and blockes in the high way, to wipe him of the Kingdome; for surely had the prevailing faction of Ioab and his brother Adoniah prevailed, Salomon had beene Office perde, his nose had beene put of joynt, hee might have fisht for a Crowne: yea hee might have pleaded for hisRethsheba urgeth this ver. 21. life, as the Lambe before the Foxe in the fable, hee should have had that favour shewed him which Abimelech shewed to the Sonnes ofIudg. 9.18. Gideon, Athalia, to the Kings2. King. 11.1. seede, and the raigning Turke at this day to hisAll are put to the sword, etc, Knol^ his Turkish history. brethren, he had beene sure to have gone to the pot or beene restained: neyther had his case beene better, had his second plot taken, and his project prevayled, in asking the Shunamite to wife, a ground of a second vie, for the Kingdome: as Salomon was so wife and nasuted, that he smelt out the danger of his1. King. 2.22. drift, so that by Gods over-ruling providence, both those treasonable plots of Adoniah were prevented, the one by the care and circumspection of David, the other by the wisedome and prudencie of Salomon himselfe: So (if we doe not voluntarily shut our eyes) do we not sensibly, and at this day comfortably and feelingly perceive, that our Salomon, our Soveraigne, hath beene rescued out of the jawes of a double danger, the one before he was invested with the Crowne of Albion, the other since the one in Scotland, the other in England; the one, as under God (whose hand kept him ever as the apple of his eye) by his prowesse, the other by his prudencie, and pollicie: for as he was lured and trained, to the house of Earle Gowry, by the false lapwing cries of Alexander Ruthwen, as he was a hunting inviting him (in his intention) to a bloudie breakefast, and thereby a serpentine wile leading him from the rest of his Nobles, as a sheepe to the slaughter, the butchering executioner standing readie prepared for the fatall stroke: the Lord cast such a punicke feare, into the

heart of him that was set to be a murtherer, that, that dogge stood trembling and quaking as an Espin leafe, (as he that once intended the murther of Darius) as not being able to looke upon ourHis Majestie is said to have the impression of a Lion on his breast, the prophesie 2. Es^ 11.27. is by some applied. Lion and gave withall such a strength, and spirit to his Majestie, that grapling hand to hand, even with that Alexander, (though naked and the other armed) he held him play, (the other standing by as a cypher or dumbe shew) till by a speciall providence, his Majestie was overhard, and so speedily relieved by his valiant followers, who in an unequallImpar congressus, etc. combat, foure to seaven, (as appeares in the particular passages, thus epitomized) with the losse of their owne bloud, and the death of some of their enemies, brought of his Majestie with honour and safetie. But this danger was but as it were a Northerne prologue to a Sotherne Tragedie, if it had beene acted and effected, as it was penned and projected, by these unfortunate Gentlemen, as their friends call them, Piercie, Catsby, Graunt, Faukes, Keyes, Bates, Rookwood, Digby, and the two Winters, for ever sigmatized and branded, (as Cain with hisGen. 4.15. marke, as Ieroboan with his1. King. 16.23 Ieroboam the son of Nebat that caused Israell to sinne. title, with the odious name of the Powder Traytors: which plot being so deepe and infernall to blow up the Parliament house with powder, and in that one blast to turne Heaven as it were into Hell, Religion into superstition, peace into warre, libertie into bondage, safetie and securitie, into bloudshed: to eclypse our Sunne, our Moone and our Stars, all at once, to turne the flowers of Christendome, the worthiest King, the sweetest Prince, the most honourable Nobilitie, the most reverent Iudges, learned Cleargy, loyal Commonaltie, wisest Patriots there assembled, into mummiamized earth; even in a trice, as it was thought to be first invented, (as powder and Gunnes by a conjuring Fryer) even by a parliament of wicked spirits, breathing and suggesting it into the heades and hearts of these male-contents, drunke with blinde and bl^u^^e zeale, as the Crow with Nux vomica: So it was (if comparisons be not odious) as is well knowne by all circumstances, as wisely and judiciously found out, and discovered by his Majestie, by rightly expounding (past a humane reach, the most intricate quiddities

of a mysticall letter, as ever Salomon found out the true mother of a controverted1. Reg. 3.27.28. childe, or discovered the ambitious and bloudie plot of a false brother Adoniah.
But to draw (at length) together my sayles, and to cast ancker in this large sea of mercies, the Lord hath not onely given his judgments to the King, but inlarged his mercies to the Kings Sonne; we are to looke upon the Sunne rising, or else alreadie risen, chiefly to admire the luster of our Illustrious Prince, after he hath beene so long hid from our Horizon, as it were shining in another Climate, yea (in our feares onely and jealousies of love) clouded and vayled from our eyes, but not from our hearts; and now the fogges and mistes of our feares being dispelled and dispersed, breaking againe upon us with more resplendent beautie to our eyes, more sweete influence of comfort to our hearts, then ever: wee now receiving him as Abraham did his Isaac, or Iacob his Ioseph, with a redundant joy, after wee had a while left him, or rather hee us in his expedition from us, which our longings thought too long.
And now to set a stronger edge upon our affections, and to excite our hearts to a higher straine of thankefulnesse, for the safe and prosperous returne of our Prince, which wee, with the whole Realme of England Scotland, and that part of Ireland that is not Romanized, yea Belgia, and all Christendome, (our friendes in the same faith) doe entertaine and welcome with joyfull Iubilees: As those that have past the waves and quicksands, and rockes, and shelves and Pyrats of the Sea, stand upon the shore, and as joyfully, as safely view and recount with glad, and exhilerated hearts, their forepast perils: So let it be with us, in this our Sunny calme, let us reflect upon the stormes that might have falne upon us, (had not the hand of the Almightie withheld them,) in that hazard which we runne in the late absence of the Prince: and as generals which may as fitly as the right Glove to the right hand be applied to our owne particular, let us consider but these specials: First how many great and famous Princes, together with other famous personages for Armes and Arts, have died out of their owne countrie farre absent from their

friends and favorites, except such as did accompanie them, finding their owne countrie the place of their birth, another of their buriall. Thus Alexander was borne inQ Cart. lib. 1 Macedonia, but died, and was buried inEuseb. libr. 1. Babylon, Cyrus borne in Persia, yet slaine and dishonourably buried inIustin. hist. Scythia, Hanniball of Affrica buried inPlutarch. in Pompeyo. Bithinia, Cleomenes borne in Lacedemonia, intombed in Egypt. Crassus and Pompey both borne in Rome, but falne untimely, the one in Assiria, the other betrayed and butchered in Egypt. So for learned men, Pythagoras borne in Samos, dead in Metapontus, Virgill born in Mantua, buried in Brundusium, Terence borne in Carthage, buried in Arcadia: so these worthie Athenians, Themistocles, Thesius, Solon, were borne in Athens, yet ended their dayes in Syria, Cyprus, Persia, and elsewhere: I might adde many moe, as King Igurthu, borne in Numidia, buried in Rome: these famoused worthies, the Scipios, Curtij, Decij, Cornelij, borne in Rome, but dissevered in their deaths over the superficies of the earth, as Paulus Emilius that died in Cynna: Titus Gracchus in Lucania, Augustus Caesar in Nola, Traian the good Emperour in the East part of theDe istis omnibus, vide apud Fulgosum, Brusonium, Lycosthenem, Textorem, Zwingerum in Theatro. world. Secondly, when I consider how many renowned yong Princes, beauteous blossoms of excellent luster have been in their verdant spring (as a tryall or punishment to their subjects) cut off from the Tree of life, cropt by that blatrant beast death, their Sun setting on a suddaine even in the first rising, or in their height and solstitiu, going backe againe by degrees as the Sun in Ahaz2. King. 20.11 Diall, 1. Sometimes eclypsed, by the immediate hand of God, as that zealous yong Prince Edward the VI. and the staffe of our hopes our so lamented Iosiah, that so faire promising Heroes, whom, (as one cals Iulius Scaliger, and Picus Mirandula) we may truly call worthy and wonderful spirit, now translated to the God of spirits. 2. some made away by the malice of man, by treasonable plots and conspiracies, as Britanicus the sonne of Claudius slain by Nero in the 14 yere of his age the nephews of Richard the 3 the Duke of Clarence, and his mate rooted out by the bloudy Celidonian Bore, in their springing buddes, 3. yea some exposed to death in their very infancie, as Romulus and Renus, that Lamusius (that was cast into a ditch) young

Cyrus, by his grandsire Astyages, etc. Some by this meanes perishing, though some againe as these nominated marvailously preserved, 4. some cut off by the sword of the enemie, as Iosiah by Pharaoh2. Chro. 35.23.24. Necho that loving Ionathan by the sword of the1. Sam. 31.2. Philistines, Ladyslaus the yong King of Bohemia, slaine by the Turke in a fatall battle, (together with Hippolitus andThis Iulius perswaded the young king to breake his league and sworn truce with the Turke, by which he perished. Iulius Cardinals, that held themselves in their pride, as good as Princes) in the 21. yeare of his age, 5. others cut off by sicknesses, incurable diseases, or other dismall accidents (from which the Diadems of Emperors, theMors sceptra ligonibus aequa^s. Crownes of Kings, and the Myters of Popes are not exempted) as Hierome Vrsmus, who died of a wound, which hee received in Rome, Henry Rauzovius crushed to death by a fall in the waters, Medices the father to the great Duke of Hetruria slaine by the breach of a Gun: as also Heraclas Constantine, with moe that might be named, all these yeelding the dew to death, and their debts to nature, in the 28. yeare of their age: some by one meanes some by another, together with Lodowicke the yong king of Hungary, that as he was eagerly pursuing the Turks, was found dead in a quagmire, in the 20 yeare of his age. But in the third place, when I seriously ponder, (paralelling histories with our present times) not onely the perils and pikes, that great Princes have past, in their expeditions by land, as many Princes and noble Peeres of Christendome cut off in their severall unwarrantable voyages, which in their blinde zeale and devious devotion, they unitedly undertooke for the recoverie of Ierusalem, the holy land, from the Turke: But horresco referens, when I deepely ponder, the perils by Sea, so many, so dangerous, as the PsalmistPsalm. 65.7 reveales, as experience knowes, as holy Saints: evenAct 27.14 15 Paul himselfe, and the disciples of ourMath. 28.^4. Saviour have tried: from which even Kings and Princes have not beene exempted, the pietie of that TroyanPius Aentas a pietate in Patrem, in patriam. Aeneas, the greatnesse and power of Zerxes or Artaxerxes, the felicitie and fortunes ofCaesarem veha^ and fortunas, etc. Caesar, as hee cald them, being but meane Orators and unprevailing pleaders, to stay the rage of angrie Neptune, when blustring Aeolus hath stird and exasperated him that he roars and fomes, insomuch that the wise Byas held Sea-men to be neyther amongst the

Nec inter vivos, nec inter mortuos. living, nor amongst the dead; and it's fathered of Cato, that he resolved amongst other things, never to goe by sea, when hee might goe by land: to which perils, if we creditA little book newly extant, of the Prince his returne. Mendoza, which now speakes English, even his Highnesse was subjected in two or three particulars, from which the divine providence mercifully preserved him: Yea when I consider how many Princes Peeres and great personages, have perished in and by the Sea, in which they have bin intombed in their watry graves, as the Egyptian Pharaoh, Aegeus of Athens, Aiax of Greece, Leander of Abaddon: yea in our owne Realmes, a King and a Queene; that as thatIcarus icarij^ nomina feci^ aquis. Ovid. Icarus before them, from being drowned in the waters, gave denomination to the waters: and commenting these and many moe examples, with that proverbiall adage verified daily by experience, that quod cuiquam, id cuivis, what happens to any one, may happen to every one: and notwithstanding, as I said before, all these justly feared stormes, which might have befalne us, in the leaving or losing of our Prince, at home, or abroad, by sea or by land; laying to heart, the perils that Kings, andAs Humber deviding Yorkshire, and Lincolneshire, and Queene Hive. princes are subjected unto, even whe^ they are at home, amongst their friends and favorites (as they thinke) even in their Castles, their Courts, their Pallaces, secured by their guard, (as Eglon slaine by Ehud, even in his owne parlour Iudg. 3. vers. 22 23. Ishboseth murthered by Baanah and2. Sam. 4. vers 5.6. Rehab, even in his own bedchamber, as Plautinus in the like case thought to have dispatched Alexander Severus, by the meanes ofThe history is at large in Guevara, in the life of Severus. Secundus, as Iudith dealt with Hollosernes in theIudith. 13.7.8. Apocrypha, as the two sonnes of Senacharib with their father whom they slaughtered, as he was at his Idolatrous sacrifice) much more subjected to more eminent, immanent, dangers abroad where they know not their friends from their foes: and yet notwithstanding all these doubts and dangers, these perils, occasioning our perplexitie, that good Angell that went out with him, as withChap. 48 16. Iacob to Padam Aram with Abrahams servant, toGen. 24.7. Mesopotamia, and with that Tobiah in the Apocrypha, being his fidus Achates, by land, his Palinurus and best Pilot by Sea, his bonus Genius, (if everie man, as everie province, much more everyThis question Iustine Martyr expounded q. 30. and later our Master Calvine lib. 1. Instit. cap. 14.7. The mayor part of all the Fathers, and the schoolemen affirme it, as Clemens Alexandrinus lib. 6. stromat. Orig hom. 8. in Gen. Basil. in Psal. 33. Epiphan. Mer. 51. Chrys. ho. 3. ad c. 1. ad Coloss. Cyril. lib. 4. contra Iul. Procopius cum cateris grounding on Gen. 48.16. on Math. 18. vers. 10. and on Act. 12.11.15. Prince have his bonus Genius

his protecting Angel) both by land and sea in every coast and countrey where he came, having reduced and brought him backe again after this large circumference to the English Court, his own center, in health and honour, prosperitie and safetie both in bodie and soule, not somuch as the least infected dust cleaving to his feete, much lesse any corrupted Popish ayre infect his royall bloud, such was the antydote and preservative of grace, of which his highnesse hath given more then Mathematicall demonstration, even since his comming home: Oh this is a mercie to his highnesse in particular, to the land and realme, all us in generall (interested in him) past expression Chiefly whe^ I consider how unworthy we have walked of former mercies, how like these nine clensed lepers, we have beeneLuk. 17.16.17. unthankefull, how there is at this day a controversie, whether God is more mercifull to us, or wee more sinfull against him: we wounding the Lord with his own weapons, abusing our peace and plentie, and all other Tallents, as Bawdes and Panders to uncleanesse, as fuell to the fire of our licentiousnesse, as if a whorish woman should with these Iewels and love tokens she receives from her husband, mantaines an adulterous lover or a favorite with these lands and revenues he hath received from his Prince assist and animate a professed rebell, wee imploying still Gods favours in the service of sinne and sathan, our sinnes like Ierusalems, yea likeEzeth. 16.49. Sodoms, pride, idlenesse, fulnesse of bread (yea and fulnesse, foulnesse of drinke too) extortion, oppression, increasing and springing with our blessings, the sins of every countrey, the German drunknesse, Asian luxurie, Cretian lying, Carthaginian perfidiousnesse, Italian wantonnesse, Iewish usurie, Turkish crueltie, the French complementall formality, with the vices, and vanities of every other Nation, meeting in our land, as in their Center, entertained and retained (as Lawyers their Clients, Physitians their Patients, Noble-men their jeasters and fooles) because they bring sackes to our Milnes, pleasures to our mindes, or profites to our purse, etc. Yea withall, when I ponder too, how little use we have made of the Lords judgements, plagues, pestilence, dearths, inundations of waters, sicknesses, diseases, deaths of the Honourable, of the Martiall, of the Senatour, and of theEsai. 3.1.2.3. Counsellour, that have beene taken from us: but chiefly the eclypsing of that bright sun, that once shined so gloriously in our hemispher, th'death of that

our Illustrious, and farre famoused Prince Henry, as greivous to our hearts, as the death of that worthieBy the malice of Roxama, cut off by his bloudy father Solyman in any great thing that happens, the proverbe is, Mustapha is dead. Mustapha was once to his Martiall Ienisaries, or the death of that noble Zisca to his zealous and valerous Bohemians: of whose death (in not dying since to any sinne, as humbled by this judgement) we have made so little use, that by our greivous provocations, and as a just punishment of our former ungratious ingratitudes, in the absence of our Prince, the Lord having lately the Ball at his foote (as hee hath ever) to goale it to our griefe, whereas hee might have brought on us now stouping plague indeede, and have payed us home once for all, by many meanes (which I leave to all Christian hearts to excogitate) yet when wee experimentally see, that as in the first creation, hee hath brought light out of darkenesse, good out of our feared evill, glory to himselfe prayses to his Majestie, as before prayers, for the preservation of our thrice honoured Prince: Is not all this the Lords doings, and it is marvailous in our eyes? Oh if David and his Nobles were thankefull for the mercies towards their Salomon, the instrumentall builder of their materiall, let us be thankefull for our Salomon, the builder of the spirituall Temple, the propagator and continuer of true Religion, the planter of Gods true worship, the supplanter of Idolatrie. If Cain bee avenged seven times, then Lamech seventie times, said thatGenes. 4.24. Polygamist. If the Iewes have cause of gratulation seaven times for Gods mercies towards their Church and Commonwealth: Kings and people; wee have occasion seventie times seven times. If the undersong of Davids Psalmes; much more of our spirituall Hymnes may well runne in this torrent to the God of mercies, for his mercie endureth forPsal. 136. per totum. ever.
Oh then let all of us this day, this houre, with our mother great Britaine, by all meanes expresse our thankfulnesse, by our rejoycings in the outward and inward man. Blow with your Trumpets as in the new Moone, strike your Drummes, advance your pikes, (I wish I could say as in England, ring your Bells) make your bonfires, sound your Cornets, display your Banners, charge and discharge your Guns, apply your powder, make good use of Match, or as more certaine, use your fire lockes, march like Martialists, daunce your measures as David did before the Arke: Let the day of our preservation from the powder

treason, of the Coronation of our King, the reduction of the Prince, be to us as the Iewes^^^h. 9.26 Purim, let them be writ in red Letters, inserted in our Calender, but for ever these mercies with their memorials, let them be (as Moses commandsDeut. 6.6.7.8. Israell) be ingraven (better then in Brasse and Marble,) in the Tablets of our gratefull hearts, perpetuated traditionarily to our Children: children: Let our Hearts, Lives, Loves, Votes, Voyces, Tongues Soules, Spirits, joyne with all the blessed Quyre of Angels in Heaven and Saints in Earth, for all his mercies, to praise the father of mercies: the God of spirits. To whom bee honour and glorie of us and in all Churches for ever, and ever. Amen.


FINIS.

