Numb. 1 there be no end of make many book say the preacher in the end of his Eccl. 12. 12. book especial if they be book of encounter whereof there be no end either for cessation because revengeful spirit foster with rancour be ever restless which make Plato the philosopher to say that brawl be easy begin not so soon take up nor end for profit so Nazianzene expound that speech of Solomon because Metaph. in Eccles. the party interest which the orator observe either through self-love or pertinacy will not be draw from what they have publish by any argument of the adverse side though many and forcible and the indifferent reader find in such writing more partial bitterness then sound tul. acad. deal lose his time which be precious in itself and may in more profitable study be employ whereof cal^...ach come the heathen proverbial sentence that a great book be a great mischief 2 all which the critical censurer of the triplex cuneus if we be not deceive in the author acknowledge preface to his manifestation elsewhere and prefer a repose life before such contentious jangle which if he do true affect not in pretence he may well have leave the blunt or dislodge of the triple wedge either to he that wear the triple crown or to he who under his redcap breathe after it for this business concern they both the pope for his breve the cardinal for his letter this censure epistler it touch no whit 3 who to answer may be think both endless and needless needless for his letter be only a farthel of conceit either sleight and unsound or malicious and untrue they carry their answer with they and as the prophet speak in a other case eye they bear there own confutation in their forehead Esa. 3. 9 endless for a itch arm desire still to be scrub and a eel delight not more in trouble water than he who only glory be in scornful inuective rejoice to have occasion give for his busy pen 4. yet sithence his censure unanswered may infect other and give he occasion to triumph in his own vanity and peradventure some partial affect may imagine that not contempt of his reasonless rail but lack of good ground for reply have enforce a silence I have hearken to king Solomon his affirmative advice and for suit a answer in some measure proportionable have prou. 26. 5. take no other than his own unmethodical method both for his treble paragraph and his multiply number which be more sincere deal than he afford the apopologie for what he can wrest or cavil at that we find answer that which appose he he pass in silence and we take it grant as truth for silence imply if not consent yet no denial not that I mean verbatim to answer every number that be to grace a pamphlet with a volume but direct by his own index to take the sum and substance such as it be of so many Sect^...ons as serve to the proof of each chief point as he entitle they 5 for example Paragraph 1. Numb. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. wherein first as if he be in a trouble pool he cast out his angle to fetch out a author and lest either his bait or skill shall seem to fail he as Anthony deal with Cleopatra at his fish in Egypt he fasten to his hook one out of his own store namely plut. in Anto^... another t. m. forsooth a inferior minister near his majesty to who he may show the book and so publish it with his majesty authority print and arm marry his majesty be so far from be the author thereof as that in this critic persuasion he do not so much as read all the content advise many passage therein be contrary to the king judgement and honour numb 2. namely for judgement first alter the question twice or thrice second charge Bellarmine so great a man with eleven contradiction not one of they so to be prove as not only learn but unlearned will find numb 3. as in that concern justification and Antichrist particular 4. 5. but especial both in that general assertive note that Bellarmine be drive to a pinch care not to contradict himself for a present avoidance as also in that sting conclusion that heaven and hell do not more differ than God book and Bellarmine work do concern the dignity of temporal prince Numb. 7 second for honour there be such phrase of contempt against the pope and against the great cardinal also call he master Bellarmine which his majesty will in law of honour sure condemn Numb. 6. 6 to tread his step we may also dally with the reader to retrieve a author and inquire as he do and who this english exile this epistle censurer shall be whether r. p. or n. d. or f. p. or p. r. or Doleman that be under all these cipher parson the jesuite who his own brother entitle a raunging-voluntary under his own hand Quodlib pa. 238. 239. runagate not in exile by authority who his own priest do style a hispanize chameleon the brat of a incubus no true Englishman either in heart or by birth 7 that he shall not be the man these rea^...ons be probable first it much grieve he yea he account it a violence offer he to interrupt the course of his peaceable preface to his manifestation priestly labour by enter into a war of writing therefore for he like a other G^...liah as he be to enter this combat not provoke there unto and upon such disadvantage can sort with his retire profession second that he a man of no inferior talon so he lish of himself a author of no mean labour shall like a other Ahimaas needs thrust himself to carry a manifestation pag. 51. 2. sam. 18. 12. message have neither leave nor errand that be shall write so shallow a pamphlet whereout rid those offal of sophistry rail and some addle discourse of the remnant you may true say as Ahimaaz of his own message vidi nesc^... al^...ud be scarce conjectural vers. 29. three if parson be ever famous for any good thing he win himself credit by the book of resolution though not invent as the priest say but borrow piecemeal from other translate only and methodize by he which Quodlib pa. 71. 237. when a man read he will take the compiler or translator to be that very crucifix of mortification describe by saint gal. 6. 14. Paul the world crusify unto he and he unto the world now that he shall fall into such passionate profane and barbarously-distempered pag. 27. etc. revile of a christian princess the mirror of the world while she live some year dead and lay up in rest with her father as if the very mention of her sacred name be a eleborous purge to make he disgorge the gall of his bitterness and the venomous rancour of his canker heart by his rabshakeis pen no man that profess the name of Christ can believe it to be the labour of one that be ingralt into Christ for they that be Christ have gal 5. 24. crucify the flesh with the passion and lust save that one of his own priestly coat assure we that for all this resolve or resolve divinity he have not as yet full cast off the just. defene pag. 297. outward man 8 and yet that he shall be the author beside the gerall report and certain intelligence first his strain at the elder t. m. as he call he be evid^...nce sufficient who discovery of romish doctrine and practice for heinous rebellion as also his full satisfaction for heathenish equivocation tho. Morton Deane of Gloucester which parson under the dumb character of p. r. undertake to patronize by a mitigation like pope adrians fly will not leave trouble the jesuite throat till he have force out his gall heart and all second the so cunning conceal his knowledge of the apology true author wherein he show himself to be right Doleman not as himself derive the name of dolour as a man of page 51. grief replete wi^...h sorrow blasphemous apply the title of our saviour Christ unto himself and quote the place of scripture in the margin for it but of es. 53. be as his own priest term he the abstract quintessence of all coin coggery and forgery that lie dissemble and equivocate at every word Quodlib page 236. 9 for be it probable that parson who make himself another take upon he to know what be do 2. reg. 6. 12. and speak in the king privy chamber as it seem by that he writ page 37. concern t. m. the young that he the great intelligencer among state who weekly spend five or six crown for postage of letter only as the priest of his own rank report shall be ignorant that our sovereign king himself be author of the apology just. defence page 236. it be not only in every man mouth style by the name of the king book but the warrant in the frontispiece which this confuter observe ^...owing though not proclaim it to the world that it be his majesty do for you shall not find to my remembrance a book of a english man extant in those word warrant but the king himself have a hand in it which the jesuite know well enough as under those cipher of t. m. he imply for by they if he will speak without equivocation he mean TVA or but be guilty to himself that he can write with modesty he feign a adversary to himself through who side he may lash his sacred majesty with le^...e envy and more liberty as Ajax the whipper in the tragedy wreak his teen upon a ram for Ulysses he mad this jesuite Ajax purposely 10 this quarrel of the oath which receive life by his majesty royal assent and who safety it principal concern to be secure by all mean of his subject loyalty among who a great many by those breve and letter as the israelite by the detract message of the esp^...ls stagger and mut^...ered it behove his majesty to ^...pouse num. 13. and undertake but to front the apology with his own name be a king of so royal descent and blood have be a display disparagement of so great a majesty the adverse party with who he be to cope be no other but burghesie and Bellarmine man of no eminent birth except as sixtus another manner of pope than the first of these that be or the second that will be Ci^...rella in Sixto they will plead themselves and as he to come out of a illustrious and resplendent family because the cottage wherein he be bear be so poor and ragged that the house be glorious bright by the sun and moon shine through the wall and roof thereof day and night 11. nor yet conceal he his name as ashamed of the work for it be his most kingly resolution not to harbour the secret thought they be his own word but such as in Presace of his (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) ^...o the reader the own time he will confident and open avouch examine ever so the secret of his drift before he give they course as how they may some day abide the touch stone of a public trial much less for fear of any default by gainesaiers to be detect therein especial if no other or great than this scribble Lynceus have alight upon 12. for to omit till their due place whereunto he refer we page 3. the challenge of the king judgement in matter of alter the state in question of Bellarmine contradiction and his abase royal dignity that one main blarre of incivility wherewith he do here besme^...re his majesty as appeach the king honour Numb. 6. for a great contempt offer by his majesty in call the cardinal master Bellarmine must first be wipe out wherein humble crave pardon of his majesty for do he this wrong compare we the person the uncivil stile-giver a king a name and dignity found by God himself and fasten by he upon Abraham seed as pro. 8. 25. the chief part of his blessing and which be more the gen. 17. 6. king of great Britain one of the most absolute monarch of Christendom the great party so style a cardinal search the scripture there appear no shadow of such a office unless as souter their leather Polydor. in vent lib 4. ca. 9 with their tooth it be the comparison of one of their own in this very case so they will stretch the scripture namely 1. sam. (@) that place to serve this their purpose peruse all the father I speak not of Gregory and Bernard say if you find it once name as now ca^...ed Interpre vocl^... Ecclesiast. unless with Onuphrius you will fetch it from cyprian because he write of the cardinal work of Christ and yet that be not cyprian book reckon all the ecclesiastical degree great lesser high low which the ancient counsel record in that row you find they not a dignity denominate either of the carpenter mortise out of Vitrunius as be incardinate it be Gregory word that be mortise or rivet to a church as a hinge to a door or of the four wind out of Servius upon Virgil as bear the principal sway where he have the title 13 now for the king so great a king to call such a Upstart officer that know not where to rake for the begin of his sublimity as Polydore confess to call he I say master be as unmannerly a oversight say this cardinal WOULD-BEE the priest say he go to Rome for it and have Scarlet bring he and no Quodlib pa. 121. less dissonant then if a man shall call the chief officer of estate by that name as master chancellor master treasurer master duke master earl etc. 14 such a dignity it may be that master prefix before it may prove a diminish term but if put to the surname of any man i^... be a addition of worship do his majesty call he master cardinal then have those instance some semblance of fit application no but he call he master Bellarmine and be the still he master Bellarmine such a in which of the word rest it in Bellarmine this censurer within the compass of pa. 3 5. one leaf do thrice Bellarmine he bare without all preface either of honour or worship belike familiaruie may do more than sovereignty and a jesuite with his superior jesuite may be more bold than a King 15 be it in master better man both for honour and virtue than the cardinal ever will be have not refuse that title in any age or language take the Hebrew rabbi it be give our saviour Christ by those that wish he neither contempt nor disgrace as by Nicodemus a ruler of the jew and therefore know what belong to manner who be no bad friend to our bless saviour as appear John 7. and he so salute he as also by the holy convert Mary Magdalen who call he Rabboni that be to joh. 7. 51. say say the evangelist master brief by all his disciple which our saviour acknowledge and approve joh. 20. 16. you call i lord and master you say well for so I be take the greek whether (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) how can this great joh. 13. 13. man be fit better than with the first be he among the cardinal as Saul among the israelite more eminent than the rest or with the second be he the principal of the conclave or with the three as he be the great reader of controversy for these all import nothing but master and in Hieronym in latin when S. cyprian will grace Tertullian most he will call for he in that title and Peter Lombard have the name master give unto he above all their school doctor as a Autonomastical eminence of note and style 15 and therefore see neither god himself nor God lieutenant on earth whether emperor or king from who all true title of honour be derive have give this name or dignity but a pope only invent it without sound warrant what reason have his majesty to take such respectful knowledge thereof of which even a bishop do make so mean account that he refuse then to be create a cardinal because he say he will not descend from a high to a low place for the true first institution of cardinal be but to be vicar of the particular parish-church of Rome under the bishop thereof howsoever now by the iniquity of time the pride of pope and the sloth of christian prince they be start up from parish-priest to be prince peer take it in scorn to be call master even by prince and yet if his majesty have either continual through the book or at least at his first name of he call he master it have be some thing but since he be so far from be ceremonious in give of title unto he as sometime he call he Bellarmine sometime cardinal sometime cardinal Bellarmine and seldom master Bellarmine of any of they hereby may the groundless and malicious quarrel of this shallow wrangler most clear appear 16 but why be it not as lawful for so mighty a king to call the cardinal master Bellarmine as for every popish scribbler even this fugitive Tenebrio parsons himself have occasion to name our archbishop and bishop dignity mere apostolical and therefore more honourable never to style they otherwise but master Cranmer and master Whitguift master Ridley and master jewel yea we must be behold unto they if they be please to afford they a title so mannerly and civil but enough of this the truth and conclusion whereof be if this master forsooth of ceremony have the grace to leave equivocate his secret intendment and drift be what Prep^...^...b f^...de (@) o^...n ^...n etc. Cass^...d some canonist have open avow that cardinal be king compeer and equal and therefore that the king shall have speak of the cardinal as of a King mean while be it not a saucy part of Robin Cowbucke for that be his right name by the wrong man that know his mother Quodlib pa. 109. as the priest say to twit a king with incivility and Su^... to teach his majesty ceremony of civil respect 17 we now come to his censure such as it be of the apology substance the reduce whereof into a orderly analysis for answer of which he make no conscience at all in his pamphlet will trouble a man more than the answer itself the preamble to the breve concern the nature of the oath the content thereof with the pope proceed therein the examination of Bellarmine letter to the arch priest be the division he make of the apology num. 8. or rather be make to his hand for he show not so much logic in his whole censure Paragraph 1. Numb. 9 10. 11. 18 the preamble be a coloquintida unto he not so much in respect of the epithet give to the powder-treason of monstrous rare nay never hear of treacherous famous and infamous attempt it deserve they say he but first that it shall be singular from all example there have be the like do by protestant though not in yet in as at Autwrep the hage and in Scotland second that it shall be crambe his so often repeat the party be execute three that the king promise and proclamation be that other catholic garnet resolve it to be lawful when the parliament house shall have be blow up shall not fare the worse for it yet * the innocent for the nocent be punish at least oppress as by libel inuective and by search of house with other outward affliction so above all which this new devise oath for their inward pressure of soul and conscience this be in and make he dilate his style into doleful rhetorical expostulation 19 the epithet please they well now which aggravate the detestation of the fact but have there not be as Decad. 1. lib. 1. Livy speak in a case of treachery error their applause have be great in the attestation thereof such action be not commend but when they be finish so hall alias old cor^... the jesuit say of this plot when it be discor the murder of a king alone please a pope so well that he make a solemn panegyric in praise of the murderer and we make no doubt but if the parliament house have burn that the jesuite who be the principal privy counsellor in that bu^...nes will with Nero have be Suetoni in pleasant spect^...ors thereof as at a feu-de-ioy and have sing to their instrument the destruction of Troy in that combusture of the senate and grace it with no less epithet than sixtus the pope do the murder of Henry the three to be 20 but be the attempt so odious and loathsome as this tender-stomack censurer make it wherefore be the of that complot garnet I mean turn to a miracle and his face make to aequivoate after his death one rot upon the bridge for his horrible treason the other shine in a straw for his ghostly purity and why in Spain be his picture draw with two rope about his neck and his bowel like a other judas trill down his body with the inscription of a martyr for the catholic cause yea by this censurer his fellow-traytor himself so entitle and maintain in his epistle to sir ed. Cook Sect. 51. but that their meaning be to enamel with a glorious pretence of sacramental confession the counsel support and conceal a HIDEOUS treason 21 which howsoever this censurer strain at it be both in singularfrom all example and not to be parallel with any one out of ancient or modern historian or poet either in fact or fiction as if of purpose their meaning be to do a act which shall put the holy ghost to school and censure his maxim pen by Solomon that for weigh all circumstance of conspiracy party Eccles. 19 object instrument cruelty pretence in this prodigious attempt it deserve to be grace with that motto of singularity from all other unless they will account all murder in hostile arm or private feud do verse 10. by gunpowder to be match aquivalent 22 and it seem this censurer do else will he not mention those of Antwerp hage and Scotland the first in open hostility what time all action for discomfiture be lawful either by sleight or force the other a plot of one single man and in revenge upon the state for give he discontent and by the report of some writer he be Meteranus lib. 11. distraught and mad but by his note of the last he discover the rancour of his heart against our sovereign for though the execution of parricide and murder upon prince have eftsoons alight upon some of the great and best of that royal sort that ever be and therefore no dishonour to they nor their posterity yet to cast up such a disastrous example in his majesty tooth prove well that he be sorry that his majesty escape the like peril who he so earnest wish to have be his father successor in such a fortune as have by hope devour the same he come on his journey a good step as some report towards England that he may have sing a in his native country for the good success of that happy exploit and yet that all man may see how malice blind judgement in this his resemblance the truth be that his majesty rather be not blow up with gunpowder but after that the murderer have strangle he in his bed sleep he be carry out to the garden and then be the house blow up to make the world believe that it be but a casual accident of fire and so what semblance of comparison be there between the powder-treason and it 23 which howsoever it can by a proper title be express to the full yet it be in the nature of those designment Decad. 1 lib. 2. which be rather memorable for the singularity then credible for the horror let the repetition thereof grieve this epistler never so much and it be the second block he stumble at and transpose he the project with a lap wings-cry upon certain unfortunate gentleman thereby to remove the crime from the jesuite the principal instigator of the pion traitor to the act and the kind receptor of the fugitive after the detection for who entertain Gerrard but parsons we say with the apostle that we can but reco^...d the thing which we have hear and see neither will we be act. 4. 20. silent thereof so long as we have either pen to write or tongue to speak or a generation live or a posterity succeed but we will report it and repeat it both unto God with the psalmist memorandum remember o lord the child of edom that be the bloody scarlet generation how in the day of Jerusalem they say edom be red or bloody gen. 25 30. Psal. 137. 7. Ezech. 24 2. down with it down with it even to the ground and to man also with god own memorandum for the day assign son of man write thou the name of the day even of this same day for the king of Babel the pope forsooth be a temporal prince do set himself against Jerusalem even this very page 4. day 24 execution of such offender must not be the silence of their offence death be the last punishment for sense and passion not for sin of that nature and condition their body deserve not enter in grave much less their vice burial in oblivion the relic of their dismemberd carcase be erect for a prey to the fowl of the air to feed on the villainy of their design cruelty to be reiterate upon all occasion for the nation of the earth and all posterity to wonder at and therefore have patience gentle jesuite for our so oft repeat it we first say with Chrysostome (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) if the repetition be so odious and burden^...ome as in your margin you note it how odious be the fact itself so complot and engine second we say with saint Paul to inculcate these same thing often to we it be not grievous and for you it be sure philip. 3. 1. profitable if not to work your conversion by repentance yet to make man at least enamour with your profession that warrant such act good in religion 25 and therefore you do well to call those detestable traitor after the discovery and conviction catholic gentleman as if you will insinuate that they die in a catholic cause and in a other place infortunate gentleman not for their fortune and state in the world they be too great unless they have more grace but for their unlucky success in miss their have it be effect Moses and Phinees shall have be report inferior to those gentleman in zeal for God cause else why do hall the forename jesuite a ringleader of this desperate crew comfort himself and Littleton with the defeature and discovery of those horrible traitor by the example of the eleven tribe of Israel twice discomfit though send by God especial commandment mark that then of Lewis the french king overthrow in sight against infidel in a case of religion and last of the christian vanquish by the turk in the defence of Rhodes but that hereby he will conclude they be unfortunate gentleman that their cause for undertake be good but their luck be ill in miss otherwise it be too gentle a title for such odious creature 26 and so this censurer also a parttaker no doubt in the complot cheer up himself not only persuade but definitive determine that both affliction outward and pressure of conscience inward cause this powder treason which be a shameless untruth yea even themselves be judge for that the conspiracy be plot before any hard measure think of by their own confession be manifest for the land invasion a treason no less desperate though more manly and visible than the powder-plot in the late queen time of famous memory motion be immediate and hot pursue by those very party and advertisement give to foreign state who aid they request that our king be like to proceed rigorous this fellow say that the rigour be put in execution with the catholic and to run the same course which the late queen do 27 second these conspirator be combine in the first year of the king when so far be the thought of any severity that as it be open prove for the space of a preceeding against the late traitor whole year and four month no penalty by statute be take of recusant insomuch that doctor bishop who write his book in 1604. even the year before the detect of the powder-treason acknowledge the king most mild carriage in government thitherto epist. to the King pa. 10. and yet it be worth the inquiry what the same doctor shall mean by those desperate word in the very same epistle when he say that the state be now settle and a continual posterity like to ensue in one nature God know what that forcible weapon of necessity may drive man to at the length it seem then some such thing be plot even in that pag. 12 confess time of mildness 28 three their own reason of their ingine against the parliament house because say they unjust law have there former not in the king time any be make against the catholic confute this bold assertion which be it true that severity in execute some law go before this plot do not the priest treason even at the king first entrance just enforce it belike it grieve they that his majesty as the prophet speak will not yield his body to the smiter es. 50. 6. and his cheek to the nipper and still like a lamb before the butcher not once open his mouth or rather it vex they as it do fimbria in Tully that his majesty have not take into his body the whole weapon like ehuds judge 3. 22. dagger bl^...de hilt and a^...l but suffer his land to be betray his person hazard his subject alienate his succession extinguish his state brandle and in the mean time like the con^...ul of act 18 17. he must sit still look on and say nothing or as Caesar wound and environ with stab knife only cry out sueton. julius ca^... 8^... make no resistance but speak with pity and die by treason 29 but what be these a^...greevances and pressure of rigour that either precede or ensue that desperate plot first infamous libel forsooth and who have scatter more than parson who be note by the priest themselves to be the pope pen-post and the Pasquil in print of all shameless slander that set out no one book which be the fashion of all jesuit they say but stuff with rebellion conspiracy and treason Quodl b. li 3. a. (@) 6. 30 m^...rry principal t. m. the elder his discovery will it not out man Excrea I tell you it be a burr in his throat like the ravenous fellow in athenaeus he have chop in a Dipnos lib. 3. creature and will neither let it go for curst-heart nor can take it down the crust be so harsh all that he can do be to cry out as that fellow do o scelera^...um Edul^...um a shameless libel but will neither be silent of it and can answer it 31 second search of house attachment vexation etc. this verify that speech of Solomon Mul^...er scort^...ns p^...o 30. 21. look back and see in one small compass of five year when Rome sway England for religion 300. innocent christian for profession of the gospel cruel burn to ash not only their house search and good spoil and that be no aggreevance but justice against heretic in fifty year of two protestant prince scarce 60 p^...sons execute all guilty of treasonable practice either for complot treason or harbour disloyal seducer who as his majesty have excellent observe Apolog. pa. 3. do make diversity of religion a safe pretext for all kind of Disloyalty and rebellion which the secular priest acknowledge and a^...ow especial in the jesuited sort who say they under colour of religion and zealous desire of our country conversion labour to stir up all man against our lib. pa. 149. sovereign and the present state now for we to and knetch these Ve^...min to search and attach such dangerous viper be a rigour and cruelty of persecution 32 and be it so how be it that father parsons be thus metamorphize to become vulture thus doleful to bewail the aggreevance of their catholic which compare to they in queen Elizabeth time be by their own confession but easy censurer yet when they be at the hot and sore parson himself think it stand not with policy or wisdom neither do he wish that the say persecution shall cease in England in lib. pa. 21. afflict they 33 but the three which of all other be the Phallaris bull this new oath be the most grievous be the aggreevance in the abstract because there be a oath command the high judge allow it both by his own example swear by himself to Abraham and by precept gen. 26. 3. to we thou shall fear the lord and swear by his Deut. 6. 13. name the unsearchable fraudulency of man heart which jeremy lament exact it for honey be in the tongue jerem. 17. 9 and treachery in the heart as the same prophet elsewhere complain the best way to make word and thought cap. 9 8. appear semblable be by oath which the holy ghost do therefore call because it do or shall at least both link heart and tongue together in the same promise and also bind the party to perform without Numb. 39 3. start what he have so promise 34 indeed to be tie in bond be a aggreevance to man nature which desire liberty but of all other unto jesuited catholic it can be none who with their paganish equivocation vocal swear but mental distinguish can with sampsons s^...ight break new cord as a thread jud. 16. 9 of tow be break when it feel ^...e though they be sevenfold so be a oath and so to be repute by the hebrew therefore shebuaah 1. shebaah original derive from that number seven as be a bond multiply and indefezable 35 perhaps then the aggreevance be in the epithet because it be a new oath so do a pagan call the christian sueton. N^...ro cap. 6. but how be it new never hear before singular from all example be it so quoth saint Hierome such a Vl^...er such a emplaster above Lora evil manner procure good law Hierom. C^...rom pl^...tar vit. and extraordinary treason must have extraordinary prevention for though the child of this world be wise by our saviour judgement in their generation than the child of light yet give we leave sithence with saint luc. 16. 2. cor. 2. 11. Paul we be not ignorant of Satan engine to be as waty in prevent as they be wily to invent mischief 36 ^...s the matter of the oath new that subject shall bind their allegiance to their sovereign for his security by oath have be both usual in all nation Christian and heathen and as ancient a custom in our land to the prince thereof as that exact by the pope of his vassal commend by Bellarmine Pontif. rom. lib. 7. cap 11. for antiquity because continue from the time of Gregory the great and be ground upon scripture both in the example of holy king and the apostle definition of a oath namely that it be (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) the end of all Heb. 6. 16. controversy wherein take this very case the or controversy whereof be whether any romish catholic can be be any true allegiance in his heart unto the king majesty this jesuite in many place of his book hold the affirmative we by effect of so many treasonable plot of priest and jesuite do hold the contrary yea the priest of the same religion be mere contradictory to he while they say that the execution of priest hood and treason be now so link together by the jesuite in England Quodlib pag. 304. as they can exhort any to the catholic faith but in so do they draw he in effect to rebellion for the take up of the antilogy and the better secure himself of his own safety and his subject loyalty what other remedy can his majesty think of then this of the apostle by oath both assertory for the present and promissory for the future assurance which be no other but what his royal ancestor in this island have do before he many our chronicle and Polyd. virgil. and often 37 the novelty then belike be in the form of the oath not as it be receive by they that be justinian in Authent no modern invention justinian long since prescribe it but as it be conceive by the state to be do in the true faith of a christian without equivocation this be in sooth that (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) that pressure of conscience under which he groan as appear by he where he complain pag. 19 and 32. that the oath exclude they from all equivocate the trial of which complaint we refer to that place or rather though it grieve he to the elder t. m. that be in that point fa. parsons in the mean time observe the integrity and divinity of this censurer who make that a new pressure of soul which saint Augustine ground himself upon that speech of the psalmist Psal. 15. 4. concluce to be of old the full and faithful discharge of conscience namely that a man a^...g ^...l. 224. shall swear according to the mind of he that minister not of he that take the oath especial when he know the judge mind by the word of the oath 38 and now we follow he to examine the weight of this pressure which he aggravate by a ironical against his majesty under the cipher of t. m. for use the word only a exception mitigate as if the take of this oath be so light to be esteem as to be thrust upon they with a only the king intend no hard usage to the catholic only a form of oath be frame to be take etc. as if that be so easy a thing which be a extremity of rigour for if it be take it hazard the soul by swear against their conscience if not take it endanger their worldly estate by loss of good life and liberty num. 12. 39 to be be a right aequivocators trick who know not that the word only do not so much signify a hypocoristicall alleviation as a compendiary limitation he that say to our saviour only math. 8. 8 speak the word do not thereby extenuate the power of Christ as if heal in absence by a speech have be a more easy miracle then by approach to touch the party but thereby wish a course more easeful to the body not less powerful to show the deity of our saviour and so his majesty by the word only signify that omit all other course of Enquiry into his subject allegiance he take that only course to frame a oath not hereby imply the take of a oath to be a easy charge because oath press upon the soul but more for evidence and the ready way for the assurance of his own state and the manifestation of his subject affection but grant that only be a alleviate particle yet it be so by comparison and so be a oath a trial of more ease both to body and mind then be those other mean by rack and torture usual in the inquisition for as the pain be unsufferable to flesh and blood so have they a very perculsive force even upon the soul Nam and innocent dolour say the stoic because in so many straits of terror Seneca pain hope fear as the orator well observe let Aelian speak of the egyptian courage or insensibleness what he will man will say Ci^...^...ro Sylla A^...in var. hist lib. 7. any thing though most unture for ease and release from such pang 40 and this oath say this censurer do as much for it drive man into David dilemma of straits to fall either into the hand of God or man of God if the oath be take because they swear against their conscience of man in that their good life and liberty be liable to law and good reason for the last because every statute have the penalty annex none can be more fit and proper for the breach of this than confiscation and death for he be unworthy to enjoy either wealth ease or life under a christian king who be require deny to swear his allegiance and obedience to his sovereign against all person which every true affect subject shall voluntary offer for the first their swear against conscience the answer must be refer where he enlarge that point for he run the wilde-goose-chase backward and forward within two leaf he confess as if he lose himself two return in the mean time he must know that a conscience may be mislead by error or stiffen by pertinacy and then the greek divine will tell he that unsoundness in the judgement and obstinacy Pa 30. sect. 33. in the will make but (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) a conscience so chrys. oecumenius nickname which be more proper to be call ignorance and perverseness and rather to be censure then tender 41 but all this his majesty have by a double anticipation prevent first that neither the oath nor penalty Apolog. pa. 4. thereof be intend against any for their opinion and conscience but only for acknowledgement and assurance of their civil obededience second that many of both sort popish affect have free take it and thereby have free both themselves from suspicion of disloyalty and the oath from the slander of pressure and both these the censurer observe and answer num. 13. the first by a concession if it be so the matter be end say he for no catholic will deny to swear all civil obedience that he owe to his majesty 42. wherein I pray you mark how sorex how treason hatch in the heart can conceal itself from utter though in hide term for observe those word all obedience that he owe to his majesty what be that and how far extend it saint Peter stretch it without limitation submit yourselves to all manner ordinance for the lord sake Peter successor so call he limit it with 1. pet. 5. 13. as in the council of Trent the successor parasite this traitorous claw-back minse it with a whereupon Numb. 30. as Tertullian say in a other case so if the king please not the pope Apologet. he shall be denounce a heretic and so cataloguize on Holy-Thursday he shall be pronounce no Christian as matth. page 97. the writhen-vexed cardinal so he entitle himself and indeed write as though he be wring with the colic have already pass his sentence and so consequent no king or if a king yet without subject for they must renounce their obedience and the king his safety and authority 43 the second he answer by a interrogation such as the rhetorician call (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) a question reprehensive at least expostulatory why blackwell and Charnocke have Hermogen take the oath be still imprison 44 this Polypragmon will fain be a privy councillor he have wrong that his majesty acquaint he not with all occurrence of state and reason of his proceed to resolve his question either by conjecture or truth I endeavour not not his intelligencer to answer a scorn be folly only as the parent say of their son bear blind miraculous cure so say I for master and if he may free speak he John 9 will say with David let the righteous smite i that be a benefit but let not their precious Psal. 141. 5. blame moisten my head nor let i eat of their delicate or as the vulgar have it keep i from the company of they that make themselves the choice company for jesuite be unmerciful ask the priest else who have protest they will rather Quodlib 1. art. 2. live under the turk for security of their soul then come under the jesuite hand blackwell as the proverb be in Aristoph gr^...matic by the example of tempest and Benson he divine and foresee his usage and therefore its like have rather choose restraint by authority than dismission with liberty for be he once lose order shall be take with he for take any more oath yea it be think for speak any more word great man than he have be so serve if their own catholic do true instance in the bishop of Cassana cardinal Allen and yea Quodlib pag. 84. pope sixtus Quintus himself all fig away in a trice for cross at least not serve the jesuite humour in their designment 45 after this as if he have all this while speak by rote he return as he say to the book where his majesty avow that the devil can not have devise a more malicious Apolog. pag. 4. trick to interrupt this so calm and clement a course than the pope do by countermand the take of this oath in his publish which this fellow answer first by deduce the cause that bring forth the namely a doubt make about the oath second the doubt consult Procop. 3. Vandal and canvas abroad and at home and here as the proverb be the garnetist differ from the blackwellist some allow equivocation in ^...ters of faith other not and among these principal which allow no equivocation in matter of faith say he be the jesuite though they be account the forward abet^...ers of equivocation 46 for the truth of this though it grieve he we refer he again to the elder t. m. that be the true of their equivocation even in matter of faith and religion 47. three in this pother of different opinion recourse be have to the great oracle for his determination his sentence be negative draw into a publish and send for indify whereof this libeler spend four whole Numb. 15. 16. 17. 18. to show how that cou^...se be over use by English catholic as so warrant by catholic doctrine in matter of doubt to consult with the pope 48 and here as Plutarch say of Lucullus (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) plut. in Lucul etc. he roll in his element scarce any epistle preface pamphlet book or petition wherein he have a hand but this be his cypress tree a theme in which he be very perfect and rhetorical to tell we what a loadstone Rome have be to England for draw thither the trial of our gold in both sense as well that of the mind to which S. Paul resemble the doctrine of faith when no other 1. cor. 3. can be currant but what Rome have coin and stamp as that also of the mint equal yearly to a king revenue if Bonner say true without which neither will Rome afford instruction neither can our preface before Gardiner land be quiet for fear of interdiction in which argument he and ALLEN before he from who apology this Centonist have borrow all that he have speak concern the oath and fly to Rome have receive full satisfactory answer namely that if they understand the pure time of Rome when the bishop there behave themselves as religious member not as presumptuous head of the church and live as ghostly father to counsel and comfort not as superior to control and depose prince the realm be then rude learn scant religion new spring and no where settle recourse be thither have upon devotion and mere necessity and yet not then without leave of the prince if after when pope leave their key and take they to their two-hand sword the run then to Rome be not for devotion but by constraint either wrought by the pope tyranny 1. reg. 12. and cunning as Hieroboam who make all Israel to sin by draw they to his calf in Dan threaten interdiction exact levy intrude corrupt teacher and suppress even by death the detector of his error or else yield unto by timorous prince ambitious and tumultuous prelate enuassal parasite or the overawe superstition and blind ignorance of the people which make one of their own historian to call England matth. Paris the pope ass and yet even then many restraint be make under severe penalty which this rhetorculist himself confess though he minse it numb 17. all these reason he do well not to acknowledge lest he shall want matter for his next work for he be one of those busy deceitful worker of who the apostle speak and therefore be nothing to the purpose in hand 2. cor. 11. himself confess it to be a digression Numb. 19 the fit answer be in brief 49 first that of the apostle be there not a wise man among you of all the priest secular and jesuited in England 1. 6 5. that can determine a controversy about the oath of allegiance may not your archpriest blackwell so authorize by the pope so commend and countenance by two cardinal Caietan and Burghesius so entrust with regency of soul over the whole land to who all be enjoin to repair for decision and question may not I say his judgement carry as much sway for the king sovereignty against some few jesuited as his censure alone against all the seculars yea against the definitive of the whole faculty of divine in pag. 1 10. Paris for the support of his own authority 50. in the case and doubt about the late horrible treason garnet and hall be think sufficient oracle to resolve and determine for it against the king without recourse to the pope for aught he will be know in case concern loyalty and allegiance to his majesty blackwell and many his associate can resolve for the king but the pope must be first consult be it because there be no god in Israel to inquire of his word say Elias of 2. reg. 1. 16. Ahaziah that you must send messenger to Baalzebub the god of Ekron have not God answer by nor by prophet 1. sam. 28 6. be not his will concern allegiance to king in so many place sufficient reveal in his word but recourse must be have to a soothsayer in endor I will not urge that bitter speech of the secular priest it be to sharp yet the time be not long since they say that for the decision of doubt the catholic must depend upon the archpriest the Quodlib pa. 151. archpriest upon garnet garnet upon parson and parson upon the devil yet then there be a pope able to judge but only it will be know which be the second answer fit this point 51 what there be in this pope for judgement in divinity that his determination shall be expect about the oath of allegiance to his majesty more than in his predecessor Clemens who opinion be not inquire of about the oath for conspiracy against the whole realm of who absolve the late queen subject from their obedience it be say by some of his own that he be religious and learned but to easy of belief of this Paulus who have interdict the subject of our sovereign king to swear their obedience either for his divinity or piety we have hear nothing s. Peter who successor he be style s. Paul who name he have borrow have their divinity indeed by infusion but their writing reveal it to the world so that Peter we know and Paul we know to be singular divine but who be this no man who seek to be famous do any thing in secret say the brother of our saviour joh. 7. 4. where then be his labour his sermon his treatise his commentary his epistle theological his doctrinal determination his judicial decision all which be the usual attractive to draw a opinion upon a man that he be a sound resoluer but in all these as the greek poet speak plut. lucull (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) as if he be Pythagoras his scholar he be whole silent 52 into his quality I will not enter he stand and fall to his own master but if he be that cardinal Burghesius who some of the secular priest have sometime describe m. Bluet etc. and have assure we that to be true in he which plut. in tiber. be speak of Tiberius Gracchus that he be (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) a rash speaker and a heady undertaker of a most violent spirit and impatient of contradiction in whatsoever he have but once imagine if this I say be true which God forbid in so great a churchman now sure he be not the fit judge to be resort unto in case of conscience especial of such nature and consequence as this in temp. henr. 7. hand wherein as a learned poet once merry say there stand latro at the bar and fur sit on the bench himself become both party and judge when pope allege pope for proof of their supremacy the canonist say it be certain this must needs be a more familiar proof when reference be make to the pope in his own cause 53 for the knot of the quarrel between these differ catholic if there be any concern the oath and that which vex they most be the point of the pope authority in depose prince and absolve from the oath for so far as touch civil obedience that stick not with they they say here be the pope become a party who now must unloose this knot and determine the quarrel none but the pope if I shall bear witness joh. 5. 32. of myself say our saviour Christ my witness be not true yea but say this jesuite the pope be pag. 10. no. 15. the supreme pastor to he by the principle of their religion catholic believe that our saviour give assistance for the direction of man soul Heres the pope make a judge certes have he determine negative against himself he have be to blame at least his authority for ever after may have be encounter with serve luk. 19 22. will not the israelite themselves though it be their misery that they may have neither weapon for 1. sam. 13. 19 war nor tool for work but they must fetch they from the ph^...listines have just laugh at they if the Philistine will have either hammer the one or steel the other or furnish they with either and if the pope in who alone determination the catholic must rest will give any argument of resolution against his own challenge if it have not be ridiculous sure it have be miraculous the apologue be know if the lion may be judge in the division of the prey his fellow-hunter shall aesop. have but a small share and king shall be sure as Tully say to Caesar have both strait limit and unquiet ma^...o sat. 2. seat if the pope may determine their bound and state 54 but let fa. parsons say in sooth if there can be any sooth in a man of such singular honesty as the priest describe he entitle he a impostume of all corruption lib. p. 237 be there any such reference make out of England unto the pope for his resolution be it by petition write or by message of mouth deliver let he show the state of the question as it be frame put down the argument of the difference to and fro as they be object and make the reason of the pope negative decision this be plain deal in he and have be fair deal in the pope if before he have send his breve of interdiction he have acquaint his majestic with the encounter of doubt that have breed the quarrel and the oversway reason which carry he to the negative this be omit his majesty give his decision the right name when he call it a malicious truck of the devil 55 for there be both malice in the sentence because do of purpose and not out of passion but after due deliberation Numb. 15. say this epistler and that be malice in any sin as the schoolman define it second in the intent there Aquinas 12ae q. 47. and 78. be extreme malice thereby to foster in his majesty heart jealousy of his subject and in they disloyalty to their sovereign and all this which be truth indeed upon the only information advice and instigation of a know incendiary parson who ever since he run out of his country like traitorous Absalon care not to set his own friend land yea to see his native soil on a light 2. Sam 14. 30. fire so he may purchase the pope favour as the other do joabs corn to approach his father presence three malice in the whole action busy interpose himself in other state which concern he nothing for that be note as a great part of the devil malice that he be and take upon he to be the general job 1 surveyor and compasser of the whole earth for what have the bishop of Rome to do with the king and subject of England in matter of religion much less of state especial see he meddle not for good but for evil cven as that other universal rector in the air not instruct but interdict 1. pet. 5. 8. 56 we say with the father in the council of Carthage when they take the bishop of Rome his advocate cardie and falsary in his challenge for the cognisance of all ecclesiastical difference to belong to he Concil. Cartha. 6. nay say this censurer the pope only have numb 20 suppose as we do in matter catholic concern person catholic that England be the pope harvest and the catholic therein his flock the division of the island by sea not make any separation from he their general head for dependence 57 this be a strong argument no doubt the pope have to do in England because some catholic suppose he have but before that supposal be bring into a positive and resolute conclusion it will ask a long time than such a pamphlet as his letter be will require and more deep divinity than parsons have if it be true which the priest report of he that he be neither acute schoolman nor profound divine but a mean preacher and a barren ghostly counsellor Quodiib page 237. 58 for whether saint Peter be make or either to derive the universality from he to the pope or reduce it from the pope to he many a knottre question be to be decide as first whether the government of the church shall be monarchical whether that monarch shall be saint Peter as superior to the rest of the apostle whether the charge of the key be give to he alone howfarre the jurisdiction of the key will reach whether feed my sheep and lamb be a universal charge and to Peter alone if all this true how come it to the bishop of Rome rather than a other whether Peter appoint he his successor whether he have it or whether that same one pastor and one flock be not proper to Christ alone why not a universal emperor as well as a universal pope with many other such which will trouble a better clerk than this jesuite even to discuss for hot brain as they undertake matter busy so they perform nothing sound or indicious 59 if other state and nation brook the pope for their judge and yet in most of they which he name they do but it be either their voluntary submission not his just claim or else his violent usurpation force on they by terror not their spiritual subjection warrant by divinity and therefore it argue some ingenuity in the man that he make it but a supposal for if all the rest of the apostle be not order bishop by saint Peter say Bellarmine then (@) rom (@) l. ca 23. can the church of Rome be the mother of all other church much less the bishop of Rome be the universal bishop and whether it be so or no the best writing jesuite Salmer in gal. 1. victor rel. 2. con 3. Suarez in tho. tom. 4. disp. 16 greg. anal. fid. li. 7. cip 2. do indeed make it but a supposal the most favourable of they that it be but likely a other that it be uncertain but other that it be scarce probable yea that it be a opinion neither general receive norgreat necessary 60 a four trick of malice mix with craft two property of the envious man that sow tare in sleep time be the pope riddle rather than answer in not particularize mat. 13. 25. the specialty to be except in the oath his craft lest strain at that point which touch his authoritic in depose and absolve he shall reveal his partiality for so as Demetrius the ephesian his clamorous act. 19 24. plea for his Diana in respect of his private gain and credit of the city or rather of the see will have be too manifest his malice close insinuate the whole oath to be utter unlawful even that very point of swear civil obedience for so he say such a oath can be take this mince distinguisher put in as it lay without annoyance of the catholic faith all this the censurer repeat but refell not num. 19 61 and this be his majesty just agreevance that how soever in matter of religion the pope will meddle yet in thing that mere and only concern civil obedience that he shall interpose himself can not but argue he to be a busy Polypragmon where he have nothing to do which this jesuite confess to be a just mislike if it prove true 62 now then this must be clear whether the oath do only concern civil obedience yea or no that it do not he take upon he to satisfy in eight number from the 20. to the 28. and that four several way as he say first out of the word of the oath wherein 1 the pope authority be limit indeed this be it which startle they second out of the pope word marshal 2 the take of the oath thus mix with clause concern religion with repair to our church assembly argue that he forbid the oath so far as it be a act spiritual three out of the cardinal letter who after consultation with other scil. with a traitor 3 call parson do therein include the oath to be unlawful because it be compound by join of spiritual and temporal thing together as julian his picture with the image of the god (@) 63 this Bellarmine do in cold blood as he be covert resemble his majesty to that but when he be by his metamorphosis or metonomasie translate into Mathaeus that be a publican vex either with wrath or fury or malice or all than he particularize the comparison and make his majesty no better yea worse than julian. 64 four by be all offer on the catholic part the 4 former whereof he draw and divide first affirmative two way viz. that so much of the oath as concern civil obedience every catholic shall take marry with a restraint twofold as much as any catholic have do in time of popery or any foreign subject do to a popish prince second concern the pope this catholic shall swear that he hope that his holiness will do nothing in prejudice of his majesty yea he will labour to stay he if he do and will pray for they both the other part be negative that the catholic shall not touch any part of the oath which seem to impeach the pope authority therefore that more be require then civil obedience by this it be evident by what because the pope deciare so and the cardinal write so and this jesuit say so 65 but we lay this for our ground first that both swear and perform civil obedience be aswell negative against any intruder challenger or usurper as affirmative for the lawful governor and sovereign second that this challenge of the pope in dethrone and depose prince be a temporal intrusion and no spiritual jurisdiction do conclude with as strong and apparent evidence that the whole bulk of the oath both in the submissive and exclusive part do only concern civil obedience of the first ground there be no doubt for be thou on our side or on our adversary be a proper and fit question move by a resolute governor lukewarm josh. 5. 13. subject be as odious and dangerous in a state politic 3. 16. as such professor be in religious society just to be vomit out of the realm as Solon his (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) and plut. n. neutral from his commonwealth of the second we make as little doubt the proof thereof by so many that have debate that controversy be so plentiful so pregnant and impregnable but see we mean this jesuite a favour we will remit he to t. m. the elder he d. mort^...bis full satisfact. part. 3. have as lief go to the rack who among many other have canvas this point in a confutation to the pope confusion 66 for this authority of the pope if it be a spiritual jurisdiction it must be either from heaven or of man ground upon law either divine or ecclesiastical bern. Eug^... say a devout father to a great pope all execution thereof not derive from either of these imply a tyranny import no right if upon divine law then either the old or the new testament not the old the priest among the jew have no such authority over their king either unite to their priesthood by God or assume by themselves confess so by a jesuite that the state Salmer in epist pauli disp. 12. of the jew be rather earthly then heavenly therefore the carnal part be more eminent that be king have the sovereignty over the priest 67 not in the new for then s. Peter shall have have it either when the key be give he matt. 16. or when that treble be enjoin he joh. 21. if it be so then have he this jurisdiction direct from Christ and universal over the world but that be not so say robert the cardinal and this Robert his echo but only over Bellar. lib. 5. rom. cap. 4 and 6. christian prince and that indirect and nay neither direct nor indirect say Saunders for there be a double power of christian De cleave lib. 2. cap. 13. fortitude constant suffering and courageous attempt that power of suffer as the more excellent Christ choose as the fit for himself and those that belong to he or if you will for himself and his apostle so then to suffer oppression under king not to infer upon they rebellion and Disloyalty be the power apostolical in respect of prince 68 by law divine than it be exclude for no man can transfer that to another which he have not himself but this royal sovereignty over prince to depose they or dispose of their state Christ have not as he be man and yet he say math. 28. 18. yea such power have be unprofitable and superf^...uous say the grand cardinal therefore he can not transfer it to saint Peter or the rest 69 for ecclesiastical law no canon council decree practice extant reckon to 600. year after Christ by Bellarmine Concil. lib. 1. ca. 13. Bercla^...us li. 6. cap. 26. Sigeb^...ri in a 1088. confession yea to 1000 and say one of their own writer do avow it insomuch that a friar of account write in the year 1088. call then the doctrine thereof a novelty if not a heresy and that act of hildebrand that famous infamous pope who first take upon he to deprive a emperor of his regiment be by a popish divine call a rent and a rent clau. in tim. Digres. li. 2. cap. 6. of novelty the challenge of this authority utter unknown to the father who have pronounce king to be no way liable to any violent censure or penal law of man their empire and sovereignty exempt Ambros. Apolog. David cap. 4. and 10. and priveledge they therefrom 70 therefore this authority of the pope thus proclaim by himself thus patronize by the jesuite be mere temporal neither scripture father council or practise for so many year warrant it and by consequent a human invention and intrusion presumptuous in the pope against a civil magistrate which be God ordinance and prejudicial to king in disquiet their state and disparage their sovereignty the matter of the rom. 13. whole oath both submissive for affirmative allegiance and exclusive for negative acceptance of foreign disturber must needs be mere civil and temporal and the whole oath to be as entire take of english subject for their king and sovereign against the pope claim and usurp part of his right as well as that of jehoiada by the man of juda for joaz their king against that usurp 2. reg. 11. 4. his state 71 neither do that point of the oath more concern religion then if any other prince Christian or heathen shall have be put in the same and the pope lest out for this authority of the pope so exclude in the oath must be as he be either a temporal prince and then the oath be mere civil or else as he be a spiritual judge which if it be a point of true religion must have the warrant in scripture and by the donation of the key matth. 16. if in any scripture 72 it be so say Saunders for s. Peter with they c. 10. receive both power temporal and civil to build and destroy rel. 1. Sect. 2. kingdom not so say a jesuite for this power of the thus they jar mean while we be sure that this be a precept in true religion rom. 13. every soul to be subject to the high power but if there be a religion such as he call catholic which exempt any when the apostle include all I say no more but that which our saviour say to the pharisee mat. 15. 6. and that which he say of they when they be offend at that speech every plant which my heavenly father have not verse 14. plant shall be root out and perhaps this ruffle of the pope with his against his majesty argue as well for he as it do for a other ruffler elsewhere that he have know his Apoc. 12. 12. time be but a 73 now we proceed to remove two block at which this jesuite stumble but he go back to fetch they for this fellow tread the maze he be even now at the 6. and now he be come to the 4. page wherein he take two exception against his majesty first in that it be say many popish affect of both sort do free take this oath second that their so take of it be call a bless success of so good adevice and intent in propose such a oath in the first the assertion he deny not that many do so but he stick at the adverb free God love adverb say the canonist the devil do not for that the adverb do make the action commendable yea denominate the action be a axiom both in divine and humane learning now lose this action of they shall be commend too much he first descant upon the word free and disprove it by the statute penalty and a distinction of philosophy for the statute inflict upon the refuser so straight a punishment Aristotle in his ethic and Thomas in his sum be so far from account it a free action that the schoolman determine it to be and the philosopher much like the instance which Aristotle give and the owner of the ship wherein S. Paul be a passenger feel the throw of all the fraught into the sea to savemens life whereunto act. 27. this case be semblable either for i to take the oath which be against conscience or endure a strict penalty which can be freedom for that freedom say he require liberty that be freedom to both extreme or object and here as if with Aesop hen he have lay a golden egg he cackle out a triumph let the discreet reader say he consider what coherence there be in this tale namely that there shall be a penalty upon the refuser and yet the take of the oath to be call a freedom 74. and be there then such a (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) and disagreement between the of a statute-law and the will of a subject that he which obey the law so enjoin shall not be account a free-subiect for his obedience then be all the people of the christen world slave not freeman for what nation be there govern by law not enjoin by sharp penalty be all subject saint Paul true scholar and will obey their superior for conscience sake all penalty be then unnecessary restraint or be all prince draco-like who have such subject will write each law in blood such penal law be tyrannical enforcement but the subject of the best prince be of diverse disposition some willing submit themselves to the strait law not for fear of the punishment but for conscience to God and duty to their sovereign other refractory who mouth must be hold with bit and bridle because without a penal constraint they will wax wild and yield no obedience therefore in the best managed state be all or the most law back with penalty and yet the subject liberty no way infringe it be licence not liberty that admit no penalty the law of God itself be impose with penalty and yet man obedience yield thereunto be not thraldom but freedom which make the apostle say that the law be not give unto the righteous man for his direction 1. tim. 1. 9 gal. 3. 23. no doubt it be it be our schoolmaster unto Christ but not for his terror because his willingness prevent the constraint and his obedience the censure but to the wicked and rebellious it be give not thereby abridge their freedom but punish their contempt 75 be the statute enforce peremptory and no leisure grant for deliberation or after deliberation no liberty of choice but enforce upon they to take it whether they will or no then may the oath be account a pressure and the acceptance thereof a slavery but first time be give to consider thereof and after consideration leave grant to choose or refuse this in their own school-learning be true and full liberty for to it they annex these two condition 1. Medina in (@) quest. 6 art. 2. a unlimited scope for the judgement to deliberate 2. power either to choose or refuse what be deliberate the first be the source or fountain of liberty the other be libertas freedom itself say Medina and that be the very case between the king and his subject in this matter of the oath so that the very refusal after deliberation argue that either to take it or no they have liberty of choice but in refuse it no loyalty of affection 76 but what if by the word free his majesty mean either a voluntary offer of some who to show their loyalty to their sovereign of themselves desire to take the oath or be require after view thereof without either respect the penalty or doubt of the lawfulness ready yield that pledge of their allegiance by take the oath then let the discreet reader to who he appeal consider what a trifle sophister this be to pick quarrel at word by wrist and strain neither to purpose nor to sense for that his majesty meaning be so by the latin translation be manifest where these word many free take the oath be there translate Apolog. lat. pag. 4. lin. 6. that be they stick not at it but without terror or doubt take it and this the makebate know wellinough but that he will perhaps take a small occasion to vindicate his credit which the priest have somewhat impair by assure the world that he be no scoole-divine by show his skill in Aquine and in a piece of Aristotle which every puny have by roar 77 second lest this their acceptance of the oath shall be too much commend he take upon he to interpret their meaning wherein let the reader consider what a hypocrite he be for it be a inseparable mark of a hypocrite to judge of other man conscience the mat. 7. heart of man be God peculiar for any man to place his consistory there be a high presumption and therefore when some have take the oath and swear they do it hearty we say with Nazian. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) for we to Nazi in epist. dive into their conceit and to judge with what affection either of fear of punishment or hope of favour or love to their prince they do it it be not our purpose nor come it within our reach and yet this Epidaurius can see more in they than themselves will acknowledge and Horace though they swear they do it willing yet he can assure both they and we that they do it by constraint 78 yea sure for he can prophesy that though they swear they do it hearty 1. sam. 10. 11. and without any mental evasion yet he be persuade and will persuade we that they do it neither free that be willing without fear of coercion nor free that be plain but with a reserve distinction and now again let the reader who help he crave behold a malicious trick of a notable aequivocator that can be content to be himself alone for double and dissemble the devil scholar that ancient aequivocator that can be the prince of darkness and a angel of light all at once but must also be his divilitie reader or schoolman to teach 2. cor. 11. other to distinguish themselves to hell fire and that be num. 30. wherein he show himself to be frame two distinction like the two horn of Sedechias such another as himself full 1. reg. 22. 22. of that spirit and put they into their mouth the first that the not authority without just cause to proceed against prince the second that the pope have not his authority direct but indirect and in and for the catholic cause in his Syriam vers. 11. say the false prophet of his horn and with these distinction say this jesuite the oath take may satisfy the statute and reserve integrity and sincerity of true catholic doctrine 79 as if he shall say though they swear as it be in the oath that they believe and in conscience be resolve that the pope have no authority upon his excommunicate of prince to absolve subject from their obedience and that they swear this according to the express word by they speak and according to the plain and common sense and understanding of the same word without any equivocation or mental evasion or secret reseration whatsoever all which be the word of the oath yet if in their mind they shall secret^...y conceive these two distinction no authority without just cause or not direct though the pope shall after he have excommunicate a prince absolve his subject they must persuade themselves notwithstanding that they have swear true and yet that the pope have do that which in their conscience be just in that his so proceed be either upon just cause or by his indirect authority 80 and now let a christian reader that make conscience either of God or common honesty consider whether these be not Satanae in the revelation even the very mist and mystery of miquity wherein he may Apoc. 24. demand of this jesuite first whether this be not a paganish delusion both of God and man the very same of Lysander and Dyonisius that child be to be moke with toy and man with oath nay more than heathenish for Aristotle Pl^... be of opinion that he which double in his oath for that be (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) to swear with a mental addition have neither fear of God vengeance nor shame of man reproof second if the oath may by such distinction R^...d Alax and ca. 18. according to the true catholic religion for so this censurer say be interpret and expound why do not the pope by his breve rather ratify these as lawful evasion then at the first dash thunder out his awful interdiction three if the oath be so thin a cobweb that two such fly may so easy break through it why do this jesuite so often term it a pressure of conscience force man to despair last he may ask of this banish catholic whether that part of the oath touch the pope authority upon which he thus mental didistinguish be a matter of faith or no ^...sno then the oath bind to no other thing than the acknowledgement of mere civil obedience if yea then in ^...o secret distinguish they do a thing unlawful for no sort of equivocation say fa. persons be lawful in matter of faith and religion yes say fa. parsons their so equivocate in this matter of faith be lawful and may stand 14. 30. with the integrity and sincerity of true catholic doctrine so then in matter of faith and religion it be not lawful in any sort to equivocate but in this matter though it concern faith and religion it be lawful will not the discre^...t reader conclude these to be rope of sand and to have less coherence then that which he strain at for dissonancy in the apology 81 and yet say he num. 31. unless these distinction may be admit he that swear honest and take the oath simple as it lie and be mean by the magistrate that offer it namely that the pope have no authority upon what occasion so ever for never so much good of christian religion to proceed against any prince either by himself or by permission of other prince to do the same do contradict the consent of all catholic divine and profess that god providence be defectuous in care of his church 82 and for he that mean deceitful to speak general be a old proverb upon a old custom the first of these assertion that the pope authority for depose of king be conclude by content of all catholics divine if by they he mean scripture counsel father story for 1000 year after Christ the reader must take it for a mendatiou vanity and let it pass for no better but if in that number he account pope testify of themselves or Canonists parazit to pope or gloss hyperbolise the flattery of the canonist or schoolman blasphemous detort scripture or adulterate and partial story forge a mathematical donation which be but chaff indeed though the church hold it in alu^...r pel. plan. Eccles. lib. 1. cap. 13. the granary for good corn say a ancient canonist of their own he must expect no fit answer than that which our saviour give to he that challenge to himself to be the great donor of the kingdom of the John 8. 44. to bring credit to their own sab^...es they must bring in witness like knight of the post of their own humour 83 the second as it be a trivial objection and borrow by this epistler from allens apology so as by one of their glossary it be first utter it be a charge favour of blasphemy namely that if this transcendent power over all bertian in a^... Gloss. V^...am Ex^... V^...es in aug. lib. 10. cap 16. thing even for depose prince be not proper to the pope our lord save his reverence say he have fail in his discretion for government of his church 84 Vives upon saint Augustine tell we o^... one that persuade his neighbour on a dark night that unless the moon be in his assesbelly for she drink it up of late shine in the pool the world shall want that light for ever parson upon Allen will persuade ^...s that unless god providence be so tie to the pope diadem that he may triple it with supremacy of control over all prince christen the church shall want that pillar for support and that eye for direction in government the first be a fancy of a jo^...or be but a merriment of folly this challenge s^...riously maintain and a main argument among jesuite be a presumptuous challenge of arrogant impiety 85 that man in agony of grief or torment of pain or discontentment of humour or rage of passion or in case of distress and disgrace will speak irreverent of God or as the Hebrew have it will charge God with folly through impatience it be usual by poet feign and by story of good job. 1. 22. note in man of good part sometime observe but that pride shall so far oversway man affection that to maintain their ambition and tyranny they shall so much forget God their saviour as to challenge he of improvidence towards his church which be as dear unto he as the apple of his eye which he have purchase with his blood which he have handfastn unto himself for his spouse and to which he have promise his perpetual assistance be singular from all example admirable but intolerable only that it favour of the spirit of Antichrist who as in his pride he lift up himself above all that be call God so for the support of his pride stick 2. thes. 2. not to charge with indiscretion and want of foresight even the very true God 86 who providence be as his power this most puissant where the mean be most weak that most vigilant 2. cor. 12. where the mean be least see that which the world count folly be God 1. cor. 1. 26. wisdom to pass by the mighty and the noble and to choose the weak thing of the world to confound the mighty yea thing vile and despisable to abate and pull down thing lofty and honourable not by curse of mouth or dint of sword but by patience of spirit and power of his word for God providence in his church-government by church man be operative not vindicative that same 2. cor. 10. 5. 6. vengeance in a readiness against all disobedience whereof the apostle speak level every high thing that be exalt against the knowledge of God and captivate every thought to the obedience of Christ like the ru^...nating of hierichoe wall by rams-horne be powerful not violent spiritual but not visible josh. 6. ^...0 by mean weak in show mighty in effect those alligan do in the Psal. those fetter make to Psal. 149 8. Aquin. in 2. 2 cor. 10. bind king be document of faith say Thomas not thunder of disturbance 87 yea have not God in the depth of his wisdom and providence of the church keep that conceit or any the least occasion to breed it even from the thought of prince that the same snake which be almost statue to death with hard and cold weather they shall warm succour and nourish in their bosom will when she have go^...ten liberty and strength first st^...ke they and that the roman bishop bring so low in the world by pou^...tie and persecution after their advancement by they will have grow to that height of insolence as to am^...te they still shall they have lie forlorn and unp^...tied at least unfurnished of those large endowment frank immunity vast privilege and honourable place which now they hold and wherewith they be uphold (@) 88 it be natural to king to be jealous of their throne wherein they can abide neither mate for division n^...r check mate for scorn it cost Ado^...ah his life for ask (@) reg. 2. 20. Abishag to wife because Solomon do thereby take occasion to suspect that he which desire the father bedfellow will also aspire to the brother throne it be not the blasphemy lay to our saviour charge by the jew that move Pilate to sentence he th^... which hasten his death be a jealous opinion though a false persuasion that he shall be a king and thereby defeat Caesar of his claim joh. 19 12. 13. to jury 89 in that point therefore we shall see God himself to be very wary for even that psalm which of all the scripture be most threatfull to king and begin with a Psal. 2. 1. thunder expostulation it please he to conclude it not with a minace ex^...rusion but with a calm persuasion or as the vulgar have it Apprehend^... and what be that be wise o you King^... and (@) the lord in fear I^... not what be the da^... that be lest you lose the righ^... way to heaven and your right in the crown of heaven he say no^... your title to your kingdom no^... right to your crown on earth God (@) think it fit to support his church by dare of prince professor of his name for that have be the way to make they not nourish F^...s but either Esa. 19 23. pinch supprest^... or at least cold and wary favo^...s of the same 90. as therefore in the time of the law he have a church flourish and famous to the world astonishment in jury be God know his name be great in Israel Psal. 76. 1. where there be pr^...ests of ve^...y ^...nent port and ^...te yet that they be subject to their king both for reu^...rent demeanour to their person and all due obedi^...nce to their command both in civil affair and for ecclesiastical charge argue no de^...ect in God prou^...ence or di^...tion so in the p^...itive time of the gospel the purity of doctrine the increase for number the success by the large prop^...tion of christianity be far more eminent in the world and the evidence of God providence more apparent demonstrate when the blood of martyr bishop be the seed of the church at what time the title of Christ vicar general be not hear of then since the challenge and claim of this papal supremacy the issue whereof ha^... be the bloody massacre of christian prince design and abe^...ted by the successor of those bishop successor I say in seat and yet that be a question but not in ^...aith 91 and the christian world can witness to God glory and the pope regret that the vigilant eye of God providence for support both of sincerity in doctrine and integ^... of di^... and public maintenance of bo^...h where bishop and priest use the key commit to they toward their sovereign for win their soul not for disturb their state for preach to they ^...ot faction against they in exhort not threaten the^... in pray for they not ^...sing they be more (@) (@) ^...visible then where the pope and all his gimmal the p^...sh priest o^... c^...rats of Rome that be their true (@) in s^...atuscons Fra^... 58. original who for their often wind and turn be only call cardinal do practice their usurp claim in ^...acing interdiction manage rebellion allow perjury instill and complot treason but in brief if it be serious propound what become of God prou^...dence when there be no pope at all as at once for s^...uen year and a half anothertime for three year together the see be vacant and to which of the pope god providence for church-government be tie in the anti-papacie or duplicity of pope for so many year it will pin^...h the jesuite to answer it 92 now from his doctor chair where he have be urge the lawfulness of his distinction he descend and fall on his knee num. 32. and as before he frame a oath for a mitigation so now he put up a request for a exposition which be indeed a oblation for our oath where he propound three offer that it will please his majesty either first to admit of these mental evasion or second to wipe out the last word in the statute against equivocation or last not to think much if they utter refuse the oath 93 it may be say to he as unto Cain in their own translation offer his submission be good but his proffer^... be not so it become he to be gen. 4. humble but not thus to capitulate wherein he seem to honour the king as Bernard note of a hypocrite sacrifice it be for the sum of in cant. ser. 24 his petition be this that either the oath may not at all be impose and so his majesty shall have of they no bo^...d of allegiance or else that it may be take with the forename reservation that so as the same father speak they may swear loyalty on the book but hatch treason in their hea^...s notwithstanding say the jesuite the rather (@) this be yeel^...ed unto because both the chief learned of their church have judge the oath unlawful as it be now frame and also their chief pastor have u^...erlie condemn it and this indeed have cause say he the great scruple and repugnancy of conscience 95 how hold this together he tell we before that it be the scruple of conscience which cause they to seek num. 15. beyond the sea both to inquire of the learned there and to consult with the pope now he tell we that this scruple be a effect engender in they by the resolution of those learned and the peremptory sentence of their pastor Papa perplex do the pope breed scruple in their mind which consult he he have say Canus and can err therefore his resolution shall remove all doubt cause none shall settle the conscience not startle it 96 but take it either way either as a cause move or a effect succeed it bewray in both a singular disloyalty in the affection do the scruple cause the inquiry and consultation that argue alienate disposition for true love obey dispute not yield and doubt not David note it in his subject they no soon Psal. 18. 44. and ca. 69. 1. John 5. 3. hear but obey he love make all thing light say s. Augustine and therein be s. john speech make good that our lord commandment be not grievous the weight of a injunction be not so much in the object as in the say the same father there may be such a affection matth. 11. 28 in the heart which may make a yoke easy and a Burden light^... such a unwillingness again there may be John 6. 60. that shall be pronounce upon a commandment be it never so easy 97 the holy ghost note it that when jeremy will the jew to put their neck under the yoke of Nebuchadnezar they which make a scruple and upon that scruple inquire of some prophet whether they shall serve he or no God himself do pronounce both they that move jerem. 27. 12. the doubt to be author of their own misery and those prophet that dissuade they to be liar in themselves and not authorize by he much more when a christian king require a bond of obedience from his native subject only for his temporal indemnity and security in that case bl^...nch it as they will every d^...ubtful inquiry be a impostume of Disloyalty it be not a (@) of conscience it be a (@) at the hea^... which because those doubt catholic can not (@) for a potsherd though it be guilt will sh^...w itself to be earth and yet be loath to bewray it they t^...ke Sanctu^... p^...o 26. 13. (@) at Rome as inquire of that oracle thereby to cover their wilful refusal under the pretence of the pope ne gative resolution that so they may answer wh^...n th^...y be call to the oath we be willing to doe^...t bu^... our chief pastor have forbid we and think it unlawful the (@) they carry out return with they 98 be this scruple a effect and do it follow upon the resolution of those learned and the pope then be it worse because now it be Armata disobedience authorize as for those chief learn as he in^...itles they they be all but one Bellarmine for aught that appear to the world who opinion in this case what it be his (@) manifest and the apology have discuss it learned he be his work do show it and yet he that shall say they be more painful than learned shall do he ^...o wrong no^... judge of they (@) this we be (@) that as learned as he and better mind than he be of a con^...arie judgement to he for the prince immuni^...ie from the pope sovereignty as will appear when we come to his Let^...er 99 but the pope Brene that be a persian decree and his a (@) it may not be dispute much less dissavow^...d in this very case ^...aith a jesuite though he pervert the law of king Az^...rius jesuit either by sinister const^...uctions or pri^...y subornation prey for he they may judge of he they may not obey he they must now this reliance unrepealable though he call it in the catholic a scruple of conscience yet be it not in they thus tie a vassalage of slavery and in the pope thus bind they look to himself a oultrecuidance of tyranny and in respect of king a licence for disloyalty in their subject and the allumette of treason to their person for what great slavery then if pope carry troop to hell yet man must follow they and not argue with they so say Boniface the archbishop of Mentz and Boniface grat. do 40. what more dreadful instability to king then to enact law for their subject to try and tie their allegiance and a foreign countermand must be send to free they and affright they from obedience 100 a second stay which hold he so long in this preface he call it the three point be that speech in the apology that it argue god blessing upon the devise oath that so many popish affect do take the oath this he trip at and give his reason that if it be a blessing it must be so first to the taker which be of two sort either in act which be swear already or in desire which wish they may but dare not the first have no outward blessing of liberty for they be still imprison if inward blessing of comfort he know not but to the other it be the great pressure of conscience and angaration of mind that ever befall they for that oppression exceed all other either corporal for pain or worldly for loss 101 indeed the the trouble of conscience be a fearful vexation but the next that come to it because it be a mental work be the trouble in answer a cavil sophister who have some remnant of commonplace wherein he be perfect like one ready to be drown that lay hold of any thing though a rush or stick snatch at word to give vent to his note neither well couch nor proper apply 102 his majesty conclude as the scripture direct and as man may judge God approbation by a outward and unexpected success that so ma^...y of the clergy and la^...tie diverse affect in religion do take the oath whereby he be secure of their allegiance and they free from his ie^...lousie who his m^...iestie may otherwise have suspect because there be no such alienation as that which be cause by difference in religion call this success God blessing for multiplication whether of wealth or people be a benediction and therefore in scripture often conjoin of just job say the wicked spirit Benedixist^... and of the same man I^...b 1. 10. job. 42. 12. say the holy spirit the lord bless his last day for his substance and family increase of all the faithful the ps^...lmist pronounce it he bless they Psal. 107. 38. and they multiply exceed 103 in the multitude of a people be the honour of the king sait^... Solomon because his strength lie in they but if as David his father describe some they be pro. 14. 28. (@) a mutter and a disloyal people of estrange affection Psa. 18. 43 44. etc. dissemble tongue false heart the king may then say with the prophet multiplica the more the worse for it be Esa. 9 3. or as the Hebrew have it we see it in gedeons army which make ^...aith Psal. 110. 3 the psalmist that give courage to the king mind and strength to his battle which word the vulgar have leave out 104 now God have bless his majesty with a accrument of a great and mighty nation but find with all that rule in vegetius to be true that it be not but not multitude but loyalty which in time of gence must prevail to assure himself that his subject will be neither Ephraim a saint-hearted people with their bow bend ready to turn their back upon he Psal. 78. 9 fail he at his most need nor belial a falsehearted people either vilify his person as some do sauls at 1. savi. 10. 27. his first entrance or turn their weapon against he as David be serve both by the son of his loin and 2. Sam 15. 12. his great councillor of state the rather have be already in David case affright with the bloody hand of strange child who mouth talk of vanity and their right hand be the right hand of iniquity he devise this oath Psal 144. for a pledge of his assurance for abond of their allegiance which accord succeed because what he hope happen yea more than he expect for many unrequired come and show themselves to be free offer to take the oath and this the king true call a blessing of God upon the devise 105 for mortal man must judge the best of God proceed by outward happy success and what more happy to king than a sure est^...blishment in their th^...oanes and none sure among man than investiture confirm by conuenant and oath for David be the king of Israel even while he be in Hebron but when the tribe come and pass their covenant with he of allegiance t^...en and not before he call himself a king establish and exalt which he only attribute unto God blessing and 2. Sam 5. (@) 3. vers. 12. apol. lat. pa. 4 lin. 3. that this be his majesty only meaning the latin translation clear it by the word argue thereby that be be a blessing outward and visible 106 now what have the commonplace of the conscience grief to do with this blessing that be this event thus fortunate succeed no more than it have before to Numb. 12. do with the adverb only save that of a word of exaltation he will make a tragedy of angariation wherein to answer he once for all first if the catholic as he call they have vex conscience it be no marvel in two respect for idolatry be mix with superstition and superstition never void of fear because as it suppose there be many god so it wish th^...re be none plut. vincen. adver. here. fear must needs work a vexation of the mind but heresy be idolatry say vincentius for so many self conceit be so many god yea the base kind of idolatry say saint Augustine this adore the wok of man Deveia relig. cap. 38. hand the other worship fancy of their own brain 107 again where the mind have no certain stay for she in matter and case of faith and conscience there must neceslary follow a miserable vexation which be the case of those catholic who dependence for resolution must ^...est upon the supreme pastor determination than which what ^...s more uncertain for what one pope decree another disalowe it be observe of some that from the time of stephanus sixtus it have be the custom of pope that the succeed bishop will either narrow impale or u^...terly repeal their predecessor decree and will any call that conscience that have this dependence our sovereign king have give it the right name when he say that conscience not ground upon (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) pa. 18. sure knowledge be either a ignorant fancy or a arrogant vanity and what resolve comfort can be in either of these 108 second if pressure of conscience may serve for good plea of recusancy to prince law there be neither malefacton for crime nor heretic for schism never so great but will make that his apology against any censure the make of law and the execution thereof must depend upon the magistrate will direct by God word not upon other man conscience whether tender as unresolued or peevish as never satisfy 109 three the answer may be with that of our math. 6. 23. saviour if the light which be within you be darkness how great be that darkness because it be with the conscience of man as with the eye of the body be the object never so bright and visible if there be in the eye any thing which may impeach the sight either mist or dust or lime which one of their own writer very elegant do allegorize either fancy of their own brain which be Caligo in this life and dusk the eye of the understanding to a man perdition for if our gospel be yet hide it be hide to they that be lose or worldly delight of honour and wealth 2. cor. 4. 4. for that be the merchant dust which tickle the eye and blind the sight of the wise or envy 3. 6. by emulation or prejudice of affection or wilfulness Deut. 16. 19 by opposition which like lime torment the eye and pervert the judgement concern the object where lie the fault then 110 if the jew to this day behold not what they shall nay what they may but whatsoever be speak of Christ though never so demonstrative they do reject it because they conceive it not be it say s. Paul because the veil be not remove from Moses face or that the law be still typical nay that be go but the veil be now spread by their own wilfulness over their own heart such be the conscience of those catholic who he bemoan who either lead by their own conceit obstinate by some former impression or mislead what with future hope buzz into their ear or by present terror of church censure or rely upon the pope as the jew upon Moses though these last have the better warrant do name that to be conscience which be but error and angariation of spirit which be nought else but peevishness the issue either of superstitious fear or malignant opposition or slavish dependence for to be grieve with that which be good be not weakness but wickedness 111 to a corrupt stomach even the light meat be burdensome but cleanse it and then it will easy concoct and orderly digest the strong food so to the unclean and unpure nothing be clean for even their mind 2. cor. 3. 14. 15 tit. 1. 15. and conscience be defile say the apostle but rectify and cleanse the quoth S. Bernard that which now pinch for a pressure will pass for a comfort and so the conclusion shall be for this bern. in cant. point of conscience which as his maieslie once well obsetue (@) 21. 15. many p^...attle of but few feel if any which hau^... take the oath be torment in mind for abjure that unjust claim of the pope it be not conscience but fancy that a^...slicts they without reason on their part o^... occasion of we it be not the statute which must bear the blame but either their own inconstant affection vari in themselves or their enthrall judgement overawe by the pope or hope or fear whisper in by other raise a storm where there be a settle quietness 112 for they which be to take it if they refuse it the penalty be before they their conscience be free but his majesty no doubt will be ware of they and the state observe they as man brand by the apostle seduce with the error of balaams wage and pensh in the contradiction of Corah and Dathan 2. pet. 2. 113 the censurer go on to show that as not the taker so not the exhibiter of this oath can account it a blessing and that for two reason first because whereas they think hereby to assure the king of his subject allegiance they rather make they to grow desperate for when their conscience tell they they have take a unlawful oath they be more exasperate against their sovereign then before this grief of their work in they a aversion of heart no fastness of loyalty to his majesty for they that will upon passion swear will upon a secondpassion break out against that which they have swear and for ex^...mple he city the story of count julians passion numb 34. second this imposition of a oath be a scandal active for it force man with repugnance of their conscience to s^...are w^...ich be a sin reciprocal both in the taker and in the exhibiter but especial in the last num. 35. 114 thus you see how this one word bless have case his note book of three commonplace angariation of conscience enforcement to desperation and give scandal all borrow ^...rom allens apology and either join they or sever they Lucian according to the proverb as they sin^... not very fit with that word in the apology so in general they be extravagant from all divinity and policy of conscience we have already speak now for desperation first even in policy be severe law not to be make or be make the severity to be abate for fear that some either froward or dissolute will either fall into despair of mind or ^...ush into some desperate act say epist. 50. s. Augustine this be to affright justice and cross s. Paul doctrine who tell we that the magistrate carry not the rom. 13. 4. swo^...d in vain in vain he shall carry it if he will be afraid of every terror 115 it be the furious fancy of the donatists rather than they will be force from their schismatical opinion in a desperate rage either to lay violent hand upon themselves or if they be strong enough and can make their party good to put they of the contrary opinion either to torment or to death but this state not the church from compel they notwithstanding their furious course by rigorous law either to unite themselves or bear the penalty little regard their threat or act of desperation which rigour the same father call mercy because by it many of they be reclaim from their error and in that church willing give thanks for their conversion to which they be unwilling and by rigour draw 116 but for divinity be their catholic no better instruct by their ghostly priest then if they may not do as in Israel when here be no king every man what judg. 17. 6. be good in his own ^...ies out because they take their sovereign to be severe in his government as luc. 19 21. one that take a strict account of his servant present they must break out into a desperate rebellion and the watchword to be belike with they verse 14. lenity must breed insolent treason whence else come that of the priest and severity must work desperate martial treason and thence come the we english Boz^...s staplet Allen (@) 1. pet. 2. 18. contemptible divine so the romanist account we have think s. Peter divinity to be better when he exhort servant to their master much more subject to their sovereign to be buxom and obedient with all fear not only to the kind and courteous but also to the froward and implacable for be there no rigour there shall be no trial of christian patience the philosopher can say Seneca 117 so that admit his majesty by his law be more severe true catholic divinity teach man either by submissive duty a ready obedience to they if they think they lawful or if not but either through weakness they can or repugnancy of conscience they dare not be so persuade then to endure the penalty with all humble patience for that be thanks worthy if a man for conscience sake towards God endure grief wrongful because our master do so who when he suffer threaten not but commit his cause to he that judge righteous but belike some desperate treachery be hatch wherewith this Boutifeaux be acquaint what else it his meaning Plut lysand. that thus strip his fox case he now show himself in his lion skin and from his suppliant petition to threaten some act of desperation even as he once say who have his hand on his sword when entreaty can not prevail cry this threat of his and let his example count. julian. Hisp. Hist be mark of no less moment then translate a empire upon a desperate passion may be a caveat to the state and so a end 118 the other about the scandal active be as frivolous and impertinent as the former for he frame it as the rest upon a false surmise do the magistrate enforce any to the oath against his conscience no but if any plead conscience the magistrate endeavour to inform he and rectify it if then he refuse the penalty ensue which he that know what conscience be indeed will rather endure though to the loss of life then venture upon the check of that indwelling and upbraid witness it argue they have but a leprous conscience as his majesty (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) pa. 15. well call it that dread more the censure of a civil bench than the fearful daily doom of that in breed and unseparable remembrancer 119. but in this point of scandal will this great di^...ine vouchsafe to learn a lesson from their own schoolman  Aquinas be the exact of this oath a scandal active in our magistrate then be it passive in their catholic for it be no scandal give if it be not take if their conscience be offend at it they be say Aquinas either in 1. job. 2. 10. simple ignorant or wicked malicious and the last rather for he that be well instruct or true sanctify can take no offence though give never so open which he confirm by that place of David great be their peace which l^...ue thy l^...w he Psal. 119. 165. which true love God neither do scandalize by sin^...ing nor be scandalize by repine because love endure all thing and therefore whatsoever be impose and tollerat he suffer and fret not he bear and rebel not 120. but what if there be none or few that make such conscience or take such offence as he speak of but that the ease he with they as once with some donatists say s. Augustine many of they epist. 50. confess that they will long since have be conformable to the state but that they be overawe by those if they shall speak but one word of this submit themselves to the king will if not actual as with the donatists yet spiritual they be threaten to be apostate to have renounce their first faith and to be no member of the catholic church of Christ it be balaams fault and let the supreme pastor as they call he for his breve and Bellarmine the chief learn as they style he for his letter look to it brand upon he in a everlasting record for a perpetual remembrance scan Apoc. 2. 1^... 121. now at last he shut up his myndian gate his long counter-preface wherein if the reader observe he as if he have be bring up in lambs-lease he seem for the most part very tender affect and pitsfullie complain of the hard measure which the catholic endure by our law but above all this last oath of abjure the pope authority in depose prince as if the church wherein he live and the religion which he profess do neither practice nor allow such enforce pressure upon man conscience if it do then matth. 7. and when their inquisition be suppress then let they pinch at this oath and our joh. 2. statute otherwise as the poet say what shall they compel and not we 122. this he be guilty of and therefore by a anticipate concession he grant it true but prevent a objection which we may and have oft just make that if they by their more than hellish torture force man as they do both innocent and ignorant even against the law of nation traveller merchant stranger to renounce and abjure the persuasion of their faith much more may our sovereign by oath enforce under penalty his native subject to abjure the pope temporal authority in depose king 123. to which he make answer both negative and untrue negative that they enforce none to swear if they suppose they do it with repugnance of conscience no more do we for if any be require and take the oath we accept it if heresuse we press he not if he swear he do it willing and the word of the oath be so we judge not the heart the overt-act and the word utter be the utmost that man judgement can reach unto untrue for if the party convent refuse to abjure his opinion notwithstanding he plead the repugnancy of his con^...ience they put he to torture and the most extreme violence that flesh can endure or malice invent in which kind Rome both heathen and popish have be note most exquisite if thus torment he renege and deny his profession can the inquisitor be persuade he do it without reluctance of conscience but if thus mangle he resist as the apostle speak even to blood Heb. 12. 4. be sing long since in Rome of a great ruler therein to death he must 124. and this the jesuite confess and answer first affirmative that they may lawful do so second negative that we may not do it his principal reason for affirm be because the catholic church have Ius a ancient right over heretic in that they be baptize into she and after leave she 125. it be a excellent liberty to encounter a adversary never extant and to argue upon conclusion never grant he take it that the church of Rome be the catholic church which we deny and the chief learned on their side as yet can never evict our denial for whether they take catholic for universal as contain all the member of Christ church militant and triumphant within it Rome be but a particular city and the true jurisdiction confine within a limit diocese or province can be it or take catholic for the profession of the true faith as s cyprian for that purpose call that ep. 55. cornel. of Africa the catholic church neither can the romish church be in that respect so entitle for what be say of the church of the jew in her corrupt state be too true of Rome her gold be mix with dross and she who faith Esa. 1. 23. be plight to Christ be become a adulteress 126. and if his rule be true that it only be to be account ^...irinen Haer. neither shall Rome be prove catholic nor England heretic when either of these be sound determine then let he plead she Ius so true call indeed as Rome now stand possess thereof have achieve it by fraud and ^...ine force where she have interest and this be her torment that in England where she once have that Ius awe our prince enuassal our prelate exhaust our substance and sell our dignity it be now Ius 127. for that right which the true catholic church of Christ and every visible part thereof within her compass respective have against heretic either for their conversion or chastisement be Ius breed within it and unseparable from it for no soon be there a church design but this right be annex gen. 3. as the enmity for contradiction so the right for suppression be native 128. if the challenge of acquisition be in respect of baptism which be allens claim and this page of he do soothe he in it as it be a injury to our church so be it a blasphemy against Christ neither the spiritual mystery nor the prescribe form nor the intend effect of baptism direct any way or make we in any thing liable to the church of Rome first in baptism for the mystery there be a indument and a strip which the ancient church reduce to two word in the first there be the put on of our lord jesus Christ for as many as be rom. 13. 14. ^...al 3. 25. baptize have put on Christ first as a lord acknowledge no other master who voice to hear who doctrine to rely upon but only he second as jesus assure themselves that there be no other name under heaven whereby they may be save three as Christ aswell their anoint king submit themselves to his will give their name to his war and swear themselves his subject as also their anoint priest rest in his one sacrifice as the only sufficient here be no mention of Rome church in the strip part they renounce and forsake the work of the devil and flesh and into that part indeed if with saint Paul heresy be marshal gal. 5. 20. Rome the nurse of they be renounce in baptism 129. for the form it be by our saviour appoint to be in the name of the three person of the indivisible trinity mat. 28. 10. and so it be perform neither of Cephas the surname 1. cor. 1. rock nor of Paul though a great apostle much less of Peter successor that bear Paul name for the end they which be baptize be thereby make both the son gal. 3. 26. of God by adoption and grace invest with a inheritance everlasting and priest to God to offer and slay to offer Apoc. 1. 5. mal. 1. and Cyril alex. in that which Cyril expound (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) the clean and unbloody sacrifice of prayer and thank ^...o slay themselves mortify their affection rom. 12 1. and lust 130. and what make all this to the Ius of the romish church over they that be baptize yea though they be baptize in the midst of Rome unless they can sound prove it to be the only true and unerring church and that it neither have swerve nor do add to that faith and doctrine which they that be true baptize be find by the scripture to profess in baptism 131. therefore we have as good cause to be persuade of our church aswell in assurance of God promise truth and presence within it as her just right for suppress heresy make no doubt but that against they of Rome we may as lawful proceed by compulsory mean and by this oath as they against we by the like 132. he deny it both by reason and example reason because they have possession long before we example because never the like oath be exact afore (@) in this nation or elsewhere by other king 133. possession for hold and prescription for time may be plea in civil court but no sound argument in case of religion for the first may be a claim by intrusion which be their case that plead for Rome and the other the antiquity cypr. Pom^... of error for so be prescription without verity therefore when truth appear let custom yield to truth be the conclusion of a council but what be all this if it be conc. Carthag Cyrpi true to the oath of civil allegiance do it exact of they a renounce of their baptism or their opinion in religion concern faith and doctrine 134. yea but there be never the like oath here or elsewhere exact if he mean for temporal allegiance in the submissive part thereof it be a untruth our chronicle be full of example to that purpose and there be no christian prince but upon occasion enforce the like upon his servant and subject a friar of their own mention to king 600. year ago if in the exclusive part for the abiur of the pope temporal right whether direct or indirect over kingdom and nation if other prince do not the like we judge they not perhaps it be in some of they a infuse persuasion that it be not lawful in other peradventure it be a violent restraint if glad they will but can be suffer 135. if with we never the like before suppose he say true first look to the motive it be upon a occasion we must repeat it though it vex he singular from all example second the pope be never so insolent busy with any nation nor his vassal so unnatural malicious with this land heretofore as of late with our sovereign and kingdom which but for he our gracious king may enjoy with a peace more continual and happy than Solomon or Augustus and so have do with his long preface which be like a flash of lightning before a thunder we now come to the thunderbolt itself as his majesty well call it I mean the breve not musical but (@) of Paulus Quintus wherein he agree with he of his own name in the act act. 9 1. out threat against the disciple of our lord but differ from he in that very case in some respect 136. for first the other do it before he change his name while Saul he breathe his against Christ be Paul he preach the faith of Christ and obedience to prince this man while he be Burghesi be in effect Paul that be as the name signify a still silent man for aught we read of he never breathe word for Christ no of (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) soon do he change his name he be Saul indeed his throat a open sepulchre but he threaten and thunder Paul signify a sepulchre against Christ if not the messiah our lord the anoint yet against our king the lord anoint second the apostle be but a commissioner subordinate under the high-priest for God truth as he think this highpriest be the chief commander himself in his own name sentence and for his own sake pursue and in his own claim as he pretend Saul while he be strike be act 9 4. strike into his yet it be folly to wish where there be no hope 137 retractation argue modesty say s. Augustine and be a preamble to conversion defense of a fault double retract lib. 1. it say philo and be a forerunner of obduration which be the pope sin in set up this epistler as his vindicator and because it may be semblable Hieronym Chromat to the former who before he use as his Vulcan to fashion his thunderbolt the force whereof be break by the apology he now make he his The^...sites by a shift and shameless libel to rail down that apology PARAGRAPH 2. num. 1. for as if he be bear among the lindians Strabo herod^...t Lactan. lib. 1. who use to offer their sacrifice with execrable malediction and do think his book as they their holy rite to be profane and unacceptable if at unaware a good word shall fall from he after he have begin his second paragraph and in one section contrive the sum of the pope two breve present for 16. whole number together as if he have a impostume of venomous filth rankle within he and nothing can burst it but the bless memory of queen Elizabeth sacred name upon a brief mention thereof he disgorge out of his filthy throat by his devilish pen the base and most barbarous loathsome contumely against her of who to speak as she deserve I be unable and in what I can I be unworthy 2. she be a daughter of the blood royal bear to the hos. 9 11. crown in the prophet word from the birth from the womb from the conception a princess advance to the crown in apparent right and by uncontroleable succession a imperial monarch wear the crown with most absolute command 3. a famous virgil. empress or rather indeed the very Impreso of fame blazon out not by homebred favourite but by foreign traveller and writer before and since her death yea even her enemy both for religion and war to be in her Osorius Bizarus mercur. Gallob etc. time and for her sex the star of sovereignty the mirror of principality a terror where enmity the load stone of majesty draw to her ambassador christian not Christian only for interview and salutation in truth for view and admiration for when they have satisfy themselves with her sight and hardly can they be satisfy what sabaes queen once say of king Solomon they all 1. reg 10. conclude of her that which often fall not out say the orator their eye have overcome their ear and truth Tully Repub. infrag have out-striptfame report be less than verity and her renown far short of her desert 4. for have she be royal in blood only and that be a blessedness to a kingdom when the prince be the son Eccles. 10. 17. of noble say Solomon a king and not prudent in government nature may have claim the honour but the state be weak manage it be the prudence of a prince which sway the sceptre as the stern guide the ship histor. lib. (@) and prudent she be say Thuanus and he no protestant or have she be sage prudent and not religious her direction have be no better than Aristotle politics paganish and profane for many heathenish king have excel in they but so religious she be that the way she make in this land for the gospel of the kingdom make her realm to be account regnum the kingdom of the gospel so lib. 13. much say Meteran and more than that and yet he no english man in brief have she be religious alone and not endow with other virtue grace she as a woman furnish she as a queen devout she may have be but retire her counsellor grave but not at all direct perhaps oft thwart her people many but in peace unarm in war dishearten 5 therefore beside those two supporter of a state as Nazianz. Nazian. call they which be in she most absolute prudence and fortitude that for direction this for defence or annoyance as occasion serve her other grace of mind either suit with her sex or fit for a empress be so visible so eminent in she so innumerable for the variety so unexpressible for the dignity say Bizarus a italian that as Demosthenes once speak (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) etc. all her action be royal virtuous histor. genue lib. 3. Demosth. de Corona virtuous religious and religious wise her wisdom seazon her religion her religion sanctify her policy her policy grace her descent all of they together wrought her immortality and her immortality be accompian with renown upon earth and reward in heaven 6 the first record in print foreign and domestical do proclaim omit all but two as most fit for this place a absolute queen she be who be thus base traduce a most absolute monarch shall speak for she a rail jesuite he be that thus revile her as rail priest of his own religion shall testify of her. 7 the foremost his sacred majesty who by his place know what a queen shall be and by his experience know what a queen she be when he have neither cause to flatter she nor need to fear she write Ba^... (@) in pe. nult a. thus of she in England reign a lawful queen who have so long with so great wisdom and felicity govern her kingdom as I must in true sincerity confess the like have not be read nor hear of either in our time or since the day of the roman emperor Augustus 8 in the second place hear balaams priest like Balaam himself blessing against his will and beyond his Numb. 23. hire utter a truth even perforce our noble Elizabeth lb. pag. 274. prince paregall and Paramount and paragon the so admire at Saba of europs England as also the world have wonder at she more than ordinary endowment of princely nature give place to none of former present or future time person or age for and in all point attend at the gate of royal honour and throne of regal majesty 9 for her reward in heaven if restraint of liberty and pursuit of malice for God truth inflict through jealousy and endure with singular patience if a release from they unexpected follow with honour and blessing neither interrupt by other whether treason or invasion nor blemish by herself with vice criminal or continue if life shut up after length of day and a full age with a courage defy death with prayer implore mercy with faith assure her prayer with testimony witness her assurance can be prepare conjecture or rather evidence of unspeakable happiness we may safe conclude that she which pass through a crown of thorn bear so constant to a crown of gold wear so triumphant have now get the three of glory to enjoy for-ever-lasting 10 for can we think that he which give her patience to be a humble confessor crown her humility with honour to be a royal queen second her honour with wisdom to be a careful governor ground her wisdom upon religion to be a defender of the faith adorn her religion with incomparable grace to be a example of virtue for her own to follow and a lodestar for other nation to admire that he I say will leave her in the end to be a prey for Satan nay rather as he show himself at first to be her father chastise she in love and after that her god in sanctify her mind and withal her king in advance her throne so much more to be her saviour to make she a inheritor with the saint in heaven 11 now this renown queen this eternize saint who memory may for ever be bless a black mouth Shemei this parson famous for nothing but capital infamy have defile I will describe he no otherwise than their own priest his own self and his own brother decipher he 12 the priest a bastard by birth a libellar by custom a Factionist in society a expulse Acad^...mian ring out with lib. pag. 236. 237. bell as a cart strumpet with pan for a graceless companion a diabolical machevilian astaine of humanity a corrupter of all honesty all which and more as if with shameless Ballio he delight to hear himself so lively Plaut. Pseudol pa. 106. 6. describe he repeat with a kind of joy in another pamphlet of his own 13 under his own hand a chameleon for his profession a backesliding from his witness assent to in a paper leave by he in his study the article of religion a perjure intruder into priesthood have once swear the contrary a dissolute libertine in choice in act in maintenance 14 by his brother testimony a fugitive with discontent runagate a viperous complotter against his country a firebrand of treasonable combustion by pen and advice and which be of all o she most re-markable a jesuite by proxy a votary by substitution of one of his associate that die upon a surfeit of fig a Paduan mountebank and a empirical quacksalver let not the pope^...nger ^...nger he he have study physic for the purpose wit ness Allen the cardinal and sixtus the pope say the priest a disdainful scorner of all reproof or council and yet a scorn vassal by all the pope he have serve of a aspire desire but defeat of any eminency which he expect and but that they use he in this kind which be his only virtue as a dog to snarl and bite and rage at his own country and nation they have deal wi^...h he ere this as the old roman with their dog in the Capitol unless they do bark their leg shall be break except he do still libel his passport will quick ^...icer Sex R^...s be seal^...d the name I say of that sacred majesty now rest from her labour this canker of youth this spawn of viper this slave of Satan from her birth to her grave yea and low than the grave have contumel^...ously base barbarous defile with ignominious unnatural beastly and leau^... slander 15 and as Abishai say of Shemei why do this dead dog never title suit he better 2. sam. 16 9 than that be even whi^...e he live a rot carcase of a poison^...d cur infect in his entrails and infect with his savour the air he breathe and the land where he have his first breath a miching cur bite her behind Honer. when she can turn back at who very look he will have flee with haste have close his black mouth a carrionly cur enter virgil. her tomb and exenterrate her very bowel to staunch his rage yea as if he be the porter of hades Charon mastiff Pluto Cerberus he harrow tartar and I tremble to write it feign with a wish her glorify soul in a ghastly ghost to speak from hell Numb. 3. 16 o blessed Trinity the concurrent creator saviour and sanctifier of her princely soul and body and all you glorious angel which environ she now possess with bliss and all you king of the earth who either admire or love her while she live or respect your own fame when you be go can you endure this hellish blasphemy and brook these slanderous impiety in silence and unrevenged never be S. james speech verify more of any james. 3. 6. then this Rabshekais tongue it set on fire the course of nature and itself be set on fire of hell the fuel whereof be brimstone it rage as you see in burn with unpartial fury and with loathsome stench 17. but again i say with Abishai why do this dead dog thus curse my lord the king our late queen and sovereign what occasion be give he to revel thus only a short but pithy and worthy recordation of her clement government which be his majesty singular virtue and gain he love with God and honour among the good never to name she but with some preface or addition of princely respect and not by the way or from the purpose for the pope in the very entrance have weep he into it have be-blubred his first with pitiful lamentation for the affliction and persecution for^...ooth which the catholic many year endure for their faith and religion his majesty therefore because it must be mean in either of both their time first acquit she and let the pope see that his tear be either as a crocodile false and diss^...mbled or as a woman causeless and for fashion assure he that never Papist be punish by death for his religion but the pressure than indu^...ed in her time be extort from she by their own misdemeanour begin upon his proscribe her realm excommunicate herself and authorize her subject to take arm against she continue by the Apolog. pag. 16. 17. 18. frequent and hydra-headed disturbance of her state and person what with foreign invasion domestical mutiny private intention and assault for murder with weapon with poison and all from Rome and therefore compare their offence and her punishment the cause not the denominate persecution she shall be find a gracious prince and no persecutor 18 these few last word as the servant of Benhadad serve the king of this jebusite hasty snatch at and as if he have 1. reg. 20. 33 swallow a purge of scammony out gush this loathsome gulf of contumely fill five whole leaf with despite disgrace and slander of the lord anoint queen and that with reverence be it speak even into his sacred majesty princely face challenge he first of profaneness for borrow a phrase from heathen writer express thereby the charitable and christian discharge of a kingly office in acquit she with her due praise after her death for her perpetual memory from that false imputation of be a persecutor namely that he have sacrifice if he may so say for that he add unto the mane of that defunct lady that Apolog. ^...a 18. numb 5. be have do she her right in record her just commendation 19 and this he proclaim for a profane heathenish speech as if his majesty have swear by the life of Pharaoh Genes. 42. 15. which joseph do and the holy-ghost if it be a fault let it pass and as though christian may not lawful use phrase metaphor and proverb of heathen man to good purpose which S. Hierome allow by a elegant epist. rom. allegory out of Moses law of take to wife the captive woman after her nail be pare and her hair cut and Deut. 21. 12. Christiana s. Augustine by allusion to the israelite convert the egyptian spoil to their own use for warrant whereof some of the father and among the rest s Basil have write whole tractate 20 yea do not the holy-ghost himself so s. Luke act. 27. 11. in name the badge of the ship which be no essential note if it have please he to omit it wherein S. Paul sail (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) which be jupiters boy or son do he thereby allow himself or will he derive to christian for a truth that fabulous story that jupiter have such son that they be the god of the sea or take to heaven and make star and sign in the zodiac or that the ship be the more lucky for carry their picture which be the general opinion than receive among the idolater 21. or more near to purpose s. Peter in express the torment of hell whereinto the angel that first fall be cast use the very word of poet (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 2. pet. 2. 4. that they be commit to chain of darkness be cast into Tartar do he allow thereby that fiction of that (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) that low gulf with brazen wall and Homer il. (@) iron chain describe by the poet or s. Paul at Athens dispute about the altar erect to the unknown GOD apply that half verse of a heathen poet (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) we be his generation shall we think he act 17. 28. thereby mean that we be all the offspring of that their feign jupiter for so Aratus from who he fetch it it understand in Naz (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) Origen Cels. lib. 1. Iliad. 5. it or Nazianzene by use the proverb of Orcigalea or Origen of Cassis do they approve thereby of Homer fiction of Minerva play bopeep with Mars under that helmet no but manifest argue to our purpose in hand that good use of poet phrase without any challenge of profaneness even in the high point of religion may be make 22 and therefore this hick-scorning-mate show he Calius rhod. lib. 25. and Alex alex. gen^...dier self to be mane in greek that be as the word be then use a slavish madbrain thus to twit^... his majesty as if by Manes he mean infernal spirit or Hob goblin as he scoff translate the word which indeed be a name and fiction of popish terror invent by illude papist to bring their holy-water and orison as scar bug in request with superstitious ignorant people who they have blind whereas the word Manes alone be not so apply either in grammatical or historical sense by the most judicious heathen themselves except they join Dis unto it 23 for as Apuleius witness they present under that name the soul of those depart which be Socr. daemon as Manes in Macrobius and so do Festus derive it from the old word mana which signify good and therefore they which sacrifice unto Festus and ma c^...ob stat. lib. 1. cap. 3. they in memory of they call they Manes that be good spirit as contrariwise those which be very bad they call IMMANES and never come in hell but as rhodigin will have the word derive from lib. 9 cap. 10. be convey into the body of man at their first conception take it at the worst it be apply to those soul by s. Augustine relation who state be uncertain whether they deserve well or ill aug. civit. 24 so that to suppose that renown prince to be in hell because that his majesty mention her mane as it show his ignorance so it bewray his hellish trouble conscience which ever threaten to itself fear of cruel torment to succeed and therefore be less religious than who will have keep man from thence he will needs send other into hell before he for have a selfe-gultie soul that he luc. 16. 28. be one of they that be bill by the devil and enrol in that catalogue of the damn which s. jude mention know himself and feel within he which make he to be so earnest with the jude. vers. 10. english dead saint to bring he to heaven that he have all the mark of a reprobate his brain the forge of mischief his face the anvil of impudence his heart the li. p. 237 mint house of treason to his country a libel hand rest^...esse and truthless a rail tongue without measure or dis^...etion his throat a open sepulchre his foot swift for bloodshed his very eutral the Psal. 5. 9 inward of impiety in brief the engarbled anatomy of a d^...mned wretch be brand^...d with Cain mark that no man may attach he to punish he here as reserve by God himself to be revenge for all by his own gen. 4 15. mighty hand 25 this (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) thus guilty to himself as if he have already conference with the devil to who king tit. 3. 11. doom he have beforehand swear himself a vassal present queen Elizabeth ghost appear from hell which never in her life commit hellish crime and who soul rest no doubt in Abraham bosom who mane that be who residual memory will both and by diffusion and duration as well ext^...nd itself with glorious renown over all nation of the know world as endine for perpetual generation of succeed age to the world end 26 and his part herein his majesty as we see most royal discharge in sacrifice to her memory that be perform this action both kindly as to his parent so he express himself by the latin word parentars Apolog. lat. pa. 18. and also in solemn manner with hearty affection and unseinealy for that be sacrifice in the metaphor both by divine and human learning 27 and sure as it be say of Caesar that in renew Pompey his decay statue he have erect and establish Plutar. his own his majesty in thus record her praise and free she be dead thus gracious from impute slander have fasten in the heart of the true english subject a unremooveable horat. monument of his royal nature and never perish same and may serve for a precedent of a most regal disposition to all prince of the world not to win reputation to themselves by blemish or conceal the virtue of their antecessor 28 in which sense for it be no other his majesty may use that borrow phrase especial utter it with a deprecatory parenthesis as it be in modesty ask leave for the passage thereof secret thereby insinuate that otherwise it be that which among the rhetorician be call Methaphora his majesty I say may better use it then parson who without blush or strain courtesy dedicate a print calendar a lie legend of his own to the saint in heaven who as if three part of his 3. Conuers their body and soul be already there unite he call wight of such worthiness and as if they can page 4. literal read from heaven to earth at least by reflection he direct they from page to page in his book that there they may read how they be justle out and confront page 7. with english martyr 29 but how will this censure Aristarchus interpret that place of their new convert of Oldcastle who in that fraple discourse of his italical progress tell that he justus epist. sacr. li. 3. ep. 14. with his company be at Milan among other special rare monument which they go to see they come at last will he translate it in his scosf to the infern all god or hobgoblin of that young Ambrose so that changeling entitle cardinal Borromaeus who tomb it be be it so then cardinal belike may go to hell and their torment ghost may walk but thus the relator will think himself abuse for he there describe Borromee to be a man of admirable sanctity while he live of more admirable grace after his death for his mane wrought miracle equivalent to all saint will he turn it to the best sense for the holy memory or sacred monument of that saint cardinal why then may not his majesty speak of a dead princess so religious and renown use the same word for her bless memory which like that precious oil in the gospel not only with matth. 26. the favour fill the whole house where it be pour this land where she live but the whole world with the report thereof wheresoever her name be mention will he say that she be a heretic but the cardinal a catholic that vent his malice but withal confute his scorn and ignorance because thereby he confess that mane may be use for the memory of man depart who never come in hell unless he will reply that Borromee be in purgatory and all that while his ghost walk but that he may seem with some reason to conclude her in hell he say she walk not in the ancient way to life especial those of mortification by prayer alm deed watch wear haircloth and the like 30 first what be thou that judge another man servant see that every man shall bear his own burden rom. 14. 4. gal. 6. 5. second fast with sour countenance prayer in open place dole of alm with proclamation be ensign of hypocrite in our saviour judgement and how know matth. 6. thou whether her chamber be shut she pray in secret yes and in public too seldom miss prayer once every day in her closet never omit the sabbath silent at the hear devout in the pronounce of they endure in other neither absence from they nor irreverence at they for her relief of the poor of all sort her almosners allowance and privy purse be more fit intelligencer then such sycophant as parson three such outward habit of mortification as jesuite term wear of haircloth and the like may argue 1 reg 21 27. ahab who go bare-soot in sackcloth and ash to be a mortify creature as well as the severe selfe-chastising jesuite of you all 31 indeed she be no cloister-nun a queen she be and a state she have to manage a people to govern and much business to attend bodily exercise say apostle profit nothing but godliness that be sound i'faith 1. tim. 48. ^...ith a good conscience ^...les with God and argue a mind ^...uely regenerate the high praise of mortification be re^...e of sin where there be the most object of temp^...t on and therefore great in her then in your vestal and sometime divest s^...ne and tall. (@) nun who command in a court of all dencacy and plenty beside her most exceed temperance in diet and her du^...y ^...tiring herself from company to a assiduous orderly and attentive read be of most chaste eye and ear not end^...ring in any that be about she either a light unseemly g^...sture or a ^...civious word 32 four eu^...h to be a king and to govern as a king shall do be a mortification of itself for that cause he be compare to the can ^...e of Israel which though it 2. sam. 21. 17 shine bright and be set alof^... consume itself in burn 1. sam. 15. 17. to give other light and to the head in the body eminent for place but most turmoil of all the member when they rest at ease five it will win some more credit to the romish church if most of their head for many year together who they call Christ vicar but their own story call ugly monster can have lead their life with as few sin of note and as many true sign of mortification and leave their life with as much reputation Genebrard a. ^...3 973. of honour as she have do some of they enter like fox reign like lion and die like dog here^...kes atheist apostate ^...ucestuous poisoner conturer and blasphemer strike by the devil in the act of adultery as their own cardinal do aver which li. 2. Eccles. (@) 103. (@) (@) enforce also one of their own writer to confess that holiness have forsake the pope and betake itself to the emperor 33 these might father parsons have present from hell upon his tra^...icall stage which their damn ghost and let queen Elizabeth alone who lead a life to use his own word either whole different or most opposite to page 27. these and therefore enjoy that place betwixt which and that where they be there be luc. 16 26. a huge gulf set that afford neither entercou^...e of passage nor enter-parle for exchange 34 after this for confutation of his majesty who have commend both her clemency in make no rigorous law against catholic till after the bull of and her piety in not censure with death any for religion which be no more then I will not say our own judge who shall be most skilful and our statute-booke which be the most infallible witness thereof but than Genebrard a observer of our english course against papist as curious despiteful as any chronologer Chronol. lib. 4. can be do confess for though in the year 1559. he say some chief of the popish clergy be niece and by murder and death make away which be a shameless untruth yet he mention no law either rigorous or moderate against papist till after the bull of wherein he proscribe her kingdom set it out to port-sale and for a prey which pass from he 1569. and be fasten by felton upon the bishop of London gate 1570. and yet no law make till the year 1572. when the pope excommunicate she who before he have denounce a heretic and now let loose her subject to rebellion as against a publican and heathen and yet no law mention till the year 1581. when Camp^...on and sherwin with other be send hither then say he Ind from that time thus far Genebrard jump with his majesty nay it be not more than one fa. parson himself say that for twelve year together the state and court be in great quiet and no question make of conscience in his green coat and li. p. 165 or religion 35 which to confuce the jesuite num. 5. tell we out of Saunders of the oath of supremacy and penal law make for heat and say mass before that bull come which be his majesty speak of law who be death he mention a oath which be but the reviuall of the like make in the time of Henry the eight her worthy father and of some law back with pecuniary mulct or loss of office and preferment 36 and so slight cast off that point he leave his majesty a while and let we fly at the lo. Cook who at the arraignment of garnet indignant scorn that the high priest of Rome shall in a breeve of he call so great a prince as queen ELIZABETH be a miserable woman by a description of misery consist of two contrary want of comfort and plenty of tribulation show many reason evident and demonstrative that she have abundance of joy and no touch of affliction but bless with all kind of felicity can not be call miserable this the censurer num. 6. answer first by a shift evasion second by a false interpretation of scripture three a slanderous imputation upon the holy ghost himself 37 his evasion that outward felicity be worldling argument no necessary improovement of God blessing indeed whether a man be love of God or no by external prosperity no man can certain know say king but if not conclude demonstration yet at least Eccles 9 2 let they be probable persuasion of God favour especial when some of they to she be such that the very enemy themselves like the egyptian sorcerer have be force to say this be the finger of God exod 8 29. 38 but why may not temporal prosperity be make a argument of God love to queen ELIZABETH and of her felicity as well as be skor up for one of the note of the true church by their beauclarke Bellarmine which he do very strong no doubt in glean Eccl. no a. 15. three or four example in war against heretic hall the jesuite as you hear reason for the contrary recite unto Littleton for his comfort certain example of heretic overcome catholic in battle and infidel overthrow christian the truth be they care not what they say nor how they cross each other so they may serve the turn for the time in say something 39 the scripture pervert a part of the Psal. where Psal. 244. 11. say he the worldling make that their argument for to prove their felicity by their full cellar their fat kine their plentiful cattle their beautiful and prosperous child and make this their conclusion so read the vulgar they say bless be the people who have these thing which be a manifest detortion for it be the prophet argument as a great motive in himself to continue his acknowledgement of God blessing unto he and his people wherewith after he have begin the psalm unto the four verse upon present danger he request deliverance from the five verse to the nine and redouble the same request verse the eleven from thence to the 15. verse he show what will be the happy effect of that deliverance which in three whole verse he do full particularize and then conclude all with a double so that what the prophet make a religious ground of exultation for God praise this jesuite make it the worldling insultation of their own jollity 40 whether of these be most true omit all other writer a popish interpreter who dedicate his paraphrase of the psalm to cardinal Farnesius shall determine flamini in Psal^...os who expound it as speak in the person of king David the reason of their mistake which otherwise interpret it be easy to be give first the word Asher in the twelve verse the vulgar turn into the plural which be according to th^... Hebrew or second for Banonu which be they translate it bare 52 who shall witness no Protestant grammarian but Arias Montanus in his linear bible and Genebrard too three that which m^...sled they all be the word dixeru^... in the last verse of the latin which in the original be not at in Psal. 144. all nor any word semblable 41 when the woman in the gospel cry out to our saviour bless be the womb which bear thou our saviour deem not that but answer she by a corrective comparison yea rather bless be they which hear the word of God which if the psalmist have here do in the last vers^... Luke 11. 27. and in the first part have say bless be the people which be in such a case and then have second it by a correction yea rather bless be they which have the lord for their god as Genebrard will have it to make their exposition hold with the Hebrew some probability there have be of his application but be pronounce in a without either dis^...unctive or corrective particle so the Hebrew read it so Montanus conster it the argument hold strong against his inducement as imply that the same lord who bless a people so far as to be their god be the s^...me which also bless they wi^...h those external felicity that they enjoy 42 the three which be a slanderous imputation lay upon the holy-ghost be when he say that the spirit of God scorn at they which so argue if he mean of any place in that psalm he do misreport the spirit of truth the whole psalm have no such word if elsewhere he shall have name the place it be true that good man grieve and oftentimes murmur yea almost revolt to behold the wicked flourish and fare so well it be job it be David case but first the holy-ghost comfort they not by scorn at the prosperity of those man it be Psal. 37. and 73. his own gift but intimate that it be join with many slippery uncertainty and that the end thereof shall 37. and 73. be visible and apparent misery 43 second the just man themselves observe that those ful-fed creature do mix their prosperity with blasphemy against God so speak job they say unto God depart job. 21. 14. from we and who be the almighty that we shall serve he so David they set their mouth against heaven and Psal. 73 9 say how do God know if queen Elizabeth felicity have issue into such effect than the more outward happy the more undoubted miserable but she blessing God in herself and cause he so to be through her whole realm and life she be and therefore she be but this be a small wrist in comparison of many other violence offer by he and he to the scripture which they use as Procrustes serve his guest hack they off Theseus or rack they out to fit they to their turn for the point in hand saint Augustine shall conclude it beat we aug. bless be he who have all that he desire and desire nothing but what be good and that be queen case 44 his second stitch against the chief justice be the description of misery as consist of two contrary copia and which say this profound and great-read-scholler be a miserable one indeed never hear of before ridiculous in philosophy and absurd in common sense (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) say he in the poet and who be this brag thus may the lo. Cook say be he ever grammar scholar Euripid. have he not then read in Ovid of one that complain as of his great misery utter in these word inop^...m i Haddit he be either with Ulysses in hell and it seem Narcissus in ovid. Me^...am he have be there he be so nimble in fetch up ghost or with Homer in describe Tantalus his torment (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) which be no other than those two contrary plenty and want he shall there find the poet and he be no ridiculous author either for poetry or philosophy if we will credit the arch bishop of thessalonica a other manner of scholar than this insolent ignorant jesuite (@) the poet I say to call they (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) grievous and dreadful misery what say he to Horace who think it in epist. as great a misery to have plenty of wealth and want of the use as for a purblind man to have goodly picture and dim eye to behold they 45 and if he have read Epictetus his Enchiridion or A^...iani Epict. those which comment on he he shall find it a philosophical conclusion that those two contrary make the great misery when a man possess much and yet desire more for where desire be there be always want such a man say one of they he want what he crave and enjoy not what he have (@) ^...ius 46 and then in divinity king Solomon no mean philosopher the son of Mahal come short of he in 1. reg 4. 31. Eccl. 4. and 5. that skill find that to be a most vex misery as any under the sun when with satiety of riches which imply plenty there be join a unsatiable eye which argue Want 47 and even in case of conscience be they not those two contrary plenty of good desire in saint Paul to do well but want of ability to perform those desire that make he to cry out why because to will be present with he there be his but he find rom. 7. 24. vers. 18. no mean to perform that which be good there be his certain in divine and human philosophy that be the great misery whereof these two meet for a man may be as full of distress and want as Lazarus of sore which the world call misery and yet rest full of comfort in his mind be no way miserable which saint Paul describe very elegant and albeit 1. cor. 4. 8. our out-wardman perish yet our inward man be renew day by vers. 16. day but in the midst of plenty and redundance to want the true comfort of conscience and the right use of they be the height of misery in this life 48 so then the describe of misery by copia and need not be proclaim so strange never hear of before and so ridiculous the stoic that love not much to laugh nor deserve to be laugh at for his Seneca epist. l^... philosophy shall dismiss he to command the whole world be a plenty but not to have the right use thereof or not to take the true joy therein there be the want and both these together say Seneca make a miserable man 49 from the description of misery he tell we that he return for he be very oft out of his way to the matter itself viz. that albeit queen Elizabeth be so full of temporal felicity protect by God bea^...ing her potent enemy set up a king in his kingdom defend nation etc. it be no more than scripture mention of pagan and namely say he Numb. 8. 9 of Nabuchodonozer by the prophet jeremy 50 he may as well have say that her case be no other than king David as describe in the psalm their Psal. 18. entrance reign and end be so semblable both of they hunt by jealousy before possession enjoin the crown with glory and victory be enthronize and end their day in peace and go to their grave in a full age as a rick of corn in due season carry into the job. 5. 26. barn as job speak but that he think the example be to good and his spite to great 51 Nabuchadonozer have visible and horrible interruption of his felicity be turn into a beast for dan. 4. 30. seven year together propound to scorn while he live in his great ruff by God himself and among the rest with one that triumph of the fir tree insult o^...er he before his death as if he be dead Esa. 14. 8. since thou be dead none come in thy place to cut we up which vex both pope and jesuit that it be not verify in queen ELIZABETH for after her death there be ascend into her throne by just right a most Christian king resolute for the religion which he profess as able to beat down the strong argument for contrary opinion with sound conclusion as if from dogmatic position they break out into pragmatical treason he be ready bent as be queen ELIZABETH that be to reward they according to their demerit indeed if either parson Dolem^...n or pope Clement breve in garnets keep have effect what they do purport as shall appear when we come to his number 61. that prophecy of Nabuchadonozer shall have be fulfil and take place at queen Elizabeth death 52 therefore find his resemblance in that main point to differ and that the state she leave be reserve as well settle in peace and establish for succession and resolve against romish opinion and practice as in her time the censurer now prevent our lord Christ at his second come and assure we that her infelicity will then appear 53 it be the apostle precept that man shall judge 1. 4. 5. nothing before the time until the lord come our lord himself while he live avoid it and say I judge no ^...h. 8. 15. man account it a pharisaical humour so to do say s. Jerome the best be that the soul of the righteous be in the hand of God and it be not Scarabaeus the malice of a filthy beetle yet it be that be not a ^...stoph jesuit doom though most despiteful can adjudge she from joy into sorrow or from bliss into torment 54 yea but her pass hence with so small feel of God as neither to name he herself nor suffer other here he note in the margin the archbishop of Canterbury to bring in any speech of God give great presage of a lamentable issue 55 if one of their own great famous pope die so let Bellarmine pass his sentence on he as the priest say Quodlib pag. 57 he do of sixtus he that live and die without repentance be undoubted go to Hell with queen elizabeth it be not so who live and die a true christian if at the first assault of her sickness she be silent and solitary physic will ascribe it to the nature of melancholy disease who symptom be among some other and as reason will interpret that as she in peremptory refuse her bed do show her princely resolution so Christian charity will infer that retire silence in she both active and passive to be a withdraw of her mind from her sense for a more serious meditation of her bypass life and her future state which she herself also profess be move by a d. of why sick to tell how she spend her time in so long silence I meditate quoth she and yet those last not out for as strength or disease weeken and nature decay she both take she to her bed and the last most reverend arch bishop kneel by she and pray for she she lay her hand upon his head and give her am^...n of assent unto his intercession make to God in Christ name on her behalf and when one of her lady desire she though she do not speak yet to think upon God I warrant you so I do my mind be little off on he say she and after that be in perfect understanding she have and hear and endure vehement prayer to be pour out for she not far from she until the last gasp she give wherewith she seem in such sweet and mild manner to send her soul into heaven as if no hand of violence may take it from she but her own devout willingness must redeliver it unto that god from who together with so many blessing she do receive it and hereof there be alive honourable and honest witness not such corner creep reremise who credit this companion as he say rely on but who name he dare not utter for they dare not appear to it 56 and this be another jesuiticalltricke as well in matter historical as of doctrine to brave it out with a impudent tale but ask they for their author who say it their answer be like the Cyclops cry in Homer (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) somebody with no body name or a name cog O^... 1. 57 but have it be as he say shall the manner of death or symptom of disease at man departure be presage of their condemnation in the life to come it will then go hard with many holy and good man both in scripture and other story say s. Augustine for be thy eye evil because i be good be a speech utter in his person who be able Matth 20. 15. to save his servant soul at the last gasp in the great distemperature of their body and distraction of their mind by violent or silent disease 58 he have rouse she in her deathbed now he run back 70. year to touse she in her cradle and there bark at she what ear or heart can brook it for a bastard so promulge by statute so adjudge by the archbishop so repute by her father first be it so and that upon such as be so breed there be brand as Plutarch say (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) indelible reproach and matter (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) fit minister for scorner to upbraid yet why a jesuite profess divinity shall reckon it among her personal infelicity the father of the church will marvel who think that it impeach neither right in heaven nor renown on earth say s. Augustine from what stock soever child do proceed if they follow not their parent vice they must not bear the burden of the ignominy so Chrisostom so hie Hierome all cite by gratian. the scripture be not so dist. 56. censorious for God himself mislike that proverb that it shall be say the father do eat sour grape and the Ezech. 16. child tooth be set on edge in s. Paul catalogue of the Heb. 11. 32. judg. 11. 1. faithful jepthe be place and he be and it be no mean genealogy which run to a main branch wherein from Pharez of Thamar there be a passage to king matth. 1. David and so high 59 second whether it hinder or cut off succession or advancement be a great question among their own lawyer of both sort the rule be currant with the most of they and it seem by damasus a pope that he account priest son to be lawful beget in marriage or if they be repute bastard yet nevertheless they be not uncapable even of the popedom and he reckon many such that have be pope but this be not the case of that royal descend queen 60 for first if that rule be good fort she show herself by her princely quality have there be no other evidence especial by her magnanimity and courage to have be spring not only as Plutarch speak (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) of noble progenitor but to be a king and no other but king Henry daughter for whereas those that be so misbeget have servile base mind at least deject spirit (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) etc. Euripid. say the poet the very memory and mention of their wrong-birth abate the courage and inthral the mind into a kind of baseness so far it be from her that her subject see and her foe feel that she have the most undaunted and unyeelding spirit even in the great trouble that can betide the State 61 second when sanders and rishton with other have in print asperse her birth with like stain and obloquy and some have undertake by discourse of argument plain and unanswerable in a just volume compile and print to clear those base and disgraceful slander she so far scorn to have her birthright question that with great indignation she cause they to be suppress at the press 62 three grant it that by her father and that statute which this epistler here mention she be so pronounce first do not the same parent and statute also disgrace their catholic persecute queen Mary her sister as much and yet in all the popish writer she be high extol and not once touch herewith second mystery of state and secret of king action be not to be narrow pry into and sift by their subject much less by jesuite to be censure prince be man and parliament be assembly of man and man as the philosopher say to a great king be changeable creature look Plato Dion epis^... stat. 25. therefore backward the same both prince and parliament but two year before have ratify that marriage with her mother for lawful and invest the offspring of her body with the succession of the crown look forward but seven year after and the same both head and body receive stat. 35. the legitimation repeal the anull statute and pronounce the lady elizabeth for his lawful daughter reduce the crown to her right and interest again so that be not this jesuite of his school that take so much text as serve his turn that which Math 4. 5. make against he to leave out as he have upbraid she with a statute blemish he may have choke himself with a statute also honour advance and true possess her. 63 or rather know if the priest of Rome say true how his own mother another Pasiphae it seem by they advance his repute father head by the birth of this jesuite betake herself for the time to one call Cow buck a name compound of two beast with diverse p. 109 frontlet that so her husband may for the enhance of his top be both Actaon and Minotaurus that be as himself speak one of the most substantial for degree in the parish pag. 90. he may have record his own infelicity and rebuke his kind mother and not have lay this ignominious slander upon a king daughter his native sovereign and the mother of his country 64 in the mean time it seem the pope have a exorbicant power that whereas both law of God and church exclude for bear any office of ecclesiastical charge yet admit this manzer so the vulgar Deut. 23. 2. call he to be a jesuite and a rector among they unless hereby the pope do insinuate as sixtus Quintus do Quodlib p. 100 that he take the whole society for no other but a bastard-brood or that the college in the vacancy put up their petition for parson to be their head begin with that verse of the poet Iwenal and I trow with all that parson himself will account the wisd. 3. 16. etc. book of wisdom but a else there be a chapter will shrewd touch he with a more grievous infelicity than that statute which he mention will any way hurt that good and most noble queen Elizabeth 65 now from her infelicity passive he come numb 12. first to her infelicity repercussive how other for her sake be make unhappy as one in her brother time for fall in love with she and other as Wyatt and Carew in her sister time raise rebellion for she and why do he not rather say so much of the whore of Babylon and observe what a unlucky religion that of Rome be which intoxicate so many with she her filthy love-drug that for her sake they machinate and practice treason against their lawful prince and for their treason under pretence of mad for her come to unhappy end 66 but for love matter as that of the admiral be it what it be let he treat of they who once renounce the study of divinity because they be his own word affect company as I do say he I shall not keep the list fa. parsons in the paper leave by he in his study when he be expel of modesty for the other of the rebellion by Wyatt or her ^...ke they be so impudent u^...ue that our chronicler will refer those imputation unto that commonplace 67 second he reckon up her infelieitie active uz. sa. 211. ^...errigorous law and cruel against catholic religion that be simple false against popish traitor he may have say and we will both deny it and yield it deny it for twelve year together as have be often ^...old they of the reign of that most memorable queen the forest punishment of some of they who obstinate refuse to do her majesty service be commitment to bishop and dean house and of other if they be just suspect to be dangerous unto certain prison where they lay as warm and wax as fat in their restraint as the best subject that live at liberty in their own house 68 for the time subsequent we yield if death deserve draw on by demerit may be call cruelty in the magistrate for after religion be make but the stalking-horse to practice treason if then the complaint be of rigour and request for more ease we say with s. Augustine when he be entreat to mediate for a mitigation of some strait law nay if prince serve Christ in make law for Christ they do what they ought I will not epist. 48. gain say they 69 and yet to examine this cruelty and rigour thereof we will not do it by comparison of popish tyranny fearful torture and bloody massacre but first their own priest shall speak for queen Elizabeth law who say that consider jesuitical practice shadow under cloak of religion all the law enact Quodlib pag 269. 277. against catholic be make with great moderation and clemency as come from a prince most mild and merciful nor they have cause to verge repeal of any statute make so long as jesuite take such course second one fa. parson who in the preface of one of his legend commend queen preface to the first part of his triple conversion Elizabeth for her moderate government and that be in the last year of her reign and yet by the way for the man singular honesty it be worth note that in one and the same lease have so commend she in one page many than she be alive in the very next page for then he hear she be dead in a preface to his majesty he compare she to no other but Dioclesian for cruelty 70 now belike to ratify that comparison he will persuade we here that it be not treason but religion upon which she do practice her cruelty which he prove with such a medusa-like argument as be able to strike the answerer into a stound virgil. and put he to silence because some be execute which may have have their life at the last cast if they will have yield in this one point of religion viz to renounce the pope and conform themselves to the present State may not that good queen complain here as he once do Theodorus that what he reach with the right hand his scholar take with the left and that a principal demonstration of her indulgence shall be bring in for a apparent evidence of her cruelty 71 put the case that Absalon have be a idolater as he be a traitor and king David after sentence pass against he for his unnatural treason will have acquit he from death conditional that he will renounce false god and worship only the true God in that manner which God himself have prescribe and he refuse it be execute shall we say he die for religion or for treason it be mercy in the king to offer but wilfulness in the son to refuse a condition so easy and religious 72 or if some father have a lewd son who to waste his wealth upon harlot like the prodigal in the gospel shall conspire with his brother to rob their father first and then cut his throat to enjoy all after arraignment and sentence past the father shall promise to procure a pardon conditienal that his son will frequent the church upon Sabao^...h day and leave those brothel house which wrought in he the thought of such wicked course and the desperate youth refuse it choose rather to die then to leave his filti^... pleasure shall we say that he be execute for his whoredom they be not before lay against he no but for the parricide and petty treason against his father according to the sentence prince which make such gracious offer do therein show their most christian affection that they desire the conversion of man rather than their destruction and look rather to the save of their subject soul than the safety of their own person as be content to remit all bypass breach of law and duty to themselves so they may make they true religious towards God 73 but to conclude this complaint of queen Elizabeth cruelty a italian no Protestant shall speak Bizar histor. Gene^...s pa. ^...68 clementia etc. so great and so apparent be the moderation of her mind and her inbred clemency that not undeserved it may be say of she which the ancient history have leave to posterity of Alexander Severus bear of his mother Mommaa AEMATON CITR as namely that she have govern her kingdom without bloodshed SV apten AEDIBUS and Ate abhor at for even her nature do abhor the think of SLAUGH^...ER or cruelty and so he go on in a large discourse in this her praise and when he write thus she have reign twenty year it be marvel their index have not scour he ere this and for this 74 yet the cur let not go his hold but sna^...les at another infelicity of this memorable queen her jealous fear which make she suspect her life to be aim at by all sort both puritan and papist and those jealousy enrage her cruelty to the end of their life and Squire story must be feign and Lopez a jew must be fetch it in and cast away yea she be never quiet till she have make away the king mother 75 for prince to be jealous of their life and safety be both usual and necessary Sallust in I^...gurth say the historian especial if they have in their realm such as do either or pretend a right or intend a mischief against their crown and kingdom nor be it the fear of their own death but doubt of the event which may follow Seneca oedip. that which trouble they be both the issue of their state which be their heavy charge how that shall be either brandle or quiet and also the estate of their issue which be their tender charge how they shall be either hurry or establish 76 there be no king be he never so gracious but he walk in the midst of eye observe for hurt and no eye so dangerous as that in the gospel which be therefore evil because the prince be good he reward mat. 20. 25. the most industrious with grace and bounty his advance to honour the best deserve approximate to his secret the most trusty and faithful these thing in some which think themselves to be either neglect or wrong breed discontent and how deep the impression there of will reach who can tell the more asspire virgil. thought be defeat do contrive and machinate the more hellish designment who then can blame prince if they be wary and cautelous but principal if they have be already within the ^...awe of the lion and upon the mouth of the sword a quality pardonable especial in a woman who sex by nature as appear by the apostle be inclinable to be alright with 1. pet. 3. 6. every terror 77 but it be not so with queen ELIZABETH careful she be fearful she be not wary but not jealous provident but not suspicious the undoubted love of her subject and the sincerity of her own mind be the double brazen wall of her security no one such quality either concomitant with jealous fear appear in she which history in suspicious tyrant do observe her body not privy arm her eye abroad not whirl about her countenance not appall her spirit not trouble her sleep not disquiet no stranger or subject admit to her presence search nor any quality issue from such fear appear in her government her people love she hate she not her Arm^...es fight valiant for she and shrink not her land flourish it sink not her reign continue long oulast the regency of a dozen pope it vanish not a evident demonstration of her mild deportment her person Seneca not assault nor her state at any time ^...umultuated but by romish instigation or conspiracy and now be dead she be still love remember and the memory of her utter without envious comparison or malicious disparison of other his sacred majesty be please most gracious to accept a infallible argument both of his most princely disposition and of her temperate and unburdensome government 78 last if jealous suspicion and fear extend itself towards any it common alight upon the heir apparent or the successor expect so ^...aith histor. lib. 1. and whether it be so or no his sacred majesty who have the near and most undoubted right can answer best in this case as for the trial of the example which he bring as story feign and fruit of her jealousy namely Lopez and Squier whether their treason be fiction or a^...ions he shall have first priest of their Quodlib lib. 1. own that confess Lopez to be set on to poison she by hoult the jesuite second a chronicler of we who s^...ow credit he much rely on for he often city he who say that they be both find guilty and condemn of high treason the one 1593. the other 1598. both of see the jesuite catechism for this they for intend her death by poison and walpoole the jesuite be the instigator of Squier 79 why do he not also name Parry the doctor authorize by the pope to the murder of she commend by he for intend it absolve from all his sin for pursue it and assure of merit for perform it cardinal com. his letter who when she know that he be arm for the point so far she be from affright jealousy that she personal confront he with her presence amate he and without terror dismiss he so unhappy be this jesuite in reckon up the catalogue of her unhappiness and yet that his hellish malice may leave nothing though never so sacred unsnarl at as before he bring in the murder of his majesty father for a parallel to the powder treason so now he reckon for one of her late majesty misery the death of the queen his mother whereby the reader may judge how he will use his majesty own fame if he be gather to his father when he be glad to allege so unlavorie example of both his parent that renown queen death be a misery indeed to this whole land and the most indelible blot that can be record of this country but that our late sovereign be abuse therein and that wicked act commit before her knowledge thereof beside her notable express of her own grief when she hear of it other sufficient proof have full resolve all honest man hereof and since our now sovereign who have the near interest in that errand be long ago satisfy by her majesty own purgation therein it be a far fetch it slander for a jesuite be not so much as that queen bear subject to awaken it now again out of so long dead ash but what may not the venom of Satan and yet since he will need rankle up again so old sore it be his majesty part and all his good subject just to blame the practise jesuite and priest of his order for bring that Ca^...e (@) jesuit misfortune upon she for never rest they from all kind of treasonable plot and practice against our late sovereign person father they though false upon the say queen and make she the high mark of their ambition till they bring she to her unfortunate end 80 and thus have strain out his very gall to vent his rancour by rans^...king her birth youth age and end with what despite and how little truth the christian reader may see be guilty to himself that he have do more then either before God or man he can justify 81 for thou shall not speak evil of the ruler of thy people be Moses precept and a memorandum to saint Paul and by a ancient canon Exod. 2^... 28. act. 23 5. c^...n a^...ost 74. a severe censure appoint upon any that shall be if a lay man to excommunicate he if in order to depose he if so straight alive much more be dead because first contumely be utter either for reproof to amend or vexation to grieve the party calumniate both these end cease in death the tongues-sting imprint no passion either for good or hurt upon deadman second if the almighty when he leave they open to the world yet restrain the tongue from disgrace or despight they much more have now take they from the world for if they be in heaven every contumely against they be blasphemy against God if damn sufficient for hell be the torment thereof three the very heathen condemn it and both enjoin silence to they that attempt it be still and cease to revile the dead say he in the poet and account they no better than hegs and (@) Astoph plin. N^... hist in prefat. arist. in rhetor in antig^...ue wicked spirit so Pliny than dog so Plato and Aristotle then profane and impious so Homer then second murderer so Sophocles repute they four this jesuite himself be so tender over traitor and those the most odious h^...leous monstrous horrible barbarous desperate unmatchable unexpressible that be in a word those jesvited powder-plotting-traitor that he expostulate with his majesty for record their bloody designment after death and be there no end of exprobration and be not those unfortunate gentleman execute say he but queen Elizabeth be dead and as David say of die pag. 6. num. 10. 11. 2. sam. 3. 3 8. she as a base woman ignominious or as a tyrant in and sanguine by violence and blood or be she cast out unbury or unregarded no but depart in peace with as much love and honour as possible a prince can be capable of and glorious entomb by her most royal successor and can she be suffer to rest and be there no end of barbarous malice but a currish bloodhound must rouse she and tear she from top to toe within and without from birth to death 82 now know I say how detestable this will be in the ear of God and in the eye of man for God it seem he care not who have bar even the very thought from conceive evil of the prince he will Eccles. 10. 20. fain satisfy the world by yield three or four reason why he have thus yell against she first to repress the lord cook insult speech as he call it that be to abase his true extol of that famous queen as if he shall say because the chief justice discharge the duty of a christian in continue the name of the righteous for a ever last remembrance therefore i will play the devil part to be and recount her virtue or vice after she be depart even as the jew d^...alt with Christ because he process himself to be the son of God they will brave he down with a slander encounter and justify it when they have do say we not well John 8. 48. that thou be a Samaritane and have a devil 83 second to vindicate the credit at least to make good the epithet which pope Clemens give she in call her miserable woman so do the uncircumcised 1. sam. 17. 42 43. Philistine vi^...ie David call he boy and curse he by his god belike if Rabsheka revile in a word Shemei must make it up with a comment of contumely it be record that they of Alexandria in Egypt keep their ibis great bird to devour the Di^...dorus Sic^...lus lib. 3. garbage of the city and to cleanse their street which they do indeed but leave of their own filth more noisome behind they so do this jesuite the pope sca^...inger keep in Rome for no other purpose but that he may justify their ribaldry with more abominable Lucian contumely 84 three in imitation for a consolation which be numb 15. that as some of the father who to animate the persecute christian describe the lewd life and fearful end of their persecutor as Nero and Domitian so he to comfort the catholic traitor must revile and belie that worthy queen the rather because she be a woman if parson have no other comfort then to cheer they up because a woman quell their insolency then may the devil be comfort because the woman they read it gen. 3. 15. have bruise the serpent head and Sissera may take great pride in it that he be bring down by the hand of a jud. 4. 21. woman but if that be the best comfort the jesuite have their catholic will think of he as job of his friend that he be job. 16. 2. but consolator a miserable comforter 85 as well for that as for his double comparison first of the late christian queen with those beastly tyrannical atheist see the resemblance will better sit those their holy pope of who some be as Clemens speak of the heathen jupiter and S^...tonius of Nero clem. alex. in protrept and other successive murderer say Rodi^...s in meibedo one of their own author for their pope second in that comparison of the primitive christian with their execute priest 86 in both which the indifferent reader will find more spite than truth more malice than conscience heaven and hell not more differ than she from those tyrant then those christian martyr from these priested traitor they acknowledge the emperor supremacy in dependent upon any but God pray for they serious both live and die say Tertullian in their person these companion Tertul. in Apol^...get suck treason with their principle hatch it in their conventicle and end with it at their execution if queen Elizabeth be the first of her sex that take upon her supreme power in spiritual and ecclesiastical matter as the epistler say in it she be no usurper by novell-claime but accept what God himself have annex to her crown her sister before her renounce it in a superstitious indulgence of the pope former loss shed more blood of person ecclesiastical within three year than she that keep it do in forty year for cause criminal of popish priest 87 his last and conclusive reason Numb. 16. be a sarcastical scorn to his majesty for this old Silicernium have not yet purge the pruriginous humour of his scoff brain because say he the apologer have take upon he to sacrifice to her mane I think myself oblige to offer some incense for mitigate the evil send even so because the son of God the holy angel stand before he to report their message the devil take himself oblige to intrude among they and reckon up his roguery and because elisha think job. 1. good to make provision for the student therefore one less skilful but more busy than the rest take it his duty 2. reg 4. together Coloquintila to poi^...on the pot or more near to this metaphor because Aaron and his son be privilege to sacrifice therefore a ringleader of rebel numb 16. must think himself oblige to take his Senser in his hand to disgrace God ordinance but as that prove not but so such ranck-incense as this be the unsavoury egestion of a filthy strong stomach be by God himself pronounce a abomination E^... 1 15. 88 which being so loathsome it be time to dismiss he for a Sensing conjurer or rather a incense blasphemer with s. Peter farewell to Simon Magus repent of this thy act. 8. wickedness and pray God that if it be possible the thought of thy heart and the blasphemy of thy pen against that worthy queen may be forgive thou for I see that thou be in the gall of bitterness and in and oblige in the bond of iniquity 89 if it be possible I say for God to forgive thou which doubt I ground upon fa. parsons his own challenge of the priest who because they have in their book turn the in side outward reveal the hypocrisy disclose Quedlib etc. important consider the conspiracy anatomize the atheism cataloguize the lewd vice of the igna^...ian brood a society which like Hannibal army be gather of the refuse and malcontent of all nation Livy cement into a Fraterni^...e as the wall of Babylon build with the demolish rubbish of rabble tower nourish by the pope as the janissary by the Turk to be Herodotus the valiant cutthroat of true christian their own native countryman especial because they have blazon he in his proper colour he not only include they within the civil and canon law for detestable libeler but bring casi of conscience to enthrall they in Manifestar 11. and 12. despair pronounce they scarce able to disburden their soul though with second recantation they restore the fame of those who before they have slander vea drive they into s. Paul dreadful impossibility and Heb. 6. 4. 5. 6. there em^...ds they because in their enter into priesthood beside their baptism they do renounce the devil and all his work who now before this libel and revile vein it seem they have take in again with seven worse than himself this humour of contumelious reproach being most opposite to charity and therefore one of the high step to the sin of the holy ghost he will they to remember that fearful place have behave themselves soireful and impudent not only against their brother and equal but much more their better and superior 90 what then be the cause of this Mote^...er but Matth 7. rom. (@) 1. am^...eyed jesuite do not S. Paul say to he therefore thou be inexcusable o man unless he account qu. Elizabeth to be neither his superior nor equal so contemptuous and contumelious so false and ignominious to reduce her from her grave and traduce her by slander in the world who bless memory though his venomous tongue most base wretch as he be can ^...annoy more than a poison dart pearl a marble stone yet suoore what sta^...e be he in in his own conscience by his own doom of the priest 91 if he say she be a heretic so be saint Paul account first that be not prove second it be but a selfe-soothing distinction or excuse which in his own opinion make a spiritual sin less sensible but more dangerous Manifestar sol. 2. 3. three admit it be true and that she be a persecutor what less be he that smite our bless saviour stand at the bar and what answer be return if I have evil speak say our saviour bear witness of the evil but if I have well speak why smite thou i all this he know and urge against the priest condemn their reproach to be issue of the bad spirit think he to be exempt from that dreadful see Heb. 6. 4 5. he have take the same order which they have and run the same race of reproachful ^...iot which they do 92 he have spend his spite upon the dead and row he vent his malice against a live majesty scorn for three number together 17. 18. 19 that t. m. the young as he call he shall commend our most gracious sovereign for his kindness and clemency former show to their catholic which he term flattery and adulation 93 be not this fellow true Canis in that can neither speak well himself nor endure that virtue shall have her due commendation by but as some write of the galathians that will permit no gold to come into their country and yet they will rob any man that have gold about he so he be neither capable of virtue himself nor inclinable to it will not suffer it to be praise in they that have it without imputation of base flattery which can be without touch of both party because none use to flatter but such as have none other mean to advance themselves and none love to be flatter but those which have no true virtue to commend they neither of which can take any hold of these person who he thus sly scoff in this place 94 for the first who he decipher with the letter of t. m. as mean a minister as fa. cow buck make he be never so defective either of honourable alliance or large pag. 2. provision of mean or many good desert and quality that he need the use and help of such servile oil whereby to glide more easy into preferment 95 and for his sacred majesty the world can but know that be so absolute complete with those grace of the spirit and gift of nature and help both of art and experience that may be require true to commend he as a man a christian or a king he be neither so degenerate from a princely nature as to have or crave such weak support as feign blandishment neither so unskilful as that he can discern between the precious and the vile but that he can make use of the praiser mouth so the read it as king Solomon direct pro. 27. 21. as the fi^...ing sornace to try whether it yield dross for gold or counterfeit for truth and therefore can quick distinguish in this place between the true acknowledgement of a faithful subject which this scorner call and the dissemble kiss of a fawn hypocrite which be as that be which follow in this section 96 wherein this judas commend his majesty great humanity royal nature and noble disposition so the devil confess Christ to be the son of God but their conclusion be withal math. 8. 97 whereunto his majesty may answer as he in Seneca what evil have I do that so bad a fellow as this be shall speak so well of i can we gather grape of thorn or fig of matth. 7. thistle be not this that self-same parson who as the priest witness labour the pope holiness to excommunicate longagoe his majesty as a obstinate and forlorn Quodl. pa. 257 heretic 98 but this noble disposition of mildness and clemency bo^...h inbred by nature and engraft by art so apparent so inherent in his majesty that be true repute he win the love and affection of all good man unto he among who some account it a great part of their infelicity though otherwise well provide Suet. tito that they can daily stand before he to be partaker of his sweet condition and behaviour if it be as the epistler say alter who have avert he or change it sure t. m. and some such other minister desirous to draw blood who inci^...e his majesty against the catholic have neither place near he nor admittance to he to speak for themselves 99 it vex they that as Satan stand at God Zach. 3. 1. right hand to resist jehoshua they may not have one of their sort always at his majesty elbow either to instill into his ear that poison doctrine of abase himself to the pope lure or i^... he will not stoop as Clement the monk serve the french king to f^...stenitat his heart with a poison knife 100 this reason of he for the king aversion or change be not only a calumniation against t. m. but a disreputation also to his majesty as if in tertullians proverb his custom be to be so variable (@) as at every man sudden information to alter his clemency into cruelty and his mildness of nature to the draw of blood than which there be nothing more contrary unto his royal heart only he take that course be force thereunto which either David do by God direction or God himself by David description come perver^... perverse with the froward to deal as sowrly Psal. 18. 26. 101 for patience oft try must needs turn into rigour and ulcerate Apostemes must be lance at least and where there be a (@) and infect gangrene the saw or Chizell must make the divorce from the other member and if there be any fault the defect of this be it his majesty constancy what it be we shall have occasion within a few leaf to examine in the mean time for this challenge of his change as God say to Israel to their catholic may be true answer your destruction come of your hos. 13. 9 self it be not his majesty either mutability of nature or in s^...t as be say of that emperor but the reiterate disloyalty of I^... suit vassal and especial this last indiscreet act of the pope in discharge Catholiks from take the o at h of allegiance which his majesty use as a fan to try the chaff from the wheat for the purge of his floor that have cause it 102 so that if there be a draw of blood as his majesty have well forewarn let it alight upon the pope who by send out his of counter-obeisance as in old time the erasm. Diogenia herald be wont to send out a ram in token of defiance have for maintenance of his own usurp power rouse a lion to their overthrow which hearken to that rebellious incite message as that old prophet in scripture procure to he that believe a errand from a feign angel 1. reg. 13. 24. by a false dissembler 103. but his principal stitch be at t. m. the young who he know well enough to have a more honourable place in his majesty household as he be Deane of his chapel than Bellarmine shall have in the pope court as he be cardinal for by that he be true and original a parish-priest yet he that be so full of manner to tax his majesty of incivility for call the cardinal master Bellarmine afford the dean now a reverend bishop in the church no other title but of t. m. in cipher and of a inferior minister in scorn and his anger be because either by jest or tale out of popish writer this t. m. some or jester belike make his majesty sport or with some bitter g^...ds provoke hard speech from his majesty against the catholic so that sycophancy be his whole exercise it be true that his majesty table for the most part at time of repast be as constant. lib. 4. Constantine court a little university compass with learned man in all profession and his majesty in the midst of they as the grecian entitle one less deserve a live library furnish at all hand to reply answer object resolve discourse explain according to several eunapius occasion emergent upon fact or accidental upon speech and as El^...hu say his ear try word as the mouth taste meat be as exquisite in the trial as Antonius job 33. Pius who for his singular and sist wit be call cumini-sector so narrow and thorough will he search Cuspin in ei^... every point and distinguish upon any hint among many other who happiness it be to attend a king so wise from who table no intellige^...t waiter depart but bett^... instruct then before this t. m. be one who birth learning religion degree and (@) do al^... concurre^... scorn of sycophancy and none more detest ^...th it then his master our Sovereig^...e therein excel Augustus Caesar who though he be commend for his (@) (@) (@) cap. 74. singular affability at board and de^...ire of discourse yet often time will have jester and player to be send for to attend and confer with they for this be his majesty excellency that he have rather have theological and philosophical argument canvas then mimical jest compose and tere but of all other sycophancy and calumniation he do abhor 104. and yet why may not we be as merry or bitter with this epistler sycophancy it be a profane word as it please he to be with the apolog^...ers mane which he translate hobgoblin and tell he that every schoole-bouk owe the word to be derive and the name impose for reveal fig therefore take the word in the primitive use and as the plut. Solon athenian do who give the first denomination it be no dis^...race for t. m. to be call a sycophant in philomne (@) athen. that sense for to that office be solemn choose in Athens (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) the most trusty and faithful of all the citizen and in the opinion of a better grammarian than this censurer whosoever be note to be (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) Alexis (@) 3. a honest man and pleasant in discourse misc^... Horace be so entitle and then who fit the office better than the king daily attendant and when be it fit but in time of his majesty repast whereat there be not more variety of meat than diversity of learned discourse much like the table of Augustus Caesar and Francis the second king of France August ap. Thuan. lib. 3. 105. but if take at the worst as there be (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) a deprave vein in it even by the epistler own verdict t. m. can be no sycophant for they which delight in such calumniation and use those delatory accusation they do it and without witness which give Aristoph plut. occasion to the proverb that the poison of a sycophant tooth be immedicable because the secrecy of the bite be inevitable but t. m. do this by the censurer confession when his majesty take his repast that be in the hear of many and of some as it seem which be parson intelligencer to send what they hear to Rome so that the party be know and the tale open tell he can be call a sycophant 106. yet grant he this wherein then consist his sycophancy what fig reveal he it seem by the apologue in scripture that they be a pleasant fruit and nothing judg. 9 11. more sweet by the ancient proverb to which first because the miracle in romish legend so magnify may aristop. well be compare pleasant in the ear and good for nothing else but to pass the time t. m. perhaps by occasion of tabletalk minister recount some of they at and for the king repast 107. as for example omit the old story of saint dionyse that carry his own head in his hand after it be strike off and of Clement the first who when he be cast into the sea with a millstone about his neck the sea infest. clem. ^...ed three mile from the shore and there be find a little chapel ready build in the sea where his body be bestow and that of Neocaessarien who staff stick ^...owne by he at the bank side keep the river from overflow greg. thou mat the bank and present spring up and spread itself into a mighty tree that pass Aaron rod and num. 17. 8. come near to his javelin which he dart from he it immediate stem up into a stately cornel tree and there it grow till julius Caesar time plut. rom. 108. like enough t. m. take the miracle of the new-mint whereof the lady of Hales and the conformity of saint Francis who they call and Xaverius his life and Bozius will afford great plenty and perhaps occasion be give to such discourse upon garnets Stram as if the pole which hold his head upon London bridge be turn into a straw 109. these be fig indeed pleasant in the care and in the taste but physician write that as such fruit though lib. 1. very pleasant breed corrupt blood and engender such creature which may make friar postil as currant and nimble as vitas-patrum so it cause choler also procure unto man of settle judgement a zealous indignation to see that religion shall be pharmacize with such drug 110. second it may be also that this t. m. alight upon the pope large extend indulgence which may fit be compare to those figleaf where with our first parent cover their dishonourable part pardon enormous sin for innumerable year upon sweet condition as for kiss two iron cross at saint Peter church door in Rome five hundred year of pardon for look indulg. rom. upon one of the penny for which our saviour be sell 1400. year pardon for behold the cross upon the top of saint John of Lateran his steeple 1400. year pardon why because that cross be make of the sword which cut off saint John baptist head but all this be nothing for sixtus grant forty thousand year of pardon to he that will say a prayer of his make consist of about forty five word and why because his catholic may not complain that the protestant satisfaction be easy than they these and such like this t. m. recount procure his majesty some pleasure at his repast and like enough occasion be give for this in discourse of the jesuite absolve the powder-traitor from all their sin for so worthy a work 111. three because as it appear by the prophet that all fig be not of one quality but like grape some (@) 2^... 2. exceed nought and sour such as the historian write of the Laconi^... fig which they say be (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) athen. aristop ^...ery odious dangerous and tyrannical fig it be probable that occasion be minister at his majesty table to disourse of those dreadful cruel positions of pope depose king expo^...g they to murder incite their subject (@) rebellion and determine such parricide to be meritorious which to some waiter attend seem incredible because they be so horrible this t. m. the young (@) the vessel to the full view city the author for he be like Plato his philosopher (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) very ready in all those writer point to the page out of Symancha Allen creswell Bannes Bellarmine and sixtus that notable panegyrical orator and Extoller of such murder 113. last to make he a perfect sycophant Dion Coccei because story do mention Livia fig which be both poison and poison for so she serve the fig that the emperor Augustus use to taste of which kind by report be not strange in Italy happy as it may sort with the time he record out of some romish writer what a excellent vein both pope have in fig each other away and jesuite too as the priest relate in dispatch with such pleasant pill any that stand in their way or light 113. if this fashion of his be sycophancy speak the truth upon just occasion offer open before witness allege his author point out the place and read they he need not be ashamed of the title but as job speak of his adversary book he may job 31. 36. take it and bind it as a crown unto he 114. in the mean time be not that sycophancy in the worst sense that jesuite and principal fa. parsons who in this kind they say be Mereurius amian Marcellin lib. 14. and like he in the story that relate unto the emperor mere dream neither true frame and perverse interpret mutter in corner and utter in foreign nation to bring our profession into hatred that in England we put catholic into the stock and there let they sit so long upon the ground till body and earth so rot together (@) Anglicanae that there can be a separation but with flesh pull from the bone that at Dover some catholic be put in bear skin and so bait to death by dog 115. that garnet the arch-traitor be execute for reprove the protestant with some sharp speech that his forehead receive a blow as he be drag upon the stone and where the wound be the sign of the @ appear and the blood drop down upon the print in Spain in quarto with a ballad straw in the hurdle other say it be at the gibbet when he be bowel a tale much like the judge of susannaes tree and his face in full feature print upon the straw like another Veronica and a seraphin countenance therewithal that so there may be two face under one hood and all this to bring credit to their society this may be call sycophancy by s. Paul description for speak lie 1. Tim 4. 2. through hypocrisy without truth or testimony 116. whereas relation of story either serious or pleasant warrant by their own author be not sycophancy but verity and if such discourse work upon his majesty affection respective for anger or mirth and make he cry out with the poet let they rather purge their book both of such fable which be ridiculous procure laughter and also of such positions which be dreadful breed horror in the care and detestation in the heart of religious prince then call the relate of they sycophancy for wherefore be they print but that they may be recount 117. yea but they be unfit apply or misunderstand by the relator say this grave censurer for he th^...^...print which be subject to examination as in this apopologie will ^...e author so impertinent either make against he else or nothing to his purpose what liberty will he take quoth he where he speak with a applause without contradiction 118. the Apologier as he call he will answer with the prophet but it be Psal. ^...0 judg. 9 36. no marvel if divaken Zebul the traitor take a army of man to be but shadow of mountain and there be no drunkenness to that of the wormwood water which in scripture resemble heretical malice let that therefore Apoe 8. 11. be the trial and as here he shall be find either impertinent or his own adversary according let his discourse at table be judge of but when it be come to that issue the reader will see and say that you mass. parsons be the right t. m. MEND axe and the truth of his as so apparent and pregnant that if your conscience be not sear your own judgement will be as be he of his sincerity will so far outstrip gen. 38. 26. you we may conjecture it by your long hold off with by-discourse and inuective for protraction always argue a misdoubt of good success 119. from t. m the minister he come again to his majesty under the name of the Apologier who to acquit himself of persecution as before he have most royal free queen Elizabeth and thereby both to staunch the pope weep for the affliction of catholic and to tax their ingratitude who as Aesop wolf serve the crane that ride A^...sop he of his choke bone and save his life be so far from acknowledge his majesty extend kindness that they break out into expostulation of hard measure offer plot treason against his whole realm with foreign enterparle that deny against his person by combination domestical that discover by conspiracy against root and branch king progeny and state all at one blow that defeat by procure the pope breve for discharge from their allegiance his majesty I say by the example of God himself who do so argue with Saul and David declare his moderate course with those catholic exceed queen Elizabeth though they 1. sam. 15. 17. 2. sam. 12. 7 8. very great and set out his clemency both by the effect which it wrought in they and by the particular enumeration of his benefit towards they 120. for albeit commemoration of good turn be general a exprobration yet have it in some case warrant in divinity for what can I have do more unto my vineyard which I have not do say God to Israel for her es. 5. 4. sour grape and be there not ten cleanse say our saviour thereby reprove the unthankfulness of nine luc. 17. 17. with record the benefit and in human learning also two principal reason Plutarch yield among many other how without envy or blush a man may commend himself and recount his extend favour either against a calumniator that do abase or extenuate they or a ungrateful person that conceal they whole or requite they bad which be no upbraid say he but in the former a apology to clear the slander in the other a reproof to check a ill nature 121. the effect viz. that it wrought in they that height of pride as in confidence of his majesty clemency they direct do expect and assure promise unto themselves liberty of conscience and equality in all thing with his majesty best and most faithful subject 122. in censure whereof the jesuite in three large Numb. 20. 21. 22. show himself both a scorn shifter and a sly sophister for after he have scoff play with those word height of pride he shift they off first by run again to his common place of torment of conscience and in match the liberty thereof that be toleration of their religion with freedom of breathe the one as if that aught as safe and free to be grant as this second by recrimination that the humble and underling protestant among we the lollard and wickl^...sts in formertime the state in Germany both high and low and the subject of some king do and do make that their plea with their superior last by ^...xpostulation why not they as well especial of his majesty a king first so free before time from cruelty second descend of a mother that think herself behold to the catholic three confess that he ever find the catholics party most trusty to he and reward they for it thereby give hope of like favour to other four receive with universal joy trust that as by his unite of two kingdom he have conjoin the obedience of two nation so will he also have entertain their religion thereby to unite both sort of his subject 123 his sophistry he show in apply those word height of pride to one thing which his majesty have reter to twain for herein it consist that they not only expect liberty of conscience but also equality of all thing with we this last he leave out and insist only upon the former for grant it be but a step of pride upon such slight presumption to expect the first yet to promise unto themselves together with that to be equal prefer and favour by a prince so diverse affect in religion and in a state so thorough settle and well furnish with man more undoubted loyal a thing which his majesty both in his book and in his government deny to his faithful native subject of both kingdom who (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) pa. 55. he exclude from office of judicature and state in both realm respective this be the summitie and sublimity of pride 124 yet we will also join that issue with he that not to desire and supplicate nor to expect and hope to which purpose he bring all his example vary from the point the king ^...aith not so but which be his majesty word direct to expect and assure to promise to themselves liberty of conscience be itself alone a celsitude of pride 125 for whether we measure the height of pride by Lucifer the prince over all the child of pride as Gregory moralize job Leviathan who only presumption in job. 41. 25. jude. verse 6. gen. 3. of liberty without warrant be both his inbred pride cause his own overthrow and his infuse pride to our first parent procure their fall or by scholestricall divine who confine all proud man within two sort one of Aquin. 22. q. 33. 5. they which advance themselves above other the second which arrogate to themselves that which be above they and beyond their pitch this selfe-promising assurance of those catholic for liberty of conscience can be place but in the high degree of pride because it assure a matter both unwarrant and far above their compass and beyond their duty 126 it being first impious against God who symbolical forbid such mixture in the linsey-wolsey-garment Deut. 22. 11. 1. reg. 18. 21. metaphorical upbraid it when he call it halt between two opinion direct inhibit it in advise not to draw in a counter ^...ecting yoke with infidel much less with heretic 2. cor. 6. 14. by romish divinity because the first arise by ignorance the other grow strong by pertinacy pinch at the permission of diverse faction of different opinion Apoc. 2. 14. 15 within the same church and threaten the toleration thereof with revenge brand even very good king with 2 reg. 15. 3. 4 34. 35. a perpetual censure for not prevent or endure it severe punish it in the samaritans who fear the true 2. reg. 17. 33. God and yet serve idol after the manner of other nation and be fasten upon they for one of their main heresy by the church of God to this day now to communicate Epiphan lib. 1 Samaris with a sin be equal liable to the same punishment with the sin and the magistrate permit be a communicate 127 second it be a matter dishonourable to the king direct to expect and assured to presume of it be a extremity of pride for honest man even of their equal will expect nothing but that which shall stand with the credit and reputation of the granter only jesuite fugitive from their country without leave and against law as if they have be conqueror of the land or the sole disposer of the crown presume upon a liberty for heretical superstition Livy as the historian speak and expect yea in a manner claim and exact of their king and sove reign who without stain of his honour can yield it or satisfy they 128 for so first he shall be contrary to himself a quality savour by his majesty own judgement in matter less weighty of two much weakness and slipperiness (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) prefat. pa. 7. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) pa. 1. he have apprehend the religion which he now profess from the cradle of his infancy resolve his conscience that it be ground upon direct word of scripture maintain it both by argument in disputation and against broil by combination with his utmost skill and strength enact it by law establish it by oath and neither by fear nor flattery persuasion or threat can be draw into the least inclination of yield to this dispensative indifference but do protest even while matter be in a mammer as watson that priest and traitor witness to who his majesty speak to the earl of Northamp it that all the crown and kingdom in this world shall not INDUCE he to change any ^...OT of his profession which be the pasture of his soul and earnest of his eternal inheritance account in that his golden book any contrary religion a abomination abhor the disturbance pa. 6. of the church peace by bitter spirit for matter indifferent even as give too great a advantage Presat pa. 11. for entry to the papist by such division distwade his son the noble young prince from take to wife a woman (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) p. 78 79. of different profession though his choice shall that way be much scant forewarn he of the inconvenience many and dangerous which will ensue such a match and withal both sharp tax and with severity disgrace prefat pa. 4. etc. the blind zeal and rash censure of some hot-mouthed minister in that country who touch he for some few passage in his book as if his majesty be either crack or cold or at least indifferent in religion final impute it as the gteat dishonour to Solomon the wise king that his slipperiness and inconstancy who have serve God in his young day be advance to the high and honour with peace abundance and all other blessing most than most of all fail in his zeal and religion and in this point principal by admit a strange worship within his realm 1. reg. 11. 129 ag^...ine it must n^...eds be dishonourable for a truly-religious king to encertaine that into his realm which no christian emperor or king ancient or modern be he a prince absolute and hereditary not elect upon condition nor enforce by violence nor wrought upon by fear nor induce by irreligious policy will ever endure as in Constantine Theodosius gratian A^...adius Euseb. const. 3. lib. 5. cod lib. 1. 5 tul. legib. lib. 2. honorius and other be manifest yea which the very heathen in their commonwealth will not admit who enjoin that none but their roman god shall be adore and they after no other manner but their own country fashion interdict any private shrine or particular worship different from their public order in religion 130 moreover his majesty predecessor a prince of the weak six be so resolute as never to brook it in all her reign notwithstanding all the persuasion ^^p^...ngs threat yea treasonable assault no not so much as to hear of any entreaty or treaty tend that way and yet rule at home in peace with comfort and honour and make her party good with any foreign opposite whatsoever if then his majesty behold to no man for the kingdom he enter but God and his native right shall immediate chop into this public indulgence give it the best name it may be think than which nothing can be more dishonourable that he have for doubt or fear or some other circumstance promise it before his entry and so do watson Digby and Piercy give it out and be not that the height of pride even that in the psalmist they do wear pride as a Psal. 73. 6. 8. chain therefore they talk wickedness presumptuous 131 three a height it be of pride to presume of that which will be dangerous to the whole state if it be grant especial their position be first that as soon as they can get strength they may break out into rebellion second Creswel in philop. pa 198 rannes in thom. 22. Bellar lib. 5. rom. that if the pope command they must obey though it be to take a^...mes against their lawful sovereign three disclose what such tol^...ration will sort unto if they have it as appear by a chief b^...l-weather among they one parson who peremptory resolution be as the priest report it that hear of queen elezabeths inclination Qu^...lib pa. 156. which be but a false b^...t to a toleration upon the league between France and Spain he utter dislike it and give his reason because they will have all or none they will admit of no condition four have such bloody mind which some of they in word have process one of their great cardinal vaunt that his horse shall cardi. Farnes Sl^...id lib. 7. swim up to the belly in the blood of the slaughter heretic make the best of it the scripture assure we that they will be either as the canaanite whip in the side and jos. 23. 11. thorner in the eye of the nation where they be or as the amalekite take advantage of the feebleness of the land Deut. 25. 16. when they have espy it 132 beside where the prince be not love the state must needs be in continual hazard and admit he toleration adieu his love on each side the contrary affect will dislike he as different from ^...hem in the main point they of his own profession will neglect he for tolerate a religion so oppos^...e to they so superstitious in itself so rebellious in the principle and no quarrel be so deadly as that which be for religion we see the samaritans can not abide the jew yet exclude our saviour only because his face be towards jerusalem for thence do luc. 9 53. arise distraction of mind bitterness of speech plot of treachery and massacre and each pa^...e endeavour to win other to their fashion will make the commonwealth like the dismember body of metius rend and tear between two cart drive contrary way say Livy dreadful in itself and loathsome in view Decad. 1 133 last it be a extreme height of pride to expect that of other which to speak in the prophet word though with more reverence than the jesuite here use they if and that Psal 114. the case be they as now God be thank it be we they will not endure to hear of yea think it impious to ask and irreligious to grant that be stapletons prompt Cath^... for 6. post Pas B^...din lib. 3. ca 7. ^...ol opinion who revile Bodin in particular as a enemy to christianity for maintain that liberty which they conclude to be the calamity of a church and out of Hillary to be a miserable thing and perilous in a state where there be as many faith as wiles so many doctrine as manner that be the rhemists conclusion in their testament and Bellarmine spend two whole chapter in in Ephes. 4. confute their argument which plead for it enforce cap. 18. 19 it from the example of the jewish church ground of scripture practise of emperor judgement of father yea reason and experience to be pernicious in any realm both to ecclesiastical and civil state and dangerous even to themselves which use that liberty breed in they for the time a coldness in their profession and in the end a nullity of Faith neither be the time long since that this jesuite himself among many reason against this expect toleration pa: 151. use that for one that it will make the catholic in England dull and without spirit 134 now let the indifferent reader judge whether this be not true call a height of pride in a company of fugitive direct to expect and assume to themselves that such a king desirous in his heart to serve God true without shrink or wave^...ing settle in mind resolve in judgement profess by word by oath by law by ad^...e will admit either a alteration total of his inbred religion or a partial toleration of a different profession a thing so contrary to God will so dishonourable to himself so dangerous to the state so condemn in other and deny in they even by those that request and expect this unless they shall think his majesty to be of the sultan mind to make no other account of religion but as a nosegay or garden of flower the more variety Cam^...rarius Lewen^... in paudect of they the more delightful view the more pleasant favour 135 and it seem this jesuite do so by the sleight resemblance he make in compare the liberty of conscience to breathe and use the common-ayre as if the king may as safe grant and they as free challenge the one as the other sure be the doctrine which they suck like the air which they take in this first concoct and prepare by sever and purge the impurity thereof before it breed or feed the vital spirit so the other cleanse from the dregs and corruption where of it be compound the best turn into nutriment of the soul the rest cast out as excrement the restraint of both be too severe and this resemblance may carry some sway but see that both the principle which be deliver infect the very inward and they which take plin. lib. 7. ca. 2. they in like the Psilli in Africa do contagious re-infect the very air which they breath with a pestilent savour of superstition and Disloyalty alienate the mind of their cohabitant as well from the true service of God as from their duty and allegiance to their sovereign the comparison be unfit and the restraint different the use of common air may be leave free and yet liberty of conscience preclude to such infect doctrine and infect spirit 136 his recrimination which be the second shift be draw from domestical and foreign example domestical first modern of those which in matter of ceremony and church government differ and sever themselves from we ^...hom both to curry favour with they he call humble and to excite envy to we he term underling protestant two title in those man mere contradictory for neither be they humble because they be underling we see the bramble and shrub in the scripture have as lofty conceit and more sting prickle in his low than judge 9 15. the spread vine or the pleasant fig tree neither a^... they underling because they be humble it be only pride and self conceit like he in the prophet stand apart come not nee^...e i for I be holy than thou which keep Fsa 65. 5. they aloof it be not the inferior place or the deject visage or the ^...oft voice or dislike of Prelacy that denominate humility to disobey authority be a great pride then to be in place of authority and therefore he do well to match these humble underling with his presume catholic for heresy and schism to frame the same plea of liberty and claim the same privilege be neither unusual nor unprobable and even this very thing convince he and he of high pride for if these humble underling as he call they dwell among we differ in matter only ceremonial be not hear in that their claim of Liber^...e it be a audacious boldness for those who in point essential and fundamental be sever from we to expect that which to they be deny the truth be the obstinate plea of our reformer for such liberty have be the very life and soul of the heart and hope of this presumptuous expectation in the romanist which by the brotherly and unanimous concurrence of the other with we have long ago be quell and crush 137 the other part be of domestical ancient example namely of lollard and wicklivist beat upon that argument and conspire against the prince upon the denial their conspiracy if any such be but the contrary be pregnant prove by master fox who cope act and Momus in hen. 5. with Harpsfield shroud under the borrow habit of Allen cope in the trial of that point we defend not subjection to prince we preach insurrection we defy lawful Conuentions for God service we allow mutinous band or conventicle seditious we condemn to supplicate unto prince and to make friend of the great with modesty and sobriety for enjoy a freedom to serve God in that manner which they be persuade true be most conformable to his word that be allowable if petition be deny submission with patience be christian humility and the evangelical precept but with reverated impudency to press or und^...full term to threaten or band rout either to enforce a grant or daunten the prince be devilish pride and disloyal conspiracy the answer therefore in brief be this do they well that claim this liberty why then be they condemn do they not well why do those catholic strike upon that string so oft and expect the grant with such confidence have the king do well in give they that liberty then be the pope to blame who incite he against they if he do well to deny they it be injury if not impudency in these catholic to crave that for themselves which they think fit to be deny to other 138 the foreign example as of the high Germany in the time of Charles the five and of the low country be no fit precedent for our state the government of the emperor be limit and conditional which he transgress they by their law and custom have warrant to oppose and stand for their impeach liberty for every Sleidan lib. 18. duke landsgrave and other great man both ecclesiastical and temporal in Germany have regal jurisdiction within their precincts it be no marvel if to countenance their special immunity they strive to maintain their several religion for conformity in religion will quick work a coalition of distinct regiment now what argument call you this several magistrate in their particular jurisdiction challenge their liberty of conscience according to custom ancient continue and upon condition mutual and former capitulate therefore subject under a absolute monarchy must claim it of their sovereign and at least expostul^...e with he if they have it not 139 yea but in Bohemia Polonia Hungaria etc. which be govern by king the like be urge and tolerate be the entrance into those kingdom successive not elective or if by descent without conditional restraint the example be more proper but it be well know as it have be answer that many of those king willing enough to reduce their country to one profession have have both their desire and power restrain by the noble and be receive of their commons at their first entry with that proviso that their accustom liberty of conscience be no way prohibit or interrupt if then they as traian the emperor when at the admit of a praetor gird his sword he give it he with these word if I rule according to law use this form if contrary to law use it against i be content so to capitulate for maintain their subject liberty their allegiance by their own law be no long tie than the other condition be perform 140 yet grant they be absolute monarch which either yield or offer such liberty of conscience what be that to his majesty who in case of religion take not man example but God law for his direct he know what prince ought to do not regard what they please to do be desirous rather to govern by christian piety then irreligious policy he know it to be observe both by jewish and christian divine that the diversity of religion tolerate by king Solomon in divine worship be by God require upon his heir and next successor 1. reg. 12. by a retaliate division of a unrecoverable rapture in the civil government and therefore how can they or why shall they expect or promise it to themselves from his majesty 141 yes say he first because he be free from cruelty and persecution before that be to say his majesty be natural merciful therefore he must become careless irreligious for to license idolatry be to communicate with impiety Moses be a very mild man above all the man that be upon the earth say the holy ghost Numb. 12. 3 yet when he spy a calse in the camp he proclaim a bloody massacre and pronounce the execution to be a exod. 32. 27. 29. 1. sam. 2. consecration it be not Ely his clemency in suffer his son to profane God sacrifice that can excuse he from a fearful punishment his majesty song be the same with king David mercy and judgement his eye to be bend upon the faithful in the land that they may Psal. 101. dwell with he but withal betimes to root out and both those that under pretence of religion fall away disloyal and those that combine together for mischief rebellious 142 second his mother hold herself much behold to catholic to the lay gentleman for their faithfulness and allegiance she do perhaps but have she not rely too much upon the priested sort her end have not be so sudden nor unkind this jesuit meaning be for true love to his majesty no doubt thus to cast salt into his eye or to stir revenge in his heart by the often repetition of his royal mother in the mean time be it not a violent presumption upon a valiant ground the mother love catholic for their dutifulness and loyalty the son must give they liberty of conscience though defile with idolatry against God and envenom with treasonable malice against his person religion be not derive traduce it be the infusion of the spirit not a conveyance by descent it be the instinct of grace not the instill of nature the son of there who be a idoll-maker become and have the name to be a father of the faithful and the heir of hezekiah a most religious king become rom 4. 2. reg. 21. a prince of cruel idolatry 143 three his majesty confess in his book that he find the catholic party most trusty to he in his other kingdom that be not so his majesty name preface pa. 6 B^... pa. 34. not catholic at all but both in the preface and in the book itself profess that he find non^... so steadfast to a bide by he in his great strait as they which constant keep their true allegiance to his mother true subject withdraw not their civil obed^...ence from their prince though he be of a different r^...ligion God have reveal the one by commandment he reserve the secret judgement of the other to himself for it be not Rome divinity but God book that make good subject and it be very probable that when his majesty have cast up his account of former disloyalty he shall find the moderate and direct Protestant that incline neither to right nor leave depend not upon pope indulgence nor plead for presbyter discipline to be the fast and faithful subject that divinity either of depose prince or surprise their parson or renounce allegiance be find neither in book nor practice of any but such as be either jesuit or genevate 144 four his majesty entry to this realm be applaud with universal rejoice if he have say general that be that the most of alsort receive his majesty even as king Solomon when he be proclaim with such shout of joy that the earth ring 1. reg. 1. 40. with the sound of they it be most true or if by universal he mean through the whole land and of all true-hearted subject it be his majesty comfort and be no more than their duty for how can it be but that the member of the body shall express their joy at his access who be the head of their guidance and the breath of their nostril but if he take universal for every subject howsoever affect either his speech be not true or their joy be unsound for some of they before ever they have see his face towards we be plot treason against he and other have breve in their cabinet if power have concur or occasion fit to impeach he so the universal bishop as Antichrist term himself be no party greg. mag. nor friend in this universal joy nor fa. parsons for he in his D^...loso his dole-man have renounce his part in our sovereign and pronounce himself elsewhere a desperate and Forlor^...e heretic yea Dolm. pa. 216 they be his express word whosoever shall consent to the succession of a Protestant be a most grievous and damnable sinner 145 and that the joy be not universal unfeigned himself do confess it for their rejoice be say he in hope of lirertie that be a mercenary respect no entire joy for true love seek not her own say saint Paul have it be sincere and simple then be 1. cor. 13. command they will perform obedience or if cross they will submit with patience for perfect ibid. Psal. 18. love neither disdain nor repine nor fall away but strange child will fail David find it by experience and that be their purpose as this jesuite purport for say he they mean to serve he faithful but now defeat of their hope their joy be quail and that mean alter 146 the last reason he use for the ground of this presumption be as Solomon speak 26. 21. a ball of wildfire cast in to set his majesty and his engl^...sh clergy in a mutual combustion and that by way of retortion viz. why shall not the catholic hope of equal favour from his majesty with t. m. and his fellow who have be old enemy and always bear a hard and hateful hand and tongue against his majesty both in sermon book and speech all the time of the late queen reign must now be so privilege as they will suffer none to be equal prefer with they 147 this be the devil humour up and down first as he be DIABOLUS a calumniate forger of malicious load for there be not one word of all this true yea it be the hearty joy of t. m. and his fellow we need not be ashamed of our society in that orbity and age of our late sovereign that there be a heir to the crown apparent though not by a declaration yet maugre all opposite jesuitic all and infernal apparent by devolution and unavoideable succession most sound ground both in the essential point of Religion^... and royal affect to the outward policy of this church-government which joy so far as without offence they may they do express second as he be SATAN a adversary of peace a sour of discord who kingdom fare best when there be most distraction thus to set enmity between the sword and the key a gracious prince and his loyal clergy but Apage Satana say his sacred majesty thou perceive not the thing that be of God for it be his property Psal. 68 to make man to be of one mind in a house and it be the duty of every true Christian by the apostle advise as much as in he lie to have peace with all man much more to preserve and nourish it between prince and subject rom. 12. three as he be Lucifer to challenge as in their doctrine God for heaven inheritance so in their pride the king for earth preferment as debt^...ers to desert we in both plead grace and not merit and the less we have deserve of both the more we acknowledge god mercy and his majesty favour 148 preferment of many be the amplitude of a king power the single out of some be the liberty of his choice and where there be less desert there grace be the large and the streiter bond to t^...e we more near in love and loyalty to so gracious a king not by presumption challenge a special privilege nor through envy repine at other man advancement but in dutiful affection and care to keep those far from he who entertainment into favour will be dangerous to his majesty and like to the untamed heifer say to their own like will soon gore he that have give they life and arm they with strength 149 for have not the truly-affectionate acknowledgement and gratulation be more entire and sincere from t. m. and his fellow than hitherto have be show from the head and members of the romish synagogue his majesty may too just have say of England as they do of the land be pleasant and rich but the people be the son of Anak Numb. 13. 29 not christian but monster a title fit unthankful man not for the rarity of the person vers. 35. there be too many but for the hugeness of that vice which comprehend within it all kind of impiety say saint Augustine augustin it be too bad a disposition that will neither afford love nor requite it neither offer it with kindness nor return it with acknowledgement 150 this because it please his majesty to exaggerate by enumeration of his manifold benefit and gracious clemency towards they both by release from greevance of purse of prison by access to his presence by addition of honour by rescue from death though convict though sentence and many such thereby to embroider the pope ingratitude and to heap coal of fire upon their head who have heap up coal for fire to have take off at once so many head how disdainful this jesuite account of the one and how simple he answer for the other will appear as follow 151 for first Numb. 24. in the margin he term his majesty rehearsal a exprobration which as be say before be rather a expostulation for return unkindness because to twit unthankful man with recount the good turn which they have receive be no upbraid of bitterness but a necessity of reproof neither be such Enmeration a advocate to plead for requital but a lookingglass to present to the party their own deformitic and to exhibit to stranger a view of both lest take knowledge of disloyal course enjoin of the one part and with all not understand the benefit bestow by the other they may take they to be inforcoment upon hard measure offer that be true the issue of corrupt nature ill dispose and this course God himself take first recount his benefit then call Esa. 13. heaven and earth to witness between he and his people and last m^...ng the party judge unto themselves of their own unthankfulness Esa. 5. 3. Seneca benes. lib. 7. ca. 23 forgetfulness in good man require admonition in ill man a exaction say Seneca 152 second after he have set down number 24. his majesty particular of those benefit he conclude it Numb. 25. with this jete scorn thus write this man. belike some contemptible fellow of the plebeian sort or foam refuse scribe like unto fa. parsons that write he know not how nor care what yet well fare king Saul though forsake of God when David repeat the kindness which he have show he in spare his life even when the lord have deliver 1. sam. 24. 10. etc. he up and some of his fellow have egg he on to kill Saul and for a evident token thereof let he see the skirt of his garment cut off he have the grace at jest the civility to acknowledge the kindness not only in good term be this the voice of my son David but vers. 17. 18. with a detestation of himself for deal so ill with he thou be more righteous than I and also a obtestation for a blessing from God the lordrender thou good for thy good do to i this day but this jesuite come short even of the stoic use who wish benefit to be record and repeat to a forgetful receiver for so he shall eitherlie in deny that he have receive they or be sorry and grieve that he do not acknowledge they for this fellow his memory be rub deny not the benefit yet scarce acknowledge they to be benefit but turn they off with a scornful extenuation such as they be like enough not worthy the name too mean no doubt for a king to give and too base belike for such true subject the pope vassal to receive 153 interest a right noble lord true honourable in himself and sound loyal to his sovereign who know what belong to religion and duty after particular Enumeration of the very same with comfort weigh they in the just balance of wisdom and thankfulness acknowledge they for the weight and price to be many talent and a large portion of grace and bounty but this be the king come no (@) garnet agg. 1. 6. guerdon from unthankful wretch as the prophet speak that he have pour his reward into a rive bag 154 but whatsoever they be small or great they apper^...eine nothing to the pope say this his proctor as if the pope be another heraclite that weep all but as if he be of the stoic mind to avow that the king Arrian epict. lib. 4. can bestow nothing worthy his account be it preferment or office or whatsoever 155 sure then be the pope either unnatural for a true head have a perfect sympathy with the member as well for mirth as for grief to be merry with the joyful as to weep with the sorrowful that be saint Paul rule or Magn^... etc. 1. else his grief he speak of be but hiprocrisie A^...ramentalis not all his tear turn into ink convey through a goose-quill into a paper never come near his heart nor be express with true affection for he can never true grieve in other distress that will not hearty rejoice in his well do the elder brother luc. 15. sullenness at the youngers ioy-feast upon his return argue that his riot and affliction do little affect he whereas the angel double rejoice at a sinner recovery imply their grief to be very great in his former fall 156 but indeed in the pope it be very pride a quality which be ever querulous repine if in every thing the turn may not at all hand be serve never thankful as challenge all courtesy even of the great state to be debt of mere duty and office of say Bernara if the pope have no more feel of benefit bestow bern. in can^...ic upon his vassal either they serve a senseless master or else good turn that way confer may well be spare marry as for the catholic say he they accept even the least favour grateful hope to have receive much great as due unto they if his majesty have not be prevent by sinister information 157 hear judas be turn into Caiphas and speak a truth as precedent to the council for the powder-plot the reveal whereof by a letter unexpected he cunning call a sinister information which indeed prevent his majesty from feel the event of that dreadful design and they also of their great hope which here he call their due as if all but they be usurper for have not that prevention happen the great place of the land which they in hope have swallow have be ere now at their disposal and this prevention he call sinister as unlucky to they otherwise he shall have say that his majesty have further enlarge and continue those favour but that he be prevent not by sinister information of other as t. m. etc. but by a dexter combination of themselves jesuit and gentleman they council these complot they conceal these ingine they absolve these resolve all together vow and swear and seal with the sacrament secrecy and villainy and this say his majesty be the Labrusca the sour fruit return and the whole recompense that be make for his former indulgence of grace and bounty 158 which speech this Miles Gloriosu^... in disdain call a calumniation of this man as this publican say the Pharisee and why a calumniation first in respect of the time because there have be persecution before that treason namely the pecuniary mulct impose in queen Elizabeth time once remit by his majesty be present recall again the arrearage exact and for levy thereof man house ransack cattle seize rent strain and tenant vex as in a common spoil and desolation 159 here be word of a tumult or rather a tumult of word to make a tragedy of trifle and a story of fable truss up together like a mountebank pack of vnsaverie intelligence convey unto he by some of his malicious and illude agent but in these case other manner of statesman and better acquaint with the course of such proceed be to be hear first that the arrearage of those mulct in the queen time be due debt to the crown be not whole remit but which be a principal favour by a special commission to come Northam garnet that purpose direct recusant have liberty to compound almost for what term and at what rate they may best and with most ease satisfy second that those mean profit which have accrue since the king time to his majesty for their recusancy be forgive to the principal gentleman who have both at his entry show so come salisb. Digby much loyalty and have keep themselves freefrom all conspiracy three for the ransack and the distreyn which he talk of if it be according to law it be warrant if otherwise it be punish for that be a further favour of his majesty to command that those officer come northampt shall be punish which make a prey of penalty and a personall private gain by the public justice of the State 160 but admit it be all true he speak as every word be false do not the treason of your good friend fa. parsons watson and Clerke break out first and a second combination not without a popish priest after that upon which some principal recusant be send for to Hampton court and dismiss with the favour before specify and grant it be before the powder conspiracy fall out it be not before those traitor fall into it or another as desperate as that which be the preamble unto this 161 a second reason why he call it a calumniation be in respect of the effect wherein clemeneie say he be make the cause of that powder treason which neither be so nor can be so first because clemency do not exasperate man or beast but the treason be a plot of MEN provoke second no philosopher in his institution of a commonweal or security of a prince put clemency for a cause of such effect three no example of any prince who come to disastrous end do warrant that to be the cause of their violent death and therefore this be a strange assertion 162 be this jesuite a prevaricator in the cause of those traitor or a proctor for they for this very same be his majesty argument and aggreevance that his clemency shall exasperate any to such a treason as be singular from all example different from all instruction of policy and degenerate from the nature of man or beast for in nature the fierceness of wild savage by mild handle jac. 3. be tame and in politikestate the more certain security to prince for their safety be by mansuetude and clemency Senec clem. li. 1. and none but tyrant be note for example of not leave their life and sanguine and therefore Horace they who against a moderate prince shall intend so bloody a death show themselves to be more undutiful and unnatural then wild man or beast 163 and yet that discontent and rebellious humour be cause and nourish in some by clemency be no strange assertion either in nature or policy whether for position or example as this great philosopher do confident aver it for as in nature some vegetable creature the more tender they be touch the more they will sting as nettle which be crush hard will reflect no plut. discer smart so in the sensitive some so fierce that no discipline violent or moderate will cicure they other so malignant that the more kind they be handle the more currish they be as some dog stroke they they will snarl strike they they will crouch so in philosophy the Seneca rule be general that Actu^... in patiense the effect of any active power be according to the disposition of the patient ask then the naturalist they will tell you that the sycamore tree the more it be moisten Ama^...us in dioscor the dry it wax that water sprinkle into a smith forge will make the fire burn the more fierce ask the phys^...ans and they write that what state the stomach of one will make another to regorge and that the sweet honey procure in some the most bitter choler go to Gregor. n^...ss in Ecclesiast. the oeconomicke you shall hear they say that some servant account their master lenity but for a anarcby and thereupon (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) so carry themselves as if philo (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) they have no master and be it not a father that say to his son my lenity have Terent. teach thou much mischief ask the politics first speculative they say that the gentle disposition of governor (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) if it be always mild and benign be clem. alexan. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 10. eftsoon contemn and contempt be the mother of disloyalty second practic begin with heaven and the king thereof who among the heathen be call regnator senec. Tacitus Psal. 78. 34. poll what find he when he slay they they seek he and return early and inquire after God but when they have qvaile to the full and manna with satiety than they repine and tempt he most come to king on earth first jewish David in his own person for my friendship say Psal. 109. 4. 5. he they be my adversary and return i hatred for my good will and in the person of Christ as s. Augustine apply it because our saviour say he in the depth of his benignity render good for evil therefore they in August in the height of their maliguitie will render he evil for good second king Christian the emperor have no such treacherous enemy as Cuspinian in berengar who he high advance and entire use in his secrecy of state and familiarity yet the story say that the more kind the emperor be and profess himself unto he for some sea will boil and rage even in the great calm 164 not to fetch example far our gracious sovereign in all the realm which he enjoy have find it too true by a over-deere buy experience as his self confess for Scotland hear his majesty speak I think by be gracious at the beginning to win all man heart to a love and willing obedience but by the (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) pa. 32. contrary I find the disorder of the country and the loss of my thanks to be all my reward for England the fact itself shall speak viz. the jesuite cry sin out of the vault of powder and iron hatch in the lake of fire and brimstone whence arise those devilish and destroy thought as the lord plead with Israel so may his majesty with those catholic o my people what have I mich. 6. 3. do unto thou or wherein have I grieve thou testify against i be it because I ease you of your fine and amerciament or that I send you with life and limb out of the land or that I make no distinction in access to my presence of tro^...an or tyrian of Hebrew or egyptian or that I honour you with favour and advancement equal with other or for which of my good deed will you have thus stone i for no unkindness can you lay against i but that I have not be at all unkind for Ireland let the rebel himself speak what hard measure feel tirone from his sacred majesty unless admittance to personal speech grace with favour grant he immunity pardon he treason give he his life which now breathe new conspiracy be a exasperation or provoke discontent 165 and therefore that there shall be so bad disposition in which clemency so gracious a virtue shall work so graceless fruit argue a strange affection but that clemency shall exasperate some nature to disloyalty be no such strange assertion in philosophy either human or divine no more than that the same sun heat shall exhale a fragrant favour out of the flower in the field and a loathsome stench from a dead corpse in the same champion for sore eye will smart in that light whereby the sound eye receive the help and comfort say s. Augustine and August Crescon lib. 10. in divinity s. Paul find the same doctrine to work the savour of life in some which wrought in other the savour 2. cor. 2. 16. of death not intentionate from the subject but occasionate by the vice of the object for the preach of the cross to they which perish be folly but to they which be 1. cor. 1. save the power of God truth to beget hatred be the poet terent. gal. 4. speech and the apostle experiment and lenity to exasperate some nature be no strange thing either in philosophy or to magistracy which our dread sovereign be both a philosopher and a magistrate that be our happiness do know in his learning and have feel in his government to be too true and therefore we will close up this point with the jesuit own word elsewhere but his majesty be wise and will as we hope according to his Numb. 24. prudence in time look into this sort of man and discern to avoid such manner of disposition well know that wasp if they be not strong repel with the bee sting will possess their hi^...s suck their comb dry and plut. their body dead 166 now let we proceed say he Numb. 28. that be let we return to show that as there be before the pow treason persecution for spoil so also by search of house whereof some be so violent and inhuman that gentlewoman be force out of their bed to be ransack for crucifix etc. Me^...rane show of a cloister priest in the low country that force man histor. belg. l. 8 wife out of their bed in a more beastly sort so to make they right catholic that be common-woomen some so felonious that a friend of his be bereave of a silver cup no chalice only because it have the name of jesus grave on it 167 many thief use to rob with ch^...lures and false beard because they will not be descry and jesuit will huddle story but conceal name lest their credit shall be hazard that malefactor either for act unlawful commit or public edict contemn shall be pursue to their hold and fetch it out of their house yea some sort to be pluck even from the horn of the altar be justifiable both by God book and man law and principal such as seduce liege people steal their soul from God and their heart from their sovereign yea and if achan have any thing execrable consecrate his tent must be search and the Babylonish garment with the wedge of gold and the shekel of silver josh. 7. though hide in the midst of the tent and in the bowel of the earth must be ransack dig out and confiscate either to public face or utter demolish for the cup he speak of if it be a chalice hallow for the mass it be forfeit by law either as Corah his Cense^... to be translate to right holy use or as the brazen serpent to be account Nehushtan and trample as a piece Numb. 16. o^... brasle or refuse silver and it be probable it be so by that inscription of jesus which upon profane vessel for common use either be not usual or shall not at all be character for if the heathen repute it a nity to the emperor that any shall stamp the prince image upon homely utensil christian shall be more religious then to engrave Seneca our saviour his holy name upon quaffing-cup but this be a story out of Lucian tell out of the cloud for have he name the party he have uncase himself ^...o the world to appear as he be indeed a mere falsary 168 from search of house he come num. 29. to imprisonment and condemnation to death of many catholic and the whole great number of those many be but two execute a priest and his the rest that be sentence but four or five pardon and send to Wisbitch where in their ret^...red ease and full diet they may cry and for what cause for come into England to exercise their function say he against the statute of queen Elizabeth and after his majesty proclamation and for seduce the king people he shall have add as if either a statute of a land with the prince death be annul which be not epist. 16^... so say s. Augustine for though Constantine be dead yet the judgement give against you by Constantine live or if in force that the breach of statute enact and contempt of king edict proclaim be either a Peccadilio or no sin at all sauls edict transgress by jonathan neither God himself as it seem take well nor the king will be satisfy for the transgression but by 1. sam. 14. 27. etc. allot to death his own son and what be the offence cast of a honeycomb contrary to command Christian prince and state for their security enact law and promulge decree in case of high nature by abandon seducer to idolatry and persuader to Disloyalty contempt and breach of both ensue and the punishment upon the transgressor must be entitle persecution the bishop of Rome his breve to interdict allegiance must upon dreadful censure without contradiction be obey the monarch of great Britain his proclamation to disburden his realm of a viperous brood must be either calumniate or sans-punie transgress whereas divinity teach christians that prince edist not make against Christ be propound to alacrity of subjection not variety of construction much less to contempt by violation when emperor hold the truth say saint Augustine they command for truth which whosoever despise purchase to himself judgement 169 in the next section after mention of one Wildborne execute at York belike for rebellious and traitorous speech he say for persuade a certain woman to be a catholic not utter untrue for the law punish even that by death because to be their catholic be to be disloyal and mistress shelley her imprisonment for receive a priest contrary to law and his majesty prohibition and the condemn to death but not execute one tempest who here he call a gentleman but the time be when the jesuite handle he very ungentle and so tempestuous that he confess he neither will nor shall like of that society to death know their tyranny pa. 84. and exteame cruelty to pass all measure against whosoever they pour out their wrath at last he much bemoan master pound one of their pillory confessor as in the star-chamber he be sentence to loss of ear and open shame be a libeler and slanderer of the state he call it his complain of hard measure against catholic so that the censure for that sin which s. jude conclude within verse 8. they despise ruler and speak evil of those that be in authority which S. james aver to be atheism at least to be irreligious hypocrisy if any man among you seem to be religious and refrain jac. 1. 26. not his tongve that man religion be vain this arch-divine call it cruelty in the judge and a honour from God to the libeler who he style with bedaes Epithere a venerable gentleman the scripture term his fellow Shemei a dead dog but do not this fellow complain 2. sam. 16. 9 of ease for pound notwithstanding the censure of that high court and this foul crime be fice by his majesty from the corporal punishment and no penny be yet demand of the fine by sentence impose 170 in Numb. 31. which be the next he pass over as he say Hereford and Lancashire persecution a transition of that which because it be not at all he let go for have there be any such thing he that so rhetorical bewail the calamity of shuttle child in Oxford who have none or but one at most then alive be neither so meale-mouthed to conceal they in silence nor so brief style to pass they over with sleightness 171 but there be one horrible persecution that strike he into a agony which as if he be carry the cross with Simon of Cyren he call a new Ariosto ation than first bring up namely that man shall be find to pay for their wife recusancy the remedy be easy let they garre there wife to frequent the church and then they shall not be angariate in their purse otherwise it stand with reason and religion that they shall be so punish for either they be their w^...es head and so can command their obedience to the law of the church or else they be underling and count^...mastred by they and then be they just punish in sust ring their wife (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) to carry a sway over they which s. Paul permit not in a peremptory denial be their wine recusant 1. tim. 1. 12. before they take they they deserve to be mulct for their bad choice prove they so afterward they deserve it much rather for their careless regard and if the lacedaemonian set a great fine upon their king for take a little woman to his queen give the reason that she Plutar. will bring forth not kingling not king much more be such to be punish for take or suffer their wife recusant in respect of the hereditary danger for man have not those insinnate mean to seduce other to their superstition as woman have especial the mother religion be for the most part derive to the child because to her the principal care of their education be commit we see it in jehoram the son of 2. reg. 9 22. jezabel 172 but be this mulct enact in the queen time as it be indeed then do parson calumniate the king government in call it a new pressure be it enact but not exact before then it be such a angariation he do contradict nimselfe for so make he his majesty hand heavy than queen Elizabeth which afore he deny howsoever if pa^...ting with a piece of money be such a pressure to the husband for the wife wilfulness what a miserable press cruelty be that to burn a woman great with child which open the womb in the totment and come forth be angariate and throw back in to the fire to be consume with the mother 173 a other persecution follow his majesty re^...ected the petition of the catholics in write for toleration and mitigation of calamity this indeed be a new kind of pressure a insolent petition be offer the first request whereof be as before be say impious against God dishonourable to his majesty and injurious to the state his majesty deny it that be a persecution then be all the christian emperor persecutor who forbid either public place or private house for assembly of heretic and saint Ambrose be either a spiritual persecutor or a insolent rebel ep. lib. 5. that will not yield to valentinians request by deliver up a church in Milan for the arrian resort the second part thereof a motion for mitigate of penalty and themselves in the mean time neither slake instigate of treason nor obey law neither will leave the land with licence nor live in it with obedience nor give pledge of their allegiance it be a cruel pity which procure hazard to the king safety 174 yea but this petition be answer by a minister with contempt answer of a libel for it be no better complain of greevance when there be none or if any force by their own misdemeanour upon themselves demerit be the fault be not in her majesty nor her council nor the civil magistrate but in ourselves Quodlib pa. 164. say the priest the answer I say of such a libel be it a angariation it be so very to they which make no conscience what they write for to have either their weakness discover or their falsity recount or their wickedness displa^...d be a sore pressure he that evil do fly the joh. 3. 20. trial of the light say our saviour lest his deed shall be repro^...ed no great vexation can betide a strumpet then to be v^...asked of her vizard and to have her paint wi^...ed from her rivel brow^... and wan-worn cheek the ^...thers never refuse such combat nor account they pressure yea rather provoke such conflict as e^...^...th I^... the contempt and insult in the answer be the grievance it need not strike deep for as long as one parson line the world shall want neither contemptuous nor contemptible neither nor insult either pamphlet or reply 175 yet another persecution his majesty yield to a conference between protestant and puritan concern difference of religion to catholic none at all it be a strange humour that this epistlor have if he say truth he lie it be true there be a conference but about difference in religion it be utter false fain they will possess the world that we be at jar among ourselves about our religion whereas the quarrel though it be indeed unkind yet it be not in this kind save only for ceremony external no point substantial for those be the jar of popish writer this difference about thing indifferent his majesty desirous to reconcile that as in the substance there be a unity so in the circumstance there may be a uniformity vouchsafe his princely pain to moderate and mediate 176 and why not the catholic obtain the like favour first their opinion touch the very head and foundation of religion in the truth whereof his majesty know good reason for himself to be so firm settle and find this realm so true ground that be perfect in all the argument of the adverse part and thorough understand the weakness of they he hold it both unsafe and unnecessary for if the rule be true in architecture a corner stone though somewhat amiss lay be not to be stir much less religion be thorough well place and so have long continue be to be dispute second though they have peenish mind and refractory against the law for Ceremoni^...s yet they have no bloody hair to his majesty at least no such overture for action appear papist have which they can not conceal even in their petition where they wish his majesty as great a saint in heaven as he be a king upon earth glad they will be rid of he which way they care not so he be not here by fire from heaven or hell the jesuit care not how say the priest and therefore take order to h^...rle he hence by garnet and Vaux their Quodlib pa. 224. whirl wind in a chariot of fire three do those great and princely pain his majesty take with the puritan work a general comformitie with the judicious and discreet it do but the rest grow more awkward and violent the like or worse issue will have ensue the other conference for after all pain take and argument press ca. 17. 5. who must be judge to determine Papa for to doubt of that be a sacrilege say gratian and then if he a ward not for his own be in his own element he have leave his old wont as king Henry the eight sleid. lib. 11. write to one of his predecessor 177 neither yet do persecution cease but num. 32. which be a great vexation his majesty confirm all that heap of constitution and canon make by the archbishop of Canterbury and bishop of London it be a good argument of Christ integrity that saducee and pharisee each opposite to other in capital point of religion shall both of they carry dislike of our saviour math. 22. and combine against he and it make much for the credit of those canon that papist and puritan so sever in opinion shall both conjoin in the reproof of they wherein then lie the vexation in the sharpness of the censure annex thereto first that argue the corruptness at the heart in catholic and the excellency of the constitution as saint Paul argue for god Law for the rom. 7. commandment be just and good in itself but it work fear and anguish and death in the corrupt nature of the disobedient will thou therefore not fear do well and obey second in the sto^...e conciliable and conventicle of Trent every canon against the truth be brandish with the thunderbolt of a anathema a lawful synod assemble for truth may more just arm her constitution with sharp censure and fevere or be the confirm of they by his majesty the corrosive that fret this vicer yea ill^... Lacri^...ae there be the gr^...evance indee^... for thereby do his (@) sh^...w and the church knowledge his supreme moderation and power in cause ecclesiastical which the pope no^...able either to regorge o^... digest it vex they into tha^... disentery from whence proceed those purulen^... excretion and bloody egestion of bull and breve of excommunication and interdiction but in sooth who shall comfirme they but the king according to the example of all the emperor Christian in th^... primitive church by who command the synod be convent by who leave liberty to consult and power to constitute be grant and under who authority derive to subordinate magistrate the breach or contempt be to be censure 178 last to make up a whole decade of persecution two more dreadful be add the lord chancellor speech (@) the star-chamber and the bishop of London d. Vaughan his sermon at Paul cross both tend to take all hold from catholic of any the least favour and the former express charge the judge to search for they and punish they but he shall have add the reason his majesty resolution upon the pr^...eding ^...solencie and treacheri^... of the papist and upon these speech proceed the powder plot say he of these Gentle^... that be to say the pyoneis be dig at the W^...es before Christmas the Vault^... as more convenient wa^... hy^...d and th^... POWDE^... convey into it before ^...er the spe^... and sermon be make the one in june the other in August follow and yet the powder traitor fall into that project after they both and such be the best answer for that point 179 now hear this conclusion numb 33. to say then that it be a main untruth and can never be prove that any persecution have be in his say majesty government or that any ^...re or be put to death or punish for cause of con^...cience which if it be utter in the indies or many mile from England may perhaps be believe but to aver such a thing in print in England where all man eye and ear be open to the contrary be a strange boldness 180 no soon have Eve conference with the serpent but present she learn a trick of add to the Text. God have say you shall die she put in lest perhaps you die gen. 2. 17. and 3. 3. with that serpent ^...sse have this viper be instruct to do the like his majesty say it can never be prove that any be or be put to death he put in or punish yet if his majesty have say so he have speak no more than truth for their punishment be not inflict for their conscience or opinion of religion but for their wilful d^...sobedience to the law of the land wherein they live and to which as by proxy they have give their consent for be civil member of one and the same body as natural subject to one king what be conclude (@) the representative body in parliament they though absent do assent unto it 181. but the main untruth whereof his majesty speak be the challenge of persecution to death for religion which in sincerity and christian confidence may be aver and justify in the eye and ear of all England for a uncontrollable assertion for howsoever both the priest afore name and after mention in this section as Dru^...y Flathers with their receipter be papist or catholic so false call yet for their opinion they be not execute no nor question and though they die papist yet they die not for popery no more than Shemei do for his rail tongue for their case in this kind for execution be in a manner the same with His. 182. Shemei be at king salomons mercy for though 1. reg. 2 9 king David have pardon he for his own time yet he lest he to his son with injunction for his death they for breach of the law be in the king mercy for their life for though the queen be dead yet the law h^...ld they guilty king Solomon in favour spare Shemei his blood but by his prerogative royal confine he to jerusalem verse 36. our sovereign of mere grace remit to they their life and by his proclamation exile they the land death be the penalty to Shemei if he pass over the river the same be their punishment if they pass the sea hither Shemei transgress in seek his runaway beyond the verse 40. river and his contempt be punish according to the sentence they return hither to make runaways or rebel execution be perform according to Law it be not Shemei his rail for king David have pardon it simple and king Solomon conditional but his breach of covenant that cause his death it be not their religion which be not once call into question but their contempt of law and edict which put a end to their life 183. as for tell tale in the indies that be to the jesuite who make it a principal part of their profession to win credit to their society by indian fable be it not for congo or cochachine or japonia or the maluchee or other part of the indies east or west Bozius have lose that sign of the true church and Xaverius lib. 5. cap. 2. Valentia Bertrandus and many a strange jesuite have never be worthy the name the Hebrew woman be not as the woman of Egypt say the midwife to Pharaoh for they be lively and be deliver ere the midwife come exod. 1. 19 at they so belike it be with the indian jesuite and convert they be more nimble at a miracle both active and passive than the christian of these part sacred or Lay. there it be but say a mass and a dead man shall start up to life though he be dead seven day lay but s. john gospel there upon a woman breast the devil shall fly from the possess as if he be shoot out of a Gun it be B^...zium but carry a standard of the cross and a army of horseman all in glitter harness shall appear who armour shall dazzle the eye and number strike terror to the heart of the adverse part mountain of 2. reg. 6. 17. horse and chariot of fire be not to be compare thereto 184. either our english jesuite be but dullard or our soil be not capable of miracle else why do not garnet hall greenwell Gerrard and the rest which be indeed miracle among man for their strange villainy but (@) miracle-worker they be not why I say do not they show any miracle among we certain if the provincial have have the indian trick or that our parlament-house have stand in congo we shall have hear from thence that such a house have be pus^...ed up with a trice upon the mass or orison of a jesuite for in Molucca a jesuite fetch down fiery stone from heaven rake up tree by the root fill up street with s^...ones and ash raise a lake so high and make it rage so strong that it sweep away all the house at once it be best therefore to send fa. parsons to the indies be it but to work one miracle that be to make himself a honest man for to report in England that he be so in the eye and ear of so many that be witness to the contrary that read his rail libel know his traitorous conspiracy and discern his devilish atheism so the priest write of he be a strange boldness indeed but to say that no romish priest or popish affect lay-man be put to death for his conscience may for the fame thereof ^...ee proclaim in India and all the world through and for the truth thereof be and shall be avouch in the most public place whether pulpit for divinity or seat of judgement in the heart of England impudency may frame libel to the contrary but truth be mighty the evidence demonstrative and will prevail 185. but to confute the assertion he first name the two statute 4. and 5. in the three year of his majesty reign more severe against catholic recusant for their mere conscience then against any one sort of malefactor or wickedman before second he bring the example of three priest to who death be less grievous that die expres^... for refuse this oath which be a persecution for conscience valesse it will be say that the oath have no matter of conscience in it for a catholic man to receive 186. it be a question whether this jesuite have less logic or honesty his argue be so absurd his deal so unsound his majesty free himself from persecution o^... do any to death for his conscience before the powder-treason he fetch in statute and execution since that villainy be discover but for the statute severity if more sharp than before it be but according to the proverb termerium like malady Plat. thes. like remedy for if Plato account treason against the prince equal with sacrilege against God not only the leg lib. 9 actor in the fact but the seedesman of such doctrine be to be meet withal by more than ordinary justice valer. max. lib. 9 Dion li. 52. say one by a present dispatch (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) say another as in heat of war and havoc of enemy as by martial law for no execution can be invent too exquisite or speedy for such wickedness say a three God cicer. ca^...il 4. himself take that course against a strange rebellion not to bring a ordinary visitation but to make a new punishment Numb. 16. 30. upon the earth school define it that a accustom sin to which any nation or people be most inclinable Aquin. 22. q. 39 art 2. E^... 4. 15. be to be provide for more severe especial if it be as they apply that place in ezra which be the very case in hand for beside the dangerous theorem and positions which their writer especial our Englishmen set down for principle their archpriest confess that his heart be wound to read they their continual practice be all for rebellion the say blackwell profess that many youth be send over daily and they by confess at large page 134. 143. virtue of their oath bind to draw man obedience from their king and therefore the conclusion in school be by the example of Corah with the rest not submit themselves to Moses his government that the censure for such offender must be and yet in the statute which he mention there be neither new nor strange nor rigorous punishment but a reviuall of certain statute before enact and all ground upon the ancient law of the land make 200. year since in the time of Edward the three and richard the second 187. in the example of priest execute he show himself to be that same a practise aequivocator they die express say he for not take the oath which in some sense be true because they be sentence to death for be in the land contrary to law and the king edict their life be offer they if they will take the oath Drury at first accept the condition afterward refuse it the other will none unless he may do it private that so he may moresafe deny it afterward upon this they be execute which convince they of a double crime first contempt of his majesty law to return or abide in the land contrary to the same second obstinacy in refuse such gracious favour offer upon so reasonable term to take a oath whereby they shall only manifest their trusty and un-treasonable allegiance to his majesty so that they die refuse the oath but that they express die for refuse it that be false the sentence of death be pass upon they before the mutual offer or refusal which offer as on his majesty behalf it express a singular indulgence and tender desire to spare-blood so be it a exact trial of their allegiance whereby the king may see whether as the philosopher speak though they be they be notwithstanding Seneca ingeni^... that albeit in lurk here they have be undutiful yet whether there may be hope that they will be sound at the heart towards he neither be the case any other then if a woman false to her husband for his bed and withal attempt the poison of he be convict and condemn for the crime of poison be offer her pardon conditional that she will swear for ever after to keep herself honest and alone to her husband she refuse it and be execute it be true that she die renounce the condition but not for renounce it her judgement for death be pass before upon the criminal attempt 188. but the preamble to the example be worthy the note for what he set down as a triumphant garland to the offender death say he be less grievous unto many of they than the other persecution how many and grievous they be he do before enlarge be a stain to their profession and may be a to his majesty it be a mark rather of desperate pagan than consecrate priest for s. Paul though profess his resolution in argue his desire to be loose hence and to be with Christ yet when his death be vow by the (@) 1. jew he avoid it by information and when he sear it at the bench he prolong it by appeal and be hard set act. 23. 17. act. 25. 10. at Rome after his escape he acknowledge it with thanks and account it a riddance from the lion jaw so far 2. tim. 4. 17. be he from rush into the breach of any Nationall law to hasten his death a caveat it may be to his majesty for the say of the philosopher be very true he that be prodigal of Seneca his o^...ne life care not who blood he spill to achieve his desire and parsons himself have confess in a letter of he that it be just suspect that many catholic martyr suffer in England not so much for virtue and p. 129. love to God as of choler and obstinate will to contradict magistrate what will they do now when by the pope they be arm with contradiction which if it procure due punishment upon they as his majesty have well forewarn let their blood alight upon the pope head as the principal cause 189. which speech after he have num. 34. with his viperous gloss vary into these phrase he insinuate and express threaten that there may chance to be a great persecution and more abundant shed of blood which must alight upon the pope head he apply it two way one be a taxation of his majesty cruelty as express hereby his desire to Ingolph himself in the effusion of catholic blood and also his hypocrisy shroud his injurious cruelty either under the name of justice or under pretence of the pope intermeddle the other application be by way of comfort to the catholic 190. if I will that he tarry till I come say our saviour joh. 21. 22. concern saint John what be that to thou upon this be bruit the report that the evangelist shall not die mistake both breed and spread misreport if ignorant it be a pardonable error if wilful it be a palpable dishonesty which be the very case of this jesuite here he have labour long to no purpose to prove his majesty a persecutor now out of the king own word he will fain make he a blood-golose and to effect that he turn a gracious premonition into a express commination a suppose occasion into a positive conclusion a due punishment by justice into cruelty by persecution and the true cause into a veil of pretence for his majesty speech be this it can never be prove that any be or be put to death for case of conscience except that now this discharge give by the pope be the cause of the due punishment of many which be as much as if his majesty shall say I be so far from execute any for their religion or conscience that I have be content to wink at their breach of my command and their contempt of law assure myself heretofore of their loyalty but now if I through favour suffer they in my realm and the pope by WARRANT forbid they to give i security of my state so that they shall neither yield obedience to statute nor give pledge of their allegiance if I be not secure the law shall be execute who then cause that and must answer for this blood but the pope who breve they now make the only allegation for their refusal be not the devil therefore true call the murderer of mankind because by his insinuate dis^...asion joh. 8. 42. from obedience he bring death to the world which be the very case between the oath and the his majesty and the pope 191. it concern the policy of the land and the king safety to exact their allegiance it stand with their duty to perform it they be willing the pope forbid they their refusal draw on punishment for their former breach of law where be the cause partly in themselves who be natural incline at least radical instruct to disobedience but in the pope who like Balaam put a stumble block in their way Apoc^... 14. that be arm they with authority to disobey now say the school he that cause sin cause death for sin in the revelation the three apoc 8. 10. 11 part of the water become wormwood and many man die of the water because they be make bitter bitterness cause death but whence come the bitterness from the star that fall into the water call by the name of wormwood a perfect resemblance of the pope breve the rebellious disloyalty of the catholic hasten their end the pope breve nourish it in they and harden they in it there be the coloquintida that have bring death into the pot 192. his comfort to the catholic follow first in a general theorem that no suffer be so honourable as that which come with a dishonourable title so Christ suffer as a disloyal person and a deceiver so Paul as a disturber first that be not simple true for the ignominy of the title add nothing to the honour of the passion unless the cause be goo^... and the party innocent either from the just imputation or the violent presumption of deserve that title for good subject like Caesar wise must be careful not only to be free from the fact but from the occasion also that may sueton. jul. give suspicion of the fact and that be our saviour case who both preach obedience to Caesar in his doctrine and perform it in pay tribute 193. but what be this to the catholic yes say he mat. 22. and 17. that be his particular comfort they suffer for the false imputation of civil Disloyalty whereas it be indeed for their roligion and loyalty to God their eternal prince this be that which they call in school beg of the cause he resume the case which be in question between we fond suppose that either the statute in that case be against religion which be for the prince safety and the state security or that the oath impeach the pope spiritual jurisdiction both which we deny and neither he nor any of they shall ever be able to evict it unless they can prove that law make to void the land of seducer and seeds-man of rebellion be against God word or that our saviour with the key give authority to de-throan and decrowne prince either direct or indirect which distinction unless it have be better follow and more substantial handle say master black-well it have be better that Bellarmine have never confes. at large page 65. touch it at all what then may we expect of this poor atomite when he come to the point who can break no ground but with Bellarmine Heiffer for if that oracle fail in any substantial controversy he be one of the sceriphian frog clamorous in inuective as they in scyrus in plin. lib. 8. ca. 85. any sound point either dumb or dull and now it be like he will come to that issue in this second part of the paragraph as he have divide it the second part of the second Paragraph 1 the front of which division separate itself with great letter from the rest will put a man in hope that now the point shall be canvas to the purpose but in the very entry he shall find that it be a great gate to a pingle of trifle when man be weary with the great affair of state for their recreation sometime they will go^... to gather pebble at the seaside as Tully note in the senator of Rome and they that have full feed and drink well have leisure to behold the celature and picture of plut. the vessel on the table but in the very entrance of a main quarrel to fall a play with word argue that he be either weary of the cause or loath to come to it or have no stomach to meddle with it and so will shift it off with such childish dalliance 2 for whereas his majesty press the point for trial how the pope can in divinity justify that speech of he that the oath contain many thing plain and direct contrary to faith and salvation he Numb. 35. challenge the king of a injury in thrust in the word direct as i^... plain and direct in honest man mouth and act have not all one meaning for among the latinist be not only use for and open plain and manifest but for and thorough whole and direct except he derive the adverb plain from the greek word (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) to deceive a word fit jesuit both their nature who be the only right planet in saint jude wander themselves and teach other to go astray and their art too who in utter plain word conceive in mind a indirect sense such a one the orator describe cic. pro. cluent 3 in the very next numb precede this jangle sophister have change all the word of his majesty speech clean contrary to the king meaning as have be show here his majesty put in but one which both in English and latin be usual join each with other and this give he to a exclamation of injury he may as well have blame Tully for join to one and the same way of happiness lib. 1 but his majesty plain and direct deal against all calumniation be evident in that he set down the pope whole word for word both in latin and english whereby the christian reader may judge that his majesty purpose not to take any advantage upon any term or tittle not there express 4 a second and great injury follow his May sty use a sppeech which a mahometan philosopher utter against Moses and turn it upon the pope the writhe pa. 34. cardinal say it be utter against Christ but wherein lie the injury unless it be in the application that the pope a usurp challenger and only a breve-compound shall be match^... with Moses a lawful governor and a holy writer otherwise that speech use by man or devil take the malice and profaneness from they may be apply to the best be not unusual or unwarrantable either in divine or human learning thither tend the profitable basil. and socrat. li. 3. ca. 15. mythology of poet fable and the moral use of apologue apply both to the best sort of man and the most eminent virtue 5 in divinity that speech of saint Paul against the 1 cor. 14. 36. insult pseudapostle come the word of God out from you or come it unto you only be the very same in effect which Z^...dkiah the false prophet use against Michaiah when go the spirit of the lord from i to speak unto 1. reg. 22. 24. thou or more plain and direct the same word which the devil utter to Christ what have we to do with thou math. 8. ^...9 our time be not yet the very same I say our saviour use to his bless mother woman what have I to do with thou joh. 2. 4. i hour be not yet come and I think there be no doubt but that the same text of scripture which the tempter misapply to the break of our saviour neck by presumption may be christianly apply to the comfort of a distress soul in assurance of God providence Math 4. and Psal 91. 6 if peradventure the Apologier have not true charge the pope in that apply assertion some may have think it a wrong or as this high-stiling jesuite term it a more gross point and injurious but peruse the whole there appear not one either authority or reason bring to confirm his say bold assertion but as be he be a oracle to speak and away as saint Augustine say not stand with the pope irre^...ragabilitie to yield a reason of his conclusion or as Galen who in this place cite for that speech of Averroes speak of such a other he (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) deliver his theorem so confident as if either he have (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) a mouth that can not err nor trip or as if none be able or worthy to find any probable contradiction against his speech 7 a three thing be a abuse offer by his majesty to the word and meaning of the namely that the king shall charge the pope of new and undivinelike doctrine for say that the oath contain many thing apert contrary to faith and salvation as if thereby the pope shall say or mean that natural allegiance to their sovereign and king be direct opposite to faith and salvation of soul 8 his majesty under correction have do the pope too much honour in vouchsafe a answer especial with that judgement to such pelt stuff of a woeful wherein he have be so sincere from detort any thing that the pope can not have meet with any more coney and ingenuous writer neither be it to be think that the high priest himself will have use such a saucy term of abuse as this right male part that be misbegotten catachrestical companion have do but if it appear that the pope word imply so much and that necessary what shall be do to he that knetch this opprobrious cur for what be this uncircumcised jesuite that he shall in so base term scurrilize so great a king 9 this therefore be his majesty argument whosoever pronounce that oath unlawful and flat contrary to faith which contain nothing else in it but a acknowledgement of all natural and civil obedience due by the subject to the prince he broach a new strange and vn-divinelike assertion but the pope do this in pronounce so of the oath of allegiance which contain in it nothing else therefore his assertion be strange uncoth and dissonant from divinity where be now the rub in the minor perhaps suppose it to be so that be but a fail in the term no abuse to the person no injury to the word modesty will stay for the proof not hasten the doom especial in such term of saucy bitterness if therefore the assumption have be insist upon in the consequence thereof for therein be the Cardo and marrow of the question that the oath contain nothing in it but that which concern civil and natural obedience this have be scholar like and christian deal and to purpose but the very word of the oath itself do ratify his majesty collection and inference 10 for the oath as have be show consist of two part assertive for the king right to his crown and kingdom and negative against any foreign challenger or intruder whatsoever or under any pretence whatsoever for so the oath do manifest divide itself his majesty argument then thus hold first that oath the positive and exclusive part whereof do not touch nor impeach any spiritual jurisdiction or authority direct or indirect contain nothing in it but matter concern civil obedience but neither of the part in the oath of allegiance do so for depose of king or absolve subject from their duty or incite rebellion foreign or domestic come not within the reach of spiritual jurisdiction etc. 11 second nothing can be contrary to faith and salvation but that which cross some point contain within or ground upon the article of faith comprise in those creed which the church have allow the oath of allegiance cross none of those nor any part in they unless the pope authority in be a article of faith and so be refer to but that can be for among many other of their own writer their archpriest refel and repeat it often that because the church letter to the catholic have not yet conclude it to be a point of faith whether he have any such authority or no or if he have not determine how far it stretch if to excommunication yet not to eradication say he neither direct nor indirect sure then not to deposition from their crown or instigation to rebellion it cross no point of faith 12 and therefore his majesty say well that the pope have do honest and discreet if he have put down the special word at which he quarrel in the oath and this libeler have reveal some spark of integrity if he have show one point sound prove wherein it touch Macrobius Le^...ulo sat. 2. matter of faith before he have fetch up his out of his filthy throat to cast a aspersion of abuse cavil calumniation and voluntary mistake the question upon his majesty for if there be any of these it be in the pope who mistake either the meaning of the oath or the limit of his own authority 13 his majesty be in the right and the assertion which he gather out of the pope word that he deny the acknowledgement of civil obedience be no surmise principle but a necessary inference as also the example which his majesty bring out of scripture father and counsel be most proper and direct to the purpose 14 the dilate and multitude whereof vex this epistler and make he in scorn first to call it a flourish so some do account that for the noise of a thunder joh. 12. 29. but a rattle in the air with a undistinct sound which other acknowledge to be the voice of a angel answerable to the occasion and the sword place at the entry of paradise appear but a flourish of a blade yet it gen. 3. strike a terror and recordation of their former disloyalty into our first parent as these commemorate example may into the heart of priest and those catholic of their with hold obedience be not their conscience sear and by prejudice make uncapable of such tender recognition but David seem a fondle say s. Augustine to who to to they which themselves be both foundling and aug. in Psal. 33. rudesbies and these authority but a flourish to a superficial jesuite that never can dive deep for any learning 15 second he term it a borrow discourse from their author because otherwise we be dry and barren if we say any thing which they do not say witness that challenge which be never yet foil nor answer that for 600. year after Christ all the scripture father and counsel stand for our assertion not one true natural vncogged or unadulterate for any point then propound and Rome now maintain against we three a combat with a shadow because they be not adverse to we in the matter of civil obedience for first they hold that subject must obey both good and bad prince in all thing lawful but who must judge what be lawful the apologue be know if the lion say the bunch of ^...sh in the forehead be a horn though it be not so it will be account so 16 second they teach that the prince be to he obey yet not for conscience sake not against conscience that be no sound doctrine in the negative part for even against a man conscience the prince be to be obey unless that he which disobey can prove his conscience to be the same which 1. Tim 1. 9 the apostle describe a good conscience accompany with true love and faith unfeigned for there may be and there may be it be the distiction of one of their great martyr name by the cardinal in his letter sir tho. more consol^...n some man conscience may be so steightn that it will strain gnat and make scruple of every thing that be command and another so vast that he will devour whatsoever be enjoin he 17 and this distinction meet with that vain challenge of he which be the three thing he object let they say he show but one only authority example or testimony out of scripture father or counsel that prince must be obey against conscience or religion and then we will grant he speak to the purpose if he have say against conscience right instruct and pure cleanse and true religion sound warrant by God word we contend it not we can we say with but see that conscience may both err and be pollute and the scripture insinuate that there may be a vain and jac. 1. 26. defile religion there be nothing more easy for proof or evident for demonstration than that obedience be to be enjoin even against conscience if it be erroneous or leprous and against religion if forge and false so call for if knowledge which be the ground of conscience may be nickname as the apostle tell we it may and so no knowledge 1. tim. 6. 20. indeed much more both conscience which apply that knowledge to particular act and religion which derive out of that knowledge her suppose theological principle may be so or else both heretic and schismatic who can and do plead conscience for their stand out have receive great wrong from the church of God 18 and therefore either the pope or this proctor of he shall if they be able show what that point be one o^... more in the oath that be contrary to a good conscience and true christian religion which because they neither have nor can his majesty conclusion be uncontrollable that the pope have prohibit catholic to perform even civil obedience to their sovereign and therein have cross both precept and example of scripture father and counsel touch that point 19 to the examination whereof or some of they rather for where he can cavil there he suppress this great bible-clerke vouchsafe to condescend num. 30. his examination of the scripture consist first of a expunction for the so most which touch the the oint near wherein the people profess their unlimited allegiance to josua in all thing to obey he that be go josh. 1. 17. into the index such un-confined and large obedience to prince make not for the pope triple turban second of a concession that he grant the example which his majesty allege of the Israelite obey Nabucodonozor Pharaoh and Cyrus to be true because it be only temporal obedience which they exhibit if by temporal he mean concern matter mere temporal he abuse the reader for they show their obedience to be due and perform it in matter of spiritual service for to offer sacrifice unto exod. 5. 1. the lord by his own appointment and message deliver to Moses their superior spiritual governor as this fellow calhim Numb. 39 upon dread of danger and punishment for the neglect be a high case of conscience and religion yet will they not attempt it without ask and obtain the king leave so the commandment of Cyrus be in a cause mere ecclesiastical viz. the build verse 3. Ezr. 1. 2. of the lord house at jerusalem and transport thither the consecrate vessel according as the lord have command he for God put the manage even of spiritual affair upon the king charge (@) without his licence the Israelite endeavour not but be appoint they refuse not 20 the three part of his examination be a counterscarp of example oppose against the instance in the apology some canonical and those vary from the point as that of the three child who refuse to adore the golden statue set up for that purpose by Nabuchodonozor dan. 3. 12. and of the israelite who will not obey pharaos commandment to sacrifice in Egypt but they will do (@) in the wilderness and of Daniel refuse to eat of the king dan. 1. of Babel meat some of they apocryphal and nothing to the purpose as that of Toby his bury the dead contrary tob. 1. to proclamation and for bear the Assyrian^... ment and last that of the maccabee refuse to eat swine 1. mac. 1. flesh and to sacrifice notwithstanding the commandment of Antio^...us 21 for which refusal and disobedience they have all their especial warrant by the reveal will of God against the adoration of that image the whole second commandment of the mo^...rall law for sacrifice in the wilderness the express precept by the mouth of Moses from the lord not as ^...e cunning s^...ts it down numb exod. 5. 1. 39 that they (@) obey because they persuade themselves that God will have the contrary for self-persuasion which oft time proceed from self-love and end in selfe-deceit be no warrantable restraint from obedience they that kill joh. 16. 2. you ^...aith our saviour to his disciple persuade themselves that they do therein God good science good intention from self persuasion against God command be mere Vzz^... and Vzziah may be example for daniels 2. Sam 6. 2. 26. 11. Deut. 14. abstinence if it be a case of conscience first he have warrant for it by the law of God wherein either such meat which the babylonians eat be prohibit or if not forbid yet be serve in or eat with certain idolatrous ceremony contrary to God word as appear dan. 5. 1. dan. 1. 8. elsewhere in that prophecy for which cause the holy ghost do call it a pollution and the same be tobies case also for his abstinence but if it be a civil duty as be a matter of ordinary diet then be command by the king his disobedience have not be justifiable unless that first he have obtain leave of the king chamberlain or master of the household and second have by prophecy foresee God blessing upon that his abstinence verse 13. 22 burial of the dead for which Toby be instance be it be a matter of christian ceremony so be it also a human respect and a point of civil courtesy let the dead bu^...y their dead say our saviour of they that be matth. 8. 22. no very zealous christian but do Tobiah this though contrary to the edict yet open against it and in contempt of the king he else say no he do it by stealth and in the night after sun set and be detect tob. 21 (@) flee upon it take it either way be his disobedience in such a case justifiable no. the maccabee for their refuse to eat and circumcise their child against Antiochus command have their double warrant from the 1. Macab 1. 65. etc. write word the one for ceremony the other for a sacrament and the reason be yield in the text because they will not break the holy covenant they be put to death it then the pope or his advocate can show in the oath of allegiance any one particle contrary to the will of God either reveal in his word or by special messege and commission deliver the refusal be justifiable and these example press to the point but to speak in the language of one of their own writer see they can bring no one argument to prove Lorinus in act. ca. 5. 19 tale that they have receive any suchprecept from GOD for their refusal it be a wilful pervicacy no lawful disobedience 23 and yet as if he be master of the field he set up his trophy with this (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) you ^...ee ^...he place of scripture allege by the Apolog^...er make nothing for he yea be flat against he just ^...o do Plato d^...sc^...ibe ^...is Crave^... Cock after about or two skip out of the pit and crow a conquest be ready presen^...ly to cry Plat. Thea^... creak revi^...w the encounter brief and th^...n let the spectator judge whether this be not a thrasonical impudency his majesty to prove that the pope in prohibit to take the oath of allegiance which contain nothing in it but a acknowledgement of mere civil obedience have do that which the scripture will not a^...ow cite many text wherein all temporal obedience be perfo^...med and command^...d even to pagan k^...ngs which p^...aces so far forth as they concern civil allegiance and his majesty bring they in for no other purpose this epistl^...r Numb. 37. grant to be true allege and the same which they themselves allow yet here Numb. 40 ^...e proclaim that they make flat ag^...nst the Apo^...ogier and all for the Catholik^...s so do the devil pronounce of the kingdom luc. 4. 6. of the earth all these be i when he have not a foot by right in any one of ^...hem no more th^...n ^...he mad fellow in aelian who think that all the ship which come to the h^...uen be h^...s own var. histor. 24 but much more s^...ith he numb 41. the authority all^...ged out of the father for they especial that of saint Augustine be f^...a^...ly for the catholic refuse and clear against the oath enjoin how so ch^...istians in temporal matter obey julian say saint Augustine though a and a idolater our christian king require no more the oath enjoin no in Psal. 1^...4 oth^...r thing they in case wherein appear difference between Christ honour and the emperor ' command refuse and if there be any such thing in the oath let catholic forbear to swear but show that point which be different from true religion I^... not then have the pope (@) that father (@) and the christian pra^...ze ^...nd so s. Augustine must needs make for the Apolog^...er a^...d so do a^...so justin martyr for except the ap^...o 2. Imper. adore of God in all other thing say he we cheerful s^...rus the emperor but the oath enjoin nothing that impea^...heth or cross adoration due to the almighty to say which be their usu^...ll shift that the difference be between some content of the oath and their religion therefo^...e they be not to obey that be a vanity and yet that be their anchorhold when they be hoist and put to the p^...sh s^...ppose s^...ith parson in english creswell in latin th^...t a prince profess that he w^...l bring in a more sound philopator (@) that be not to the purpose he be find to defend the romish faith assume that of they to be Christ religion which we look to their doctrine and opinion account to be a mass of (@) and respect the usurp jurisdiction have prove and find to be the sulphurate fuel of all disloyalty 25 and therefore that protestation which he make numb 42. we will serve our sovereign we will go to war with he we will fight for he and do all other office of temporal duty and that Numb. 44. we will acknowledge he only inferior to God in his temporal government be but a hypocritical flourish of word like josh. 9 the gibeonite cou^...enage without truth of heart for their position which he there call rule of catholic doctrine be direct contrary the king can use his temporal sword but at the pope beck say one and if a christian molina tract. 2. Institut. disr 29. simanch lib. 23. sect. 11. Institut. king be a heretic say another immediate his people be free from his command and their subjection what service then may his majesty expect be now by Mathaeus pronounce a heretic and by the pope Breu^... curb and cut short of his temporal supremacy 26 ^...he (@) (@) be t^...e (@) of the other (@) cite by his ma^...estie for if the k^...ng be^... only (@) our to the true God as say Tertullian if ab^...ue ^...he emperor th^...re be none but only God which make the emperor th^...t be optatus his speech then make^... it full for t^...e ^...S a^...ul (@) (@) (@) 3. oath which deny the pope to have any authority over our sovereign either to depose he or to dispose of his kingdom and subject for that be to bind the king to his good behaviour and make he a most base underling to the pope because depose be the high point of supremacy and the base for indignity that a king can indu^...e and belong to none but God only who be the alone superior to king as those father confess or to a inferior for message and relation and that by God special and person^...ll command as be the case of some king by prophet yet for all this these also must make for the catholic 27 notwithstanding it seem the speech of s. Ambrose (@) (@) A^...xent ^...p li^... 5. do somewhat trouble he who profess that otherwise then with sigh and tear he neither may nor can resist for such be the weapon of a priest how then will the ^...igh-priest of Rome justify his breve of interdiction and his faculty of absolution and his bull of rebellion against prince and how make this flat for the catholic refuse the oath therefore in sift this father he be curious and that by double interrogation 28 one do saint Ambrose by this acknowledge th^...t the emperor have high authority than ^...ee in church matter that be extra not the case in hand superiority in ecclesiastical cause h^...th the proper (@) in answer to the cardinal letter where it be to be discuss the point now controve^...ed upon saint Ambrose his speech be whether the pope have do like a priest in forbid the take of a oath which concern nothing but civil obedience i^... he have not then saint Ambrose and he be different indeed so much of his as be write with the fresh moisture of his ink the rain-water of his tear (@) I say be ambrose-like and priest-like but when he come to put in his caveat with the (@) and the sharp ingredient of his prohibition these be the water of Marah so bitter that none of a religious palate can drink they and therefore saint Ambrose leave he there for by any other mean say that holy father then by tear and sign I can I ought not to resist 29 and the pope predecessor Gregory the great more epist. 61. li. 2. indict 11. open forsake he for he have receive a law from the emperor to be promulge according to command of his superior mislike the edict as contrary to religion in his opinion set down the reason of his dislike but publish the law notwithstanding according to the emperor mandate this pope deal clean contrary with the oath neither show his reason of disallow it nor yet suffer it to pass for currant but plain forbid the take of it and yet say this vain epistler this example of saint Gregory make flat for the catholic 30 the other interrogation concern saint Ambrose be whether if the emperor have offer he a oath repugnant to his religion and conscience he will have take it to which first he answer both for himself and we too sure no. and this also be (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) nothing to the catholic for neither be there in the oath any m^...tter touch religion other than that obedience which by true religion be allow neither be their religion and that holy father more semblable especial in that point of o bedience then cha^...e and wheat than gold and dross but suppose that saint Ambrose will refuse such a oath urge upon he will he with all forbidden other to take it by warrant of interdiction sure no for in as great a point of conscience as that his I have do what belong to a priest l. for the rest let the emperor do as a emperor shall that be I have discharge my office answer like a priest in make know the unlawfulness of the emperor demand now leave it to the emperor pleasure I have no other mean of resistance but grief and tear and sigh 31 and this to be the proper office and right course of pastor and preacher the father have observe in a elegant allusion to that name of Boanarges the son jeronym in mar. 3. 17. in Psal. of thunder for preacher be cloud say s. Augustine among which if by the power of sun and star a exhalation be force up and by coercion so straighten that it can have passage by counterforce of both their strength the one impel the other resist the cloud break into thunder yet that dreadful noise end in moisture and rain say saint Hierome that be as they moralize it superior and governor command that unto bishop and pastor which be unlawful they yield not but show cause of their recusance not prevail but more press they lie open those judgement which in such case God have reveal there be the thunder yet when that be do they go on further but end in tear and that pity may mo^...e where threat ibid. perhaps exasperate say the same father this do saint Ambrose and yet must this example make for the pope for sooth who sure by that resemblance of s. Jerom show himself that either he be never good pastor or else his be a strange meteor which begin with moisture tear and lamentation but without either render cause or show reason end in a thunder of dreadful (@) like the crocodile that first weep and then rage 32 second he give a reason of that his negative for s. Ambrose why he will not swear in a matter repugnant to his religion and that by three instance of fact in all which for like Aesop though ^...ce have borrow they all from allens Horac apology neither serve they for any purpose but to e^...ke out his pamphlet the first his denial to dispute with Auxe^...tius the arrian in the consistory before Valentinian require thereunto in the emperor name by dalmatius a Tribu^...e and a notary for so the text have it (@) tribunus and not as he vary it the Tribu^...e bring with he a public notary to test^...fie the same with reason and ground of his refusal that bishop must judge of emperor not emperor of bishop in ma^...ters of f^...ith 33 it be true and saint Ambrose do well in it and say (@) for it his fact and reason both be christian-like ^...son place and cause make whole against his consent for^...o app^...are before he as a judge in divinity and ^...o (@) a po^... who Aristotle will scarle admit ethic. 1. ^...o b^...e a auditor in philosophy have be a great weakn^...sse first the emperor be a young man not only in y^...ares but in grace neither yet baptize nor right ca^... chize second prejudicial in his opinion have already Ambros. epist. li. 5. etc. Sig^...nium de occident lib. 8. an. 383. e^...cted a law for the arrian Doct^...ne which be the matter ^...utable say s. Ambrose three overawe at least mislead by his mother a woman heretical affect and that sex must predominate which way soever incline four the conference must be in a public consistory among a multitude of jew gentile and heretic where he can expect no other issue but what the apostle find when they act. 2. 13. speak with diverse ongu mock and scoff for there be some place not fit for christian either their action or argument our saviour himself can do no great miracle in his own country not that he be unable for want mar. 6. 5. mat. 7. of power but he see it be unavaileable through their lack of faith and why shall that holy father cast his pearl before swine 34 his reason of denial be divine-like denial I say not of come for say saint Ambrose I have come most noble emperor unto the consistory according to the summons save that the bishop and people both withhold i but of dispute before the young emperor as a judge in cause of faith which may not be the spirit of prophet be subject to the prophet by the apostle rule 1. cor. 14. 32. 35. may not then a prince judge in case of religion and faith no not to determine what be sound divinity or not and so impose that upon the conscience of man for faith which he alone define to but or he may and aught when the church have determine matter of faith command the profess thereof within his kingdom as the sound and worthy to be receive for so some schoolman distinguish of judgement make it first twofold definitive to set down what be to be think of each in Dialog. thing and so prescribe it to man belief and that be the principal prerogative of God himself and secondary of the church representative guide her judgement by God voice which be his word the other of recognition or sift out the truth which they make threefold either discretive to try whether thing either be or be not or whether they be that they seem to be and that be common to all christian to try the spirit whether they be of God or no or directive to lead other into a right judgement 1. John 4. 1. by reveal the truth and instruct they which be a public duty be proper to the pastor of the church and three decretive which be in the prince both affirmative to bind those within his compass aswell clergy as Laity to the observe of that which be so try and adjudge and negative to suppress the contrary this last to judge for the truth saint Ambrose deny not to the emperor yea it be his grief that he do not so but to judge of a truth whether it shall be so or no as in this very case be a high mystery of faith whether Christ shall be the son of God or not which God himself by his word have warrant and the church by the assistance of his spirit have already determine and establish this I say he deny especial to Valentinian who want as it seem those three quality which be principal require in judgement first authority for it be the church Aquin. 22. q. 60. and 61. right to determine in matter of doctrine second prudence to which many year be require say the philosopher but the emperor be very young and a novice arist. ethic. l. 9 in the rudiment of faith three justice which have indifferency ever annex and that in Valentinian be defective who have forestall the same with a partial law for the adverse part a strong bar against true judgement for man be hardly remove from private opinion much less king from their law once publish especial in point of divinity because such retractation will always leave a aspersion either of ignorance rashness or inconstancy 36. his second and three instance follow as stale as the former for this fellow live upon allens scrap s. Ambrose deny to yield up a church at the emperor command for the arrian to assemble in as also he refuse to send the consecrate church-vessel to the emperor require they and his reason for both be etc. 37. that be thing separate to holy use and house dedicate to God service be not to be alienate to common usage for say the father God have in they a double right as king David confess first as his gift to man second as man gift back again to he which twofold cord tie they so strong that it be 1. ch^...o 29. 14 a anathema for any not consecrate to challenge they yea for they which be consecrate if they do not only put they to that use alone for which they be dedicate otherwise the sacrifice of the lord even in the hand of a priest may yield a evil savour much less be they to 1. sam. 2. be betray to heretical pollution for why shall the church separate to the honour of Christ b^...e open for entrance to blasph^...mies against Christ this be s. Ambrose his reason of denial 38 now what of all this he that thus refu^...ed in these thing what will he have do if he have be with a oath against his conscience sur^...ly if the emperor have command he to have abjure his faith he will as he do there refuse by denial render his reason with all humility and if occasion so ^...quired rather yield his body then betray his faith and in the mean time weep for grief to see Christ so wrong and his sovereign so mislead for so himself profess often 39 but put the case aright if the emperor have he because he see his diversity of opinion in r^...ligion to swear his true allegiance unto he to abjure all usurper or challenger of his crown either pretend right unto it or claim any authority to depose he or set free his subject from their obeisance will be not have take that oath yes he that ple^...ded so divine-like for god right unto the emperor will for the emperor right have be as zealous acknowledge unto Caesar his due as unto God his duty so (@) will he have be from the pope vein to send out breve and prohibition thereby to nourish mutinous and intestine rebellion for even in those case of conscience before specify when all the citizen of Milan stand for he and the soldier deny to at end the emperor to any but s. Ambrose his church the people be in a unnult be defi^...ed they of the emperor part that if they take he to be ince^...or the st^...rer or procurer of the same he may be execute or (@) and protest for himself that for his part he neither may nor ought res^...st and commend the christian patience and for bearance in the multitude as a influence of the holy ghost when with their weapon in their hand they (@) (@) say R^...gamus we request noble Em peror epist. (@) 5. 33. we fight not and be not this direct to his majesty ^...urpose to show that the office of a priest and bishop the pope be none other be to practice and (@) obedience to gre^...under pressure not to make resistance to pray against unchristian violence not to countermand civil alleg^...ance 40 but that of Gregory touch the very quick who as he think his duty discharge to God in show his reason why he dislike the law so do he form it very ready to the emperor in promulge the same immediate according to commandment A^... this example for all the epistler sleight account thereof as not cite to purpose be a bu^...e in his thro^...t and make he cough up a little bortow read but that falsify for not deny the promulgation of the law by the pope upon the emperor mandate he will fain make it good with a false gloss namely that Gregory first correct the law and so temper by he send it to the emperor to which mauritius yield the pope do publish it so correct grant this to be true Gregory show more manner and religion than pope Paul do who neither qualify the oath himsel^...e nor desire his ma^...estie that it may be temper not declare the point wherein it be to be mitiga^...ed (@) (@) new marry guest in the gospel scorn his predecessor all sober excuse set a^...t as a m^...n wed to his own will and new possess o pope jo^...nes (@) he send out his peremptory luc. 4. 18. 20. neither himself will nor other shall yield unto it 41 but what this jesuite speak of correction or mitigation of the law before Gregory publication be utter untrue and be not his profession mere impudency he ^...ould not d^...e to speak it for that the pope do after some reason deliver adi^...re the emperor very earnest to alter or dis^...null the law be apparent in those word E^...ist 61. lib. (@) (@) l. 11. but before ever this motion of his be make know to the emperor the law be by Gregory publish for he be sick and can not then write as not only in that letter itself be manifest but in another not far from it wherein it will appear that the pope have divulge the edict but see his request for mitigation nor accept write to Theodore the emperor physician ep^...st 64 lib. 2. and entreat he to deal with his lord and sovereign about it the reason whereof he have not yea he will not he say a responsal^... dare public yield as from his chair and oracle much less by his br^...ue interdict but have suggest it private he leave it to God and the emperor leisure and wisdom if after that upon his importunity it please the emperor to qualify it by give a more large scope to that monastical desire yet be not that yield of his make so public that all may take knowledge of it but Gregory be fain to make it good upon his credit in those word in that epistle which this falsify jesuite mention but leave they out very cunning mih^...redite believe I epist. 11. lib. 7. (@) l. 1. our gracious emperor be so content it seem then that they have read the edict and receive it before uncorrected 42. and be not this most proper apply to his majesty purpose that a pope though mislike a law ecclesiastical make without his privity and consent shall not take any public exception against it but private by letter not prohibit any to obey it but make mean to the emperor attendant for mitigation thereof and in the mean time publish it present upon the mandate as it be send unto he if the pope have reveal unto his catholic the unlawfulness of the oath and yet will they for conscience to God and in duty to their prince to take it and in the mean time promise that he will endeavour by intercession and mediation to the king majesty either to mitigate or abrogate the law than have he be more like Gregory and yet the example make nothing for the pope or his catholic sore Gregory except private against the law but obey the commandment for publish it the pope open interdict they obstinate refuse take of the oath the truth be the submissive carriage of that pope to the emperor both in his style and deportment do so plunge the great Bellar. rom. lib 2. ca. 28. debater of controversy that like one founder he know not whether he shall ascribe it to Gregory his humility or necessity and so make their great saint pope either a hypocrite to give the emperor a hail master who in heart he contemn yea account a persecutor say parson or else a temporize lukewarm Laodicaan that for fear or constraint will yield to any num. 49. thing against his conscience that the emperor shall command 43. the counsel follow and not only that of Arles in France with five other at least which submit themselves whole to the emperor Charles the great in most humble term but the four general counsel which Gregory compare to the four evangelist summon at the beck and command of the emperor and submit for the validity and establishment of their decree to their most royal assent and yet all this be nothing to the purpose say this antapologer 44 no if whole counsel submit themselves in all dutiull reverence to their sovereigns not only in matter of temporal affair but of faith and religion then do the pope office and un-priest like in forbid the king natural subject to acknowledge their allegiance to he in civil right it be even the like argument which God himself use in way of complaint by comparison the son of JONAD rechabs jerem. 35. some keep the commandment of their father which he give they but my people (@) not i 45 yet (@) his reason particular ag^...inst that of Arles for the other of the general (@) he will not tom. 3. C^...l (@) 4^...1 etc. stan^... to examine as he say numb 55. quoth the Ora^... of ^...ome that w^...re drive to a stand and inco^...uenience in (@) (@) (@) (@) and they be by way of Interrog^... four in number first in that synod in Arles (@) there any mention of a oath no more be there in that example whi^...h God bring of jo^...adabs son any m^...ntion of idolatry whereof he complain in his people but the rechabite obedience be show in abstinence (@) strong drink Israel disobedience in follow strange god Hi^... majesty be now in argument a Thesiad Hypothesia by comparison thu^... all^...bedience be heeretofor by scripture father and counsel ackn wlege to prince in all cause then sure in be the pope very faulty to forbid his catholic to take a oath which contain only a recognition of natural and civil obedience 46 his second interrogatory be his submission in requ^...sting the emperor assent because the council be assemble by his Commandemen^... yes for he that have the sole authority to summon a council h^...th the sole power to make good or void what it conclude without the emperor like it be probabie th^...y meet not say this je^...ite which he borrow from Bellar but the chief commission come from Rome how will that app^...are the pope (@) c^...cil ca. ^...3 (@) be not once mention either in the preface or body of the who^...e council but the word (@) p^...ine nostr^... (@) by the commandment of our most religious emperor our brotherhood be here meet in one and the year of his reign be there prefix 47 yea but in a council at worm the first that the say Charles cause to be celebrate in his dominion 770. (@) be leave register AUTHORIT as etc. ecclesiastical authority teach that counsel may not be hold with out the allowance of the bishop of Rome a manifest untruth make good by a obscure author out of a council either no^... assemble or never record Canizius who in his chronology ante. Catechis seem very diligent in number all the counsel both universal provincial and Nationall name it not Genebrard himself a Frenchman reckon all the counsel Chron. l. 4. which the emperor Charles assemble mention it but neither date it nor warrant it as he do the rest at Arles tower chalons etc. all which he muster in the vere^... 13. but in the year 770. he acknowledge no such thing no idle compiler of the counsel name it only in that year and leave this note upon it in the french annal in the life of Charles the great there be find mention of a certain synod to be celebrate at worm Caranza the epitomist name only one at worm hold in the year 816. or there abouts under Lewis the second but of any under Charles either as king of France which must be (@) (@) anno. 770. or emperor tom. 2. con. pa. (@) which be not till (@) (@) at least he say not a word and yet out of such a smother record (@) ^...out of Baronius and he mistake this fugitive (@) a definitive sentence to warrant no council goo^... (@)ted without the pope authority for assemble that be to say at one push to overthrow the credit of all the counsel both general and particular for the better p^...rt of 900 year after Christ especial when the church have rest and flo^...ished under emperor and king 48 a thing so clear and radiant that Bellarmine himself be dazzle in behold the evidence as s. Peter not wi what he say oppress with the glister matth. 17. luc. 9 countenance of our saviour will needs build tabernacle bo^... (@) (@) and Moses so he labour to build for the pope as if all counsel must necessary depend upon his oracle and come to his tent for summons and strength labour also to build for the emperor and in the same place show diverse reason why it rather belong (@) council l^... c^... 13. @. Concil. Laterane Ha^...rian com. li. 4 Geneb lib. 3. dist. ^...3 Adrian Papa Romanus to emperor then the pope to assemble they and if any emperor may challenge it charles the great much rather to who by authority of council and pope power be give to appoint the bishop of Rome and to dispose of the sea apostolic which so remain in he and his successor for a long time 49. be then this submission at the council of Arles make to the emperor for approbation of matter of faith that be his three interrogatory to which he answer no and yield his reason by repetition of that place in saint Ambrose before specify that in case of faith bishop must judge of emperor and not vice to judge definitive which be matter of faith or no it be not for the emperor but to ratify by his assent and command by his authority what the church or council so assemble have define to be a matter of faith be proper to emperor and king and this be the end of their submission at Arles as the word purport and that this be s. Ambrose his meaning also his own fact be the best interpreter who when the synod at Aquil^...ia convent by the emperor command about the point of Christ deity no mean article of faith be dissolve and break tom. 1. Concil. pa. 5^...4 etc. (@) gratian. Valentinian Theodosius up write with the rest of his brother their letter to the emperor particular discourse the whole manner of their proceed and by messenger purposely address from the synod humble and earnest desire they that they will vouchsafe to make good what the bishop have in this assembly conclude ne lest this our ^...eeting shall be frustrate and to no purpose which we have make in obedience to your clemencies commandment 50 or be this submission or rather remission by the synod make because this council be assemble only for reformance of manner that be his last interrogatory and answer by he affirmative yea for after the first canon which contain a procession of their faith the other twenty five be in all but twenty six be about reformation of matter amiss and so he reckon up eleven of the twenty five Genebrard indeed do call all those synod by Charles the great assemble Chron. lib. 4. 813. REFORMATORIA belike than it be grance that prince within their several dominious may assemble their clergy concern matter of ecclesiastical discipline and that be matter of faith have a great dependence upon that reformation because unsoundness in opinion be seldom separate from dissoluteness of manner 51 but be the assembly only for that first then the clergy do aliudagere and go beyond their commission for after their mutual salutation and joy at each other meeting Praesat Consil our whole company begin to confer at large about matter spiritual say the father of that council second the eleven canon define who be to be account (@) and within what degree of consanguinity they be comprise and that I trow be a matter of Dostrine yea and the eight canon which in the margin the jesuite have mark but omit in the body of the discourse be by their own rule a matter of faith and religion and by this epistler term Nomb. 50. a point of the law of God namely the prohibition of enter into monastical life mauritius in his edict forbid that soldier shall be admit as monk and that by greg. the great be account such a matter of conscience and religion that he take it to be against God himself and to be a mandate preclusory of the way to heaven the say very restr in it for nun and monk be within this council and yet now it be repute but a matter of manner the 18. canon not only conclude the crism to be safe keep under lock and key but determine it to be a kind of sacrament and therefore not to be touch by any but priest 52 yet grant it be so that this council be only assemble to correct deformity in manner do they then by their submission acknowledge the emperor authority only in those case and not in matter of faith and religion what can we say to the four general counsel specify by his majesty assemble by the emperor and particular that of Ephesus against Nestorius summon by the emperor and after many earnest supplication and interception of their letter and hard pressure upon some orthodox father for Cyril and Memmon upon sinister tom. 2. Concil. p. 921. information be lay fast their decree be at last confirm by the emperor authority his answer be Numb. 55. those only tend to prove temporal obedience and therefore he will not stand to examine they very learned speak and very honest no doubt 53 such be the fashion of many ignorant geographer say Plutarch when they come to some Pl^... thes. that go beyond their small read and they know not how to describe it they place it in a corner of their map and say that nothing lie beyond but certain quicksand or unpassable mountain or freeze sea just that which Aristotle note in Anaxagoras that absurd disputant who Metaphys 1. when he be drive to any exigent and can not give a cause why such a thing shall have his existence he will shift it off with his old spell of n^...t that the understanding do it when as in all other thing he will make anything the cause rather than it here temporal obedience be make the cause of the counsel submission which say the jesuite we offer most willing when as those synod be not assemble for any one such point and he with his be ready to perform nothing less and so pass they with silence because he know not what to say unto they he tell we that he will draw to a end of this paragraph wherein like schole-boy when they have spend their question he fall on rail against the Apologier with his saucy term 54 and why so because his majesty profess that it never come within his read that temporal obedience be against faith and salvation of soul sure he be that Christ profess himself of another opinion in deny his kingdom to be of this world and in command joh. 18 36. matth. 21. 21. Caesar right to be give unto Caesar and therefore if the pope have once set it down as a article of faith for he have a trick by the infallibility of his spirit to make new article at his pleasure before he have thus pronounce of the oath of allegiance it have be more excusable 55 upon this the jesuite result in a kind of tertullus rhetoric with a volume of empty and haughty word call this speech a insultation and the apologer a trifler a wrangler a wrongful imposer upon his adversary a voluntary mistaker of the question and a calumniator numb 56. for first the say he forbid not temporal obedience no it forbid the oath wherein be only acknowledgement of civil allegiance and he which prohibit the swear against a usurp deposer deny temporal obedience to the rightful sovereign second say he neither the pope nor the whole church together can make new article of faith by the judgement of any learned catholic they may make new rule of faith for those book which the church in all age have repute as the book of Hermes and the constitution of Clement the pope and council may make canonical so say Stapl^...ton and he Relect. d^...ct prine count 5. (@) 2. (@) 4. no unlearned catholic yet more near bish^...p fisher a most holy and learned man so Bellarmine style he say that what a pope with a council deliver we to be believe that must be receive as Art. ^...7 co^...a (@) (@) ^...n article of Fait^... yet more direct Aquinas no mean learned schoolman be of opinion that to prevent or (@) error new arise it be necessary to make a new (@) q. 1. art. 10. symbol or creed and no man have that authoritie^...ut ^...ut the pope to who it belong final to determine concern matter of faith to be of all bel^...eved and receive INCONC^...SSA without doubt or waver which point of desine how many or how few they shall be to belong to the pope only and not to a council a jesuite and therefore learned Institut. pa. 2. lib. 4. cap. 10. parsons will say maintain very firm for the pope may define any thing though not express in Scripture to be defy a article or point of faith without any explicit revelation from God say Suarez another jesuite tom. 2. disp. 3. art. 2. sect. 6. qu. 27. 56 but what need opinion when the practice be extant a whole new symbolum be set out in the provincial synod tom. (@) Concil. pa. 950. at Milan wherein twelve new article be add to the Nicen creed which all catholic be find upon pain of a Anathema^... to profess by word and swear by oath 57 these be explanation not new article as she be not the true mother more after the child be sentence to be divide then before but than it appear more plain that she be so say the epistler so some canonist call the pope challenge c. elect ^...n 60. to his doubl^... monarchy Constantine not donation but declaration or real explanation of that text Petrus explanation be declaratory illustration of a truth involve in some former article not addition of a doctrine new conceive for a truth so say the council of Florence but in that annexion at Milan the most of the article have no ground either in scripture or decree by the primitive church allow and therefore purgatory transubstantiation communicate under one kind seven sacrament worshipp^...ng of image etc. which be annex to the nicene creed by the synod at Milan have no relation to any article of that or any other ancient creed or divine scripture can not be say the florentine council ^...om 4. Concil. pa. ^...22 etc. wherein that case be full canvas but must needs be ex^...ranea addition of new article fetch it in by the pope extravagant power which the canonist ascribe unto he Decius and can li. (@) 1. reg. 3. which show his comparison of the true mother reveal by the appoint division of the child to be a foppery for if the creed can speak for itself at the impose and enforce new article upon it under the name of declaration as that natural mother can at the sentence for the dismember of her child it will tell the whore of Babel that she play Michols part to make a dead image carry the resemblance 1. Sam 19 13 of live David and that these explanation so call be but Ephesiael^...terae illude imposture no conclude truth athen. dipnos. lib. 12. and will justify that charge of his majesty in say that the pope can make new article of faith to be as far from calumniation as this jesuite be from shame or honesty to avow the contrary in say that no learned catholic do affirm it when there be so many witness against he and the practice itself in their new form so apparent 58 insomuch that some schoolman press that canon of the eph^...sine council that none under pain of anathema shall or any other symbol Th^...m ^...qu or any thing to that of the nicene creed turn it off first that the anathema in that case touch private man and not the pope second that those article of the pope be ^...ut explanation not addition which be a weak privilege for so much may yea every minister in catechize must do that be explicate and declare the sense and meaning of the creed therefore what the pope add must needs be a new article of faith or else his prerogative be no more than belong to the office of every ordinary priest that be learned so that if the pope have by his infallible judgement and irref^...agable authority once determine it for a article of faith either as his majesty put the case in particular that temporal obedience be against faith and salvation of soul or as m. blackwell in general that the pope have judicial (@) declare his sovereignty and power in E^...l Catholic ^...glic than his to come upon it have carry some colour which be a thing as it seem very soon do if he will for if there be a question say Suarez though it have be long canvas and none dare define either way yet if it make for the profit of the church as for example whether the virgin Mary be conceive by her parent without sin the pope have power and what he conclude must be receive 59 from this his majesty prolemma and anticipate conclusion the epistler come to answer this dilemma that be if temporal obedience be lawful the pope be injurious to forbid it to his catholic if it be unlawful yet be he unjust to condemn and not to show the reason both these pillar as the jesuite call they like another Samson he set his force to frush at once and yet they stand himself be crush with his own shock for what he have hitherto labour to confute and now again peremptory deny that the gainsa^...th not obedience in civil thing in answer to the last part of the dilemma he plain confess and grant for the pope be just tax by his majesty for not express any cause or reason of the unlawfulness of the oath the epistler say there be as many reason that it be unlawful as there be point in the oath which concern religion and there be no one point but do so even that very first article which mere touch civil obedience I do swear before God that king James be the lawful king of this realm etc. for every subject be by religion in conscience find if he be require to swear unto the lawful right of his true sovereign and therefore the pope by this antapologer grant not distinguish the part but lay down the whole oath in a lump as a sufficient reason of the unlawfulness deny even civil obedience and recognition to be acknowledge by his catholic unto their lord and King 60 but perhaps by religion he mean the point of the oath where the pope and church of Rome be name it have then be honest deal in the pope first to have say so and then to have show what foundation that religion have which give he such power to depose king or absolve subject and to have make that point sound good for himself before he have rush into such a peremptory prohibition but that be yet a debate-able ground and a controversy not agree upon among his own professor nor determine by his cathedral autliority it be a hasty rashness not upright justice to award a sentence so resolute interdictive for though a judge dispute not but determine as say this jesuite yet it be a judge part to guide his determination by the allegation and proof make on both side in the hear of the party if it be possible if not yet to intimate the reason of his so sentence which otherwise even a pagan thought to be a absurd yea a brutish course for he which give a definitive sentence hear but one party act. 25. ^...7 hand though his determination be just his proceed be unjust say the philosopher in the pope then there be a double injustice first to judge in Seneca the absence of one side second suppose they say that the oath itself serve as the adverse party present that ^...so be injustice to condemn the good with the bad for either gen. 18. but some part of the oath concern temporal obedience that parsons confess and then have the pope deal both unjust to condemn the whole oath as it lie and undiscreet and injurious not to express the particle of his exception or else the whole oath do only concern it and then be the pope deal both aberrant from divinity and cruel to his catholic force their sovereigns sword out of his scabbard and whet it in his hand against they as also which his majesty very judicious collect by exhort they to constancy not to yield therein he cast a foul imputation upon that religion as if it and civil obedience be incompatible in themselves and that no zealous Papist can be a true subject to his sovereign 61 this collection he term a injurious inference but answer no other way than first by a shift comparison that the same objection may be make against saint cyprian and other father for exhort martyr to constancy not to yield against their conscience and second by a preoccupation that if we shall reply that the thing then exact by emperor be simple and apparent unlawful these not their answer be that unto they in their conscience the oath be as utter unlawful which be as much to say to swear allegiance unto their natural and rightful sovereign be in their conscience as unlawful as to sacrifice to idol for in denial thereof only be the constancy of those martyr try who s. cyprian hearten as in the very book which he quote be manifest exhort martyr divide into twelve chapter six of they all handle that only argument as the subject of their perseverance three he answer by a expostulation why shall it be more indispensible to deliver up a bible or a new testament which the martyr then deny to the emperor and so die for deny it and be by the church commend for so die then now for Rome catholic to swear a oath against their conscience when the king exact it 62. the reply be first that it be not the substance of the oath that stick in their conscience but the form thereof especial those last word I do make this recognition willing and true otherwise they have a trick in their religion to swallow the whole oath without strain for this be their doctrine and it be worth the observe that if a man be call to swear if he take the oath unwilling it be unto he as if he have not Azor. in^...itut pag. 1. (@) 10. c. 4. swear at all yea grant he be very willing to swear but have not no will to bind himself to perform what he swear it be no oath unto he he be as free as if he be never swear 63. second that this be as the schoolman speak but for there be no proportion in these case of disobedience because simple to deliver up a bible unto a superior require it be no sin yea to deny it be a contempt for so far forth as they be material book they be but as victor in August speak and after delivery may either be transcribe by copy or recover by entreaty or supply from other place but if the emperor require they to use as jehoiakim do jeremiah his prophecy or Antiochus^...e ^...e book of the law to burn and deface in contempt 36. 23. 1. Maccab. 1. 59 60. (@) lib. 8. ^...p. 2 ^...nob lib. 4. 4. and despite or fury and passion and that be the case as appear by Eusebius and Arnobius in those word or as julian the who call in all the heathen writer both of philosophy and poetry out of the christian hand under a socrat. lib 3. cap. 12 fair pretence of abandon paganism to bereave they of all knowledge thereby to take from christians the true mean of their instruction the cause be far different for so to obey be wilful to betray the truth of God whereas obedience to prince be a injunction both to 1. pet. 2. 13. tit. 3. (@) all subject for performance and to clergyman for suggestion also to remember the other of their duty 64. from which there be no startle exception say Aquinas unless he be either a usurper or intruder which command and that be not our case God be thank or 22. q. 105. art. 6. ad. 3. that he command thing unlawful if they say that be their case we deny it but let we suppose it yet their angelical doctor will tell they that in those thing they must notwithstanding of this divinity I judge not it be their own and can there be a great scandal in a state than that a king shall have so many subject in several rank that shall refuse to join in the same allegiance with their native countryman and cohabitant as for danger can a man take fire in his bosom and his clothes not be prou. 6. 27. burn say Solomon or a prince nourish recreant in his realm and be secure of his safety obedience therefore be the bible doctrine what resemblance have the deliver up of the bible to the despite and rage of furious tyrant and the oath which bind the obedience only in secular thing and be therefore call the oath of allegiance 95 to which he answer first that be the inscription not the truth for the fair title be put upon the foul matter when it be to be exact or persuade it be true fa. parsons for murder of prince be now entitle a Sixt. quint. panegyr Card^...m Parri^... memorable and worthy exploit as in the monk case that slay the french king yea a meritorious work deserve letter of commission indulgence of pardon and inheritance in heaven as in the case of Parry the design slaughterman of queen Elizabeth as for depose king and incite subject to rebellion they be entitle the two principal ward of s. Peter key without which God bulla 5. have be desicient in his providence because without they the church can neither be well open nor shut but that the oath be such a harpy with a fair face and a foul heart we must and will denieit till it be prove that there be any thing in it which either scandalize a good conscience or contradict any point of true religion or which mere concern not civil obedience 66 he therefore second answer that the exact of bible to be deliver up be under pretence of allegiance unless he have a warrant under the pope seal to falsify that little read he have he will not thus write the author which he name mention no such thing vea the contrary be imply by they for not only the bible but paper book also of collect note and book of physic be exact to the fire as in saint August appear yea some of Tully his work as Arnobius witness even as Numa Pompilius his volume contra. Crescon lib. 3. cap. 27. lib. 3 Sixt. li. 2. long before by a ancient decree of the roman senate and for this exaction two reason only be give first a purpose to destroy all writer that make against their doctrine of the paynim god and that fetch it in Tully and the old testament especial second it be the current opinion in those time as witness Arnobius that our saviour Christ be Magus a notable sorcerer and conjurer and so the new testament be fetch it in and whatsoever writing concern he as reckon in the number of magical book they that through torment and fear yield they up be call say saint August the name first know 40. yoare after saint cyprian and ^...apt lib. 7. cap. (@) death in the time of Dioclesia and no one word mention by any writer concern allegiance either in the emperor edict or relation of the history and therefore to bring it in for comparison with this oath be absurd and ridiculous wherewith the other edict of the say tyrant command christian to sacrifice unto idol have as much coherence more true do those represent unto we the roman for as they by their faint yield do what in they lay to speak in Arnobius gent lib. 3. word utter to abolish the publish knowledge of Christ and to make the saviour of the world a sorcerer so do these by their false purgation as much as they can endeavour to make all the father romish advocate and to leave to the church neither true history nor sound author no more than Pharaoh will have leave one male alive have not the midwife prevent exod. 1 16. he 67 some shadow hereof to go no further may be see by this jesuite in the point of these two breve of Clement the 8. in this place mention by his majesty which garnet the arch-traitor have and burn and wherewith the epistler make the way to end this paragraph for pag. 46 li. 5. as concern Rome be Babylon he speak not a word as by silence grant that which cardinal Matthew plain acknowledge and confess it to be even that Babylon in the apocalypse now than his majesty who have good reason to know what concern matter of state affirm that those breve be send by pope Clemens immediate before the late queen death this the antapologer conclude to be a exaggerate calumniation the tortoise in latin say it be a vanity and falsity belike pag. 45. li. 24 these man stand upon a sure ground they be so confident what be then the proof the english jesuite say that have procure knowledge of the two he find they send into England not together nor immediate before the queen death but the onedivers year before 1600. and the other after her death 1603. the vn-iesuited latinist pag. 46. li. 20. he say that have the copy thereof in his hand he find that Clemens the eight send these two in the year 1600. one to the clergy and the other to the laity both of they together three year before the queen death one come not till after her death and yet both of they come before her death 3. year where be the falsity now perhaps one be dispatch by cut-speede the post and the other send by tom-long the carrier the holy ghost speak it of as honest man as these mar 14. 56. and their witness agree like harp and Harrow 68 if the date thereof must determine the truth why agree they not upon it but suppose they do that must not carrieit it be a easy matter for the pope to make a ante-date the gibeonite come to josua like far-went traveller when as they be his confine neighbour josu. 9 12 13. and with tear clothes and mouldy victual as become so by journey which they have make by craft and the breve of the new coin may easy have a old stamp in the Popesmint to make they currant for his catholic purpose they write of Asia that the want of one diphthong Plut dysop luc. 16. be the overthrow of the whole country the pope be not so nice to hazard his case upon such quillit if add or alter or falsify or outface will do it in word sentence or volume his scribe be at hand like the honest steward that can write down 50. or 80. it be but turn a figure into a cipher and 600. will easy apul. florid. lib. (@) be make of 603. but it be more than probable by that which this epistler confess that upon report of the queen despair recovery both the breve be draw according to the proverb Dorio Phrygium of two diverse nature the one to raise a tumult if they find any head to make a foul stoppage against the king if not but that in despite of the devil the king shall have his right and the state be once settle than the other shall start out to make a fair show for the pope and some way for a toleration a stale and silly policy God wot and not much different from the laconian to have plut. and Gell^...um two ticket in one pocket of a contrary fashion for two diverse event 69 yea rather which be the truth according to his majesty relation contrary to what the scripture observe in nature course which deny sweet water and brackish to spring from the same fountain yet which the same scripture abhor in man tongue out of the same mouth of the pope proceed blessing and curse at one time his even then gastr his majesty title jac. 3. 12 and debar his right when to send some of his majesty minister abroad he both profess and promise (@) furtherance in advancement thereof for the substance of the be that the catholic shall admit none for king be he never so near conjoin in blood and descent except he will first swear not only to tolerate but promote the catholic romish religion within his realm 70 to this he answer that the be rather a determination of the pope upon a question move unto hi^... what catholic be find to do in conscience for admit a new prince after the queen death first what have the pope to do in decide tules or marshall^...g descent one that have more right to the possession of the whole earth he by who king do reign and prince Psal. 3 pro. 8. luc. 12. 13. bear rule refuse to be umpire in any such matter for who make i a judge of inheritance say our saviour in the gospel and one not the meanly learned among they deny the pope to have any authority either by prescription or power to meddle with second who teach franc. relect. 1. Eccles. @. the pope such divinity that kingdom hereditary descend to religion not to blood three the pope therein oppose against his majesty claim for he have many evident demonstration that the king neither be nor will be popish affect his profession general settle in the church and state where he live his resolute answer his statute enact his edict publish his book print his argument multiply and upon occasion enforce make all to the contrary his tule be not so weak that he need the pope furtherance nor his desire of a crown so ambitious that for achieve it he will betray his conscience which the pope know and his majesty shall have feel the smart thereof have the catholic party be strong enough and therefore that other ground of the pope which the epistler put down be a falsity and a vanity a hope conceive that his majesty be not far from be a Papist but there may be some reasonable hope of his conversion 71 what go you out into the wilderness to see say out saviour a reed s^...ken with the wind and what minister matth. 11. the occasion to this hope of his majesty inconstancy which they call conversion the relation and earnest asseveration of those his majesty minister abroad quoth he first that be one just reward of a strumpet to be gull with gloss and false promise of her rival to feed her lustful humour and win her like to themselves and the whore of Bobylon queen of the world as his majesty entitle she to who there be such frequent recourse can want whole stew of intelligence yet a politic historian note it as a point of singular folly and rashness for prince and statesman to credit every report especial in bru^...tes of high nature and not (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) very narrow dion lib. 52. lie to (@) out the truth thereof second though he be Nabal a churl that speak it and fail then in the particular yet his thesis be too true there be too many servant now a^...es 1. sam. 25. 10. that break every man from his master that carry name of minister be fugitive and of agent be traitor great man prince especial do seldom want a ziba to give out treacherous information contrary to the intention and derogatory to the reputation of their 2. sam. ^...6 3. master which put they most in trust but as it be not the wise nor upright doom in the judgement of all divine give by David upon a report so malicious frame and so slender prove to condemn Mephibosheth as a traitor so it argue no great discretion in the pope up ibid. on bare information and as the end will show mere slander have in they neither ground for proof nor shadow of truth to be so credulous as to conceive that his majesty will be a from that religion which in his infancy he have suck and have succour in his kingdom and hazarue sometime for it both li^...e and liberty if perhaps he mean those letter which mention ere this time he can but know that those treacherous abuse be now full discover by the voluntary confession of the party himself the then secretary of Scotland who get those letter sign but make not his majesty acquaint with the content l. of Balmerinoth thereof because before that have move the king ^...o write unto the pope his majesty have utter deny he and what prince christen may not in such sleight of deceit be abuse if those to who he commit his especial ^...ust will be so sraudulent wicked yea be not one even of their own modern pope serve in the very like kind wherefore be Belochto the taster unto sixtus and his attendant who he dear love condemn to the galley where after many month he miserable die but for sign with the fisherman ring a apostolical the pope unwitting thereof the (@) six content whereof be contrary to the pope mind nor the taster only but Gual^...erruccio also one of his secretary as a accessary to that treacherous cousinage and another beside he who Onuphrius will not name be all adjudge to the like punishment for the same fact say the stoik and it may be the case of any governor be he never so circumspect the master credit may for a while be hazard by the servant unfaithfulness but when time have reveal the truth the falsy of a treacher may not be a prejudice to the innocency of a sovereign 72 so that what this gloss scribbler write of that pope kind affection to his majesty as love his person most hearty speak of he honourable treat his nation kind and use more liberality that way than he think convenient to speak of be but juggle device to deceive the understanding of simple reader for though there be nothing (@) (@) majesty but that which be amiable and admirable his part of nature art and grace all so singular that by the eminency of his place be descry far and near they most needs excite great love to his person draw man affection to he and occasionate most honourable speech of high quality and deportment ^...et that pope Clement shall be so kind respective be much to be doubt who letter send to his majesty while he be in Scotland be refuse by he and return without admittance yea but the pope and the king can be altogether ignorant of it nor ingrate for it cause a special prayer to be make for his majesty 73 first who require these devout service at your hand say God himself to a people as religious as Rome es. (@) 12. afford we know that God hear not sinner taint affection may mar good orison and the best prayer John 9 31. from such mind like Cain sacrifice may turn into sin humility enforce prayer into the cloud to be return gen. 4. Psal. 109 7 Eccle. 35. 17. with effect say the wiseman but the claim of depose king be no humble conceit such haughty imagination send forth but hollow suit and receive but empty answer second both the subject matter and the intend end of a prayer be corrupt may make it frustrate you ask and receive not say saint jaine because jac. 4. 3. you ask amiss such a prayer therefore it may be that his majesty have little cause to thank the pope for it have the jesuite set down the collect it may have be examine but by that which he insinuate it be ground as it seem upon the former hope that his Maies^... will be one of their catholic or at least tolerate their religion and even this conceit alone be able to over throw any good prayer for God which usual hear not do not in mercy grant a aug. in Psal. request that issue from a affection intend both to the dishonour of his anoint as also the hazard of his life safety and his soul health and therefore the best thanks the pope can deserve at his majesty hand be that of the prophet David let not their precious bal^...ms break my head that be as one of their own interpret it let not (@) Psal. 4^... their blandish prayer alter my mind nor dissipate my counsel 74 but have thus gloss upon the breve of Clemens the eight he come now to show his art in those of Paulus Quintus which be the last point in this paragraph the first whereof he will make good against his majesty who in the apology affirm that in the opinion of diverse catholic not of the simple ^...ort but of the choice yea the arch priest himself it be so void of divinity policy and natural sense that they account it a counterfeit libel make in hatred of the pope and the answer which he make to it be sourefold the two foremost his old palinody of scorn and malediction first that it be a calumniation second that it be but a feign de^...se of t. m. for no catholic of judgement or piety will think so three a injury to the reverend archpriest four a double supposition first it may be that some do doubt at the beginning whether it come from the pope or from the inquisitor their defectuous information second that if there be such a doubt it be now remove by the second whereby all man may see the sentence of the see apostolic and learn to obey he who God have appoint for the decision of doubt and havi^...g thus say he leap from thence to Bellarmine letter 75 such as man be themselves for the most part they (@) other to be because they will fa^...e have th^...m ^...o be such which make this fellow who the priest (@) ^...titled to be the mint master of all forgery to repute que. li^... p. ^...36 even unseign truth to be calumniation and De^... but be this in sooth a fit course of answer to turn ^...ll so deep and press a charge with such un^...itting frumps^...nd ^...nd a short negative it be not so a woman answer more sobe^...ly but as full and say as much when the angel charge she that she laugh it be not so ^...ghed not and yet which be worse to vary in that nega^...e gene. 18. 21. for what before he deny now he grant and say it may be it be so it have be to the purpose both in (@) to his majesty and satisfaction to the catholics if he have make it plain that none of that sort think so of the or ^...ad show some reason that they have no cause to think so and to have prove by some sound argument that this course which the pope take be neither against divinity Polli^...e nor common sense 76 but that both the archpriest and diverse catho^...kes be of that opinion be without question and that ^...hey h^...d good reason so to think be manifest for whether it shall come from the pope of his voluntary motion which as they say that know he be hasty violent and boisterous enough or from information of jesuite or inquisitor who want neither litie nor malic^... in their relation no more than they do falsi^... and desp^...ght in their translation of the english statute divulge in Spain with horrible addition of their own cruel imagination never dream of in our state nor congruent with the true body of those law thereby to procure detestation to the realm it force not the itself carry those brand with it in the bulk there of to be irrel^...gious imprudent and void of common sense 77 for rel^...gion there be no more in it then in the (@) Co^...ban to which it may be fit compare for mar. 7. 11. as by that tradition or illusion rather the most natural duty to parent be dissolve under the most specious pretext of Pret^...e be in our saviour judgement the very height of impiety as derogatory to the express commandment in the law so the native and legal obedience in the which subject be bear and find to their sovereign be by the pope under pretence of faith and salvation church right and Christ authority even against Christ precept and the true church practise ca^...iered frustrate and prohibit which have make some of that sect to rely thereon and die therein as judes do for as he presume upon that Corban tradition as a sufficient warrant to exp^...ate his treason bring the hire of his treachery into the holy treasury matth. 27. 5. and present upon it go to his own execution so they take that unto they for a sufficient this charge from their acknowledgement of loyalty do wilful thrust their neck into the halter and become author of their own death 78 for policy and sense as much to be have in it as job find favour in the white of a egg prudence in the philosopher opinion be the eye of the mind which job. 6. 6. who so want be in worse case than the blind Cyclops say a Proteus of their own whether therefore we respect (@) Polit. l^... (@) cap. 1. quin. ^...2 q 47 that which in the school they call whereby any particular man may be adjudge wise in his own affair even that eye be either dazzle with passion or miss carry to a wrong object in send out a so evident proceed from self-love ground upon misse-conceit publish in revenge and pythagorical peremptory without yield reason or if we look to that which they call ibid. and show a man wisdom in state-matter therein also be that eye much blemish that of his be like rehoboams answer upon his yoonkers advice more lordly than judicious more imperious than politic 1. reg. 12. for what policy can there be so to deal with a king lawful possess royal ally strong back now new invest in his throne rouse some few month afore by treason upon treason in a redouble conspiracy with romish priest fresh exulcerate with the most horrible design for savage cruelty that ever be engine and that also from jesuite and the pope his own darling while his majesty be as it be in hot blood his spirit as yet trouble and who can blame he by ^...he horror of such intend villainy what policy I say can it be that the pope a stranger to this nation and the grandfather of those romish brat even then shall send out a prohibition that his majesty native subject especial of that religion so late taint shall not acknowledge their allegiance 79 put case that some ingredient in the oath upon the fresh memory of that cruel project have be over sharp yet time may have allay that heat and fair entreaty wrought a mitigation in the oath in the mean time have the bishop of Rome show unto the king his detestation of those treason and request some monument of that strange and barbarous design eradication which like Lot wife pillar may have remain liu. lib. (@) as a woeful but a wholesome spectacle to posterity yet withal entreat that neither the religion which those pretend may be think the worse of nor the catholic that profess the same to be more hardly deal with this have be both a season and a seasonable a prudent and a sensible policy for generous mind yield where they find a relent passage rebecke by opposition provoke liu. lib. 22. to wrath and hasty opposite as they be unwary so prove they unlucky 80 to avoid therefore this imputation and to show John 19 ^...2 that the pope like another do what he do with mature deliberation and without hope of revocation he second it with another like a second crambe ovid. whereto this jesuite ascribe a double virtue as well corroborative of the former to put it out of question as retentive to the catholic confine they within their obedience to he who God have appoint for decision of such doubt but what if the first be a sin and this doubt-driver prove errant his double of the one show pertinacy in the mind but aggravate the crime and their rely upon the other like the egyptian reed argue their misery and Esa. 36. 6. hazard their safety and be it not a sin to prohibit the take of that oath which the scripture do call the oath of God because in his name and for his sake and at his command subject do swear loyalty Eccles. 8. 2. to their sovereign and can there be a more miserable slavery then to fasten their soul upon his decision who by the confession of their own writer have no more privilege for warrantable resolution than a other m^... howsoever a new late start up of u^...ce endue he with Antithes Co^...ar to 1 pag. 184. lib. 1. ca. 4. mat. 15. 14. a more than angelical immunity that though he will never so fame he can err in particular controversy of fact there be no doubt but the pope may err say Bellar. yea even in point of faith say Alphonsus in his last edition though correct our saviour then conclude if the blind lead the blind the danger of the Pitfall be equal to they both 81 this controversy therefore whether of fact or faith rest not there but lest it may be think that the oath be oversway by the pope authority without ground of learning or be interdict either upon passion without deliberate judgement or upon ambitious maintenance of the see apostlolike without weight of argument to strike that stroke dead outstep cardinal Bellarmine a ready arm champion in his behalf who successor perhaps he hope to be and by a letter to the archpriest black-welll as by his gauntlet cast he challenge the oath of atheism and he of apostasy for take it and now according to the proverb for this be he in who lie their main strength and hope for Baronius compare his book to David tower and armoury cant. 4. say the dismay 1. Sam 17. 25. israelite at the sight of a tall soldier and be there any stand against such a combatant but in the mean time do not the cardinal take it in scorn or for a wrong that this Rotarius or mile such the old roman account to have little strength and less liu. lib. 8. trust such a one as parson shall take upon he to make good his challenge against the apologer which be as much as if tinca the fraple rhetorculist shall undertake tul. orator the defence of Tully his oratory and this he do in the three PARAGRAPH entitle about cardinal Bellarmine letter and answer thereto by the apologer numb 1. as if the apologer answer like jerichoe wall shall present fall with the blast of a ram horn and josh. 6. 15. a few turn about it and yet be the title well fit his reply for many wind and turn he have in a preface about it before he come to it and be in it he tread a labyrinth and sometime lose himself and yet in the conclusion he wind his cornet in three several blast first comminatory to our state second causative of his antapology three supplicatorie for a more moderate proceed in the preface after he have first show the occasion impulsive of Bellarmine writing a foreign mislike of blackwell take the oath though with a limitation and a scandal conjoin in regard of his person and place the catholic of our climate as this jesuite confess be of another mind so full of concord they be between themselves he second sum nom. 14. par. 1. up as in one total the particular in the cardinal letter yet neither like a logician nor a good auditor but as if a false borrower shall sum up the interest without the principal he leave out the essential and kindly part thereof and only take those that be consectary and dependent and those very simple and rude 2 as thus the cardinal say he show his opinion consist of two point the one that the oath as it stand compound can not be take the other that the archpriest ought to stand firm in regard of his place in defiance of danger whereas to make Bellarmine speak himself the true analysis be this the cardinal whole letter after the gratulatory preface be exhortatory to blackwell first to rectify his judgement in the true understanding of the oath second to recover his constancy which he have lose in take of it the first he persuade by reason because either open or private it impugn the faith touch the primacy of the see apostolic which be slender prove and false ground his first proof a sly anticipation that the oath imply more fear than danger second a false lustre that it be like the mixture of julians picture his false ground that the oath impugn the spiritual primacy of the see apostolic which be utter untrue and set upon that sandy and unsound foundation his whole building be place and so the stand thereof be prefigure in the gospel this be the true analysis of the first part of the letter the second be untouched mat. 7. 27. and so let it lie 3 and as he have sum it up fond so false also this epistler say that Bellarmine take the oath to be compound of lawful and unlawful clause whereas the cardinal say plain that the oath though it be so Apolog. p. 39 30 temper and modi^...ied yet be it whole unlawful which be as much to say as there be not a lawful clause in it and this be his labour in the two first number after which who will not expect his present encounter but it will not be you must give he leave after his manner (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) to stepalide he be somewhat gri^...pt horat. Tpist and a knotty point or two trouble he before he can join issue the first be the wrong translation of the cardinal subscription which the apologer have thus metaphrased your very reverend brother whereas those word say the epistler be to be refer to the archpriest and not to the cardinal and this in his pang he call a cavil both in the corpse and in the margin 4 so the moralist write of a quick sight empiric that will perforce make a gentleman believe he be inclinable to a great sickness because he see a pimple or the skin rise below his nail but suppose Plutar. it be not exact translate first be not the sense all one for both the brotherhood and reverence be reciprocal and may be refer to both party either your reverendships brother or your reverend brother especial as it be in the write copy where the d. in the end have such a dash as it may be take aswell for as dae second why do not the epistler mend it and translate it right himself because he be oppose for shall he have intreprete in English true the reply he foresee will have be upon he as Alexander be upon Diogenes who beg a talent the emperor answer it be to much for a cynic diog. Luert to ask he than crave a halfpenny the emperor tell he it be to little for Alexander to give have it be translate your reverend lordship that be to lofty a title for the grand cardinal to give a archpriest who the canonist some of they make but a rural Deane other Glos. dist. 50. in dist. 25. c. lect^... distinct. 60. ca. nullies epis a archdeacon inferior they that put he to the high strain rank he but as a dean equal if it have be your reverend mastership that have be terminus too mean a style for a archpriest for so you may aswell call Bellarmine master cardinal which in this censurer opinion you hear before be Parag. 1 a unmannerly part even in the king himself 5 but why shall he call it a cavil be any argument frame out of it or the cardinal ambition aggravate for so still himself no such thing only translate and so leave the latin be extant and unalter and in blackwels examination at large translate your reverend lordship brother whether proper in the one or the other be it not true both a quarrel (@) (@) who shall have the lordship either the cardinal or the archpriest and a abuse of the reader to withhold he from serious matter with trifle and gewgaw the other point be the apologer wilful mistake of the question and thereby a great advantage give to the cardinal for his defence that yet and let not he that be gird to the battle boast as he that be unbuckle from the fight if it be so that need not then have stop he the more advantage the easy conquest the trial will show it and upon that let it rest 6 and now these twinge be past he come Numb. 4. to the first exception take against the cardinal letter confess by he to be great if true that Bellarmine have mistake the question and like a man blindfold have impugn the oath of supremacy instead of the oath of allegiance and so much do m. blackwell confess after he have well read and weigh the say letter in say that he perceive examine large pag. 12. the cardinal do not distinguish between those two oath that of 1 o. and this of 3 o. but Bellarmine have himself prevent that objection say this jesuite in that he speak of a oath temper and modify which can be understand ^...f any other but this oath that of the supremacy have no such mixture in it and this he call a clear refutation 7 which be indeed but a duskish illusiion for first if this oath be so modify in comparison of the other why be it account by this censurer the great affliction and pressure that ever befall the catholic and why shall not Paragr. 1. no. 33. pag. 20. a oath so allay and temper be as ready entertain by the pope and his follower as be the edict of mauritius the emperor by their own confession after it be correct and moderate as they say second those Parag. 2. no. 49 mitigation and alleviate temperature be not mention by the cardinal argue rather that he do very mistake the oath write upon other man relation not his own understanding and judgement for he that compare the oath shall find this last of allegiance to be more press pithy and peremptory against the pope primacy in than the other against his spiritual supremacy and in all circumstance a more exact and search touchstone to try and discover a loyally-affected subject from a hollow-hearted recusant three therefore the modification which the cardinal speak of as by the verb and tense he use may well be conjecture be not in the tenor of the oath pass so by the state which still remain as it do but in the offer of the magistrate when Blackwel take it not long before whereof himself speak in his letter to the priest Exam. pag. 23. lin. 3. and repeat it again in his letter to the cardinal at those word etc. the first of which Resp. Bellar lin. 12. letter be write in the midst of july and Bellarmine date his not till the end of September follow to that offer temperature and acceptation there specify by the archpriest it be more probable that the cardinal allude then to the oath itself wherein there be no one qualify point so that his majesty exception that the cardinal have mistake the oath remain yet unremoove for all this clear refutation unless he bring more evidence which he intend 8. but soft the giddy fellow tell we he have another errand to do not out of the way but a note by the way the scripture set a more essential note upon such by way taker Psalm. 125. 5. wicked man as thief plot or pursue take all the by-way nook and lane they can pass for arist. eth. athen fear to be describe or apprehend and both poet and philosopher have note they for absurd disputant and discourser that start into circumstance and leave the principal matter which be controvert but this be just according to the title of this paragraph about the cardinal letter for the prolong to come to it and be in but a while be out again present let we follow he though and see what Daiz^...e he have pluck by the way in three whole number 5. 6. 7. the apologer belike as Caligula do with jupiters statue sueton. have take off the right head and put another in the place thereof in set down the form of the oath of supremacy for whereas in the time of king Henry the 8 and king Edward the six the title be then the king highness be the supreme head the apologer think it not good to give it unto his majesty but call he only supreme governor 9 questionless either a bold oversight in his majesty that he dare change a borrow metaphor into a proper word or a overawe fear to take that title of head into his style which God himself give to a less and a far worse king and the apostle to every marry 1 sam. 15. 1. cor. 11 man who he call the woman Head but what be the ulcer that vex he for this alteration perhaps because the first which give that title of supreme head unto king Henry the 8. be bishop of their own profession stat. 26. c. 1. hen. 8. not of we and so it be as appear in that statute which he mention if so why be it then account such a sacrilege and blasphemy of we as in all their writing it be continual traduce or be it because the title of governor have more in it or be a lofty and proud style than head no themselves confess it be all one to be head of the church and to be chief governor Allen apol. ca 4. and hart. in confer in cause ecclesiastical if so identity of command express in diversity of term admit no just quarrel much less be to be account as it be here a new device of John reynolds certain he deserve as well to be call master as Bellarmine cardinal because such a one as he or such other at he about some twenty year agee be the first deviser of it so say this epistler and will this great intelligencer make himself so ignorant as he seem to be to attribute that to one or some few private man and repute it for so modern a alteration which be the action of the whole state of this stat. 1. Elizab. land above fifty year past for so it be in the first year of the late queen of famous memory explain rather then alter at the request of the noble and diume of the land and express not by the word of supreme governess as this mate scornful speak and false lay it upon m. Reynalds the word of the statute numb 7. confer cap. 1. 2. pa. 52. in quarto be put in the masculine governor and in that conference also which he have neither quote nor allege true the word of m. reynolds be we give unto her highness the title not of head but of supreme governor and repeat it so again in the same section 10. and that not in regard of her sex which permit she not to speak in the church as this malicious hickscorner dally for be descend as she be she have as due right to the crown and as absolute authority in the fruition thereof as any male-monarch whatsoever neither do she take upon she to speak in the church that be to matter of faith administer the sacrament ordain or consecrate as Oziah once sacrifice and as some 2. par. 26. 16. romish slanderer have write nor meddle she with church-matter more than scripture gaucher leave by the place she have nor be her authority in ecclesiastical cause any thing amoindred or make less by that change or rather explanation of head into governor which as before be say the romanist themselves confess to be all one thing but only to prevent or avoid a scandal which through ignorance may be take at it lest weak mind shall think we give unto our king that title which be the proper office of the head as be the fountain of moisture and be the arist. somn and vigil most true attribute of Christ alone who be so call by the apostle who also elsewhere give a reason thereof because eph. 1. 22. by he all the body be furnish and knit together by coloss. 2. 19 joint and bond increase with the knowledge of God and that by the influence and work of his holy spirit but only as the high and chief for pre-eminence and command as the head in the body which be guide and director Plat. timaeus of the other member thereby to settle truth prohibit error anjoine church-officer as inferior and subordinate the discharge of their several duty and punish their negligence or contempt etc. and be a more true interpretation and exposition of the prince lawful authority in church-cause than that worthy one of the pope who to prove s. Peter primacy above the rest expound s. john Cephas which be a stone by a head and John 1 42. dist. 22. c. sacrosanct beginning from whence all the other be to be derive 11 but it seem his hope be that this alteration may work they some gain and be as a reconciler between we and they for a agreement why then do it stumble he out of his way or how will that appear because say he whereas in head be include a supremacy in cause ecclesiastical by governor perhaps they mean the king authority within his realm over all person spiritual but it matter only temporal for s. Ambrose as you hear before for bid lay-man their intermeddle in those affair to be supreme judge of doctrine by debate decide and determine point of faith and religion that s. Ambrose dislike and we approve not nor give it to the prince so you hear before too but by their authority to command priest even in religious service to do their office Paragraph 2. par. 2. num. 34. and punish their neglect thereof or negligence therein that the scripture commend in diverse king Danid Ezekiah josiah etc. and we just ascribe it to our prince acknowledge with s. Augustine that it be the duty of all epist. 50. king to command in matter not only concern the (@) of man but the religion of God also and thus much I subscribe unto say heart one cap. 10. diuis. 2. 674 of their banish traitor but the very next word to governor in the oath as by himself it be cite be in all cause as well spiritual as temporal which may have well cut off this sly scorn of he but that he isidle and have no other mean to spend time or to frame answer but by excursion and outleaps to no purpose it be wont to be the proverb bene current they run well yet out of eras. c^...l 1. the way but to run bad and out of the way too be not only a erroneous but a ridiculous quality and yet you see for what he have step aside for some on-sowne grain fall by the way which our saviour note to be the food matth. 13. for those fowl of the air which the grecian call (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) such as woodcock and daw to gather up 12. but now let we return again say he to the apologer charge it be a vex torment to a man enjoin a journey upon a speedy business require a serious dispatch to travel with a trifle companion that will make many errand by the way or have many acquaintance to stop he in the way or be force to make often return upon forgetfulness of diverse thing such a one be this u^...tiginous who Plato describe for a inartificial disputant (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) now go on his way now step by the way now return and in parmenide anon go again well then let we return now say he to that charge of gross mistake lay by the apologer to the cardinal for give the child a wrong name which beside the former mention of the modification and couch of lawful and unlawful clause in the oath the cardinal do also confute those modification in say that they be but the sleights of SATAN to impugn the primacy of the see apostolic either secret or open which argue that the cardinal aim at both the oath 13 first can a man confute that which he never mention nor point at nor can find or second be this a good argument the cardinal say that such modification as these in this oath do impugn the faith touch the primicie either secret or open he have relation unto two oath the one secret impugn the other open be it not as strong a consequent our saviour in the gospel speak of a judge that neither fear god nor reverence man he have relation to two judge the one not fear God the other not regard luc. 18. man but be it so then both the oath belike by this jesuite have their modification though the one more close the other more overt which be a plain diction to his first argument for there he say that Bellarmine must needs mean this oath of allegiance and no other because this only have these modification the other of the supremacy have none here he insinuate that both of they have their mixture the one more secret the other more reveal thus be the antopolog^...r become turn-sicke in trouble his little wit more than he need to free the cardinal from that imputation which honest he can 14 for certain it be that Bellarmine in that his dismay inuective rather than letter unto the archpriest have play the Andabata or blindfold fencer commit three gross oversight therein first in that either he through ignorance wist not or in his policy will not see a difference betwixt those two oath second in that he discover not those subtle stratagem as he call the modification here specify but in general term say they do impugn the primacy either close or open three that all his argument and authority bring be touch the spiritual supremacy not one of they concern the temporal which the oath of allegiance do only impeach and encounter so that his whole epistle be the same which they call Rhetorica he a good speech if it have be to purpose for there be not any one part of the pope spiritual supremacy touch or aim at in this last oath 15 have the cardinal therefore either mean the right oath or intend a direct confutation thereof his argument shall thus have be frame that oath which either secret or open shoot at the pope primacy in can be take without endamage the catholic faith and his conscience that take it but this oath of allegiance do impugn his primacy in there secret or open therefore this oath can be take without a double damage have he thus reason his mayor proposition shall have be (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) and his whole epistle to blackwell be bestow in plain and effectual proof that the cross of the pope primacy in t^...mporall government over all christen king be the overthrow of the catholic faith and of true religion which conclusion as it will have make his brain to sweat before he can have get any show of proof for it so it will have make both he and his religion odious and hateful to all the king and good subject in Christendom which he know well enough and therefore voluntary do mistake the question and turn all his force to support the pope spiritual supremacy which be not touch in one point of oath 16 which because his majesty in the apology aver this jesuite make he to be contradictory and adversary to himself for so say and that in the very next period where divide the oath into 14. particle 12. of they at least say this epistler do impugn the pope spiritual supremacy it appear then there be at most but two of those lawful and allow clause in the oath if there be so many and those modification whereof he speak very few even one in all as appear num. 10. namely the first I do true acknowledge that our sovereign lord king james be lawful king of this realm which be the same almost with the first clause in the oath of supremacy so that either one and the same modification be in both oath and then this Censur^... ^...are refutation be obscure or e^...e the cardinal have mistake the oath if not in word sure in sense which be not only his error but his in^...stice as his majesty well observe because in advise the refusal of the whole body of the oath as it be conceive and impugn the same as whole unlawful he make those that believe he to fall into rebellious conclusion for he that shall refuse to take it must needs hold the negative to those fourteen proposition because all refusal be either of wilful obstinacy or of a persuade contrariety as first that our sovereign lord king james be not the lawful king of this realm second that the pope have power to depose he and so of the rest 17 and this the jesuite s^...reth at in the mean time what be become of the apologer contradiction and the overthrow which his majesty have give himself that he be not yet ready for he crave a respite to a further examination Numb. 8. but this say he be a simple fallacy call by the logician from deny of a compound to infer a denial of all the parcel therein contain which he exemplify in a oath frame either by some Platonist in magnify his master or by a arrian or Pelagian prince in favour of their sect and both the oath mingle with clause some lawful some unlawful wherein first secret he gird at his majesty for be both a philosopher which be his majesty great glory and our realm happiness for true philosophy join to government regulate the sceptre to the subject comfort and the kingdom renown and a heretic also say so plain a perfect slander in they both for by that religion which they call heresy he do true glorify the god of heaven 18 second this challenge of sophistical argue be more than a fallacy it be a falsity for thus his majesty argue he that refuse the whole body of the oath not distinguish nor declare his allowance of some part thereof by this his un-distinct refusal conclude the unlawfulness of the whole and be presume to hold that the contrary assertion be true but the cardinal condemn the whole oath as it be conceive not except any one for a lawful parcel thereof and will the archpriest so to refuse it therefore thus condemn it without distinction he induce they that refuse it to a lawful persuasion of a total negative and contrariety of opinion which be the very argument of our saviour Christ he that gather not with i scatter that be who so condemn i as whole unworthy to be receive do thereby will man to matth. 12. 30. refuse my person reject my doctrine blaspheme my work and total deny i to be God and many and renounce all prophecy write and testimony reveal concern i 19 say the law F^... reg. the general whether affirmative or negative contain in it all the specialty and a total refusal be a entire denial of each particular he that shall say that the whole body of the decalogue be unlawful in itself and repugnant to christian liberty do he not conclude the unlawfulness of every several precept in Law^... and withal imply that a Christian free by grace may be without fear of the law moral a idolater blasphemer and a adulterer and c. neither be his majesty argument draw from the compound to the part divide the cardinal have make no such division for he have condemn the whole body and bulk thereof to be unlawful but it be rather as he which deny the whole world to be of god make h^... both deny that God make the light and sun and star and planet and also argue his opinion to be either there be no god or that he be no creator 20 take therefore the jesuite own example and frame it aright to the point put the case that a arrian prince shall contrive a oath for his subject to swear that there be three person in Trinity that God the father create heaven and earth that the second person be the son of God have a beginning of his essence in time be crucify dead and bury etc. some christian sear or hear of a error therein but not discover it have recourse to some great doctor to know his opinion he descry the Arianisme forbid they to take it and not show they the erroneous article assure they that the whole oath as it lie be unlawful do not that doctor condemn all the article therein and will they inclusive to deny the trinity and the father to be a creator yes and as much as in he lie cause the enemy of God to blaspheme they as atheist and pagan for their general denial and therefore the rule of God almighty be Ier: 15. 19 the precious from the vile be according to my word this the cardinal shall have do but do it not therefore his disallow it in gross show his manifest dislike of every article therein and his implyedaduice that catholic shall deny even the very first that king james be the lawful king of this realm nay say this epistler that be a calumniation all catholic do both profess and confess the contrary 21 do they so then father parsons either be not or part. 2. cap. 5. be not a catholic when he write his Doleman for there he labour the point hard that king James can either by religion nation blood or ^...awe be the rightful king of this realm and if it be catholic doctrine as Simancha and Philopat^...r have conclude it that no heretic be capable if a heir or can be a just possessor of a crown when he have obtain it then who have so pronounce of king james either deny he to be a lawful king or all of that profession be not of the same mind for the King yea we will go further whosoever refuse to swear to any one of the article in this oath acknowledge not the first for the whole oath be like a indenture all the clause tie and tend to one condition of allegiance the breach of one proviso in the indenture forfeit the whole the deny of any one article in the oath be the denial of the whole even of the very first 22 take but one for example he that refuse to swear that the pope have no manner of authority simple or compound to depose the king he refuse to swear that king james be lawful king of England for if he be once lawful then be he ever so true legitimation be neither intend nor remit and unlawfulness of title only carry with it the casualty of depose and Dethroning it be not vary in religion nor alter of manner nor misorder a realm all which may show a king to be unjust but not prove he a unlawful king they may hazard his safety but not impeach his title a right of depose must be in he that have either a high power and that be only God for say David and none Psal (@) and Ambrose in but a king can say so or the just claim and then be not the sovereign in place the lawful king for two several party can have equal right to one crown but the pope lest of all other be a foreigner to the nation and a utter stranger to the blood so that he which deny not the pope that depose power deny unto our king the lawfulness of his investiture and dominion the brief and truth be let a king be what he will for his religion or government if he have right to the crown the subject must endure and pray for he the foreigner may advise but not disturb he they both may lament and use mean to amend he but neither of they both assume the power to depose he which authority of the pope for depose as also his power in the rest of the negative part in the oath either of absolve subject or license rebellion or incite murder of king excommunicate etc. no complete council ever fasten upon the pope neither can their own schole-doctor agree how that shall concern he but be as his majesty true observe at irreconcilable jar among themselves about it to all which the epistler answer not one word 23 but the next exception he take be the example bring out of the counsel of Toledo especial the four which contain a oath of allegiance command and lay upon all person without distinction and therein also the very point of equivocation so careful eschew in this statute oath insomuch that almost every point of that action and this of we agree save that the father of that council be careful to see that oath execute but he that pretend and usurp to be head of all counsel be as straight in prohibit it to his catholic which discourse the plain-dealing jesuite do call the apologer fraudulent manner ^...f proceed argue a bad cause and add his reason because in those counsel which be thirteen in number there be neither form of oath prescribe nor any mention of equivocation but only of flat lie and perfidious deal 24 be we so idle as to follow he in his own vein we may catch at these last word of his but only of flat lie and play with his word only as he do before as if he thereby make flat lie and perfidious deal but a small fault for so he tax his majesty Parag. 1 Numb. 12. for say only a form of oath be frame and thereby conclude upon he with his own word there by this except of only a man may well perceive this fugitive make little account of flat lie and perfidious deal but let he go idle he be and the Pharaoh of Rome use he according keep he to gather such straw and stubble in Egypt because he be neither good nor fit for any thing else while this jesuite be attach the apologer of a suppose fraudulencie himself must even there be arrest of a fraudulent impudency charge his majesty to say that every point of that toledan action have aggreeance with we and leave out the principal word which his majesty use when he say that almost every point and subnect immediate a particular exception of disparison as if there be no difference between his speech that shall say fa. parsons be almost upon the sea-coast for England expect the issue of the powder-plot and his that shall aver that he be upon the sea-coast and ship for England 25 in the mean time what say he to the council of Toledo it puzzle he horrible and make he rove about for 8. together to shift it and when he have like a fond surveyor who have no more ground than will serve a goose to graze on will needs discourse and show how it abut upon all the quarter of the world when I say he have with many circumstance set down the occasion of that counsel assembly with the cause of the treaty concern one Sisinandus that have displace king suintula the canon say that fear his own wickedness Concil. Tolet. 4. can. 75. he strip and deprive himself of his kingdom and how that the say king procure this four council then reckon up the prelate and humble behaviour of the emperor before they with the full sum of the decree all of they in ecclesiastical cause save one the last of all concern a order for the future establish of their king and then have tell we of the excommunication denounce against all those that shall attempt the destruction of their king or break their oath of fidelity make to he with a repetition of that curse diverse time in that canon and a reason therereof with a commendation of the care which those father have for preserve the subject fidelity to their prince and a supplication of their clergy to their king for his moderate and mild carriage to his subject and a promulgation of a counter-curse against the cruelty of the succeed king if it prove such with a confirmation of the expulsion of Suin^...la for his wicked life though saint I sidore speak much good of he and final a form of a oath in the six counsel of Toledo prescribe to the king of Spain before they be cron that they shall not suffer their subject to violate this catbolike faith and a special mark upon the word this show that faith to be opposite to the protestant faith after all this range discourse as if he have run himself out of breath and sense to his sober conclusion be that this be all against the apologer 26 some say that Pericles have that skill in wrestle that though he receive a fall yet he will persuade the wrestler that cast he and the sectator that behold thu^... in plut. Per^...cl he that he be the conqueror notwithstanding this art do father parsons assume to himself often but very unlucky for what be that one point of all this that make to the purpose much less to confute the apologer or be against he have he take exception against the council as unlawful because his majesty call it a famous council and therefore not to be allege in this controversy Baronius will have snibe he who have magnify it to the sky be it then that this famous council consist of so many prelate 70 or 68 or 62 be summon and conveny at the command of the say king for so it be the word be and imperij^... we be assemble by the command Pref^... Concil. (@) 1. and authority of our most religious king Sisinandus this indeed may make against the apologer for he have before maintain and demonstrate that emperor and king be wont to convent counsel both universal and Nationall (@) pa. 26. 27 or be that the point because the canon of that council be all flat opposite to the protestant opinion be it so first the apologer meddle with no one canon of that council but the last concern the oath how then do this make against he but be it so indeed view three or four of they the marriage of priest so^... be with the consent of the bishop be there allow canon 43. that ignorance be the mother of all error not of devotion be there positive set down canon 24. that the clergy immunity from civil molestation and trouble be from the king and by his command and authority that be decree in the 46. canon last that all the decree and canon of that council be confirm by the clergy AND after the king royal assent have unto they and that be let down canon 75. now which of all these make against either the apologer discourse or the protestant opinion that so the reader may see he may have spare his mark this set upon catholic for the church of England both for substance in doctrine and ceremony in discipline do hold the same which many of those canon do conclude 28 as for the particular canon concern the Cath how be the apologer therein take short yes four way first there be no particular form of a oath set down in the counsel but only a general command for keep not for take a oath can a oath be keep which be not first take but ^...n the canon it apppeare that all of they have before take it be the word of the canon for it be say Barro^...s and do his majesty say that the council Annal to 8. no. 633. 72. do decree the take of the oath no but a oath be decree a thousand year ago which a famous council with diverse other counsel command to be obey without exception the state decree it the subject of all sort take it the counsel enjoin the in^...iolable performance thereof so then a oath there be that be without question and a form it have if not set down in the council what be that to the point sufficient have his majesty evict what he will to prove that this oath of allegiance amo^gst no such strange thing it have a precedent in like kind confirm by diverse counsel about a thousand year since but be this a good argument Thereis no form of a oath prescribe therefore either there be no such oath or it be fraudulent deal in the apologer to speak of it by the same consequent the title whereby the pope support his sovereignty monarchical and derive it from s. Peter even in spiritual cause may be just conclude a fraudulent claim for when the key be give and that triple enjoin to saint Peter which be the two main pillar and refuge for that challenge of the pope there be no mention either of successor or of Rome mat. 16. joh. 20 but only Peter to thou will I give the key and Peter feed thou my lamb the fetch of both which the successor and see into those text drive Bellarmine into a maze for first he say that the bishop of Rome be Peter successor and that Christ Pontif. rom. li. 2. ca. 1^... appoint it so present he say that it be FACTUM Petri it be Peter own institution that the bishop of Rome shall be his successor may such reason prevail that manifest text either of scripture or father verbatim to express what we argue may only take place or the quarrel end the pope will be find a more fraudulent impostor than a pastor and transubstantiation shall never have have either the be or begin 29. but say in sooth fa. person be there not in those counsel a form of such a oath of the kind and quality of the oath it seem you doubt not the council declare it to be a oath promissory which be of something afterward to be do the Re of the substance and matter of the oath it be not question for the canon set it down and you also confess it in your second exception say that it be a oath of allegiance the controversy be of the form which though in scripture and use we know to be diverse yet all conclude that to be the true form justin. wherein the name of God be use for so himself command Deut. 6. 13. which be of many sort also that be find to be least question wherein his name be join either with a preposition as by or before God or use by way 2 cor. 1. 23. lib. 10. ca. 2. .. 1. Apolog. pap. 54. Co^...l Tol. let 6. C^... 1. 8. of imprecation or i^...uocation as in that of the apostle I call God to witness to or against my soul and this their own doctor deny not now even this very form be express in one of the counsel of Toledo cite by his majesty and translate and it begin thus etc. etc. we protest and testify before God and the whole company of angel that noman shall or may intend or enterprise the destruction of the king etc. what then mean the epistler to venture all the poor credit of all that he write which he may do well enough he be bankrupt of that long ago Nilisthic martial say the poet of a old woman that have lose all her tooth with twice cough if in all the 13. toledan concell there be find any form of a oath prescribe how will he avoid the above cite perhaps he will say there be a oath describe but not prescribe acute be it that the state secular frame the oath and enjoin the subject to take it yet the council assemble confirm the oath which be all that his majesty endevonr to prove and express the form thereof as it be conceive divine than do teach we that every canon of confirmation by a council be a prescript of injunction for obedience 30 let we now hear his second exception sc. that oath in the council confirm be a oath of civil allegiance which neither the cathelike refuse nor pope Paul prohibit the cathelike refuse that which pope Paul forbid and that oath which he condemn be the very same for substance in every point with the oath of Toledo the title be the same with we each of they call a oath of Feal^...y or allegiance that of Spain Tolet. 4. (@) 75. comprehend all the article of our statute oath if in a short space and less number that make no more to the alter of the quality or the substance thereof then if we may compare human with divine thing the abridgement of the decalogue into two great commandment which our saviour make yea into one word as the apostle contract it do vary the quality or substance of the law matth. 22. rom. 13. moral for who so take these 14. proposition into which his majesty have resolve and branch the oath set aside the first clause whereof they say they make no Apolog. pag. 49. 50. etc. question and the last part touch equivocation which have the proper place anon to be examine all the rest of the particular may most proper and natural be reduce to those few which in the counsel be comprise 31 for the whole oath either in general concern the protection of his majesty both person and crown and that be the main branch of the 75. canon of the four council or in particular a prevention of any other claim (@) 3. or attempt by any person to deprive his majesty either of his life or his kingdom or his subject whether by single hand or joint conspiracy or treacherous defection or open Rebellson and these be all within the list of the 18 canon of the 6. council first for usurp claim Nemo we protest no man shall or may there be the pope whole exclude if he be in the number of man usurp or challenge any one tittle of his dominion much ^...le which be in the four council the sovereignty of his kingdom there be power of depose go for it be a high sovereignty to make and mar and overtop king then to be a king and that which God have reserve to himself alone for God be the judge it be he that pull down one and set up another say Psal. 75. 7. the prophet the other particular of the statute-oath be easy reduce to these no man shall seek the destruction of the king nor attempt his life nor deprive he of his power nor by any machination associat^... or help the hand of any conspirrator against he all which be plain and verbatim in the 18. canon of the 6. council cite by his majesty and the jesuite espy it pass it and the rest over not so much as either touch or name and this be the manner and form and nature of the oath which those counsel do allow and ratify but the top-councell pope Paul have whole interdict and will his catholic to refuse it as be repugnant to faith and religion which in no one essential point differ from that so approve by those father 32 his three exception be rather (@) supposal if king (@) Sis^...d have offer the council a oath pretudictall to their ecclesiastical affair they will have lose their life rather than have yield to it this be again his sophistical Elench though very silly and simple whereby he beg the question in hand and that by a suppose conjecture when his majesty speak of a fact but we have oft say and they shall never disprove it that there be no one article in the statute oath cross any call affair nor challenge of the pope in spiritual cause unless the very name of the pope be the prejudice which in the whole council be indeed not once specify either for convent or dissolve it yet at the time when they meet there be a pope and his name be honorius when the council therefore confirm that oath against Depri^...on or abet conspiraty in those general term Nemo priuct etc. have they but dream of such a authority in the pope they will sure have add or this they do not but in simplicity of heart go on and set it down Nemo no man may or shall deprive our king wherein the pope challenge power be as much impugn as in our statute oath 33 his four and last exception be there be no mention of equivocation in the counsel but the word be to swear false or lie between both which what be the difference no more than between a pair of cozen juggler the one shine in silk the other clothe in rullet this more open and clownish the other more fine and cunning feat nay it be no more then that which be note to be a fashion in all language the abate of a odious vice or harsh and unpleasing thing with a fine term and that fashion never more frequet then where the vice be most use as in Israel their blasphemer be call blesser and in Athens (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) their srumpet they will 1. reg. 21. Thucyd. li. 3. and plut. Solon call (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) she-friend and their grievous exaction covenant of state so among the roman their open enemy they will term host which natural fi no more than stranger and who we in the southern T^...l offic. part call thief in the northern part they call taking-man and who oar which be the more gross but true appellation with we they call vsed-woman even so that which scripture father and counsel have heretofore simple call MEND ium a lie in plain term the finer-mouthed jesuite to blanch the soulenes of the sin to which they be so accustom and by a inbred pranitie of mind as Tertullian speak rejoice and delight in lie by a rhetorical (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) call it in a fine word aeqvivocation a term to all Apologet. cap. (@) antiquity utter unknown but only as a fallacy in logic and a sport figure in rhetoric and therefore to define out of any authentical writer this jesuitical equivocation to make the difference appear from flat lie it be impossible for a thing unknown in nature or custom can be define by Art 34 yet not to enter into a full tractate thereof because cau^... m. the elder have hunt this fox in his equivocate Male-Pardus thorough well to try the difference full Satisfact. par. (@) between the canon sense of and shall we say that to equivocate mental for of the verbal and literal the question be not now be to speak one thing with the mouth and to conceal or reserve in mind a thing diverse from that which be utte red that be not full for so shall Abraham have be say to equivocate when he tell Abimelech that Sarai be his sister keep the other part unto himself that she go 12. be his wise for both be true and every wise man may be so style for it be the mark of a ^...oole to open all his (@) at once whereas a wise man reserve it till afterward say Solomon but put the case that the king have pro. 29. 11. ask Abraham whether Sarai have be his wife and he have say no reserve the other part she be my sister in his mind this have be a flat lie in divinity and yet it be the same which the jesuite call equivocate for it be a overruled case among they that if the question be put to one of they whether he be a priest by the rule of equivocation he may answer no though he know himself to be one reserve some evasion within himself be then to reserve in mind any thing which we know contrary to that which the tongue utter whether answer to a question or swear before a judge be that I say equivocate or flat lie take either of they it be no other than that which the council call a vary and double deal with faith plight and procession make and also Tolet. 4. s^... the fair semblance of the tongue with treachery at the heart even while the oath be in take and be first practise by arrius that abominable heretic in matter of religion and be abhor even in civil commerce not only Socr li. (@) c. 38. aug. apost ser. 2^... Homer by divine who accountman that useit detestable beast but among pagan also as much detest as hell-gate and what be this but the jesuite equivocat which all ancient holy writer call flat lie no other than the very sin of a^^n^^s and Saphira for when a man speak any thing contrary to that which in his mind he think say the jesuite say act. 5. the master of sentence li. 3. D^...st 38. c. 35. the principal difference which they make be in their purpose that they do it not with a intent to deceive but only to defend themselves from danger first good intention can never make action forbid by God to be lawful especial private respect shall never s^...lue perjury for he that swear though to his own (@) or hurt he must keep his oath without vary say the kingly prophet be a Psal. 15 4. (@) (@) rom. 3. rule in school not a good end by ill mean must be effect second this be but a juggle mist of mere appearance void of sound and true distinction because they know that it be impossible for they to be conceal or escape without illude or beguile the magistrate do therefore purposely deceive he that so they may decline their danger the avoidance of be disclose it may be be the first thing in their intention but the first that they put in execution be the beguile of the judge for the end can be purpose without the mean to the End three this be the very case of those goth in Toledo towards their king for have a oath prescribe by the state many of they think that Sisenand usurp the kingdom either by a unlawful deprive or a over-awfull Paul Aemyl press of Suintila his predecessor to a voluntary resignation yet for fear of the law penalty and to keep themselves untouched from confiscation of good and forfeiture of life swear fealty and homage unto he as their lawful sovereign but think contrary in their heart to that which they have swear and this the father of that council call flat lie and be no other but the jesuite refine equivocation though not in that very term specify yet agree in sense 36. and if that be account but a cavil in arrius Russinus and socrat. and his sect to except against the word homoousion because it be not find in the scripture though the truth and full meaning be there and when we put they of Rome to the proof of transubstantiation because there be no such term in any scripture father or warrant council they count it a cavil and upbraid we with that exception take by arrius against the coessence of the son with the father what a shift be this of a trifle caviller that when the matter and substance which the word imply be in the council he will proclaim it in his majesty a fraudulency to parallel the perfidiousness of both the action together because the very word be not there to be find which like rahels child that must needs be miss because they be not can never be mention because 3^... 15. never dream of 37 and therefore we will conclude this point and dismiss the censorious epistler with that admonition which those father assemble give to such as himself and those Concil. Tolet. 4. can. 75. that be of his cut and let there not be within you or among you as among pagan and gentile and other heathenish nation any ungodly sleight or shift of disloyalty and unfaithfulness not the falsehood and treachery of a crafty and deceive mind not the abhor crime of PERIURY as u^...orthy the name nor the abhominated enterprise of conspiracy and powder-plot but which be the preacher advice take heed Eccles. 8. 2. to the mouth of the king and to the word of the oath of God and so with he we end this part of the paragraph yet with a premise this that to the rest of the counsel either of Toledo or he have not answer one word nor show the difference between that which they call equivocate in a oath and that which the council call swear in the name of God deceitful but pass to the particular exception against the cardinal letter which he call the second part of the three Paragraph 1. in the entrance and first section whereof as if he be another Photion the hatchet of Dem stene his pithy o ration he chap off full six leaf of his majesty answer plut. (@) at once with two or three sleight word that they be but dalliance and pick quarrel whereas in the whole apology there be no passage more witty and proper nor more serious with judgement handle for in the seven exception so many they be to be number not the cardinal weakness of judgement but wickedness of haste and affection which be the chief seat of religion be ransack and discover to the world as it right deserve for whereas the general opinion conceive common of the cardinal have be this by those that have not ponder his work and preface especial that father rob. Bellarmine have be no base pragmatical fa. parson but a honest quiet ingenuous student now by this his letter to blackwell he be true make know first to bestow some good part of his hour in receive intelligence out of England how painful blackwell and his fellow do labour every day and hour like true fox and swine in root and undermine the lord wteyard so that for the space of almost these forty year neither heart nor Campion nor garnet nor Gerrard nor any other d sturber of our christian peace have want bellumarma-minas from Bellarmine howsoever he cover it under Numa his (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) his sacrifice in prayer at the lord altar which can neither be very charitable in he plut. num. nor acceptable to God nor any way profitable to they for who he pray so long as he now reveal himself which be the three exception to account death for treason to be the most reioycefull kind of martyrdom and withal which be the four to esteem of our gracious sovereign as of a other julian and a most bloody persecutor to which four and to the other three as well concern Bellarmine mislike of the modification in the offer of the oath as also of the challenge that no point in the oath tend to matter of faith which shall make he that swear either to believe or not believe any article of religion and last of the rebutter to that unsavoury and unmannerly comparison between Peter successor and our sovereign his succession from king Henry that neither the pope doctrinal nor personal succession can come near any such probable warrant or assurance as that there shall be any semblance of comparison to all these this contre-defender scarce spend three section and that in answer only two of they 2 the first whereof be clear of Bellarmine from the imputation that the great traitor and conspirator against her late majesty and particular campian and heart give up fa. rob. Bellarmine for one of their great oracle and this he do two way first dub it for a abuse exceed a man imagination that the apologer shall thus write second a deceitful equivocation that because they do cite he in controversy of religion therefore he shall be account a author of their conspiracy 3 it be well that he will give equivocation the right epithet of deceit but do his majesty say he be allege by they as the oracle of their conspiracy no his word be the great traitor and fomentor of conspirator give Bellarmine up for one of their great oracle in their conference for thereto his majesty refer the reader in the margin whereof their conspiracy be no part for their treason they be arraign apol. pa. 57 convict and adjudge the conference be have about their opinion in religion in which colloquy the prinpall author they rely upon campian borrow much from he and heart call for he by name be Bellar i who dictate there specify be transcribe and conference in the tower pa: 6. every young novice that come into England be find to have they for to they principal the cardinal be appoint the doctor of the chair and reader of divinity as himself boast in the preface mention by his majesty tom. 1. Contr. 4 second have he be conclude as the great oracle of those and other like conspirator there be no such improbability of truth no way to be defend as this censurer avow but the argument be necessary for the cardinal be their principal author for opinion and the issue of those opinion be treason and conspiracy it be more than probable that from his position and lecture they have suck that poison which there rankle at their heart and here break out at their arrival in their action the apologue be know and proper that when the trumpeter be take in battle and plead for his life that he have kill no man nor shed any blood aesop. only sound his instrument which give a pleasant noise the answer be that he do more harm and be the great slaughterman in the army because be it not for his hearten and incite sound the horror of the cry and blood will appall his fellow heart but when they be ready to quail he then provoke they to a fresh assault and it be not for any valour that be in they or any hostile act in open arm do by they that make Philip of Macedon to condition with the athenian plut. Demosth. for yield up their orator unto he but because by their enforce rhetoric they persuade and incite the citizen to the continuance of war he repute they for his deadly and most annoy enemy 5 which be the very case of Bellarmine he in his lecture and dictate blow the bellows of seditious doctrine which flame out by his scholar conspiracy to the disturbance of the chief state of Christendom one part of his lecture whether at Lovan or Rome for he read in both whereof his dictate be a extract be his five select lib. 7. cap. 4 and Tort. pa. 64. book Romano and what be the whole sum of that but argument and example to prove and show that the pope may by his imperial power though indirect depose prince from their state and seat his familiarity therefore be more inward with the novice of England because he be their master his majesty may proper call he the oracle of his scholar conspiracy for they be the only visible issue and effect of his doctrine in they for aught appear yet so much for that 6 now here the censurer make a Almain leap skip 3. whole page together and the second thing he alight upon be his majesty complaint with our saviour that neither severity nor mildness that neither weep mat. (@) nor pipe will content these man the first oath of supremacy be account such a eager potion that it be unprobable unreasonable unnatural and impossible to be take down able to drive man into utter desperation Allen Apolog. ca. 1. sect. 5. say cardinal Allen this oath of allegiance be offer by their own confession temper and modify and it be the great affliction and angariation of pag. 8. etc. spirit that ever do betide distress catholics say this cardinal-parasite it be the subtle sleight of Satan impugn the epist. Archi primacy of the sea apostolic unlawful and repugnant to christian faith say cardinal Bellarmine now whereunto shall we compare this wayward generation who neither rigour nor temperature can please give they wine from the grape that make they brainsick to storm and rave reach they allay and mix that make they stomacke-sicke to disgorge and vent their inward rancour against the state and do not this give a just cause of his majesty complaint wherein what be there that shall make the apologer blush at it 7 blush be no virtue but a laudable affection say eth. 4. the philosopher and that in young man and underling only for in magistrate and man of year it be not come mendable because it be to be presume that they will do nothing which shall procure their blush belike then there be here some main and shameful crime that be thus censure and what be that forsooth the cardinal do not say that the oath be temperate in word but tempere in matter and can matter be express without word and be not in latin as true translate temperate as temper and when mention be of thing write rather attribute to word than matter as in Tully and Hierom often to temper the st^...e and pen and Hierom. in eccles .. in all profession both of divinity state physic music and other art always signify a allay or quallife by mixture Aristot. Ge^... fernel ther. li. 3. say the naturalist so that be it the cardinal mean in substance and matter his majesty complaint remain just and his charge unblushable that their stitch against the former oath be for that it be too rigid Tort. pa. 66. they shall kick at this also though themselves confess it to be temper that be allay by a proportionate mixture and so the cardinal mean otherwise his other word modify be unnecessary which signify draw to a equal measure as when a thing be make neither too sharp nor too sweet nor too high nor too low etc. but that the cardinal mean it be temper in the style and word it be manifest by himself in that subsequent speech of he certain certain with what word soever that oath be conceive by the adversary Apolog. lat. pa. 3^... ang. 38. of the faith in that kingdom etc. 8 and as this be his majesty complaint so the ground thereof also remain yet good for sure do they not build a monarchy to the pope and not to Christ one of these course will content they either that of the first oath severe peremptory for the prince supremacy in spiritual cause or moderate temper for his sovereignty only in temporal respect the sole subject of this last oath which his majesty evict by a double question first can there be find in all the oath one word tend to matter of religion whereunto the censurer make a short and a sly answer in a conclusion affirmative upon a supposal if the power and authority of the pope and sea apostolic less by Christ for govern his church ^...n all occasion be a point of religion than there be ten or twelve article or branch in the oath touch religion 9 and will the pope judicial forbid and the cardinal doctrinal conclude and the epistler impudent impugn the oath as utter unlawful and against religion which yet depend upon a if and be not yet determine for a point of Reli gion that the pope have any such authority over king as in the oath be mention this therefore be his majesty press question and shall have force the jesuit to touch the quick but like a equivocate juggler he bemist' the reader in cunning conveyance and suppose a authority lest by Christ to the pope but distinguish not whether in ecclesiastical or civil cause for put the case it be grant that the pope have his supremacy in ecclesiastical cause from our saviour Christ this be not now the question in hand neither do the oath meddle in that matter his other usurp claim over king and prince till it be determine for a article of religion the oath do just oppose and yet without touch or impeach of any point of christian yea or their own catholic religion for a controversy undetermined can be hold in any church either for article of faith or principle theological and thereupon ensue his majesty second question 10 do he that take the oath promise to believe or not to believe any article of religion to which the jesuite put the oath itself to make the answer even every clause thereof in effect say he as that i. a. b. (@) profess that the pope have not any power or authority to depose the king and that I do fur there abjure as impious and heretical that damnable doctrine that prince excommunicate by the pope may be depos^... a by subject and that also I do believe and in conscience be resolve that the pope have no power to absolve i from this oath upon which the jesuite like another double his force with a two sell question first do not these clause include either belief or unbelief for what a man be resolve on that he believe what he abjure that he do not believe second what will the apologer say hecre sure nothing to put the last first for he have more serious affair in hand then to answer such pelt question 11 one that have less judgement and more leisure will easy shape a suitable answer that this censurer be a absurd disputant still to beg the question as if these article abjure or allow by he that take the oath be point of faith which be but machia^...lisines of the conclave or as be belief be every where use theological and that a christian belief shall be always take for his christian belief for there be a natural belief the object whereof be natural and civil thing such as in this oath wherein there be not any clause which be not ground upon the very principle of nature that though there be no word of God at all which be the true ground of christian faith and whereunto his majesty have reference in his question yet every good subject be find to believe and to be resolve in his conscience even in the light of nature as a truth which without scripture be infallible sound that he must obey his parent both of body and country and abjure and resist by all mean any that shall impeach his sovereign either in his title or person which two even the very law of nature have so fasten unto he that no authority or power may alter or hinder his majesty therefore add for the explanation of himself which may have prevent all this verbal cavil have the censurer purpose or be able to deal ingenuous that the taker of the oath be not bind thereby to believe or not believe any point of faith whether article of the creed or position in scripture or determination of the church for moral certitude and and historical narration which be the strong resolution and best ground for the pope either his succession or sovereignty must not as his majesty most wise observe pass currant for article of faith although the cardinal think it sufficient for his greatness in a bare assertion to say that the oath endamage the christian faith which when without proof he have confident and categorical aver from the archpriest he mount to the king and turn the envy of the oath upon his majesty causeless fear of danger from the pope because it be never hear off from the church infancy that any prince though a heretic though ethnic though a persecutor be murder by the pope either his command or allow ^...nce 12 unto which objection of panic fear his majesty in his reply purposely upon good judgement avoid to make any answer the sincerity of his conscience witness within himself and the openness of his carriage show he in the world to be as confident as a lion otherwise his majesty may have tell Bellarmine that if in any person in prince especial that rule be necessary king can be to provident for their safety in which respect it be observe in Homer that he ever present the great commander in the field arm at all point and that the lawgiver among the grecian make straight decree against (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) such as cast away their shield and target though they tolerate plut. Polopid (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) those that throw away their spear and sword which politic historian apply to prince and governor of state who they persuade to be more careful of their safety in defend themselves then of their valour to annoy their foe for both scripture and nature make it plain that in a king though one in person the life of million be endanger and if any prince be ever force to stand upon his safeguard and fence himself with law our sovereign much rather have such embowel enemy within his realm as jesuite be and do procure and such hydra-headed treason suppullulate one after the other and exceed each other in degree of unspeakable cruelty and of all other time now especial that they refuse and prohibit other to say their heart open by take this oath but his majesty pass by that as a sillly frump of a white liver redcap observe in this speech of the cardinal first his voluntary but subtile-preter-ition in leave out all the other disaster in the oath wherewith pope have affright and infest emperor and king as depose degrade excite arm kindle rebellion etc. and insist here only upon one sc. murder of prince and this very cautelous do by the cardinal lest as his majesty well observe he shall in open and direct term across his own pofition wherewith his book be stuff 13. all which the cardinal page this antapologer pass in silence and stay himself upon the second wherein his majesty charge Bellarmine with a imply contradiction against himself in that denial of he that pope have neither ^...manded nor allow murder of prince see that Bellarmine confess and exemplify it that they have wage war against they diverse time and what difference be there between personal murder of prince and raise war against they the lot whereof be common and unpartial 2. sam. 11. 25 say David the king be no more exempt from the slaughter then the ordinary soldier yea more expose to death hazard then any other and the chief mark aim at fight neither against small nor 1. reg. 22. 31. great but against the king of Israel say Benhadad and Ahisophel^... resolution to assault David in battle be as dangerous as if he shall have plot to have kill he in his privy chamber for we will s^...ite the king only say that pestilent counsellor doubtless he that excite 2. sam. 17. 2. and allow rebellious and civil war in hostile arm against natural sovereigns do much more allow their personal murder unless his meaning be that they shall not die alone or that the more blood be shed and more money spend the great shall be his glory and that pope have thus do no other testimony need be bring but out of Bellarmine book 14 this the censurer here answer first by divert the argument num. 27. and say that though the pope have wage war against prince yet he never cause any to be unlawful murder wherein he deal like sauls armorbearer because the cardinal have stab himself somewhat gross he will help to kill he more clean and neat for the adverb be worth the observe secret imply that the pope have command or may command prince to be murder but not unlawful whereby it seem lawful murder of they have be command and commend and of the lawfulness no man may judge if the pope say the word so that what story soever Bellarmine have quote or what murder the pope have commit or we can enumerate this one adverb must salve they all either they be not unlawful do or else the cause be just say this epistler or which be a pretty passage Numb. 28. the pope have persuade themselves they be just and therefore as a general in the field pursue they as open enemy or as a judge upon the bench command execution to be do upon they as malefactor 15 but first who gird the sword to the pope side suppose the key be put into his hand they be no weapon for war as he be a priest he may not fight our weapon say the apostle be spiritual tear and prayer and sigh for with no other we may resist say s. Ambrose 2. cor. 10. lab. 5. ep. 33. if as a temporal prince defend his own territory he may but to invade another king land or infest his kingdom with rebellion or aid his subject with wage or arm he may not and yet he have do it for he deprive Leo the emperor if Bellarmine report be true from the principality of Ravenna when as yet he have nothing to do with it for it come to his patrimony Pontif. Roma. 1. li. 3. ca. ^...8 afterward by the donation of Pipin second who make he a judge temporal in this manner to proceed for ecclesiastical censure stretch not to good and life if over his underling and vassal be it so yet over prince in no case who be the second and next person in comparison of God after who they be the first and high but afore all (@) Apolo get and above all other both God and men. 16. in the second place the jesuite deny the consequent both in general and particular that though Bellarmine confess pope to have wage war and depose emperor yet it be no opposition to himself when he say that no pope ever command the murder of prince to be commit or commend they after they be commit as if which be by deprive they of their realm be not all one against prince with the cut their throat for he that be depose from his throne be present expose to death yea death to he be more welcome because no misery be to be compare to his who from sublimity and affluence be throw into disgrace and distress which be verify in the particular tul. epist. instance that his majesty bring and to which this jesuite shape a kind of answer in the emperor Henry the four who all their author concurrent conclude to have die after his Cuspinian per. etc. through extreme grief and sorrow but before we come to that have the cardinal write to the arch priest plea say to remember what another archpriest a cardinal have record of hildebrand the pope that he hire with Beano cardin. money a base fellow to tumble a ^...reat stone from the roof of the church upon the say emperor head as he be pray before the altar in s. Mary church upon (@) A^...entine he will never have let fall such a peremptory conclusion or be there no example of fact extant against the pope in this kind yet that they may command prince to be kill be Bellarmine own doctrine both symbolical as the spirit may command the Pontif. roman lib. 5. cap. 6. @ flesh to fast and chastisement yea even to death itself if the spirit see it necessary and positive also confirm by diverse argument but one more direct than the cap. 7. con. rest sc. christians may not tolerate or suffer a infidel or in heretical king to reign over they but to judge of infidelity and heresy belong only to the pope say he and therefore at his doom the king must stand or fall and lest it shall be say that this reach but to depose not to death it follow after that such a king be ibid. Paragr. unworthy to receive the sacrament of baptism who take it for a injury do to he if the church that be the pope adjudge he to lose his honour and wealth yea his life also for to that end do he cite the place out of the gospel luc. 14. 17 but the first particular instance which his majesty bring of the pope fury against the son for the inter of his father the depose emperor as it ratify the position that pope do allow of prince murder for they that execute their rage upon a dead corpse it be questionless they pursue in heart at least that man to death and be more than glad when he be dead so do it put this antapologer to much trouble and many shift both fond and false to transfer as well this barbarous rage and profane exhumation from their holy primate as also his incense the son to rebellion against his natural father which two point be warrant by their own writer some of they live about the same time 18. for the first the dig he out of his grave that be compass with a whole cloud of witness some writing that the pope pursue he with such implicable revenge that Helmold hist. Slau cap. 33. be dead he will not suffer he to be bury another the bishop of liege with other of his sort be receive into the communion of the vrspergens an. 1106. church who cast they out but the pope upon condition they will dig out of the grave the corpse of the emperor which he have before bury in the monastery the very same another historian verbatim relate both for the fact and reason of the fact they Naucler vol. 1 gen. 37. be the very last word wherewith Sigonius end one of his book his body lie unbury in a desars cell for five year lib. 9 because the pope have forbid the inter of it for be put into the earth say a late compiler of their own HORTATUPAPAE by the pope persuasion EXHUMATUM Binnius tom. 3. Concil. Paschal 2. it be dig out again and remain above ground five year 19 yea but Cuspinian who the apologer in the margin quote his word be clean contrary say this censurer for thus he write when Henry the father be dead and bury in a monastery at liege his son will not make peace with the bishop of that place except the dead body be pull out of the grave again sure this be a oversight of the apologer for want of well understand his grammar to make such a escape see that the word be so plain Cuspinian in henr. 4. that be by the son procurement at who hand but the pope for what need any procurement by himself to himself the bishop can not be reconcile to who but to the pope who have accurse both church and church man at liege for put the body of the decease emperor into the grave Panth. part 17 all thing at liege be blast with the pope thunderclap for discharge that Christian at least civil and last duty to their master whereupon by the pope mandate his corpse be throw out of the churchyard and all christian burial deny it say the same author who live in those time and be by his own testimony notary and chaplain to three emperor so that the reconciliation or peace to be make be with the pope not the young emperor who perhaps do procure the stay thereof 20 why then all this proceed from the son who procure the pope to do it and therefore it be false ascribe to his holiness yet this be nothing to any jar between the son and the bishop but will the pope yield so much to the ungracious and unnatural despite of a parricidious usurper make a request so barbarous and beastly perhaps the son be importunate and so the pope like the good nature judge in the gospel though he neither fear God nor regard man yet say he luc. 18. he so importune i be it as he will and that the son be so instant importunate be most clear for say the foresay writer it vex the son to the heart that his father bone shall be castout among malefactor which doubtless be a evident argument that he sue hard that his father may not be bury because man use to plead hard that they may obtain what they utter dislike therefore for a further confirmation thereof that it be the son impiety not the pope malice when the emperor and pope come to parley upon condition this be Annal tom. 12. a 4 lib. 4. cap. 38. one as Baronius who you may be sure will write all that he can which may sound to the pope disgrace set it down permit^... at the young emperor earnest reqvire that his father corpse may be inter to which demand the pope that the world may know that the keep he out of the grave be against his will good man present yield with a strong negative and tell he it may not be and give he his reason for that he have receive a terrible injunction from the martyr decease and in those place shrine that he shall suffer no wicked person to be bury within their church for they will not endure it and therefore the reader must needs see that this censurer have just cause to say that all this be false ascribe to the pope 21 the second thing in this story wherewith his majesty charge the pope be that he stir up the son against his father and procure his ruin whereof this epistler will also ease their holy father and that by the apologer allege author Cuspinian who write that it be report how hildebrand have absolve the emperor before his death but that his son never leave solicit the succeed pope to excommunicate he again first this be write but for a report than which there be nothing more uncertain say the orator but yet what follow hereof Philippic 2. therefore the pope stir not up the son against the father a weak consequent absolution of the emperor from the curse free not the pope from his instigation of the son in pursuit of his father therefore the same report which Cuspinian record do add which the jesuite according to his common honesty leave out and set down the cause why the pope absolve the emperor namely because hildebrand the monk otherwise Gregory the seven be much grieve in mind molestass that he have vex and molest Henry the emperor wrongful and unjust and in that anguish of mind confess as a friar witness that he do it at the instinct of the devil and among other he raise up rodolph count of reins sigebertut 1085. field against the emperor his to who he owe all that he have and send he a crown imperial circle about with a inscription of s. Peter Cuspin hen. 4. name and gift 22 but what be this to the incite of the son nothing for pope Gregory or hildebrand who in distress of soul absolve the emperor die before this his son Henry the five rebel but yet by the mean of mathilda the emperor kinswoman and the pope too near neighbour she stick close to the pope at all assay and season conradus his ibid. elder son be instigate to rebel for which cause the father disinherit he and appoint Henry his young brother for heir apparent but then come Paschal the second into the see who curse he and re-curst he say Cuspinian and after that from the convention of Mentz be send two or three bishop in the pope name to fetch from he his and imperial ornament that his son who be then in arm against he may be invest what author can the apologer bring that avouch this say the epistler no better than the messenger themselves the bishop of Colen and Wormez who tell the old emperor to his face it seem good to the pope and the prince of Germany that thou be Sigonius Ital. lib. 9 1106. deprive of the communion of the faithful and deturb or tumble out of the possession of thy kingdom this say Sigonius and Genebrard come not short of he who say that this be do at the Genebrar li. 4. 5206. commandment of pope Paschal and yet say fa. parsons here be much say against the pope with little proof not so much as the pope lay and lay against that emperor with less warrant excommunicate he for simony and the proof because he have take a sword in lieu of his favour for bestow ^...ree bishopric indeed the bishop which come to divest he they lay it foul to his charge for the emperor ask they of Colen and Mentz the rich and ample prelacy of Germany what great matter he exict of they when he confer those dignity upon they they stick not to tell he plain that he have neither exact nor take any thing yet this be the huge Simonist so pursue with the pope malice and their parasite pen 23. the second instance which his majesty bring to confute the cardinal general negative be a recent and extant panegyric in extol the murderer and murder of king Henry the three of France make by a pope who job. 32. 19 as if he have be another young E^...hu and his word within he like new-wine in a bottle boil and work with the joy thereof do with such open mouth and stretch and glorious term hyperbolise both the author manner and fact that his oration have like to have receive in the consistory a Herod not only verbal for deify the pope the voice of God not of man but actual also for canonize the friar DERER into a half God and a whole saint to the first part whereof this epistler answer Numb. 30. that there be no record of credit in Rome if he have stay there he have say true perhaps or elsewhere that pope sixtus ever make any such speech be it not time well spend to deal with such unhonest shifter in the first exampleof the emperor Henry the four when Benno the cardinal book be quote of hildebrands notorious and extreme pursue plot and insi^...iating his death Bellarmine the cardinal turn that off with say that Benno never write any such thing but some Lutheran in his name affix Roman Pontif. lib. 4. cap. 3. the cardinal title or else if Benno do write it it be but the exercise of his wit as Xenophon write the life of Cyrus for a idea of a excellent prince so he for a pattern of a absolute wicked pope not for truth of matter the book be so full of impudent lie now this second example famous to the world be yet fresh in memory and the oration in print translate into diverse language with the day of the month and year and place prefix with this inscription pont. max. etc. on the second day of September anno. 1589. in the consistory at Rome now this I say be shuffle off with a Ignoramus that there be no record of credit to be find belike then there be a record but because it do not accord with their desire and remain there to the eternal renown of the pope zeal and piety for celebrate assassinat and mutherer of king the credit thereof be call in question 24 a cleanly excuse have be that because pope sixtus be so extreme hate after his death that his B^...nnius and statue of brass erect in his glory at his first entrance be cast down and a act make never any for his sake to be set up again that this oration of his also and the record thereof be deface and tear for that there be a oration to that purpose by he make both and this epistler be force to confess which they divide into two part a admonition and a admiration that forsooth it be not in commendation of the heinous fact but that a monk in his can shall perform such a valiant act a admiration of God strange providence a fit epithet doubtless and fetch from profound divinity for can God providence be strange which in the universal governance of the world and guidance with protection of prrticular creature be daily and continual or be anything strange to his providence which see thing to come as if they be present and existent or can Aquin. gentile visible act be call God providence which by the school man definition be so far forth call providence as it remain in God secret not yet appear in any thing for when it be and show itself in effect sensible than it be call not providence or because it be as the prophet Esa. 23. 2^... speak and barbarous action which the pope so admire by what figure in rhetoric do this jesuite call it God providence as if that do cooperate with the bloody mind of a desperate monk to a parricidious murder do David so in the murder of Abner which be the very case save that there be no sanguinary priest party in the act when joab under pretence of salute he stab he to the heart do thereupon David make a speech in admire god 2 sam. 3. 27. strange providence in that Abner be so treacherous slay because not long before he have kill Asahell as here pretence be make of the king slay one of 2 sam. 2. 23. his subject no but utter a funeral oration in praise of the party murder both for his prowess and nobility with a detestation of he that do the fact and a prayer to God to reward the doer according to his wickedness 2 sam. 3. 34. and at last give a charge to his son not to suffer the treacherous murderer to end his day without Blood this or the like if the pope have do it have be a 1. reg. 2. 6. speech more fit a bishop and a divine and have leave God providence in such specialty to himself to who it be best know which we speak not of his foreknowledge but of that which they call (@) (@) (@) 35. Aquin. 1. 1. q. 10^... art. 7. whether in his universal regency gubernative or executive in particular action do always work by that which be good and tend unto good say the schoolman for with the wickedness in the mean God have not to do save to turn it to some good if therefore the pope have be acquaint with God intention or after the murder have see that some real true not partial suppose good have be effectuate by the parricide that shall he true and only have ascribe to God providence as joseph apply his be in Egypt gen. 45. 5. for the relief of his kindred unto God mission not his brother sale for so far forth as in their treacherous and unnatural chevisance there be a premission of he into Egypt and a preservation of they in his be there that be God providence who in his secret council decree this so to be and foresee that it shall so be not approve their ill but intend their good otherwise Balbus the emperor and the caian heretic be more justifiable than the pope for they Zonar gr. c. fab. lib. 1. Epiphan aug. etc. commend judas for the betray of his master because he foresee it to be the only mean of man redemption 25 but yet if we shall examine this bald excuse what be the strange and admirable providence in this murder have the monk come into the camp like another Scaevola and be a profess enemy enter the king pavilion i. in lib. 2. in the thick of the crowd stand about the king and not discover by habit or otherwise have strike at he open with his weapon that have be a more manly and a more strange act and far more honest for there it be one enemy strike another or have the friar challenge the king to a single combat unarm in his cowl with a weapon only and have slay the king by fine force or some raven or foul of the air assist the lib. 7. friar in the monomachy have still be bear in the king face as a Frenchman be serve in the roman story this have be a plentiful theme for the pope to have dilate upon God strange providence to have say with Liny but that a priest not secular but retire profess more than ordinary mortification shall nourish such rancour blood and treason in his inner part and arm himself with a two edge knife and the same poison that so the blow may be speedy but the death with torment and shall make God to he the author and abettor of his parricide for night and day he pray his assistance by their own report mercur. Gallobelg and praise and in his friarly garment habit of peace and piety crave access to his sovereign who never deny it to man of his sort under pretence of letter and message of importance while the king gracious stoop to he for receipt thereof shall villainous and cowardly stab the lord anoint and a pope the huge divine of the christian world shall admire this as a act of God strange providence be so contrary to religion honesty and the very light and law of nature it do argue either this jesuite to be of a strange boldness to refer the pope oration to such a high common place or else the pope to be a strange divine to attribute the treasonable murder of a anoint king by a popish friar to God providence which David celebrate for rescue not destroy king for it be he that give deliverance unto king say the prophet in the Psal. 44. psalm 26 but in the second part of the pope oration as they do sort it and call it a admonition that the manner of the murder and one circumstance thereof special when nothing be less expect may be a spectacle unto prince to be more moderate in their power this one thing alone we will observe that if the powder-plot of the jesuit have take effect what whole seluse of rhetoric have be open for oration in this kind to all nation christen for king and prince to have be more moderate in their law and penalty for that the king of great Britain with his dear queen and elder son environ with his chief officer of state compass with all his noble and peer of all sort attend with the choice flower of the land gentry and commonalty in that very place where those rigorous law be enact shall be blow up on the sudden with the touch of one hand of a silly fellow when nothing less be expect and this also must have be ascribe to God strange providence that so many barrel of gunpowder be at several time couch be never discover before the blow be give but this in conclusion you see that what they will deny perforce they confess that a speech there be make by the pope and be their gloss never so cunning or impudent the oration extant never yet control will remain for a perpetual monument to show that the pope rejoice in it as a retaliate revenge upon the king person for some ^...cedent act dislike by he 27 and little there want such comfort there be take in it of sainct this wicked instrument of God strange providence howsoever father parsons say that there can be nothing more improbable and ridiculous yea rather if it be such a strange providence of God comparable sixtus (@) panegyr to juduhe behead Holofernes and Phinees his transfixion of the adulterouscoople it be more than probable that the execution of a action semblable shall receive a memory proportionable with that inscription it be account to Psal. 106. 31. he for righteousness to all posterity for evermore RIDICULOUS it may have be for such jest be not strange in Rome conclave money and friend have easy make saint which when a cardinal of Rome see and consider what manner of person man of singular and Bessarion method hist. rare abomination be canonize there he begin to doubt a whether those thing be true which be write in ancient time about such matter there be no doubt but the pope tooth water to have friar Clement enrol but that some of the conclave wise consider that which one of their own side afterward observe quod occasion (@) ded^...rit calumniand that the heretic have already take ^...ccasion to detest not the bar lib 6. cont^...arch ^...8 (@) man only but all his whole order 28 the three example confront Bellarmine negative be our late queen of precious memory set up by the pope bull as a butt to be shoot at by all manner of conspirator hearten to their treason by their confessor injunction and authorize plain by the pope allowance where of be there no other argument say his majesty this one be indefeizable that the pope never call any churchman into question for meddle therein the censurer answer to this be foure-fould first by interrogation second by a experience three by a apology and four by a challenge his first interregation be in scorn thus and need no more sir but this there need no more cur but that for continue silence after cognizance of a fact imply allowance defer^...d reproof may argue wisdom in man and sometime mercy oftentimes justice in God that long forbearance may there aggravate the penance or operate conversion but if still prorogue it argue a delight or consent at least so God himself reason in the psalm read it and see in three verse your picture Pa^... parsons and your cope-traytor Psal. 50. 18 19 etc. garnet lively describe which he conclude these thing thou do and I be silent whereby thou though^...st wicked that I be like thyself to see evil and by silence to approve it but I will reprove thou and set they all in order against thou and what silence be this for he begin that very psalm with the god of god have speak namely his silence from exec^...ing not denounce his judgement which make Sa^...e August (@) to break out as in a amazement whence sound this terrible I rumpet aug. (@) (@) he be silent from revenge not silent from reproof but this have be the pope double fault which must needs imprint into his M^... a persuasion of his allowance that he have be silent a and and a monend^... and vindican do from monish and punish either from (@) the fact or chastise the malefactor and this silence be continue aswell divinity as law have conclude it to argue either consent to the crime (@) a content with it 29 this the epistler strive to fling off with his second interrogation consist upon three what be draw from the pope intellectual and wherein he show some small grace purposely to avoid a positive denial simple to say that the pope neither know or ever hear of any such thing but thus he propound it what if he know not what if he hear not what if he see some ridiculous device there be no such insensibility as that which be wilful and of purpose and some man will pretend to be deaf save when they hear what they like of Rome belike be desolate from resort and sequester from intelligence and England so void of romish agent and the pope so destitute of busy informer that it be no marvel if he be utter ignorant of such occurrence but according to the proverb there be none so blind as he which will not see gallio in the act see sosthenes the chief ruler strike in his act 18. 17 presence and in the face of the court but the text say gallio care not to take knowledge of these thing which be the pope very case in this point and yet it seem he can see some feign devise against priest to affright the queen especial that of walpoll and squire which he descry to be a monstrous fiction like enough for a false glass will present deceive Catech. jesuit object perhaps the pope do look through parson spectacle but the party himself confess the fact the jury find the gild and the priest of Rome acknowledge it and write it to be true how come it beyond-sea to be but a feign devise some will not believe a man be bald unless they may see his brain nor the pope conceive that the queen shall have be poison except she have be see to swell and die present have squire poison take the effect intend it than have be a act of a martyr but be discover and defeat it be now become a fiction like a monster the best be that the record of english court come not within the reach of index the fact be too evident to be deny the evidence too substantial to be devise and the proceed more just than can be control 30 his experience follow num. 33. that he never know it prove that any pope euer' procured or consent to any private violence against her person this jesuite make himself Them^...stocles his plut. son for english matter either he must know they more than any in Rome or they can be true but yet he must borrow his fellow garnets answer to justify this speech and say with he if equivocation help i not I have overlashed therein for to omit all other conjecture of his knowledge be not the letter of a cardinal sufficient proceed against the late traitor proof and be in print both in italian and english in the answer to allens apology can it be unknown to he that the pope be particular acquaint with the private and personal murder of queen ELIZABETH intend by Parry do he not make s. Peter key open the wide gate in heaven to Parrie for accomplish it absolute approve the intention and gracious absolve the murderer from all his sin for act it do not the ^...etter begin thus sir the holiness of our lord the pope have see your letter with the ore dence thereof and can but praise your good disposition and resolution etc. and be it not subscribe to Parrie you to dispose of n. cardinal of press the cenjurer with this and if he do not equivocate with his knowledge or the proof that he either know it not sc. to impart it or else it be not prove sc. to his contentment if he have one spark of modesty he will revoke what he say 31 but the three and most impudent be his apology that if the pope do proceed against she as a malefactor as well by SPIRITVAL as by temporal arm also for her REMOOVALL who be illegitimate by parliament do as they be persuade usurp the Cronne to the prejudice of his majesty mother and himself they may just do it be it seem the inscription upon the pope key law or war to rifle the title or ruffle with the throne and in the realm of prince be at the pope choice but a man will imagine at the first read and hear of a pope proceed against a woman malefactor that some courtesan in Rome have appear before he in his ecclesiastical consistory for her unlawful lust but when he come to temporal arm and see it touch the remoovall of that lady queen ELIZABETH the diamond among prince the glory of royal majesty and the joy of the christian world for her sex while she live he may with just disdain ask what have the bishop of Rome to intermeddle in England or with her crown and bid he look home to his own usurp claim because there be more evidence to prove he to be that Antichrist then ever can be to show that she be illegitimate 32 yes say he her father the arch and parliament do sentence she so and the same father arch and parliament upon better ground within few year renounce the say sentence and repeal that act as before be say but be once true quoth he no human power can make it untrue to the prejudice of another if the illegitimation have be in her blood no law can make it good against the right heir but that be sound seem allegation and plausible inference may for the time dazzle not altar her right but they be clear and reverse these second deliberation do not so much establish she right which be inherent in her blood as make it more apparent and sensible incontroulable as for human act the rule of ancient law have be that (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) after-lawe and constitution be more strong bind than the former be yet hereby I hope the argument do aswell hold on the contrary that if a king be once true legitimate and right possess no human power and take the pope at the high he be but s. can dispossess or depose he under what pretence soever much less to the prejudice 1. pet. 2. 13. of another and yet it be one point of jesuitisme that the father may be depose for a heretic and his son and heir al^... exclude from claim of succession unless he be a catholic of the roman si^...e (@) tit 64. Sect. 75. 33 but who be that other person prejudice by q^...eene Elizabeth reign his majesty mother say this epistler and consequent himself who by right shall have enjoy the crown 44. year since and the fawn apologer can without open untruth or manifest ini^...rie AVERRE the contrary he that write the apology of all other vice abhor fawn both active in himself and passive from other his nature be to royal and noble to be a sardonian fawn and chrouch he leave to such base bonegnawer as fa. parsons for his majesty have long since in his own person not conceal his name in that his golden book aver the contrary to this and signify (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) preface to the reader that he be no way prejudice in his claim or right by queen Elizabeth reign for first he acknoledge she to be a lawful queen govern with wisdom and felicity second for the state of England he profess that it can no way become he to be a busybody in a outstretch prince matter nor to fish in outstretch folk water^... as the proverb be three that during her time it become he lest of any to meddle therein 34 doubtless have his majesty see his right encroach on or impeach much more detain he be neither so careless of his interest nor so soft of nature nor so weak arm with force and friend domestic and foreign but he will and may have if not (@) she yet grievous molest h^...r and exhaust both her strength and treasure how far he be interest in this state none know better than himself and although he be silent as himself speak his blood and descent do sufficient proclaim it but know the (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) that his just appoint time by God and nature be not yet till the almighty have call she to lay she with her father his majesty with undaunted patience and unpassionate haste expect that which to the mutual comfort of himself and his subject with peaceable entry glorious inuestiure and regal majesty he now enjoy and long and long may he do so in despite of such fawn counterfeit as parson it 35 for what a cog and shameless companion be this now to curry favour with h^...s majesty as bewail his 40 year grievance and wrong endure so long keep out from his actual right due to he in conscience when of all other this very epistler under Dolemans vizard utter disable his majesty for have any title or interest in this kingdom not only under protext of conscience for his religion avow that whosoever shall consent (@) (@) patt. 1. pa. 216. to the succession of one faulty in religion that be in his sense a Protestant shall co^...mit a most gri^...uous and d^...able sinna and such a one be his majesty in this mate opinion as the priest record for he have pronounce of king james to be a most obstinate heretic of who conversion p. 218. there be no hope nor that only but operfidious hypocrite he will there make his majesty utter uncapable by a plain fr^...sh statute as he^... call it (@) Associat^...n as therein foil by law through that death D^...lem part. 2. pag. 1^...7 cap. 5. of his mother which he there enforce to be a argument that admit neither solution ^...r r^...ly be it within the compass of the apology or to the purpose in hand he shall find that it may easy (@) (@) and have not he at all time prostitute his ^...en and soul to write any thing though never so false neither will he have cite this statute nor pronounce it so unanswerable for the plain word of the statute do confute he because they only be in the act exclude by who mean her majesty life shall be take away not seek and that it shall not touch their issue yea an. 27. elizah statute for provision etc. cap. 1. though she have die by such violence except they have be any way assent or privy to the same and what be this either to his majesty mother or himself but that he will take any occasion to regorge his malice against our gracious sovereign but hereby it may please his majesty to observe in this passage of pretend illegitimation urge against queen Elizabeth confer it with this last clause out of dole-man that they which under colour of a statute make as it be well know in king Henry indignation and displeasure conceive against her mother though afterward repeal do so often reiterate it as to her prejudice and disgrace will not stick if occasion may serve for they either to vent their rancour or wage their force to twit his majesty and his posterity upon the advantage of this act of ASSOCIATION as he call it with the like ^...pprobrious calumny and in dignity but his majesty be wise as a angel of God 2. sam. 14. 36 his challenge be the last though thrust in before num. 32. wherein he tax the apologer for his facility (@) overlash when he speak of sau^...ders and Bellarmine in say of the first that his book be full of parricidio^...s doctrine against prince of the other that his volume be fill with contradiction for Saunders he appeal to a conceit of improbable impossibility that there be so many of they and of a diverse argument they shall all be fill with such doctrine what need conjecture when the book be extant which who so read shall find in they all that where this doctrine of depose and deprive of detbron and decapitate prince be canvas lib. visi^... and cl^... D^... he be in no theme so vehement and large as therein A^... therefore in compound and mixture the rule of philosophy and practice of art be to denominate thing according to the quality which do predominate in they Aristot. and corrup so this d^...ctrine in all Saunders his book be the most prominent as most principal intend and most full handle may just give the name to all the rest of the discourse whatsoever but this be his majesty second proof that pope do manifest approve of prince murder or else they will not suffer Saunders his book that be fill with such rebellious and parricidious doctrine to be by authority divulge and neither call they in nor purge they thereof the censurer labour not one whit to disprove it but from Saunders he step to Bellarmine 37 over who as if the cardinal be gasp for breath under the blow he have receive for his contradiction after the epistler have a while brave it with some rhetorical flourish as I can but marvel etc. and I be ashamed for my country sake etc. he mean that his country be ashamed of he and if my judgement deceive i not etc. and though I mean not to discuss etc. with diverse such round-about at last of the eleven wound by contradiction which be give the cardinal he take upon he as chirurgeon of the camp to cure 3. or 4. of they and first he begin with that of confidence in good work Numb. 35 etc. 38 the cross proposition in Bellarmine be this for the uncertainty of our own righteousness li. 5. cap 7. and the peril of vain^...glory the safe course be to repose our whole confidence in the alone mercy and bounty of God and this say his majesty be a conclusion contradictory to his whole five book of justification this the epistler endeavour to cure two way first by think it strange that five book shall be contradictory to one proposition he shall rather have think it to be a very strange conclusion which in so small a roomth shall have matter to cross a discourse so large as that be a strange poison one scruple whereof infect a whole river and that engine of Archimedes a very strange instrument which be but of a little compass Plutar. Marcel with one wrest by a small force will overthrow muniment and bulwark of many day work and the royal strength of a whole army so this a very strange proposition which be of such force as that it contradict so many prepare reason advance to the contrary and that it be so be manifest for the chief and main scope of all those book be to prove that the righteousness wherewith we be justify and for which we shall be reward be both true justice and inherent in we and also able to stand and abide the trial of God judgement for to these two principal head may all the ^...hief question in that bulk of controversy be reduce e^...ther to the quality of our justice that it be inherent not imputative or of the merit whether it be reward for the value of the work or of mere grace and both these by the first word of this proposition be direct cut off for the uncertainty there mention be either or either of the righteousness itself or of he which have it if of the thing itself then be it no true righteousness for truth whether of essence or propriety cassiere all uncertainty and it be hypocrisy not righteousness which be not true if not righteousness than not inherent if it be of the person than the second part be cut off for merit raise a confidence but where there be no comfort there can be no confidence and in uncertainty there be no comfort for reliance on that whereof a man doubt cause rather a fear to be deceive than a confidence to be relieve which also cross the very next precedent proposition that some confidence may be repose in our own righteousness and good work if man be assure that they be good work but by this proposition in hand it seem none can be assure if they may why do he call it uncertainty of our righteousness if they may not where be then their confidence or how may they settle it if some may and other not he shall have describe and distinguish they or else that forego proposition may well have be spare which afford little use and less comfort and in that regard be direct opposite to this last which be full of confidence and consolation and be the very same which the prophet David renounce all other help and hope both in heaven and earth in hea^...t or flesh pronounce Psal. 73. of himself with joy etc. it be good for i to cleave fast to God and to put my trust in the lord God so that any scholar may see this his majesty assertive challenge to be defensible in the nature of a true contradiction howsoever this epistl^...r p^...remptorily deny it to be possi^...le for that it be the first property of a contradiction to be fortissi^... the most forcible of all opposition and where be great force see then that a proposition of three line shall overthrow the main strength of long book 39 see we then if his second cure be more sovereign in appearance it shall be the emplaster apply be so large for as before in the council of Toledo so here he come about and fetch in a whole chapter out of Bellarmine by question and solution but neither faithful for the content of the chapter nor sound for the defence of his master nor sincere for satisfaction of the reader for first whereas he say num. 38. that the chapter consist of three question about confidence to be place in good work it be not so there be but one only question propound in the rubric or title and in that chapter discuss namely QVATENUS how far forth a man may place confidence in his merit which he explain by three proposition that may very fit be compare unto the three fatal sister Clotho Lachesis Atropos which they call Eumenidas the last cut off what the first carry and the second twist 40. the first proposition be that the confidence towards God which be in holy man arise not out of faith alone but out of their own good work and merit also the second that in good merit which be true know so to be some confidence may be place if pride be avoid the three which be the Atropos and cut off in a trice the whole labour of the two former be this cross proposition by reason of the vacertainty of our own righteousness and hazard of vainglory it be most safe to repose our whole confidence in the alone mercy and bounty of God than which there can be any thing more violent contradict yea total evert the very principal question for imply that some confidence may be place in merit but with a limitation this last admit no confine but draw our whole confidence from man merit to God mercy alone and carry with it a double contradiction both and so to speak the subject Tota man whole confidence this exclude all partition in itself it must be entire take it either as because confidence may be extend or remit be great or less or as as it be define a hope corroborate Aquinas and perfect or as confidence of this or that nature and quality as Bellarmine himself describe it in the two first proposition whether raise out of our good work or in repose in our good work the whole say the cardinal whether great or less whether weak or strong whether one or other be whole to be cast on God mercy even as our saviour when he command we to love God with our whole soul heart and strength include therein all the faculty of matth. 22. soul and body part inward of understanding will affection etc. and part outward all the member of our rom. ^...2 (@) body to be make s. Paul whole burn sacrifice because God though he love a break heart Psal. 51. ^...7 tear with sorrow yet he can abide a cleave heart part within itself which may make a Ose. 12. 2. man to be as s. james call he (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) a man with two soul which saint August also imply in that his short but effectual prayer to let the fire of thy spirit consume i whole in psalm wherein he exempt no part nor faculty of himself from that sanctify and cleanse power 41 the object also afford a strong contradiction so mercy alone which be as Aquin. 1. q. 31. 3. Aristo Elench. lib. 2 cap. 3. mat. 4. 10. schoolman observe a exclusive speech admit no participation with any other for the very force of which word put the tempter to silence and to flight also soli he only shall thou serve have the cardinal say in the first place man confidence must or may be repose in his own merit and afterward subjoin man confidence must or may be place in God mercy these have not be contradictory but communicative merit may have part stake with mercy but when he add in mercy alone merit and saint and angel and whatsoever beside be abandon and cassier for admit no consort say Aquinas which make David to profess direct SOLIUS I will remember thy righteousness only and Psal. 70. 16. saint August to insist upon the same both with a admiration o SOLIUS and also with a question I pray aug. ibid. you why shall he add this word SOLIUS have it not be enough for he to say I will remember thy righteousness no but SOLIUS it alone altogether I will remember why so for in so say I put out of my mind any righteousness which be my own so then TOTUM whole confidence that take away the particular ALIQVA in his former proposition Sola exclude in both proposition 42 what be then the cause of this epistler his confidence to say that it can be any way defensible in the nature of a true contradiction ignorance I think which be the mother in the opinion of father and philosopher of audacious assertion and undertake he perhaps think there be no contradiction but where Nazian. Thucyd. and Plutarch a universal if negative be cross with a particular affirmative as thus no jesuite be a traitor some jesuite as parson by name be a traitor if affirmative with a particular negative as thus all jesuit be machiavel^...sts some jesuite be not a Machiavel^...st whereas in loguke we find two manner of contradiction one express the othe^... employ and both of equal force the first Logician^... the other in of the first sort be those example aforenamed wherein the negative note be express as of the second sort be such as this in hand where the note negative be omit and yet one member overthrow a other take a instance which will please the cardinal well let the proposition be every bishop of Rome be under Christ the immediate and sole chief ' pastor of the whole church in the christian world this may be contradict two way first express some bishop of Rome be not the immedi eat and sole chief pastor etc. this be a contradictory with the negative second it may be cross by implication as thus the patriarch of Constantinople be under Christ the immediate and sole chief pastor of the eastern church this though it be a contradiction in yet do it as main oppose the former general proposition as if it have a negative note and Bellarmine will take it so and as much derogatory to the highpriest of Rome as the other yea more for there be in this a double contradiction both and the patriarch of Constantinople cross the bishop of Rome the eastern church and the whole world contradict each other implicit 43 and this be our very case in hand have the cardinal say man whole confidence be to be repose in the alone mercy of God and cro' it with a other thus some confidence of man must not be place in God mercy alone this have be a manifest negative contradiction but utter it thus some confidence of a man must be place in his own merit though it do not so negative confront the former it do as powerful overthwart it and as thorough overthrow it take they then several whole by itself and alone by itself the contradiction be irreconcilable join they together the jar and dissonance be redouble for Tota admit no partial distribution in itself and Sola reject all consort participation with another therefore his majesty observation be just make and logic confirm it to be a violent contradiction for these two proposition man whole confidence be to be place in God mercy alone and some confidence be to be repose in man merit will no more agree as be most opposite then a new piece with a old garment which our saviour say to be a incongruous impossibility mat. 9 44 and thus stand Bellarmine case in itself but his proctor the epistler have make it worse for he suppose the cardinal to handle the controversy by question and answer whereby it seem he never read the place himself sum up the chapter by way of interrogation and solution and make Bellarmine first to say that good work in a christian man join with the promise of reward do in their own nature increase hope and confidence there be in the whole chapter no such thing the cardinal first proposition be the confidence which a christian have towards God be not raise by faith only but also by the good work which he do for no divine either Protestant or Papist will say that good work increase confidence in their own nature that opinion of a recent but nameless doctor be condemn long since by the bull of as Bellarmine justific lib. 5. cap. ^...2 report which cause he often in those book of justification to distinguish between good work and merit because all good work be not meritorious for if in their own nature they shall be consider without respect both of the promise make unto they and also of the dignuie of God spirit the original worker of they they can carry no merit with they say he therefore by necessary consequent no confidence can be raise by they nor comfort take in they of their own nature 45 second he make Bellarmine to assoil another question thus a man may place any confidence witting in his own merit so he beware of pride the cardinal say not so but his second proposition be limit both in subject and predicate that some confidence may be place in a man good merit if he be sure that they be true such for man be a self-loving creature and because that affection interpret the own action partial confidence may be wrong place if the goodness of the act be not thorough discern and assure the want whereof condemn the Pharisee suppose his work to be just which be not so but the knowledge luc. 18. job. 9 thereof make job to pronounce of himself I fear all my work and good reason say Gregory because the best work have attend on they Grego moral 9 cap. 26. two worm which gaster and infect the goodness of they and sloth and deceit either negligence in they or pride of they or some corrupt affection mingle with they 46 now then join the last proposition of the cardinal from whence this debate arise with these of the censurer and see how he will make they hang together first our own good work have such a uncertainty in they as that our whole confidence must be refer to God mercy say the cardinal our good work in their own nature be such as that they may give hope and confidence of themselves say this champion second man whole confidence be to be place in the mercy of God alone say Bellarmine a man may witting repose any confidence in his own good work say fa. parsons between they both they have broach a goodly doctrine and very comfortable no doubt first good work of their own nature may raise up our confidence towards God and yet a man be uncertain whether they be good or no second man must be ascertine that the work he do be true good or else he may not trust in they and yet no li. 5. cap. 7 @. proposition verlo lib. 1. cap. 2. man can assure himself that they be so unless he have a revelation say the cardinal than which what be more uncertain be his own word for that which seem a revelation may be a illusion and as some superstitious people take that fire for a walk spirit which be but a illude meteor so pharisaical and melancholic conceit may think they to be infusion of the holy ghost which be but speculative imagination of their own ghost 47 it be well do therefore of the cardinal to add this last proposition though it overthrow all his precedent doctrine whereby he lead man to the near and safe way the alone mercy of God forget all their bypass merit rather then to let the former stand uncontrolled to procure despair to distress soul as needs it must and better be it for the cardinal to acknowledgan oversight in a long discourse then to overthrow one souleredeemed by Christ blood contradiction in assertion wound but one opposite member but unsoundness in doctrine concern salvation do wound the weak conscience of a christian that may be amend by repeal retract it but a wound spirit who can bear it say Solomon and if the wound of the soul cause violence to the body who can recall it and nothing soon prou. 8. 5. cause it than a waver uncertainty for aff^...ance in the particular case of a man own state touch his salvation 48. the courteous reader will pardon the length of this discourse by reason that the censurer set up his crest and rest upon it that if in this there be any contradiction he will yield that the apologer have not overlash in the other let the unpartial trial be the severe judge either way and so we come to the second 49. where the cardinal say in one and the same chapter that God do not incline a man to evil either natural or moral and yet again that God incline a man to evil moral which be a manifest contradiction amiss grat^...e and stat^... p^... cat^... lib. 2. cap. 13. even that by the logician call a affirmative cross a negative in the same subject and predicate this antilogy the antapologer Numb. 41 will salve by a figure in grammar call acyrologie and will scare up the wound by a impropriety of speech for that moral in the second proposition be take improper which if the cardinal mean he express not and then like a sphinx he propound riddle he read not lecture but that it be not his meaning be most plain because what the epistler call a improper moral incline or command be as the cardinal set it down not subordinate to that which he before have simple call moral incline but a several member by itself distinguish and diverse from the former 50. for thus Bellarmine make his division all impel or incline other to evil be first either natural by ^...oving the will immediate or moral by true and proper command or else second permissive by suffer a evil to be wrought which be a tropical kind of command or else three desertive by leave those open to the evil which be propose and appoint to be ann^...iea therewith or four ordinative which he take from Hugo by dispose the will of a evil man to this or that act not positive but by permission from the first hoe exempt God whole that he neither natural nor moral incline the three last may be verify in he to which he also add as a over-weight a distinction out of Aquinas his etc. that rom. 9 if the other will not serve God yet may be say to incline a man unto evil indirect and by occasion not natural move the will but moral immit and sena in some good thought whereby the wicked man take a occasion to do this or that evil if then the cardinal when he speak of moral incline have subdivide it into moral proper and moral occasionate or improper and have free God from the first but lay this last upon he than have the apologer wrong he and himself have not be so wring as by his name it seem he be but this he do not nay he mean it not for he make true and proper to be the difference constitutive of moral incline as if otherwise it be not so to be term for make it differ from the permissive which Bellarmine himself say to be a figurative and improper incline or commandment whereby lie be also fall into a gro^...le absurdity in logic confound member divide and make 51. whoso read the place even with partiality for the cardinal credit may thus perhaps explain the cardinal sense and the epistler slutter about it that God do not moral incline man to evil in general but to do this evil rather than that he do moral incline the will not as author of the corruption but disposer of the order for example that Clemens the monk shall rather stab a king then poison the pope for the priest say he leave that to the jesuite which be as much as if he shall say it be impiety and blasphemy to aver that God moral inclive the will to murder in general but to murder king rather than ordinary man or this king rather than a other God do moral incline the doctrine we examine not we be now to try contradiction not to handle controversy this I say may expound the cardinal meaning but it no way reconcile the contradictory proposition much less be they salve by the censurer adverb improper for whether in the order or in the matter of the evil moral incline be that only as Bellarmine describe it and be touch before which be true proper and direct and yet lest the cardinal shall seem thus to distinguish without his author as he do indeed he cunning thrust in and join it in Aquinas his speech who have no such word in that place with which two will as well agree together as Moses his ox and ass in one yoke Deut. 22. 10. 52. the three and four follow which the epistler crowd up together in one Numb. 44. the first that bishop do succeed the apostle and yet bishop do not proper succeed the apostle and lest any shall think that this Bellar. cler. lib. 1. cap. 14. rom. pontif. li. 4. ca. 25. be no antilogy because in the last proposition the adverb proper qualify it the cardinal himself have in the very next precedent chapter prevent that where he say that bishop do proper succeed the apostle than which what more strong counter-shock can cler. lib. (@) cap. 13. there be between any two notwithstanding this epistler think he have break the force thereof with a distinction namely that they succeed in power of episcopal order but not of jurisdiction and the judge thereof he make the place quote which either this censurer never read or if he do the poet give he Horace good council anticyra for sure his brain want purge 53 the controversy canuaze in that chapter which have the affirmative proposition be whether bishop and priest be equal or no that they be not but that bishop be superior unto they Bellarmine show three way first in respect of order second of jurisdiction three of the principality and precedency in all ancient session and assembly of priest have ratify the first for episcopal order he come to the second concern their superiority in jurisdiction etc. for confirmation whereof he bring his first argument from the analogy and pattern of the priesthood in the old testament but the second reason he fetch be for their power of jurisdiction out of the new testament because they have the same which the apostle have that bishop do succeed the apostle therein be not one man testimony alone but constant say he all the father do hold it with one consent without vary in themselves or differ from other 54 if he stand upon the other place where the negative be there indeed the cardinal drive to his shift be force to coin this distinction but how unfortunate he who name though dead like Zisca his drum be a Whitaker rom. Pontif. qu. 8. 4. terror to Bellarmine do at large discuss but yet that salve not the contradiction but make it great for therein he show that he manifest oppose both himself and all the father for in superiority of jurisdiction bishop by the testimony of all the father succeed the apostle as himself confess prove and approve in this place 55 the four be concern judas of who quality to discuss whether he be just before his election or make good by the choice and how long he countinue so whether as Tertullian say till he be make both Almosiner and purveyor or till he be exasperate by his master for repine at the expense or Tertul. tract 13. Hieron Pelag. 3 Cycil (@) joa^... lib. 9 Ioh 17. 12. joh. 6. 70. till the first entry of the treachery in his heart it be but questi^... as the father well term it nor that only but curious and frivolous it be enough for so much as concern his state to know that the son of God call he the child of perdition and that the saviour of the world pronounce he a Diveli and for our document both to admire in our lord choice his gracious kindness (@) that have rather appear to fail in his judgement then in his affection and by his patience also in judas his Ambros. in luc. salt to learn and tollerat and in if in our choice of a consort either our judgement of he be deceive or our benefit towards he be miscarry to our own hurt the question be not about his condition but whether this in Bellarmine be not a contradiction that judas believe not and yet that judas be Vere Justus just and true good 56 if just be take in the large sense to name he a righteous man that be so justician for the time Cyril jerosol Nazian. etc. arist. eth. 2. that he do some action of a just man as somewrite that judas do they he and Saul and Cain may be so call and the contradiction will not be harsh for hypocrite and infidel may do as much yet the philosopher in the light of nature will not admit even that title to be give unless a man do just that his action proceed from a good ground and be direct to a good end but our saviour notwithstanding matth. 7. 23. all their preach devil cast and miracle whatsoever call such just man plain worker of iniquity because all those without faith be as prosper speak the shine of saint Paul Prosper^...sen August 1 cor. 3. matth. 7. 27. gold upon saint Mathewes sand make a glimmer show without sure ground but the join of the adverb veer that he be true righteous and certain good and yet not believe make it a contradiction incurable because he can be say saint Bernard that be Vere which divide those two in himself cant. ser. 24. at the same time 57 for the work of a christian must be sacrifice of righteousness say the prophet a sacrifice it can be unless it be offer say Chrysostome the oblation be by Psal. 4. action which make it acceptable to God and before man say our saviour acceptable it can be except it be lively Chrysost. in rom. 2. mat. 5. rom. 12. Abac. 2. say the apostle faith give it life sever these two righteousness from faith the sacrifice be but a dead present take faith from it it be but a breathless lump say saint Bernard he that offer such a divide sacrifice have as good knetch a dog say es. 66. God by the prophet but judas believe not say Bellarmine there ' ore he can not be Vere for be without faith he be without Christ say August because without say it be impossible to please God and whatsoever be not of faith in hebr. 11. rom. 14. be sin all this the epistler take upon he to cure with a short and present remedy and that be by equivocation of time for in the beginning say he judas believe and then he be trvelie good but after that he fall both from faith and goodness 58 yet well fare a old acquaintance a friend at need equivocation have a faculty to make treachery and perjury appear no vice judas and jesuite to be honest man but yet he that will make a concord of a jar by distinguish time shall particularize the difference into their several season which the epistler do well to omit because he can not do it for though it be but a conjectural calculation what in that time shall be speak there be no direct place of scripture for it yet to justify his evasion he shall have take that course or have seek some other remedy but if scripture may determine it be probable rather that judas never believe and take no other but that very place which Bellarmine quote for the time of his unbelief namely when saint Peter make mat. 16. that confession thou be Christ etc. which be not long after our saviour have begin to show himself by preach and miracle unto the world which because it be new and fresh it raise a admiration and extraordinary fame of he concern which our saviour then make a inquiry with his disciple for long continuance of any thing slake the wonderment and make the wing of report to flag Pontif. rom. li. 1. ca. 12. yet even than judas believe not say the cardinal nay before that time as some in their h^...rmonies do place it when S. Peter in the name of the rest make that Ioh 6. 69. profession we know and believe that ibid. chrys. thou be Christ the son of the live god the opinion of some father be and Bellarmine approve it that he speak not then in the person of judas nor that judas his heart do agree with saint Peter word nor give his consent to that 59 when be then that beginning wherein the epistler say judas believe there be a place available at least probable for the contrary that there be no beginning of his relief for the evangelist say that jesus know joh. 6. 64. from the beginning which they be that believe not and who shall betray he which beginning take it either for Moses his Bereshith a beginning temporal gen. 1 the incarnation of our saviour or saint john in joh. 1. in joan. 6. mat. 4. his beginning without beginning for Tolet refer it both way or saint Mathewes exi^...de when our saviour begin to preach and choose his disciple he then at all these time know who believe not and who shall betray he than not believe he put in the present tense as if he shall say he then know who do not present believe not who shall or will not believe and this he impute to all the flincher that forsake he but upon judas he lay a double load both of a present incredulity and of a future treason and both these he know to be the beginning scil. that judas do not believe and that he will betray yea it seem that judas believe rather in the end then in the beginning for^... with the halter in his hand he confess more than when he have the bag in keep namely that the blood which he have betray be innocent and guiltless mat. 27. 4. blood if the censurer have have but the shadow of such a place for judas his belief in the beginning we shall have hear of it with a triumph as of Nicholas deaconship and saint Paul conversion 60 but grant it true that he do believe at the first be his faith that which be form by grace and work by love and be the true life of a just man justus sure in he which have that say Aquinas Abac. 2. in rom. 14. for be once have it can be total and final lose nor be it more separable from he than the essential form of any thing from the subject which it denominate be it a general apprehension a historical faith as it be indeed that can not denominate he to be a just man much less Vere for such a faith be common both to unjust hypocrite and uniustify reprobate and in sound divinity no faith at all 61 and so much for the contradiction for here the censurer think good to leave with his fellow judas transmit that of Antichrist to the cardinal himself with the rest of the antilogy the wise part that ever he play for these be no matter of state but be point of learning and so out of his element he be weary of they yet lest he shall seem to do it for want of skill he give a double reason thereof first that he shall wrong the cardinal it be very likely for if Bellarmine can understand what great pain and little ski^...l this empiric the roman be wont to call such Parabolanos a true mountebank have bestow in cod Episc. and Cler. bind up his wound thus loose and unsavour he will take up the old orison for ever after second that he shall wrong himself that be as true also no man know what be in man better than the spirit of man which be in he and it be a point of wisdom to discern 1. cor. 2. the cuman creature strout it a while in a lion Horace skin but feel it too unwieldy for he and how ill it become eras. chili he he cast it off with some shame but for his ease father parsons be wise and know himself to be a more sit instrument to kindle contention in state then to reconcile contradiction for a cardinal 62 and therefore from his didactical we must now follow he to his historical skill for his majesty to give some answer to that sarcastical objection of Bellarmine concern that imputation of causeless fear for that no christian king be or ever be afraid of the pope show by diverse instance ancient and modern what other emperor and king have do who in fear of he have undecent stoop whether voluntary by themselves or compulsiut by mean to the pope proud insolence in cite whereof this censurer say he find such a deal of exaggeration wrest addition and unsincerity that he be not able to refute they and yet that he may confute they he begin at the wrong end first scil. with the example of king Henry the four of France that now be 63 for this you must know to be parson vein if it be matter of ancient story whereof there be substantial testimony by authority of writer their own special they he cast off as the fellow in do his spectacle these be too true for my false eye his rhetoric can there roll to add or deprave or detort or defalk because he shall be espy but if it be a modern story of any thing late do and that at Rome than he cry with Cato when he have get his sword though therewith he kill himself now I be i own man and where I will be wherein if there be any thing that may touch the pope tyranny all the excuse blandishment extenuation and pretence that may be be heap together for the qualify thereof for he may safe do it in that there be no author extant to control he and the eye-witness at Rome must underpin any tale for the apostolic credit 64 and that make he begin with this particular of the french king who his majesty for a demonstration of his fear in regard of the pope instance that to have the excommunication revoke he suffer his ambassador to be whip at Rome for penance which the epistler hoot at for a manifest untruth and propound be to be laugh at for a monstrous assertion and which will overthrow in his mathematical imagination the PUNCTVALL sidelity of the rest for that there be eye witness at Rome which can testify that the ambassador be not whip with a rod but a white wand be lay on his apparel soft in token of submit himself to ecclesiastical discipline which answer of he have more disgrace his holy master than his majesty assertion for be it not for penance that the ambassador be so ceremonious strike and be not penance the severe part of ecclesiastical discipline be 1. cor. 4. 21. no sport threat of the apostle if in a rod there be severity wherein be it show the end of church discipline by saint Paul rule be the very same which Uegetius give for war 1. tim. 5. 20. that all which behold or hear of it may fear and that some may smart who feel it here military lib. 3. cap. 4. the king himself at home he feel it not his ambassador have a wand soft lay on that smart not to give office by white wand be a ancient ceremony in great state and to hold a white rod in the hand before the congregation as old a ceremony in penance but that the rod of ecclesiastical discipline shall be turn^...d into a white wand SOFTLI lay on as if l^...ke Moses staff it may be a serpent when he listen and a a rod when he will that be such a metamorphosis as exod. 4. neither primitive church or ancient father ever dream of 65 but hereby a man may conjecture what the selfe-whipping of the jesuit and romanist be for they which (@) so tender kind unto then public offender such as will stand out to excommunication will they not say to themselves when they have the whip in their hand as saint peter to his master be good to yourself sir mat. 6. Ep^... c. 5 29. for no man ever yet hate his own flesh but nourish it which be a better place of scripture against selfe-whipping than the pope have any for turn the rod of correction into a wand of ceremony 66. his majesty therefore do the church of Rome more credit than it deserve in call it whip which be the original and true form of displing whereof the wand be but a ^...ymbole for who will think that the pope and a conclave dare dally with church discipline and make a mockery in a dumb show of ecclesiastical penance and which add to the sport that penance shall be perform by a proxy which make it a more ridiculous jest than that assertion of his majesty to call it whip in temporal affair for message or employment king be to have their ambassador to who what honour be do or disgrace offer the king in person do take it as do unto themselves but that they shall have ambassador to be disple for their master offence as they use to tame lion hist. by whip mastiff or to chastise king child by correct their playfellow be a childish act and the ready way to weaken the strong sinew of the church and to bring all religion into contempt 67. but be it wand or rod lash hard or lay on soft the name which his majesty give of whip be justifiable for to call a figurative presentation by the proper term of that which it express be neither absurd untrue or unusual either in human or divine learning Significa^...a and significat^... say s. cypria unction chrism Exo. 7. 12. cyprian Moses call Aaron rod while it be a serpent and then devour the rest by the name of a rod and not of a serpent and which sit this tragicomical play best the poet bring Hercules upon the stage do call that which he have upon his shoulder and be but a light compound of paint cloth and reed by the name of his clab and describe it for the weight compass and stiffness thereof so also this assertion that the send of his ambassador to be thus handle in his stead argue that king fear and the pope tyranny be punctvally lineal and in all dimension true though the penance be play but superficial for that which drive the king to that submission be nothing else but fear of those usual earthquake which the pope thunderbolt and be the concurrent meteor of the romish region either his subject revolt or populous tumult or intestine insurrection or defeizance of succession or personal assault whereof bariere give he some taste and Chastile another as the priest declare at large catechism jesuit li. 3. cap 3. and 6. 68 neither be the pope over-awing surquedry any whit the less that the smart rod or whip be turn into a wand or ijrk into stroke a change which french crown may easy make no more than Galba his cruelty when be entreat for a gentleman condemn Sueton in Galba cap. 4. that he may not die the death of ordinary male factor he will that the gallow shall be white and colour for he as if the paint gibbet may add solace and honour to his death neither do it allay the fearful submission of the king any more then if a magistrate of a corporation who for some great offence be enjoin and all his successor to take their oath with a halter about their neck in token of their submission shall obtain the favour to have the rope change into a Ribben the silken lace show their servile homage no less than the hen penhalter for the principal end of discipline be shame the smart be not so much and that be as great and as famous by the wand lay on as if it have be the jash of rod yea more terror will it have strike into christian prince since they will needs stoop to such indignity and debase that threefold image of God in they in their birth of freedom in their baptism of christianity in their place of sovereignty and more credit for the pope discipline to have it do in the right kind and upon the offender own body for the king of Israel and Nineve do the penance themselves and more wise have this censurer and his master do to have let his majesty word of whip pass uncontrolled that the world may have know that the pope will not suffer the contempt of his fearful anathema to be redeem so easy I will not say so cheap with the tap of a wand upon another man cloak that never offend but hereby christians may see that in Rome as the sacrament so the discipline be make but a mere pageant they to allure the sense of carnal man this to fill the treasury of a unsatiable priest both of they to establish the monarchy of a oultrecuidant pope 69 but be it as it be whether a mummery or a penalty his majesty assertion be true that the pope drive the king into that fear which make he send his Pr^...e to Rome there to be disple for he if the pope commute for gold that neither qualify his tyranny nor the french king fearful submission for it be as much on either side sin the cause of king Henry the second of England who (@) the very smart and rod upon his bare skin in the church of Canterbury which be the last but two of the (@) that his majesty give and the second in order (@) (@) encounter cersurer insist upon for of th^... (@) king his great grandfather (@) by the pope of half the kingdom of Navarre which be the next upward in the apology therein he be hush 70 from which ijrk penance this epistler will fain rid the pope first by hovedens authority who show the contrary and second by Baronius cite aright for the author but not quote true for the year Baronius Arr^... 1174. who resute it as a fraudulent narration both of they argue it to be the king voluntary choice so then of the king body sacred by holy unction that it be whip by the clergy there assemble with 40. strip H^...ueder matth. Paris i^...end angl. Nubrige^... etc. ba. 2. cor. ^...1 more or less there be no question so many story concur therein and accord and Baronius himself out of diverse confess and commend the same compare the lash with the apostle stripe mention by s. Paul himself and avouch out of one author that they be above 80. but whether the penance be uolantarie or enjoin the king who make the question his majesty move it not neither say any such thing only repeat the fact and yet have he so say there be great probability to confirm it for the cardinal who be send from the pope to examine the murder of the archbishop beside that injunction which be in the charter of absolution as the censurer call it command he other penance not there specify Genebrard insinuate so much when he say anno. 1174. etc. it be enjoy^...ed they in token or for the manner of his penance this among outstretch thing what be they which come not to public notice in thom. lib. 4. cap. 5. in alexand. (@) say he that write beckets life after the king humble promise for penance say it be add moreover that he shall do this or that it seem the injunction go first for his corporal penance and the addition follow for Rome satisfaction but the legend of England if it have credit he be a Papist sure that write it say that over and beside those public note the legate privy enjoin he fast and alm and outstretch certain thing and that the king answer be to they legend angl. fol. 292. s. thom. cant. Corpus lo lord legate my body be in your hand whatsoever you enjoin I be ready to perform it or as a other report it who live in those time who Baronius city and approve therein the king answer be thus neubrigens lib. 2. cap. 25. I refuse no christian discipline placuer it devote ampl^...ctar I will devout embrace and perform ^...hat you dcree 71 yet his majesty charge not the pope thus far but show that the cause of this dei^...ction be the king fear of the pope wherein the most author concur for the pope be so enrage against the king about the death of Becket that most unthankful prelate whole make and raise only by the king grace that when the king have send his ambassador to Rome to clear he of the guilt either by command of it or consent to it the pope will not admit they to his kiss not to his foot not to mat. Paris in hen. 2 his sight and be send the second time the cardinal entertain they with word only no other welcome but so far they be from be admit to the pope audience that he be determine have the consent of some cardinal upon Maundy-Thursday then at hand to have accurse the king by name at the high altar and to have interdict his realm have not some other cardinal assure the pope that those ambassador be send of purpose to take a oath both to clear the king their master from that murder and also to signify that he will obey whatsoever the pope and his cardinal shall enjoin he which notwithstanding the pope be so far from believe that be Polydore virg. in hen. 2. persuade that all thing be clean contrary to that which they avow he send his legate into Normandy with full authority both for examination of the fact and mandate of satisfaction by penance this be all that his majesty intend and which he undertake to specify that it be the fear of the pope interdiction that make the king thus to stoop and deject himself which because the censurer can not control he frame a question where none needs whether the pope enjoin the whip penance yea or no 72 for the three example of the emperor lie agroofe upon his belly and the pope tread on his neck without further answer and for his own ease he remit we to Baronius as in the contradiction he put we off to for these be his two oracle Baronius be his Phoebus for story and Bellarmine his Apollo for doctrine who by many reason and authority have refute this as he say 73 i he shall Iwenal anno. 1177. have say for Baronius bring not one authority to confute it nor any reason to discredit it he take indeed a great deal of pain to set down the whole proceed with the circumstance in that conclusion of peace between the emperor and the pope at Venice out of a author choose to his own humour if there be any such for it be out of a manu-script in the pope library of one not yet extant in view and for aught be know may as well be forge as true and be not this good deal when there be so many author of credit in print to avow the story one manu-script uncoth obscure writer must encounter the credit of they all cite by Baronius a very sincere relator no doubt to salve the of his master holiness Stapleton insult upon doctor Whitakers for cite a manu-script and call he even for that a barbarous divine and seem to be eager author Eccles. desen lib. 3. cap. 19 angry with any that take that course but why shall not Bessarion a cardinal carry as much authority who avouch the same and have for his warrant as Baronius confess ancient monument 74. yet welfare B^...us in that he profess he know no more but one author that be C^...l tom. 3. pa. 1345. which write this story but thereby to infer such a necessity of fabulositie upon the report as he do show he to be more peremptory and partial then judicious and learned since that beside there be a heap of witness in print all concord in the truth thereof as Petrus justinianus Philippus Bergomensis papirius Masonus Alphonsus etc. and of all other the most in censur orient an^... at in cap. 13. sect. 6. Psal. 9^... forcible gennadius the patriarch of Constantinople who do particularize the fact with the manner of conculcation and the word there with utter out of the psalm thou shall go upon the lion and the adder etc. with the emperor answer thereunto and the pope reply upon it 75 if exception be take against he as if of envy or malice he shall speak it be of the eastern church it be in that his tractate which of purpose he make for the extol and magnify of the pope primacy divulge not by any protestant writer but put into the oriental censure dedicate to Gregory the thirteen translate by with his annotation capitular and Fevardentius his note marginal premise with this reason of affix gennadius his testimony to that book ibid. that be the and even in that pierce tractate which shall thus dig out their eye that will abase the pope sublimity be this story with all the circumstance allege for the advance thereof if his credit sway not what say they to a venetian historian who write in italian the full discourse Girolam Bardi naval impress 1584. of the sea-sight between the state of Venice and Otho that emperor son a partial writer for the pope bitter against the emperor and a rank catholic as Rome entitle her professor who describe the manner of that conculcation and recite the word utter by both the party only differ in the pope allege the text of the psalm for other repeat it as in the scripture it sefe in the second person thou shall walk etc. he for the pope glory make he pronounce it in the first I shall or will walk upon the lion and the adder notwithstanding all these we must appeal to Baronius to who if we shall go for trial let all thing be unpartial weigh the relation of so many author will be more probable than the omission of that particular by a obscure corner-creeping relator present like a puppet to speak what his prompter will have he yet therein lie his main force of argument will be available to the contrary 76 for first in his entry to that narration he much bewail the blend and mingle together of truth and fallhood by diverse historian and give a caveat that man shall not be carry away but by the number but by the choice of witness a good warning if follow by himself and in this very case but this argue that something appear to he in his read about this matter that do distaste he as make little for his lord the pope commendation second in his censure of the story itself his argmment be all without wrest easy retortible against he as first who be present at the act and write the story do not mention it a weak reason for a narrative discourse be no forcible confutation and a omission of a circumstance by one single man falsify not the credit of many man relation and to argue from authority negative be but a silly piece of logic three evangelist omit the story of the repent thief yet be saint Luke Luc. 23. narration and the thief his conversion true uncontroleable three say he if the pope have so do it have be a action monstrous for the unseemclinesse wonderful for the strangeness singular for the novelty therefore the more beseem and likely for the pope who be that Antichrist exalt himself above all that be call God four that have be the way to have exacerbate the emperor and drive he from penance say he true but rage expel discretion and revenge admit not of religious caution the pope be then thorough incense for have take Venice in a cook habit for his refuge and be thither pursue by the emperor and have fast in custody the emperor son who contrary to his father commandment fight before his time limit be take captive it be most probable that have get this start by the son restraint he will handle the father somewhat coarse upon his former pursuit and this present advantage as hawk seize upon those fowl with most eagerness which have put they to the long flight and the often retrieve for have not the emperor upon the son entreaty and tender his present state yield to the peace he must have return a childless father his five argument which be by admiration of God providence for stab and trample upon king be all now refer to that lofty commonplace that can make so cruel apersecutor who hadset up a anti-pape thrice and promulge deadly edict against the pope authority shall be bring so low as to hold the pope stir-up after the reconciliation make it more likely that the pope will debase he yet more vile in the very act of his submission sixth his insultation upon the emperor in those high term and unfitting comparison do make for the punctual truth of the pope conculcation for if Baronius be but a cardinal a story-writer and a library-keeper can without indignation pass his censure of the emperor now dead 500 year since almost nor forbear to call he tyrannical persecutor compare he to Pharaoh to ^...roaring lion and to job Leviathan that be in Gregory moral the devil call he the king over all the child an. 1160. n. 35. of pride it be most probable that the pope himself who feel the rigour of the emperor puissance and be but new strip of his cook apparel not at all from his choler and former terror will when he have he at his foot kiss and lick they as Baronius himself confess else where and triumph in it not stick to compare he to a lion and a basilisk have a text as he think fi^... for it but that which he add of the emperor revolt ibid. after reconcilement be a invincible demonstration that either the former submission be force and involuntary and only in respect of his son redemption or that he be indeed though for the time he suppress it exasperate at the insolent conculcation and usage of the pope in the act of his penance 77 and so much for that story and Baronius too unto who the censurer remit we if his authority be so irrefragable it have wrought we this benefit that we shall abridge the next instance which his majesty bring of the pope put on and strike off with his foot the emperor diadem at his coronation for howsoever this silly antapologer will glide it off because it have but two testimony one borrow it from the other that be more by one than the lybrary-cardinal bring to confute the former story yet Baronius assume it for a truth and grace it with a symbolical Hieroglyphik express what the anno. 1191. sect. 10. pope shall mean in do so but still all this make for his majesty purpose and argument that both the emperor do what they do in awe and fear of the pope 78 the next instance which his majesty bring be of Philip the emperor elect against the pope like in the minority of his nephew Frederick the second and that the pope like he not there be two proof first his proud threat that either he will wear no mitre or Philip shall wear no crown second that he set up Otho the duke of Saxony against he who he abet in his pursuit and crown he after he have slay philip. this in two word brief but smart the epistler call a mere slander because not Otho the emperor but another Otho of WHITLESPACK a private man do slay he mistake of a person where two of one name concur in the same story if it be not wilful may be censure for a negligence but not improve to a slander and who so read that history of garboil cause by the pope for therein all that write consent may easy be deceive in the two othoe neither of they both be a private n a^ the one duke of Saxony the other a count Palatine or as an. 1204. some will have he a Lantsgrave both of they espouse to one and the same daughter of Philip and each of they so near ally to she that they can neither of they Naucler gen. 41. 1208. krantz lib. 7. cap. 29. lawful marry she which circumstance consider it be a easy matter to mistake the word he be deceitful slay by OTHO and without attentive diligence hard to say unto which of they both to ascribe it 79 but yet his majesty be not so incurious in peruse story as to commit even such a slip for he do not say he be slay by Otho the emperor hand but that Otho slay he which may be refer to his mean as well or rather than to his hand even as when eliah reprove ahab about the death of Naboth and ask he with indignation have thou slay and also take possession when as ahab meddle not therein 1. reg. 21. 19 further than consent to his wife wicked plot if so far do the prophet thereby reprove he as the actor or as the procurer thereof and that it be by Otho the emperor underhand mean as thing then stand there be strong presumption first their hatred in pursuit each of other be for a empire second it issue out into blood and with open and often battle eager follow still with Otho his overthrow and disgrace three their reconciliation be but fresh and new make wherein by Salomon rule there be not much trust to be repose for hatred pro. 26. 25. (@) of a enemy reconcile be easy cover by deceit and his fair pretence do usual conceal seven abomination four one condition in the peace be the continue of the empire unto Philip during his Sigonius reg. lib. 15. anno. 1207. life and such termer be quick dispatch especial which be the five presumption when the second condition be that Otho shall be his next successor for hope defer be a affliction to the soul say the wise king pro. 13. 12. and where there be but one life in the way to hinder from a crown the afflict soul will seek her ease by what riddance soever S^... Ius have too current a passage in every age especial where coronation and possession have precede and blood have be spill for the keep of it which be the case of Otho 80 add to these that long after this new agreement Philip be slay and what sitter instrument can Otho the emperor use than Otho the palaine for though Philip espouse his daughter simple upon Otho his conditionate successor as a pledge for more assurance of his life and peace yet the duke know that by alliance he can not marry she and assure that the count to who she be before betroth will be enrage at this Sl^... and mockage take she the rather for his spouse as the mean^... to shorten her father life and hasten his own way to the crown by the palatine revenge whereof he need not doubt the nature of the man be so ireful and bloody as all that write of he do observe in he for thus Otho see he may be rid of two obstacl^...s at once Philip that stand in his way for the empire and the count also who life must needs be a eyesore to he as have a kind of interest in his wife before by promise assure to he and this may true justify his majesty assertion that Otho the emperor slay Philip as king David do uriah by treachery though neither with his own hand nor to the world knowledge and yet Nathan 2. sam. 12 9 tell the king that he have slay he 81 but not to let it pass so there be not presumption only but authority also to confirm it nic. Cisnerus who by his place in the state have easy mean to be acquaint with the record of the empire in his tragical orat. Freder Imperat. history of Frederick the second spare not to say that not long after the peace be conclude mutual what by the pope what by Otho between they both Philip be murder in his chamber and slay if he may not pass for currant be a modern writer what he say Conrade Lichtenaw he justify by the testimony of a abbot of vr^...erge live at that time who name be for a long while not know his annal be ascribe to he who we usual call Urspergensis till the error be espy and amend and he direct Cisnerus to say as he do 82 yea but the author say the epistler who only the apologer cite be plain for his murder by the count not by the emperor for the count he be plain of the emperor he say nothing silence omit the relation excuse not the guilt neither do his majesty cite he for it but for that comminatory speech of the pope that either he will lose his mitre or Philip shall lose his crown Urspergensis write that but for a report say the epistler no more do Cuspinian that when he say that Gregory the seven absolve Henry the four before he die and yet parson Numb. 29. insist upon that though but a Hearsay as a strong argument to rid the pope from be repute as a persecutor of that emperor 83 but to this report Urspergensis add quoth he which be not to be believe that be not so he say that what he hear be a hard thing to be relate and scarce will be believe but do that excuse the pope or exempt he from so say yea rather it do exaggerate the pope pride and malice that will deliver such a speech which be write and true yet man will hardly believe it not that it be any strange thing with pope to utter word and perpetrate fact for their abomination incredible (@) that read that whole chapter to the end Philippi shall find that the be not insert as suspect a Vrsperg defect of truth in the report but to express the hyperbolical arrogancy of the pope as if he be that God by who king must reign or stoop at his pleasure 84 neither do the abbot relation only but the pope act also verify the report for first that he never love Philip in that all writer do agree second he deprive the archbishop of Colen for crown he and put bruno in his room three he deny to give any archbishop krantz saxon. li. 7. ca. 15. 26. the pall unless he will take othoes part against Philip four when Philip have commit bruno the pope archbishop for deturb the other the pope send he word that if he do not deliver he he will lay sore and heavy bond upon he last say Urspergensis although man will not believe that the pope will utter that strange proud threat above mention as if thereby he will pin^...on the divine providence to his own will yet he set a upon this it be manifest that all his life long the pope be a heavy enemy of Philip and his continual opposite yea even for that small time he possess the crown baptist. Egnat lib. 3. in philip. it be say egnatius with the pope dislike and heavy displeasure 85 but if the pope shall so speak why be ther^... no Vrsperg ^...198 Philippi more to witness it but one who repeat it in the abbot word give a reason for it for that it be a very unpleasing and a matter for truth beget hatred and yet with all he confess that he find the fame Naucl. gen. 40. an. 1198. in some outstretch writer but he that read Cusp^...ian shall see the very word by he also repeat and close with a pretty glance at the pope charity and in Philipp^... humility for so speak and now what be become of this mere slander which be ground upon such strong presumption as well for Philip death by Otho his competitor as also for the pope insolence in make such a proud vow both which do still ratify what his majesty intend the awe that pope keep emperor in at those time for it be only the fear of he that make Philip to release Crantz lib. 7. sax. cap. 26. the intrude archbishop of Colen and condescend to a parley with Otho the pope darling 86 that other of emperor Fredrick the second poison by the pope corrupt mean in apulia whereof then escape he can not avoid the other by one Manfredus hire by the pope to do it but thereof he die this he call a tale and a malicious tale a tale that the emperor die of the poison a malicious tale that the pope procure it and herein as think he have get a advantage he spend three whole Numb. 52 53. 54. first that of all the author which write the emperor life the most part mention no poison and six of they he marshal in the margin be it so yet his majesty have good ground for that which he say if some of they do so write for clock will soon agree than all historian concur in the same relation but sure they who his majesty ground upon be no protestant and that he be poison Cuspi fred. 2. ep. lib. 2. Paris hea. (@) there be as many for it as otherwise Cuspinian Petrus and Matheus of which the two last live in that emperor time yea two of the author marginate by the epistler incline that way mention the poison but will not determine it not that gen. 42. anno. 1247. it be not so but because diverse author report it diverse so that a man know not which be the true say he and of that mind be Binnius see the variance of writer Concil. Tom 3. par. 2. Innocent 4. reg. Ital. lib. 18. about the manner or kind of death which he die but Sigonius be direct and say that in apulia he die of the poison in apulia 87 but all or most agree say the epistler that he be stifle with a pillow by Manfredus the emperor base son not all nor the most for they can agree either of the person place or kind of his death but grant it true what then therefore he die not of the poison that be no good consequent for a man death may be effectuate by two mean though one more speedy and visible Abimelech be slay by a woman and yet his judg. 9 54. page thrust he through she give he his death he speed he so be Saul say to be slay by his own hand and 1. sam. 3^... 5. 2. sam. 1. 9 yet a Amalekite rid he of his life certain it be and therein most agree the emperor be drench before and have take in the poison in Apuliam but Manfredus think the time long and fear his recovery shortue his life with the pillow which have the death wound before by the poison so say Sigonius he die by poison and manfred be shrewd suspect for it by who it be report he be choke with a pillow in epist. lib. 2. say Petrus return into apulia he perish by poison whether by a disease or by poison he die say and Cuspinian agree with they that anno. 1247. Cuspi fred. 2. the emperor recover by the help of physician from the poison manfred take a short course with he and as Hazael screw Benhadad with a cloth stop his breath 2 reg. 8. 5. with a pillow where be now then the fabulosity of this assertion and what audaciousness be this to entitle that for a tale when his majesty have so many author and all of they papist to direct he to this averment 88 but belike the malice of this tale be inexcusable by lay it upon the pope who be free from it no author free he the only freedom which they give he be their silence of he save only one who acquit he thus that matth. Paris in hen. 3. indeed the enemy of the church give it out that the pope have hire one what with money what with promise to poison he but do he free he thereby God know say he whether it be true or no but absorduit Papa fam^... the pope get he a FOULENAME by it quoth that very author and the presumption be very strong for it for sure it be that the pope hate he so extreme say Cuspinian that day and night he devise how to destroy he Saul not more eager in the pursuit of David yet he eye he and follow he as the hawk do 1. sam. 26. 20. the partridge than pope after pope be in pursue that emperor more like devil than christian if their own story be true 89 he be excommunicate and deprive of crown and allegiance upon slight pretence by they he be procure by they to promise in person to go into the holy-hand (@) (@) 3. (@) (@) om^... (@) V^...perg against the Turk even as jaso^... by Pe^...as into Colch^... for the goulden-fleece that in the mean time they may r^...fle his territory in his absence and so they do indeed the emperor by reason of the dangerous sickness be force to stay his journey one year the pope take it for a dissemble and excomm ^...nicated he for his delay the emperor send his ambassador to Rome with their affiduit to make faith for his sickness the pope will not admit they to his presence next year to satisfy the pope the emperor determine his journey but before his go he call a counsel of his prince to Ravenna which he appoint also for the place of rendrevous for some of his soldier to attend he the pope cause they to be stay from that meeting waylay the coast of Uerona and Milan and take order that the soldier shall be spoil that be prepare for that expedition against the Turk which ^...las be a shameful thing to speak of say the abbot that write it the emperor be in the Holy-land and in battle against the turk the pope in his absence enter apulia part of the emperor dominion surprise and take it to his own use and keep back all supply of soldier that shall go for aid of the emperor in that holy war and which be the height of all impletie the emperor have perform his promise by that his journey request absolution from the pope he not only with contempt deny it but command the christian soldier in Asia to leave the emperor Naucler gen. 4^... (@) 1228. to the turk malice as be a public enemy of the church and dispatch secret letter to the patriarch of jerusalem and the soldier there to rebel against the emperor as Blondus the pope soothe flatterer be force to confess and by private letter which be intercept by the emperor and whereof he complain deal with the saracen to make no truce with the emperor nor to deliver the crown of jerusalem unto he though he shall win it by conquest and when the emperor send letter of joyful advertisement to the pope of his victory and truce take with the Turk the pope throw away his letter in disdain and cause it to be give out through the empire that the emperor be d^...ad upon which rumour there grow a defection of many city from the emperor to the pope and those valiant soldier the almain which be return from that christian expedition against the Turk into apulia be design to be slay by the inhabitant upon this rumour 90. what be this will he say to the pope consent for his poison sure they be violent inducement that he thirst after the emperor death which way soever for he which will arm the emperor own soldier against he cause a treacherous revolt from he while he be fight the lord battle betray he into the mouth of Christ swear enemy (@) his possession in his absence dispers^... false rumour of his death contrary to truth and his own knowledge and by contempt and anathemte do his best or worst to break his heart will make little account or conscience to drench he out of his life if opportunity and secrecy will coucurre 91. and yet that presumption may not only carry it Cuspinton have author for both report ^...lates the procurer thereof doubtful but the (@) certain that Manfredus poison he without c^...ntroversie in fred. 2. (@) ^...ther corrupt by the enemy of the emperor or by the pope he will not say but so he die yet the emperor h^...selfe have discover a poison intend and prepare for he by his trusty attendant as he think they upon amination find it to be the pope do and make a Matth Paris in hen. 3. lamentable complaint thereof be very sick whether poison^...d or disease he send to be reconcile to the pope ibid. Paulo post rejoice at his misery and distress refuse to accept the offer which make many the peer of France ally to love the emperor and and to detest the pride of he that call himself the servant of God servant not long befor^... that four conspirator be apprehend that shall have make away the emperor and they all confess that the pope have set they on have Urspergensis continue his story to the death of the emperor he will not as be probable by his free delivery of the former part have spare to set down the truth with the circumstance of his death more than he do the aggreevance above specify offer by the pope 92. but what better witness and of more credit can there be than Petrus who live in those day and be continual about the emperor and as Cuspinian say have true relate the occurrence of that time it seem by this censurer that three exception may be take ibid. against he first he be but one for Cuspinian borrow what he have for that point from he and none else true and he give a good reason for it because the italian writer be stoma disdain to read the german story as rude stuff do make many and foul escape in their relation and omit many thing worthy of knowledge second they be the pope vassal therefore as Tully once say the thing which may discredit their nation and the head of their religion they pass over in silence three this epistler in the case of Fred^...rik the first remit we to Baronius though but one and he foist we off with one (@) a Vatican desk creeper never yet extant and he be but one must foil the credit of a whole jury in print and we must take he for good only because he live in that time and be present at the conclusion of the peace but who be secretary to the emperor be ever about he write true and be a author approve must be cassier in the case of Frederik the second because he be alone in who Cuspinian a authentical writer verify that proverb Strabo geogr. lib. 10. that he alone may stand for all the rest 93 his second exception thereof be Petrus be a servant to Frederick and a profess enemy to the pope so be Surius and Baronius two swear supporter to the papal see and profess enemy to the religion which we maintain yet in every example the one be intrude for confutation of whatsoever out of history we object and the second obtrude for every fabulous story which they approve second servant do not always speak the best of their master even when they make their fair semblance for a man shall oft time hear his own servant curse he say king Solomon and no fit instance can Eccles. (@) be give then of this emperor in that case for he differ (@) in henr. 3. some think it be the same party but it be no^... probable not much from the historian name who the pope hire once to poison this emperor Frederik if do not err or deceive the reader for his name be of near place and trust about the emperor even for his soul be Petrus de U^...ea that be so hire and plot withal three neither do write that discourse as a servant but as a historian who in all his Tract must have a eye to the truth without which a history as Polybius well resemble it be like a live body with all the bone take out which it seem this gentleman do well know lib. 2. for as it appear by Cuspinian he dissemble not even the foul vice of the emperor his master 94 which may prevent the three objection of this epistler who say that he write so partial in this matter that the pope be fain to write apologetico book of apology to clear himself and his book must go for currant without contradiction be in defence of his own particular act but his majesty write a apology against a defame inuective of a cardinal about the oath of allegiance frame by the council and wisdom of the whole state for his majesty safety and trial of his true subject that must be encounter with a in latin and a traitor in english and may not pass uncontrolled but who can witness that the pope write those book Blondus say he record it and he the most gloze recorder that ever the pope have who for his extreme flattery of the papal mitre be usual call blandus the only painful Pseudolus of any historian that write many a day secretary to a pope and live two hundred year after innocentius but do the pope write those book in defence of himself to confute Petrus sure that be a argument that he be guilty say s. Hierome promptitude of excuse imply pammach epist. 61. a consciousness of the f^...ult yea what say the same father of judas the traitor when our saviour tell his disciple that one of they shall betray he and all the rest of the apostle matt. 26. 23. as strike with grief pluck their hand from the dish for bid meat to their mouth and judas only thrust in his hand this he do that thereby he may dissemble and Hieron in think to persuade his innocence by his boldness the prophet describe one kind of man that flatter himself in his own mischief until his wickedness be find out and appear to his own detestation but be depren^...nded then Psal. 36. 2. 3. the word that he speak in defence of himself be impiety and deceit pope innocentius do see that his act can no long be hide descry they be and it be time for he to speak and then if he will not make the best for himself wit^... his own pen he may have be beg for a innocent 95 and now all this while where lie the apologer mali^... in this relation no where unless it be that he do not make a concord^...nce of all author for one story which be a hard task than the torment of Sisyphus in hell describe by the poet. it be his majesty exceed humility that he will grace Bellarmine be but a cardinal so much as to vouchsafe he a answer it be his eminent commendation that he can ready understand all story write in this kind or any other it argue his singular industry that after so many hour spend in the high affair of the realm he can take the pain to peruse these which he do it be his pregnant d^...xteritie that he contrive and abridge the discourse with that method and sincerity but it be his admirable judgement and wisdom in forbear variety of other author which write but by hearsay and deli^...red what they write upon the second hand in this example to pitch principal upon he who live in that time and see and write what pass between the emperor and the pope in every particular true christian and well affect to godward will rejoice to see so great a monarch so learned and so expert consider what the ignorance of king have be heeretosore but this be the catholic envy and vexation that not Eld^...d and Medad but monarch num. 11. 26. also can prophesy and discover their weakness s^... that whereas now they can as in former time ^...hral they by superstition and insult upon their ignorance they be enrage against their knowledge account their learning forgery and their truth-telling malice 96 another instance obict by his majesty which pinch their holy father to the quick be of that pope who when emperor Frederik be in the holy land fight in Christ quarrel fear that his return will be some annoyance to the romish see betray he to the sell in to who he direct his private letter and with they also send the emperor picture in case the sell in shall mistake his person unto which this epistler grave answer be that it be a calumniation for there be (@) such thing in PAULUSIOVIUS have Saul in seek his father ass return such a answer or himself retire because he find they not in (@) and Salim he have never prove sa^...linter Prop^...s for who direct this censurer 1. sam. 9 4. to the apologer sith he quote^... hi^... in the margin true for the next story immdiate follow but the printer misplace he give he a high room by five line in the page than he shall have a error or slip at the press be not a calumniation in the author if it be than Medice for if the reader turn but only one leaf back in pag 100 of this epistler censure the very like escape for all the world will appear in himself for in Numb. 49. speak of king Henry the second of England his whip at beckets sepulchre the marginal note will we to see Baronius in mclxxvii there to receive a confutation of that inioned penance search the place we find no syllable of any such thing for that point he discuss in an. 1174. so that the note of 1177. be to be bring down to the next instance of Frederik Barbarossa for that be the place indeed where Baronius do tumble himself in that story and yet examine thereof and find a wrong direction we revile it not for a calumniation nor sl^...r it off with a Ignoramus nor pronounce it untrue because we find it not where we be direct but seek the right place alight upon it and discuss so that have there be any grace or good nature in this antapologer if he read as he faith he do the second book of and find not this but the next succeed story there he may present have discover the printer slip give a touch at it and confute the objection but because in likelihood he see it uncontrollable all the answer he make be it be a calumniation for he find it not in jovius the reply therefore must be semblable that since he searcht^...t not the right author the story must stand for true and he must pass on for a wrangler 97. as he do manifest in the very next example with the evident and confirm truth whereof be convict that pope Alexander the six cause the turk brother to be poison he first confess that this have most appearance of truth only because outstretch author beside Cuspinian who be quote in the margin of the apology concur therein belike then if it have come alone though be a popish bishop and do at large particularize every circumstance it must not have pass for even as it be he make it but a appearance whereas the rule of almighty GOD be that if the testimony of two witness speak with one mouth in Deut. 19 15. over it shall be a establishment and that be more than a appearance of truth in the case of Frederick the second and Cuspinian be both produce to confirm one story that can not serve the turn because they be but one the last borrow what he say from the foremost in this instance there be two different witness which concur in verify of one and the same fact and this though thus second be slight turn off as make but a appearance but it will be find that with this their appearance they will also give in such evidence of a irreligious treachery as can not be imagine will enter the heart of any that profess religion scz that the high priest of Christendom so he will be call at the request of a mahometan Turk for a bribe of money and which be a horrible yet a ridiculous thing Paul lib. 2. to hear in exchange of Christ unseam coat for we must think the soldier at our saviour his passion cast lot to have it keep for the great Turk to be reserve by he for a relic 1500. year after shall poison a prince commit to his refuge and protection to satiate the thirst of a blood-golofe and secure he in his tyranny for do he not hereby give a just occasion to the Turk bothrto blaspheme our saviour and scoff at Christianity that as once his own disciple betray he to death for a piece of money his dear vicar will now poison a innocent man and in who life remain great hope for the good of all Christendom as their own writer record for the exchange Onuphr alex. 6. of a mock robe a relic which must needs perform great wonder be thus purchase with the price of blood as also brag that Christendom be behold to he for her principal relic for before he have send the spear that s. longy pierce our saviour withal and ibid. now they shall have this coat his second answer therefore be that writer set it down doubtful and suspicious 98. it seem he have read they but which of they isit for cuspinians word be that so he call in Bajazet 2. Gemen the turk brother die of poison ignorant the pope not unacquainted therewith fam^... say and it be the constant and uncontrolled report that ALEXANDER the pope mingle powder with sugar which shall not end he present but waste he by little and little the most doubtful reporter be Sabellicus who say that there be that believe he die of poison and that the pope cause it etc. which doubt if it be any must not only be refer to the author that procure his death but to the matter also that cause it which be never question for all agree that it be poison save only Onuphrius who indeed mention not the poison but name a disease as a effect thereof a disentery or continue looseness^... the true and design operation of the poison as describe it which be so prepare as that it shall spend he slow but speed he thorough but Guicciardine stop not at it who aver it for undoubted that he be poison and by the pope mean too yea say the epistler but he give a reason why it be so report because the corrupt nature of the pope make any wickedness to be believe of he Christ have a good vicar in the mean time and saint reter a worthy successor may not the church true have then complain 99 it be true that Guicciardine give many reason not of the report but of the ground thereof why the pope shall do it and they all make singular to the excuse and credit hist. lib. 2. of the universal bishop first the Turk allow the pope for his brother maintenance 40000. ducat yearly this gobbet the pope lose be enforce to part with Gemen to the french king and that vex he into the purpose for the poison and into the practice too second he take pleasure with himself so much good it do he to think how he have co^...sened the king that get he who look for the same annual allowance shall so quick be ease of it by death three he envy at the glory which the french-king shall get have that prince in his possession by who mean he may con quer the Turk so easy and speedy four he be in bodily fear that the french-king succeed well in those war against the Turk whereof there be little doubt Gemen be with he will after the return from that battle set upon his skirt and look into the reformation of the church the abuse wherein it be whole alien from the ancient devotion-custome and purity of the primtive state have bring the religion of Christ into contempt last because the pope have good cause thus to fear therefore he also think the poison be very necessary for nothing prevent reformation more speedy than poison do his entry into the papacy by wicked mean make all the world expect no better but a more corrupt state of the church day after day and that the pope know well enough these be the reason which that faithful historian couch together and be by he allege not so much to justify his speech that there be such a report but to necessitate the author that it must needs be the pope that act it 100 after which a joint fame be spread the motore that some body shall instigate the pope to do it and the opinion concur that it be by the great Turk motion who have corrupt the pope legate Bucciardin to solicit his master thereunto Guicciardine add to this for that it be so horrible that the nature and ha^...or of the pope be so wicked that there be no conceit though never so detestable but Alexander wickedness be capable of it and able to make it sound true and yet for all this the epistler say that this matter be but doubtful and suspicious relate than the which there can be of any in story to use his own word a more assertive affirmation than Cuspinian and Guicciardin have make who both categorical and constant do avouch it and here as before with that trusty disciple JUDAS he end his contradiction so with this honest pope ALEXANDER he close up these instance which his majesty rehearse to justify his own wari^...es rather than fear since so many emperor and king have feel with smart and sometime their ruin the rage and revenge of the pope malice 101 as for all particular of those plunge which our late queen of happy memory be drive into by succeed pope as also of his majesty own motive to this wariness by the pope both his engine of cruelty and indulgence of lenity the first his debar bull at his maisties entry and his barrel bullet after his investitute the other that though the principal agent and plotter thereof be the pope jesuit so confess by some of that sort that die for it yet neither the pope will call they that flee away and escape to account for it nor fasten any note of obloquy or infamy upon they which act it and be execute for it of all this I say his own conscience bear he witness it be too true he be whole silent and so pass to the three part of the cardinal letter but first he must give a part blow by a ijrk comparison of king with pope that as (@) Moses chair and saint Peter see there sit scribe and Pharisee so in throne may be place wicked king and yet the authority of neither be either discredit or pr^...iudicated by their wickedness 102 wherein first be verify that speech of Seneca art can long estrange Seneca nature but as the apologue describe venus trans^...fors med^...aiting maid who be trick up like a gentlewoman mink' it a while till she spy a mouse but then make it know she be a cat so this censurer who all this while will make the reader believe that he confute Eras^... chil. only one t. m. the young and will seem to take no knowledge that our gracious sovereign have to do in the apology now be with this round canvas of the pope and know that it will be descry for the style and vein of more than a ordinary man he forget his dissemble adversary and like a perfect jesuite retort's upon king for if t. m. who he make but a inferior minister of small account be the true apologer the Para. 1 recrimination have be more fit both in respect of these precedent instance of pope and that suppose author to have make the comparison by bishop and minister that as not all pope so neither all which wear the habit or be invest into holy order among we be free from notorious vice and scandalous to the world but he be pinch and the egyptian ape can not forbear to break out of the mask to show himself in his right kind 103 second what insolency be this to compare pope with king subject with their superior for even priest as well as other be subject to their sovereigns in rom. 13. by Chrysostom rule the pope sublimity exempt he not it be usurp king be enthroanize by divine ordinance pope advance by hu^...ane arrogance regnant be the text for king speak by the wisdom of God and uter in the book of God by the mouth of the wise king that ever breathe the text for pope priestly pre-eminency none at all for their temporal principality none other but a text Bonifac. 8. in extrauag. come in the extravagant from a pope own decretal and he one of the worst that ever sit in Rome describe common by the name of three beast 104 three do he not hereby offer some disgrace to their holy father for if pope and king be to be compare together in respect of their eminent place as the world find they yet for integrity of life and freedom from sin there shall be a great disparison between they for it be a shame to pope that prince shall be so free from vice as they who profess themselves the abstract of sanctity and be so entitle make themselves Christ vicar take upon they to be the only through the whole world and challenge the high place shall give the best example whereas king have many occasion which may allure they to sin especial have that privilege in scripture whether or whether by exemption from God or fear in man that no man may say unto they why do you thus and yet never can this Eccles. 8. 4. censurer have make a more untimely and unfitting retortion then at this instant his majesty endowment and cartage be such as if their own historian deceive we not few pope will be find less taint than his majesty will appear in the strict search for as some of their own author do testify pope be usual praise for their goodness when they surpass not the wickedness Guicciard lib. 6. of other man and some of they confess that a pope have be trise away on the sudden because it be suspect he will be overgood four if that Genebrard lib. 4. Chron. be true which he say as it be indeed that the wickedness of king do not prejudicate their princely right either for power or dignity what doctrine then be that which teach that be king never so virtuous if they acknow ledge not the pope primacy their right be none either in hope if they expect or hold if they possess a crown but their person be liable to depose and kill and their subject excitable to insurrection and rebellion so that all blasphemy and profanation all murder and oppression all concubinacy nameless innumerable shameless unmatchable shall not impeach or subvert a king right only the denial of the pope authority shall be able to turn he out of his throne and life 106 and now be it time that we come to the three part of this paragraph which be spend in the examine of the sentence and authority of the ancient father cite by the cardinal in his letter to the archpriest among which as he close up the other part with Alexander the 6. a eminent pope for singular wickedness so be like because Pindarus will have in the begin of a treatise (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) some glorious pindar personage to be front he single out julian to be the foremost a excellent emperor for famous blasphemy unto which impious it please Bellarmine the jenocinate pander to the whore of Babylon to compare our gracious sovereign hereby insinuate that as julian to beguile the christian do insert the image of devil which be nazianzens word or false god into his own picture that they according to the roman law bow to the emperor image may unwitting also adore those cunning include idol so his majesty in the oath of allegiance have mingle with some article concern his own sovereignty other clause touch the pope and his authority to the end that as the ancient christian discern that fraud in the picture so they also which discover the mixture in the oath forbear to take it may both be draw within the compass of treason 107 in which comparison his majesty observe as Homer in Thersites head no countenance of a man and the tongue of a scrpent both venomous malice in the personal and a total diversity in the real resemblance unrip this similtude and by diverse particularity show that whereas all comparison be like jaakob after his wrestle (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) sinew-shrunke in the thigh halt Genc 32. 31. of one leg this not only like Mephibosheth be (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) lame of both the foot but as the physician describe some 2. sam. 4. 4. disease it be (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) and have a general luxation in all the joint and member not agree in any one point for which it be bring save only which his majesty well observe that our sovereign be a king and julian be a emperor which thing alone reveal the malice in the cardinal choice of that example for if he have mean to touch the oath only for the mixture and leave the person alone even in that very place of Nazian whence he borrow that resemblance he may have fit his purpose better in compare the blend and temper of those mix article unto the compound of (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) wholesome meat and rank poison together Nazianz. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) in julan for so that great divine fit compare that action of julan but hereby he will notify that it be not the oath but the king which be the eyesore of the romish clergy his glory provoke their envy his religion their malice 108 and now to this what say the learned censurer his answer be a long but not a inch to the purpose namely that the apologer be sore press with this resemblance be force into a weary discourse to show the diversity in that comparison which must needs be loathsome to every man of mean judgement who know that a similitude must be defective in all thing but in that point wherein the comparison be make or else many parable utter by our saviour Christ whereof he city many may seem very strange and impertinent and so he go on in a long flag discourse whereout the offal of scorn term be take to be resume by himself as the ejection which he have once void with Solomon loathsome creature all come pro. 26. 11. to this one profound conclusion that a similitude must only hold in that point wherein it be compare of which if any man but mean learn have have the handle he will have reduce it all brief to that rule of isidor Pelusiot epist. 175. that in parable we must not take (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) nor sit matter to every circumstance thereof for that be to wring the scripture by wrest it too violent and to wrong divinity by force in many a fancy which be Gregory speech allude to the place of Solomon of wr^...ging the nose till the blood come because if a comparison pro. 30. 33. shall hold in all it be a identity not a resemblance 109 for which cause divine have reduce all parable to four head either (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) wherein the nature only of the thing do make the comparison as in the parable of the seed sow the variety of increase by the word preach be express by the multiply mat. 13. 19 or fail of the grain according to the several soil where it alight or 2. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) wherein the disposition or affection only be resemble as when our lord compare himself to child pipe and whistle to express the mild and comfortable mean which he use for the win matth. 1^... 7. of soul or three (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) wherein a passion or perturbation be only assimilate as the second come of Christ be resemble to a thief burghlary and a woman 1. thess. 5. 2. 3. travel for the suddenness and affrightment or last (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) wherein the action only be to be regard for comparison without respect to any other circumstance either of person or manner as in the par^...ble of the unrighteous steward who make friend with his master money luc. 16. 6. against a hard time as we of the good lend we by alm to the poor who prayer may help we against the day of trial to which last this resemblance that the cardinal have bring be to be refer produce by he for no other purpose as be pretend but only for the mixture of diversity as there in the banner so in the oath with we and therein have he m^...nifested more malice than judgement for even in that very point his similitude as take with the cramp halt downright because in the imperial picture though there be different feature yet they all concur to one end and for the same intent that be for adoration though to the one more open to the other more covert for so say Nazian. in this action of julian there be (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) amixt adoration communicate both with the emperor and with the idol also in the oath it be clean contrary which be so far from be a mixture of allegiance that it separate all acknowledgement of any temporal right or right of any temporal acknowledgement from pope or any other else but to his majesty alone within his realm and if this be a mixture it be such as philosophy will not acknowledge and no other but that which king Solomon speak of remove the wicked from pro. 25. 5. the king and his throne shall be establish in judgement which be the sum of that part of the oath that be thus say to be temper so to abjure and abandon that wicked doctrine and that usurp authority of the papal claim for depose of king and so prince throne will be establish they shall rule in peace and live in safety and that be no other mixture than fire make in the fine furnace to clear the dross from the gold say ibid. the wise King 110. have the oath be so cunning frame that with the recognition of his majesty absolute and unmatchable right there be secret couch a covert acknowledgement of some other person whereby in swear allegiance to his majesty he that take the oath shall at unaware swear also to the support of some other exotic authority then have the resemblance be very pat and fit apply even in the very point but see those modification as the cardinal call they be all exclude one the oath may be call any thing rather than a mixture or if it be so it be only because the pope be eftsoon name in some clause where his majesty be insert and so indeed the resemblance in that circumstance may hold of the imperial picture and image of devil but though the king and pope be name in one oath as Christ and belial in one text by the yet be it not for 2. cor. 6 15. joint adoration as in the banner but for recognition of the one and abjuration of the other whereupon his majesty to show the virulent malice and unlogical argumentation of the cardinal by fetch in this sinister comparison advise express how it fail not only in the very apodosis and for which it be bring but that in every circumstance beside thereis a manifold difformity and disparison a labour as it now appear by way of prevention necessary for according to his name play the wiredrawer and will needs stretch the resemblance into a identity force it to agree in every point 111. and yet this the nasty censurer take the savour by his own breath call a loathsome labour of his majesty but add withal say more true than he be aware of it be loath some to man of mean judgement he know that by himself but endeavour not to confute it only with certain inkhorn term of euacuate and shift and trist etc. and a few postilar note of scripture-parable so dull and iniudicious lay out that a man of any learning will loath to read they at last he pitch upon this stale and trivial conclusion that a sim^...litude require not parity in all point which his majesty deny not yea he say as much before he and thereupon displai the absurdity of this resemblance which vary as the logician speak in that very poy^...t to which the cardinal will malicious apply it and have no conformity either with the manner or with the intendment of the mixture so to call they for the manner there be covert and purposely dissemble here open and advise reveal the intent there be a colourable worship of both the feature the intendment in the oath a diametral renounce one of the party and grant there be a mixture in both yet there it be real for a mutual adoration here but verbal at most for a real separation 112. the second authority which the cardinal allege to rectify the archpriest judgement in the nature of the oath be a apocryphal of Eleazar that as he will neither eat nor feign to eat swine flesh lest by his simulation 2. Maccab. 6. 18. he may make other to prevaricate so shall not the archpriest take the oath upon the like reason of give offence which his majesty answer show not only that the ground of refusal be different because that eat be express for bid in the law of God this swear warrant by scripture and command by the magistrate but also retort it upon the cardinal that if a man shall choose to die rather than break a ceremonial law or feign the breach thereof for fear of seduce other much rather shall a man hazard his life than either refuse a oath which the law of nature God and man do justify and enjoin or pretend the refuse of it to the scandal of a realm and the just offence of his sovereign this be a knot Vindice Horace which the epistler can tell hasty how to unloose therefore as the orator note of poet in their tragedy tulli. nat. that be drive to a exigent they will have some god in a engine which must give they a listen and help they out clean so this censurer whensoever he be at a stand want another answer present wind in his old commonplace of conscience and catholic religion for thus he speak that if a man in his own conscience think the oath to be against the catholic faith he ought to be as shy of it as Eleazar be of eat swine flesh 113 but what if there be a false assumption or a untrue application by the conscience then be it erroneous not bind as put case the conscience either assume that to be sound and catholic which be false and unchristian doctrine or apply that which be true and unchallengeable to a wrong end then be it not conscience but error and this be their very case which refuse the oath for first they assume the pope power of depose prince to be catholic doctrine which have no ground for it in warrantable divinity second they avoid a recognition of mere temporal allegiance as apply it to be a denial of a spiritual supremacy a pattern of both these error in another case may be see in s. Peter himself first when he forbear gal. 2. 12. to eat with the gentile lest he shall give occasion of offence to the jew assume that his abstinence for avoid scandal to be warrant by divinity which s. Paul not withstand to his face tell he be not the right course there be his false assumption the other be matt. 16. 21. his undue apply of our saviour prediction touch his trouble and death which s. Peter refer to a temporal pressure not a spiritual redemption be therefore persuade in his conscience that he ought to dissuade our saviour from it by use mean to prevent it but thereupon he procure to himself the name of a errant opposite to be call Satan therefore as it have be often say for the epistler his frequent palinody cause irksome reiteration either make the doctrine sound that the conscience direct by it may not err or else if that be corrupt this will be leprous 114 and it be well when such as he plead their conscience they will withal define what it be in they see that as the elephant use her probos^...is or trunk it be extend or contract as it seem at the pope pleasure for in the year 1580. campian enlarge it assure the catholics that not withstand the pope have excommunicate queen Elizabeth yet with a safe conscience they may obey she in all temporal cause about eight year after upon the invasion Allen do straighten it though that holy father say he do then permit obedience in some case to the queen yet this holy father discharge all man from it and therefore with a safe conscience they may not obey she in anything in such diversity of science how can there be a settle persuasion of conscience and this put the main difference betwixt Eleazar abstinence and their refusal that he have for the warrant of his a express commandment from the law of God and therefore do forbear they have none other but either a fancy conceit of their own or a tyrannical injunction from a intrude usurper pretend conscience for refuse that which the law of God allow for proof whereof his majesty instance the oath enjoin by k. Saul to his army the punishment whereof God himself take in to 1. sam. 14. 24 his own hand for the breach thereof but that example Harpocrates have put the censurer to silence 115 and so he pass to the three authority allege by the cardinal and record by Theodoret concern s. Basil who refuse to yield his consent in the point of Eccles. hist. lib. 4. ca. 17. lat. 19 Arrianisme at the (@) request make unto he in the emperor name for that purpose and give his reason for it that rather all kind of torment shall be endure than one syllable of God word shall be corrupt in his majesty answer thereunto the epistler o^... serve as he call they three shift for light a impostor will speak in the phrase of his own occupation the first whereof where his majesty tax Bellarmine for one of his old and usual trick in cut off and leave out that piece of the sentence which shall make most against himself and for the requisition to the oath he call a calumniation in two respect first because the sentence leave out do nothing avail the apologer but sit the cardinal purpose direct how prove he that nay you must take his word for a oracle for proof he have none examine it notwithstanding 116 the word of s. Basil add by Theodoret omit by the cardinal call for by his majesty be that he much regard the emperor friendship so far forth as it be join with piety but if this be want the other be dangerous which word do thus make for the apologer that see the oath consort in all point with piety both towards God and the king the archpriest by that speech of s. Basil shall embrace his sovereigns love by take the oath and submit himself unto that which true godliness do warrant but that be want in the emperor request to that reverend prelate it cause s. Basil to make small account of his deputy message if the cardinal have sound prove the same defect to be in the oath the example have be proper but the contrary be manifest he both reveal a falsity by couple a conclusion which make against he and a indiscretion also by cite a example that avail nothing to his purpose 117 and this the censurer call the first shift in answer to this ancient or rather antic for so both in his gibe vein he profane term that grain and holy bishop and with his ignorant boldness scoff at his majesty for call the father ancient which be in truth their most proper term for first to denominate person of eminent qual^...e by the concrete be usual in every language the hebrew do style man notable for valour and courage in the adjective alone for Benaiah be say to have his name among the three strong so the grecian do entitle man singular for sanctity above other 2. sam. 23. 22. by the name of holy or saint and so man for year multiply or by authority advance the latin rom. 1. 7. do call they senior elder or ancient of the Numb. 11. 16. vulgar people second the title of father be always understand relative to the son which he have and so in spiritual sense it can be proper to those great writer alone for if it be give in respect of beget man to Christ by preach the gospel so both the apostle challenge 1. cor. 4. 15. it to himself and every preacher of the word or rector of a congregation deserve that name if in regard of ordination so be it proper to bishop only in the opinion of epiphanius and s. Augustine and then all those holy writer can appropriate that name of father unto themselves aug. in Psal. 45. because Tertullian Origen and Clemens alexandrinus three of the near almost unto Christ time that be extant and s. Hierome one of the four principal in account be not bishop but priest and justin martyr a philosopher only entitle the word ancient therefore whether we respect their authority in the church or their antiquity of time be the more suitable albeit for the most part in scripture they signify the same thing for the text whereby they use to arrest we and force we to make those father judge in our controversy combine they together ask thy father say Moses Deut. 32. 7. and he will tell thou thy ancient and they will show thou so s. Paul rebuke not a ancient or elder but exhort he as a father and the mighty God 1. tim. 5. 1. who S. james call the father of light the prophet Daniel entitle he the ancient of day yet jac. 1. 17. dan. 7. 9 such be the inbred gibe nature of this Ishmael that he can forbear his ^...ering vain though to the disgrace of the holy writer but because his majesty call they ancient he will stout they into antic 118. indeed be they who his majesty mention such ancient as those foist upon we by the romish church such as abdias and amphilochius cite Hardi contr. jewel for the antiquity of their mass the one of they as they say be of man year in Christ time in his story then write mention who live a hundred and sixty year after he the other write the story of beckets life seven hundred year before the sullen saint be bear these with their Clement and and those of that fry he may have call antic cover young face under old deform vizard and present nothing worthy view but moppish toy in ridiculous fable but let he go for what credit can a man win with encounter such a mate sithence he that reprove a Prover. 9 7. scorner get himself a blot say king Solomon 119. to the point itself be his majesty press challenge of the cardinal for slice of that piece of the sentence which may make against he a shift then have all the father turn off the devil with a shift for that be it of which they challenge Satan in his temptation of our saviour that under pretext of a scripture text he will have our lord to break his neck which have not the devil mangle by leave out the word that will have choke he the very same text have confute he even for that very motion for thus he city it to Christ he shall keep thou that thou shall not hurt thy foot matth. 4. Psal. 91. the original be he shall keep thou in all thy way that thou sh^...lt not etc. and so be it a contrary scripture to that temptation and against the throw himself from the temple-pr^...cles for that be not because the right way from the top of a church be down by the grease or stair not by tumble over the battlement and this be Bellarmi^...es case in that his mutilate tation of saint basil. 120 the second reason why he call it a calumniation be by occasion of those general word of tax the cardinal with that his usual (@) which have it be sit to the matter in hand will with ease have be justify out of all Bellarmine work both his cut of father when he city they for his advantage delumbate the position of protestant to make their doctrine odious take one instance of each cite a place out of saint August to prove that the scripture (@) (@) D^... (@) cap. (@) s. (@) be so deep and profound that if from a man you^...h to his decr^...pit age he shall serious apply they yet he can not attain to the perfect knowledge of they the honest cardinal cut off the ver^...e next word that follow and touch the controversy indeed that yet for all that those thing aug. epi. uol (@) 3. which be necessary to salvation be not with such difficulty to be attain ^...ll gr^... and (@) (@) cap. 1^... P^... (@) (@) (@) elsewhere fetch in a place out of the same father that after grace be increase it be perfect by the will of man not lead but follow it as the hand m^... not as the usher thereof now say the cardinal re^... judicious reject saint Augustine for this speech as ^...E cut he off it be true but he that read shall ^...d he allege that say of saint Augustine and conclude it with the word that will have throttle Bellarmine pet. etc. which be no ill i^...t (@) lib. 2. (@) 7. speech of that holyman pet. Lombard have deprave and preposterous detort ^...nd so go on to justify s. August against Pelagius and Lombard and many such may be produce be it now pertinent but let we come to his second imputation and that be his challenge of the apologer for mistranslate the word and this he call a elude of the reader or author that then must be try 121 the word of s. Basil be they which have be thorough nu^...tured ^...nd bring up (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) in God word will not suffer one syllable (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) of God doctrine to be betray the sleight which the c^...r here observe be that his majesty have translate this last part with reference to the former thus they which be thorough instruct in God word will not suffer ^...ne syllable of the same etc. which be the natural interpretation in the sense though not the grammatical reddition of the word but how do the epistler mend it first by a translation they that have be nourish say he in sacred learning can suffer any one syllable of divine doctrine second by add a parenthesis not in the text of the church to be violate corrector quoth terent. phor. he in the comedy of such another this be just the very botch which our saviour speak of whereby the rent be make worse first for the translation to make a glorious show he have place the greek in the margin for his credit which indeed be as the flag of confusion to himself for first who ever read (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) use by the father or translate by faithfully-learned scholar for any other but for the holy scripture yea even christopherson who interpretation he follow translate it and those word be never attribute to any write but those which be pen by the holy-ghost 122 for those thing be only and proper call (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) wherein there be something either of God divine nature or his attribute include and so the mystery of our salvation the sacrament be call (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) divine mystery or where the spirit of God be the penman if it be for writing and so the scripture only be call (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) God writing both these in one place of Cyrill and Dionysius the Areopagite as he be entitle speak of his master Hier^...theus a among other his praise give he this that (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) Cateches 4. diui. cap. 2. which the greek scholiast expound in saint john word out of the prophet that he be (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) teach of God as have it by especial revelation and a Papist examine ibid. that place though he vary from that interpretation yet say as much to our purpose that he which frame his life according to God word may true be say (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) Billi in isid. Pelus lib. 1. cap 36. Eccles. hist. li. 1. cap. 7. seek no further than Theodoret the author now in hand who manifest express the same in that excellent speech of Constantine the emperor who word be that see the evangelical and apostolical book and the oracle of the old testament which S. Paul in the abstract rom. 3. 2. call (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) the word of God do plain teach we whatsoever we ought to know or learn (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) of any thing that concern God that be either his divine nature as s. Luke use the word or his attribute and quality as s. Peter apply it or his law and religion as the penner of act. 17. 29. 2. pet. 1. 4. the maccabee take it all which the emperor have before 2. Macca 4. 17. call (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) God business away therefore say good Constantine with all strife and seek for the solution of these matter (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) out of the scripture inspire by God himself and elsewhere also the same Theodoret make the orthodox Christian to check his fellow disputant for add something of his own to a scripture-text tell he that (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) to divine writing nothing must be add which must be understand of God word only for it be the prerogative of it alone to be exempt theodoret. orthodox from add or detract a privilege which no other writing be it never so holy can challenge 123 but none can better expound saint Basil then himself who in the controversy about the manner of speech concern the trinity resuse custom or any other learning wish that the scripture inspire by God may judge between the adversary and he and that the truth for ever may be decree to be they who opinion shall be most consonant (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) unto God word here be the very phrase that he use to the emperor basil. ep 80. add eustath lieutenant which this profound jesuite cunning translate sacred learning lest saint Basil shall be think to attribute over much authority to the scripture and thereby shall imply unwritten tradition and to make this the more probable very honest he force in a parenthesis of the church upon the text and translate (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) divine doctrine as if that holy father have understand decree or canon ecclesiastical conclude by the church in some synod 124 which give occasion to the second question that will appose a better scholar than this chatter censurer where it be ever read that the church constitution or opinion resolve by counsel or father not have their warrant from the express word be call in his division of tradition imply lib. 4. ca. 2. the contrary for sort they into three kind divine apostolical and ecclesiastical they only he say to be divine which though they be not write Christ himself with his own mouth deliver unto his apostle but have he be silent one of more antiquity and credit than he be have long since interpret saint basils lib. 3. u^... word make these three the holy scripture and the word of God all one yea even in this very chapter Theodoret use it twice in that very sense so that his majesty translate it with a reference to that former part do it not either with prejudice to any party or superficial through neglect but upon good warrant for they that betray the doctrine which God have deliver that be (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) they do also betray the book of God itself wherein it be deliver 125 and yet lest it may be think that his majesty do this without precedent or direction not only who translation be most rise and be know to be a perfect Gr^... but because he be no Papist may be except against a great officer among the Parisien inquisitor have so turn it into latin in his last edition of theodoret. his word be The^... which be nourish (@) syl ILLAR^...M johan. Picus A^... 1608. if he have do it false than be their book censurer negligent to let suc^... a error escape if true then be there both malice in this c^...r to challenge his majesty for sh^...ing it by a wrong translation and hypocrisy also to make it a fault in the apologer which be pass for good and so divulge by their own translator 126 but of this challenge he give a reason that it can not be mean of God doctrine in the scripture because the controversy then debate be concern homoousion and and other such name substance person Trinity etc. which be not find express in scripture but determine by the church saint Basil call now who will not admire father parson his dexterity in answer but special lie his profound skill in divinity be the positions and opinion concern the coessence substance person etc. conclusion only of the church and not bible doctrine then be s. Ambrose to blame to triumph over the arrian with such a dare question how be it thou say that homoousion be not to be find in scripture that be basils Ambrose side contr. Arrian cap. 5. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) in the holy scripture be that thou see and may know the unity of substance to be ratify by the authority both of prophet and evangelist whereof saint Ambrose have cite many in the chapter before and the most of they Theodoret our author also have couch together in his first Eccles. hist. lib. 1. cap. 8. book then be saint August likewise too venturous in appeal for homoousion both from the council of nice which confirm it and that of ariminum which confute it unto the sacred as the most August lib. 3. contr. max. Arrian indifferent witness in that controversy but epiphanius more bold than they all who say that the coessence of the father and the son be in the law in the apostle and the prophet (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) and in they it be manifest Haeres. 60. contain and so may we cite Tertullian athanasius Basil Hilary and many other all earnest in the point that the coessence as it be a divinity position be scripture doctrine 127 yea but the word itself be not there what be that to saint Basil that be (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) not (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) that for which the deputy challenge he and request he to relinquish be (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) a curiosity of opinion not of divinity term and word neither the controversy of the christian with those arrian be for the word so much as for the substance and doctrine Euseb. hist. li. 1. cap. 12. and yet it appear by Theodoret recite the epistle of Eusebius concern the Nicen creed wherein that word be insert that those father account even the word itself to be a scripture term for in the anathema annex by that council unto the conclusion of that creed it be enjoin upon pain thereof that none shall use any term or word not write in the scripture and that be it of which s. Basil himself challenge eunomius for enforce Contr. eunom lib. 2. word and term not find in any place of holy writ which within a line or two after he call (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) God doctrine school or library so that the reader by this time may judge whether of the translation either that of his majesty or this of the censurer be more agreeable to the greek text or the purpose of that holy father his majesty to avoid a repetition of the same word twice moral reg. 26. and 80. reg. jater 1. etc. God word God doctrine translate it with a reference this epistler to make tradition good which saint Basil be the most forward to anoide in all his work and so be Theodoret also by botch in a word of the church never dream or by either of they both and for which he have no warrant either from author or interpreter his majesty have a translation of their own justify his reddition word by word and the question also then in hand be to be vmper only by the holy scripture for that which lead the father in the Nicen council to the word theodor. eccle. hist. li^... cap. 8. homoousion be the sole authority of God word 128 from thence he pass to the three shift as this land-le^... which be his majesty counterpoise of disp^...rities between the case of saint Basil and the archpriest that holy father be excite to Arrianisme a heresy subvertng the main ground-cel of our religion be no less than the deny of our saviour his eternal God head blackwell urge to thwart no article of faith but only to recognize his loyalty to his natural sovereign which though the jesuite at the first calls a weak argument yet he be please afterward to try how he can make a conformity between it and the oath which he do by a compatative suppose and that two fold first of the person both of the emperor deputy and our judge that if modestus the deputy have be ask infavour of what religion he make the demand to saint Basil he will have answer the orthodox as the judge of England do now that require the oath 129 which be a su^...posall of utter improbability of the one and manifest untruth of the other part for the deputy it appear he care not which be orthodox or heretical he be of the emperor religion up and down true or false which by his argument unto s. Basil be evident apparent for the opinion then controvert he term they but quillet as gallio a other deputy but a question of word and name either may stand as the act. 1^...15 emperor think good and for the profession he tell saint Basil it be but yield for the time make fair weather for the present and the most press motive he use be but the promise of the emperer friendship for that you may be sure the deputy think to be a man and to be prefer before all the coessence or hypostasis or Trinity or deity or whatsoever which make that holy father to tell he that his argument be toy for child as for our judge which of they among we in tender the oath do offer it as a matter of faith or doctrine tend one way or other save that as the allegiance of a subject and the assurance of the king safety be a point of religion 130 his other personal supposal be of the forenamed emperor and a protestant prince that if any man shall havethen call Valens Arrian it have be no less offensive then now to call king james that be his meaning a Caluinist or Lutheran and what be this to the purpose but that his gall overflows and he must void it by his pen in his icteritious pamphlet his majesty no further hold with Luther or Caluin than saint Paul his give he leave that be so far forth as they hold with Christ and be 1. cor. 2 i. not the romish both prince and priest enthrall to the to take his word Horace for gospel more than king james be to Caluin or Luther faction in religion have long since vanish and Christianity have be more firm establish and floutish more general in the mean time to this scorn flur his majesty answer with the same modesty truth and learning that saint Augustine do such a petulant companion as Contr. petil. lib. 2. cap. 10. 12. this jesuite by who he be charge to be a Manichee it be Petilian say he who judge of a other man conscience do so entitle i but I deny myself to be which know myself and speak out of my own conscience area I be a man of Christ floor if I be nought I be the chaff if I be good I be the grain yet be it not the peevish or lavish tongue of father parsons that must ventilate the corn of this floor to try whether I be chaff (@) wheat 131 his second conformity therefore be of the matter that the difference betwixt arrian and catholic in saint basils time be the same which be between protestant and papist at this day in the chapter where this story in hand be record Theodoret make mention of lib. 4. cap. 17. the emperor cook who name be Demosthenes how rude he rail upon saint Basil when he be confer with Valens the emperor and all the answer which that reverend father give he be a smile with this touch now I see a unlearned Demosthenes and who will not smile and say that he now hear not a unlearned only but a shameless jesuite make this comparison for it be know that Arrianisme raze the very foundation of our faith in Christ jesus whereas there be no principle of divinity nor article of creed but the protest int so call do profess it more sincere and maintain it more firm than the church of Rome have do for these thousand year 132 but grant all this that have be say by he be true as nothing can be more false yet what be it to the oath or to the cardinal intendment or for the archpriest refufal either as Bellarmine apply the story or as the censurer abbet it for this be Bellarmine argument if he mean it to the purpose in hand Sant Basill deny his yield to Arrianisme at the emperor command lest there by he shall deny the god-^...ead of his lord and Christ therefore blackwell ought to forbear the take of a oath wherein he shall only recognize his faith and fealty to his hedge king and sovereign the epistler be this Arrianisme and Calvinism be both alike opposite to catholic truth therefore papist may not take the oath of temporal allegiance to their lawful King for let it be due weigh be the circumstance never so many this be the sum and substance of their apply and support that allege authority if they speak to the point and do not then the saducee make as necessary a consequence upon the judicial law seven brother successive marry one woman as Moses will and they matt. 22 25. all decease she at last die therefore there can be no resurrection to another world lest the marriage there shall prove litigious 133. but by this time now the censurer have surfeit of his pain and be glad as it seem by he that he be come to the remainder as he call it num. 68 so that all the the section follow be but transition of s. Peter and marcellinus and Gregory and Leo etc. example produce by the cardinal and refel by his majesty with singular d^...xterity learning and zeal and yet this though but a remainder the epistler as be too heavy for his weak skill transmits to the cardinal wherein he disfer from that rail cook before mention for s. Basil be enforce to cut he off tell he that his skill be best in the kitchen when he be season broth his adder ear be not for mystery of divinity but fa. parsons though the priest describe he to be a most hot and choleric fellow have you see this grace or art at least while these point be in hand to dismiss himself and slip the collar just as gallio do in the act and in his act. 8. 15. very word if there be matter of any notable treachery villainy conspiracy you shall find i ready to support you cardinal Bellarmine but if they be question of God law touch point of divinity matter of ancient story or read in father look to it yourself sir I will be no judge in these matter if any matter of scorn or revile or fresh intelligence of thing never act nor think of then turn he loose to justify this for a truth the reader shall not skip a section for howsoever he transmits the reply upon his majesty answer to those authority unto the cardinal for the substance there of yet he have alight upon a scoff therein as he term it and there he stay a while 134. if it be a scoff it be that which they call Macro satur. lib. 7. without gall or contumely and what be it Tully say that Hortensius lift up eloquence to heaven that himself may go up with she so Leo praise S. ^...eter up to the sky that he be his heir for so he style himself may thither also be advance with he a comparison full of urbanity and truth civil tax not the pope arrogancy so much as his policy that can wind himself up into a universal pre-eminence by the proxy of s. Peter pretend assumption but be not this resemblance retort indeed with a bitter scorn by the epistler when he say that his majesty borrow both that allusion and those subsequent collection out of Leo from m. reynolds as if all his majesty learning be at the second hand and m. reynolds from m. jewel sure he be as lawful a bishop as m. Bellarmine be a cardinal and deserve the title as well which be not a scoff only but a plain slander 135. first for his majesty he that hear his ordinary discourse at every meal upon every occasion in any argument of any kind of learning shall find according to the ancient greek proverb that he be not Achil^...s his son but Achilles himself and that he have not fetch it his learning from any man cistern but drink it plut. and in at the wellhead from the author themselves and be the great cardinal his majesty attendant at board he shall know and find that in any different point of religion his majesty will appear a more perfect textuary and for the scripture especial than himself second for d. reynolds his book divulge be few but compare they that be quantity for quantity with Bellarmine large bulk of controversy let the collation be unpartial the cardinal will be find to come as short of he for variety of all kind of learning admirable memory uncontroleable quotation and true allegation as the ^...oot-man drag behind the lydian coach which they say be as swift in the flight as a arrow three as Plutar. Aristotle once apply it out of Homer Polydamas mum do fa. parsons tax any for borrow who not eth. only by the averment of the priest but by the true trace of his pamphlet be discover for a more vain crowl brag it with his borrow plume then that jacke Daw which Aesop describe and Horace apply in the like case for if every creditor shall arrest he for that he have borrow in the world view beside his privy debt he will be force for shame to say as the do in the comedy for his steal damosel when he be attach and can conceal they no long Plaut. I marvel that no man challenge they from i before for I will swear they be none of my in his ward word that whole decade of reason to d^...e the pope from be Antichrist be whole take out of Bellarmine book in his triple conversion all his martyr and saint fetch it out of Surius and with the roman legend in this censure of the apology those foul imputation lay upon lady Elizabeth that queen of precious memory all borrow from Saunders reynolds and gifford save some rail term wrought out of his own brain as the spider web out of her own substance but whatsoever concern the nature of the oath or title of supremacy allens apology be his chief oracle and that so palpable that as he once say Terent. but of all other his resolution which be the only praiseworthy work that ever he do if from thence Gasper loarte pa. 71. 173. shall take what be his a few scrap will remain of parson own if the priest say true yea Bellarmine himself that great Apollo for controversy it will be justify have no answer to any argument nor definition nor division of any wit or weight which he have not borrow from popish writer that have handle the same question before he but it be all-day see that there be none so ready to take a debtor by the throat for borrow a petty sum of four noble than he who himself be in arrearage above ten thousand talent matth. 18. 28. 136 and what be that which be thus borrow by m. reynolds certain hyperbolical bombast phrase wherewith Leo set out s. Peter authority especial that blasphemous speech of he that our lord do take s. Peter into the fellowship of the indivisible unity such a impious and profane proud assertion as a christian heart will tremble to imagine it his hand horre to write it and this say the censurer have the apologer take from m. reynolds and he from m. jewel and will fa. parson avouch this upon his small credit such challenger shall direct the reader to the place else they will be think forgery and make true quotation than the epistler do here who for that speech of Leo send we in the margin to a epistle of his there be no such in all his book but one entitle which be it his own or the printer error since he will be such a curious Lynceus in other man marginal slip it be good to let he see his own escape yet not as he do with contumelious insult but in what book of bishop jewel be it or where have Harding answer it the truth be that this may be a double untruth both for the challenge and the answer see he quote no place for bishop jewel in one book neither name Leo therein nor b. jewel ply artic. 4. Diuis. 32. read the word so as Leo have they but the word by he there cite be that God take s. Peter in into the consort and fellowship of the indivisible trinity and for the author of the speech he quote Boniface the 8. out of the six or Extr. elect and elect paragr. fundament decretal how then can Harding answer he for Leo when in that case he mention he not but suppose he have answer it what follow thereof be once answer quoth he they need not repeat it so often again if pap^...sts have take out that lesson the world have be ease of many book and Bellarmine may have epitomize his three tome 137 indeed such swell word of vanity or rather of blasphemy be better bury in silence then revive in print if the pope will leave arrogate to himself and Benedict^... Benedict now and his advocate cease to flatter he in it as much as that hyperbole come to though in other word but unsufficient answer must not impose a perpetual reticence from reply for silence in that kind do not only betray the truth but also establish a falsehood by a imply consent 138 hear we then that answer either make by Harding or cog by parson the unity that Leo speak of be of name not of essence first then both Leo and Boniface be to blame who in the very same place where those word be say that Christ make s. Peter the chief that from he as from the head he may pour his gift into the whole body of his church and present subnect the reason thereof for that he have take s. Peter into the consort of the indivisible unity this be another manner of assumption into unity then name will afford but the gloss be much more to blame to point we for the interpretation of the word unity to that chapter of the decree in but that thereby they will have we know the unity whereunto Christ take s. Peter to be gloss. ibid. and Consecr. dist. 2. in christo. aluar. Pelap planct Eccles. lib. 1. cap. 37. the same of the son with the father and do not their own canonist plain say that second what learning will justify that phrase of speech a unity of name one name may be communicate between two or among more and many name of diverse appellation may be unite in one catalogue or after the custom of the old roman and some nation in one man title but that the same name impart to several person shall be call a unity le^... all the onomastiks and nomenclator or mathematician or schoolman be search and it will not be find or what divinity will warrant that be ever attribute to any but to the holy Trinity in the eternal and unseparable essence unite three whereas he say that hardings answer be according to Leo his sense and drift it be a errant falsehood for his word signify the ^...o epist. episcop in time past thereby he infer that Christ have first assume s. Peter into that fellowship his pleasure be to call he by the name of that which himself be four the word rock be none of the name of our saviour but symbolical only and so be the name of light which title notwithstanding matth. 5. 14. he impart to all his apostle which by this rule may invest they with as high a interest in the indivisible unity as s. Peter have and Moses much more unto who the almighty give his own name tell he that he shall be Elohim God unto Pharaoh another manner of unity for exod. 7. 1. a name than the metaphor of a rock 139 in brief let Leo expound himself as elsewhere he do when he say that our lord of his favour and grace vouchsafe to s. Peter the great and wonderful consort and fellowship of his own (@) Serm. 3. ass^...mp power among the rest that there shall be no principality on earth but it shall be give by s. Peter and a little after make Christ speak to s. Peter of the prerogative which be grant he he declare withal the extent thereof ^...oid which be proper to my ' power be also participate in common between we two and be not this unity of more inward consort then name can work which to turn the censurer word upon himself if Harding or parsons will have equal consider neither will the one have answer it so slight and un-divine-like neither the other be offend to hear it oft repeat that even for the credit of their eloquent arrogant pope it may have light upon a sound apology or interpretation at least but speak insooth honest censurer be unity of name hardings own distinction in answer to bishop jewel himself deny it for m. Harding say that har. fol. 174. d. jewel def. of apol. part. 2. fol. 121. addition Leo mean thereby a unity in quality a unity in grace a unity that be proper to Christ himself and mention no unity of name for though he be a corrupt doctor yet be he a better divine then to speak so absurd as parson will here make he 140 after this like another Lysander have strip himself of his lion skin and speak for Leo what he can and as you hear now he present himself in his fox case and take Bellarmine person upon he for of Saunders it seem he be ashamed in which habit he have cunning creep through seven leaf at once of the apology from page 95. to 110. even to that place where his majesty do charge the cardinal after a excellent comparison of contrarietye between the scripture and Bellarmine writing that God and belial light and darkness heaven and hell be not more contrary than the say Bellarmine estimation of king be to god which after this censurer have emboss with a name according to his custom call it a passionate conclusion he make a long relation of the reverend opinion that Bellarmine have and of the high supremacy which he allot to king which we may see he say in the cardinal book for he be excellent to lengthen a discourse when it be prepare to his hand as jacob gen. 27. be to commend his cog venison when Rebecka have provide it 141. but have read that book to which he refer we what shall we fin there first that the cardinal do there respect king as much as any other perhaps have ever do bef^...re he second that he maintain the authority of prince against anabaptist atheist and other miscrean^...s etc. in both which fa. Rainard show himself what he be for lest he shall be take in the first for over-lashing because it will appear that Bellarmine in that theme come short of many book both of God and man extant before his he put in perhaps and then what have the cardinal do equal with other man for that word must excuse he if either his good respect of king come short of other author or his base account of they exceed any other that perhaps he respect they as well as they do and perhaps not now sure m Bellarmine mande you have alight upon a worthy patron and his majesty upon Terent. a learned antapologer and even so he deal in the second for the cardinal maintain king say he against anabap tist and atheist but he add not and against the POP^... unless he rank he among those who he (@) miscreant and than what great matt^... have the cardinal do for king just so much as the saxon do for the ancient Britain who free they from the pict but inth^...alled they to themselves in a sore s^...ruitude virg. angl. hist. li. 3. Apthon it be a old rule of rhetoric in theme comparative (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) to disgrace a thing by extol it and to advance that which a encounter comparison ^...hal debase to the low such art have Bellarmine show in his lift prince up to the sky by embroider their authority but set the pope above they he do turn they down with a more foul disgrace as the eagle in the apologue soar the high with the tortoise that ^...he may (@) she in piece with the great fall yea so aesop. much the cardinal himself confess that all the prerogative Resp. Venet. which ever he give to king be only in refute of anabaptist not in respect of the pope 142. but which be those moun^...ing pre-eminence that he have afford unto king one be say the censurer that the civil law of the temporast prince do no less bind the subject in conscience than the immediate law of God this be indeed a eminent prerogative but be it a true position in divinity or false take it for the time but as a question ask not now to be debate if false then without controversy the great master of controversy have fond err in set down such a unlimited maxim if true why then do not the romish catholic of England obey the temporal law of the realm by his majesty establish or by what divinity can the same Bellarmine di^...wade the archpriest from yield his assent to the oath which a statute and law-civill confirm by his majesty do in^...oyne or how can the profound Antapologist inti^...le this law of a temporal prince such a a^...gartation of conscience as never be impose upon any (@) if that position stand firm then have recusant catholic sin against God and their consci^...nce in deny the oath if it be limitable by their romish di^...tinctions than never brag of any prerogative that prince have by this (@) of Bellarmine 143 well but he be yet more kind and endowe king with a more special privilege affirm that unto they belong^... the protection of religion and be this general unto all king first then that pope delude the king of England when he annex the l^...itle DEFFNDER of the faith ^...o their (@) a of (@) grace and different from other prince make that which be and a honour o^... favour which be so by nature and a reward for merit which be a office unseparable from sovereignty second w^...at kind o^... protector do he make they sure protector minor for as if they be in their age they be find say lib. cap 18. pa^...ag at ^...rror he in that very place to protect no religion but what the catholic bishop and special the high priest o^... Rome do teach to be hold and maintain 144 but yet more than that he permit they civil government in civil matter over all person as well ecclesiastical as temporal a high fa^...our verily and prince be much behold to he for it but be not this a implicit contradiction to the former for how can a king defend religion that be repel heresy suppress schism and see that the faith of Christ be sincere profess within his kingdom and yet be a governor in civil cause only and not in spiritual can a king be a protector of that with the violation and breach whereof he may not intermeddle as a governor and be it not a thank worthy privilege that he afford king especial over clergyman who he submit to their sovereign only as if discretion not religion be the bond of their duty 145 why but this be as much say the epistler as reserve god right to himself a catholic can give to Caesar first then that catholic straighten Caesar more than God himself do and this be that wherewith his majesty challenge the cardinal for his vast difference from God in this case who in his word have appoint king to be guaraians of both the table to command Deut. 17. 18. and prohibit not in civil affair only but in matter also concern religion say saint augustin second cont. cres. gram. lib. 3. ca. 51. that catholic be no less nor better than the donatists who opinion it be as the same father describe Co^... (@) P^...m lib. 1. cap. 7. it that prince may not meddle in case SPIRITVAL but Solomon who himself be a king and know what concern a sovereign in all point for who may compare eccle. 2. 12. 13. with he say the scripture be of opinion that the Pro^... 20. 8. king sit in his throne do with his look chase away all kind of evil and I trow say s. August that all heresy and schism be a evil I be sure qd. (@) gal. 5. 20. s Paul reckon themamong the work of the flesh and that speech of king Solomon Bellarmine himself cite for prince in that place where he grace they with that power to be protector of religion 146 now we have follow he thus far we must retire for this wily creature fear lest he shall be take by the tract or send have earth himself back a gain into the 92. page and there break ground where his majesty show the cardinal what wrong he have do Gregory the great in say that he assume unto himself the title of the head of Faith in consure whereof the epistler first differ from Bellarmine for that which the cardinal apply as a personal ^...le to Gregory himself this champion of his ^...e^...erres as a local privilege to the see apostolic which perhaps they will reconcile by make they two the pope and see term convertible second he repeat his majesty interpretation refute it not but labour upon the second answer where his majesty say that if the interpretation and sense which he have give will not be admit he may then as well dismiss Gregory suppose he speak in his own behalf as they will have he as Bellarmine often cast off many of the father he speak not very advise and to that purpose cite two place now here be work for the censurer to tumble over a book and see if he can take the apologer trip in the quotation as for the matter it self that the cardinal must look too 147 and what have he find in his search that the apologer can defend himself from wilful exaggeration and voluntary mistake because that speech be use but only in one of those place marginate by his majesty and there utter of lyra a recent Paraphrast not of any father but he that read the place shall find both a explicit contradiction and Numb. 25. 8. a double trans-fixion like that stroke of Phinees for force not for zeal pierce with one speech through two at once for in the very next precedent Paragraph lyra Bellar. rom. Pontif. lib. 2. cap. 10. say the cardinal be of no such authority as that we shall oppose he to all the ancient father present in the next word without doubt say Bellarmine lyra do follow Hierome in that his opinion there be the contradiction for how can lyra thwart all the father when he have what he say from saint Hierome second he have Hierom for his author in say as he do although therein he speak not so advise say the cardinal whereby he strike they both at once and Hierom rather than Lyr^... for if lyra speak unadvised have what he speak from Hierom Hier^...m be much more unadvised to utter such a thing of his own head brief be the opinion orthodox and true then be not lyra to be blame be it unsound and not justifiable then be Hierom touch by the cardinal and not Lyra. in the other place the very word be not at all but the sense of they to the full for Bellarmine say there that some of the christo. li. 2. ca. 2. add secund. father do sometime err that be speak unadvised or worse and that therefore he follow they not in their singular opinion when one cross the rest and I trow that singularity be either a unadvised or a wilful error where be now the apologer voluntary mistake the place for quotation and the speech for substance be true allege 148 yea but it be a wilful exaggeration to say that he do it often and to exaggerate a truth justifiable against a adversary be no fault either in Rhetorik or divinity and that it be a truth a little pain shall be take see this champion of he do exact and challenge they to cull out of his work some few place to show his frequent rejection of the father with worse than Minus 149 in one place he cast off Theophylact and Euthymius together for make unfit answer and give solution not christo. li. 2. cap. 22. to the purpose and the first of they a little a^...ter with some disgrace bothby comparison that father more learned holy and ancient than he be of another mind and with scorn also no^... himself no doubt will be laugh at if he swerve from their opinion but it will be say perhaps Ibi^... parag. Quart. that he be a modern writer not past 800. year stand may be so shift but justin martyr irenaeus epiphanius etc. he will regard if they come in his way it may be so for of they three he say lib. 1. bea. Sanct. ca. 6. I see not how we can possible defend they from a error neither can Tertullian who antiquity may not be accept against free himself Pontif. rom. lib. 4. cap. 8. for Tertulliano in this case Tertullian be not at all to be credit say the cardinal elsewhere of saint Hierom he seem say Bellarmine not to be very constant to himself cler. lib. 1. cap. 15. Pontif. rom. lib. 1. for that his opinion in another place Hierom seem to be of that opinion which be a false one and shall in the due place be confute elsewhere he crowd three of they up together very curse Tertullian say he be a arch-heretic Lactantius slip into many error and study Tully beatitud. lib. 1. cap. 5. work more than the scripture as for victorinus though a martyr yet he be no scholar brief take they altogether who know not say he that the father have the gift of interpretation in a excellent manner and yet interpret lib. 3. ca. 10. Dice^... it be manifest that some of the chief among they have erre^... in some thing and that be more than Minus to speak unadvised now these be but a few among many and that in one of his tome only which notwithstanding for good reason may still have be suppress but that the epistler will needs according to the proverb anagyrian have this mixen stir which be neither much to the purpose in hand nor for the cardinal credit who be observe to use the father as it be say that Solon use his friend and that be no otherwise then merchant use their figure in account for thousand if they please he for cipher if they cross he 150 but here again the vermin have out strip we and be scud as far as pager 08 where his majesty set down the base and mean style and title which Bellarmine give to king and the first be that king be rather slave than lord which charge by his majesty the censurer according to his custom call a outrageous proposition a intemperate accusation and a shameful but how do he confute it even like a vain and fraple surveyor who take upon he to make a terrar of some man land describe the situation and discourse of the quality of the ground and meadow that lie about it but of the content of the land itself he say nothing for after the epistler have spend three whole number to tell we what excellent argument Bellarmine have make in two or three chapter thereabouts to confirm the authority of king against the anabaptist but in no case against the pope and of the difference of se^...uitude with a great deal of such stuff to avoid the imputation itself say against the cardinal he say not a word but hoote at it as if there be no such thing which if it be not there to be find let the reader judge for the cardinal first lay his division of a twofold subjection civil and lib. 3. cap. 7. parag despotical this last he say to be the true and proper servitude or slavery then show the difference between these two that the politic subject serve for his own commodity not for other but the true note of servile subjection be to serve for another not for his own benefit upon these the conclusion which he infer be that if there be any servitude in a state politic as there must needs the king ought to be call and his reason be because he serve not for his own benefit but for other now lay these together he be proper a slave or vass all which serve for a other commodity not for his own but a king serve not for his own but for his subject behoof what be this then but to conclude king to be slave in the right kind upon his premise division and difference if it be right 151 the second be that king be not subject only to pope to bishop to priest but even to acon this be saint Chrysostom say the epistler not Bellar mine hom. in mat. 83. that be not so though the cardinal will needs fasten it upon he the particular instance which follow of keep man though of the high place and condition from the communion because therein the deac^...ns power go beyond king this indeed be Chrysostom but the preamble general be Bellarmine when he say that Chrysostome do subject king even to deacon therefore unto he may the poet verse be apply Chrysostom speech be good as it be confine by he to martial such a high ecclesiastical function for no man ever deny that priest have more authority than king in such case of ministerial duty but be the conclusion thereupon sound or honest therefore Chrysostome make king inferior to deacon yet this be Bellarmine sophistry to put in the word of as if that holy father have mean indefinite of any moral access or coercion civil whereas he only speak of come to the lord altar or table to receive the communion if than the priest know the king to be a notorious and public scandalous sinner and continue therein to the offence of God and church without repentance he may in that case and for that time forbear to minister unto he but that Bellarmine mean in all case whatsoever be manifest by that speech which out ja Psal. 98. of saint Augustine he cite in that very place that Moses be therefore a priest because he be the great for no man can be great than a priest which as propound by Bellarmine he that read it will think that saint Augustine abase king below priest in all thing a conceit which be ever far from that holy father and yet distingue at that time in Israeli it be true before there be a king for hereditary succession for as the same father show elsewhere the state of Israel be then to be entitle regnum sacerdotale a priestly kingdom 152 and yet thus do he also shift off the three place which be that a emperor must content himself to drink after a bishop yea after his chaplain or deac^...n for this also the censurer transmits to Sulpitius Seu^...us from who Bellarmine fetch it it and true it be that Sulp^...tius so set it down but he that read the story how Martin the bishop mart. ^...p. 23 Dialog. lib. 2. cap. 7. of tower carry himself in his outward behaviour towards that emperor as also towards the queen Augusta suffer she to stand and wait upon he a^... supper time to fill he his drink to minister water to his hand to eat of the remainder which he leave and in the mean time the bishop to sit in his chair and permit all this with many other such passage will rather think that Sulpitius describe a sullen and a surly prelate then either a humble christian or a humble saint first therefore to the story and after to Bellarmine 153 bishop Martin be at a feast with the emperor a ser^...itor at the midmeale according to custom offer a bowl of wine to the emperor who comm^...nds it to be first reach to the bishop which sit next to he in a chain hope to have receive it from the bishop hand again the bishop take the cup and his full draught and pass by the emperor duke and other guest of high place reach it to his deacon a mannerly prelate sure both to drink afore the emperor and to balk he after but the reason add by the historian be notable because he think no man there more worthy to drink after he then the priest and no marvel for saint Paul have teach they both that rule rom 12. 10. to outstrip each other in give honour and precedence and elsewhere that every ^...an esteem a other better than himself for questionless the spirit of God phil. 2. 3. set he out for a example of admirable approbation Esa. 65. 5. that say of himself stand apart come not near i for I be holy than (@) (@) (@) Sto^...y but what be this to Bellarmine for he must take it as he find it 154. doubtless it argue his extreme base account that he make of king even in recount this story and especial as he have place it for have urge two argument before out of scripture and father to prove the inferiority of king to person ecclesiastical how well apply this be no place to examine the christian reader may there judge he add a three which be draw from the behaviour of bishop and king so he marshal they each to other first how Fabian the pope exclude Philip the emperor from the Comm^... at e^...ster second how S. Ambrose make Th^...odosius the emperor do public penance in the church and the three be this of bishop Martin and his chaplain thus uncivil use the emperor a^... his own board open and all these to show the subjection as he call it of king to eccl^...siasticall person and that of the mean order wherein the cardinal discou^...reth his mind that not in spiritual office of the church alone but even in civil behaviour king be inferior to priest else as he do cite the story to show what be do so will he either have censure the (@) for that proud fact or at least have reprove the historian for render such a reason so unchristian and so unsavoury but cite it for a proof and not confute it for a surquedry he reveal the base conceit he have of king 155. to all this what say the learned censurer as if either the cardinal have appoint he to be the apology godfather or as if he have take Adam office upon himself he think it enough for he to give name to every instance as it pass by and this he call a gene. 2 19 violent enforcement which will be find to be a ^...turall and necessary deduction for if the bishop do w^...ll in prefer his c^...plaine before the emperor and the historian give a good reason thereof because he think none of the c^...mpanie more worthy to pledge he and Bellarmine infer this as a argument to show the mean account that king be of in respect of priest and not declare his dislike in the least circumstance it be a necessary consequence that he prefer the mean deacon before the great king even in civil comportment have Bellarmine excuse the bishop that his so do proceed of modesty as not presume to drink either to the emperor or those great personage this have be well but than it have be no good argument to his purpose have he therefore tax Sulpitius for his vain aitrologie and that reason give of the bishop proud thought so have he rid himself of his imputation yet than the example have not fit his intent but both he and his fellow cardinal cite and recite the story as in a glorious triumph over king for Baronius premise this story and that usage of the bishop towards Augusta the queen with a that in no case they must be conceal Bar^...ius 386. n. 21. 156 the four place be that king have not their authority from God nor his law but from the law of nation in repeat whereof the epistler shriek as if he see a monster and cry out good GOD and will not a man bless himself to se^... such deal true fa. parsons he will indeed and desire to be bless from such a doctor who be a Christian shall write so impious and a divinity-reader shall speak so unlearned but why do the censurer thus exclaim be they not Bellarmine very word or be not the place true quote in the first secular principality (@) ordain by man and have his be by the law of nation say the Pontif. rom. lib. 1. ca. 7. cap. 28. cardinal in the second place terr^... it be within the compass of the inferior orb from whence be give to king that power which they (@) now where be the calumniation to be descry which the antapologer talk of 157 Bellarmine meaning say he be mistake for thereby he understand the different form of government not the power itself they which read book use not to ^...ift riddle the word be plain if this be his meaning he dissemble it but it be manifest that this be not his meaning for he do not say the diverse form of secular principality as to be a emperor or king or duke according to the custom of several nation be by man ordinance but simple and indefinite se^...lar pri^...cipalitie be from man and in the other place king have that power which they have he say not the form of the regiment but the power itself by human constitution which be flat contradictory to the apostle that there be no power but of God and to our saviour negative rom. 13. (@) unto P^...late thou can have no power except it be give thou from above which pla^...e meet both with the joh. 19 11. cardinal and his learned interpreter for do Christ speak there of pilate power simple that which Pilate before mention his power to lose or crucify then be Bellarmine go who say that secular principality be from man do he speak it to he as he be deputy then under Caesar and appoint so by the emperor yet even that his deputyship say Christ he have from above there be the censurer go yea both of they speak contrary to the light of nature for blind Homer can see and say (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) that honour and principality what name soever it bear or Iliad. 6. what power soever it have be of God and if Bellarmine meaning shall be as his abettor make it can the cardinal have say any less of the mean office in a city that the execution of his authority be from God but to be that officer rather than a inferior that be from man so to be a king and not a earl by the cardinal rule be from man but be a king to rule and govern that be from God where be then that other image wherewith S. Augustine grace king different from other christian and magistrate subordinate if not as he be a king but as he have power thereby to do this or prohibit that so much the mean substitute officer in a state have within his compass even the sergeant that a^...esteth a felon or a debtor therefore one of their own rank and sort a cardinal and once a jesuite adjudge better in say that in every governor there be and his authority titular whereby he be denominate in johan. 19 11. annot. 4. either emperor king or duke and his power executive either to lose or bind to condemn or ^...ree and both these say he our saviour tell Pilate he have from above and yet we know that Pilate be then but Caesar deputy and at his appointment 158 and have the cardinal either true religion or christian policy he will not have leave such speech religion because the wisdom of God itself have say by prou. 8. 15. 16. i king reign both as they be king and as they reign their title and their power both by i as they be in that place in several name distinguish king consult prince statesman judge all of they for office for power by i they be (@) for be this the way to make king nurse father to the church or to win the favour of prince to churchman for if to be christen bring king into such slavery under priest whether one or more pagan have more liberty and that be dear to prince they will rather remain no child of the church then be slave in the church and can prince either true love they or desire to advance they who be in place shall be the chief to abase they 159 there be no king true a Christian which will not afford both bishop and priest in their place their due respect know they to be God ambassador and his vice^...gerents in spiritual function but if it once come to counter-mastering and depr^...ssing king to man ordinance the meek of they all will say as the dam to the curse heiff have I give thou horn to gore myself withal and therefore who can blame his majesty if as the epistler say his conclusion be passionate when he read such a letter dissuasorie to the archpriest from acknowledgement of his allegiance to his majesty right and royal authority send from a man that broach positions so mean respect yea so contemptible abase the sovereignty of prince 160 but let the reader take comfort for the censurer set he down here to breathe himself and profess that he be weary to wade any further in these objection and he may be believe in all respect first for his (@) have as the prophet speak t^...ken a great deal of pain to do wicked and feel within himself jerem. 9 5. which be the fruit of such toil he prevent sap. 5. 6. the tune and utter that in a figure of Rhetor^...ke by himself alone which without repentance elsewhere with gn^...shing of tooth he must pronounce among other company we have weary ourselves in the way of wickedness and destruction second for wade ibid. it be as fit a term to express his shall^...w passage as he can devise but if his tread so over have weary he how will he have be tire if he have dive into the depth of those point which he have thus but wade over three for the objection in the front of the apology it be tell he he shall meet with wedge too deep cuneus and strong drive for his light trip or shallow wade pace to find much less to remove which make he of twelve proposition to tra^...ke but four and yet for all his weariness because he will not seem to be tire downright he can leave but he must fumble and tug at three of the rest at once 161 the first whereof be that proposition of Bellarmine that churchman be as far above king as the soul be above the body and what be the name which the onomastical censurer give unto this charge by his majesty a mere calumniation for it be nazianz^...nes and not Bellarmine the contrary be true for Bellarmine city Nazian. but misseapplying he upon wrong translate and not right understand he he make it his own for nazianzens comparison of the soul and body be not personal between himself and the emperor if it be the emperor to who he speak or rather a deputy sub-ordinate which be the opinion of the greek Paraphrast nor between their two judicial power the imperial nicetas bench and the bishop consistory as the cardinal will have it and another cardinal Allen by name do say it and urge it but a power spiritual only in the pulpit and so far forth as freedom of speech extend itself in preach of the word which be the power of God to salvation the high must submit himself unto it the word (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) which be usual translate his tribunal be no other but that which ezra have when he read the law that be the pulpit wherein Nazian. preach and out of Nehem. 8. 5. which he speak at that time for so both the septuagint do call that wherein ezra stand and Nazian. use it in that sense as in many place so in his apologetike where complain of the forwardness of some that thrust Apologet. themselves into the ecclesiastical function he say that before they be think worthy to come into holy order they strive and crowd about the holy table (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) and challenge unto themselves the possession of the pulpit which be the tribunal that nazianzen in that allegory mean and so it be of all bishop and pastor for that be the place indeed where the bishop (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) that be nazianzens word his power and authority be most eminent and shall be most prevalent 162 now what be this to the comparative superiority a word not mention by Nazian. for the authority which he there describe he say not to be superior but great or more absolute as the doctrine of the gospel delivere^... by bishop and minister in the pulpit which he call the spirit be more mighty and perfect then the wrath revenge and desire of punish and such other carnal affection which in the great man there present be predominant and that great divine in that place cal^...eth fl^...sh and be no other but a allusion to that text of s. Paul that the weapon of our warfare be not carnal but mighty through God 2. cor. 10. 4. to pull down hold and cast down imagination and every high thing that be exalt ag^...inst the knowledge of Christ and therefore the cardinal in cite Nazianzen as make there for a personal pre-eminence abuse the reader and misse-leads the epistler who take what he write out of father upon trust and at the second hand 163. the other two place he shuffle together first that obedience due to the pope be for conscience sake and the second that obedience due to king be only for certain respect which the epistler very learned will make but one for his logic do teach he to put two (@) (@) flat opposite assertion into one categorical proposition and yet he grant the first to be true the other he term calumnious the truth of the first he ground upon the apostle precept a text well apply if once he can prove that the pope Heb. 13. be indeed one of those who as a pope that be universal pastor they never yet can defend to be either as God ordinance by s. Saul or as by s rom 13. 2. 1. Pet 2. 13. neither scripture authorize he nor father nor ancient counsel nay not all their own writer so approve he the other his watch for soul God wot it be the least part of his care not so much as in the king of sodoms sense give i the soul gen. 14. that be the person take the rest to thy self for he invert the speech and give i the outstretch thing say he and take soule and body too who list simony either carnal for affinity or pecuniary for ready pay shall make Bernard (@) and al^...r (@) eccle boy be bishop and idiot accumulate dignity and stranger which shall never approach to h^...ape benefice in foreign part sans number and this be the watchfulness which that grand gregorian have of the soul or the ca^... that he have o^... account which he must give for they 164 the other of obdience due for certain RE spect which he call the calumnious assertion make he amaze at the conscience of the apologer for quote a place where there be no such thing with what eye do this man look who be in a grove can see wood for tree nor respect in a chapter which have nothing else in it wherein there be at least as many and one more than the son of Haraphah have toae on a foot or finger on a hand in cause only temporal clergy 1. sam. 21. 20. man be find to obey prince there be one respect to the cler. lib. 1. cap. 28. paragr. public law of the prince their obedience be find so that those LAW cross not the church canon there be a second or that they make not against ibid. parag. ibid. ibid. the clerical function there be a three those politic law must be direct only not enforce that be a forth and yet to those direct law the clergy be not find by a obedience coactive there be a five ibid. their obedience be so tie that though they break those law yet they may not BEE punish by the civil judge or obey if summon to his audience Parag. there be the six the clergy be not find to obey king long than king be their superior and that be so long as the pope will for who he exempt they be all free that be another reckon they now and it will appear they make up the number of Mary magdalen devil whereof she be free by our saviour but so will not Bellarmine of these as long as he have either the papacy in his hope or popery in his heart or controversy in print 165 odious matter the epistler call they and just too for God and good man detest such assertion but fraudulent lay together say he to make catholic hateful T^...'s labour not fraud to bring scatter sition into one synopsis the hatefulness be in the pestiferous assertion nor the industrious collection if there be fraud it be in the cardinal dispersion that the thin conveyance may not so easy discover the contagion and malice with all that every place may have some poison infection his majesty have herein do what God himself threat thing Psal. 50. 21. act in secret and in several place he have bring they into one view together and place they in order to their confusion and torment 166 but to who do they make catholic odious sure to he unto who they desire most of all man under God to yield most satisfaction for their temporal duty say he unless they understand temporal for temporary that be till they may have a (@) season and place as a vault under a parliament house or that they may be strog-enough to make their party good otherwise it may be say to they as a learned knight say of his wife to his man with who he find she too familiar and hear she profess that she love the fellow above all man believe she not sirrah quoth the knight she have tell i so a hundred time ere now the law presume every man to be good till he be apparent nought but when fact have be evident to the contrary fair word as they cover the deep treachery so have they not with wise man the easy passage for credence and therefore the same law presume he to be still nought in that kind who have be once taint with a crime 167 but matter be make worse by these makebate minister who put daily jealousy in his majesty mind against we say this censurer they be makebates indeed that have just make his majesty not ieal^...us through fear or suspicion but zealous to enact prudent law and wary to provide for his assurance but those be ^...esuits the principal Boutefeaux and incendiary makebates through all Christendom who lay fuel to fire which be salomons resemblance of such disposition with their doctrine kindle and with their counsel inflame both the mind of prince in jealousy each of other and the natural subject with disloyal conspiracy against their lawful sovereign minister in England have other study than state-busines they confine themselves within the scripture limit which have prescribe Am^...riah the priest for God matter and Zabadiah the chie^...taine for the 2. Paralip. 19 11. king affair who need no minister to incite his affection nor descry falsehood the apology show that he can understand Bellarmine position without a interpreter and the jesuite dur^...tean-horse the vault hemer (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) of gunpowder have teach he Epicarmus his rule to beware how he trust he be no such novice in government that he needs be instruct nor have s^...ch weak spirit that they shall be excite Diu^...atio in say Solomon and experience show both that he can by prophecy discover intend treason and pro. 16. 0. that he will not stick in justice to turn the wheel over the offender notwithstanding if elisha do know of any ambush lay for the king his master it be his duty to reveal pro. 20. 26. it and the king wisdom to credit he and avoid it and if it move the aramite to indignation as it do 2. reg. 6. 9 10. this wolfish brood to regrett that his majesty have such watchful shepherd the matter be not great nor the wonder strange but Vespa he have now cast his sting and leave it in the apology which make he end like a dorre in a verbal epilogue full of noise and buzz terror and this in great letter he entitle the conclusion 168 wherein there be as many pang of diverse passion as there be number of uncoherent section as if he will h^...ue it to be resemble for the first to ezechiels roll ^...s the vulgar read it and some of their own wherein there be and carman and a medley of variety consist of lament of grief and Ezech. 2. 10. song of praise and threat of wrath but a man will think by thus write he be another as s. cyprian describe he Epst. 8. lib. 2. sometime he glaver palpable present he minace with terror eftsoon he pray uncharitable by and by he insult with disdain anon he complain lamentable now he be upon mount Gerazim and from thence he bless our sovereign instant upon mount gebal and from thence he curse our religion here he brave Deut. 11. 29. it like a soldier there he slatter like a parasite anon he weep like a crocodile every where he speak in the idiom of a traitor 169 first he let fly at the instigator so call by he but name not who they be sure by his own description of they they must needs be honest man for he say that the principal and chief motor of they be in general hatred with both extreme of opposite in religion that be the Puritan^... and Papist certain happy man be they for it seem they hold a middle course which be both the safe and best the mean between two extreme be virtue Herod and Horace Pilate at opposite jar each with other and yet both conspire against Christ argue his innocency to be the great and excellent action be hereby commend say the philosopher when nothing can be add or take from they a moderate track between a superfluity and a eth. 2. nullity of ceremony show the most religious conformity of scripture and uniformity in a church and such it seem be the case of these instigator 170 yea but these man be interest in the rapine and spoil which their ravenous pursuivant daily bring they home this if a true challenge be a shrewd imputation if a false a devilish calumniation divine they be of eminent place and note which use these pursuivant as public officer for search and forfeiture of superstitious relic vessel and vestment whereunto by just authority they be warrant by statute not with any intention of appropriate they to private use for increase of their wealth that be a base conceit of a malicious fugitive it be far from their thought who be know to be more religious wise for first this they be assure will make they too open liable in the mouth of the adversary to that imputation of the apostle that they do seek their own and not that which be jesus Christ second they know better than any jesuite can instruct they that Mammon service be the base of all other especial when it come in a religious habit as for other good whether of money plate utensil etc. they be not in those search meddle with if any be as what man can answer for the particular fact of all inferior officer who so do it as he utter pervert the true meaning of those eminent person to who trust our most religious sovereign commit those affair so upon due proof he be severe punish and the good safe restore and therefore so deep a charge till it have strong evidence must pass with the like for a impudent slander and that it be none other fa. parsons his silence make it very probable who be know to be a man neither so tender of mouth nor so charitable in heart but that if he can name the party he will proclaim they though they be the great 171. now he be at his prayer first for his majesty that his eye may be enlighten to see what inconvenience many and great may ensue such violent co^...rses his majesty know how to pray for himself and desire none to pray for he that love he not his precept in this case be the same with let he first be religious to Apolog. cap. 34. God that will have God propitious to his Prince^... and his prater in this kind be the same with David lord open thou Psal. 119. 18. my (@) that I may see the wondrous thing of thy law as for the threaten fear of a malcontent and a treacherous band his eye be pierce enough both to discover they and to recover himself from they he be not as elisha his servant able only to descry a host of aramite beleagure and not 2. reg. 6. 15. a army rescue but both together as a treachery environ so God host at hand for defeat that danger and defend he as for these minace inconvenience they can be no great than some of his royal predecessor have feel for disturb their state and assault their life and his majesty also in his time for treasonable surprise of his sacred person with his hopeful issue and for utter extinguish though with fire in a moment the brightness of his glory the glory of his succession and the succession of any settle good in the future state for present there shall none have be 172 but what be the great inconvenience to be fear or lament a pi^...tifull thing to see a house divide within itself beat hunt and pursue one each other and a great sin to cast in oil to augment the flame doubtless here be a allegory learned follow for what have oil to do with beat or a flame with hunt but to the point the division of Reuben be great thought of heart say Deborah in her song and frater^...all judg. 5. 16. faction be both dangerous and lamentable but when the cohabitation be treacherour and the concordance unfaithful safe be a pursue separation than a intestine falsehood and better be a open division make by the prince than a tolerate coalition of mind divide from the prince I come not to send peace but a sword say our saviour and therefore happy be that division whereby religion matth. 10. 34 be preserve from mingle the king from hazard and the state from mangle 173 he have do with his majesty eye and now come to the ear both of his majesty and also of his counsellor that they can reach beyond the sea and hear the variety of discourse concern the issue of this pursuit for that it must needs weaken the force of the land both at home and abroad if there shall be as heretofore foreign war and woe be to the author both of these inward division and foreign invasion that either cause the one or procure the other or nourish both and desire the last who encamp power be it answerable to this write malice neither shall our wall have peace nor our palace plenty but doubt not you fa. parson of his majesty or his counsellor their reach ear whereby they can easy convey from foreign part perfect intelligence both of the treacherous course and unnatural discourse which english fugitive complot and compile against their native country and sovereign and also of the base account those runagate be in with foreign state further than they may make use of they for proditorious and prodigious mischief because otherwise no wise man will ever trust traitor say the orator cic. in ver. 1. 174 o but the cry and complaint of these man affliction give a strange admiration for no such thing be expect from his majesty for many cause thing strange and unexpected be admire but what have his majesty do either new or not look for execution of offender be no wonderment in a just judge and constancy in the same religion be no strange occurrent in a resolve prince and provision for his security be a matter coincident with the prudence of a King his majesty course to distinguish the true from the falsehearted subject be make a wonder of admiration but the complot of dreadful design against his majesty be but a point of sleight regard such be one misery which prince have say the historian that conspiracy though disc^...uered will either not be credit or impair in the report Suet. Domitia unless the prince death be effect by they for if they escape and punish their execute the delinquent be a persecution of tyranny and a admire violence but the villainy complot only a unfortunate enterprise even the gunpowder treason itself be style by this jesuite a lamentable attempt at the (@) of sir ed. Cook high and his majesty providence to secure his indemnity be by the cardinal proclaim a causeless fear the admiration shall rather be of his majesty exceed clemency that upon such a monstrous combination do not utter crush both dam and spawn of that viperous brood 175. nor that only but it work a strange alteration in judgement and affection say the epistler and who be the party in who this change be wrought if he mean their catholic whether writer or actor the alteration be none other but that the prophet speak of in jer. 13. 23. the blackamoor skin and the leopard spot the same that have be before the position of the one in their tractate and argument both for contemptible abase and proud depose king the complot and attempt of the other for murder and treason the powder-plot only except which be singular from all example be as mischievous and dreadful in former time as since his majesty bless government over we for Clement the pope his breve and un-Clement parson his Doleman with other his seditious pamphlet discover both the same judgement for opinion of his majesty religion and also the same affection for disturbance of his possession before his entry as since his investiture into the throne 176. but he mean of prince and people abroad who aversion be inward howsoever they hold external amity this be but to intimate his embowelled familiarity with prince inward if as a councillor of state with they so poor snake he will be repute then be he perfidious in reveal they disclose of secrecy be the extremity of unfaithfulness in a councillor if as a confessor to they than be he sacrilegious false and canonical irregular by their own jesuitical rule to reveal what be confess it be the height of impiety for that be to break the seal which shall not be bruise say themselves but withal he proclaim they as well for notorious hypocrite that thus carry peace in their mouth but war in their heart as also for busy polypragmon in the state of other nation for what have any foreign prince to do with the manage of another man kingdom either for religion or policy so that neither himself nor his subject receive any injury thereby but his envenom (@) to lay a imputation upon his majesty government carry he perforce to slander other prince also with these despiteful reproach 177. last all this be but a clap out of a cane or the crack of a alder-stalke that yield more noise than force for first do he think prince to be so idle or simple that for the slanderous report of a few fugitive malcontent either through waywardness of mind or for difference in religion they will fall at jar much less to open war with their confederate prince yea rather it be suppose that such revolter do receive from they either the like answer which Verdugo a great commander under the king of Spain give sir William Stanley estate of Engl. who when he hear the false knight transport into violent speech against this realm wish he to use more moderation of his tongue for though he have offend his country his country have never offend he or that which count Charles another of the same rank ^...itted York withal when he breathe out at dinner his blasphemy against our late queen and state the count bid he hush tell he that his table never give privilege to any man to ibid. speak unreverent of prince parsons be not to be diet there 178. but suppose there shall be king cast in this censurer mould that will arm themselves under pretence of religion against our sovereign it be no more than other have do before against some of his worthy predecessor and his majesty know there be a psalm that begin with which be able to lead they all in triumph and teach they that if they Psal. 2. 1. band against the lord or against his anoint he that sit in heaven can laugh they to scorn in the mean time his majesty favour we hope be great with God and his conscience we be sure more secure in the right of his cause and his power more enlarge in the view of the world then to be afraid of paper-threat yea or arm terror that if the trial shall come the will of his subject to use the epistler word against himself will appear so unite as that their force in their sovereigns defence shall be both admirable and dreadful 179. from cry of complaint he proceed to tell we of obloquy and prayer a good conjunction and proportionable to his own and his associate affection who devout soliloquy concern this state be nought else but revile obloquy of the State to he by scripture rule all prayer be true direct who dwell in the light which no man can attain and by saint Bernard warrant 1. tim. 6. 16. bern. sent. those prayer be to he unacceptable and in themselves unavaileable wherein there be either or either no light at all as a man be in a dark place that see not himself which our saviour check in their prayer that will have fire from heaven you know not luc. 9 55. of what spirit you be perhaps the affection be mud with earthly thing or the understanding enuelope with a superstitious darkness or the cogitation transport to malicious intent or uncharitable revenge or when there be too much light man see themselves too well as the Pharisee that vi^...ified all other in respect of himself luc. 18. such as think no religion or action good but their own the prayer proceed from both these whether cymmerian or over-radiant affection may better be spare which because we take to be the conceit of their bee-yond-sea prayer when they think of we not devot but devouente not with charitable devotion but malicious imprecation we doubt not but they receive either the answer which God himself give by the prophet though you make many prayer I will not hear you for your Esa. 1. 15. heart and hand be full of blood or as our saviour to the daughter of Jerusalem though they better affect weep not for they but weep for yourselves and for your own rebellion luc. 23. 18. 180. in their oratory perhaps they pray for our conversion but what shall be the ground of these general obloquy here mention first the very catalogue of english statute extant in print against catholic for profession of their religion if this be the offence the obloquy can be general for none in those part understand the language but a few english fugitive and their calumnious slander be no more to be regard then the curse of that people which yearly go out and very solemn revile the sun for scorch their body Heredot melpom. if the offender be angry with the law it be no marvel yet he discover thereby both a singular impatience and a bootless rage he that will not fear the vigour either of law or magistrate let he do well but perhaps these statute be translate for other nation to view if false than not the statute but the corrupt gloss cause the obloquy a pregnant presumption whereof rom. 13. 3. be a modern practice in that very kind for the place be know where those two statute make since his majesty reign touch such man be bee-gored with such bloody addition in another language that be compare with the original he that read they may true exclaim as the poet do Niobe Niobe if true neither our state nor statute ovid. need fear any obloquy except for clemency since there be no realm which have not more severe law for man of different religion and treasonable affection then all we be the speak of a word or make the least sign of dislike to the religion establish in any point or ceremony thereof be condemnation to the fire present without remission in a nation whence parsons have his best maintenance and do not cardinal Bellarmine both confess and commend that rigid course when he say that catholic will not suffer any among they lib. 3 ca. 19 parag that shall declare by any outward sign or gesture that he favour the lutheran yea he be very peremptory that it be the only remedy against such betimes to send they their long home and give a ibid. cap 21. parag reason for it because to keep they alive though clap up in prison or banish the land be no safe course for that so they may corrupt their converse neighbour with word and foreign nation with their book 181 and yet this censurer make that the second part of those obloquy namely the banish of threescore priest at one time out of the kingdom in describe of which lamentable spectacle he be very passionate rhetorical that man of so good part amiable aspect sweet behaviour etc. shall be cast out of their native soil it be a grave conclusion of the senator of Troy concern Helena the world wonder for beauty and excellent part which the philosopher elegant apply to any vice seem it never so delightful (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) etc. that arist. eth. 1. cap. 9 Homer Iliad (@) even though she be such a one for unmatchable beauty and behaviour yet for all that rid she hence say they rather than to we and our posterity (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) she shall abide here for a ibid. snare and destruction the counsel be wise but the indulgent king refuse it her stay bring forth twenty four book of iliad and a Iliad of misery the like resolution but with a more active execution be that of our king and state when they enact that be their birth personage and quality never so honourable and admirable yet have viperous heart under their amiable aspect the land shall be disburden of they rather than nourish they under pretext of religion to alienate true subject from their sovereign and make they fit for assistance of any enemy either intestine or foreign as occasion fit for what be one of sauls fault the spare of agag because he be a goodly man more regard his 1. sam. 15. feature than God precept as josephus note but Samuel joseph antiq. lib. 6. cap. 8. for all that hew he in piece and our saviour charge in the spiritual sense for the soul safety will that if a man right eye the most amiable member that he have do offend he he shall pluck it out and cast it from mat. 5. 19 he rather than keep it to his own overthrow be as fit in politic advice for the realm security for better those eye be lose than the whole state endanger by keep they in if they be eye or man so extraordinary endow as this jesuite make they for be they better than any of they yet can appear to upright judgement they have leave behind they in all respect both for outward feature birth and behaviour and also for inward quality of nature art and grace man of different religion their equal at least and which be the true commendation of christian priest of more faithful and true heart to their prince and country without which all the rest in any man be but the weapon of Disloyalty and impiety even in the philosopher judgement arist. Polit. 1 182 but here to borrow this man rhetoric in his own word against himself as physician do the scorpion inward against the scorpion sting what a lamentable spectacle to all nation shall that have be wherein parson have his heart hand and head to have see not threescore only but to that number a thousand more at least in one moment with one hoist puff without all judgement of law man of so good part amiable aspect sweet behaviour natural bear subject of the land the most of they of very worshippfull parentage all of learned education clear and denoid of suspicion of crime in the flower of their age add hereunto the natural king and sovereign of the land his virtuous and goodly queen his hopeful and innocent progeny with personage of most honourable place noble birth admirable wisdom peerless virtue matchless learning to be cast out of their native soil and up into the air only for profess that religion which only be justifiable by scripture and only warrantable in all pure age this sacrifice of so much blood be ^...elike no ground for obloquy in other nation if it may be call a sacrifice not of the old testament sure for that be on mount Zion of beast only this as in the valley or vault of h^...nnon of human creature 2. cor. 28. 3. 1. pet. 2. 13. mar. 9 49. even of all for the most part in saint Peter sense nor of the new testament for every sacrifice say our saviour there must be powder with salt but this must have be salt with powder marry for threescore treacherous priestling condemn by the law to death to be pardon their life and fair di^...mi'st the land which they infest deadly and before time have leave both unnaturaily and voluntary and with convoy and safety to be send into those part where their heart do lie this be such a obloquy that the cut of Alcibiades dog tail fill Plutar. not Athens with more talk than this forsooth do the whole world 183 especial be second with another lamentable spectacle of the like number of noble and gentleman pass in very good sort through sundry country be retire out of Ireland their native country for the same cause of conscience there be no paradox so strange but some philosopher will undertake to defend it cic. divin. say the orator nor any vice so soul but the grecian have (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) some refuge of apology to maintain just. mart. it for good say the christian philosopher but yet till now never will any justify or deplore a band of open traitor for even enemy though they entertain the treason do ever abhor the actor tacit. anal. lib. 1. say the historian but such a privilege have jesuitish divinity that it may commend a band rout of forlorn fugitive as if they be religious pilgrim and one traitor know how to bewail another only this art the lament jesuite have in this height of his impudency to conceal the name of Tyrone the chieftain and ringleader of the rest who rebellious insurrection in the time of our late queen who give he his first nobility be otherwise but of a base original cause the waste of the land treasure and exhaust the blood of too many valiant soldier cassier all hope even in himself that his life shall be spare much less his case pity yet this last revolt and contemptuous out-breach so exceed disloyal and unthankful to his gracious sovereign who have pardon he his former treason entertain he with favour protect he with authority dismi' he with honour and follow he with all occasion that may give a well dispose man contentment do make he so odious and abominable that even caecilius himself that great undertaker for verres and of any bad cause else will be ashamed to patronize he 184 much less as this Jesuit shroud he under the cloak of religion who profane life and heathenish opinion express by his brutish action be proclaim to the world that he make no conscience of religion so far be he from be nice upon difference in point of religion unless to make murder no sin promiscuous marriage no adultery rapine no stealth oppression no wrong and rebellion no disloyalty be the point of Rome catholic religion otherwise his conscience so call be set as free for popery as his heart can desire not in Ireland only but while he be in England where he have his mass and priest without impeachment or disturbance and with such favour that in a search for other his Pri^...st be take and signify to who he belong he be present dismiss without any further quequestion or molestation nor do he alone obtain this favour but all the rest of that sort from the high to the low not one of they be once question for his religion or any oath cendr to he which if they be ask they will not be so impudent as to deny it but hereby the reader may clear see what the epistler mean by that liberty of conscience which he plead for so often namely immunity to sin against God freedom to make port-sale of his native country licence to revolt from his dear sovereign connivance to entertain treasonable consort permission to enrich himself for project usurpation brief a general indulgence to stain the earth with blood the ayte with blasphemy the soul with corruption the heaven with luxurious rapine and incontivency and if these may not be grant it be such a angariation of conscience as must needs break out into these retire event say the antapologer that be to say into these traitorly revolt from his sacred majesty 185 who this censurer here vouchsafe to besmear with his glaver balm commend his majesty natural inclination to sweetness peace and tranquillity which as his majesty repel with that speech of Eccles. 25. 9 that a good man praise do no more befitte a wicked man mouth than a ring of prou. 11. 22. gold do a swine snout therefore think of he as Milo do of vatinius who name for detestation come into a Catullus proverb do take it for a disgrace that so lewd a man shall offer to commend he so he demand with all why be of a disposition so sweet and peaceable as his subject find he and such fugitive confess he they shall bewray such bad nature with small wisdom to use the mean which must exasperate and provoke he for the quiet spirit once thorough stir be not easy allay Macrob. satur nay the neat wine if it once turn eager prove extreme keen 186 and as he praise ^...o he bemoan his majesty and the state with he who he think by such revolt to be cast into perpetual care about the same such tender affection issue from a loyal heart be very acceptable but this be unsound the other be a coggery king and statesman have their care many and great especial a monarch crown be unto he that wear it rather a then and circle with more care than jewel the more wrong therefore do they offer to their sovereign who by such contemptuous and disloyal out-leapes augment those care which the break out of many more such as these do not so much accumulate as the fomentation of these rebellious practice by priest and jesuite the principal instigator to such continual revolt and insurrection so that who can blame his majesty and the state if to lessen these care and to prevent such mischief they take order to keep out and cut off the original nourish inflamer which minister the rechaffment to these disloyal attempt 187 but be these care more than they ar^... yet be they not dismay with terror but excite to providence nor blunt the sword of justice but rather edge it to execute suchincendiaries for shall not the corrupt humour be purge because at move of the same a few pustle will break out which though for a time they disfigure the countenance and cause a little pain yet the body be cleanse for a long time after when this Spartacus of these fugitive Tyrone by name have his rebel in plut. crass. the field with his ensign display and his auxiliary supply from a potent adversary yet then do he not cast the state into such care but that in the end it bring he on his knee be now flee the care be the less for a open enemy give more security than a intestine dissembler and a rove fugitive than a home bide rebel for what trust will any foreign prince repose in such or commit to they but conclude of they as mon dragon do of the like ^...o these that be then in pay estate of eng. Fugi^... a king in those day hostile to this nation that they be all but traitor whence they come and spy where they come and it be worth the remember which one have observe that in the famous invasion of 1588. not one of our english fugitive thou^...h some of they man of great valour honour and birth be trust so much as with any ibid. inferior place of command ^...ay scarce suffer to be band in t^...e company of the invader the land rid of such do ease the realm not fill th^... state with care 188 now have he do with his pair of lamentable spectacle and be sudden fall into a chafe for these section conclusory be rather counter-passion of lunacy then artificial close of a epilogue and his anger be that the apologer will say that there be no persecution or ha^...d deal for religion neither in our king nor in the late queen time the averment of a troth shall not raise choler through impatience but incline the mind to believe neither be it the avow assertion which move his patience for in his own conscience though sear he know it and he know that the world right inform be full persuade of the truth thereof but the diminish of the hope number which the pope only expect and they rely on by diverse statute wise provide for be indeed that Angariatian of their conscience which he so term for raval of a confederacy where affiance be place in number be a torment discouragement 189 that pang be past now he be rapt into a ecstasy of admiration wonder why this late apology have be so publish in English and latin to the world first for the publish to that end it be do which be the general intendment of all writing which in scripture be twofold that it may both disperse itself to Psal. 102. 18. public view and remain also to posterity second for the double language therefore it be do that both stranger may be therewith acquaint and also that it may be free from corrupt translation by which jesustish trick our doctrine and nation be usual and wrongful make odious for both together that in present and future age as well fo^...rainers abroad as friend at home may on each side see both his majesty prudent and clement course only require a oath of his subject for his own security in temporal allegiance after so many attempt by that bloody generation and also the pope frampold deal who not only redouble a encounter prohibition but his champion Bellarmine also brandish a violent dissuasion he to the catholic in general this to the archpriest in particular both of they disallow and reprove that which whole counsel ancient have warrant and holy bishop have never deny to any emperor 190 why but the pope breve be write private to the catholic of England the nature of any writing be judge not by the secrecy of the conveyance but by the authority of the writer especial if in a public cause and to many person familiar epistle be secret breve from pope be writ upon record lest therefore the succeed age find such precept in the registry may persuade themselves of the pope sovereignty for England the apology to prevent such mischief have crush that conceit disclaim his proud usurpation and proclaim he for a busy-body where he have no command for what have a bishop in Italy to do with the subject of great Britain to inform their conscience say the epistler or rather to infect they and by a spiritual tyranny to countermand with a interdiction what they of themselves be most willing and ready to perform be afore persuade that it be most consonant to God religion and christian duty 191 but Bellarmine letter be write only to a private friend true but neither of they both be a private person the one a cardinal the other a archpriest nor be it write to be keep private for scarce be it read by he but copy be disperse wherein his majesty see not only his public act but his sacred person both scornful and contumelious handle beside the general infection which this pharisaical treble leaven though secret convey may work by contagion think it stand he upon in honour both to make the world judge of these irreligious passage from Rome and also to discover as well the wickedness of their purpose as the weakness of the argument produce by this couple of grand-clerke in their several encounter 192 you but by this publish of they first diverse will hold themselves oblige or provoke to answer the same what after and parsons if they shall do it better that will be a shame to the cardinal if worse a stain to themselves only this comfort they have that worse than the censurer have do they can answer howsoever they do either better or worse let they assure themselves it will not pass with silence post i say he in Livy Scaevola lib. 1. 193 second the unlawfulness of the oath will be dispute and condemn in all university school and book of particular man it be a good counsel that the poet give not to take measure of another man foot by Horace your own last university have more judgement and discretion than a single cardinal or one scribble jesuite dispute the question they may but before they condemn the oath they will be advise or if they do they shall not be sear truth have as strong armour as falsehood can show yet the censurer be no great clerk than the priest make he and this book show he have do wise first to expect such a schoole-determination but ignorance will ever press forward and a boil stomach can conceal or retain the enclose rancour 194 three the unjust violence in force man to swear and notwithstanding to make they say that they do it willing and without coaction will appear both to be one of the great contradiction in itself and most injurious to christian man that ever be hear how oft have it be answer that a upon a statute be no enforcement of the conscience which have liberty left both to demur and refuse after which demur to reject it utter argue a overt disloyalty to take it and not willing imply a covert treachery the law punish the first upon the plain discovery it require the last for the more sure discovery where be now the contradiction either express or enfold the law instict a mulct upon he that refuse the oath there be one proposition the same law enjoin he that take it to profess that he swear willing there be the other if the oath have be impose upon a man to take it whether he will or no and withal require of he to say that he take it willing this have indeed be contradictory but ill lu^...ke have this epistler either in frame or pationize contradiction 195 what be the second grievance it be most i^...rious to christian man say he every injury be according to the name either a injustice against some law or a wrong offer to some person right now what law do the take of a oath to be hearty true unto the native sovereign for his temporal security either defeat or thwart as for the person a party consent to a action can be say to receive a wrong by that action but his consent be enforce no liberty of choice be no enforcement of consent but if he do it not he incur the danger true that be a punishment for his contumaci^... no violence to the conscience be not the inquisition more coactive christian shall have less pressure and popery few di^...ciples 196 yet a other fit take he for after a few fair pause wherein he tell we by way of prophecy that some learned man will answer more sufficient than he have do that be easy credible for as Tully say of heius he have rather mar the cause then help it because what act. 4. in ver. he have write do but occur to he so say jacob of his counterfeit venison that it be bring to his hand after gen. 27. this I say he fall again to his P^...rs that God will incline his majesty heart to take the best course for unite his subject will but his prayer be with a vengeance that if God will not so incline despair the mother of headlong precipitation will enter for patience provoke will turn into fury here be a herald of defiance not a jesuite at his devotion the very humour or rather heat of he in the poet do our saviour pray so no for you have condemn and kill the just say saint james and he have not resist jac. 5. 6. you but hot spirit must have fire from heaven if the luc. 9 54. gate of a city be but shut against they for they have belike learn it of saint Paul who will man not to avenge they rom. 13. 9 self but to give place unto wrath and of God himself because he say vengeance be i I will repay and of his bless Deut. 32. 35. son resist not evil but if a man will angariate thou a mile go with he t^...aine mat. 5. 39 41. 197 not withstand all this there be no remedy but one and that be toleration for friendly entreaty say he will bind up wound bleed on all side whereas exulceration make they fester with grief and danger and neither of they untrue where the wound be green or the cure not desperate where the cause oppress be good and the party cassier be innocent otherwise most false for absence of a adversary do alleviate the concurrence of opposite do exulcerate both grief and wrath as the wound dry up will bleed a fresh at the presence of the murderer if therefore that remedy deny there must needs treake out a desperate rage be it so better that a few be drive into despair then the whole state raise into a commotion which nothing soon than toleration of two diverse religion in one realm interim these (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) false fire and paper-threate Eras chil. cent. 4. be bootless where the wrath be forceless and the denouncer graceless 198 but be not the very up-close of all a plain contradiction to these precedent to God holy providence say he than hole be to be commit who for his great glory whether to life or death will dispose of all threat of revenge for pretend pressure and total commit the same to God providence be mere opposite his sacred providence be to keep king person and their authority sacred that be free from touch of disgrace or dismay of terror by any hu mane power obedience of the subject be the safe guard he have appoint for that immunity any doctrine^...o ^...o the contrary be adversary bo^...h to his holy providence and that divine ordinance patience with hope be the best argument of reliance upon his care and wisdom priest especial shall pray with charity not threaten with affrightment preach to subject loyalty with sufferance not arm they with impatience no^... charm they with fraudulence to affray king live and revile prince dead argue neither trust in God providence nor reference to his glory controversy in divinity there may there must be but school and clerk have nought to do with prince crown save in duty to obey and with learning to support they so may the end of all turn to his glory of whole glory there be none end but religion turn into STATISME will soon prove at he be me.