



The Trades Increase.
SEEING by chance a late Treatise entitled, Englands way to winne wealth, etc. and being easily inuited to reade the same, euen for the Titles sake; I must confesse my selfe so affected with the proiect, that I presently resolued to goe a fishing, withall concluding with my selfe, that as there is no fishing to the sea: so there was no fish in the sea like to the Herring: and for that my estate is but meane, and my selfe a fresh-water Souldier, it requireth cost, and I would haue company: the sea is large enough, and hath roome enough for vs all, and there are Herrings enough to make vs all rich: for that I say a man may runne a course this way to enrich himselfe, to strengthen his countrey, to enable his Prince more honestly then many late sea-courses can warrant vs in, more easily, more safely, more certainly then any other
sea-course can perswade vs to whatsoeuer; I could not choose, out of my allegeance to my Prince, out of my duety to my Countrey, out of my loue to my neighbour, but commend these motiues concerning the same to a further consideration, consisting,
In the Necessitie, Facilitie, Profit, and Vse of fishing.


The necessity out of want of 
Shipping.Mariners.Imploiment of me^.


As concerning ships, it is that which euery one knoweth, and can say, they are our weapons, they are our ornaments, they are our strength, they are our pleasures, they are our defence, they are our profit; the subiect by them is made rich, the kingdome through them strong, the Prince in them mighty; in a word, by them in a manner we liue, the kingdome is, the king reigneth. If the sea faile, the Venetians they fall; and if we want ships, wee are dissolued. Esops Sheepheard kept his flocke well so long as he nourished his dogge; but when the Wolfe had perswaded him that he was superfluous, hee cosened him easily of all his sheepe. It is the kingdomes case in shipping, which made that heroicall King of Denmarke at his view of the Kings maiesties Nauy at Chattam, confesse he then saw the strength of England, the greatnesse of our
King, In sola tanta est fiducia Naue.

Want of shipping.
Concerning the want of shipping, though to presse the consideration thereof be very material, yet the poynt it selfe is to be handled very tenderly: for that as I haue no pleasure to touch our owne wounds, so I am loath in this case to discouer our owne wants; for that I feare the enemie will sooner take the aduantage of them, then wee will be stirred vp thereby to make supply. To giue therefore the true and faithfull subiect a darke Lanthorne whereby hee may onely see himselfe, and he not be seene, setting the contemplation of the Kings royall Nauy aside, so mighty, so well conditioned, which hath so many good Officers, and such worthy Ouer-seers, which is so chargeable to his Maiestie to maintaine, as I hope it will neuer be safe for the enemy to meddle withall: setting, I say, this aside, our Merchants Nauie consisteth in the Shippes
For 
The Straights.Spaine.France.Hambrough and Middlebrough.The Sound.Newcastle.Island.New found Land.The East Indies.
I haue not named Moscouie, because we haue in a manner lost that Trade, the troubles of that
kingdome, and our desire of security hauing depriued vs therof, which we may the more lament, because I haue heard Marchants affirme, that in these vncomfortable daies of aduenturing, it was one of their best Trades, and with no small meruaile yet vpheld, and most prouidently followed by the Hollanders,
The Countrey being afflicted with war, and the Hollanders will, petere cibum e flamma. we being scarred away from so good and profitable a trade, as birds from Cherrietrees, with the shew of dead carkasses, or shout of boyes, whilst other lusty and plumpe laddes haue wililie beate away the children, beate downe the scarre crowes, and stolen the fruite away, to their great gaine, and our disgrace, there repairing not thither aboue two Ships English in stead of seuenteene of great burden for the company formerly, besides Enterlopers, to the great decay of our Marchants and shipping: whereas the Hollander (according to a credible report made) betweene the Ward-house and the East-ward, at Tippenie, Kilden, Olena, and the Riuer Cole at Colmograue, and at Saint Nicholas in Russia, had aboue thirty fiue sailes of their Shippes the last yeare. Happily some will say, that they made so poore a voyage that they had bene better kept themselues at home; and it is very likely, yet the yeare before, they had some thirty saile, and now this yeare they haue againe repaired their Nauy, renewed their aduenture, and sent neere as many, as neither dismaied with troubles, nor yet discouraged with losse; and to make it the more strange that they shold thus preue^t our trade, and increase their own: as it was after vs that they came thither euen by
leaue, as it were, to gleane with our Reapers, (for the fields were ours) the discouery of the Land, and Trade wholy ours, found out by Chanceler and Willoughby,
Primo Edw. 6. and euer since continued by our Merchants) so againe their best Trade thither, is maintained euen by our owne commodities, as Tinne, Lead, Course-clothes and Kerseis: the inconuenience whereof, together with the preuention, I leaue to the sensible consideration, to the sufficient ability of the Moscouie Marchant, who I feare can scarce heare mee, being (as I said) gone so farre as the East-Indies; and if I should send to him, I feare I should not finde him at leasure, hauing thither transported much of the Moscouie Staple. For the Marchants that formerly vsed the Moscouie Trade are now there seated; and because as we know it is warmer there, and as they find it, it is very profitable, we will also by Compasse trauell thither our selues; that as Valeria a faire Lady, answering to Scilla in the Theater, being demanded, Why shee pressed so neere, said; That thereby shee might haue so me of his felicity; so by being in their company, wee may communicate with them of their good fortunes, or commune with them of our wants.
The Straights. So then, to beginne our iourney at the noblest place for worth, and one of the newest in knowledge, the worthiest in former remembrance, the worst in present reputation, for the bottome of the Straights, the first in name, and whilome a very materiall busines of Marchandize: I do find this Trade but easie, and the difficulties many and
new, the Trade it selfe being lessened by the circumuention of the East-Indie nauigation, which fetcheth the Spices from the well head; and I find the rest of the benefites alayed, by charges, by insultation of Pirates, and infidelity of seruants. These make presents and profit of their Maisters goods abroad, so farre, that some of the owners become lame at home: Pirates meete with that whereby others are extreamly hindred, and by the charges the rest are exceedingly discouraged, so that the Merchants returne is but poore, and the nauigation much lessened, the employment thitherward fayling in neere thirty shippes, and those of such burden, that they were of defence and renowne to the kingdome. I heard a worthy Marchant in his time Thomas Cordell of London say, that on the first beginning of the Turkey Trade, his selfe with other Merchants, hauing occasion to attend the late Queens Maiesties Priuy Councell about that businesse, they had great thanks and commendations for the shippes they then builded of so great a burden for those partes, by the Earles of Bedford and Leicester, and other honorable Personages, with many encouragements to goe forward (euen to vse their owne words) for the Kingdomes sake, notwithstanding it was then to their great benefite likewise, whose ordinarie returnes at the first were three for one, which I speake not out of enuy. For as all callings are, and ought to be maintained through the profite that ariseth thereby, labours rewarded, dangers recompenced by the sweat and sweet of gaine; nay,
in our most Liberall Professions, the Diuine for his spirituall nourishment hath temporall foode; the Physition for the care of the body asketh the comfort of the purse; and the Lawyer must bee payd for his Plea: so Merchants of all Companies the most liberall, are likewise of all sortes the most worthie to gaine, Vt qui per vniuersum orbem discurrunt, mare circumlustrantes and aridam; to vse that hopefull Prince in his time King Edward the sixt his words in a Letter to forren Princes, in Sir Hugh Willoughbie his behalfe.
Beeing bound for discoueries Prim. Ed. 6. But to end my long Parenthesis, I speake it I say out of pitty, to see now the returne so meane, the Merchant so discouraged, the shipping so diminished: and to conclude this poynt without loue or anger, but with admiration of our neighbours the now Sea-herrs,
See-herren. the Nation that get health out of their owne sickenesse, whose troubles begot their liberty, brought foorth their wealth, and brought vp their strength, that haue out of our leauings gotten themselues a liuing, out of our wants make their owne supply of Trade and shipping there; they comming in long after vs, equall vs in those partes in all respects of priuilege and port; that haue deuanced vs so farre in shipping, that the Hollanders haue more then one hundred saile of shippes that vse those parts, continually going and returning, and the chiefest matters they doe lade outward, be English Commodities, as Tinne, Lead, and Bailes of such like stuffe as are made at Norwich.
For the rest of the Straights, one side, as the
coast of Barbary, serues onely for places and Citties of refuge, not after the Diuine Leuiticall law, when one hath killed a man by chance there to be succoured: but after that diabolicall Alcoran, when any haue robbed and murdered abroad, thither they may repaire, be in safety, and enioy.
The othe^ side, as Naples, Genoa, Ligorne, and Marseilles, employ some twenty saile, and they most with Herring. For the Ports neere to the Straights mouth, as Malega, etc. wee haue some store of shipping, as about thirtie saile, that begin in Iune to set forth some for Ireland, to lade Pipestaues in their way to Malega, they returning Malega wines. But the Hollanders likewise haue found out that Trade, and be as busie amongst the Irish as our selues for Pipe-staues: nay, by your leaue, they haue beene too busie there of late with some of our poore Country-mens wind-pipes; but that is besides the matter heere. But for Maleg a it selfe, the Inhabitants there haue through our plentifull resort thither, planted more store of Vines, so that on our recourse thither, our marchants haue withdrawne themselues much from Cherris.
Spaine. For Andalusia, Quantado, Lisborne, Pertugall, it is easily knowne what shipping wee haue there by our Trade, which is but meane, consisting in Sacke, Sugar, Fruit, and west-Indie Drugs, which may employ some twenty ships. Amongst these Cherris Sackes are likewise brought into England, especially in Flemish Bottomes.
For the bringing in from thence any store of salt by vs, it is excepted against, we being by report
furnished principally by the Hollanders of most of the salt that our Fisher Townes do vse for the salting of Island fish, and all other Fish for Herring and Staple-fish, as the Ports of London, Colchester, Ipswich, Yarmouth, Linne, Hull, Scarbrough, can testifie. Albrough men were wont to bring it in, especially employing some thirty or forty Saile belonging to it, of some seuen or eight score, or two hundred Tunne; which for the most part, were set on worke all the yeare long, with transporting of coales from Newcastle to France, and fetching salt from thence; which Trade is now much decayed with France, by the double dilligence of the Hollanders, who serue vs principally from Spaine.
France. For our Trade to Burdeaux, it is lightly as great as euer it was: For I do not thinke there was euer more Wine drunke in the Land. Yet that voyage appeareth not to be so beneficiall in regard of the small rate that the Owners and Sea-men haue thither-ward. France may euery way employ, and those most small vessels, some threescore ships and barkes.
Hambrough and Middlebrough. To Hambrough and Middlebrough there are belonging six or seuen ships to each place, and they lade for the Company (and are called Appointed Ships) euery three months in all the yeare, there may be laden some thirty odde Shippes, and they but 14 or 15 bodily. But as they make, as is said, two voyages the Ship, how it standeth with them, or how they will stand, it is vncertaine in regard of the manner of the altering of Trading with their cloath. Once for certaine the Merchant
aduenturers ships haue been alwaies formerly the sure stay of Merchants seruices both for their readinesse, goodnesse, and number of shipping touching the common-wealths affaires.
The Sound. For Danske, Melvin and Quinsbrough, there are not aboue fiue or sixe shippes of London, that vse those places, as many mote of Ipswich, and so likewise from Hull, Linne, and Newcastle, the like proportion resorteth thither for Trade. These make some two returnes in the yeare: but in all those places the Hollanders doe abound, and bring in more commodities by fiue times to vs, then our owne shipping. And for Liefland, the Narue, Rye, and Reuell, the Hollanders haue all the Trade in a manner; the commodities from these former places being Corne, Flaxe, Sope-ashes, Hempe, Iron, Waxe, and all sorts of Deale.
For Norway we haue not aboue fiue; and they aboue forty saile, and those double or treble our burden euen for the Citty.
Newcastle. The next is Newcastle Trade, and for certaine the chiefest now in esse, for maintenance of shipping, for setting Sea-fearing men on worke, and for breeding daily more, there may be about some two hundred saile of Caruiles, that onely vse to serue the Citty of London, besides some two hundred more that serue the sea-coast towns throughout England, small and great, as Barques and other shipping of smaller burden, and more might easily be: for hither euen to the Mines mouth, come all our Neighbour Country Nations with their Shippes continually, employing their owne
shipping and Mariners. I doubt me whether if they had such a treasure, they would not imploy their owne shipping. The French saile hither in whole Fleetes, some forty or fifty saile together, especially in Summer, seruing all their Portes of Picardie, Normandie, and Brittaine, euen as farre as Rochel and Bourdeaux, with their owne shippes and sailers from Newcastle. So they of Breame, Embden, Holland and Zealand do serue all Flaunders, and the Archdukes Countries, whose shipping is not great: These paying no more then his Maiesties owne naturall subiects, if they transport any coales. Which imposition, say our men, made our Countrey men forbeare their carrying any more Coales abroad, because the Frenchmen would not giue aboue their old rate: and which was worse, thereby they sold away their shippes, some to France, some to Spaine, some to other Countries. Whereby sure their faults are more apparant then their ill fortune, in that though their gaine was lesse at the instant, by the imposition then formerly; yet to leaue the Trade, argued neither good spirits, nor great vnderstanding, nor any especiall good minde to their Countrey. For whence I pray you came such a necessity to leaue the Trade and to giue ouer shipping, as if they could not liue thereby; when presently forraigne Nations fell to the Trade themselues, as is formerly set downe, and fetch away our coales on the same tearmes which wee do refuse? And by report, notwithstanding the fiue shillings imposed, the French do sell in France one Chauldron of coales
for as much money as will buy three or foure of Newcastle. Had they held to with patience, either they might haue brought the stranger to their price, or else by due order and discreet fashion opened the inconueniency to the state, of the strangers stomack in refusing their Coale, and fetching them their selues: so as they might easily haue wearied them, and won their Trade and gaine againe; whereas now they are beggard, our Country disfurnisht of shipping. The stranger keeping his coine at home, bringeth hither bare and base commodities, their shipping and Mariners are employed and increased; and notwithstanding the Argus eyes of the Searcher, carry gold away with them, alwaies bringing more in stocke with them, then they carry away in commodities.
For to make a motion to haue this fiue shillings excused in our owne Nation, is rather profitable then necessary, in regard wee see the stranger thriueth notwithstanding it, and it being done out of his Maiesties royal prerogatiue, and ex causa lucratiua, as is apparant by what the stranger gaineth; and the like is willingly imbraced here in other transportations, as Beere, etc. were, me thinkes, vndutifull likewise. But to mention a motion very lately made, and generally amongst his Maiesties loyall subiects imbraced; Might it please his Maiesty to make and ordaine a Staple Towne in England for Sea-coale, and we haue many fit places, and Harbours more neere and proper then that of Tinmouth, at Newcastle (and herein as I am bound in affection to wish well to London, so I must, out
of many mens iudgements, commend Harewich, statio bene fida Carinis, and then lying fit for the Low-countries, and indeed open to all Nations by the benefite of the large sea which washeth it) whereby strangers shall be restrained from further Trade to Newcastle, and shall all repaire to the said Staple Towne to fetch their Coales: Besides that it would be an exceeding benefite to his Maiesty, it would likewise helpe vs in this our complaint of want of shipping. For by this meanes our English bottomes bringing all the Coales to the Staple Towne, shall not onely be set on worke, but increase will follow in Shipping. The Venetians sometime passed being out-gone by those of Zant in their custome, drew the Trade from the Grecians, and planted as it were, a Colonie of Curranes at Venice. If for a little custome, and to pull downe their suspected subiects swelling mindes, they did so, why should not his Maiesty for the increase of his Shipping, and the releiuing of the prostrate estate of his faithfull and humble subiects, take this warrantable course?
Island.Island voiage entertaineth 120 ships and barkes.
New found landNew found Land employeth some 150 saile, from all parts, of small ships, but with great hazard; and therefore that voyage, feared to be spoiled by heathen and sauage, as also by Pirates.
East Indies. Now followeth the consideration of the East Indie Trade, into whose seas, not onely the Riuer of Volga, as before you heard, disemboqueth it self, but euen the bottome of the Straights is emptied to fill vp those gulfes, and not so onely, but besides
that many of our best Marchants haue transported their Staples thither; it hath also begot out of all Callings, Professions, and Trades, many more new Merchants. Then where there is increase of Merchants, there is increase of Trade; where Trade increaseth, there is increase of Shipping; where increase of Shipping, there increase of Mariners likewise: so then rich and large East Indies. The report that went of the pleasing notes of the Swannes in Meander floud, farre surpassing the records of any other birds in any other places whatsoeuer, drew thither all sorts of people in great confluence, and with great expectation to heare, and enioy their sweete singing. When they came thither, they found in stead of faire white Swans, greedy Rauens, and deuouring Crowes; and heard, in stead of melodious harmony, vntuneable and loathsome croaking. In indignation that they were so receiued and deceiued, in stead of applauding, they hissed; and of staying, fled away. You are now braue East Indies, Meander floud, your Trade is the singing of Swannes, which so many iourney so farre to enioy. God forbid you should be found so discoloured, and we so ill satisfied. And howsoeuer that I may be sure to auoide any detraction, whereby my nature might haue any imputation, or by calling vp more spirits into the circle then I can put downe againe, I might incurre some danger, and be taxed likewise of indiscretion, for that we onely hitherto haue complained of the want of Shipping; we desire now but herein to suruey the store, and see how
you helpe the increase. You haue built more Ships in your time, and greater farre then any other Merchants Ships; besides what you haue bought out of other Trades, and all those wholly belonging to you; there hath beene entertained by you since you first aduentured, one and twentie Ships, besides the now intended voiage of one new Ship of seuen hundred Tunne; and happily some two more of increase. The least of all your Shipping is of foure score Tunne: all the rest are goodly Shippes, of such burthen as neuer were formerly vsed in Merchandize; the least and meanest of these last is of some hundred and twentie Tunne, and so go vpward euen to eleuen hundred Tunne. You haue set forth some thirteen voyages, in which time you haue built of these, eight new Shippes, and almost as good as built the most of the residue, as the Dragon, the Hector, etc. so that at the first appearance you haue added both strength and glory to the King dome by this your accession to the Nauy. But where I pray you are all these Ships? foure of these are cast away, of the which one was of three hundred Tunne, another of foure hundred, the third of three hundred, and the fourth of eleuen hundred; two more are docked vp there as Pinaces to Trade vp and down: the rest are either employed in the Trade in the Indies, or at home out of reparations; which if true, if the Kingdome should haue need of them on any occasion, it shall surely want their seruice; and so then there is not onely no supply to the Nauy this way, but hurt euen to the whole kingdome, the woods
being cut downe, and the Shippes either lost, or not seruiceable. Surely stories can shew vs, which we may reade in the courses of Common-weales, how tolerable, nay how laudable it is in all States, to enlarge Commerce. Merchants whom wee should respect, can tell vs of the casualties which not onely the Ships, but their estates are subiect to by aduentures. Mariners whom we must pitty, can teach vs of the ordinary dangers not onely that Shippes and goods, but their liues are subiect to by sea. I must not then exprobrate that to them which is to be imputed to the Sea; nor are they to be blamed out of reason for that which deserueth, in humanity, commiseration; nor is England bounded by our Horizon, to go no further then we see. We haue learned long since, that Mercatura si tenuis sordida, si magna splendida: the stranger the Country, the greater the aduenture; the more famous our Nation, the more worthy the Merchant. Before wee were, euen Herace writ, Currit Mercator ad Indos. Loath then am I to borrow that saying of Demosthenes on his courting of Lais, to pay it to the Indian Trade, by alleaging, that Non tanti Emam poenitentiam, only hauing now in common that Roman prouiso, Ne quid detrimentiresp. capiat. Let vs examine that which may moue patience, that our woods are cut downe, and the Ships either lost or not seruiceable: Our woods I say, cut downe in extraordinary manner, neither do the Shippes die the ordinary death of Shippes. Our woods extraordinarily cut downe, in regard of the greatnesse of the Shipping, which
doth as it were deuoure our timber. I am able out of sufficient testimony to affirme, that since the Indian Trade, and meerely through their building of their ships of so great burthen, and their repairing (the building notwithstanding beganne but fiue yeares since) that timber is raised in the Land fiue shillings, and more, in the loade, nay, almost not to be had for money, which the Company (no question) being sensible of, very wisely seeke to helpe themselues in, by building of ships in Ireland for their seruice: yet it seemeth their incouragement that was, is but necessitous in regard by their owne saying, besides the hazard, the charges are little lesse; and which is worse, that kinde of timber is but vntoward for that vse, being so extreame heauy, that a ship of small burden, draweth much water. If in fiue yeares space their building, together with their repairing of shippes, almost equall to building, beget such a scarcitie, what will a little continuance bring forth? Bring forth I cannot say ought, but a priuation will follow euen of all our timber-wood. The Kings Nauy must be maintained, other Marchants of lower ranke must haue shipping, and the sea-trade may increase, and then either wee must trade without shipping, or make ships without timber.
When the Norman Conquerour hauing subdued the most part of the kingdome, passed from Essex into Kent, which then made head against him, the Kents, hauing by the aduice of their politique Bishop, and their stout Abbot, cut downe great boughes, and with them in their armes marched
towards the Conquerour; whereby, besides the nouelty of the sight, the Army appeared double as big. William himselfe so conceiuing it, as also amazed to see woods walke; more feared and discontented with that sight, then otherwise assured with his former successe, condescended to what demands soeuer were made by those people, to haue such weapons laid downe, and to gaine such ingenious subiects; whereby, to their eternall benefite, and credite, their persons were neuer in bondage, nor their Lawes altered. In this their Land-stratageme, I see our sea-Arts, in that and these woods being the fatal instrument of our fortunes, boughes of Trees kept the Kentish-men out of seruitude, when they held them in their hands, and but for shew; their bodies will keepe vs in liberty when they containe vs, and are for seruice, and by their mouing on the water they will amaze both French and Spanish, and whomsoeuer, and keepe them, and all others, from comming neere vs:
34. Hen. 8.17.13. Eliz. 25. Out of which prouident fore-sight, our most worthy Princes formerly raigning, haue made diuers Lawes in fauour of timber trees:
Forbidding by Proclamation the building with Timber. and our most noble King hath prouided therto with new accessions for the preseruing and increasing of them; but that a parricide of woods should thus be committed by building of ships, it was neuer thought on by any of our royall Solons, and therefore there was no prouiso for it: Nay, this inconuenience was so little suspected, that our sayd famous Princes haue prouided cleane contrary, with great bounty and indulgence, haning encoraged
by reward out of their owne purses the builders of great ships; as bestowing on the builders fiue shillings on the Tun for euery Tunne that is builded aboue one hundred Tun in a ship, so necessary did the Prince thinke his maintenance of shipping, the accession thereof consisting much in their greatnesse, to the honour and safety of the Kingdome; and such vse he made account he should haue of them. Whereas now this way he contributeth, to the spoile of his woods, to the losse of the ships, and to the hurt of the Kingdome. I heard a Ship-wright say on the losse of the Trades Increase, that if you ride forty miles from about London, you could not finde sufficient Timber to build such an other. It was a ship of eleuen hundred Tunne for beauty, burthen, strength, and sufficiency, surpassing all Marchants ships whatsoeuer. But alas! shee was but shewne, out of a cruell destiny shee was ouertaken with an vntimely death in her youth and strength; being deuoured by those Iron wormes of that Country, that pierced her heart, and brake many a mans withall memorable in her misfortune, onely redounding to the Commonwealthes losse. For as for the Marchants, though I pitie their aduentures with all my heart, yet in this their part of losse was least; for all their goods were on shore; and she had brought aboundance out of the Mecha Fleete, which she did both tith and toll: And thankes be to God, they are more then sauers by what is returned from her, and more then that often, by the grace of God, will come from her to the Marchants gaine.

The like vntimely fall had the other three of great burthen, galla nt ships, neuer hauing had the fortune to see their natiue soile againe, or the honour to do their Country any seruice, in respect of all other ships that wander ordinarily to other Countries, therefore I may iustly say that they die not the ordinary death of ships, who commonly haue somer est, and after long seruice die full of yeares, and at home, much of their timber seruing againe to the same vse, besides their Iron-worke, and the rest otherwise seruiceable, and not in this bloudy and vnseasonable fashion, rather indeed as coffins full of liue bodies, then otherwise as comfortable shippes. For the rest that liue, they come home so crazed and broken, so maimed and vnmanned, that whereas they went out strong, they returne most feeble:
Our ships are faine to take in the natiues of the Indian Countries to supply the wants of our dead Sea-men to bring home their shippes. and whereas they were carried forth with Christians, they are brought home with Heathen. What the profits are to the Marchants, for so great an adue^ture, I know not. I am sure amends cannot easly be made for so great a losse, euen in this point which is our special subiect now, for wast of woods, and spoile of shipping.
And thus we haue surueyed all the fountaines whence our shipping especially doth flow: which before I shut vp, I remember me of a new Spring in Greeneland, that batheth some ships and burdeneth them likewise with her owne natural fraight, with the which the Whale is so richly loaden withall. This place is but of late frequented so especially, and hath employed this last yeare some foureteene ships, and more would do, but that the
poore Fishermen, who though they knew the place before, yet being belike afraid of the Whale,
The Moscouy Merchants haue procured an inhibition for all others from fishing there. are now swallowed vp in the Whales ships.
I cannot finde any other worthy place of forren anchorage. For the Bermudas, we know not yet what they will doe; and for Virginia we know not well what to do with it: the present profit of those not employing any store of shipping: and for this other it is yet but Embrion: no question a worthy enterprise and of great consequence, much aboue the Marchants Ieuell and reach. And sure in regard of the great expences they haue beene at, and the poore returne that is made, they are much to bee regarded and commended for holding out so long: I could wish, that as many of the Nobility and Gentry of the land haue willingly embarqued themselues in the labour, so the rest of the Subiects might be vrged to help to forme and bring forth this birth, not of an infant, but of a man; nay, of a people, of a kingdom, wherein are many kingdomes. When Alcmena was in trauell with Hercules, the Poets say Iupiter was faine to be Midwife; and sure, as we haue the countenance of our earthly Iupiter, so we are humbly to emplore the propitious presence of our heauenly God, toward the perfection of this so great a worke. And so leauing to medle further with what we haue nothing to do, let vs returne to our ships, out of whose entertainements we may either reioyce at their increase, or by other obseruations preuent their decay: and because we propounded to our selues the necessity of our home-fishing out of the want of
our shipping, we will affirme that by this our superficiall view we find a decay thereof, and that out of two reasons; because that in places formerly frequented, our shipping lesseneth, and in places new found, they doe not succeed: we haue giuen reasonable probability of these already without any pleasure, and there is no need of repetition, and it will be more apparant in the preferring of this desire of Fishing, out of the examination of the next induceme^t therto, which is want of Mariners.


Want of Mariners.
Mariners, they vse the weapons, shippes, they weare the ornaments, shippes, out of them ships, are strength and pleasure: otherwise they are but Pictures, that haue but a shew, or are as carkasses bereft of life. It is the good Pilot that bringeth the Shippe to the Hauen: It is the wise Maister that gouerneth the men in the Ship; but without men the Maister cannot gouerne, nor the shippe goe: What is a Leader without an Army, and that of Souldiers? the same reason of Sea-men in a ship; the body must haue life, bloud and flesh: the same are Sea-men to a shippe. Columbus found out the new world, Drake brought home the hidden treasure in a ship; but they were both prouided well of men, and gouerned well: therefore as Shippes are manned; and as Masters vse their men, so ordinarily their shippes succeede. As for this last matter of gouernement, it is besides our busines, wee will leaue that to whom it concerneth. Now then, though wee cannot vse shipping without men, and therefore they must goe together; yet we must consider the one after the other, and hauing
looked into the strength of the one, we will view in them the state of the other, in the which wee will not be long, for that the subiect is vnpleasant, and our Tale is halfe tolde already: for the consequence is necessary. As shippes are employed, so men are busied.
For Moscouy, it is apparant that the shipping thitherward is decayed; so neither Mariners are well employed that way, nor any. Sea-men almost bred. The fleete that went ordinarily thitherward entertained three or foure Nouices in a ship, and so bred them vp Sea-men, which might make in the whole happily some foure score men yearely, which was well for their partes. Now then there were some fiue hundred Mariners and Saylers employed withall: so then this way there is want.
The like reason of the Straights in their proportion, the very bottome of the Straights failing in thirtie shippes, maketh yearely seuen hundred Sea-men and Mariners at the least, seeke some other courses which were that way employed, besides the vnder-growth hindred of some hundred and forty sea-men yearly. And but that I am loath to renue our complaints; I would say it were great pitty of this so great an ebbe of our men in these seas, for that besides the voyages were of encouragement euen to the Frie, all in generall commonly went and returned in good health, a ship seldome loosing a man in a voyage; nay, I heard a proper Maister of a shippe say, that in eighteene yeares, wherein he frequented those parts, he lost
not two men out of his ship: and whatsoeuer may bee imputed to the incontinencie of our men, or the vnwholsomnesse of the women in other places, surely in those parts I heare the common sort of women to be as dangerous, and the generalitie of our men as idely disposed.
Naples, Ligorne, Marseilles, and those parts of the straights, may imploy some foure hundred men, and breed of these about forty.
Malega imploying besides some foure hundred men, the imployment that may come by all other places in Spaine and Portugall, not arriving to foure hundred men, in regard of the pouerty of the trade, and the superfluity of the commodities, it being indeede rather entertained because they will not be idle, otherwise then that they are well busied, like foode that keepeth life, not else maintaineth strength; yet it hath a pretty mystery in it, that though the gaine scarce provideth for the Marchants liuelihood, yet the commodities make the land merry: and howsoeuer, I am of the opinion that the former hostile state busied more Sea-men then twice the Trade of Spaine can nourish, yet I differ from those that would rather by reprisall make Souldiers, then by nourishing commerce increase Mariners.
Our shipping into France, is not such as it hath beene, but nourseth many yong men, or rather sheweth them the Sea, and may busie some seuen or eight hundred men.
Hambrough and Middlebrough alwayes haue beene counted the ancient maintainers of Mariners
for the States seruice on all occasions, being ready at hand, and therefore as we wished well to their Shippes, so we desire encouragement to the men. There may be belonging to their employment some foure or fiue hundred Mariners and Sea-men.
Norway and the Sound may breed and employ some foure hundred men, those parts being most frequented, those commodities most brought in by the Hollanders.
Newcastle voyage is the next, and if not the onely, yet the especiall Nursery, and Schoole of Sea-men: For, as it is the chiefest in employment of Sea-men, so it is the gentlest, and most open to land-men: They neuer grudging in their smallest vessels to entertaine some two fresh-men, or learners; whereas, to the contrary, in the Shippes that voyage to the South-ward, or otherwise, farre out of the Kingdome, there is no Owner, or Maister, that will ordinarily entertaine any land-man, be he neuer so willing, as being bound by their Charter-partie to the Marchant, as they say, not to carry but sufficient men, and such as know their labour, and can take their turne at the helme, toppe, and yard. It is by great fauour that others slip in, and they very likely; and therefore whereas in former aduentures I allow them the bringing vp of two or three men in a voyage, it is in generall to be vnderstood, that they were first trained vp, either amongst the Coliers in this iourney: or else came out of Fishermens Boates, and yet but Nouices to those Seas and Saylors,
so then this Trade, without all exception, admits of all sorts that neuer see the Sea before: whereby are yearly bred and employed, out of the great store of ships busied therein, some two or three thousand people. A great comfort to youth, and men that want employment, and a great stay to the Sea state, that shall haue need on all occasions of their helpe. I haue shewed my good will enough, being so priuate, to further their employment; and being so ignorant I must not bee bolder.
Island entertainement, asketh and nourisheth some two thousand fiue hundred men; after the number of shipping and barques set downe, and ordinarily employed.
New-found-land may breed and employ some fifteene hundred; but seeing what discouragements they haue, what casualties they are subiect to we may iudge of their incertainty.
Out of the extraordinary number of all people busied in these two former employments; it is no vnnecessary obseruation, that in any Trade in particular, our coale excepted, our speciall employment, nourishment, and encrease of Sea-men, is euen in this forraine fishing, which I hope will proue but petty, when it commeth to be balanced with our home fishing.
The last Consistance of Shipping propounded, was that of the East Indies: which though yongest, was found in shew and state to haue ouer-topped all the rest; as a bird that maketh herselfe gay with the feathers of all other fowles;
hauing borrowed; nay, hauing bought the best Shippes out of other Trades to honour their voyage, and plumed euen Constantinople her selfe, of her shipping: therefore that men are entertained extraordinarily in this voyage, it is apparant out of the greatnesse of the Shipping; the entertainment of them increasing, it should be a consequent that Sea-men increase this way: But that wee may not by ambages tryumph in their losse, or our calamities, wee see this way that our Shippes perish, and therefore our men they shrinke. Nay, though shippes come home, yet they leaue the men behinde: so in this voyage, there is a two-fold way towards our want of Mariners.
In that Shippes, nay great Shippes, are extraordinarily subiect to bee cast away, and then there must bee losse likewise of men; In that though they come, they come home emptied of their men.
By the losse of foure Shippes, wee haue lost at the least foure hundred and fifty men: and in the adventure of some three thousand that haue beene imployed since that voyage beganne, wee haue lost many aboue two thousand.
Dauid refused to drinke of the Well of Betheleme, which the strong men had fetched, when he thirsted and longed, because it was the price of blood. This Trade, their commodities are at a far deerer rate, being bought with so many mens liues.
But happily some will say th^^ the greatest losse
of these men was at the beginning, when as all things are difficult: but since our men, framed to a better composition of themselues, to the variety of this Clymate, and heartned to the tediousnesse of this voyage, haue better endured and ouercome those difficulties, and returned more comfortably. Herein the latest voyages will informe vs best, and we will instance it in the three last that haue made returnes.
The first was vnder Sir Henry Middleton, whose former gouernment in that kind of voyage, had approued his wisdome and moderation. His ship was that famous and infortunate vessell of eleuen hundred Tun;
The Trades Increase. his company in that ship some two hundred and twenty men. After foure yeares errours vp and downe the sea, wherein he vnderwent many constructions at home, and ouercame strange difficulties abroad; hauing, to his eternall reputation of policy and courage, out gone the perfidious Turke, and revenged their barbarous wrongs, to the Marchants gaine, and the Kingdomes repute. After He, and his, had, I say, been accompanied with many sorrowes; with labour, hunger, heate, sicknesse, and perill; That worthy Commander, with many a sufficient Mariner, with the whole number (ten excepted) of his liue Cargazon, perished in that Acheldama, in that bloudy field of Bantam.
Nicholas Dounton, the Vice-admirall of that Fleet returned, and of seuenty he carried forth, brought home some twenty; the rest, their labours and liues were ^^crificed to that implacable
East Indian Neptune:
Captaine Pemerton that escaping imprisonment at Moha, iournying in that vnknown Countrey 15 miles by night, got to the sea side, and finding a small Canow, made a saile of his shirt, and a mast of a stick, and so recouered the ships. the Darling of that voyage is yet there, nor neuer will the Maister, an approued Sea-men, returne, with diuers others.
The second was that of Captaine Saris, and Captaine Towerson, men formerly exercised in those iourneys, and therefore thought meet to command. Whether they were short of the opinion conceiued of them or no, I know not; if they were, I should attribute part of the losse of their men to their insufficiency, but that the destiny of that country chalengeth it all to it selfe. Captaine Towerson who first returned, hauing left behinde him of some hundred and twenty carried forth, fourescore and fiue; and Captaine Saris, of some 90 and odde not having brought home aboue two or three and twenty: the Thomas of that voyage, which went forth with some 60 men, was brought home by way of a wrecke,
By staying an Armenian ship, wherin at least were some 400 men bound to the Indies, and commaunding the Port, hee drew from the^ plain dealing, and made honourable conditions for the Marchants. He encountered foure Gallions, wherein might be some two thousand men. you know the destruction of men that name importeth.
The third, that of Captaine Tho. Best, Admirall of the Fleete, a man whose former behauiour in Sea-affaires, drew into that iourny with great expectation, and which is very seldome and hard, his carriage in this employment went beyond the great expectation of a reposed demeanour, indulgent to his men, vigilant in his charge, his courage like to his cariage; and his fortune aboue all: he checked the Indians, he mated the Portugals: those honour our King, these feare his forces: he setled a trade in Cambaya, reduced things in order in Bantam, brought riches home for the Merchants, and kept reputation for himselfe;
yet for all this he had, Nemesin in dorso, the Indian vengeance hanted his ship euen to our coasts; of some hundred and eighty men vnder him when he went forth, depriuing him of one hundred and odde men for euer. Some foure or fiue and twenty of the remainder are left, on the desperate account of men, for the Countries facteridge, onely thirty are returned. In two great Sea-fights with the Portugals and their Gallions, which continued foure whole dayes, hee lost not foure men. It was not then the fortune of the warre; neither out of want of ought that victuals and good gouernment could affoord; imputations to some other voyages: Nor had the length of time any fault, part of others bane; he hauing made the voyage in shorter space then any other ordinarily; the dogged Starre of those Clymates, the stench of those Countries were his Fatality.
As one Swallow maketh no Summer, so it is not much to bee maruailed, that in all these voyages some one Ship hath not beene scarred, and not else much hurt in this iourney: She indeed but euen seeing those Coasts, and presently on so great a glut of our men and ships, with the which it seemeth the Sea and Land was then busied and full: when as Captaine Newport returned with little losse, and in short time.
Now then as we haue said before, that the Indian shippes die not the ordinary death of Shippes: and that we haue shewen likewise before, that men doe die extraordinarily in this voyage, which is almost incredible: they are distressed likewise after
their death, and that is very apparant by the meane account made to their heires of what they had in possession in their life time, by what should otherwise be due to them in their purchase, by the calamities of their wiues, children, and friends, after their death. Fabulous and phantasticall Legends haue beene made of the restlesse death of many concealed extortioners, and murderers, whose ghosts haue been said to walke in paine and pennance. On the contrary, how many liue bodies, indeed the true images of the deceased, complain on the death, call for the due of their friends, Fathers, Husbands, Children, Kinsfolkes, and Creditors? Poore Ratlife, Lime-house, Blacke wall, Shadwell, Wapping, and other Sea-townes abroad can sensibly tell. The Marchant he is at home, and therefore he cannot embezell the goods abroad: and it is likely, that what is directly proued due, is paid here to theirs. Then is the calamity of that iourney more fearfull, because out of his owne ill Planet it maketh so many miserable. How this is recompenced it is neither my purpose, nor my part to examine: For certaine there is want of Trade: the Hollander would grow greater, if he had all this Trade in his own hands. The Kings customes are now aduanced: This way Shipwrights are set on worke, which must be maintained; and other Mechanical Trades liue hereby, with a number of poore busied. And surely he that would not haue the poore to liue, I would he might begge: And he that would not advance the Kings profire in all liber all manner; and Marchandize is a faire
meanes, I would he might dye: and he that regardeth not his Countries good, it is pitty he was euer borne. I desire not, like a second Phaeton, to make a combustion. All that I would enforce at this time is, that in this trade our men are consumed, and thereby more want of Mariners. Let the Straights-men, and the Lisbone-Merchants complaine of their hinderance this way, and say their traffique before was more beneficiall by much, and more certaine to the Custom-house then the Indies be now. Let others report that the foundation of this trade was layd in the ruine of a Caricke that Sir Iames Lancaster tooke in the first voyage, and that the maine of this after-iollity proceeded of the forced trade driuen with the Mecha Fleete by Sir Henry Middleton,
Wherein hee was his owne Trade-caruer out of tenne hundred thousand pounds worth of goods. whereby diuers durst not go presently after to the Straights, as the Angell, and other shippes, out of rumour of reuenge for violence offered by our Indian men to the Turkes in the red sea. Let the co^mon people say that their commodities are vnnecessary: aske the Tradesmen, nay all men, what they haue cheaper: looke into the price of victuals how it riseth out of their great prouisions. Let the whole land murmure at the transport of treasure, and bring in Charles the fifth his opinion,
Hall Chron. An. 25. Hen. 8. speaking to the Portugals of their trade to the East Indies, who said that they were the enemies to Christendome, for they caried away the treasure of Europe to enrich the Heathen. Let goe the speech of the small reliefe thereby to the poore, and they whom it doth concerne, may suggest the Indian home state and particular
profite. Once I am sure, that as Vespasian the Emperour sayd, He had rather saue one Citizen, then kill one thousand enemies; so his royall Maiesty had rather haue his Subiects, then Custome for them: and you see plainly, that his Maiesties subiects, our country-men, fall this way, and this way is want of Mariners.
Greenland ships, which before I had forgotten, entertaine some Mariners, and helpe to breed others; as of late being fifteene saile, employ some foure hundred men, and may breed of these some fourescore, which helpe somwhat, and may be, by reasonable encouragement, farre more beneficiall, if it be more publique.
And thus we haue runne ouer the materiall trades state and condition in them of sea-men. In all in generall we conceiue want, in regard of the small increase of what is needfull to furnish this great Machina, this goodly Engine of our Seastate, either by supporting their owne members, (the Newcastle trade excepted) or all ioyned together, to make vp the great body of our Lands Nauy: witnesse that general presse that was made of men from all the Coasts, to man the shippes that were to attend that matchlesse pearle, that peerlesse Princesse the Lady Elizabeth her grace, with her hopefull and happy mate, the illustrious Palatine, at their departure; and our nakednesse that would appeare if there were sudden occasion to furnish some sixe of his Maiesties shippes: all which maketh for the furtherance of our proposition of fishing.



The third motiue hereto was Want of Employment.
As the Cosmographers in their Maps, wherein they haue described the habitable Globe, vse to set downe in the extremity of their Cards, on vnknowne Regions and Climates, That beyond those places they haue noted there is nothing but sands without water, full of wilde beasts, or congealed seas, which no ship can saile, or Scithyan liue in: so may I write in the Map of employment, that out of it, without it, is nothing but sordide idlenes, base condition, filling the minde with a hundred Chymeraes and grosse fantasies, and defiling both body and minde with dissolute courses and actions; like fat ground neglected, that bringeth forth a thousand sorts of weeds, or vnprofitable hearbs. And with this disease is our Land affected, our people infected; whereby so many come to an vntimely and reproachfull death in the Land, and many more liue so dissolutely, and so wickedly on the seas. I doe not thinke that in any two kingdomes in Europe, there are so many Iustized for Murderers and Felons yearely, as in England. And aboue all Nations we are most infamous for Pyracies; wherein, against the law of sea-robbers, or at least, besides ordinary example of any other Nation, we forbeare not to prey on our owne Country-men; nay, wee forbeare not our owne acquaintance. Sure the want of grace, and feare of God, is much in most of these: but that men should leaue their wiues, children, and family, and rebel against their owne Soueraignes
lawes, and make warre on all people, proceedeth more out of want of means, want of emploiment at home. Besides, how many that haue more grace, and the same wants, are straightned in their Fortunes, notwithstanding their abilities of body and minde; and are, as it were, damned to pouertie? and more then all these, that haue a litle grace, and lesse meanes, that leade the loathsome life of begging?
Now, if the meanes may be found, nay, if the meanes long found already be offered vnto vs, to redeeme vs out of this disaster, why should wee not vnderstand them? why should we not apprehend them? why should we not be industrious in them? Wee are not those rebellious Israelites that could not see the flowing Land, much lesse enioy it: we haue this place in possession, and if my Ephemerides faile me not, I dare say, Natam inde esse artem, that shall not onely take away all those discontents and miseries, that want of employment breeds in any of our infortunate countrey-men, but that shall also repaire our Nauie, breed sea men aboundantly, enrich the subiect, aduance the Kings custome, and assure the kingdome; and all this in our owne Seas, by fishing, and especially out of Herring. Towards the which, apparant necessity hauing hitherto made vs the way, we are to perswade you to follow in it by the
Facility,Profit, andVse of this fishng.

The Facility, in that the meanes are in our owne hands.
The Place, our owne seas.The Art, well knowne.
The meanes in our owne hands, in that we haue all things that shall be vsed about this businesse, growing at home in our owne Land (Pitch and Tarre excepted) whereas the Hollander, hauing nothing growing in their owne Land for it, is faine to goe to sixe seuerall Countries, and those remote, and vnder diuers Princes, to furnish themselues, and doe furnish themselues meerely with the barter of Fish and Herring taken out of our seas.
Then the place is not farre remoued, if in our owne Seas, if in his Maiesties Dominions, on the coast of England, Scotland, Ireland, is this principall fishing: for by the report of many exercised in this mysterie, and the relation of two especially, painefull herein by their Treatises, Hitchcockes and Gentleman,
The Herrings first, and towards the ending of Summer, shoote out of the deepes on both sides of Scotland and England; and beginne to do first so, on the Scots coast at Midsummer, when is the first and worst fishing.
The second and best is about Bartholomewtide, from Scarbrough in Yorkeshire, till you come to the Thames mouth.
The third, from the Thames mouth through the narrow Seas, but not so certaine, for that extreame weather maketh them shoote on both
sides of Ireland, likewise on the Coast of Ireland is good fishing for Herring, from Michaelmas to Christmas.
On the North-west seas of England, ouer against Carliel, about Wirkentowne, is good fishing for Herring from Bartholmewtide till fourteene daies after Michaelmas. So then it appeareth by these reports, that this fishing for Herring is especially on his Maiesties dominions. And to this end aske the ancient custome of the Hollanders and Flemming, that before they beganne their fishing for Herring, craued leaue of Scarbrough aforesayd: which easily obtained, they then layd their Nets. And howsoeuer it pleaseth his Maiesty to allow of his royall Predecessours bounty, in tolerating the neighbour Nations to fish in his streames: yet other Princes take more straight courses. For whereas till Christmas, on the coast of Norway, called the Mall Strand, all strangers do fish, as Hitchcockes writeth, they then paid a youhendale on euery Last of Herring, to the King of Denmarke. And I can likewise remember, that certaine of our Merchants of Hull had their goods and Shippes taken away, and themselues imprisoned, for fishing about the Ward-house, and not paying the duty imposed on them by the King of Denmarke.
The place, our Seas likewise, for other necessary and profitable fishing: on the Coast of Lancashire from Easter to Midsummer, for Cod, for Hakes; twixt Wales and Ireland, from Whitsontide vntill Saint Iames-tide, for Cod,
and Ling about Padstow, within the Lands end of Seuerne, from Christmas to middle Lent, and in seuen or eight seuerall places more about the Coasts, and within his Maiesties Dominions, the which is largely set downe by Hitchcockes.
Now besides this fishing treasure lyeth easily to bee found in our owne Seas, what good Harbours fitting thereto lye open to vs in our owne Coasts, as Colchester, Harwich, Ipswich, Yarmouth, with a number of other, set downe painfully by Gentleman, together with the commodities they affoord for Timber, Workemanship, furnishing, and harbouring Busses, Nets, and Men?
As the Hauens lye open to vs, as the Seas bee our owne, and as we haue all things almost fitting for such a businesse at home, and naturally, so that nothing may bee wanting to vs but our selues; the Art is well knowne to vs likewise. Maisters for Busses may be had from Yarmouth and Sould, and the rest of the coasts downe the riuer. Vse maketh Fishermen, and these places affoord store of Seafaring men for the purpose. In Orford Hauen and Alborough be many good Fishermen, whose abilities exercised in Busses, would (by Gentlemans report) put downe the Hollander. The like may be sayd of Sould, Dunwich, Walderswich, which breede Fishermen. In all these, and many other places, is this rich Art knowne, but not vsed. In all these, and all other, the Hollanders swimme like Elephants, we wading like Sheepe. We keep the Bankes and Shoales, when as they are in the depth.

Besides, to encourage vs the more, the charges are not great, the paines are not great, the time is not long, the hazard is nothing at all. This is very apparant, and exactly set downe in Gentleman his Treatise, whom I shall but obscure to contract; neither is he long.
The next motiue to this fishing, was that of profite; wherein if euer it were true, that a good cause maketh a good Orator, here is a subiect to enable all meane Rhetoricians. Euery man almost is taken with the attention to profite. Loue doth much, but Mony doth all. Here is money, heere is profite in aboundance, and diuers waies. In aboundance, for that the whole charge of a Busse,
That is betweene sixtie and eightie tunne. with all furniture and appurtenances, betweene thirty and forty Last, will cost about fiue hundred pounds: the charges for keeping her a whole summer at Sea, may be some three hundred three score and fiue pounds: the whole Summer filleth her three times, with making one hundred Last of barrels, amounteth to one thousand pounds; wherby, allowing one hundred pounds for weare of ships, and reparations of nets, there is gained fiue hundred sixtie fiue pounds by one Busse in one yeare, and this is after ten pounds the Last, which was so rated in Hitchcockes time, which is some thirty three yeres agoe; the Hollander, now, selling them for fifteene, twenty pounds, and vpward the Last, at Danske. Hence one may gather of the great gaine, that euen riseth to a priuate purse, by this fishing, with a small aduenture, Busses being the maine (and those likely likewise
to continue, by Gods grace, some twenty yeares) So then her charges returned for keeping her at sea; the first yeare also she quitteth her own selfe, and there is, I say, fiue hundred sixty fiue pounds, as long as she liueth afterwards, dc claro. I would faine know, not desiring to be too curious in a strange Common-wealth, but rather to inuite my Countrey-men into this society, what Trade in the Land did euer in his strength promise so much; howsoeuer, neuer any, I am sure, performed so much, so easily, so continually.
When Antiochus, in his shew to Hanniball of his glorious Army in battel-range, his Elephants being most richly adorned, and all his Souldiers in very braue and costly harnesse and abiliments, willing to draw some acknowledgement from him of his power and strength, asked his opinion of it: the warlike Souldier replied againe, That it was an Armie able to satisfie the most couetous enemy. No question, though the Carthaginian noted the people of cowardise; yet it would require great charges, and cost some bloud, to ouercome such an Armie.
In the best Trade in appearance now that is, (and in those Countries certaine there are infinite riches) you see how remote it is, and with what cost of purse, and losse of people followed, yet without such satisfaction. Here is wealth enough to satisfie the most thirsty thereof, without much cost, without any spoyle; euen almost Salmacida spolia; if not, sine sudore, sine sanguine, and not for a time, but permanent. All other Trades are fetched
as it were, out of a Well, out of the Deepe, I meane from farre, heere is a meere spring which is in superficie hard by vs, out of our owne inexhaustible Sea, from the euer-lasting store of Herring, whence onely the Hollander reapeth a million of gold yearely; besides, the most gainefull fishing with other vessels for Cod and Ling. Hitchcockes long agoe discouered the same, his booke is extant; and fore-named Gentleman hath very plainly set downe, and in very probable and particular manner disclosed the mysteries thereof. And the conceit the Hollanders haue of it, calling it their Chiefest Trade and Gold-mine: and the confidence they haue in it, as laying out their Childrens money giuen them by friends, in aduenturing in Busses, and fathers likewise putting in their childrens portions into Busses; presume of the increase that way, and so proportion a summe certaine out of that gaine, in a certaine time; as also that there is for Orphanes laid out, and so increasing that way for the maintenance of them. Here then we may get treasure in aboundance, and certainly; and besides the gaining of it, we shall stay the vnnaturall tide of the departure and transportation of our gold; a mischiefe, which notwithstanding our royall King was sensible of in the raising of it, yet it still departeth with Vestigia nulla retrorsum, out of the lazy and disgracious Merchandize of our Coasters, that giue away our coine to the stranger for our owne fish. Which vnseasonable and vnprofitable humor of Cauponacion, is this way to be diuerted onely.

But some will say, that our men are not so apt, nor disposed thereto: which cannot be, in regard of the store of Fishermen that our Coasts nourisheth, which liue as hardly, and take as great paines in their fashion; onely wanting the vse of Busses, and seeme to reioyce at the name of Busses, and may on very good reason; for that this Busse-fishing is more easy then any other kind of fishing, which now we vse in Crayers and Punts, as being armed this way better against all weathers, which others suffer and perish in, in other vessels yearly. And as their prouisions are better, and the dangers lesse, so their paines are likewise lesse.
Againe, who will not be exceedingly encouraged with the benefite of such gaine, in so honest a manner, when once the sweete is tasted of, when as otherwise our Countrimen runne such laborious and desperate courses, especially out of want.
Others will say that our Land will not vtter them in any quantity, in regard that the feeding on herring, and fish, doth not taste vs, nor is so receiued as amongst those Holland and Sealand Mermaids. And sure, if those necessary Lawes prouided by our aduised State, for the keeping of fish daies cleane through our Land were better obserued, it would be more wholesome for our bodies, and make much for the aduancing of our fish, and plenty of other victuals; besides the deerenesse of our fish victuall, which more hurteth our purse then our appetites, for that the price is within this 20. yeares almost trebled, which indeed maketh the
true distast, as all Householders finde, and theron feed their housholds with flesh, and otherwise; this fish victuall being now obtained by Merchandize, which indeed is our owne Staple commodity, whereon groweth this penury to the poore, this great price to others, this disvse to all, and in these the Kings, the kingdomes losse. Yet notwithstanding there is such quantity of herring, besides other fish, consumed amongst vs, that Hitchcockes alloweth 10000 Lasts for our prouision of herring to be spent here in the Realme; so that it wold saue at home 100000 pounds of treasure, which to our great shame and losse, the Hollanders carry away, euen for our owne prouision: besides, that prouision is of the worst, such as they call Roopsicke, and such as they are forbidden to bring home. Now to be serued of our worst, whereas we might be our owne caruers, and to giue our gold for that we may haue for nothing; iudge of the losse, of the indignity. And as wee may easily remedy this by our owne industry, so we cannot otherwise excuse the fault: our gracious Prince, no question,
1399 the Art of making cloth, being growne to good perfection, King* Henry the 4. first prohibited the inuention of forrainemade cloth. being ready to assist vs herein by the same fauourable authority which other Trades for their benefite taste most plentifully of, by forbidding the sale and vttering of herring to his loyall subiects by any forrainer or stranger whatsoeuer. And in Holland it is not lawfull for them to buy any of our Herring, if they be brought thither; Nay, if we bring any thither they are burned. Besides what other effects of his incomparable clemency would blesse our industries heerein, hee
being Lord Paramount of these Seas where this fishing food groweth, and which now is taken by strangers? and therefore hee would not questionlesse allow strangers to eate vp the foode that was prouided for the children; the crummes we would not enuy them, though wee are now fed vnder their Table.
Now farther it may be alleaged, that we can vtter no such quantity, nor can affoord no such peny worth. For the first, that must arise out of our diligence. No question we once attaining the Art of the Flemish vsage of these Herring, they will be in as great estimation as the Hollanders, in Normandy, Nants, Burdeaux, Rochell, and other such Countries; for which, returne is made of Wine and Woad, for which is alwaies paid ready gold, with a number of other commodities: They will be in as great estimation in the East Countries, Reuel, Rie, Russie, Danske, Poland, Denmarke, the returnes whereof are set downe in Gentleman. And the quantity of Herring that these fore-named Countries consume is infinite. Therefore though the Hollanders spend more Fish and Herring by much, in their Countries then we do, yet it is their forraigne Trade with all other Nations that is their Basis, else they could neuer employ so many Shippes, nor gaine such wealth, or get such strength thereby. And in all these places wee can and doe Trade, and all their returnes wee neede and vse, and therefore may vtter them in as great a quantity as they doe.

Then for the affoording of Herring and Fish at as good a rate as they can, let any consider of the likelyhood in our behalfe. First it standeth with reason, if we haue the like vessels, we can go with as few men: and our fishermen on the Coast, by diuers reports, can liue as hardly as they. And let any iudge of the hardnesse, when the principall time of fishing for Herring is in September and October, and a sixe weekes time, and they are almost in sight of our owne Coasts; and besides good prouision of butter and cheese and Beere, they haue the plenty of the sea-fish: then this way wee may affoord as good penyworths as they. But I goe further, and say that we haue great vantages of them.
The Seas be our owne, therefore we iourney not so farre as the Hollander doth, whereby likewise our trauaile and charge must be lighter: our ports, harbours and roades be at hand; nay, which is more, all vtensiles and appurtenances belonging to shipping, as is before shewed (Pitch and Tarre excepted) are found in our owne Land; whereas they with great cost, paines, and hazard, fetch them from sixe seuerall places. So then we shall be able to affoord better cheape then the Hollanders;
You English we will make you glad to weare our old shooes. and so we may sell when they cannot, and so the English shall and may weary them, and weare out those flouts wherewith our poore Fisher-men are scorned. For if they bee put by the vttering of their Herrings abroade, they will bee driuen to leaue their great Ships, and fish in smaller vessels neere the
shore to serue their owne turnes, as heretofore they haue caused vs to doe; when as likewise on euery tempest they openly triumph ouer vs, for not taking the blessings of God powred into our lappes.
These hinderances obiected taken away, wee may now resort againe to the sweete fountaine of profite: which besides that it watereth our priuate estates with the continuall spring of great gaine, keepeth in our treasure, which exceedingly now wasteth, bringeth in all commodities that either the East and North Countries, France, or Flaunders, affoords euen for this barter; it runneth into the sea of the Kings custome: the venting onely of ten thousand Last of Herring beyond sea, commeth to fiue thousand pounds after the rate of the ordinary poundage, besides the custome of Cod and Ling, very neere as valuable as the benefit of Herring, the particular view whereof is set downe by him whom I haue so often named, and in whose booke you may see the greatnesse of the custome amounting to aboue 50000 pound starling, that accrueth to those Countries out of this fishing Trade. And yet all this to them is nothing: their keeping in their treasure, their carrying away our treasure, their aboundance with all other commodities, their greatnesse of their custome this way, is nothing in regard of their profit, honor, safety, that their increase of shipping, increase of Mariners this way begetteth to themselues, amongst all nations, to their state.
The life of the sea is in shipping, nay one may
say to ships, Mare non est mare, vos estis mare. The beauty of the Sea is in Shipping: and sure the Poets affirming Venus to be the daughter of the sea, might meane a Ship by her. For Haec vna Venus omnium surripuit Vener^s: and this little land of the Hollanders, exceeded in quantity by Norfolke and Suffolke, hath gotten this sea, hath gained this Venus; England, Scotland, France, and Spaine, for shipping and sea-faring men, not answerable to them; and all spawned out of fish and fishing.
There hath bene numbred in sight two thousand saile of Busses, and other good vessels, gone out to sea at once of the Hollanders: and there hath beene found (by computation) some thirty seuen thousand Fishermen in diuers sorts of vessels at one time employed herein. Hence proceede their great vndertakings, and prodigious aduenturing to all places: hereby they out-goe vs, and ouer-beare all Trades where euer they come. Wee thinke the West-Indie gold to be the cause of the pride and presumption of Spaniards: we may assure our selues, that our North-Indies counteruaile that treasure, and are the onely confidence of the Hollander; euen by breeding sea-men, and increasing of shipping in that aboundance, as that hereby they both swarme euety where, and France, Spaine, and the East Countries are full of their shipping. Hence they fetch our coales, and carry them abroad; from Norway and Danske they bring vs all commodities, and carry forth ours, at a farre better rate then we can our selues: they haue filled Moscouy, whence we are emptied, with thither
shipping; and the Straights abound with them, once our possession. They go into, nay they arme in the West Indies where we may not be seene; and in the East Indies they haue had long setled Factories before vs, and haue foure men to one of ours there, and go beyond vs as farre, besides the number in store of goodly shipping; whereby, as they hinder our trade, so they forbeare not (which I cannot but write with stomacke) the honour of our King and kingdome, as presuming somtimes to call themselues English, and pretend Embassage, and presents from his Maiesty. Which they did to the King of Siam: in other places calling the Crowne and State of England into comparison; which made the King of Achem aske captaine Best, whether the King of England, or the King of Holland, were the greater Monarke.
Besides, what an infinite number of shippes and men of warre haue they alwayes in a readinesse at home? And as the In-keeper of Chalcis sayd to his guest, admiring tantam ferculorum varietatem, It was with Art all cookt out of pork; this their store, this their aboundance, is raised all out of fishing. Who then would not be moued? who would not be stirred vp therewith? Who would not goe a fishing? You see what want we haue of shipping, what want we haue of Mariners, what discouragements we haue in trades, what wants our men are in. When Naaman the Sirian complained to Elizeus of his leprosie, he was bid wash himselfe in Iordan seuen times. He looked for other miraculous courses to be taken by the Prophet, and could
hardly be perswaded thereto, because Abna and Pharphar (flouds of Damascus) were better. Naaman was a Heathen, and had neuer any experience of Gods Iordan: yet hee was in the end perswaded. To supply our wants, to satisfie our hunger, to heale our diseases, there is not a riuer, but a Sea, shewen vs, and that not in another kingdome, but in our owne; wee are but bidden goe and take fish out of it. Wee are Christians, and it is God that hath prouided this remedy: and we see by experience no water like ours, and wee see our neighbours from every place resorting thereto, and healing themselues thereby. You see how it concerneth vs; let vs in the end likewise be perswaded. What the number is of our Sea-men, bred and employed by all sorts of Seatrades, (our petty fishings excepted) may easily be ghest at; and whatsoeuer it may amount to. If out of our whole Land there bee but foure hundred Busses built, and set forth, of seuenty tunne the peece, there are in two yeares nine thousand Mariners more then was in the Land before: let men of experience and state iudge of the proportion by the way of comparison, euery one can perceiue the increase simply. Besides, by the report of some of our best Mariners, these thus bred, proue not onely equall, but better able then any bred otherwise, for Sea-affaires, and publique seruice.
On this publik profit of fishing thus spred abroad the maintenance of Hauens and Hauen townes in England besides, haue no small dependancie, and are so materiall to the land, so plainly vnderstood
of all his Maiesties subiects; and so welwished to by Hitchcockes and Gentleman, that it is enough for me but to poynt at them: we all know the vse of them: they shew the decay; and this Art, the reparation and maintenance of them.
The vse of this fishing is implied much in the profite, but more eminent by the consideration againe of the infinite number otherwise of idle people, and out of imployment. Onely by this Art, it is reported not one goeth a begging in all the Low-countries; and what a number of people haue we, that, now destitute of meanes, may this way haue a calling? It is a grieuous sin, Idlenesse, and bringeth forth, as we see, horrible effects: to get a liuing by the sweat of our brows, is the ordinance of God, and this way there is a recompence. There were found in Yarmouth the last yeare, three or foure hundred, and those of honest disposition, that wanted meanes: and how many hundred more are there in other places, that wold gladly be thus vsed? Hichcockes alloweth to euery one in this imployment, twenty pounds yearely, besides his diet, for his reward, a good sauour to honest men that now haue no meanes; and this onely out of two voyages for Herring. A number of Carpenters and Shipwrights shall be set a work, Coopers busied numbers of people making lines, ropes, cables,, dressers of hempe, spinners of thrid, makers of Nets, bred; many salt-houses set vp, besides what store of poore people, all along on the sea-coasts, which are now very poore and idle in England and Wales, to be vsed in splitting of fish, washing of fish, packing, salting, carrying and recarrying
of fish. And on these foresaid occupations depend an infinite number of seruants, boyes and daily labourers, for the vse of things needfull. Nilus, whose fertility is enuied, affoordeth not so many sorts of fish, of monsters, as this fishing entertaineth sorts of people: which humbly committing to the high disposer of all hearts, and to the due consideration therby of his Ministers here on earth, I will leaue further to enlarge; and shut vp this abrupt discourse with the allusion of that of Basil to this sea-businesse, Putei dum hauriuntur speciosiores.
Now for a Corollary to all these imperfect lines: whereas in the superficiall suruey of want of shipping, we find most of our sea-trades, either decaying, or at a stay, let me out of themselues, without offence, propound the consideration of one remedy therto; euen by a freedom of Traffique for all his Maiesties subiects to al places. Hereby his maiesties customes will increase, the nauy and sea-men will receiue nourishment out of more imployment, the whole incorporation of marchants reap comfort, in that they may communicate with all aduentures, and the vniversal body of the subiects of the land content, in that they may become merchants; being very ready in this aduentrous world to make new discoueries: whereas now otherwise merchandize, sorting and setled in companies, confineth merchants into those limits that priuate orders tie them in, so that they may not helpe themselues through any discouragements in one trade, but by sute and submission of themselues to the other; though, I say, their trades faile them, and other
haue too much: nor may any else of the kingdome come amongst them, though neuer so able and well disposed, vnlesse they come in on such conditions as the victor pleaseth to propound. A thing in ordinary sence somewhat harsh to fellow-subiects, and equall Citizens in this great Monarchie, to be so seruiceably tyed and subiect one vnto the other; and the rather for that those priuiledges, by the indulgencie of the Prince, being granted as a reward to some for their industries, and exemplary to others incouragements, are strictly vsed to the eternall benefite of a few, and the wrong of all the residue.
The French company manifesteth this plainly, which if it had continued (and it beganne but the other day) had vndone all the Westerne men.
The Moscouie company declareth the same, as being granted on condition of seruing his Maiesty of all materials (as Flaxe, Oyle, Waxe, Tallow, Cordage) belonging to shipping: whereas now it is supplyed by strangers, euen ten for one ship, and those double our burdens; and notwithstanding they doe not performe, and haue let fall their Trade, yet none may enter but on their conditions.
The Greenland company, out of the pretence of their first Whale-hunting, keepe all Fishermen, notwithstanding they knew and vsed those seas, from further resort thither: and some Marchants of Hull were taken by them in that iourney, and brought backe; notwithstanding, as I am informed, those countrey-men found it first.

The Virginia company pretend almost all that Maine twixt it and New-found-land to bee their Fee-simple, whereby many honest and able mindes, disposed to aduenture, are hindred, and stopped from repairing to those places, that either knew or would discouer vnfound euen for fishing.
The East India men, not able to furnish those places they resort to, keepe out other from comming amongst them, and to looke into those parts they know not, and would giue out of their largenesse and riches, entertainment to all the Marchants in the Land. Besides, how tedious and costly they, and all other Companies, make it to their owne Associates, when as out of orders, and cause of vpholding their Trade, men can neither dispose of their owne as they would, nor haue the benefite vnder a long time. Besides, how priuate doe they, and other Companies, make it, when as out of orders and maintaining their Trade, how plentifully soeuer the commodities are brought in, and at what advantage soeuer they buy them, they will be sure to keepe vp the price, either by sending forth most part of the commodities abroade, or else by buying all others into their hands? that other is hard for the owner somtimes, but he doth it in his owne wrong; but to the buyer this is alwaies iniust, for that he suffereth against his will, the common-wealth being made private, suffereth by all; this, that, the first, and all the more disco^tentful, in that besides that all other Nations resort freely to all those places whence they keepe out their owne Country-men, the like
fashion of Companies and Societies is not vsed in all Christendome else; it being lawfull and vsuall to all other amongst themselues, promiscuously to frequent and communicate with places, and Trades, one by the other. Nay, this separation of Trading, and excepting of Subiects from places, betweene diuers Princes that had but peace one with the other, was so admired and disallowed of,
Hall. Ann. 15. Hen. 8. formerly, that Charles the 5 Emperour, being moued by the Portugals, being vnder their owne absolute King then, to forbeare the Eeast Indie Trade, because they had found it; answered, That he had peace with them, and therefore he would haue Trade with them; for they were not his friends, but his enemies, that would hinder him of it. How much more we, murmuring at this iniquity, may affirme that we are all Britaines, all subiects to one royall King, all combined together in one naturall league, and therefore not to be barred from trading equally to all places? which his gracious Maiesty, together with the whole assent of the high Court of Parliament, openly professeth,
Ann. 3.1 Iacob. 6. when as there was enacted free liberty for all his Maiesties Subiects, to Trade into the Dominions of Spaine, Portugall and France, with most sufficient reasons therfore; for the increase of shipping, mariners, thousands of Handicrafts men, of prices of their owne commodities, and augmentation of them, together with the plenty of forraine commodities, and a cheapnesse of them, and the bettering of his Maiesties customes. No one man euer inuented all Sciences, nor any Merchant found all places: yet they make a compensation
one to another. Society first beganne, and knowledge and ciuility, by communication. But if the world in his infancy had beene resolued to haue held priuate what they had in possession, and to haue concealed what they knew, there had not onely been no ciuility, but no society. Yet as the first maintainers of Society had their honour; the first inuentors of Sciences and Arts their rewards; and in all well-disposed States, the Industries of those that do benefit them, haue their encouragements: so is not this my proposition of free Trade otherwise entertained, then that there should be a due respect had of all worthy aduenturers, an especial consideration of the charges and hazard of the first discoueries: which the solertious Hollander examples vs, by forbidding their owne Subiects to trade to those places which some particular purse hath, or shall finde out, before that the first Founders haue receiued reasonable benefite of their paines and charges; allowing them some sixe returnes to their owne priuate aduentures, before any else set thitherward. If those aduentures or returnes were increased here for the Finders content, and profit: there is no man would grudge it. But to keepe others out for euer, vnlesse they pay, and submit themselues according to their order, and to their gouernment; or vnder the pretence of one place found to include more then was euer meant; seemes very iniurious. Againe, my Proposition is not any way so tumultuous, as that thereby I would excuse all order and forme of Gouernment, in Trades, or otherwise to intend a promiscuous kind of calling, or rather confusion
of all sorts. Who knoweth not that the Common-wealth consisteth, Non ex medico, and medico; sed ex medico, and Agricola? as also that there must be an Oeconomicall and discreete partition and proportion among the members; Diuers trades, to maintaine the generall body Commerce? I haue onely poynted at some aberrations, but as the Nouice, trauelling through strange Countries, Topmando, or tanquam canis ad Nilum. The prosecuting of this Argument would draw on a larger discourse then all the whole former, and would then exceed a Corollary, and detaine the Reader too long. Neither like I the issue of medling, when men tire themselues with controuling of publicke matters, yet many times cannot manage their owne affaires. I make no intrusion into Merchants Mysteries, neither desire to pry into the States secrecie. It was a foolish complaint of the Poet, Cur aliquid vidi? it is much more for me to say, Cur aliquid scripsi? I am so far from giuing any cause of publique offence, that I would not iustly prouoke any priuate person. I was borne in the Cittie, and liue amongst Sea-men. And as some Almanacke-makers, when they pretend exactnesse in their Calculations, though they doe but roue, vse to appropriate their obseruations to the place they liue in: so I, writing with the same knowledge, would say I desire good to the Meridian of these two places; notwithstanding, as they say also, These may serue alike to all the Land.

FINIS.


