




PSAL. 102. vers. 13, 14.

13. Thou shalt arise, and haue mercy
vpon Sion, for the time to fauour
hir, yea the set time is come.
14. For thy seruants take pleasure in
hir stones, and fauour the dust
thereof.


THE Verses are two, so are my
parts; the one belongeth to
God, Thou shalt arise etc. The
other to man; For thy seruants
take pleasure etc. Both
these riuers of mercy, the waters that bee
aboue the firmament, and the waters beneath,
Mercy from heauen, and mercy
from earth, run into Sion; there is Collectio
aquarum, the subiect and sea of miserie,

and therefore the fitter vessell to receiue
mercy.
Mercy doth well to all sorts of men,
but especially to the houshold of Faith, Galat. 6.
therefore to Sion aboue all the parts of the
earth: And mercy commeth amisse at no
time; but how faire is mercy in a time of need?
Vt nubes pluviae tempore siccitatis, 35. Ecclis.
as a clowd of rain in the time of drought,
therefore, when the time, the set time to
haue mercy is come. And mercy is a
gracefull ornament in all sorts of men,
especially in those, that are the children of
God, Bee yee mercifull, as your heauenly Father
is mercifull. Luc. 6. therefore the seruants take
pleasure etc. But when wee haue all sayd
or done, the mercy of God is aboue all
his works, and therefore aboue the mercies
of all men and Angels, O let me fall into
the hands of God, for his mercy is exceeding
great, but let mee not fall into the hands of men.
2 Sam. 24. therefore Tu exurgens, Thou
shalt arise and haue mercy vpon Sion.
All these parcells of my text, when I
consider them aright (me thinketh) they
walke togither, as the beasts and birds

that went into the Arke, all by couples.
First, here is God and his mercy, Tu
misereberis; but not without an accent.
Tu exurgens, thou shalt arise, and haue
mercy: that is, it is not a wishing and
woulding mercy, but a preuailing, speeding,
releeuing mercy.
Secondly, here is Sion, and her misery;
for miserable shee must needs bee, that
standeth in need of mercy; but not without
an accent. When it is come to that
extremitie, that the (...) of Sion is
brought to an (...), hir composition to
resolution, euen vnto the stones and dust
of it.
Thirdly, here is time, and times opportunity,
but not without an accent, of the
vtmost exigent, pressure and hazard of
time, that can be imagined; for it is time,
and with an (...), eccho, resound, againe
time, and with an (...), the very set and
appoynted time is come.
Lastly, here are the seruants of God, and
their charity; but not without an accent.
For it is such a charity, as bringeth affliction,
disquiet, pitty into their soules,

(which is affectio maerens, a mournfull affection)
for the miserie of Sion. Put them
all together. To vndergoe this worke
of restauration,Act. 3. (...), you haue the
powerfullest agent,Tu Exurgens Thou: and his readiest
propension, preparation to it, shalt
arise: with his sweetest action, and haue
mercy:Misereb* the dearest obiect, not an vnica,
a soule,Sion. a saint, but Sion, a Church, a Communion
of Saints: in the vrgent'st time,
when time,Tempus etc. yea time, the appoynted time is
come: not onely in the wisdome of God,
but in the opinion of men: for the seruants
of God,Serui tui out of their tenderest and
softest affections of loue and compassion,diligunt lap: to
the extremest desolation and dissolution
of Sion,miserentur pulueris. euen in materiam primam, to the
very stones and dust of it, call for comfort.
Thou shalt arise and haue mercy vpon Sion,
for the time etc.
I begin with the first part,1. Part. which is
Gods part, and belongeth vnto him,
Wherein you haue his person, Tu, his position,
exurgens, his disposition, misereberis,

his patient, Sion, the perswasion, quia
tempus, and the pressure of that perswasion,
statutum tempus.
Tu.Tu. 1. His person. We begin well, in Dei
nomine: My text, and the worke of my
text, haue a blessed beginning. Quod foelix
faustumque fit. Wee begin with God, Christo
duce and auspice Christo: and God must begin
the worke.
Ad prima^ voce^ timidas aduertimus aures.
I craue your religious attention for the
first words sake. In the beginning God made
heauen and earth: and God must begin to
new make Sion, or it will neuer be. Nisi
Dominus aedificauerit, vnlesse the Lord build
the house, their labour is but lost that
build it. We see the disioynted stones of
Sion, like the dismembred parts of Medeas
children, and hir honour layd in the dust:
Out of such weake and beggerly elements,
who can repaire hir againe, but he
that of the dust of the ground (which is
the terme of my text) made man, and of
the rib of the man, as it were one rafter
of the house, built the woman (wee are
speaking of building) and of the stones

by the riuers bankes, raiseth vp children to
Abraham? Sonne of man (God to his
Prophet, 37. Ezech.) shall these bones liue?
Lord thou knowest. Erant sicca vehementer,
they were very dry. Yet prophecie: and
hee prophcied, and the spirit of life entred
into them, and they came togither bone
to his bone. Shall these disiected and deplored
stones euer come togither againe,
and shall the dust arise and giue thanks to thee,
and serue in thy Sanctuary? (they aske
the question in scorne Nehem. 4. Nunquid
aedificari poterunt lapides ex aceruis pulueris?
Shall these stones bee built out of the heaps of
dust?) Yes, for Tu exurgens misereberis,
Thou shalt arise and haue mercy vpon
Sion. It is plainely exprest Zach. 4. Non
in exercitu etc. not by an armie, nor by strength,
but by my spirit, saith the Lord: and they shall
bring forth the principall stone, with showting
and crying, Grace, Grace vnto it. Wee haue
begun happily, bonis auspicijs, (...), with
the good speed of God. Other foundation
can no man lay. And hauing found
out (...), a wise Master-builder of
the worke, let vs seeke out the worke

it selfe. To this hee commeth addrest
and prepared.Exurgens. 2. Exurgens, thou shalt arise,
as a Bridegroome (saith the Prophet
of the Sunne) that commeth out of his
bride-chamber, or like a strong man to runne
his race, Psal. 19. or as one that awaketh out
of sleepe, or as a Gyant refresht with wine. Psal.
78. After long expectation, till their eyes
faile in their heads, and strong exclamation,
till their tongues cleaue to the roofes
of their mouthes, vp Lord, why sleepest thou?
and proud insultation of the enemy, where
is now their God? Exurgam, ait Dominus, I will
vp, saith the Lord, and helpe the distressed.
Thou shalt arise. And wee must arise in
our thoughts, and not haue so grosse and
earthly a conceit of God, as if hee arose
indeed, who neuer sitteth, or lyeth
downe, or giueth any rest to the temples
of his head, or as if hee returned to his
worke, which he neuer intermitteth, Semper
agens, semper quietus, saith S. Austin. It
were a phrase of speech fitter to be vsed to
Samson sitting in the lap of Delilah, Tu exurge,
Vp Samson, the Philistines are vpon thee;
or to Ionas sleeping in the bottome of the

ship, Quid tu soporate? Vp sleeper, call vpon
thy God; or in scoffe and subsannation of
some Idoll-god,1 Reg. 18. as Elias of Baal, perhaps he
sleepeth, But viuens vidensque, that euer-liuing
and all-seeing God, whose eyes are
neuer closed vp, Hee neither slumbreth, nor
sleepeth, that keepeth Israel, and whose seuen
eyes goe thorow the earth, Zach. 4. Nunquam
minus otiosus, quam cum otiosus, neuer doing
more, then when hee seemeth to doe nothing
at all, cannot in propriety of speech,
thus bee entreated: But, as himselfe speaketh,
Hos. 12. (after the Latine) Assimilatus
sum in manibus Prophetarum, it hath euer
beene the manner of Prophets, and the
Pen-men of the Holy Ghost, to make resemblances
and expressions of God, from
the fashions of man; who, when he is weary
and giueth ouer his worke, sitteth vpon
a stoole, as old Eli, or languidus in cubitum,
leaneth vpon his arme, or stretcheth
himselfe vpon a couch: But, when he intendeth
his businesse to purpose, then hee
standeth vpon his feet, explicateth and
displayeth his limbes, and setteth his
whole body in a readinesse.

And thus in a parable and some sort
doth God; His cessation and pawsing to
vs-ward for the time from outward and
apparant help, carrieth some shew of indisposition
and otiation in God, as if he
were gone to rest, and minded vs not. But
doe we heare of his rising vp? We may
assure our selues, the Lord will neglect vs
no longer, but the worke of his prouidence
and care, which hath bin throwne
aside for the time, will in hand againe.
To be short, that, that we gaine by Exurgens,
is this; that the mercy which God
intendeth to Sion, is not a mentall mercy
alone, we wish you good lucke; nor onely
a verball mercy, Goe in peace, helpe your
selues, Iam: 2. it is a reall and effectuall
mercy, in that God doth arise, that is, aduance
and exalt himselfe, and gather his
forces about him to exhibite this mercy.
And so from his person, Thou, and his position,
or prouision, shalt arise, we are come
to the third, his disposition; which in man
is affection and passion, but in God, action.
Thou shalt haue mercy.Misereb.
Misereberis. We neuer came at the kernell 

and marrow of my text till now. This
is the (...), the word of comfort:
Sion had no hope of recouerie, till shee
heard of the sweet name of mercy. Crueltie
pulled hir downe, exinanite, exinanite,
downe with hir, downe with hir, euen to the
ground, and drew the line of vanitie ouer
hir, Mercy must set hir vp againe. Tu misereberis,
is a large theme to preach vpon;
and I haue but my time, yea my set and appointed
time, and therefore must march like
Iehu.
The heauens are within a span, the
earth within a circle, the waters within
the fist, the mountaines vpon the ballance,
the Sunne within tropicks, but
what number, or measure, or bounders
shall I set to the mercies of God? He that
had wisedome as a floud, the Preacher of
Preachers, and preached vpon that sad
text, wofull and disgracefull to the sonnes
of men, Vanitie of vanities, all is vanitie, how
iustly and euerlastingly might he haue
preached vpon this text, Mercy vpon mercy,
all is mercy? O mercy, the lady and empresse
of all the glorious attributes of

God, what shall I say of thee? Heauen
and earth are full of thy glory: The glorious
company of the Prophets praise
thee, the goodly fellowship of the Apostles
praise thee, the noble armie of Martyrs
praise thee, the holy Church throughout
all the world doth acknowledge thee.
Of all those infinite treasures and riches,
which that immensitie of the Godhead
aboundeth with, what is there to
vs, wormes of the earth, which lye
low at his footstoole, that wee dare approch
and claspe in the armes of our
soules, and loue as our eyes, but mercy
alone? His Maiestie astonisheth vs, his
glory beateth vs downe, his greatnes striketh
vs dead, we adore his omnipotency,
admire his wisdome, stand in awe of his
iustice, flie from his vengeance; in mercy,
mercy alone, we taste how gracious and
amiable the Lord is. Out of that strong,
is this sweet, out of that lyon this honycombe,
out of that greatnes, this goodnes,
that is so much sought and pursued by vs.
I could liue and dye in the contemplation
of mercy. Blessed be hir wombe that

bare vs, and hir paps that gaue vs sucke,
we liue and moue and haue our being by
her. Shee grew vp with vs from our
youth, and forsaketh vs not, when we are
gray-headed, shee giueth vs, our daily
bread, and hourely breath; continueth vs
in life, comforteth vs in death, and crowneth
vs with life in the world to come.
Two things there are, which, without
betraying my text, I may not let passe:
 the one, the nature and valour of a true,
generous, Christian faith, bearing hirselfe
so stoutly and resoluedly vpon the immutable
eternity of God (in the verse before
my text, Thou Lord abidest for euer,
whereupon my text ensueth) and the yea
and amen of his faithfull promises, that in
a case of greatest extremity, as this was,
shee standeth not vpon termes of vncertainty,
si forte, it may bee God will haue
mercy, at this time maketh not so much
as entreaty, Tu miserere, Doe thou haue
mercy; but out of a strong (...),
confident, abundant perswasion, that
God can no more deny to bee mercifull
to hir, then denie himselfe, shee layeth

hand fast vpon God, and by anticipation
before hand, maketh a promise, and
saith to herselfe, Tu miserebere, Thou shalt:
as the Sunamite to the Prophet, catching
hold on his feet, though Gehezi thrust her
away, Viuit Dominus, as the Lord liueth
and as thy soule liueth, I will not let thee
goe: And, as Iacob to the Angell, when
hee had wrestled the whole night with
him, Non dimittam, I will not let thee
loose, till I haue a blessing from thee.
The other, the modesty and humility 
of Faith, bold as a Lyon, but meeke as a
Lambe. Sion had as much to glory in, as
any hill in the world.Psal. 68. Why hop you so, you
high hills? this is the Lords hill. If any other
may seeme to be confident in the flesh, that is, in
earthly prerogatiues (may Sion say, as the
Apostle, 3. Philip.) much more I. I shall say
no more at the present, but as the Psalme
saith;Psal. 48. Goe about Sion, number her turrets, mark
well her bulwarkes; Goe about the Scripture,
number the praises, marke well the
priuiledges of Sion:2 Cor. 12. yet will not Sion reioyce,
sue in her infirmities: and the plea of
Gods Seruants, on behalfe of Sion, is not,

Turetribues, thou shalt requite Sion; quia
dignus est, vt hoc illi praestes, Luc. 7. Sion is
worthy of fauour from thee; but in the
language of Canaan, the true Church of
God abandoning all merit, and worth in
Sion, Tu misereberis, Thou shalt haue
mercy.
Their speech bewrayeth them (as they
sayd to Peter) to bee of Asdod or Aegypt,
that bring into the Church of Christ, the
name of merit.Gen. 11. That, as those of the old
world, to get them a name vpon earth,
make bricke of their owne deuising, and
build them a Babel, a Towre that reacheth
vp to Heauen; and when they had
all done, they had but bricke for stone (the
Scripture noteth) and slime for morter, and
the end was confusion: So these, to get them
a name and opinion, of being more holy
then other men, (touch mee not, I am of purer
mold then thou art) make brick of their own
pure naturals, and inherent righteousnes,
to build vp a Babel of merit, that shall
gaine them the Kingdom of Heauen, and
when they haue all done, it is but the
bricke and slime of mortall corruption,

and they can prognosticate to themselues
no fairer end, then Babels was. I maruell
what region of the world, they can rake
into,Psal. 136. to find out merit? for, By his wisdome,
he made the Heauens, because his mercy endureth
for euer: And laid out the earth aboue the waters,
because his mercy endureth for euer. Giue me a
thousand, and million more of the actions
of God, the amaebaeum and burthen to
them all must be, because his mercie endureth
for euer. And I haue read of a Mercy-seat, in
the Temple of God; but I neuer heard of
a Stoole of merit, but in the Chappell of
Antichrist.
Sion is the obiect of mercy; Sion, a 
Mount by nature,Sion. by nature and art togither,
a Fort; by misprision and errour, for
the time, a Fort of the Iebusites, enemies
of God; by conquest and purchase (Mons
dextra Dei acquisitus) the Fort of Dauid;
by accession and improuement of honour,
first the Palace, and afterwards the
Citie of the great King; by grace, the Habitation
and Mansion of God (God is well
knowne in hir palaces;) by type, the figure
of the Church, both militant in this

world, and triumphant in the world to
come. And well might it; for there was
tabernaculum, the tabernacle for the Arke of
Gods strength, and the seat of Gods worship,
and there the Coenaculum, Conclaue of
the Apostles of Christ, where they receiued
the first Sacrament of his Body and
Bloud, were inspired by the Holy Ghost,
had the keyes of the Kingdome of Heauen
deliuered vnto them, chose Matthias
to the Apostleship, gaue Orders of Deaconship
to S. Stephen and others, and formed
the first infancie of the Gospell of
Christ; So that Sion, by birth-right and
eldership, carrieth the honour of the Gospell,
from all the parts of the earth. Lex
e Sione. And it were no Soloecisme in
Diuinitie, nor any violent straine to
the booke of God, to say that the Temple
of Ierusalem stood vpon Sion. For,
though it was seated vpon Moriah, a lower
hill; yet, was that Moriah, a part of the
daughter of Sion, the issue, as it were, of hir
wombe; because, in dependance and
continuance, it grew out of Sion. Sion
and Ierusalem (ioyne them both togither;

for, by an easie coalition in Scripture, they
may stand for one, (they differ but as mother
and daughter, the vpper and nether
Citty,Es: 31. Mons Sion and collis eius, a mount and
an hillock) for salubritie of ayre, fertilitie
of ground, munition of place, beauty of
building, populousnes of inhabitants,
(sowen with the seed of man and beasts)
commodiousnes of situation, placed (as
they write) in the vmbilike and center of
the earth, the miracle of the world, the Metropolis
of that land, the Metropolis (saith
Hesychius) of all the miracles of God: Gloriosa
de te dicuntur Ciuitas Dei: this Citty, Sanctuary,
jewell, dearling of God, princesse
and paragon of all the places vnder
heauen, became (as the name of Sion importeth)
specula and speculum, and such
like, the watch towre, beacon, mirrour,
looking-glasse, terror, spectacle, parable,
hissing to all the nations in the world,
of more stupendious miserie, and consequently,
(when the light of Gods countenance
shone vpon it againe) of more
insignious mercy, then the whole earth
besides. They are harder then stones and

rocks, and viler then the dust, that the accursed
serpent licketh vp, that heare of
the stones and dust of Sion, and are not
grieued at them. The bowels of Scythians
and Massagetes would be turned
within them. A Citty so sanctified and
dignified, possest (I grant) at the first by
the Iebusites, and vnder the name of
Iebus well neere 500. yeares; but afterwards
recouered and held by Dauid, and
his line, almost 500. more, the strongest
and stateliest pile of building that euer
the eyes of the Sunne looked vpon,
more, then the Aegyptian spires, or all the
Mausolaeas in the world; and then ouer-turned,
ouer-turned, ouer-turned, as a man turneth
a platter vpside downe, by the proud
Assyrian Monarch; and after the dead
winter of that desolation, recouering a
fresh spring, at the end of 500 yeares
more, sackt and demolished by the Romane
Conqueror; and (to lengthen the
storie a litle farther) after all this, Saeuitum
in vulnera,Cypr. that they spared not the very
ruines and fragments, but brake them
downe to the ground, and sowed the

whole land with salt. And (to beare the
rest company) that glorious Temple of
Salomon, one of the goodliest limmes of
that beautifull body, made for the eyes
of God, and Angels, and Men, to contemplate
vpon, worthy enough to denominate
the whole City, as if Hierosolyma
had the name of (...); that, in
honor wherof they exalted their tongues
like trumpets, the temple of the Lord, the
temple of the Lord, this is the temple of the Lord:
and (to say no more of it, then God by his
Prophet, Ezech. 24.) Superbia imperij vestri,
desiderabile oculorum vestrorum, super quo pauet,
anima vestra, the pride of your power,
desire of your eyes, and feare of your
soules; this temple (I say) in one thousand
yeares, the same moneth, the same
day, twice burnt downe to the ground;
and after the Mount Moriah, whereon it
was built, euened with the plaine, and the
earth of it throwne downe into the valley
of Iehosaphat, and brooke of Kedron;
so that sooner or later, foxes ran ouer the
Sanctuarie, saith Ieremie, Lam: 5. but Ierome
goeth farther, there ran not a beast,

neither flew there a Fowle ouer the whole
coast of Ierusalem, it was so dismall and
desolate. And now lastly, abused to bee
the cage of all vncleane birds, Satyres and Schrichowles
to dwell in the parlors of it, I meane Saracens
and Infidels: he that can heare or
read these things, without mone and
compassion, I shall say his bowels are
harder then the anuile the Smith smiteth
vpon: therfore there was reason enough
to cry, Tu misereb: Sion, Thou shalt haue
mercy vpon Sion.
The rather for the reasons sake that followeth,
quia tempus miserendi eius, because it
is time to haue mercy vpon hir.
Time yeeldeth a strong perswasion;quia tempus.
 when the time is past, perijt spes nostra, our
hope is gone. (...); (say they
to the Ruler of the Synagogue, 5. Mar.)
Thy daughter is dead: the time past.
Master, if thou hadst beene here, my brother
had not died (Martha, 11. Ioh.) now
he is dead and buried: the time past. Nos
sperabamus, wee hoped it had beene he that
should haue redeemed Israel, hee is now dead
three dayes sithence (the two Disciples

Luc. 24.) the time past. I say it is a strong
perswasion that floweth from time: and
it is as strongly enforced in my text, nayle
after nayle, driuen home to the head.
Time and (by apposition) time againe,Tempus, tempus statutum venit. and
(at the period and full poynt) appoynted
time, and time come: that is to say, time
and season of time, and season of season:
or time, and opportunity, and necessity
of opportunity, and extremity of necessity,
and the very dregs and setling of extremety:
the punctum, the nunc, the moment
and indiuisibility of time. Tempus
faciendi Domino, now or not at all.
When I see the Spirit of God in the
mouthes of these suppliants, pressing so
strictly and punctually, I say not the
circumstance, but the instance, which indeed
is the substance of time, instanter, instantius,
instantissime, againe and againe, and
neuer often enough; time treading vpon
the heele of time and incandescit eundo, it
gathereth strength by going; but that the
sickle of time, which cutteth all things,
threatneth to clip the wings of my
speech, how would I vrge vnto you in

all your weighty affaires, the presentest
prensation and pursuit of the very forelock
of time? Will you show mercy to
Sion, giue helpe to the helplesse? Marke
not the winde, you shall neuer sow then, obserue
not the clouds, you shall neuer reap. Say to your
selues, It is time, yea time, the appointed time is
come. Momenti transitus, anni transitus, aeui transitus
est: Once lost, and euer lost. Will you
shew mercy to your soules, by repenting
your sinnes? Deferre not from day to
day; Deterior posterior dies, the longer, the
worse. Say to your selues, It is time, yea
time, the appoynted time is come. (...),
good is not good, mercy is not mercy,
that commeth not in time. But, as a messe
of meat set vpon a graue, where the dead is
no whit the better for it.
It is thought, by many learned Scribes,
that this Psalme was fitted for the mouths
of the Iewes, in the captiuity of Babylon.
When the seuenty yeeres, mentioned Ier.
29. were neere their expiration. This time
they calculated, and pitched vpon exactly,
out of the Ephemerides, and Booke of
God, that could not deceiue them: and

therefore, by warrant from him, they
pinch thus closely vpon the time: Tempus
miserendi, tempus etc. They may boldly
and safely do it, when God himselfe hath
prefined a time. Otherwise, let no man
presume to appoint his times, quae posuit in
potestate sua, (they are a part of his royall
prerogatiue, who can cause the Sunne to
stand still, and double the day, to bring his
worke to an end) nor tye him to canonicall
houres, and atomes, and puntilio's of
time, tempus, tempus, statutum tempus. It is a
sinfull temptation.Iudg 8. Vos qui estis? Who are
you, that tempt the Lord? (when they fixed
him a time of fiue dayes, to releeue the Citie
of Bethulia, els to deliuer it vp to the enemie)
Binde not the counsell of the Lord, he is
not as men, that he should be threatned, with
much to the like effect. O tarry the Lords
leasure, be strong, comfort your hearts, possesse
your soules in patience, if the vision stay, stay
with it, hope euen against hope: Nullu^ tempus
occurrit Regi, is the priuiledge of an earthly
King, much more of the King of Kings;
who, when he is pleased to helpe, can doe
it in ictu oculi, in the twinckling of an eye,

and sub ictu gladij, vnder the dint of the
sword, as in the case of Isaac, when manubrium
e manu, God so forced the heft of the
knife, in the hand of Abraham, that he
could not smite.
I haue done with my former part,
Gods part; the latter, which belongeth
to man,2 Part. followeth. Quoniam placuerunt.
For thy Seruants take pleasure in hir stones, etc.
It is but a second reason added to the
former; that in effect was this: Thou
shalt haue mercy vpon Sion, because the
time requireth it. This latter importeth, but
thus much: Thou shalt haue mercy vpon
Sion, because thy Seruants desire it. It is
both subsequent and subordinate to the
other; for, the mercy of God in the former,
is both the exemplary, and efficient
cause of mans mercy in the latter. That
is to say, God doth both lead the way, and
giue grace to man, to extend his mercy.
Therefore, where the vsuall reading
is, Tu exurgens, thou shalt arise, and haue
mercy; Ierome, out of the Hebrew, readeth
transitiuely, Tu suscitans, thou shalt
raise vp others. He that brought water

out of the rocke, and honie out of the
stone, can wring mercy out of the heart
of an enemie. He made all them that led them
away captiue, to pity them. Man would grow
wilde, and degenerate from nature, forget
that he is a man, become a wolfe, a Deuill
to man; but that God keepeth him in
tune.
Amongst these Seruants of God,Thy Seruants. they
ranke in the first place, Cyrus and Darius,
Lords ouer men, but seruants to God,
and (as a seruant is defined by Aristotle) his
liuing Instruments, to doe their Masters
will. Thus God speaketh to Cyrus, Esa. 44.
Thou art my shepheard, and he shall do my desire.
He shall say to Ierusalem, Thou shalt be built, and
to the Temple, thy foundation shall be surely laid.
The story is very strange, in the booke of
Esdras, the first and sixt Chapters especially,
and shall be opened amongst other
bookes, at the day of the Lord, against
many beleeuers: that a paire of out-landish,
and heathen Kings, should not only
giue leaue to the Iewes, to returne to their
Countrey, and build both their City and
Temple, and restore them their vessels

and iewels, that had beene taken from
them; but allow the expence of their
building, out of their owne reuenues, and
supply them beside, for sacrifice and sweet
odours, with a checke to all their aduersaries,
be yee far from thence, and a peremptory
decree, that whosoeuer should alter that
sentence, the wood should bee pulled
downe from his house, and he hanged
therevpon, and his house made a draught-house.
And lastly, a direfull imprecation
against all Kings and people, that should
put their hands to alter, and destroy the
house of God in Ierusalem.Esa. 49. Erunt Reges
nutritij tui, was Gods promise, Kings shall
be thy nursing fathers: here is much more,
Nudauerunt lamiae mammam, Euen Dragons
draw out their breasts, Lam. 4. when the
people and house of God, such milke out
of the breasts of Gentiles.
Others fall lower a degree, to Nehemias
and the rest, that were the Princes of the
people, and had the cheefe charge of the
worke.
We may knit vp the sheet at the foure
corners, and include in the name of seruants,

without difference, high and low:
there being no soule in the world, that
hath giuen his name vnto God, and subscribed
with his hand, Ego Domini, Esa. 44.
whose sparke of religion and piety, is not
quite put out; but the dilapidation of any
of Gods Oratories and Sacraries, his
Heauens vpon earth, goeth to his heart like
swords; nor, can hee behold with dry
eyes, the destruction, or despight done to
his sacred Inheritance. They that can
brook it with patience, God shall one day
say vnto them, by the words of Obadiah,
Tu quasi vnus ex eis, thou art one of them.
The short is:Psal. 74. thine aduersaries rore in the
midst of thy Congregation, and set vp their banners
for tokens, and breake downe the carued
worke, with axes and hammers. The Atheist
accounteth the houses of God, common
and prohane, like other houses, maketh
lay-stals and dung-hils, where their site
was, and turneth them into stables for
horses: (the stories of the Church are full,
and England is not empty of them) but
Serui tui, the poorest seruant in the house
of God, that heweth wood, and draweth

water to the Campe, is better affected.
Placuerunt seruis tuis lapides,Are pleased. what heare I?
take they pleasure in the stones of Sion, are
they delighted with it, there, there, thus would
wee haue it? No; but euery the least remembrance,
representation, remnant of
Sion,
Relliquiae Danaum atque immitis Achillei,
That commeth into their eye, doth them
good; as when Dorcas was dead, Acts 9.
they shewed the garment and coats, that
shee had made, to mooue affection: the
sight of the very crums, that fell from the
temple of Ierusalem, is a kinde of refreshing,
and giueth contentment vnto
them. A man is pleased with the picture
of a dead friend, sith hee hath no better,
sic vultus, sic ora ferebat, thus hee looked.
Their affection liueth not* dieth not with
the fortune of Sion, They loued her in
prosperity, they loue her euen in misery,
We wept, when we remembred thee, o Sion: and,
if I forget Ierusalem, let my right hand forget hir
cunning. And so did the Ancients, that
had liued to see the beauty of the former
temple, and saw the vnlike foundation of

the new--simulataque magnis Pergama,
Weepe in remembrance of it.Esdr. 3.
They take not pleasure in the stones, for
what they are, but for what they haue
beene, sometimes the chosen materialls,
and now the disiected and dislocated
members of those glorious edifices quorum
pars vna, whereof they had beene a
part in their younger and flourishing
dayes. And to speake plainely, they delight
more in the stones and sheards, the
very shadow and ghost of Sion (if I may
so say) then in the standing houses, stateliest
palaces, and whole body of Babylon.
Hir dust is better vnto them, then
their gold, and euery the meanest stone,
that was but a dore-keeper in the house
of the Lord, lay but vnder the threshold
of it, is (...) to them, a precious
stone, far beyond the Saphyrs and Diamonds
of Babylon. Thus did that great
Constantine kisse the eye of Paphnutius,Euseb.
which the tyrant had caused to be digged
out. He tooke not pleasure in the wound
and deformity of it cui lumen ademptum,
but because it had beene the orbe and circle

of that eye, which stood in the head
of so glorious a Confessor, as Paphnutius
was. The later word of my text maketh
all cleare.Pitty. Miserentur pulueris, they so take
pleasure in the stones, that they pittie the
dust of Sion: and where there is pitty,
which maketh miserum cor, a wofull heart;
there can be no pleasure. Complacentia in
the first part, but displicentia in the last.
Some read placuerunt lapides, take pleasure;
some diligunt, loue: both commeth
to one; for Amor is complacentia, Loue is a
contentment. It is affectus vnionis, desireth
vnion; as the hearts of Ionathan and
Dauid were knit together: Currit per desi
derium, requiescit per gaudium, saith S. Austin.
Desire maketh it run, and delight maketh it rest.
Thus far is Complacentia, all is well. Soror
amoris dulcedo. Loue and delight goe together.
But is there any danger of losing
what I loue? I feare; doe I lose it indeed?
I grieue; doth any hinder me? There is
anger: is any a corriuall? There is jealousie:
doth any violate or wrong it? There
is reuenge: doth any mishap or miscariage
betide it? There is pitty: In amore haec

insunt omnia: and then it commeth to
passe, that cor meum sicut cera liquescens, mine
heart in the midst of me is like melting
waxe.Saluianus in Epist. Saluianus rightly fitteth me; Amor,
quid te appellem nescio: bonum an malum, dulce
an asperum, suaue an injucundum? Ita enim
vtroque plenus es, vt vtrumque esse videaris.
Loue I know not how to terme thee,
good or euill, sweet or sowre, pleasant or
vnpleasant. For thou art so full of both,
that thou seemest to be both of them.
In summe, where there is loue, there,
vpon any misfortune, will be pitty; and
where there is pitty, plus quam afficit, facit, it
puleth not in the bosome alone, and
spendeth it selfe in affection, but breaketh
forth into action, and will lend an helping
hand. I haue done with my text:
Thou shalt arise and haue mercy vpon Sion: for
the time to fauour hir etc.
I come not on a common message vnto
you;Application. nor is my Sermon a Sermon of
course. I may say, as Act. 15. Moyses hath
them that preach him in your Citty of old time
(...), euery Sabbath day, out of this
chaire: Moyses or Christ, Law or Gospell

without faile. You may see there is more
then so, by discerning the face of the skie.
When euer did your Sunne, since his first
arising amongst you, stand still in your
Gibeon? the person (I meane) of your
King, vouchsafe to be a part of your auditorie
in this place, (with that glorious
starre that followeth the Sunne, and the
whole host of our heauenly firmament
about him; with so many thousands of
soules besides, seeking the face of their Ruler,
as I say not but in a triumph or show
where they come to gaze, or along the
streets in trsine and succession, there haue
beene more, but in a garland and ring of
an auditorie coucht togither, neuer haue
more beene seene) till this day? A part of
your auditorie, did I say? Yea, and a
principall part of my simple oratorie,
such as it is: He laid my foundation for
me, and set me my patterne (as God did
Moyses in the Mount) to worke by.
The truth is, my text was not taken but
giuen me, though not by a voyce from
heauen, as that of S. Austins, Tolle lege, tolle
lege; yet by a voyce from earth, that is

next to heauen. So that with allusion to
the place, and some easie alteration, I may
say, as Christ vnto Peter, Ioh. vlt. When thou
wert young, thou wentst at thy pleasure, and girdedst
thy selfe, but now thou art old, an other shall
gird thee: So had my manner euer beene
aforetime, to open the volume of this
Booke, and goe through the fields of the
old and new Testament, plucking and
rubbing such eares of corne therein as I
best liked, making choice (I meane) of
my text, and buckling my selfe to my
taske, at mine owne discretion; but now
I am girt and tied to a Scripture by him,
who as he hath most right to command,
so best skill to direct and appoint the best
seruice I can.
It is not a twelue-moneth sithens (it
wanteth but a fortnight of it) that in the
greatest assembly and confluence, for
number and state (since that of that euer-admired
88, when the honor was done
to this Land, that the Lord sold Iabin and
his strength into the hands of a woman,
and that woman, then whom maior non surrexit,
a greater neuer arose (to vs) amongst

all our daughters of men, called vp hir
selfe and hir people to a solemne and publicke
thanksgiuing,Iudg. 5. Vp Deborah, arise and
sing, I my selfe will sing, (Shee did it at the
Church dore, as also did our gracious
Soueraigne) vp Barak: and they offered
their joynt sacrifice of praise to God, vpon
this the most eminent and conspicuous
Altar of the Kingdome) I say, not a
twelue-moneth sithens, that I recommended
vnto you, and we both vnto
God, the case of our absent and sicke Soueraigne,
the incense of our prayers and
praises, like a sweet perfume, ascending
and preasing thick into heauen for his recouery
at that time.
Then was the subiect of my speech a
Sion, a mount, excelsis excelsior, a fort, the fortresse
and bulwarke of this Iland, a temple,
but of an other kind, (destroy this temple,
said Christ, he meant it of his bodie, and)
I meane the bodie of the King, a building
not made with hands, but shaped of flesh
and bloud; nor so mortally sunke and
fallen downe to the stones and dust, as this
Sion was, but with the long siege and strong

impression and assault of as furious, tyrannous,
and predominating a sicknesse,
as euer was, that mercilesse Monarke against
Sion, which had amassed togither
the forces of many diseases into one, so
battered and shaken, that it was high time
to cry to him, that hath the keyes of life and
death, Tempus miserendi eius, it is time to
haue mercy vpon him, yea the appointed
time is come. We cried, tanquam anima vna,
as if there had beene but one soule amongst
vs all, and God heard vs from
heauen, and I trust that Sion, of whom I
speake, who is now come to pay his
vowes in the midst of his people, will
neuer forget it.
I am now to speake vnto you, from
Him, and in His name, of an other Sion,
(neerer by far then that in Iudaea, we are
vnder the bower of it) a literall and artificiall
Sion, a Temple without life and
motion, yet of a sickly and crazie constitution,
sicke of age it selfe, and with many
aches in hir joynts, togither with a
lingring consumption, that hath long
lien in hir bowels, the timber in the

beames whereof cryeth, I perish, and the
stone in the walles answereth no lesse,
and part is already moultered away to
stones, part to dust: and (that which is
more) symbolizing with that other Sion,
not onely in hir fates and casualties, but
in the very returnes and revolutions of
those fates. After hir first building
(which was 600 after Christ) about 500
yeares, salted with fire, sacrificed to the
anger of God, with no small part of the
City; and being raised as a Phoenix out
of those first ashes, betwixt 4 and 500
more (twice in a thousand yeares) touched
with a (...), from an invisible hand,
a Cole from the Altar of God, that was neuer
blowne, which wholy consumed the
crest and verticall poynt, the top and top-gallant
of it, and so scorched and defaced
the rest, that euer since that day, it
hath remained valetudinary and infirme,
rather peeced out with an ordinary kind
of physicke of but needfull reparation,
then restored to the sound plight it had
before time.
For this Sion is my comming; to

which I ran not of my selfe, I durst not
presume so far; but was sent, as the Baptist
before the face of his Master, the voyce of a
Cryer, only to prepare the way, the marrow
of perswasion is behind. Or, as Gehezi, the
seruant of Eliah,2 Reg. 4. who was sent before, with
the staffe of the Prophet, to lay vpon the
dead childe, but could not recouer life in him;
it is not the staffe, the reede in my hand,
the strength of my tongue, that can put
life into this dead body. But, when my
Master himselfe shall come, and stretch his
body vpon the body, afford his owne bodily
presence, and set himselfe to the worke,
lay his eyes vpon the eyes, view the lanthorne
and windowes, and his hands vpon the
hands, marke the pillars and pinnacles, and
make it his princely care, that euery seuerall
decayed part, may receiue some comfort:
and lastly, apply his eyes to your
eyes, and (that which is more) his mouth
to your eares, which cannot resist the
power of his wise and religious charmings,
then if the Childe neese not, if the Church go
not vp, there is little hope.
I would to God you would look with

your owne eyes, they are the truest witnesses.
The eye that beholdeth these ruines,
and adiureth not the heart, to yeeld
some help, what metall is it made of?
(...); See
you all these? What stones, what buildings?
marke them well; They were, at
the first, in the Heptarchy of this Land,
the worke of a King of Kent. (That other
at the Westend? and this, (...), much
about a time.) And, after their first combustion
(I told you) founded anew, and
brought forwards amaine, for twenty
yeeres space, by Mauritius Bishop of London;
in that amplitude and dimension,
wherein you now see them, (for hee was
immodicus animi, of a large heart, and therefore
intended a large worke) and twenty
yeeres more continued by Beaumor, that
next succeeded him. That, as they of
their Temple, forty and six yeares was this
temple in building. Io. 2. So may wee say of
this, it was in building forty yeeres, during
the sitting of two Bishops, yet far from
finishing. Diuers Bishops of this See (that
indeed had a sea to our ditch) in processe

of time, some enlarged it with building,
some enriched it with reuenue, some with
treasure and stocks of money, some with
priuiledges, some with one thing, some
with another: and it was not the least
good of him, that bought in the houses
round about, and layd out this (Campus
Martius, shall I say?) Campus pacificus, wherin
you haue so large and commodious a
roome, to heare the tydings of peace.
Now, I aske againe, Doe you see all these?
What stones, what buildings now? Lapides
clamant, the very stones cry out after you;
out of the mouthes, of these infant and speechlesse
creatures, hath God ordained strength; there
can bee no stronger eloquence, to affect
the minde, then what floweth into the
eye, from the fissures and maimnes, which
euery corner of the Church yeeldeth.
When the body of slaughtered Asahel,2 Sam. 2. was
left in the high-way side, there was not
a man, which came by, but stayed. When
Iacob had the sight of the bloudy coat of
Ioseph,Gen. 37. he mourned, and would go downe
into the graue after him, would not bee
comforted. The shewing of Caesars bloudy

robe in the market-place, set them all in a
tumult. I shew you the outward weeds,
and, as it were, the tattered rags and relicks
of a wounded, bleeding, dying Church,
falling so fast to a plaine anatomy, and (...),
that if to the malice of time, which deuoureth
his children, I meane, all temporall
things, and that viui comburium, burning
of it in the life and liuely-hood therof,
which hath set so many brands of disgrace
vpon the whole face of it, you adde
the neglect of a few yeeres more, euen Saul
amongst the Prophets, euery one of meanest
capacity and fore-sight, may bee able to
diuine, Non relinquetur lapis super lapidem,
not a stone shall bee left standing vpon a
stone; but all will downe: which that
Deus tutelaris, Protectour and Patron of
this noble City of yours, forbid. You
might then change the name of your City,
and call it, as the wife of Phineas called
hir sonne,1 Sam. 4. when the Arke was taken, where
is the glorie? It is a fire in my bones, and I
cannot suppresse it, to speake a little of
the honour and happinesse of this Iland,
whether for nature or grace. They called

Sicily the barne of Rome; and Aegypt, for
the fatnesse of Nylus, the barne of the world.
Is there a barne, a Canaan in Europe, if this
Iland be not? I know how proudly they
write of Italy (for there, if any where, is
the chaire of pride, and throne of Sathan
himselfe) Quod far conferam Campano? quod
triticum Appulo? quod vinum Falerno? quod
oleum Venafro? nonne arboribus consita, vt tota
pomarium videatur? What corne, or wheat,
or wine, or oyle, like to that in Italy? doth
it not all thorowout, looke like an Orchard?
They may doe well to match it
with Eden, the Garden of the Lord,--Non
equidem invideo. I dare not be proud of our
Countrey (I am sure it is too good for vs.)
There is a worme at the root of the gourd, sinne
at the doores, that can marre all in an instant.
But standing and stated, as it is, for
all the most naturall and necessary commodities,
of rayment and nourishment
(and habentes alimenta and quibus tegamur,1 Tim. 6. sayth
the Apostle, let vs be content) I may terme
it (within hirselfe) the very Signet and
Benjamin of Gods right hand, no Countrey
beyond it. And what we want from

abroad, God hath made vs a way in the sea,
and a path in the mightie waters, to bring it
in, Esa. 43. And yet after all this, may she
say, Dedisti laetitiam in corde meo. Thou hast
put more gladnesse in my heart, then their corne
and wine can possibly giue them. For wee
haue a golden candlestick, a glorious Church,
wherein the light of the Gospell shineth
(which is the true Nylus of all our happinesse,
and they want it abroad) and she, as
a Sanctuarie and City of refuge, openeth
her lap, to receiue forraine Churches.
Neither haue wee a King, like that new
King in Aegypt, that knew not Ioseph; but one
that walketh in the steps of hir beautifull
feet that trode before him, and is a Nutritius,
a tender Nursing-Father to the
Church; not onely our owne, but those
that sojourne amongst vs. These things
layd together, was there euer Iland in the
world (as Herodotus telleth vs) that had
(...) to name, by reason of the fairenesse
and goodnesse of it? Let her resigne, and
bow to ours.
You may thinke it a digression; but to
this end I speake it. If England bee the

ring of Europe, your City is the gemme.
If England the bodie, your City the eye; if
England the eye, your City the apple of it.
Here is the Synopsis, and Summe of the
whole Kingdome. Here the distillation,
and spirits of all the goodnesse it hath.
Here the Chamber of our Brittish Empire.
Here the Emporium, principall Mart of all
forraine commodities, and Staple of home-bred. Here the Garrison, and Strength of
the Land, the Magazine and Store-house
of the best of Gods blessings. Here (if in
any place) are the woodden wals, and
gates of iron. With you is the Tagus and
Pactolus, the riuer that runneth with gold.
You haue the body of the King, the morning
and mid-day influence of that glorious
Sun; others parts haue but the euening.
His houses of mansion and station are
round about you. You, of all others, are
neerest the heart, for care and protection
Here hath the Lord ordained a lanthorne for his
Anoynted. Here are the thrones of Dauid, for
judgement; and the chaire of Moyses, for instruction.
O fortunati nimium: You haue
the finest flowre of the wheat, and purest

bloud of the grape, that is, the choyce of
his blessed Word, hath God giuen vnto you,
and great is the companie of the Preachers. And
what shall I say more? Dies deficeret. The
day would forsake mee, to speake of all.
Doth any City on the earth beare hir
head high, for any one singular felicity?--Tendimus
in Latium. I am once more
in Italy. Dites Venetiae (say they) ingens Mediolanum,
superba Genoa, nobilis Neapolis, rich
Venice, great Millaine, proud Genoa, noble
Naples, and--Roma caput mundi;
Rome the head of the world.--Contingat
mea Roma mihi, say I, giue mee London
in England, which is as a Load-star to
lead all the rest.
And yet for a warning in my way, that
reuelations puffe ye not vp, be not high minded,
but feare. Art thou better then No? 3. Nahum.
that was situate in many waters, and had
hir rampart and wall from the Sea Aethiopia
and Aegypt were her helpers, and it was infinite.
etc. and yet she was carried away captiue. Remember
Sion. The pillars of Sion fallen
downe, are monuments vnto vs to beware
by hir falling, Quia in alto posita, in

sublime cecidit; shee stood high, and fell
low. Qui stat, videat ne cadat, is S. Ieromes
admonition vpon these words. Your
siluer is not so pure, but it is mixt with
drosse: your best not so good, but it hath
much bad with it. But I leese my way.
When I come to reproue sinne, I shall
sowe no pillowes. I am now to present
before your eyes the glasse of your honours.
Your Citty hath beene anciently
stiled Augusta. Caesar had to name Augustus,
(saith the story) quia natura hominis amplior,
because he was more then the nature
of man. It may be your Citty was more
then other Citties. I am sure it had not
that amplitude and maiestie it now
hath.
Not to weary mine eyes with wandring
and rouing after priuate, but to
fixe vpon publicke alone, when I behold
that forrest of masts vpon your riuer for
trafficke, and that more then miraculous
bridge, which is the communis terminus, to
joyne the two bankes of that riuer; your
Royall Exchange for Merchants, your
Halls for Companies, your gates for defence,

your markets for victuall, your
aquaeducts for water, your granaries for
prouision, your Hospitalls for the poore,
your Bridewells for the idle, your Chamber
for Orphans, and your Churches for
holy Assemblies; I cannot denie them to
be magnificent workes, and your Citty
to deserue the name of an Augustious and
majesticall Citty; to cast into the reckoning
those of later edition, the beautifying
of your fields without, and pitching
your Smithfield within, new Gates, new
Water-workes, and the like, which haue
beene consecrated by you to the dayes of
his Maiesties happy reigne: and I hope the
cleansing of the Riuer, which is the vena
porta to your Citty, will follow in good
time. But after all these, as Christ to the
young man in the Gospell, which had
done all and more,Matth. 19. Vnum tibi deest, si vis
perfectus esse, vade, vende: so may I say to
you. There is yet one thing wanting
vnto you, if you will be perfit, perfit this
Church: not by parting from all, but
somewhat, not to the poore, but to God
himselfe. This Church is your Sion indeed,

other are but Synagogues, this your
Ierusalem the mother to them all, other but
daughters brought vp at hir knees; this
the Cathedrall, other but Parochiall
Churches; this the Bethel for the daily
and constant seruice of God, other haue
their intermissions, this the common to
you all, and to this doe your Tribes ascend
in their greatest solemnities; others appropriated
to seuerall Congregations,
this the standart in the high rode of gaze,
others are more retired, this the mirrour
and marke of strangers, other haue but
their side lookes; finally, this vnto you,
as S Peters in the Vatican at Rome, S. Marks
at Venice, and that of Diana at Ephesus,
and this at Ierusalem of the Iewes; or if
there be any other of glory and fame in
the Christian world, which they most
ioy in.
You haue opened your hands, and filled
with your blessing (a blessing of this
kinde (...),1. Cor. 16. they are both the Apostles
words,2. Cor. 9. 1. and 2. Corinth.) many
Churches both at home and abroad.
S. Albans, and a number besides, looke

with a chearefuller countenance through
the oyle of your goodnes. Your English
Colonie in Virginia (I named hir the
little sister that had no breasts) hath
drawne from the breasts of this Citty and
Dioecesse a thousand pounds towards
hir Church. The Churches of Prague and
Franckendale, though of an other bloud,
nothing of kin to you, (the latter, I confesse,
the maiden and prime suite of Hir,
that in all respects of grace and accomplishment
is the prime Lady of Europe, the
other a meere stranger at that time, the
present condition of things not then suspected
nor dreamt of) haue both had an
offering of a faire eye from this honourable
Citty.Gen. 27. Now (as Esau to his father
when Iacob had beene before him, Nunquid
non reseruasti, Num vnam tantum?) haue
you not kept one blessing in store? or
had you but one blessing? or haue you
forgotten the old rule, Charitas a domo sua,
that Charitie beginneth at hir owne
house? or will you be marked with
those the Apostle speaketh of, which prouide
not for their owne?1. Tim. 5. Or will you begin

at your owne houses indeed, and there build
like Xerxes togati, seele your chambers with
Cedar, and paint them with Synoper, 22 Ierem.
that when you haue done, you may
walke in the tarras of them, and say, Is
not this great Babel, which I haue built, for
the honour of my name? But as for the
house of the Lord, with those 1. Agg:
Nondum tempus, the time is not yet come.
Nunquid tempus vobis est? read forward,
it is a fearfull place, and stingeth like
Scorpions. Ponite corda vestra super vias
vestras. Consider it wisely: you eat and
are not satisfied, etc. What is the reason?
quia domus mea deserta, and vnus quisque festinat
in domum suam, because mine house lieth
desert, and euery one maketh haste to
build his owne house. Or is no man
smitten at the heart, as Dauid was, 2. Sam. 7.
Behold I dwell in an house of Cedar, but as for
the Arke of the Lord, it remaineth in medio
pellium, in the midst of curtaines: Or
these houses of clay, which we beare about
vs, and are in medio pellium indeed, in the
midst of skins, shall we garnish and trim
on the outside, like painted sepulchres, whited

walles, gilded potsheards, Aegyptian temples,
that scarce haue an Arke, a good soule
within them, but some Monkey or Cat or
Crocodile, or the like; and that in so garish
and strange a fashion, that that which
was opprobrious in former dayes, is prodigious
in ours,--Iuvenes vt foemina
compti, a man trickt like a woman; a
shame then,--Iuvenes and foemina tonsi, a
woman trim'd like a man, a grace now:
Quid androgynus? (saith Tully) what is a
man-woman, woman-man? nonne fatale
monstrum? Shall all this be done, I say,
and shall this house of the Lord, the place
where his honour dwelleth, drop downe by
peeces, and leaue a memoriall against vs
of senselesse indevotion to succeeding
ages? O yee the liuing stones, and reasonable
Temples of the Holy Ghost, breath vpon
the chill faces of these dead and disfigured
ones, euen for kinred sake, the spirit of
life and refreshing, renew their youth as the
Eagles, take off their filthy garments, as they
from Iehosuah, Zach. 3. and giue them a
change of raiment; and (as God spake to
his people, Malach. 3. Bring in, that there may

be meat in my house, and proue me) bring in,
that the house of the Lord may but subsist
and stand, and proue him, if he will
not open the windowes of heauen, and
powre downe his blessings vpon you.
Goe vp to the mountaines, Agg: 1. bring wood
etc. doe but begin the worke, lay but a
stone of it: shall I euer distrust the prouidence
of that God, that is (...) and (...), the
beginner and finisher of euery good worke,
that giueth both to will and to doe, whose Spirit
bloweth where it pleaseth? who when he
gaue order for the building of his Tabernacle,
the charge was no more but this,
Euery one that is willing,Exod. 35. whose heart eucourageth
him; and they brought in so fast,
men and women, that the workemen came
from their worke, and told Moyses, there
was too much, and a proclamation was made
in the Campe to bring no more, Exod. 36.
And when stuffe was to be prouided for
building the Temple, Dauid left it at large,
Who so is willing to fill his hand, 1. Chron. 29.
and both King, Princes, and people offred
aboundantly and willingly; in so much that
Dauid, for himselfe and them, giueth

thanks to the Lord in this forme, Who am
I, and what is my people, that we should offer thus
willingly? and when Iosias repaired the
Temple, 2. Reg. 22. the money is deliuered
into the hands of the workemen, and
no accompt must be taken of them:
why? because they did the worke faithfully.
And when Iulian, that broken bow, and gracelesse
Apostata, to elude and falsifie the
word of our Sauiour, Non relinquetur lapis
etc. gaue them money from his owne
coffers to build their Temple againe, they
were so zealous to the worke, that they
made them mattocks and spades of siluer,
and the women bestowed their
jewels towards the charge, and bare out
the rubbell and earth in their bosomes?
There is not a soule that feareth God, but
the zeale of Gods house will euen eat it vp.
Many a true-hearted Areunah will offer his
land to build the Altar vpon, and his
oxen for sacrifice, and his plough-timber
for fire. The rich, of his superfluitie will
giue the more; the poore, will giue a mite
euen out of his penurie. The liuing will
send their goodnes into heauen before

them; the dying will be carefull to take
it along with them: and (I perswade my
selfe) there will not be a Will made, but
God shall haue a legacie, Christ a childes
part in it. Euen Iudas himselfe that hath
well thriuen by the worst meanes, will
out of remorse of conscience,Math. 27. (...),
cast downe his siluer in the Temple for the
Priests to dispose of.
For this great and glorious worke
doth your great and gracious Master
come to speake. I haue drawne with my
cole before him, the colours of life and
grace are in his lips, where sceptrum and plectrum,
authoritie and eloquence will kisse
each other, and the tongue of a King, like
the harpe of Amphion, draw stones to the
building. It hath euer beene the care of
religious Princes to build and beautifie
Churches. Great Constantine, the Noah
and father of the new Christian world,
after that floud of bloudy persecution,
in founding the Lateran (then the Constantinian)
Church, bare 12 baskets of earth
vpon his owne shoulders: I spare the
rest, stories are fraught with them. I receiued

it in a message (amongst other
enlargements and perswasions of his
Royall spirit) from our religious Constantine,
that he would be contented to doe a
penance, and to fast with bread and water,
so this Church might be built. The
request is not harsh, cannot be grieuous
to any,2. Reg. 5. but (as the seruants to Naaman
their master, If the Prophet had commanded
thee a great thing, shouldst thou not haue done
it? how much more when he saith, wash and be
cleane?) so when the King shall request
no more, but build and repaire the Church,
and your honour togither?
I say, when the King shall request it.
You remember what Paul wrote to Philemon,
though I haue great authoritie to command
thee that, that is meet, yet out of loue I rather entreat,
(...), being such as I am, I Paul the
aged, etc. Hee that hath the ball in his
hand, and commandeth farre and wide,
yet layeth downe (as it were) his Crowne,
and stoopeth to entreaty, Caetera imperaui
vobis,Q. Curt. hoc vnum debiturus (as Alexander to
his souldiours) commanding in other
matters, beholding in this. And (...)

being such as he is. One that hath kept
the fire vpon your Altar yet burning, (I trust euer
shall) I meane, that hath nourished the
Gospell of peace, and gouernment of
peace, and liberty, plenty, prosperity the
daughter of peace, amongst you to this
day. One that hath filled you with such
hope at home,--Quantus in ore pater radiat?
What a Father, what a Sonne? and such
honour abroad, I wish I were worthy to
blason it.
(...), such a King entreateth, that as
these seuenteene yeeres of his raigne, haue
been honored and priuiledged with more
exemplary and spectable workes, in your
City and Suburbs (I named not the Charter-house)
in Countrey and Vniuersities,
where Libraries, Schooles, and Lectures,
prouoke all Christendome to emulation,
and some Colledges haue beene newly
founded, euery Colledge almost hath
cast his old skin with the Serpent, and
gotten a new coat, then in so many yeares
twice told (picke them where you will) of
any his Predecessours; So the re-building
of Pauls, may be the Coronis and Vp-shot,

the Glory, Garland, and Master-peece to
all the rest.
I am full as the Moone, and must speak
to take breath, from the abundance of
the heart, my mouth speaketh. A great
dore and effectuall is opened vnto mee. I neuer
spake in such an Auditory, neuer shall againe.
But if euer I were in the Spirit (I
trust Gods Spirit is in mee, and affecteth
me thus to speake) I meane, transported
beyond my selfe, now it is, to haue so many
thousands of soules within mine eye,
so faithfull and firme (I perswade my selfe)
to God, his Anoynted, the Church, the
State, as with their meanes and assistance,
alliance and friends, are able and ready
(to build a Church, shall I say? yea, and)
to maintaine, and fight for the Church, to
defeat all aduersaries it hath, and debell
proud Antichrist himselfe. Deum in voco
testem in animam meam, I speake as I thinke,
I see a cluster and bunch of the grapes of Canaan,
the very first and best of the fruits, throughout
the whole Kingdome. Now, you on
the other side, Behold your King. Ecce Rex
vester. Hosanna, Hosanna, saue Lord, blesse

Lord; blessed is he that is come vnto you, in the
name of the Lord; and blessed, blessed againe,
that comes in the name of the
Lord, and with the Lords errand. Set it,
as a seale vpon your hearts, that your
King is so come vnto you. Such commings
are not often; but like Ludi Saeculares
in Rome, once in an age, once in a
Princes raigne, Queene Elizabeth once, and
now your Soueraigne once. I hope I
shall not sinne, in wishing that such commings
were more often,--Ex visu fit amor.
Such a people, in view of their King,
and such a King in view of his people,
banding their eyes to and fro, the one
from the other, would be as the flowing
and falling of waters, a reciprocall and
enterchangeable motion of loue betwixt
them. I know not what others thinke;
but to mee, it seemeth worthy, to adde a
Rubricke more to your Almanacke, and
make a new Holy-day amongst you. The
Pope maketh Iubilees at his pleasure, why
not this a Iubilee, a yeere of extraordinary
joy to your City?
I doubt not; but our Chronicles will

make report of this, to future ages. Some
will bee so happy, to take the pencill in
hand (none but Apelles should doe it) and
describe the honour of this day. But will
it almost be beleeued, that a King should
come from his Court to this Crosse,
where Princes seldome or neuer come;
and that comming to bee in state, with a
kinde of sacred pompe and procession;
accompanied with all the faire Flowers of
his Field, and the fairest Rose of his owne
Garden; an holy Congregation to bee
called; his desires sanctified before hand,
with prayer and preaching; and in the
hearing of a world of people, to make a
request to his Subiects, not for his priuate,
but for the publike; not for himselfe,
but for God; not out of reason of
state and policy, but of religion and piety;
no lesse fruit of honour and fauour,
with God and man, accruing thereby to
his people, then to his sacred Majesty?
You that see it at the present, and can value
and prize it, with all due circumstance
and merit, haue cause to admire it.
I cannot conclude in a better time, nor

can I make a better conclusion, then a little
beneath my Text, from the 18. verse
Scribentur haec, (there is your reward) these
things (if you doe them) shall bee written for
the generations to come, and the children vnborne
shall praise the Lord.
Now the God of peace,Hebr. 13. make you perfit in euery
good worke, through Iesus Christ our
Lord.
FINIS.

