


THE FORESPEACH OF
THE INTERSPEAKERS IN
this Academy, wherein is handled the cause
of their future discourses touching the naturall
historie of Man.
The names of the discoursers.
ASER, which signifieth Felicitie. AMANA, Trueth. ARAM, Excellency.
ACHITOB, Brother of goodnesse.

ASER.
My companions, I greatly bewayle
the misery of our age, wherein so many Epicures
and Atheists liue, as are dayly discouered
amongst vs in all estates and callings.
True it is, that the disagreement in matters of
religion amongst them that beare the name
of Christians is very great, and causeth much
trouble in the Church: neuerthelesse, I doubt
not but that agreement might soone bee
made, if the word of God onely might be the iudge of true and false religion.
For all that feare God, and are carefull to doe nothing contrary
to their duety, that accompt the holy scriptures to be the true doctrine
of the spirite of God, and are assuredly perswaded, that there is
another life after this and a iudge before whome they must appeare,
they, I say, are not so hardly induced to peace and concord, but that a
man may hope well of them. But they that feare nothing, that call all
things into question, that esteeme all religion to be opinions only tormenting
mens braynes: they likewise that stifly resist euen the trueth
it selfe, whereof their owne consciences conuince them, labouring as
much as lyeth in them to extinguish not onely the light of God within
them, but that also which they learne in his word, such monsters, I
say, will trouble all Christendome more then the contentions about
religion, vnles the goodnes of God prouide some conuenient remedy
for the same. For they must be taught to beleeue one God, one Iesus
Christ, the immortalitie of the soule, the resurrection of the body, a
second euerlasting life full of ioy and happinesse for good and iust men,
but full of griefe and paine for the wicked and vniust: generally, they
must be taught to beleeue whatsoeuer we learne in the holy scriptures
concerning the creation and end of euery nature. These things being

spirituall and heauenly cannot be seene nor comprehended without a
celestiall and supernaturall light, nor without spirituall eyes, ioyned
with the vertue and power of the spirite of God, who onely is able to
clarifie our eyes and to giue them sight. For albeit God gaue spirituall
eyes to man, when hee endued him with a reasonable and vnderstanding
soule, yet they are euen blind through sinne, if they alwayes
haue not God that great and euerlasting Sunne to illuminate them
with his diuine light: as the eyes of the body remaine in darkenesse,
when bodily light is taken from them.Matth. 15. 14. iohn 9. 39. Hereupon they are called blind
in holy scripture, that haue not the true knowledge of God by the
light of his word. For although they that are most ignorant haue some
little knowledge and sence of the diuinitie by that small remnant of
naturall light, which man receiued at his first creation, neuerthelesse
because this sparkle is so small in regard of that darkenesse, which filleth
the mind of man, it is not sufficient to leade them to God, and to
the right way of saluation. Therefore they soone goe astray and wander
hither and thither, and for the most part followe superstition in
place of religion, and lies in stead of trueth: because it is an easie matter
for the deuill to disguise his inuentions vnder a false shew of piety,
that they may not discerne betweene trueth and falsehood, betweene
that which God liketh, and which he disliketh. For seeing the sparke
of naturall light in mans vnderstanding is so small, there needeth no
great troubling of the spirite, neyther any great impediments to bee
cast in his way to confound and amaze him, and to take away, or vtterly
to ouerturne his iudgement, whereby to mak^ him as vnable to
iudge of the trueth, as a blind man is to iudge of colours. But they are
in farre worse case that voluntarily separate themselues from all truth,
both naturall and supernaturall. For they easily beleeue that, which
the Epicures long since taught against the immortalitie of soules, and
against the prouidence of God towards men: insomuch that they hold
this for most certaine, that the soule perisheth as the body doth, and
that there is no God that intermedleth in the gouernment of humane
affaires, but that they are guided eyther by fortune, or by prudence,
or by the folly of men, according as matters fall out.
I quake to thinke that such monsters are to be found amongst them
that berare the name of Christians, and haue in former times receiued
the markes and seales of Christianitie in the Church of Iesus Christ.
But my quaking is doubled when I consider, that many of them that
professe learning and humane philosophie, and that are thought to
haue most skilfull sharpe and subtill wits, are not onely infected with
this execrable Atheisme, but professe it, open a schoole thereof, and

know how to poyson many with it. For as there was neuer yet opinion,
error or heresie so strange or monstrous in the world that hath not
alwayes found men ynowe to receiue it, so long as there were Authors
and masters to set it abroach, so these professours of Atheisme are
neuer without great store of disciples: because after this maner God
punisheth the curiosity, ingratitude, and peruersenesse of men, the contempt
of his word and hatred of the trueth, which is commonly in
them, as also the pleasure they take in vanitie and lies. Therefore God
by his iust iudgement giueth them ouer into a reprobate sense, so that
they cannot but alwayes reiect the trueth, and imbrace error and lying,
as he often threatneth them by the mouth of his Prophets and Apostles.Esay 29. 14. 2. tim. 3. 13. 2. thes. 2. 10, 11, 12.
Examples hereof wee see dayly in such as thinke themselues
the wisest men, who haue this in their cogitation (if they dare not
speake it openly) that it belongeth not to men of wit to beleeue in
God and his word, but to such as are simple and foolish: not to these
great and noble spirits that flie aboue the clouds, who in trueth know
more then they should, to bring them to that place of weeping and
gnashing of teeth.
We are to liue (my companions) amongst such kind of men, and I
suppose that ye, as well as my selfe, haue heard some of them speake:
especially since of late times the seruice of Princes hath longer retayned
vs neere vnto them, then we were wont in our yong yeers when
the study of good letters did wholy possesse vs. Therefore we ought to
be very desirous to fortifie our selues dayly with strong and powerfull
reasons against whatsoeuer wee may heare vttered by these scorners
of all pietie: not for feare that wee shall at any time bee deceiued by
them (for I am most assured of the graces and gifts, which we haue
receiued from God) but that we may haue abundantly wherewith to
resist the vaine and weake arguments of these deceiuers, when wee
light among them, especially in the company of ignorant folks, whom
they may easily draw to their side if we should be silent. Besides, although
we should not be able to confound them by reason of their obstinacy,
yet we shall at the least giue them occasion to thinke more seriously
of their error. I know well what small accompt they make of
the testimonies of holy scriptures, and how they esteeme of them but
as of fables and dreames made by some doters and idle persons: for
so they call the Patriarks, Prophets, and Apostles. As for the writings
of Philosophers, they will beleeue Epieurus, Pliny, Lucretius, Lucian,
and others of their sect, who deny all diuinitie, and the immortality of
soules. But they will giue no credite to any thing that we fetch from
the saying of Pythagoras, and Socrates, and from the writings of Plato,

Aristotle, Cicero, Plutarch, and an infinite number of other excellent
Philosophers of all nations, who haue all taught that there is a diuine
prouidence and iustice, and that the soule is immortall. What shal we
say then? where shall we seeke for arguments which they will vouchsafe
to heare? I haue heard them say sometimes, that they would giue
credite to naturall Philosophy in those things wherein the causes are
prooued by their effects. Now if we take this course to prooue vnto
them a godhead, his prouidence, his future iudgement, and the immortalitie
of the soule, which way soeuer we turne our selues, eyther vpward
or downward, on the right hand or on the left, we shall find testimonies
euery where, which they may not in any wise reiect. For we
haue nature, the necessitie of causes, proportion and similitude, the life,
decency, and dignity of man, the goodnesse of God, the vtility that
commeth by mankind proceeding from the bounty of God, all which
with one common consent, and as it were with one voyce doe teach
and cry, that there is one God creator and gouernor of the whole world,
and that the soule of man cannot be mortall. Hereof it is, that the holy
Ghost doth often propound vnto vs in holy scriptures this whole visible
world, as a great booke of nature, and of true naturall diuinitie, all
the creatures as preachers and generall witnesses of God their creator,
of his workes and of his glory. Neuerthelesse there are but fewe that
haue such eyes as are requisite for the reading of this booke, or fit eares
to heare the voyce, and to vnderstand the sermons of these naturall
preachers, no not amongst them that are most skilfull and best studied
in the searching out of nature, and haue greatest knowledge of naturall
things, of liberall arts, and of all humane philosophy. For there are as
many, yea moe, to whom in this respect the selfe same thing is befallen,
which long since befell to the first and greatest philosophers, vnto
whom Saint Paul obiecteth this by way of reproch,Rom. 1. 18, 19. etc. that when they
knew God by the works of the creation of the world (wherein he maketh
his power, his eternall and inuisible Godhead, as it were visible
vnto vs) they did not glorifie him as God, but withheld the trueth in
vnrighteousnesse. And yet it wil not be a hard matter for vs (God being
our helper) to make it manifest by the consideration, not onely of
the whole frame, but of the least creature therein, especially of the body
and soule of man (who is a litle world) and of the creation, nature,
dignitie and excellency of both his parts, how not onely the simplest
and most ignorant may and ought to learne to know God and his prouidence
ouer euery nature, and so to honor and to glorifie him, as hee
hath bound them thereunto, but also how the wisest ought to direct
all their skill and knowledge which they haue in naturall philosophy,

to this selfe same end. As for those that make open profession of Atheisme,
and refuse the testimonies, which God in his word setteth
downe vnto vs, of himselfe, of his prouidence, and of all things belonging
to the saluation and soueraigne good of men, they shal haue yet,
wil they nill they, ynough probable reasons to prooue all these things,
so that we may easily conuince and prooue vnto them by these testimonies,
which euery one of them carieth about in himselfe, both the
immortality of the soule, as also the religion of God and of his prouidence.
For these three things are so linked together, that in no wise
they cannot, neyther ought to be separated: so that he which admitteth
the one, must of necessitie approoue the others, and if he doubt of
the one, he reiecteth all.
As therefore (my companions) some yeeres past after our returne
from warre, we tooke occasion vpon the corruption that then was in
all the estates of Fraunce, and the forlorne manners which raigned in
euery one, to meete together and to discourse in our Academy of the
institution in good manners, and of the meanes to liue well and happily,
to the end that in renuing the memory of our former studies we
might begin to direct our life to that principall end, which the Philosophers
appoint thereof, namely vertuous actions: So I thinke that euen
now we haue an other good occasion to read in this great booke
of nature, and to bring one to another whatsoeuer we haue learned
concerning the nature of man. For first we haue leaue in regard of our
Princes seruice, to recreate our selues for a while in our owne houses.
Againe, the selfe same place where we met so fitly, and wherein we
began our former discourses of Philosophy, doth inuite vs to proceed
in them. Moreouer, we doubt not of the combat, which is prepared
for vs when we shal visite our neighbours and friends, amongst whom
many professe themselues better Philosophers then good Christians.
We know also into what straights we haue bene brought in our masters
courts: and let vs not hope that the perill will be lesse when their
seruice shall recall vs neere vnto them. Wherefore we shal doe well to
arme our selues now with all the reasons and testimonies which wee
haue in nature against that Epicurean doctrine, whose only drift is, by
denying the immortalitie of the soule to turne men from all religion
and feare of God. For thus doing, we shall not onely greatly profite
our selues, but them also, who being in danger to be seduced by such
deceiuers shall heare vs now and then reason with them: who feeling
themselues conuinced by naturall reasons wherein they supposed to
haue greatest strength, will not be so bold to vomit their poyson before
others, but shall be constrained to d^gest it by themselues ^o heir

owne confusion and ouerthrow. I desire therefore (my companions)
to know how you stand affected towards this my intent and purpose.


AMANA.
If euer there were age, wherein those signes of the end of
the world,Matth. 24. which the spirit of God hath foretold vs, haue bene seene,
it is this, wherein they are so apparant, that there is no one body, if he
be not depriued of all discourse of reason, who doth not acknowledge
them very euidently. For we are fallen into those times wherein store
of false prophets are arisen, and haue seduced many, wherein all iniquity
is increased, and charitie altogether frozen. Which thing hath discouered
not only many false religions, but also Atheisme, which is farre
worse. For without doubt they that are altogether voyd of religion, are
farther off fro^ true religion then they that follow one that is false. And
yet there are as many, yea moe at this day that doe openly shew themselues
to be Atheists and Epicures, then there are of those that are taken
for good Christians. If in outward shew they professe religion, it is but
to couer themselues vnder the vale thereof, to the end that men should
not take the^ for such as they are indeed, as also that they might keepe
company with the best. But in their hearts, and amongst their companions
they mocke and laugh at al religion, at al feare of God, and whatsoeuer
els is taught vs by his word touching any other life the^ this, wherin
ioy is prepared for the good, and torments for the wicked. Nowe if
there were nothing els to doe, but to conuince such men of errour and
lying, the matter were easie: for they cary all their witnesses and their
condemnatio^ with them: but they are not so easily confounded. For a
man is conuinced, when he is constrained to acknowledge in his conscie^ce
that he hath no reason wherby he is able to withstand and gainsay
that trueth, which is shewed vnto him, and which condemneth him.
But if he be obstinate, head-strong, wickedly giuen and f^oward, he will
neuer leaue kicking against the pricke, but perseuere in his headin^sse
and obstinacie, and in his maliciousnes and peruersenes. For whe^ reason
faileth him, he armeth himselfe with impudencie; like to a bold murtherer,
or to a shamelesse harlot that will blush at nothing. Therefore
Chrysostome said not without reason, that heretiks may wel be conuinced,
but not confounded. For they do but wipe their mouth, as Salomon
speaketh of an harlot, which presently after boasteth that she is an
honest woman. But howsoeuer wicked men striue to blindfold their
vnderstanding, and to harden their heart against the iudgement of God,
yet it is neuer propounded vnto them, but will they nill they, they
feele themselues pricked and pressed with some sence thereof. True it
is, that it is not so with them as the childre^ of God are touched, as they
of whom it is written, that after they had heard the preaching of Saint

Peter,Acts 2. 37. they were pricked in their hearts, whereby they were led to true
repentance, because they had bin touched to the quicke by the word.
But it is said of the reprobate and of them that are hardened, of which
sort are all Atheists, that God hath giuen them a pricking spirite, by
reason of their bitter h^^^t, which causeth them alwaies to increase in
bitternesse, to fret and chafe against God, when they feele themselues
pressed by his word and by his iudgement.
Therefore I am of opinion (my companions) that for this cause,
and for those reason which ASER recited vnto vs, we are now to call
to memory all the testimonies that we can bring of God and of his prouidence,
of his iudgement, and of the immortalitie of mens soules, by
the consideration of the nature of man, and of his parts, the body and
soule: expecting when sometime hereafter God shall giue vs grace to
contemplate the selfe same things in euery nature, and in all this great
visible world. For no doubt but such kind of contemplation will furnish
vs sufficiently with arguments to conuince all Epicures and Atheists,
and to constraine them to acknowledge in their conscience a diuine
iustice,Psal. 19. 1. and an eternall life. The heauens (saieth the Prophet) declare
the glory of God, and the firmament sheweth the worke of his hands. This
hie ornament, this firmament so cleare, and face of heauen so sumptuous
to behold, is a thing full of greatnesse. Therein we may behold the
Master builder thereof, clothed with the whole frame as with a garment,
which is a sure testimonie of his power and vertue. He who cannot
fall within the compas of mans grosse sences, maketh himselfe as it
were visible in his terrible workes.What we learne by the view of the world. This worlde is vnto vs a learned
schoole, wherein the praise of God doth preach it selfe. It is a goodly
large and rich shop, wherein this soueraigne and most excellent workman
layeth open all his works, to this end, that he might be knowen
by them. It is a temple, wherein there is no creature so little, but it is
as it were a similitude and resemblance of the creator thereof, to shew
and manifest him vnto vs. In a word, it is a Theatre, where the diuine
essence, his iustice, his prouidence, his loue, his wisedome haue their
working by a wonderfull vertue in euery creature, euen from the hiest
heauen vnto the center of the earth. Aske the beasts (saith Iob) and they
shall teach thee, and the foules of the heauen and they shal tel thee: or speake
to the earth and it shall shew thee, or the fishes of the sea, and they shall declare
vnto thee. Who is ignorant of all these, but that the hand of the Lorde hath
made these? But truly there shineth in man more then in all other creatures,
a beame of the diuinity, and a proportionable image and similitude
of his nature, in that God hath framed him of an immortal soule, capable
of vnderstanding, and of reason, to make him partaker of his eternal

glory and felicity.Psal. 8. 1. 4, 5, 6. O Lord (saith the Psalmist) who marueilous is thy
name in all the wolde! What is man that thou art mindfull of him? and
the sonne of man that thou visitest him? Thou hast made him a litle lower
then God, and crowned him with glory and worship. Thou hast made him
to haue dominion in the works of thine hands: th^^ hast put all things vnder
his feete. But withall, as God hath more expresly created man after his
owne image, then any other visible nature, and therefore more excellent
then the heauens or the earth, or any thing contayned in them, so
he hath singulerly bound him to know and to honour him, in which
thing he hath placed his soueraigne Good. But man being exalted by
God to that honour, that he might attaine to so great felicitie, could
not conceiue or acknowledge it: which is the cause that we see so many,
who following the corruption of mans nature, are not onely become
like to brute beastes,Psal. 32. 9. Isai. 1. 3. but much more vnthankefull, yea farre
more forgetfull and miserable then they are. The Oxe knoweth his owner,
and the Asse his masters crib, but man will not know God his creator,
of whome he holdeth body, soule, and goods. What a horrible
shame is it, that the Oxe and the Asse, which are such dull beasts, should
giue greater honor and obedience to man, of whom they receiue their
food, then man doth to God, of whom he hath and dayly doth receiue
so many benefits? Let vs make hast therefore (my companions) to go
to the schoole of nature. For if we profite well therein, I doubt not but
we shall easily come to the knowledge of the creator thereof, and of
the chiefe end of our being.


ARAM.
All things created haue their proper motion,Euery creature hath his proper motion and disposition. which they
follow according to that loue that euery one of them beareth to his
natural disposition. For the heauens continue alwayes constant in their
naturall motions. And as the fire and ayre naturally loue to be aboue,
and therefore drawe thitherward without ceasing: so the water and
earth loue to keepe below, so that they alwayes bend that wayes. So
that none of the elements can find any stay or resting place vntill they
be come to those places which God hath appoynted for them. Plants
cast their rootes downeward, and their branches vpward, euery one
following therein his nature. For a plant being to receiue his nourishment
from the earth by meanes of his rootes, which are vnto it in stead
of mouthes and veines to sucke and draw necessary sustenance for the
preseruation of it selfe, sendeth them alwayes into the ground, and disperseth
them all about according as they can find nourishment: but
the stalke, stocke, branches and boughs, which are to be nourished in
the ayre, alwayes disperse themselues, draw and ascend vpward. Beasts
hauing sense, doe much more shewe that liking which they haue to

follow their natural inclination. For we see that by their proper apprehension
and appetite, they are driuen hither and thither to seeke and
follow after that which they desire and loue, being agreeable to their
nature: and to flie from that which they hate, as being contrary thereunto.
Likewise men, who only of all other mortall creatures were by
creation made partakers of reason, haue their proper motion conuenient
to their nature. For being created to attaine to that soueraigne and
eternall Good, which is set before them in the diuine essence, they haue
receiued from that infinite goodnes power and vertue to wish for that
Good, with a desire to apply and ioyne themselues thereunto. Wherefore
all men are naturally pricked and driuen forward with a loue and
desire tending to that Good: aswell because of that naturall agreement
which they haue with the same Idea of Good, which is God (their
soules being of a celestial and immortall essence) as also because this
Good is of that nature that it ought to be loued of euery nature, yea
so much the more loued as there is greater measure of reason in the
creature to know it.The difference betweene the naturall and supernaturall desire of man to good. But this desire naturally ingrafted in euery mans
heart, which prouoketh and keepeth men in a loue and liking of euery
thing which they thinke meete to content and satisfie them, and which
they seeke after in diuers things as their affections lead them, differeth
much from that desire, which by heauenly grace is planted a new in
those, whom God according to his good pleasure and alwaies iust wil,
hath chosen and elected to euerlasting happinesse, and pricked forward,
guideth and leadeth them to that principall end for which they
were created. For although the other sort of men, being heires of that
corruption that hath ouerspread the whole nature of man by the
meanes of the sinne of the first father of all, be driuen forward in soule
and spirit, yea many times not thinking thereof, to their naturall desire
of obtayning that Good: yet they seeke it as blind men that goe by
groping, but cannot find it, because the darkenes of error and ignorance,
wherewith their vnderstanding is ouerwhelmed, hindreth them from
looking directly towards that Good, and causeth them to wander out
of that only way that could lead them vnto it. So that in stead of looking
vnto God, and to celestiall and heauenly things, they stay themselues
about earthly and corruptible things, vnto which the neerer they
labor to approch, the farther off they are from the end of their wishes and
desires. For this cause the blessed Apostle saith,1. Cor. 2. 14. that the natural man perceiueth
not the things of the spirit of God: for they are foolishnesse vnto him:
neyther can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. But they
that are illuminated, and guided by heauenly and supernaturall light,
and whose vnderstanding is framed by the spirit of God, to receiue

It, know then how they are carried by their proper motion to the
contemplation of the true Good, in the enioying whereof they shall
once for euer be made partakers of a felicitie,Isay. 64. 4. which eye neuer saw,
nor eare heard, neither came into mans heart: I meane, when by
dissoluing the mortall tabernacle of this body, they shall be clothed
with glorious immortalitie, and shall see him face to face who
is all in all: in whome they shall be satisfied, according to the doctrine
of the Prophet,Psal. 16. 11. In thy presence is the fulnesse of ioy, and at thy
right hand there are pleasures for euermore. This is that (my companions)
which ought to whet vs on to direct our sight streight to that
place whereat wee ought to leuell, namely to heauen, and not
looke to any other thing then to God, who is the scope, which
we desire and shal one day attaine vnto. Nowe if wee can not see
this white so farre off, and much lesse come vnto it without direction,
GOD is come neare vnto vs in the person of his Sonne Iesus
Christ, who being the brightnesse of his glory, hath left vs his word
for a sure guide, besides so many testimonies of his prouidence and
goodnesse ouer all creatures,How we may see God. that wee daily beholde him as it were
visible in them. For the ruled motions of the heauens, the wonderfull
workemanship of so many starry tents, the connexion, agreement,
force, vertue and beauty of the Elements: the situation, firmnesse, and
spreading of the earth amidst the waters, and so many sundry natures
and creatures in this whole frame of the worlde: al these things I say,
are so many interpreters to teach vs that God is the efficient cause
of them, and that he is manifested in them and by them, as their final
cause. But the glasse wherein we may yet better beholde him is man:
in whome shineth and is imprinted an image of the diuine essence,
which is not found againe in any visible creature; and that is reason and
vnderstanding, wherof by creation he was made partaker aswel as the
Angels. This is the chiefe and principall work of the creation, whereby
God meant to giue such a being to his creatures and spiritual natures, to
the end he might communicate his wisdom and goodnes with them, and
thereby lead them to eternal felicitie. Wherefore if it be good for men
to consider the works of God in his creatures, and in their nature created
by him, and that for the reasons and ends declared by vs, it is better
and more necessary that they should do the same thing in their owne
person and nature, wherein there are almost as many maruailous works
of the almighty power of God, as ther are in ye whole frame besids,
and in all other creatures. Therefore that sentence which saith, Knowe
thy selfe, was not without good reason so much praised and renowmed
amongst al the ancient Greeke and Latin Philosophers, as that which

is worthy to be taken for a heauenly oracle, and a sentence pronounced
by the mouth of God. For whosoeuer shall know himselfe well, cannot
faile to know God his creator, and to honour him as he ought, if
he follow the chiefe end for which man was created, as wel as the residue
of the creatures. Plato in his Phaedrus, and in the tenth booke of
Lawes,How Plato came to the knowledge of God. searching and inquiring by the meanes of motion, what was
the substance, nature and immortalitie of the soule, attained to the vnderstanding
of the diuine essence. Aristotle also taking the same way
in his 8. booke of naturall Philosophy, sheweth that he knew God vnder
the name of the first moouer, who was perpetual and vnmoueable.
But we may attaine to the knowledge of God and of our selues, a great
deale better then al the Philosophers could, who were ignorant of the
true beginning and end of things, if we be guided by the word, which
is the light of the trueth, and whereof al the humane philosophy of the
wisest that were, is but a li^^e shadow. Now then, if vnder this heauenly
guide wee feede our spirites with a doctrine that teacheth man to
know himselfe well, wee beginne at that science which of all other
is most necessary, profitable, and pleasant: I say necessary, as that
which guideth and leadeth vs as it were by the hand to find out God;
profitable, because it bringeth a maruailous commoditie to this present
life, both in regarde of bodily health, as also of ruling all our actions
according to vertue; and pleasant, because a man may see
therein as it were in a sacred temple all the images of the wonderfull
workes of the world.


ACHITOB.
I cannot but greatly commend those Philosophers
that reprehended and condemned them, who spent all their time only
in the contemplation of heauen and earth, and of the nature of other
creatures, and in the meane while descended not into themselues,
to know themselues and their nature, but especially their soule.
For what will it profite a man to take so great paines as to measure
the whole world, and to compasse on euery side all the elementarie
region, to knowe the things that are contained in them, and their
nature, and yet in the meane time hee can not measure or knowe
himselfe being but alittle handfull of earth? For although the knowledge
of the rest of the creatures that are in this great visible worlde,
will greatly helpe to leade him to the knowledge of God the Creatour,
neuertheless^ he shall neuer be able to know him well, if withall
he know not himselfe.The knowledge of God and of our selues ioyned together. Yea these two knowledges are so ioyned togither,
that it is very hard matter to seuer them. For as a man can not
know himselfe if he know not God, so he cannot know God wel, if in
like sort he know not himselfe. So that I take this for most certain, that

neither Astronomy, Geometry, Geography, or Cosmography, nor any
other Mathematical science is so necessary for man, as that whereby
he may learne to know himselfe wel, and to measure himselfe wel by the
measure of his owne nature, that he may thereby know how to contayne
himselfe within the limits thereof. As for Mathematicians, natural
Philosophers and Phisicions, who bestow their trauaile in the knowledge
of nature and natural things, and in the meane time forget God
and themselues, whereas they ought to learne both the one and the other,
by that knowledge that God hath giuen them of his works, I
say they are not worthy to be taken for naturall Philosophers, Phisicions
or Mathematicians, but rather for blockheaded beasts. In my opinion
they behaue themselues, as if a man should be alwayes occupied
in looking vpon his house, and handling of his mooueables and
houshold stuffe, and in the meane time did not put them to those principall
and speciall vses, for which they ought to serue, but were altogether
forget full of himselfe, of his wife, and of his children. Moreouer
concerning Phisicions, if their care to know their own soule, with the
nature and parts therof, be not more to minister that food and phisicke
which is necessary for it to liue wel and happily, and that for euer,
then to know the nature of mens bodies that they may cure others, it
may worthly be said vnto them, Phisicion heale thy selfe. For if he be
worthily derided that taketh in hand the cure of other men and cannot
heale himselfe, or at the least hath no care to doe it, surely that man
is well worthy to be had in greater derision that is more carefull, not
only of his owne, but also of other mens bodies, then he is of his owne
soule, whereby he differeth from brute beasts, and is made partaker of
an immortall nature. Wherefore it is very requisite, that all students in
naturall philosophy should profit so well in the study thereof, as to be
able to turne it into true naturall diuinity, whereby they may learne to
know God their creator, in that nature which he hath created to this
end to make himselfe seene and knowen therein to all men.
We haue therefore good cause (my companions) to bestow al possible
paines and trauaile, that we may proceede on in so necessary and profitable
a knowledge.Two books that reach vs to know God. Wherfore we must lay before our eyes two bookes
which God hath giuen vnto vs to instruct vs by, and to lead vs to the
knowledge of himselfe, namely the booke of nature, and the booke of
his word, which we must ioyne both together, as also that doctrine,
which is set forth vnto vs in them concerning the knowledge of our
selues, especially of the soule, which is the true man. For the first booke
would stand vs in small stead without the second, as we see it dayly by
experience, yea euery one of vs hath trial thereof in himselfe. Therefore

God of his great mercy hath added the second booke vnto the first, to
supply the want that is in our nature through sinne. For if man had not
sinned, this booke of nature would haue sufficed to haue kept him alwayes
in the knowledge, contemplation; and obedience of God his
creator. For then he should himselfe haue caried the booke whole
and perfect imprinted in his heart and mind: neyther should his soule
haue needed any teacher to know to selfe, but in it selfe it should haue
cleerely beheld and contemplated it selfe, so long as she preserued ^er
first light and aboad in that harmony wherein God had created her.
But now that she is in the body, as it were some excellent picture of
Apelles fallen into a sinke of mire, couered and compassed about with
thicke mists,The necessitie of the word and obscure darknesse, it is very needfull that we should
haue another new light, brought vnto vs from heauen, which is not naturall
as the first but supernaturall. For this cause God hath farther giuen
vs this second booke, of which I spake euen now, by means wherof
and by the vertue of his holy spirit, hee communicateth vnto vs as
much celestiall and heauenly light as is needfull for the knowledge
of our selues and of his high Maiestie. Being therefore guided by the
spirit of God, whereby our spirit doth see and contemplate, let vs read
in these two bookes, and diligently note in them the parts, and powers,
force and vertue aswell of the body as of the soule of man, especially
the immortality thereof: whereby we shall make the way easie, for vs
to walke and sport our minds hereafter in the large and goodly fields
of the whole world, by discoursing of all natures contayned therein, if
it shall please God to giue vs grace, as he hath giuen vs wils to performe
it. True it is, that we haue now taken in hand a very long piece
of worke, and not greatly necessary in respect of the principall cause
of our meeting together, if we meant here to make an entire and perfect
Anatomy of mans body. This duetie belongeth to Physicions;
which we will not take vpon vs: but it shall suffice vs to open a gappe
to the consideration, first of the matter whereof the body is made, and
of the diuersitie thereof: then of the fourme which God hath giuen
vnto it: and lastly of the profit and vse of them both. For through a
litle vnderstanding and knowledge, which wee may haue of these
things, if we consider them as we ought, we shal haue great occasion
to maruayle at the worke of God in the frame of the body: yea wee
shall see therein store of testimonies of his almighty power, knowledge,
wisdome, goodnesse and prouidence. But as for the soule, we
will labour to make her to behold herselfe in the glasse of her wonderfull
actions, so farre forth as she is able to contemplate herselfe, and
to measure her greatnesse by her owne compasse. Wherefore we will

here make as it were an Anatomy of the soule, and of all her partes,
powers, vertues, and faculties, instructing our selues at large in the consideration
of her nature, creation and immortalitie: and eschewing in
all our discourses as much as we may, obscure words and phrases, subtill,
curious and vnprofitable disputations, which the ancient Philosophers
haue vsed in the searching out of such matters, we wil apply our
selues to the greatest number of such as haue not haunted the schooles
of philosophy, that we may profit many, and instruct our selues in the
truth by familiar speaches, so farre forth as our weake iudgement is able
to comprehend, being directed by the gift and grace of God, and
made co^formable to his word, which is the true touchstone whereby all
doctrine is to be examined. Moreouer we wil obserue in our discourses
the same order which we kept in our Academical treatises: but only
that I thinke it meetest for our present purpose, that euery one of vs after
he hath discoursed of some point, should offer matter subiect to his
companion to prosecute and speake of, as if he gaue him instructions
concerning that thing which he propoundeth vnto him. And thus we
will deale all foure of vs, euery one in his course, making one discourse
round in the morning, and another the afternoone: continuing vntill
we haue finished as it were a naturall history of man, and of
his parts, the body and soule. First therefore thou shalt
instruct vs ASER, in the creation of first
man, and in the matter whereof
mans body is
made.

Par la prieres Dieu m'ayde.



THE FIRST DAYES
worke of the second part of
the French Acadamy.

Of the creation of the first man, and of the matter whereof the body
of manis made. Chap. 1.
ASER. God only hath his being of himselfe,
therefore he is eternal, without beginning and
without end. But because hee would not be
alone, he created the creatures, and by their
creation gaue being to that which was nothing
before. Therefore all natures tooke
their beeing and essence, and do hold it of that
first euerlasting essence. Thus also he answered
to Moses, who asked of him what his
name was:The name of God. Exod. 3. 14. I will be that I will be: or, I am that I am, Moreouer he said,
Thus shalt thou say to the children of Israel: I am hath sent me vnto you.
We see heere what name hee giueth himselfe, whereby hee sheweth
that he onely is, and hath an immutable essence and existence, which
onely, to speake properly, a man may call a Being. Wherefore seeing
God is the first essence, and that onely that hath being of it selfe, and
from which all others proceede, as riuers from their spring and fountaine,
we shall easily come vnto the Eternitie of God, if we know how
to ascend thither by the degrees of the essences of all those creatures,
which descended from his eternall and vnchangeable essence, by reason
whereof he is called Iehouah by the Hebrews.
If then we consider our selues, euery one of vs shal know that he had
a beginning, that he made not himselfe, neither came into the worlde
but by ye help of another. This consideration wil leade euery one to his
father and mother that begat him: and being come so far, he wil passe on
and ascend step by step to his ancestors,Steps to ascend vp by to the knowledge of God. making the like iudgement of
al his predecessors as of himselfe. For he wil by and by think, that they
came into the world after the same maner that he did, and not otherwise,
and that they were not the first men. Thus if a man ascend vp stil
from father to father, he must needes in the ende come to some one father,
that was the first father of all, of whome all others tooke their
beginning, as hee that was the stocke of all mankinde. This first
father must either haue his being of one, or be eternall, or come of

some eternall matter like to God, or bee God himselfe. Which
because he^ coulde not be, ^hee must needes haue some beginning,
and bee borne after another fashion then they were that descended of
him. Now what (...) can we say he had but the Creator of the whole
world? Being come to his first beginning wee can mount no higher,
but must stay there, and conclude, that this first builder of nature was
without beginning, that he is infinite and eternall, otherwise we shall
neuer find place to stay at. Thus we see how the creature leadeth vs
from essence to essence, proceeding from one to another, vntill it come
to the first essence which is infinite and eternall, the spring and fountaine
of all others, which we call God. But let vs speake of this creation
of the first man.
After the almighty power of (...) Eternal had within nothing and of
nothing made the onely matter of the world, and had seucred out of this
Chaos, the ayre, the fire, the earth and the water, and inriched the whole
with celestiall lights; herbes, plants, earthy, ayery, and watry liuing
creatures,Gen. 1. 26. Let vs (sayd he) make man in our owne image according to our
likenesse, and let them rule ouer the (...) of the sea, and o^er the foule of the
heauen, and ouer the beasts, and ouer all the earth, and ouer euery thing that
creepeth and moouethon the earth. Nowe we will note here in the first
place three things well worthy of consideration.Three things to be considered in the creation of man. First, that God did
not barely command that man should be made and created, as he commanded
for the other creatures: but he speaketh, as though some great
king or prince should ideliberate with his Councill about the making
of some great worke: declaring afterward himselfe why he tooke this
way in the cruation of man onely, and not in the creation of the other
creatures like wise, when he sayth, According to our own image and likenesse,
which is the second thing we haue to note. For by these wordes
he plainely declareth, that he mindeth to make a worke, the like wherof
was not before, and to draw our an image more agreeable to his
nature and more worthy his Maiesty then he had done before amongst
all the works^ of his hands. For although he had already idomed and
replenished the whole heauens (...) goo^y lights, yea al thee (...)
and residue of the world with all sorts of creatures, yet there was not
one creature vnder heauen which he had made capable of vnderstanding
and reason, to know and glorifie God the creator of the whole
world. And (...) the Angels being (...) spirits had this vnderstanding
and knowledge, yet he would haue man besides vpon earth,
for whose sake chiefly he had created the world, to the end hee might
know and glorifie him together with his Angels. Therefore Moses addeth
the third thing which we haue to consider in this deliberation of

mans creation, thereby the better to let vs know the excellency of this
creature aboue the rest, when hee declareth, that God would create
him, that he might rule ouer the rest of the liuing creatures, and ouer
the whole earth, as if man should be his Lieutenant, and as it were a
litle terrene god, vnder the great and soueraigne God that created him.
But some man may aske with whom God maketh this deliberation?
For he speaketh as though he would haue some helpers and companions
in the making of this so excellent a work. The Prophet Isaiah answereth
to this,Isa. 40. 13, 14. rom. 11. 34. saying, Who was his counseller? or who hath giuen to him
first, and he shalbe recompensed? For he had no other counsaile or helpe
but of himselfe, and of his heauenly and eternall wisedome, as it is testified
by Salomon.Prou. 8. 22. etc. Therefore we must not thinke that he had the Angels
for counsellers and helpers, either in the creation of man, or of any
other creature whatsoeuer, as some haue presumed to imagine and
to affirme. For that were to derogate too much from the nature and
maiestie of God, and to take from him the title of Almightie, which agreeth
to him onely. For the creature cannot be a creator. And as there
is but one onely God, so there is but one creator of all things. For the
worke of the creation can agree to none but to God only. But Moses
by this maner of speaking in the plural number, meant to giue out
some obscure knowledge of the trinitie of persons that is in the vnitie
of God,The trinitie of persons in the vnitie of the godhead. and that vnion which they haue together in the worke of the
creation, which is common to the Father, with the Sonne and the holy
Ghost, as are all the other workes of God. For although there bee distinction
of persons in one and the same diuine essence, yet there is no
diuision betweene them nor separation. And as they are vnited together
in one and the same essence, so likewise are they in all their works.
For the Father doth nothing but by the Sonne, and that in the vertue of
the holy spirite.Gen. 1. 27. Therefore the Prophet addeth immediately God created
the man in his image: in the image of God created he him: he created them
male and female. We see here that Moses doth not propound vnto vs
three Gods or three creators, but one onely. And in that he doeth twice
repeate this, that God created man in his image, it is to let vs vnderstand,
that this point ought to be well considered of, and weighed, as that
wherein consisteth all the excellencie of man, and the true difference
that is betweene him and the other liuing creatures, which are but
brute beasts. We shall know where we ought to seeke this image of
God in man, after we haue heard the rest of the historie of his creation.
For after that Moses hath briefly and summarily spoken as wee haue
saide, he taketh the same matter againe into his hand and intreateth
thereof more specially.Gen. (...) 7. He saith then, That the Lo (...) of the

dust of the ground, and breathed in his face breath of life, and that the man was
a liuing soule. Wherby he sheweth euide^tly, yt God did not create ye body
and soule of ma^ both at one time, as he had created the beasts, but the
body first and then the soule, which he ioined therwith, not only to giue
life vntoit, as it is giuen to brute beasts by ye soule which they haue, but
also to make it capable of vndersta^ding, as we shal vnderstand more at
large hereafter. For we speak not now by what means, or at what time
ye soule is ioined with the body in the co^mon and ordinary generation of
men, but only of the mean and order which God obserued in the creatio^
of ye first ma^, according to ye rehearsall which Moses maketh. Now touching
ye matter wherof he made him, because the chiefest and most apparant
was taken fro^ the earth,Gen. 3. 19. it is said expresly, that he was made therof,
and that he should return thither, as we see it true, in the death of euery one.
But this is most certain and granted of al ye great philosophers yea euide^t
to be seen, that mans body is compounded of the 4. elements, and of all
their qualities,Mans body compounded of the 4. elements. as also all the other bodies of creatures vnder heauen.
And because the greatest part which remaineth of yt which wee see of
man, is of ye earth, therefore it is said, that he returneth to earth, although
whatsoeuer is taken of the other elements in ye compositio^ of his body,
doth likewise turne againe into the^. For the flesh of man agreeth aptly
with the earth, his vital spirits wt the aire and the fire, his humors with the
water.Of what element e^ery sence holdeth most. The sence of seeing agreeth wt the fire: that of hearing with the
aire: yt of tasting we the element of water: the sence of touching with the
earth: and that of smeling with the aire and fire, as we shall vnderstand
more at large hereafter when we handle them. Yea there is no piece so
small in the whole frame of man, wherein euery one of the elements
doth not intemeddle his power and qualities, although one of the^ doth
alwaies command aboue the rest. This is to be seen in the blood, which
is the first and chiefest of those 4. humours in the body, and is properly of
the nature of the aire. For the muddy dregs, which co^monly thicke^ and
settle in the botto^ of it, are of the nature of the earth, and are called Melancholy:
the pure blood that swimmeth in the midst doth represent vnto
vs the aire: that humour that swimmeth in a rounde circle is watrie
sleame: and the skumme that appeareth aboue, is the choler, which is
of the nature of the fire. If we co^sider the ordinary generation of men,
the matter is humour: naturall heate is as it were the master buylder:
drynesse hardneth the body: and colde refreshings doe not onely moderate
the heate that the moyst matter should not bee consumed, but
haue also their proper action to congele and gather it together.
Nowe we must vnderstand that of this first matter which contained
all the elements,The first matter the mother of all things. and which God made the mother of all things, and

capable of all formes, euery bodie is compounded, and euery one returneth
into the same againe, and of that taketh a new forme: so yt the true
matter of all corporall things doth not turne into nothing, neither increaseth
or decreaseth in any sort. So that euer since the Eternall that
can doe all things, made this whole great frame of nothing, no one
thing is made of nothing, neither doth any thing vanish into nothing:
but the change of euery thing yt is bred or that dieth, is only in forme.
Now by this knowledge of the matter of the first mans body, we may
easily vnderstand of what matter al mens bodies are made. For certain
it is, yt of one only man al others haue had their beginning, being all his
seed and offspring and multiplying daily according to his first vertue. The
reason hereof is this, because this power is naturally ingraffed in euery
thing to bring forth his like, and to continue it selfe in the same kind, being
inhabled therunto through a quickening vertue infused into it by
that diuine reason, which is the efficient and preseruing cause of all creatures.
Now I doubt not but ye Epicures and Atheists, and such like deriders
of God and his word, with whom this age is pestred more then any age
past, will account all this to bee a very fable, that hath bene hitherto
spoken of the creation of the first man. For they giue no more credite
to the writings of Moses, and of all the Prophets and Apostles, then to
an old wiues tale, or to the fables of doting dreames. Neither wil they
beleeue any more of God, of his prouidence and of his workes, then
they are able to vnderstand, know, and comprehend by their naturall
reason. They will say then, that they haue not seene the like workes
in nature,An argument of all Atheists against mans creation. (which they put in stead of God:) and so by the same reason
they wil account for lies whatsoeuer the word of God teacheth vs co^cerning
the creation of this great visible world, and of all things contayned
therein, as also that which we shal heare anon touching the creation
of woman. And thus because they saw not when God created the
worlde, and because he did set another order in nature after the creation
thereof, then there was before he had created nature, therefore according
to their goodly phylosophie, there shalbe neither God nor Creator,
nor difference betwixt the workes of the creation, in which nature
it selfe was created, and those that sollowed after God and disposed the
order of nature created by him. What then shall we say of man and of al
the world? Shal he be without a creator, and eternall, or made of some
matter that was eternall with God, or shall he be God himselfe? For
eyther he was created, or he was not created. If he were not created,
then is he eternall, as euen Aristotle saith, following the discourse
of humane reason,Aristotles errour was yt the worlde had no beg^nning which notwithstanding blinded him in this marter
of creation: Wherein hee is not onely contrarie to the worde, but

also to his master Plato, and to the best and most excellent amongst
the Philosophers. But if the worlde was created, it must needes bee
that it had some beginning, and that the first man, (as likewise euery other
creature) was begotten after another maner then the vse is at this
present. But what would these sharpe wittes, or rather dull beasts say,
if they had not seene by experience the woorke of God (which they
call the worke of nature onely) in the generation of men? For of what
are they daily begotten and conceiued, but of a supersluitie, and as it
were of an excrement of mans body, as hereafter we shall vnderstand
more at large? Is this farre more easie to digest in humane reason then
the first creation of man? If these skorners had neuer seen such a thing,
and if they were not conuicted heereof by dayly experience, they
would giue as litle credite to those that should tell them of it, as they
doe to the spirite of God speaking of his workes by the mouth of his
Prophets. As for those that set nature in the place of God, what greater
brutishnes can proceede from them? For doeth not the very same
of nature declare sufficiently,Nature commeth of the Latine word Nascor. which signifieth to be borne. that nature is a thing made and created,
and so consequently, hath her creation and her birth of God, as all other
creatures haue? But God punisheth these poore ignorant fellows
with the like iudgement that he doeth many other skilfull and great
Philosophers, whome hee oftentimes giueth ouer into a reprobate
sence, because through their pride and ingratitude they abuse
the knowledge of naturall things which God giueth them: and so
that science which should lead them to a greater knowledge of God,
maketh them more beast-like then any other, through their owne
fault. For it cannot be otherwise but that euery one, considering the
nature and composition euen of one only member of mans body, most
of necessitie acknowledge and confesse, that some Woorke-master
made it, and that this Woorke-master is of no bodily or humane nature,
but of a spirituall and diuine being: that hee hath not onely vnderstanding
and knowledge of all things, but also that hee is vnderstanding
it selfe: that hee knoweth, loueth, and is the authour of all
order, and that his wisedome and vertue is so infinite, that it surmounteth
all mens vnderstandings. Heereupon it followeth, that hee is
worthie to be esteemed for God, and to bee woorshipped of all men.
There are others that aske, why man was not created an infinite space
of time before hee beganne to be by the testimonie of the holy Scripture,
which teacheth vs, that it is not yet fully 6000. yeeres since his
creation, as though he had bene created very late. But if the shortnesse
of time offendethe them, because they thinke that there are so
fewe yeers, since we reade in holy Scripture, that man was created,

let them consider that nothing lasteth long if it haue any
ende, and that the whole space of ages past, if it be compared with eternitie
that is endlesse, is not onely not to be thought litle, but none
at all. Therefore that question which now they aske after 5000. yeres,
they might with the same curiositie demaund after sixe hundred thousand
yeeres, if the world had endured so long. They also that were before
vs when man was but newely created, might haue moued this
question: yea the first man might haue enquired also assoone as hee
was made, why he was not made before. And so this controuersie about
the beginning of mans being, had neuer at any time heretofore
any other reasons then it hath nowe, neither shall haue heereafter.
Let vs knowe then that God being eternall and without beginning
began time, and in time made man whome hee had neuer made before,
being ledde thereunto not by any newe and sodaine motion,
but by an immutable and eternall counsaile. For no newe thing can
befall him, neither is there any thing in him that is mutable: but according
to the height and depth of his riches hee hath multiplied the
children of men. And let them thinke, imagine and dispute what
they list, yet all things haue had their beginning according to the
good prouidence of God, which no man in the worlde can sufficiently
comprehend. O great mysterie, that God hath alwayes
beene, and that it pleased him some time past to make man first,
who was neuer made before, and yet not to change his purpose
and will!How we must ascend vp to the knowledge of God by his creatures. Thus you see howe wee must steppe by steppe ascend by
the workes of God vnto himselfe, as we haue alreadie touched in the
beginning of our speech, and as wee can doe it well ynough in mens
workes. For when I behold a worke, it by and by putteth me in minde
of the instruments wherewith it was made, and the instruments, of
him that made them, and of him that set them aworke. Then the
Workemaster putteth me in minde of him that made him such a one,
namely, both of his master that taught him, and also of his parents that
begate him. Thus climing vp still from one to one, and from degree
to degree, I must needes in the ende conclude, that there is one chiefe
Workmaster, of whom all others are descended by their order and degree.
And there I must stay: as in like maner proceeding from one essence
to another, I may come to the contemplation of that infinite and
eternall essence, which is the spring and first cause of euery nature,
namely vnto God, who hath giuen to that matter whereof he made all
things, a forme meete and conuenient for that worke which he would
make of it. This is that which I thinke we ought to conceaue touching
the creation of the matter of mans body. Now before we consider the

disposition therof, I thinke we ought to intreate of the creation of woman,
who is one selfe same flesh, differing onely in sexe, and appointed
of God to bee a necessarie helpe for the originall and preseruation
of mankinde: which I desire to heare you discourse of, AMANA.


Of the creation of Woman. Chap. 2.
AMANA. No maruaile, if the eye of mans soule be often dimmed,
yea looseth all light in the diligent consideration of the wonderful
workes of Gods prouidence. For as the eye of the body although
cleare of it selfe, cannot behold colours, figures, and other visible things,
except it bee illuminated with light from heauen, or from some other
lightsome body: so albeit our vnderstanding of it owne nature be very
cleare sighted, as being a beame of the diuine brightnes, yet by reason
of the bond that conioyneth it to the body, wherein it is ouerwhelmed
with the darknes of the matter, it can in no wise attain to the glittering
conceptions of eternall wisedome, vnlesse it alwaies haue God
that great and euerlasting Sunne, and his heauenly light to illuminat it,
and to guide it to the faithful contemplation of the woorkes of his almighty
hand. This hath bin the cause why so many great wits discoursing
philosophically of the originall and beginning of things, and looking
on euery side, yea doubting and fearing many things, which they
found contrary to humane reason, haue bin caried hither and thither
with diuers opinions, like to a vessel tossed in a deep sea, but could neuer
come neere to the knowledge of the trueth. But if wee follow the
bright starre of trueth fixed in the heauenly booke of life, as wee haue
learned therein the creation of man, so we may as easily be instructed
in the creation of the woman, to the confusion of the wise men of the
world, and of all Epicures and Atheists. The holy scriptures teach vs,
that after God had created man and placed him in the garden of Eden,
to dresse it, and keepe it, and had forbidden him to eate of the tree of the
knowledge of good and euil, which was a signe and toke^ of the homage,
obedience, and subiection he did owe to God his creator and Lord, and
of that blessed life appointed for him as a recompence and crowne of
this obedience, It is not good (then saide hee) that man shoulde bee himselfe
alone,Gen. 2. 15, 18. I will make him an helpe meete for him. And to shew the better
how this helpe was, not onely meete, but also necessary for man,
Moses saith, that God had already brought all the beasts before Adam,
that he might name them according to their natures and kinds,
which hee perfourmed.What great knowledge of naturall things was in Adam. Whereby we may iudge, what great knowledge
of naturall things was in Adam before he sinned. For otherwise

hee could not haue giuen to all liuing creatures names agreeable
to their nature: and if hee had not named them as he should, hee
had brought in great confusion in nature, Afterwarde Moses addeth,
that amongst all those liuing creatures hee found no helpe meete for
Adam: yea the Lorde had spoken of him before, as if he had bene
alone in the worlde. For although all the beastes, and all the residue
of the creatures were giuen to man to assist him, so that being
in that estate of innocencie wherein hee was then, hee might
receiue all seruice and readie obedience from all the creatures, neuerthelesse
hee had not as yet any helpe of his kinde. For hee coulde
not haue that familiaritie and conuesation with the beastes, nor
receiue such helpe from them, as hee coulde from creatures of his
owne kinde. Therefore when the Lorde saide, that it was not good
for man to be alone, hee declared plainely, that he did not create him
to liue and solitary in the world, but with companie, and that his
will was, that there should be men vpon earth, who should liue in societie
and fellowship together.Man was created for societie. Nowe seeing that man was created
for this ende, he coulde not liue in company with others of his kinde
without generation and multiplication thereof, which coulde not
be except hee were ioyned to a wise, seeing it pleased GOD to appoynt
it so. Wherefore as hee created the other liuing and sensible
creatures of two sexes in one kinde, namely, some males and others
females, that they might increase and multiplie by generation, so
likewise dealt hee with mankinde. But as hee tooke an other course
in the creation of man, then he did in that of beastes, so also dealt he
in the creation of the woman, whome hee purposed to giue vnto
man for a companion. For hee created not man and woman both
together, but man first, and then woman afterwarde, as wee will
declare by and by. Nowe because there is no coniunction or communion
in any humane societie, wherein that holy bonde, which
ought to knitte all men together, and ioyne them one to another, is
better declared, then in that whereby man and wife are conioyned and
vnited, as it were in one selfe same bodie, and in one soule, therefore it
pleased God not without cause to beginne this holie societie by that
coniunction, which is the bonde and foundation of all the rest, and
as it were the spring-head and fountayne of all mankinde. Therefore
it is written, that GOD minding to create woman and to
giue her to man for an helper, caused an heauie sleepe to fall vpon
Adam, (which name is as much to saye as, Of earth) and
when hee slept hee tooke one of his ribbes, and closed vp the flesh
in steade thereof. And the Lorde God made a woman of the

ribbe,The creation of woman, and vse thereof. In Hebrew Ish signifieth man, and Ishah woman. which he had taken from man: then the man said, This nowe is
bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh, she shall be called Mannes, or Mannish,
because she was taken out of man. First we see in this history, that God
woulde not that the male and female should haue two beginnings,
but onely one, and that they should be as it were one stocke of mankinde,
to the end that the coniunction therof should be more straight,
firme and inuiolable. For if it had beene otherwise, the diuersitie of beginnings
might haue giuen occasion either of conte^ning one another,
or of enuie, dissention, and brawlings. Therefore God created
in the person of Adam the fountaine of mankinde, and after
framed Euah, (which is as much to say, as aliue, or liuing) to the
ende wee might knowe, that the woman was not created as a new
creature of an other race or kinde, but was onely a portion and part
of the nature of man. By this meanes Adam had in the woman as
it were a glasse to beholde and contemplate himselfe, as Euah also
had the like in him, and as yet to this day euery husband hath the
like in his wife, and euery wife in her husband. For the woman
was flesh of the flesh of man, bloud of his bloud, and bone of his
bones, euen as it were his owne body, and a second-selfe. Howe
then can the husband despise and hate his wife, and not hate himselfe?
For as Saint Paul witnesseth,Ephes. 5. 29. No man euer yet hated his owne
flesh. And what cause hath a woman to bee loath to bee obedient
to her husband, if shee consider that shee is taken out of him, and
that in setting her selfe against him, shee striueth aginst her selfe,
and doeth her selfe great wrong and iniurie? Therefore as the Lord
hath declared what place hee woulde haue the husband and wife
to keepe, euery one in their degree, by that order which hee hath
obserued in creating the man first, and then the woman: so he hath
done the like in that hee created the woman neyther of the mans
head nor of his feete, but of his ribbe. Whereby as on the one side,
hee admonisheth the wife not to lift vp her selfe aboue her husband
by taking authoritie ouer him, and so making her selfe his
head: so on the other side hee admonisheth the husbande not to
abuse his authoritie, by putting his wife vnder his feete, as if shee
were a slaue, but to account of her as of his sister and ^ompanion.
Wee are therefore to consider the great wisedome and prouidence
of God in this creation of the woman. But Atheists, and other contemners
of the worde of God, besides that goodly ground and foundation
of their impieti^^ whereof wee heard before, take farther occasion
to deride this historie of the creation of woman, because it
is sayde, that shee was builded of a ribbe which God tooke from Adam.

Truely the woorkes of God in the creation of things are not vsuall,
because they are the first: but they which will not beleeue them,
may as well giue no credit neither to the myracles that haue beene in
times past, nor to those that are daily seene. For they were not to be
called by this name of miracles, if they were wrought by an ordinarie
course of nature. They conclude then out of Moses speach, either that
Adam had then one rib more then he should haue had,How Atheists scofle at the womans creation. or else that he
had one lesse then he should after the womans creation: so that what
side soeuer you take they will find a great absurdity. They that seeke
for occasions in this sort to scofte at the workes of God, that study and
take delight to cauill at them, will alwayes finde absurdities enough
in them according to their corrupt will and iudgement. For they will
daily coine as many as they list to hinder themselues from the knowledge
of God and of his workes, least they should be constrained by
them to glorifie him. But indeede what can they doe else but barke against
God and his prouidence, and laugh at al that is taught vs by the
holy spirite concerning the creation of all thinges contained in the
world, seeing they are not capable of the knowledge and vnderstanding
of heauenly mysteries? But I demand of them, what strange matter
they finde in this, if it were so that Adam was created with one rib
more then men commonly haue, which God prepared in his creation
for the womans creations or otherwise, if hee had one lesse after her
creation,Genes. 2. 21. which is more likely? For it is saide expresly, that God filled
vp with flesh that place out of which hee tooke the ribbe whereof he framed
Euah. So that Adam lost nothing, neither was he lesse perfect in
respect of that. For God did very well recompence it two wayes.
First, bicause that which he put in steade thereof, did serue Adams turne
as well as if his rib had remained still. Secondly, it turned to his great
good, in that he had a whole woman for one of his ribbes, yea such
an helpe was giuen vnto him, that shee was as it were another halfe
of his body to make him a perfect man. Besides al this, we haue further
to note the significations of those things which God meant to represent
vnto vs, and to teach vs by that manner of proceeding, which hee
obserued increating the woman; of which I haue already spoken. But
we haue also to marke herein a notable prophecy of Iesus Christ and
of his Church and a liuely image of her vnion,Of the mvsterie of Christ and his Church in the creation of the woman. coniunction, and communication
with him being her husband. For as the rib was taken
from the mans side whilest he was asleepe, that the woman might bee
made: so in the death of Iesus Christ, signified by this sleepe, and whilest
he hung vpon the crosse, his side was pierced, out of which issued
blood and water which resemble the Sacraments that tend to the edification

of the Church. And as Euah was taken from Adam according
to the flesh, who was the first stocke of mankinde, and then ioyned
vnto him in marriage, that of twaine they might be one in one flesh:
so the Church was taken from Iesus Christ according to the spirite,
who is the true stocke of mankind regenerated and reformed after the
image of God, that she might be one mystical body with Iesus Christ,
who was giuen vnto her by God for her husband and head. For this
cause we may say the same things of him and of his Church, which we
spake before of the authoritie and soueraignty of the husband ouer his
wife, and of the subiection of the wife towards her husband. For the
Church was not first, but Iesus Christ who is eternall, very God and
very man: neyther was Iesus Christ taken from her, but shee from
him. Therefore that which Adam saide of Euah, when God brought
her vnto him, and when he had seene her after he awoke from sleepe,
namely,Ephes. 5. 30. This now is bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh, Saint Paul applieth
to Iesus Christ and to his Church, because shee is made bone of
his bone, and flesh of his flesh, and partaker of the very nature of Iesus
Christ by faith in him, and by that vnion, coniunction, and fellowship
which she hath with him, whereby shee is conioyned vnto him
as his spouse. Wherefore the faithfull haue good cause to reioyce,
knowing that there is the like spirituall vnion, coniunction and communication
betweene Iesus Christ and them, as there is betweene the
husband and the wife according to the flesh.
Nowe as wee haue answered to the friuolous speeches which Atheists
commonly make about the creation of the woman, so wee
will not passe ouer with silence the opinion of naturall Philosophers,The opinion of naturall Philosophers touching the nature of women.
who say, that the male is as it were a perfect man in comparison
of the woman, and that shee is an imperfect man. For they doe
teach, that nature tendeth alwayes to the greatest perfection that
shee can attaine vnto: and because the male is more perfect then
the female, therefore that shee alwayes endeuoureth to bring
foorth males. But when shee wanteth power and strength to doe
that shee woulde, she ingendereth females insteade of males. Wherevpon
it shoulde followe, that the generation of the woman, as also
that of the other females of all liuing creatures, is an infirmitie, a
defect, and an imperfection of nature. But I woulde gladly demaunde
of them, whether GOD made an imperfect worke or
no, when hee created the first woman: and whether hee did not
create her as perfect in her kinde, and in that degree for which hee
created her, as hee did the man in his. Moreouer, seeing God is
the creatour of nature, it is certaine that hee created it perfect in all

things belonging vnto it, and that hee hath made it subiect to certaine
Lawes, vnder which it is alwayes guyded by his prouidence
as well in the generation of females as of males, of the woman as
of the man. And if some creatures excell others, yet that hindereth
not why euery one shoulde not bee perfect in his order and
nature, hauing regarde to their Creatour, and to the ende for the
which hee created them. Wee must not therefore alleadge anie
imperfection in the creation of the woman, more then in that of
the man: seeing that if shee had beene created otherwise then
shee was, shee shoulde not haue beene so perfect in her nature
as shee is, because shee woulde not so fitly serue that turne for the
which shee was created, namely, to helpe man, both in the generation
and continuance of his kinde, and also in being a succour
vnto him in such thinges as belong to his nourishement, and
in the guiding and gouernement of them. Besides, is it not sayd
as well of the woman as of the man, that she was created in the
image of GOD, as wee haue already heard? For Moses, after
hee had sayde that God created man in his image, addeth immediately,Genes. 1. 27. 1. Cor. 11. 7.
In the image (I say) of God created hee him, hee created
them male and female. And, as man is the image and glorie of
God, so the woman is the glorie of the man: neyther can the one be
bee without the other. For as the woman is of the man, so the man
is by the woman, but all thinges are of GOD. Therefore the worde
of Building,What the word (...) importeth in the ^^eation of the woman. Genes. 2. 22. which the Prophet vseth in setting downe the creation
of the woman, is duely to bee considered in this matter. For
when hee saieth that God built the woman of Adams ribbe, this
worde importeth more then if he had simply sayde, that he made
and formed the woman. For thereby hee woulde haue vs knowe
the perfection of man, and of mankinde in the creation of the
woman, because without her his building coulde not be finished.
So that man is as it were the first foundation, vpon whom the woman
was builded: as likewise by generation of children proceeding
from them both, this building is not onely preserued and continued
still, but also furthered and augmented. Vpon the like reason the
worde that signifieth a childe in the Hebrew tongue, is taken from
a worde that signifieth to build in the same language: as in deede
children also are the true building of a house. But before we enter into
any larger discourse of this matter to know the generation and multiplication
of mankind, I am of opinion that we shal do well to intreat
first of the dispositio^ of that matter, wherof we heard before his body
was made, as also of the partes thereof. For generation respecteth

chiefly the third kind of the natural powers and faculties of man, whose
vertue and properties we are not to consider of, before we haue beene
instructed in all things that concerne the particular composition of
mans body and of euery part thereof: to this end, that we might haue
the true knowledge of that lodging which God hath giuen to man to
dwell in vpon earth, and that step by step wee might come to consider
of the host or tenant of this tabernacle, namely of the spirite and
soule, which is truely man. Let vs then beginne to take a view of the
diuision of the chiefe partes of the body, and so handle first the simple
or similary partes, of which all the rest are compounded. This matter
subiect I offer to thee ARAM, for thy discourse.


Of the simple or similary partes of the body, namely the bones, ligaments,
gristles, sinowes, pannicles, cordes or filaments, vaines, arteries,
and flesh. Chap. 3.
ARAM. If wee take pleasure in beholding materiall frames builded
with mens hands, especially if they be made by rare workemen,
and such as excell in their Arte, and in viewing attentiuely the
goodly workes that are in them, we ought to be a great deale more
delighted without al comparison, in looking vpon the stately edifices
builded with the very hand of God, and vpon the exquisite and wonderful
workes wherewith he hath adorned and set them forth. Curiosity
causeth many men to wander all their life time in lands and seas
vnknowen, to feede their mindes with a vaine knowledge of the maners
and customs of strangers: but very few will be found, who haue
a care to know themselues. In so much that being able to discourse of
the situation of diuers regions, and of the beauty of those places and
fortresses that are therein, yet they know not their owne house wherein
they alwaies dwel, and much lesse themselues, namely their soules,
which are the inhabitants. But if we thinke it a shame for a man to bee
ignorant of those things that belong, or bring commodity or pleasure
to the life of man, the ignorance of our selues, which hurteth this life
and the other we looke for, is a great deale more shamefull and dishonest.
Now a man may easily perceiue how commendable, excellent
and profitable the knowledge of the nature of our bodies, and of euery
part thereof was iudged to be by men in ancient time, in that they
had publike schooles amongst them, in which euery one might daily
behold Anatomies: yea Anatomies were shewed to euery one that
would see them in the priuate houses of Philosophers and Physicions.
And for this cause Galen saith, that the Ancients would not write of

this science. But after when this diligence of the first louers thereof
beganne to be despised and reiected of the most part of men, it was
necessary that some should write thereof for their good, as also for the
benefit of posteritie. Otherwise they would haue fallen within short
space into a dangerous ignorance of their nature, and of the causes and
remedies of such diseases as dayly trouble them. But wee must referre
that knowledge, which in our discourses wee seeke for out of this science,
to another end. Neyther do we vndertake to speake of that Art
and Science that belongeth to Phisicions, as though we made profession
thereof,The true ende and vse of knowing th^ booke. but onely to shew the true vse of it, and howe it may bee
referred to the honour of God, and to the knowledge of his wisedome
and prouidence: as also to the end, that in beholding the wonderfull
composition and disposition of the members of our body, wee shoulde
remember the creator thereof, who seeth whatsoeuer heth most secret
and hidden therein, and who is able to make as it pleaseth him an
Anatomy both of body and soule, and to send them both to euerlasting
hell fire, when they will not acknowledge him to be the efficient
and finall causes of their being. Hauing regard therefore to this ende,
we will consider of the parts of mans body according to the subiect
propounded vnto vs.
The partes then of the body are diuided into two sortes or kindes:
the firstis, the simple or similary parts, the other the compound parts.
The simple partes are of that nature,What the simple or similary parts of mans body are. that euery portion of them, howe
great or little soeuer it be, retaineth alwayes the name that is giuen to
the whole, whereof it is a part: and of these simple partes the other
kinde is named, whereof wee will intreate heereafter, because they
are compounded partes, and obtaine the place of members, whose
partes are not called by the name of the whole member, but euery
part hath his speciall name. For all the partes of the head are not called
by the name of the head, and so it is in the other members of the
body. But if a bone bee broken into many peeces, euery peece is still
called a bone: and the like may be said of the other simple parts, which
are nine in number, namely, the bone, the ligament, the gristle the sin^w,
the pannicle, the cord or filament, the veine, the artery and the flesh. Our
speach therefore must be of these. No man is ignorant, that the foundation
of euery building is as much a part thereof rather more (although
it appeare not) then any other part howe sumptuous soeuer it
be. For the rest are laid and planted vpon the foundation, neyther can
they long continue in their beauty, vnles that be good and firme. We
may say the like of the bones of a mans body:Of the bones of mans body. (which are made of the
seede in generation, when the thickest part of it is hardned by heat, as

stones are baked in the earth by great heat.) For they are not only like
to foundations and pillers, which sustaine the body and al the members
thereof, but they are as it were pales and fences vnto it to containe all
things that are within the building of the body, and to inuiron al the
parts of it, as it were with walles and rampires. For this cause they are
more earthy, drier, and colder then any other part of the body. And
therefore the prouidence of God appeareth most wonderfull in this
composition of the bones, seeing that of one selfe same peece of earth
or clay he maketh the bones so strong and hard in comparison of the
ligaments,Gods prouidence great in the creatio^ of the bones. gri^tles, and oter simple partes: so that in respect of these
the other are for strength and hardnes like to stones and mettals in comparison
of the other part of the earth. Neither is the wisedome of God
worthy of great admiration in this respect onely, but also because hee
made not the bones all of one peece, nor yet of one fashion and forme.
For minding to giue motio^, not only to man but also to al other liuing
and sensible creatures, the bones were to be diuided and distinguished into
diuers pieces, to the end they should not hinder this motion, which
is so necessary for those creatures: the maner whereof wee may see in
men armed at all points.A fit similitude. For the harnesse must be made of diuers pieces
according to the ioynts of the members, that their moouing may
haue no impediment. But because the bones being diuided and separated
one fro^ another, cannot be so conioyned or vnited together, that
euery one should sustaine that charge which it hath to beare, therfore
that they might serue more fitly for motion to the creatures, God hath
framed the^ in such wise, that they haue their ioynts in so good proportion
and so aptly interserted one within another, as that the whole combination
and vniting of the^ al together is maruailous exquisit and goodly
to behold, like to a worke made of many pieces, which all meet together
in one body. For some of them are hollow like to a round box,
that they may be conioyned with the other that are round in the ends,
to the end they might be knit together more co^ueniently. To be short,
they haue all their fashions proportionable one with an other according
to that maner of vniting, which is most meet and conuenient for the^.
Now because this coniunction of ioynts cannot keep itself at that stay
if it haue no other band,Of the ligaments. therfore hath God placed there certaine ligaments,
or st^ings of the bones which are white partes, without blood,
void of sence, not holow, proceeding from the bones, and differing from
them in nature,Of the gristles. although not so much as the gristles do. For the gristles
(which serue also for a stay that is softer then the bones, to the end they
should not rubbe together ouer hardly one within another) are more
earthy, drier, and harder then the ligaments, and yet not so much as the

bones: so that they are as it were of a middle substance and nature betweene
the bones and the ligaments, which are also very earthy, drie,
and hard, but lesse then the gristles and the bones, and more then the
sinewes,Of the sinews. which also in some sort draw neare to the nature of the ligaments.
But they differ both in that they haue diuers originalles, as also
bicause the ligaments are altogether insensible, as the bones and gristles
are, neither can they giue any motion or sense as the sinewes can, but
serue only for ba^ds to tie the bones one to another, and to knit the other
members vnto them. But the sinews, which proceede either from the
braine, or from the marrow of the backe bone whose originall is from
the braine, are of a te^der, soft, and white substance, and of that nature that
they haue al sense, which they impart to al the sinewy parts of the body.
And of the^ also some giue both sense and motion together. Therfore
their substance is not so dry, nor so hard as that of the ligaments: neyther
yet is it so soft and tender as is the substa^ce of the fl^sh, or of the kernels,
or of the skinnes, and of such other like parts, wherof we wil speake
hereafter. As for the pannicles,Of pannicles and ^ilaments. and cords or filaments, which are litle long
threeds, slender and white, solide and strong, we may comprehend them
vnder the name of sinews and ligaments, because they take part of both
natures. For some of them haue sense with the sinewes, others haue
none with the ligaments. The office of the pannicles (which are litle
skins made of sinews and ligaments) is to defend and to knit together the
members, and to impart to many of them sense, as to the liuer, the heart,
the lungs, the splene, and the kidneis. And as for the filaments, they serue
the body, some to draw nourishment, others to retaine and keep that
which is meete to nourish the body, and some to driue forward and
to cast forth those excrements and superfluities, which help not to nourish
it,Of the veine^. but are only a burthen and griefe vnto it. The veines are thinne
and slender pipes carying the thicker blood wherewith the body is
nourished, and they haue their beginning from the liuer. For in that
the hollow veine is greater and larger then the rest, and out of that all
the other veines extend themselues into all the body, as it were branches
proceeding from the body of a tree. Herein (as we will do in all
our discourse) we follow the common opinion approued of the late
learned Philosophers, Physicions, and Anatomists. For Aristotle wrote
that the heart was the original of the veins. But Hippocrates taught otherwise,Of the arteri^.
whom Galen followed, confuting Aristotles opinion. As for
the Arteries or pulses they are pipes that proceed fro^ the heart. For in
that is ye great artery planted, which is ye stock of al the rest, which serue
to cary the vital spirits throghout the body: they are couered with litle
skins, that are strong and thick to keep the spirits from breathing out, and

for the same cause they haue their passages more streight. So that they
haue two skinnes or couerings, whereof that which is vnderneath is
fiue times thi^ker then the skinne of a veine. To conclude, the Arteries
and veines are ioyned together, to the ende that the vitall spirites
might draw and receiue from the veines conuenient matter for their
nourishment, as also that by their heat they might warme the blood
that is within them. For there are certaine mouthes in them both for
this mutuall communication, both that the spirit might draw his nourishment
from the veines, as flame fetcheth the preseruation of his
light from the lampe, and also that the veines might receiue spirit and
heat from the arteries.Of the flesh. As for the flesh it is a substance of blood, which
is then made when the thickest part of it is as it were congeled: and
with that all the members of the body are clothed outwardly. Wee
must speake more largely of the vses and properties of all these simple
partes, which wee haue here laid open in few wordes. In the meane
time in this litle that hath bin discoursed, wee see a maruailous prouidence
of God, who hath disposed and tempered the matter of the body
in such wise, that hee made it so apt to effect that worke which hee
purposed, and that by proportions and mixtures so well contriued from
one degree to another, as he hath done in the elements, to the end that
all the partes of the body might the better be preserued one by an other.
And although mens bodies are compounded of earth and of the
other elements, as we haue already touched, yet God sheweth himselfe
very won^e. full in this whole worke and matter of man. For as
he turneth the earth into diuers natures, so that of one peece hee maketh
gold, of another siluer, of this brasse, iron and other met^alles, of
that mineralles, of another pretious stones of sund^y sortes, which are
as it were ^he bones of the earth, besides a great many other things of
diuers kinds which were infinite to rehearse: so of one selfe same matter
appointed for the composition of the body, hee maketh va^iety of
workes that (...) may be framed and furnished in al respects. For we see
what difference there is betweene the bones, which partes are most
earthy,The bones most earthy of all the parts. and so consequently driest, hardest, and coldest, because of al
other partes they d^aw nearest to the nature of the earth. Then the gristles
obtaine the second degree next after the bones for agreement of
nature, as that which is in then iddest betweene the bones and the
ligaments, as the ligaments are of a middle nature betweene the gristles
and the filaments, and the filaments betweene the ligaments
and the sinewes, and so of the rest. Therefore as God the great workmaster
of nature hath framed all the partes of mans body of matter taken
from all the elements, so also hee hath tempered his matter according

to the worke he meant to make, and to that office, which it
pleased him to appoint vnto euery part and member of the body. So
that the matter of some partes holdeth more of the earth, of other
partes it hath more water, or aire, or fire, or else is more or lesse mingled
of all together. Whereby it appeareth how aptly this workemaster
can apply himselfe vnto his worke. Wee haue also another notable
testimony of his prouidence, in that hee hath made the ligaments
so strong and firme according to the necessitie of their office, hauing
ordained them to knit the bones in their ioynts, and to bee as it were
bands and cords to tie and conioyne them together, euen as the thongs
of harnesse keepe the parts thereof bound and tied one to another. We
may say as much of the filaments, but chiefly of the sinewes, which
in their places serue for bands to the body. And here wee haue also to
note, that because God hath created them to giue both motion and
sense to the body, therefore hee hath planted their roote partely in
the braine, partly in the marrow of the backebone, which is also deriued
from the braine: as the originall of the ligaments is either in the
bones, or in the gristles, or in the skinne, and the beginning of the filaments
both in the ligaments and in the sinewes, according to that vse
for which they were made. And that the motion of liuing creatures
might not be hindered, hee hath not made the ligaments, nor the filaments
nor the sinewes of any such boisterous or stiffe matter, but that
the creatures may easily bend euery way whithersoeuer they list to
mooue and turne their members. Neyther hath hee made them of so
tender and soft matter, but that they are strong and powerful enough
to holde fast all the members within their ioynts, to the ende they
might not easily become bare and thrust out of their places, as also to
furnish the creatures with strength and power, which consisteth principally
in the force and might of these partes. It is requisite also that
they shoulde be such, because they are as it were in continuall labour,
and sustaine great stresses. Wherefore they must needes bee of such
matter as will not easily yeelde or weare away, or breake in pieces.
And because all the members and all the ioyntes are not to sustaine
labours and brunts alike, therefore the Lorde hath very well prouided
for that, as hee hath done the like also in the composition and distribution
of the bones. For those members that must sustaine the heauiest
burthens and greatest brunts, that are to dispatch most laboursome
businesse, and therefore require the greater strength, haue biggest,
strongest, and mightiest bones, ligaments and sinewes, so that
their bulke, bignesse, breadth and thickenesse are answerable to
their necessary vses. The lesser members and such as are to vndergoe

lesse paine, which are ordained to effect more fine and witty workes
wherein Arte is more required then force, haue also their bones, ligaments
and sinewes lesser and smaller, so that in certaine places there
are some bones passing small, and sinewes, which are onely as it were
little threedes. Thus much I thought meete for vs to vnderstand
concerning the simple parts of the body, nowe wee must consider the
compound partes: and first intreate of the outermost partes, and so
followe that which wee spake of the foundation of mans building, to
the ende, that by little and little wee may set him vpright, and consider
him throughly in all his partes. Therefore thy speach ACHITOB,
shall be of the feete and legges, and of the armes and handes.


Of the compound partes of the body, and first of the feete and legges,
and of the armes and hands. Chap. 4.
ACHITOB. Among the manifolde and great commodities,
which wee may reape by the diligent consideration of the Anatomy
of the body, there are two of greatest weight. The first is, to
put vs in minde of our mortalitie in regarde of our bodies,A double vse of Anatomy. to the ende
that we should not please ourselues too much in the beautie of them,
and so waxe prowde and abuse our selues, as also that wee should remember
all those testimonies, which wee haue in the holie Scriptures
of the frailtie of man, and of his whole nature. For when wee
see that those partes of the body that are hardest, strongest, most firme,
and such as after the death of a man continue longest before they returne
into powder, and into that first matter out of which they were
taken, as namely those partes that were propounded vnto vs in the
former discourse, especially the bones: I say, when we see that these
notwithstanding their hardnesse, must in the ende returne to dust as
well as the rest, what shall wee thinke of the other partes that are
softer and more tender, and lesse able to resist corruption? Therefore
the spirite of God doeth so often by his worde call and send vs backe
to that instruction, which hee giueth vs by the matter whereof hee
made and framed our bodies, and by the consideration of our owne
originall and birth: to the ende wee shoulde learne to containe our
selues euermore within the compasse of all humilitie and modestie,
as well towardes him, as one towardes an other. Hereof it was that
Isaiah had commaundement giuen him from the Lorde to crie,Esay 40. 6. Iob 14. 1, 2. that
all flesh i^ grasse, and all the grace thereof as the floure of the field. Man
that is borne of a woman (saieth Iob) is of short continuance, and full
of trouble. Hee shooteth foorth as a floure, and is cut downe: hee vanisheth

also as a shadow, and continueth not. Againe for the second point,
wee are taught to consider and to knowe by that prouidence of God,
which sheweth it selfe in the composition of the vilest and most earthy
partes, and in that frame which hee maketh for the building of the
whole body, howe great and woonderfull it ought to be in the residue,
namely in the noblest partes thereof, especially in the soule,
if wee could see it with our eyes, as wee beholde the body. Wherfore,
that wee may the better knowe the excellent worke of God in
this building, we must raise it vpright before our eyes, to the end wee
may behold it on the out-side (as it were a frame ready made) from
the foote to the top, and from the foundation to the couering and
highest part thereof.
The whole body of man is commonly diuided into foure principall
outward parts,Foure principall parts of the body. which are called compound, in respect of the simple
partes spoken of before, which serue for matter to make them of:
whereupon afterward they take the name of member, according to
that forme that is giuen to eche of them. These foure principall parts
are, the head, the breast, the belly, the outward partes, namely, the armes
and handes, the legges and feete. The head endeth where the necke
beginneth. The breast comprehendeth that part which we commonly
call the breast, also the backe, the ribs, and whatsoeuer else is contained
in them from the necke vnto the midriffe,Of the midriffe. which is a skinne
that separateth the heart and the lungs on the one side, and the inferiour
intralles on the other. The belly reacheth from thence where the
breast endeth vnto the bone aboue the priuie members and neare to
the groine. The extreme or outward parts are already named by vs;
and of them our present discourse shall be, beginning, as it were at the
foundation, vpon which all the body is laide. First therefore wee see
how God hath so aptly fashioned the feete, that they doe not onelie
beare vp al the rest of the body, but also carry and recarry it wheresoeuer
a man wil. Next, the legs are set vpon them, as it were the pillers
of this whole building, being closed in such sorte vnto them as neede
requireth, to helpe the feete to sustaine and beare vp all the rest of the
frame laide vpon them.Eccles. 12. 3. For this cause Salomon calleth them the strong
men that stoope in olde age, when their vertue and strength faileth them.
For they bow through weakenes, and tremble as the hands do, which
the same Prophet calleth the keepers of the house. Now because the chief
stre^gth of the body lieth in the bones, when the scriptures meane to set
forth any viole^t griefe, as when a man is extremly pressed* and as it were
altogether oppressed,Psal. 6. 2. and 22. 14. isay 38. 13. they say that his bones are vexed, or broken, or out
of ioynt, that is to say, all his strength and power, so that he is as a bodie

whose bones are wholy broken and shiuered. And when the Scripture
woulde signifie the contrarie,Iob 21. 24. Esay 66. 14. it saieth that, their bones runne
full of marrow, and that they flourish like an hearb. Nowe if we take
the whole legge, namely from the huckle bone vnto the endes of
the toes, it hath three great partes answerable to the three partes of
the whole arme, which part of the body reacheth from the shoulders
vnto the endes of the fingers. In the first place is the foote, which is
the nethermost part of the whole legge, and it consisteth of three
partes,Three parts of the legge. which also are answerable to the three partes of the hand.
The first is the heele, which by a ioynt and conuenient knitting together,
vniteth the foote to that parte of the legge which reacheth
from thence vp to the knee or gartering place. The second is the sole,
and as it were the back^ of the foote, being long, large and hollow
in the middest, to the ende it might be more fit to stand fast and to
walke vpon. The toes are the third part of the foote, being set and
placed in such wise as is most conuenient for that duetie of the foote.
For they differ much from the fingers, not onelie in length, but also
in situation, because the office of the hand and the foote is not all
one. Therefore as the fingers are longer then the toes, so the thumbs
are otherwise placed then the great toes. For if the great toe were
placed as the thumbe is, it woulde hinder the foote in steade of helping
it: and the like may bee saide of the other toes. The two other
partes of the legge are, first, that which is from the knee to the
foote, which is commonly called the legge for want of an other proper
name in our tongue, next the thigh, which is from the huckle
bone vnto the knee. And as this hath his ioynt and band to fasten him
to the knee, so the other by the like meanes is ioyned to the foote.
Therefore both the foote and the whole legge haue their necessary
motions through the helpe of the sinewes and muscles, as well to
stretch it selfe out, as to bowe and bend forward and backeward, vpward
and downeward, as also to turne it selfe on the right hand, and
on the left, and round about: both to set forward and to retire, to ascend
and to descend, and for all the motions that are meete and conuenient
both for this member and for all the partes of it. Thus much
for the lowest foundation of the frame of mans body, and for the pillers
that holde it vp. Nowe wee must consider of the other outward
partes, the armes and the hands.
As God hath giuen to man two legges and two feete to holde him
vp,Of the armes and handes. and to carry him whithersoeuer hee woulde goe, so hee hath giuen
him two armes and two handes, to dispatch all businesse which
hee thinketh good. Therefore the hand is rightly called by Aristotle,

^he instrument of the instruments. For there is no member in all the
body nor instrument whatsoeuer, that maketh moe or more sundry
workes. This instrument maketh all other instruments, and setteth
them a worke, as wee see by experience. And because man onely of
all other liuing creatures is capable of Artes, and knoweth how to vse
them, therefore hath God giuen to him onely this instrument to exercise
them. We see also that there is no worke which he cannot doe
with his hands. And what worke of God is there which hee doth not
counterfaite, as if he were some litle god vpon earth, that had vndertaken
to make an other visible worlde within this worlde created by
God? For if wee consider the Sciences and A^tes of men, and those
excellent woorkes which they make by the meanes of their handes,
who will not be rauished with admiration? That sentence of Anaxagoras
may well be approoued wherein hee saieth, that the hand is
the cause of knowledge and wisedome: (although Plutarch doeth
learnedly vnderstand experience, by the hand.) For if it did not frame
letters and figures, nor made instruments requisite and necessary for
all Sciences and Artes, they could not in any wise be either taught or
learned. Therefore considering well that which we say, man may bee
called a second Creatour, who taking patterne by the worke of God
in the creation of the worlde hath endeuoured to make woorkes answerable
vnto those which God hath giuen him in the worlde for a
pattetne to imitate.The agreement and difference betweene the workes of God and the workes of man. Psal. 33. 9. rom. 4 17. But there is great difference betwixt the workes
of man and the workes of God, especially in three pointes: namely,
in the matter, in the forme, and in the life of them, together with all
those thinges which it bringeth with it. For first man can not worke
without matter, which he cannot find in himselfe, as God who made
all things of nothing, and made that to be which was not. But man
dealeth contrarily. For hee can make nothing of nothing, but must
of necessitie haue matter meete for the worke he taketh in hand, vnto
which he is able to adde the forme onely. And yet hee cannot giue it
any fashion except hee first had the patterne thereof in the wo^kes of
God. For although he can make very strange figures, and such as the
very like hath not beene seene in all nature, nor amongst all the creatures,
yet hee cannot pourtraite any so new, or so strange, whereof he
had not before some resemblance in the workes of God in sundrie
creatures. For hee taketh diuers pieces of many sundry figures, with
which afterward heaped together, hee counterfaiteth one altogether
newe and strange. As for example: neuer man sawe a mountaine
all of golde, yet a man may imagine one in his mind, and frame
an image thereof in his imagination. For albeit he neuer sawe such a

mountaine, yet because hee hath seene both mountaines and also
golde, by ioyning these two together which hee knoweth, he can
frame the image of such a mountaine in his minde, and then hauing
in this sorte formed and conceiued it, hee can counterfaite it with
his hand. But as God taketh not the matter of his woorkes without
himselfe, and without the treasures of his infinite power, so hee needeth
not to seeke else where for formes and patterns then in the treasures
of his eternall wisedome and infinite knowledge. Againe, there
is this besides, which is chiefest of all, that hee is able to giue, not
onely being, but also life, sense, and motion to his workes, yea such
nature and properties as pleaseth him: which man can not doe. For
hee can not change the nature of that matter vpon which hee worketh,
but it must st^ll continue the same in nature and disposition.
And although hee can drawe sundry effectes from those matters about
which hee is occupyed according as hee may mingle and
compound them together, neuerthelesse hee altereth not their
nature, but they retaine it still according to their portion, euerie
one in his place. Neither can hee giue to the best of his woorkes so
much life as is in a reddish, or in any other lesser hearb or plant: nor
so much motion, sense, and industry as a Flie or an Aut hath, or the
least worme in the earth. Nowe to proceede in beholding the vse of
the hand, wee must vnderstand that God gaue vnto men armes and
handes chiefly to helpe one another, more then with any other member
of their body, in so much that they ought to referre al their works,
artes,All handy workes ought to tend to common profite. and exercises to common benefite and profite. But it is farre otherwise.
For there is no member whatsoeuer with which they hurt
one ano^her more: so that their hands are more dangerous without al
comparison, then the pawes of all sauage beasts. For those beasts that
are most cruell spare the blood of their kinde, but men delight to imbrew
their handes in mans blood, yea in the blood of their nearest
kindred. There are some also who shamefully abuse their handes in
causing them to serue for diuinations: from whence the Arte of
Palmestrie proceeded,Of the Arte of Palmestrie. which is full of superstition, and of fooleries
well woorthy to bee laughed at: and such are all the other kindes of
diuinations inuented by the vanity of mans braine. They that would
seeme to alleadge some shewe and likelihoode of foundation for it,
say, that nature hath imprinted in the lines of the handes woonderfull
significations of the temperature and disposition of the whole bodie.
Therefore they call the long line in the middest of the hand, the line
of life, and say, that they who haue it whole throughout, are long
liued. But suppose this were so, yet what probabilitie is there for

any to seeke in the lines of the hand for the knowledge and signification
of all thinges that shall befall men, and to foretell them,
as they say, their good and ill fortune? For although it were so,
that by looking vpon the handes, a man might in some sorte, iudge
of the temperature and disposition of the body, yet what reason is
there to extend this consideration to the foretelling of all thinges, as
if God or nature, as they speake, had set markes in the handes, so
that a man might knowe, I say not by the Science, but by the vanitie
of Chiromancie, whatsoeuer good or euill shall come vnto
men? For they that deale with this kinde of diuination doe not
only foretel whereunto the body may be disposed according to the
temperature therof, as a Physicion may iudge of the sicknes or soundnes
of the body by those tokens which he seeth therein folowing his
Arte, but they go a great deale further. For they take vpon them to
foretel al good and ill aduentures, namely, whether a man shal be rich
or poore, married, or no, and whether he shal haue many wiues, and what
they shalbe, whether maidens or widows, whether rich or poore, with
such other toyes and olde wiues tales, whereof their Bookes of Palmestrie
are ful. They therefore are very fooles that giue credite to such
praedictions.Of the Palmestry of Christians. But Christians haue a true and sure kinde of Chiromancie
which they may vse. For if men consider onely their handes,
with what workemanship they are made, for how many vses they
may serue, and howe profitable and necessary they are for them,
they shall finde in them an infinite number of markes to make them
good diuiners; yea it will teach them to diuine that of necessitie
there was a God and a Creatour, who was the workemaster that
made that worke and those so excellent instrumentes, whose vse
and commoditie can not sufficiently bee conceiued. For although
wee had neuer heard of God or of his prouidence, this onely consideration
ought to bee sufficient to teach vs to seeke him, and to
holde vp towardes him those handes which hee hath giuen vs. If
therefore by the contemplation of our handes, and by those markes
of the power, wisedome, goodnesse and prouidence of God, which
are imprinted in them, wee can learne such a Science and Arte of
Diuination, as will the better induce vs to glorifie God in the workmanship
of our bodies, then doe wee profite greatly therein. And
this wee ought to doe, not onely by the contemplation of our
handes, but also of all the residue of the members and parts of our
body, euen vnto our very haires and nailes. For wee haue not
so many Preachers onelie of his glorie and magnificence in our
bodies, as wee haue members, but also as there are haires in the

head. For there is nothing, no not so much as a little haire, (as wee
shall see heereafter) whereby God doeth not testifie his diuine prouidence.
Wherefore if wee shoulde by peece-meale lay open onely
those principall things which are to be considered in all the partes
of the arme and hand, and those testimonies of the great prouidence
of God that may be found and noted in them, a whole day would not
suffice: although we did onely behold the great workemanship that
is, I say not in the whole hand, but in one finger thereof. For it is an
instrument which God hath giuen onely to man, to touch and to take
with, to gripe and to vse in his owne behalfe in steade of all kinde of
defensiue weapons.The vse of the hand. In this respect he made it of such a fashion that
he can lay hold of, and apprehend all things either great or small, of
what forme or figure soeuer they be, whether round, square, or otherwise.
And therefore it was requisit that the fingers of the hand should
be vnequal, that they should be placed and disposed as they are, thereby
the better to gripe and to lay holde of all thinges. For albeit some
of them be longer then others, yet when we close our hand, and gripe
anything, they are all equall. And as God hath giuen to man a mind
capable of vnderstanding and knowledge, so also he hath adorned him
with this excellent instrument, which is so necessary for all Artes, that
without this, those other would remaine idle. In a word, it is an instrument
which man could not want neither in peace nor warre. Neither
is there any thing to be found therein, which doth not serue very fitly
for al dueties of the hand, as also nothing is wanting that is necessary.
The very nailes haue two excellent properties:The properties of the nayles. the one is, that they
serue for a couering and an ornament to the ends of the fingers: the other,
that they help to take hold of, and to gather litle and hard things.
For this cause also they are so conuenient both for matter and forme,
and so fitly fastned and set in their places, as better could not be deuised.
But let vs consider of the whole arme or hand, to see the composition
and diuision thereof. As we said before of the legge, so there
is in the whole arme three great and principall partes,Of the three partes of the whole arme. taking all that
member which is from the shoulders vnto the endes of the fingers.
The first is the hand, which likewise hath three chiefe partes, namely,
that which is ioyned with the lower part of the arme from the elbowe
vnto it selfe, and it is called the wrest: the second is the hollowe
palme which is apt to gripe with,Three parts of the hand. together with the backe of it
on the other side: then the fingers make the third part, being so
made and placed as they are fittest to take easily, to gripe, to close,
and to crush. In so much that whatsoeuer hath beene spoken by
me worthy consideration in the legges and feet touching their office,

and all those motions that are apt, and necessary for them, the same
also may be plainly seene in the whole hand and arme. The second
principall part of the whole arme is that which is taken from the elbow
vnto the hand: the third is from the shoulder vnto the elbow, and
both the one and the other are so coupled together with their ioynts
and bands, as is most requisite for all their motions. Thus ye see what
in my opinion ought chiefly to be knowne in this our present matter.
Now seeing we haue begun to take a viewe of the foundation of the
frame of man by the consideration of the fourth compounded part of
the body, I thinke that before wee handle the other three, wee shall
doe well to behold the wonderful composition of many bones, which
serue also to sustaine the whole stocke of the body, and vpon which
the backbone is chiefly grounded. Therefore thou ASER intreating
therof, and of the ribbes and other bones of mans body shalt prepare
the way for vs to proceede in the description of our building, euen vnto
the toppe and highest place of the whole frame.


Of the Backebone and of the marow thereof: of the ribbes and of other
bones of mans body. Chap. 5.
ASER. Those Philosophers that were indued with greatest
knowledge of those excellent things that are hidde in mans nature,
stood much vpon the contemplation of this, that his face was lift
vp towards heauen: whereupon they concluded, that he ought to abandon
all carking care of base and earthly thing to contemplate
those things that are aboue and heauenly, and in the knowledge of
them to satisfie the desires of his soule. And truely this is woorthy to
be considered, that amongest terrestriall creatures which walke vpon
the earth, God hath created none with two legges onely, or that is
made straight and bolt vpright, but man. Therefore he onely and no
other hath the ridgebone made according to the straightnesse of the
legges: which is neither in foure-footed beastes, nor in birdes, albeit
they goe vpon two feete, and haue their head lifted vpwarde. For as
well their legges, as those of foure-footed beasts are so placed in regard
of the backebone when they walke, as mens legges are when they sit
downe, namely cornerwise, not downeright. But when men goe,
their legges are stretched straight with the backebone, (which is like
the keele of a shippe) vnto which all the bones belonging to the stock
of the bodie are conioyned, euery one being answerable each to other
according to their proportion: as the other peeces of wood whereof
a shippe is made, are ioyned with the keele by that knitting together

which they haue therewith. For this cause the whole bodie of
man is straight, and can stand vpright, and sit downe. But no beast
can doe eyther of them, because there is no such vprightnesse
voyde of corners betweene their backebone and their legges, as
there is in man. Therefore they can neyther holde nor doe any
thing eyther standing or sitting. For although they can stay themselues
vpon their haunches, yet they cannot sitte altogether like
to man. And contrariwise, man can doe nothing well lying along
or with his bellie downewarde as beastes vse: but standing or sitting
hee can doe all his affayres verie easily. To this ende hath
GOD giuen him legges and feete, armes and handes, of which
wee spake before. Now as hitherto wee haue seene the lowest foundation
of mans building, namely the feete and legges, so heere
wee must knowe that there is yet another wonderfull frame of bones,
as it were a newe foundation for the whole stocke of the bodie, and
residue thereof. Amongst others some are verie strong, being placed
crossewise to vpholde the rest: they serue also for the defence
of manie inwarde partes that are against them. Vpon this second
foundation the backebone is layde,Of the backebone. which reacheth vp to the
head, and is verie artificially made. For first, because a man cannot
alwayes stande vpright, but must sometime bende himselfe,
or lye downe, or turne from one side to another, it is not
made all one bone, but it consisteth of manie bones, namely of
foure and twentie, which are called the knuckles or turning ioyntes
of the backebone.Eccles. 12. 6. For this cause Salomon verie fitly calleth it the siluer
chaine or coarde, which lengtheneth, or shrinketh being consumed
with extreame olde age. For it is framed after the fashion of a
chayne, and holdeth the lower partes of the bodie, as it were tyed
and chayned unto the highest part, which is the head. Againe, it is
not without good cause called (...) chayne of siluer. For it is a verie
precious part of the bodie, and ought to bee greatly accounted of,
both because the bodie standeth in neede of it, and also for manie
great benefites which it receiueth thereby. True it is that some vnderstand
by this chaine of siluer, the vniting and agreement of matters
whereof the bodie of man is made, beeing taken from all the
Elements, and ioyned together by a goodly harmonie and proportion.
But the former exposition seemeth to mee most fitte, because of
that similitude which the backbone and ioyntes of it with their vse,
haue with a chayne and the vse-thereof. For if the chine-bone
were all of one piece, a man shoulde bee alwayes stiffe like to a
pale, or like to a logge or bodie of a tree: and so the stocke of

the body coulde not enioy those motions that are necessarie for it,
as wee see all the members haue agreeable to their nature. For
they are nt planted into the stocke of the bodie, as boughes and
braunches are into the stocke of a tree, which are without motion
aswell as their stocke. Likewise man (whome the Philosophers
called a Tree turned vpwarde, because hee hath his rootes in his
head) is a farre other kinde of plant then those are, which beeyng
in the earth, stirre not out of one place. For it is a tree to be
caried about, whose braunches haue their naturall motion. And
as touching those bones whereof the chine-bone is made, they
are so ordered, that the first which sustayneth all the rest, as the
principall foundation (beeing called Os sacrum,Of the holy bone. that is, The holie
bone) is the largest, biggest and strongest: and beeyng ioyned to
the hippes is verie artificially framed of three bones, and sometimes
of fiue or sixe. Wherefore some thinke that it is so called
by reason of the artificiall composition thereof: others, because of
the greatnesse: and some, because it helpeth women in their trauaile,
as that whose knitting together openeth with the hippebones
in them that bring foorth children. Others saye, that there
is no opening, but onely that it stretcheth foorth and inlargeth it
selfe. There are some also that thinke it is so called, because it is so
necessarie vnto life, that after it is once hurt, death followeth. After
this bone, the rest that followe are lesse and lesse vntill you
come to the highest: insomuch that the lowest are biggest, and
the highest least, to the ende that as they are the foundation one
of another, so they might bee able to beare that charge which
they are to sustayne, and bee the lesse burdened. And as for the
coniunction and vniting of them together, it is so well contriued,
that it hath so much strength as is necessarie for it, and is
neyther too soft, nor too harde, too drie nor too wette and slipperie,
but that which is meete for their motions. This order of bones
and turning ioynts thus raunged, is properly called the Backebone
or Chine, and in Latine Spina dorsi, because of the sharpe endes or
poyntes which eche of them hath oneuerie side for his defence, as it
were thornes.Of the marow of the chine. This whole chine hath a marow proceeding from the
hinder part of the braine, and reaching downe to the nether ende
of the backebone: which beeyng rounde in shape, is as a riuer
whose spring is in the brayne, from whence it proceedeth as the
great Arterie doeth out of the heart, and the hollow veyne out of
the liuer, as wee haue alreadie declared, and may intreate thereof
more at large in speaking of the inner partes of the bodie.

Therefore as the great arterie is as it were the stocke of all the rest, being
planted in the heart from whence it springeth, and the hollowe
veyne whose fountaine is in the liuer, is as it were the stocke of the
other veines: so the marrowe of the chine is as it were the stocke
and spring from whence all the sinewes issue, which afterward like
to litle riuers impart their sence and motion. And because the fountaine
of this riuer is in the braine, therfore also the originall of sinewes
is attributed thereunto, notwithstanding that all those sinewes which
giue motion and sence to the partes that are vnder the head, except it
be to the intrals and guttes, proceede from the marrowe of the chine.
Hereby we may note once againe, that that place alleadged by mee
out of Salomon where hee calleth the backbone a siluer chaine,Eccles. 12. agreeeth
also very fitly with that which is here spoken. For seeing the sinewes
distribute sence and motion to all the members of the body, as
it hath bene already told vs, and haue their beginning from the braine
and marrow of the chine, we may well say that it is a chaine and coa^d
of a great length, which extendeth it selfe very farre by reason of other
chaines and strings proceeding from it. For as the backbone may
be resembled to a chaine, so the marrowe within it is like to a coarde,
whereof all the sinewes, which are as it were the little strings of all the
members of the body, haue their beginning and increase. And therfore
some in stead of a siluer chaine translate, a coard or threede of siluer, as
wee reade in the common Latine translation: but the sence is all one.
And that which Salomon addeth after of the golden ewer which is broken
in olde-age, with the exposition of the best learned giuen thereof,
agreeth also very well to this effect.Of the skinne of the braine called the golden Ewer. For by this golden Ewer they vnderstand
the skinne that couereth the braine, which is of a yellowish
colour, resembling the colour of golde. It is very fitly called a Ewer,
because it is a vessell contianing the matter and nourishment of the sinewes,
and as it were the fountaine of all the motions and sences of
the body: it is as it were the lodging of all the animall partes, and the
originall of all the sences both internall and externall. Wherefore the
matter of the braine contayned within it is of a more celestiall nature
then any other part of the bodie, and commeth neerest to the spiritual
and diuine natures. So that this vessell is not without good and iust
cause called by Salomon the Ewer of gold. For there is in it a fountaine
out of which man receiueth great treasures. Nowe because the sinewes,
arteries and veynes were to haue their passage and issue from
their fountaine without let or hinderaunce, it was requisite that the
backebone should haue such holes as it hath, and that the bones therof
should be of that fashion they are, to the ende that neyther themselues,

nor the marrow within might be easily broken, and that the
next partes and members might not be hurt. For it is very dangerous
to haue any rupture or hurt in the chine aswell by reason of the marrow
as of the sinewes. And because it pleased God to lodge there
those internall members of the bodie, that are most necessarie for life
and for the preseruation thereof,Of the ribbes. he fastened the ribbes to both sides
of the backebone, namely twelue on euery side: and hath left a sufficient
space betwixt them, that the place might bee able to receiue
those members, for whose cause they were so built and disposed. So that
there are before and behinde, especially about the noblest members,
very long and large bones, to defend them on al sides (as it were good
harnesse and strong bulwarkes) but chiefly behind, because the armes
and handes cannot so well defend them, as they may the other before.
Therefore God hath better armed them with bones, making
those of the shoulders so large behind as they are, and knitting them
also vnto the backebone by their bande, but yet so that they touch it
not. Likewise they are fastened to the highest bone in the brest which
reacheth vp to the throate, aboue the first ribbe, by two litle bones
which passe ouer the ribbes that are betwixt them. For this cause these
bones are called the keyes of the throate.The keyes of the throate. For they close and shutte
vp these partes as it were keyes, so that without them shoulder
blades would fall backeward, beeing no more able to keepe close together,
then the poldron of an harnesse not beeing fastened to the
gorget. The armes likewise are fastened to the shoulders, as also the
thighes and legges to the hippes: then the handes are ioyned to the
armes with their ioyntes and bandes, as hath beene touched before.
Now we are to note further, according to that I spake euen nowe, that
the backebone is in a mans body, as the keele in a ship: so that as the
rest of the matter and forme of the shippe must bee well proportioned
and framed according to the keele, so is it in the composition of
mans body, and in that correspondencie, which all the members
ought to haue with the ridgebone of which they all depende, otherwise
there would be no good agreement but great deformitie. And as
for the ribbes and brest bones, they haue such workemanship as is requisite
for the members contained within the ribbes.Of the workemanship of the ribbes and of other bones. For seeing the
members of mans breathing are closed within, needefull it is that they
should not onely bee defended and armed with bones for their garde
and preseruation, but also that these bones should bee so placed, that
they might inlarge and restraine themselues, open and close againe, in
such wise that the breathing and members thereof be not hindered in
their motions. Therefore they are all by nature lesse harde then the other:

besides, they are many, to the end there might be spaces betwixt
them, not only for the inlarging and restraining of the breast, but also
that the muscles might bee placed betweene the ribbes. And this is
one cause, why it was needfull that the backebone should be framed
as it is, namely, that it might bee moe commodious for respiration.
And because the stomacke also standeth in neede of inlargement and
restraint according to the quantity of the meate which it receaueth,
and according as it is lift vp and pressed downe thereby, therefore it
was requisite that it should haue the like helpe. But forasmuch as it
might soone bee hurt by reason of the hardnesse of the ribbes, if they
were driuen and forced against it, God hath so disposed those ribbes
wherewith he hath defended the stomacke, that they are neyther so
long nor so hard as the rest. For they are of a softer kind of bone, drawing
neerer to the nature of gristles then the other, and the more they
descend downward, the shorter they are. Therefore the lower part of
the ribs are commonly called the false ribbes,How many false ribbes there are. or bastard ribbes, which
on eche side are fiue in number; the other seuen ending at the breastbone,
to the end they may defend and garde the heart and lungs, which
are vitall parts. Hereupon when any hath bene wounded to death, it is
often said in the holy scriptures,2. Sam. 2. 23. and 3. 27. that he was stricken vnder the fift ribbe,
because no blow pierceth those partes, but it hurteth some one of the
vitall members, which cannot be wounded, but that death followeth
therevpon. We see then how the prouidence of God did well forcsee
whatsoeuer was requisite in this worke of mans body, and hath prouided
thereafter as need required: as we may easily iudge by that which
wee haue heard of the bones onely, which parts are most earthie and
massy, and are voyde of all sence. Wherefore we may well conceaue
how excellently this wisedome hath wrought in the other partes and
members that are more noble. But we may iudge a great deale better
of all this, if we consider that our treatise of the bones onely, is but very
litle in comparison of that which might be spoken, if a man would
vtter it as Phisicions doe, and distinguish properly of all the kindes of
bones, and of their vses. Nowe to ende the outwarde composition
of the body touching the bones, we must consider of the share bone,
and of the bones of the head, and of the marow that is within the bones,
and of the vse of the necke. Last of all, wee will clothe with flesh this
dry Anatomy, that afterward we may come to those parts of our building
that are most noble and excellent. Therfore it belongeth to thee
AMANA to intreat of this subiect.



Of the share bone and marrow of the bones: of the bones in the head, and of
the flesh: of the muscles and of their office. Chap. 6.
AMANA. Nothing maketh the worke of God in the composition
of mans bodie more woonderfull, then the beautie of his shape,
and the exquisite arte vsed in the worke, wherin a man cannot change
so much as a naile or an eyelidde, which is but haire, but that some imperfection
must be acknowledged therein, and some discommoditie
following thereupon will cause it to be perceiued. For this cause the
kingly Prophet considering his creation, speaketh as one rauished
with admiration. I will (sayeth hee) prayse thee,Psal. 139. 14. for I am fearefully
and wonderfully mad: marueilous are thy woorkes, and my soule knoweth
it well. Hee could not in all that Psalme maruaile sufficiently at
so excellent a woorke of God. Therefore he vsed a word which signifieth
as much in the Hebrewe tongue, as if in stead of our speech,
thou hast framed or fashioned me, hee should haue saide, I haue benewouen
or wrought in tissue and interlaced, and fashioned artificially as it were
in broadery woorke. And truely no image or picture, howe well soeuer
it bee painted and purtrayted, is to be compared with the forme
and figure of mans bodie: neyther is there any woorke of tapistrie,
so well wrought and imbrodered, or that hath such varietie of exquisite
arte, and such diuersitie of figures, as that hath. And from
what paterns doe Painters and Ingrauers take the fashion and forme
of those Images and pictures which they would drawe foorth, but
from this? What is a piece of tapistry or imbrodered woorke in comparison
of a mans bodie, which is as it were an image of the whole
world, and wherein a man may finde almost the varietie and draughts
of all things contained in the whole frame of the world? This will euidently
appeare vnto vs in the sequele of our speeches, touching the
compounded parts of the body.
Therefore to finish the externall composition of this humane building
concerning the bones, we will first note, that God in creating the
bellie hath not compassed it about with bones,Why the belly is not enuironed with bones. as he hath done the other
parts of the body, and that chiefly for two causes. First, it is most
meet it should be so, by reason of the meat it receiueth. Secondly, for
the benefite of women that beare children. But to the end it might be
vpholden together with that burden it beareth, God hath giuen vnto
it the Share bone for a foundation,Of the Share bone, or tayl^bone. which also standeth insteed of a bulwarke
for the bowels. And because a man cannot alwayes stande vpright,
but must oftentimes sitte downe, not onely to rest himselfe, but

also to dispatch many works which he hath to doe, therefore he hath
the buttocke bones and the flesh wherewith they are couered,Of the buttocke bones. which
are vnto him in stead of a stoole and a cushion to sitte at his ease. And
forasmuch as the bones are to be nourished, they haue for their familiar
foode, the marrow, which by nature is moist, soft, fat, and sweete.
Therefore it hath neyther sinew nor sence,Of the marow. but is within the bones, as
the sappe of trees is in the middest of their stockes and braunches. For
this cause Iob speaking of the prosperitie of the wicked,Iob 21. 24. saieth, His
breasts are full of milke, and his bones runne full of marrowe. But this is
strange, that seeing it is made of the thickest of the blood, as it were a
superfluitie of the meate, how it can be ingendred within the bones,
and draw nourishment from the veines, as other parts of the body do.
But God knew well howe to prouide for that, and to make way for
nourishment through the hardnes of the bones, which are not all alike
full of marrowe. For as some of them are more drie or moyster,
more hard or softer then others, so they haue more or lesse marrowe:
and some haue none at all, because they neede it not. Now this marrow
whereof we speake nowe, differeth from that in the chine-bone,
which the Arabians call Nucha,Nucha. and is of the nature of the substance
of the braine, from whence it proceedeth as a riuer from his fountaine,
for the generation of sinewes, to which ende the other marrow is not
appoynted of God, but onely for the nourishment and preseruation
of the bones. Seeing then we are come to the braine, we must consider
with what bones God hath inclosed it on euery side for the defence
therof, how many in all there are in the head both before and behind,
on the right side and on the left, aboue and beneath: of what forme,
breadth, length, and hardnes, and how they are ioyned one with another
by seames and bands, and that not without great reason and consideration
of the Workmaster, which made such an excellent peece of
worke.Of the bones of the head. For first, there are commonly sixe bones, which compasse the
braine on eche side, besides that which is called the Wedge-like bone,
which is vnder the pallat of the mouth, and vnto which all the rest are
fastened. And because there are many vessels and members in the
braine and head, God hath made the head of a round figure, reaching
somewhat in length, and bulking out somewhat more both before and
behinde. Now forasmuch as vapours, fumes, and smokie excrements
mount vpward, therefore he hath created the head, and those bones
of the head that are highest, not so solide and thicke as the rest, to the
end the vapours and fumes should not continue inclosed within the
braine, but might euaporate, and so disburthen the brayne: otherwise
it would be very ill at ease, and subiect to many diseases. Therefore

all of them together are so made one bone, that yet they are not
all of one and the same piece, but ioyned together, not by ligaments,
as many sundrie and seuerall bones are, but by such a proper and apt
coniunction, that there appeareth betweene them as it were a seame
made after the manner of a Sawe or Combe, as if they were verie finely
sewed together. And because the bones behinde coulde not haue
that helpe of the handes, for their defence which the bones before
may haue, God hath created them more harde and stronger. Besides,
they all are to the brayne and to euery part thereof, in stead of an helmet
and murrion to defende it on euery side. Thus you see the composition
of the head touching the bones thereof, which is so ioyned
to the body by the backebone, that nothing but the neck, which is the
vpper ende of the chine,Of the necke and vse thereof. is betweene them. For it was necessarily
to haue motion both aboue and beneath, before and behinde, and on
both sides: which could not haue beene if it had beene fastened to
the shoulders without any space betweene, which is necessarie also
both for breathing, for voyce, and for manie other purposes that
may bee noted heereafter. And albeit the necke serued for nothing
else but for voyce, yet is it so necessarie, that without it a man coulde
haue no voyce, nor any other creature to which it is giuen, as appeareth
in those that haue no necke. For all beastes that want the necke,
want also the voyce, as wee may see both in fishes, and in those
beastes which the Latins call Insecta animalia: the reason is because
they haue no necke whereby to ioyne their head with the rest of their
bodie, but onely as it were a litle threede, which holdeth both the
one and the other close together. Nowe that wee are come to the
toppe of the building of mans bodie, and haue set him vpright, as it
were a dryed Anatomie, we must come next to the couering of the
bones, sinewes and other partes mentioned by vs, to the ende that
after wee haue finished the description of the outwarde partes, wee
may speake also of those that are within.Of the flesh. The flesh then is the first
garment wherewith the bones are couered: and it is properly called
by that name which is giuen to that part whereof the Muscles
are compounded. For some vnder the name of Flesh comprehend
the Kernels and the fatte, because of the agreement which these
partes haue one with another, and by reason of their vse. For as
for the flesh, it hath this in common with the Kernels and fatte, that
it is soft and tender: but heerein it differeth from that matter whereof
Kernels are made, in that the matter of Kernels is more Spongelike.
Wee learned before that Flesh is a substance of blood, and
howe it is made thereof. Concerning the Muscles, wee vse to

call by that name the proper instrument that mooueth voluntarily
all the members of the bodie.Of the muscles. Therefore it is compounded and
made of threedes proceeding from the sinewes, and of ligaments
compassed about with a great deale of flesh, insomuch that when
the Muscles are taken away from the bodie, there remayneth almost
nothing but bare bones. Their proper place is in all places of
the bodie where there are ioyntes and where motion is required. For
without them the bodie cannot haue that voluntarie motion whereof
I spake euen nowe,What voluntary motion is. and which is so called, because thereby a
man may mooue and remooue his members from one place to another
as he thinketh good, and as hee shall iudge it needefull for himselfe.
Wherefore we must knowe that the brayne which is the seate
of the animall partes, and the originall of the all the sinewes, and of all
motions and sences giuen to the bodie by them, is in respect of the
whole bodie like to a Waggonner that guydeth his Waggon, and
the Muscles are like to the bittes and brydles of horses, to cause them
to retyre or set forwarde as the Waggonner pleaseth, eyther to draw
them backewarde, or to driue them forwarde, to pull in or to let
loose the bridle. The sinewes are as it were the reynes and leathers
fastened to the bridles, to holde them in, or to let them loose, and
to turne them both on the right hande and on the lefte: then
those members of the bodie which moue it from one place to another,A comparison betwixt the body and a chariot.
are as it were the horses that are ledde and guided by this
meanes, and the rest of the bodie is like to the Charet and the burden
which it caryeth. And for this cause the Muscles are compounded
of ligaments, sinewes and flesh. For as the ligaments serue to
knit them together, and the sinewes minister sence and motion, so
the fleshe serueth to the benefite of those litle strings that proceede
from the ligaments and sinewes: first to nourish them, then to holde
them vp fostly, as if they leaned vpon little cushions and pillowes,
and lastly, to keepe them aswell against the vehemencie of internall
heate, as against the heate, colde, and hardnesse that comes from
without. Likewise the flesh perfourmeth all these thinges vnto the
rest of the thredes that are throughout the whole bodie, both in the
heart and in the stomacke, and in other partes that haue flesh. But
we haue further to note the great differences of flesh that are in all the
partes of the bodie, that we may still increase in the knowledge of
the marucilous woorkes of God, and of his diuine prouidence. For
there is great difference betweene that flesh where with the bones, ligaments
and sinewes are couered and clothed, and that of the internall
partes of the bodie, which also differeth in quality, albeit all is

compounded of one and the same matter. For what difference is there
betwixt that flesh which is betweene the skinne and the bones,The differences of flesh. and
that of the brayne: as also that of thelungs, heart, liuer, splene and
kidneyes? Not one of all these members hath his flesh like to any
of the rest, but they all differ very much according to the nature and
office of the compounded members. For the flesh of the brayne is by
nature apt for the generation of the animall spirites, as that of the
heart for the vitall spirits, and that of the lungs for ayre and breathing,
that of the liuer to turne the matter which it receyueth from the stomacke
into blood and into nourishment for all the members: that of
the splene to draw the grosse blood which is as it were the Lees of the
blood, and to nourish it selfe thereby: that of the kidneyes also to
drawe so much blood as is requisite for their nourishment, and likewise
to drawe the vrine, which after they sende into the bladder.
Thus you see howe euery of these internall partes of the body is compounded
of flesh meete for his nature and office. Whereby wee see
many and sundry shoppes within mans body, whereof euery one
hath his proper woorke about which it is busied, and such a nature
as is agreeable to that woorke which GOD hath assigned vnto it,
who is the Creator and the Workmaster, and effecteth all these works
by his heauenly prouidence.
Moreouer,Diuers vses of the flesh. we haue to note that the flesh generally serueth the
whole bodie for matter of filling, to keepe close all the members
thereof, and namely all the bowels, and to fill all the spaces betweene
them, as also to strengthen all those partes that are inuironed
therewith, to the ende they might not easily bee shaken in
pieces. It defendeth also all the members both against heate and
colde. Likewise if any man fall, or lye downe, it serueth him for a
boulster or soft pillow, and for a shelter against bruses, and a defence
against wounds, for a shadow against heate, and a gowne against
colde. And thus much I thinke sufficient to bee knowne concerning
this present Subiect. Nowe before wee take any other matter
in hande, wee are to consider of the Kernels that are in the body,
because of their excellent vse and propertie: especially wee
are to consider of the Dugges, wherein appeareth a singular worke
of GOD, namely in women, as wee may presently heare of ARAM.



Of the kernels in the bodie, and of their sundrie vses, especially of the
breasts of women, of their beautie and profite in nourishing of children,
and of the generation of milke. Chap. 7.
ARAM. He that should onely stay in considering the lumpe and
confused matter whereof man is dayly made, hee shoulde see
therein but a litle slime, yea such vile corruption and rottennesse, that
a man would bee euen ashamed to name it. But as a painter with his
colours and draughts of his pensil giueth a forme to that matter whereof
he maketh his piece of woorke, and painteth limme after limme,
and piece after piece: so the Lorde giueth by little and little and by
piecemeale to that confused masse and lumpe, such forme and fashion
as it pleaseth him to bestow vpon it in that time which he hath appointed
for that purpose: and, as hee vseth to doe, beginning alwayes
at the least and weakest part, and at that which is as it were nothing,
hee still continueth and increaseth his woorke vntill it be perfite and
absolute. Likewise, after we haue considered of the least and most earthy
partes that are in the corruptible matter of the body, we will looke into
them that are more excellent, and then come to the contemplation
of that immortall essence, which dwelleth in him. Therefore I wil now
goe on with our matter Subiect.
Those partes of the body that are called Kernels (by reason of the
similitude they haue with nuttes) are of two sortes,Two kindes of Kernels in the bodie. and haue their
vse and commoditie very great, especially in two respects. For some
are by nature more thicke and dry, and serue to fasten the vpper partition
of the members and vessels of the bodie, to the end they should
neyther breake nor cleaue. Therefore wee haue such Kernels in the
necke, in the arme-pits, in the groynes, and in those partes where the
elbow and the hamme bende, and in certaine other partes. There are
others not so thicke by nature, and more spongy and moyst, and full
either of milke, or of seede, or els of a flegmatike and glewish humor.
Now albeit all kinds of Kernels are giuen to the bodie to drink vp the
humors, and to moisten the other partes, neuertheles those that are of
this latter kind, ferue chiefly for the first vse. We haue such also to moisten
all the partes of the mouth, and of the throate by the meanes of
spittle, that so they may bee kept from drought, and that thirst may
bee repelled and moderated. Likewise they are very seruiceable to
the life of man, in that they soake and drinke vp, as it were spoonges,
the fleame that descendeth from the braine, that it should not fall vpon
the lungs, or into the stomake, or vpon other partes of the bodie,
to the great damage and danger thereof, as it happeneth to such

as are short breathed and in consumptions, and to them that are
troubled with rheumes. And as these serue in the mouth and throate
for spittle, so there are many, and those very great ones in womens
pappes, especially when they haue milke to the making whereof
they serue, as also those that are in more secrete partes which serue
for seede, namely to keepe it, to dresse it, and to prepare it for generation.
Therefore it is that those kernels which are in the breasts
of men and of young maydens are lesse and harder.The least part in man full of admiration, and very profitable. Wee ought not
heere to passe ouer without great admiration, the good temperature
and disposition, which GOD hath made of the whole matter
and forme, and of all the partes and members of mans bodie, insomuch
that there is nothing howe litle or vile socuer, which is superfluous,
which is not very commodious and profitable, and which
is not wonderfully well applyed and appropriated to such places as
are most fitte for it, and to those vses whereunto it ought to serue.
For who woulde haue thought that these kernels thus dispersed
throughout the bodie, were so many wayes seruiceable vnto it as we
see they are? Yea wee might heere rehearse manie moe vses if we
woulde speake more particularly of this matter, whereof wee
meane to speake but generally, as also of all the rest that concerne the
anatomie of the bodie, according to that ende which wee propounded
to our selues in the entrie of our speeches, namely, to open a
gappe onely to the consideration, first of the matter whereof mans
bodie is compounded, and of the diuersitie thereof: then of that forme
which God hath giuen vnto it: and lastly of the profit and vse of both:
to the ende wee might dayly learne the better to knowe the great
power, skill, wisedome, goodnesse and prouidence of him that hath
created and disposed all things in so good order. But as touching
that which we spake of the pappes, and of their substance, wee haue
yet to consider of two poynts well worthie the noting, concerning
the place where God hath seated them.Of the pappes, and of their situation, and vse. First, they are there placed
where they serue to shroude and to defend the noblest and most necessarie
partes for life that are in the breast, namely the heart and the
lungs. For they are set before them to countergard and keepe them,
both from ouer great heate, and from excessiue colde, and from many
other inconueniences. And as they serue for the heate of the heart,
so their owne heate is increased by reason they are so neere the heart,
whereby the milke that is ingendred in them is the better baked. So
that wee see, that although GOD hath not giuen men pappes for
the generation of milke and nourishing of children, as women haue,
neuerthelesse they are not without profite, and vse in them, as wee

haue hearde. Whereunto also wee may adde the beautifying of
that part of the bodie where they are placed, especially in women.
Againe, could they possibly be set in any place, that were more fit
and more easie, both for Mothers and Nurses, and for the children
to whome they giue sucke and nourishment? For if the mother bee
disposed to giue her childe sucke, shee hath this commoditie to sitte
downe if she will, to holde it in her bosome, and vpon her knees,
and likewise to imbrace it in her armes, whether she sit, lye downe,
or stande: also shee may carie it vp and downe whither shee please,
euen whilest shee giueth it sucke, and feedeth it. This commoditie
is not graunted to the females of beastes when they giue sucke and
nourish their little ones with their teates. Wherein wee haue to
marke one notable difference which GOD hath put betweene
men and beastes.The difference betweene ye care of men and beasts ouer their litle ones. For beastes haue no other care of their yong ones,
but onely to nourish their bodies with foode vntill they bee able to
feede and gouerne themselues: afterward, both syre and damme and
little ones forget one another, taking no more knowledge eche
of other, nor louing one another more then other beastes of
their kinde. But amongst men, both the father and the mother are
caried with an affection towardes their little children, which is
the cause why they forget them not as beastes doe. And as they
loue their children, so are they loued of them, insomuch that there
is a mutuall loue proceeding from that naturall affection which they
beare one towardes another. On the other side, this loue causeth
parents to let their children haue instruction, that they may bee wise
and vertuous. And therefore it is not without good cause that
womens pappes are placed in the breast, namely, to the ende they
shoulde bee vnto them as signes and testimonies of the affection of
the heart, and of that loue which they ought to beare towardes their
children, whereof they ought to make them partakers aswell as of
the milke of their breastes, and as if they gaue vnto them their
heart, as they giue them their blood turned into milke. Likewise,
children are by the selfe-same meanes to bee admonished of that
mutuall affection and loue,A good lesson for children. which they ought to carie towards their
mothers, as if they had sucked it out of their breasts, and from their
heart together with their milke, that they may returne the like vnto
them againe. Wherefore, mothers and children haue a wise mistres
in nature, and in the prouidence of God that appeareth therein, if they
knew how to followe it well. Againe, for this cause mothers ought
to take greater delight in nourishing their owne children, then in

committing them to the handes of strangers and hyred Nurses. For
out of doubt, the mutuall affection and loue of eche to other woulde
greatly increase thereby. Nowe hauing spoken of the place which
God hath assigned to the pappes,Of the forme of the pappes. let vs consider his prouidence in
their forme, which is such, that fayrer and more fitte for that office
of theirs coulde not bee deuised. For wee see howe they hang
there in the breast of the mother and Nurse, as it were two bottles,
hauing nipples and holes made fit for the infants mouth, that
hee might take holde of them, and drawe and sucke the milke
that is within the dugges, which are filled presently after the child
is borne, so that hee is no sooner come into the worlde, but hee
hath such foode and nourishment readie drest as is meete for him.
For albeit the infant bringeth his teeth with him from his mothers
wombe, yet because they are hidde within the gummes, and are
not yet come foorth, hee must haue such meate as needeth no chewing,
but may bee sucked, which GOD hath prouided for him.
Wherein wee haue a woonderfull testimonie of the care hee hath ouer
vs, and what kinde of Father and cherisher hee is. For this
cause Dauid had good reason to say,Psal. 8. 2. Out of the mouth of babes and
suckelings hast thou ordeyned strength, because of thine enemies. For
if one consider the prouidence of God, which dayly sheweth it
selfe ouer children onely, there is no Atheist, Epicure, or other
enemie of God so great, which shall not bee confounded, conuinced,
and constrayned, will hee nill hee, to giue glorie to GOD.
For before children can speake, euen from their mothers breastes,
they shewe foorth and preache the prouidence of God in prouiding
milke for them.How children ^resed in their mothers belly. But wee shall finde it a matter of greater admiration,
if wee consider not onely in what manner they are nourished
presently after their birth, but also howe they are nourished
in their mothers wombe. For there they are not sustayned
by the mouth, nor with milke, as they are after their byrth, but
with their mothers owne blood receiued by the Nauill, which is
in the middest of the bodie. But God hath made such an agreement
betweene the wombe in which the little childe is nourished
in his mothers belly, and betwixt her breasts, that that blood
wherewith the Infant was feede before it was borne, presently after
the birth ascendeth into her pappes,How and whereof milke is made. in which, by reason of the
aboade it maketh there, it becommeth white, and is so well heated
and prepared, that it hath as conuenient and pleasant a taste, as can be
put into the infants mouth. And as for the substance of the milke, there

cannot be any that is more fitte to nourish it or more naturall, feeing it
is the accustomed and vsuall sustenaunce: neither is there any difference,
but only in that it is otherwise coloured, being somewhat changed
in taste and sauour, as also in this, that the infant receiueth it by another
passage then it did before. Wherefore it is needfull that it should
haue a conuenient and pleasaunt taste for the mouth that receiueth
it: as also it is very requisite that it should bee of that colour which
it receiueth in the pappes. For it woulde bee strange to see the
infant draw blood from his mothers breast, to haue his throate full of
it, and his mouth bloodie. All these things shewe well that the Prophets
had good cause to say, that the mouthes of litle infants preach
the prayses of Gods prouidence, and confounde his enemies. For
when that foode which God giueth to nourish them in their mothers
wombe can feede them no more there, it hath pipes whereby to retire
to that place in which it may performe the ^ame duetie, and that so fitly,
that if that blood which is turned into milke did descend, as it ascendeth
by veynes which passe from the wombe to the breastes, the
prouidence of GOD would not so manifestly appeare as it doeth.
And therefore we see by experience, that so long as the childe is nourished
in his mothers wombe, there is no milke in the breasts, but after
it is borne, the blood that ranne euen vnto the wombe, ascendeth
vpward by veynes, making a good long iourney before it come to the
breastes.How the milke is wrought and whited. For these veynes reach vp hard to the throate on euery side,
insomuch that the blood which they carie to the pappes ascendeth aboue
the breasts, and then descendeth into them: to this ende, that
through the length of time wherein it abideth in the veynes, it might
haue more leasure to bee the better wrought, and to bee turned into
milke, and into that white colour which it receiueth. And the milke is
made the whiter, not onely through the aboad which it maketh in the
breasts, but also by the meanes of that kernelly flesh whereof they
are compounded. For it is of a whitish colour, that it might giue
the same colour to the milke, whereof the pappes are the vessels. So
that heere wee may the better knowe (as wee touched before) why
GOD by his prouidence made the breastes of that matter and colour
whereof they consist. Nowe wee haue further to note another
poynt wherein God hath very well prouided for the comfort
of women, as it were a recompence for the paines and trauaile
which they haue both in the bearing and bringing vp of their children,
namely, that whilest a woman is withchilde, and giueth sucke
to her infant, shee hath not her monethly and vsuall purgations, because
her supersluous blood, and that which at other times is an

excrement and must be voyded, is not then any longer a superfluous
excrement, (if she be not otherwise euil affected in body by sickenes)
but is turned into the foode of the child,Whereof womans milke is made. whether she beareth it in her
belly, or giueth it sucke with her breasts. Wherein wee see a maruailous
worke of God. For it is all one as if hee turned poison or venim
into good meate and nourishment, yea into most deintie foode, for
the vse of such a delicate mouth and tender nature as an infant hath
that is newly borne. Further also we will note heere, that so long as
the infant is in his mothers belly, it is nourished more like to a plant,
then to those liuing creatures which receiue their food by their throat.
And yet after he is borne, he knoweth wel wherefore his mouth s^rueth
before euer he vsed it, without any other Master or Mistresse to
teach him this skill them the prouidence of God, which sheweth it
selfe also in other creatures in the like case, but not in such euident
and excellent manner.How and where an infant receiueth breath and foode in the wombe. We may say the like of the breath which the
infant receiueth not in (...) mothers wombe by his mouth, no more
then the meate wherewith hee is fedde, nor yet by the nosethrilles,
which are more specially giuen to the body for that purpose, but by
the nauill which is appointed to be the pipe to conuey both vnto him
before he be borne. But the discourse of this matter will fall out more
fitly heereafter to be handled at large, when wee shall speake of the
naturall and internall powers of the soule. Wherefore it is time to finish
the couering of our building, and so make an end of the speaches
of this dayes worke. Therefore it belongeth to thee ACHITOR, to
couer it with skinne and haire, vnlesse you thinke good first to tell vs
something of the fat that is found within the skinne.


Of the fatte and skinnes of mans body and of their vse: of the haires
thereof. Chap. 8.
ACHITOB. Hitherto our intent hath beene, after speach had of
mans creation, first to erect vp his tabernacle, as it were a d^ie
Anatomy, which is a body consisting onely of bones. After wee clothed
it with sinewes, muscles, ligaments, flesh, and kernelles, which
serue it for a garment,A similitude. or standeth in steade of morter or plaister for
the walles of a building. For in this edifice of mans body, the bones
occupy the place of stone, which must afterward be committed to the
Mason to cause them to keepe close together, euery one in his place.
But yet we haue to white it ouer, which is the last couering, to make it
fairer, better polished, and more perfect. For if we consider it onelie
as hitherto it hath beene set out vnto vs, we shall see it but as it were a

frame not polished, nor made perfect without: or as it were a bodie
without a skinne, which is not very pleasant to sight. Therefore wee
will now put on the last garment, which couereth all the rest, namely
the skinne: but first a word of the fatte, which being within, is of great
force to preserue and keepe it.
I will not stay heere to declare how and by what meanes the fatte,
as also the kernels and paps are made of the blood, because our principall
scope is to shew the prouidence of God in the vse of all the parts
of the body, leauing to the Physicions that which appertaineth to
their office, touching the intire and perfect knowledge of the Anatomy
of the body. Seeing then wee are to speake of the fatte that is
found in the body,The vses of fatte in the body. it serueth for the defence and preseruation of those
partes that are couered therewith, not onely against heate and cold,
and other thinges that come from without, which might indammage
those partes, but also to keepe in naturall heate the longer, by whose
vertue concoction of meate (commonl^ (...) led digestion) is made
in the body. Likewise it is very profitable for those partes that are
in greatest and most vsuall motion, to supple and annoint them, as
well to make them more nimble and readie to mooue, as to preserue
them from drying, and so consequently from bruzing and wasting.
There is also in many places a certaine humour which serueth
to annoint the ioynts and their ligaments, and the small endes of the
gristles. For moisture helpeth motion very much, and preserueth those
partes that are mooued, as wee see by experience in chariot wheeles.
For when the axeltrees are greazed, about which they mooue, they
doe not onely turne about more easily, but also last and continue longer:
whereas although they were all of yron, yet they woulde
weare away and be set on fire of themselues, if they were not annointed
and moistned with some humour. Nowe let vs come to consider
of the couering of mans body. As therefore a man vseth not one
onely garment, but diuers, so is it with the body. For first hee is clothed
with three skinnes,Three skinnes of the body. that are great, long and large, with which
hee is couered cleane ouer from the sole of the foote to the toppe of
the head.The first skinne hath no feeling no^ blood. The first is a little skinne very thinne, which of it selfe hath
no feeling, being made of the second skinne which it couereth: and
this second skinne is made of sinewes, flesh, and litle veines, and in
some places of little arteries, being as it were of a middle nature betweene
the sinewes and the flesh. Therefore this skinne hath feeling
throughout, and is not without blood as the first is. There is also a
third skinne vnder the second, which is more fleshy, and therefore
it is thicker and more strong, vnto which the muscles cleaue, and

through which very thinne arteries and productions of sinewes passe,
which tie it with the other skinne. The fatte of the body is betweene
these two skinnes, which serue the whole body not onely for a couering,
but also for an ornament, especially those that are most
without, which in mens bodies stand in steade of that skinne wherewith
the bodies of beasts are couered. Besides these three skinnes
that couer all the body, there are within, many other particular skins
of diuers sortes, to couer the members that are there, which the
Physicions call Membranes and Tunicles,Of membran^^ and tunicles. with such other names
agreeable to their Arte, to distinguish them one from an other according
to each of their offices. For there are many in the head to
couer, folde vp, and to containe the inward partes thereof and of
the braine: as also in the breast, and consequently in other partes
and members within. Among the rest some are like to nettes and
coiffes: others resemble littl^ sackes or bandes, according as those
members are which they are to couer, seruing also for defence vnto
them, and to distinguish and separate the partes one from an other.
Wee will leaue to the Physicion to number and to distinguish them,
and to name euery one by their proper name: and nowe come to
consider the last couering which is vpon the body in certaine places,
especially vpon the head,Of the haires. and that is the haire, which principally
aboundeth in the head, both in men and women, because it proceedeth
out of a moyst and soft place. And to the ende it might take
the better roote there, the skinne that is vnderneath it, is very
thicke and fleshy. The profite of the haire is great, and serueth for
many thinges. First, it is the ornament and beauty of the head.
For as the face woulde bee euill fauoured and vnsightly, if it were
hairy, so contrariwise, the head woulde bee very deformed if it
were skinnelesse, where it is couered with haire: as we may iudge
by them that haue balde heades. Therefore because it is the toppe
of the building of mans body, God woulde haue it adorned with
such a couering: which also standeth him in some steade to defend
his braine, and to consume the grossest and most fumy excrements,
of which the haires of the head are ingendred, so that they are a
kinde of purgation for it. Besides, it serueth for a couering to
the head, which it may vse at pleasure, as neede requireth, against
both heate and colde. For it doeth not alwayes neede to bee alike
couered at one time and in one age, as at an other. Therefore a man
may let them growe, or cut them, or shaue them cleane off, as
is most commodious for euery one. And when they waxe gray

and white through age, they put men in minde of two things. First,
that they drawe towards the graue and death, to the ende they might
in good time frame themselues thitherward,Good lessons for the gray headed. and if they haue gone astray
in youth and forgotten God, that then at length they should bethinke
themselues, and consider that they are no more yong, and that
they must shortly die: for although it be late, yet better late then
neuer. But it is best to follow Salomons counsell, who admonisheth
yong men to remember God before the Almond tree flourish:Eccles 12. 5. comparing
an olde man that is gray and white with age, to a blossomed tree,
by reason of the whitenes of the floures. For when a man flourisheth
in this sort, his floures put him in minde that the tree of his body drieth
vp, and that it looseth his naturall strength: whereas the floures of
trees are testimonies of the vigor that is yet in them to beare fruit.
Therfore we are very miserable, if we do not glorify God in our youth,
neither thinke vpon any other life then this. For we come farre short
of the life of trees, and are not of so long continuance, neither are wee
yeerely renued as they are, which seeming to be dead in winter florish
and wax greene in spring time, as if they became yong againe. Which
thing we are not to looke for in this worlde, wherein we flourish contrary
to trees, namely in winter, which is our olde age. Secondly, gray
and white haires warneth men to haue such manners as becommeth
that age and colour, that they may make olde-age reuerent, according
to that saying of the wise man,Prou. 20. 29. The glory of the aged is the gray
head. For such are those ancient men, whome God in his Law commaundeth
to be honoured,Leuit. 19 32. when hee saieth, Thou shalt rise vp before
the horehead, and honour the person of the olde man, and dread thy God.
I am the Lorde.Of the beard. The same consideration also ought to be in the beard,
which is a great ornament to the face, and serueth to distinguish the
sexes, and likewise the ages of men: vnto whome they bring authoritie
and maiestie. For this cause the auncients did shaue or powle
their beardes and haire in the time of mourning and affliction: so that
when the Prophets denounced some great aduersitie and desolation,
they foretolde that euery head should he ^ald, and cut, and shauen, and
the beards in like manner:Esay 15. 2. 2. Sam. 10. 4. as it appeareth in the Prophecie of Esay against
Moab and such like. Wee (...) also that Hanun king of the
Ammonites, shaued off the halfe of the beards of Dauids messengers
to bring them in derision, whereupon they would not shewe themselues
openly to the people vntil their beards were growen. Concerning
womens haire,Of womens haire. Saint Paul testifieth expresly, that God hath giuen
it vnto them to admonish them of the subiection they owe to their
husbands, and of that power which they haue ouer them, in token

whereof they ought to haue the head couered, especially in the assemblies
of the Church.1. Cor. 11. 5, 6. Therefore he saieth, Euery woman that prayeth or
prophecieth bareheaded, dishonoure thither head: for it is euen one very thing,
as though shee were sh^^en. Therefore if the woman be not couered, let her
also be shorne^ and if (...) be shame for a woman to be powled or shauen, let her
be couered.Vers. 1^, 14, 15* And a little after: Iudge in your selues, is it comely that a woman
pray vnto God vncouered? doeth not nature it selfe teach you, that if
a man haue long haire, it is a shame vnto him? But if a woman haue long
haire, it is a praise vnto her: for her haire is giuen her for a couering.
Wherein the Apostle laboureth chiefly to admonish women, that nature
hath giuen to them longer haire then to men, and that it becommeth
them best to haue it so, to the end they should keepe their heads
couered with some vaile and honest couering, for the reasons declared
by him: sending them to the schoole of nature to learne of her what
modestie and honestie they ought to followe and to shewe in their
haire.The schoole of Nature is the schoole of God. For indeed this schoole of nature is the schoole of God the creatour
of nature, in which he teacheth vs by our owne body, and by the
nature thereof, what is conuenient and honest for vs. Therefore God
hath not couered some partes of the body with haire for an ornament
only, as the beard in men, and haire of the head both in men and women,
and for other causes whereof I haue spoken, but also to admonish
them to couer that, which they can not discouer without shame
and villany, whether it be by deede or worde. Heereupon it is* that
not onely those parts of the body that are more honorable and noble,
as the head and face, are adorned with haire to giue them greater maiestie,
but also places more secret are couered therewith, to teach vs,
that the honour wee owe to them is to keepe them couered and hid:
and that they dishonour them greatly, and themselues also, who discouer
them, not only byvile and shamelesse handling, but also by infamous
and dishonest wordes, as many doe, that alwayes haue filthie
speaches of whoredome in their mouths. For that which is dishonest
to be seene and to be discouered to the eyes, is also dishonest to bee
heard, and to be disclosed to the eares, which wee must keepe chaste,
as likewise the eies, the tongue, the mouth, and the heart. Therefore
they that behaue themselues otherwise, do as if they meant to despite
God and Nature, whome they will not followe as mistresse. Wherefore,
when Saint Paul sendeth women to the schoole of Nature to
learne that lesson which is there taught them, hee openeth vnto vs a
great gappe, whereby wee may knowe what Mistresse God bath giuen
vs in nature, and what instructions wee may receiue from her, if
wee can vnderstand her, and haue the wit to knowe, and to comprehend

all that shee sheweth vs, euen in our owne bodies and goe no
further into her schoole, considering that there is not so little as one
haire therein, from which wee cannot take instruction. Howe great
then woulde the profite be, if wee coulde consider as wee ought, other
thinges that are more excellent, and of greater importance?
Nowe that we haue raised vp the frame of mans body from the foundation
vnto the very top, we must to morrow by the helpe of God, in
continuing our speach of the compound parts of the body, enter into
the consideration of those goodly outward members wherewith the
head is adorned, and of the senses of the body, vnto which those serue
as instruments. Therefore it belongeth to thee ASER, to beginne the
handling of such an excellent matter.

The end of the first dayes worke.


THE SECOND
dayes worke.

Of the bodily and externall senses, especially of touching: of their
members, instruments and offices. Chap. 9.
ASER. They that haue the greatest knowledge in humane
Artes, although it be in naturall Philosophie,
are not therefore more happy then others, vnles they
haue learned to ioyne therewith the knowledge of diuinitie.
For albeit they haue greater vnderstanding of
the nature of things created by God, then other men
that haue not beene conuersant in such studies, yet all their skill, being
blinde in respect of true and eternall wisedome, wil profite them
nothing, but onely to make them more guiltie before God, and
worthy of greater condemnation, then if hee had giuen them no
more vnderstanding then beasts haue. And who knoweth not that
the felicitie and soueraigne Good of man,Wherein true (...) consisteth. consisteth not in the knowledge
of the creatures and of their nature, but in the knowledge of
the Creatour that made them? Therefore wee shoulde labour in
vaine to knowe our selues, if it did not leade vs to the knowledge
of God: yea it woulde helpe vs nothing at all, but to manifest more
euidently our ingratitude towardes his Maiestie, and to aggrauate so
much the more his iust and fearefull iudgement vpon our heades.
Likewise wee shoulde reape little benefite by our carefull inquiry into

the matter and forme of the frame of man, whereof wee discoursed
yesterday, if it serued not vnto vs for an entrance into a deeper contemplation
of the goodly woorkes, that appeare outwardly therein,
and of those corporall senses that haue their seates and instruments in
them. And all this knowledge woulde doe vs little or no good at all,
if wee were not ledde thereby to the vnderstanding of the internall
senses of the soule, vnto which the former serue as messengers and
ministers, as these latter doe vnto the minde and vnderstanding.
Therefore in following this order let vs ascend step by step to those
things that are most excellent: and although the eye of our minde
should dasell whe^ we draw neare vnto the^, yet we shal gaine greatly,
because those things are very great which draw neerest to perfection.
Hauing before compared the composition of mans body to a building,
and hauing raised vp all the outward partes of it vnto the verie
toppe, it remaineth nowe that wee set on the gates and windowes.
When a man woulde signifie that a house is very lightsome and hath
ayre enough, wee commonly say that it is well boared or pierced.
Which may truely be spoken of mans bodie in respect of those outward
members,Of the beautie that is in the face. which God hath fashioned in the head, especially
in the face, which hee hath appointed for seruantes to the chiefe
bodily senses, whose seruice also is afterward required for the spirituall
and internall senses. It is in this part of our building and tabernacle,
wherein God causeth the greatest beautie thereof to shine, I
meane in the face, which is as it were an image of goodly, orient, and
liuely colours, enriched with many excellent workes, not onely in
regarde of the skinne and painting, but also of the forme, and of
so many goodly and pleasant members as are ornaments vnto it; yea,
which are so necessary, that without them all the rest are as it were
vnprofitable, neither coulde they preserue and keepe themselues. I
speake not yet of those partes that are hidden, and contained within
the head, but onely of those members which appeare outwardly,
which are in such wise disposed euery one in his place, that albeit they
be not farre distant one from another, yet the neere ioyning of them
together doeth not cause them one to hinder the office of an other,
notwithstanding their diuersitie, as wee see euidently, and shall
know more at large by the sequel of our speaches. Hereby doth God
admonish vs how wee ought to behaue our selues one toward an other,A good instruction for euery one.
and dwell eueryman within his boundo^ and limites, not setting
one vpon an other, and not incroching vpon any thing that is our
neighbours. For as these is spare and roome enough in the head for
all the senses and members that are there, and the like in the rest of

the body for all the members whereof it is compounded, by reason of
the good order, concord and consent that is amongst them: so the earth
and the worlde is bigge enough, and hath goodes enough for all, if
wee had skill and coulde beare one with another, and be content euery
one with his estate and office, and with those gifts which we haue
receiued from God, as members of one and the same body. If this
good accord and consent were amongst vs, a litle place would please
vs: but if we doe otherwise, all the worlde wil not be great enough to
suffice vs. No riuers, seas, or mountaines will be sufficient, to keepe vs
within our bounds and borders. Therefore let vs learne of the senses
and members of our body, what rule wee ought to keepe one with an
other. The bodily senses, which God hath giuen to man to bee ministers
and messengers to the spirituall senses of the minde, are fiue in
number:Fiue corporall senses. namely, the sight, hearing, smelling, taste, and touching.
To al the members and instruments of these senses, which shal be hereafter
declared vnto vs, the facultie of sense is generally giuen by the
sinewes, which haue their originall from the braine, as we haue already
touched. So that hereby we see what is the dignitie and excellencie
of the head, seeing God hath placed therein the fountaine and
spring not onely of all the sence, but also of all the motions of the boby,
which are wrought by meanes of the sinewes. For we must know,
that foure things are required in the office and vse of the bodily senses.Foure things required in bodily senses.
The first is the power and vertue of the soule, which giueth sense
by the animall spirite guided by the finewes. The second is the instrument
being well applied and made fit for his vse and office, by which
the soule effecteth her worke. The third is that thing that is to be perceiued
by sense, about which the soule exerciseth her office. The fourth
is the meane or way, which receiueth the obiect of the sensible qualilitie,
and and carrieth it to the instrument. As for example: If the question
were of sight, first there must be this power and vertue of seeing in
the soule. Next, the eie is necessarily required thereunto: for it is the
proper instrument appointed to receiue light. Then there must bee
light, without which all thinges are couered with darkenesse and
made inuisible. For although the eies by nature are partakers of light,
yet that which they haue naturally, and which they cary within them
selues, will affoorde them as small light as if they had none at all, except
they receiue a greater light that commeth from the heauens, or
from some light (...) body, as from fire, or from a candle lighted, as
we see by experience the night time. Lastly, the meane or middle
way is of necessitie required, by which the light is to be brought and
communicated with the eye, and that is the aire, through which it

passeth, as through a glasse or christall or such like bodies, which are
not so (...) that they keepe backe the light from (...) through
them. For if there bee nothing betweene them, I meane betweene
the eye and the light, and those colours which it must beholde, a
can not apprehend and perceiue them. The like is to bee saide of the
senses of hearing, smelling, and tasting, as we shall vnderstand berter,
when wee speake of them heereafter particularly. But as for the
sense of touching it is most earthy of all the rest.Of the sense of touching. Therefore it agreeth
with th^ (...) is common to all the partes and members of the
body that haue s^ns^, although it bee more (...) lesse in some places
the^ in others. This sense is giuen to the body to discerne the first
qualities by, namely, hote, colde, moyst, and drie, from others that
accompany them, as heauy, and light, hard, and soft, sower, and
sweete, thicke, and thinne: which are compounded qualities, taken
from the foure (...) all corporall things are made of the foure elements.
Concerning g^^^atnesse, figures, members, motion, and rest,
they are common to many of the senses. Thus much for the sense of
touching, from which the rest do differ, in that euery one hath his proper
sense, which is not communicated with any other. For onely the
eyes see, the eares heare, the nose breatheth, the tongue and palate
taste. And heere wee haue to consider of the great prouidence of
God in many points.No body can live without some sense of touching. First, forasmuch as the body cannot liue without
the sense of touching, which hath for obiect the elementary qualities,
it is giuen to all liuing creatures in euery part of the body, to the ende,
that thereby they might knowe according to the proportion of the
qualities, what is profitable or hurtfull to their bodies in the participation
of these qualities, and so eschew more easily that which might
hurt them. But men haue this sense chiefely in the endes of their fingers,
that touching slightly with them, they might make the first triall
of all qualities. For if they feele that the thing which they touch,
is too hote, or too cold, or that there is some other excesse in the quality
which might hurt them, they are admonished thereby, to the end
that by a very litle hurt, they might auoyde a greater. For a man may
better cheape feele a litle griefe and that very lightly in the end of one
finger, or of many, then in a whole member, or in all the rest of his
body. Besides, God hath further prouided for this sense, in that it is
not so sharp to ^^ele suddainely and to the quicke, as the sight or hearing,
to the end the body should receiue lesse dammage by that which
it toucheth if it be hurtfull for it. Now the eyes, because they doe not
touch that which they see, nor the eares that which they heare, therefore
they can not be so damnified, as the residue of the members may,

which feele not except they touch.
Moreouer,Some members of the body absolutely nec^^^tie to life. we haue yet to note the prouidence of God herein, that
amongst them members giue by him to the body, he hath created some
of that nature, that a man can in no wise liue without them: and others
so, that albeit they be not necessary for life, yet he can not liue at
his ease, and not receiue great hurt if he want them. The members of
the first sort are, the braine, the heart, the lungs, the liuer, the splene, the
stomacke, and such like, that are the seates of the animal, vital, and natural
vertues, without which there could bee no stay of life. For after
these members are hurt or perished, farewell life. The other sort are
the eies, the eares, the nose, the tongue, the feete, the hands, and such
like. For although a man loose some one or many of these members,
yet he doeth not therefore loose his life, but hee shall surely feele the
detriment, which such a losse bringeth vpon him. And as wee commonly
say,A prouerbe. that the Oxe knoweth not the valow of his ^orne vntill the haue
lost it, so wee may with greater reason say, that no man knoweth of
what valew the partes of his body are vntill he want them, or vntill
they be so hindered that they cannot fulfill their office. Wherefore we
ought to pray to God to preserue them for vs whilest wee haue them,
and giue him thankes because he hath not created vs lame or maimed
of any member. And when we see any that were borne without them,
or that haue lost them since, wee ought to be so much the more stirred
vp to glorifie him, acknowledging it to come from his grace in that
he hath dealt better with rathe^r with them, although we haue deserued
no more then they. Now because we do not so, neither haue this
consideration as we ought, to giue him thankes, and to vse them to his
honour and glory, therefore he depriueth vs of them many times, to
punish this ingratitude, and to cause vs to know better the valew of
these gifts, after they are taken from vs, and that wee haue lost them,
seeing we could not knowe it whilest wee had them, nor yet him that
gaue them vnto vs. And by the same meanes also he would admonish
and put vs in minde of the dammage we receiue by the defects of our
soule, by those which wee feele by experience in our bodies. Whereupon
wee haue an other goodly point of the prouidence of God to
note,An other point of Gods (...) in that hee hath giuen vs almost all double members, without
which we could not liue but with great paine and trouble: to the end
that if we lost one, wee might yet vse the other, and in some sort supplie
the losse of that which is wanting. For this cause hee did not
create onely one eye, or one nosethrill, one eare, one arme, one
hand, one legge, or one foote, but twaine. This ought to bee well
considered, that wee might haue the better knowledge of the care

that God hath ouer vs, seeing hee hath so well prouided for all
things, that hee will not onely haue vs liue, but also furnish vs with
all necessary things, whereby wee might liue more commodiously,
more easily, and with lesse paine and trouble. And when it falleth
out, that some one of these members or both are wanting, God supplieth
this defect by maruailous meanes. For sometimes wee see that
maymed folkes haue done many thinges with their feete, or with
their necke and head, that others could hardly doe with their hands:
at least wise they haue done things without handes, that would seeme
altogether incredible to such as haue not seene them.The hands sometimes stand in st^ade of the tongue and cares. And many
times wee see dumbe men, whose handes stand them in steade both
of tongue and eares. For by the signes and gestures of their handes
they signifie their meaning to others, as if they themselues did
speake: and vnderstand the minde of others that make the like
signes. Yea, there are some that conceiue what others say vnto
them, onely by seeing them open and mooue their lippes, so that
we must needs acknowledge it as a miracle of God. Now hauing spoken
generally of the senses of the body, and specially of touching,
as also of their members and instruments, wee must come to their
particulars. Therefore AMANA, thou shalt discourse vnto vs first
of the eyes, which are as it were the principall windowes of this
building which we haue vndertaken to pourtraite and set foorth.


Of the eyes, and of their excellencie, profite, and vse: of the matter
and h^nors whereof they are made. Chap. 10.
AMANA. It hath alwayes bin the opinion of the Stoics and Academics,The opinion of the Stoics and Academics.
that the bodily senses did rather hinder then help to
obtaine wisedome: that no man could know or vnderstand anything:
that the senses were feeble and slowe: that sensible things were so
small, that they could not be perceiued: or els so subiect to motion,
that no certainetie coulde be found in them: that our life is short, and
full of opinions and customes: that all was compassed about with
darkenes, and hid: and therefore that nothing could be perceiued or
vnderstoode, so that men were to professe that they woulde affirme or
approoue,In Phad. and in (...). of nothing. Plato writeth in many places, that wee must
beleeue nothing but the vnderstanding, which beholdeth that that is
simple and vniforme, and as it is indeede: and that there is no science,
but only in those reasons and discourses, which the soule maketh whe^ it
is not troubled with bodily lets, as with sight, and hearing, or with
griefe and plesure.14. de ^rap^^. Euang. c. ^. Eusebius disputing against this, sheweth that the senses
help much towards the obtaining of wisedome: and that when they

are rightly affected, and in their naturall habite, they neuer deceiue the
mind that it ^tentiue. But wee shall knowe more at large what their
profit is by continuing our discourses of the instruments of the senses.
Let vs knowe therefore,Of the eyes and of their vse. that the eies were giuen of God to men to
cause them to see, and to be as it were their watch towers and fentinels,
the guides and leaders of the whole body: as also they are as it were the
chiefe windowes of the body, or rather of the soule, which is lodged
within it. For it is a most excellent worke of God, whether we co^sider
the matter wherof they are made, and how diuerse or agreeable it is to
the office that is assigned them? or the beauty that is in their forme, and
in the diuersity of their colours: or the commodity and vse of their motions,
and howe they are set in their places, as it were goodly pretious
stones laide in some curious piece of worke: and how they are inuironed
and armed both aboue and beneath, on the right hand and on the left,
with the eye-lids, and the eye-browes, not onely for their protection
and defense, but also to adorne, and to make them shew more beautifully.
And surely it is not without cause that God hath put such great
excellencie in them, and hath created and framed them so artificially.
For first, they are the chiefest members of all the bodily senses, whose
nature approcheth nearer to the nature of the soule and spirit,The eyes draw neerest to the nature of the soule. then any
other, by reason of the similitude and agreement that is betweene
them. Therefore by good right they beare rule among all the senses,
and all the other members of the body, as being their guides. For they
are giuen to man chiefly to guide and leade him to the knowledge of
God, by the contemplation of his goodly works, which appeare p^ncipally
in the heauens and in al the order thereof, and whereof w^ can
haue no true knowledge and instruction by any other sense but by
the eies. For without the who could euer haue noted the diuers course
and motions of the celestiall bodies? yea wee see by experience, that
the Mathematicall sciences, among which Astronomy is one of the
chiefest, cannot be well and rightly shewed and taught, as many others
may, without the helpe of the eyes: because a man must make
their demonstrations by figures, which are their letters and images. I
passe ouer many other Sciences, as that of the Anatomy of mans body
and such like, which are very hard, yea impossible to bee learned
and knowen certainly vnlesse they may be seene with the eie. Wherefore
seeing the bodily senses are the chiefest masters of man, in whose
house the spirite and vnderstanding is lodged and enclosed, the greatest
and first honour is by good right to be giuen to the eies and sight.
Likewise it is the first mistresse that prouoked men forward to the studie
and searching out of science and wisedome.Sight is our first mistresse. For of sight is ingendred

admiration and wondering at thinges that are seene: and this
admiration causeth men afterward to co^sider more seriously of things,
and to marke them better: and from thence it is that men fall to enquire
of matters more carefully, and to sound them deeper. In the
ende they come to the studie of science and wisedome, which is the
knowledge of supernaturall light, namely of the light of the minde,
vnto which, science and doctrine is as light is to the eye, so that it
contemplateth and museth by that, as the eye seeth by right. Therefore
we haue to note, that it hath pleased God the creator of al things
to scatter his light throughout the whole world, and ouer all creatures
as well spirituall and inuisible, as corporall and visible. His spirituall
light hee hath infused into spirituall creatures, and bodily light into
bodily creatures, to the ende that by this benefite the spirites might
haue vnderstanding, and the eyes sight. So that Angelles and the
spirites of men, which are spirituall and inuisible creatures, are illuminated
by the meanes of vnderstanding,O^ spirituall eyes and spirituall light. with that spirituall and
heauenly light whereof God hath made them partakers: as the bodies
of liuing creatures, and chiefely of man are illuminated with the
corporall light of the Sunne by meanes of the eyes. For as bodies
haue their bodily eyes, so spirites haue their spirituall eyes. For that
vnderstanding wherewith God hath indued them, is vnto them as
the eyes are to the body. Wherefore by that they see God, who is
their heauenly Sunne, and the fountaine of all diuine and spirituall
light, as bodily eyes beholde the materiall sunne, wherein as in a
fountaine God hath placed corporall light, which he would haue vs
see and know by meanes of the eyes: which wee ought to acknowledge
as a great benefit.(...) the light (...). For the light is a worke of God woorthy of
great admiration, which discouereth and sheweth to vs a great part of
nature, and is vnto vs in steade of an image of the best and most excellent
natures, which without doubt are lights and shining natures. Neither
coulde any man possibly expresse in wordes or teach in any sorte
what the light is, which sheweth al other things, and what is the beautie
and excellencie thereof, vnlesse the eyes did beholde and know it, and
distinguish it from darkenes. For by meanes of the eyes we may iudge
what our life woulde be, if it were buried in perpetuall darkenes, or if
man had no instrument to apprehend and to receiue the light when it
sh^neth. Therefore as God hath created the light to discouer and shew
all things by it, so he hath giuen eyes to man, whereby he may apprehend
and receiue it. To this ende he hath made them of a matter that is
partaker of light, and meet to receiue it, that by the agreement of nature
that is betweene them and the light, they might enioy it, and by ^he

selfe same meanes they might be messengers to the minde to induce
and leade it to the consideration of the diuine light, whereof corporall
light is a very small resemblance: and hereby also the mind might
knowe that God,1. Tim. 6. 16. who dwelleth in a light that none can attaine vnto, is a
maruailous light, as holy men knowe by experience when hee sheweth
himselfe vnto them. For as the eie is like to a glasse that receiueth
the images of thinges offred vnto it, so God imprinteth images of him
selfe in our mind as in a glasse. Wherefore as a glasse cannot receiue any
image, but of such things as are set before it: so the image of God
cannot shine not be imprinted in the mind of man, vnlesse he alwayes
set God before his eies, that he may receiue his image. And as the eie
is illuminated by the beames that proceed from the sunne, so the mind
is illuminated by the brightnes of the diuine light, in which we consider
the Father in the vnitie of the godhead, as the spring and fountaine
of al light, and the Sonne, as the beames and brightnes ingendred thereof,
and the holy Ghost, as a flame proceeding from it, which causeth the eie
of the mind to receiue it, and to be made partaker thereof. We see then
how our eyes together with the light admonish vs of great thinges, of
most excellent works of God, and of great secrets of spirituall and heauenly
things, whose images he hath imprinted in the light and in our
cies, to the ende, that by these corporall and visible images, wee may
haue some knowledge of those things wherof they are images, which
cannot be seene and perceiued with corporall senses, but only with the
spirituall senses of the soule. Wherefore wee ought greatly to praise
God for this goodly gift, both of the light and of the eies, which cannot
sufficiently be valewed. For although it did vs no more seruice then it
doth to brute beasts, namely to guide and leade vs in this corporall
life, yet we ought seriously to acknowledge the excellencie of so great
a gift of God, and how profitable and necessary it is for vs. But there is a
great deale more in it,The difference betwixt the sight of men and of beasts. by reason of the mind and vnderstanding which
God hath giuen to the spirit and soule of man, as it were spirituall eies,
to the end there might be an agreement and proportion betweene the^0
and the eyes of the body. For as the eies declare to the mind what they
see, that it might take knowledge therof: so when the mind hath seene
with spirituall eies those images that are offered vnto it by the bodily
eies, it causeth them to see a great deale more clearely, then the eies of
brute beasts do. For because they want minds and vnderstanding, their
eiesight pierceth no further then vnto those corporall thinges which
they behold. Wherfore when they see the light of the sunne, they only
prepare themselues to be guided by it, and neuer co^sider or looke any
further. But man, if he be not altogether brutish as beasts are, stayeth

not there, but passing further he co^sidereth the beauty of the sunne, and
those great benefits which it bringeth with it. And being ascended so
hie by the means of corporall light, he ascendeth euen to the spirituall
and diuine light, and to God, who is the eternal and infinit Sunne. Man also
hath so much the more knowledge of the nature of corporall light, and
of the effects therof, and hath also so much the more celestiall and heaue^ly
light whereof bodily light is an image, as his mind is illuminated by
the word and spirit of God. For otherwise men see litle clearer, and not
much farther by the light of the body, then brute beasts do. Moreouer
we made mention in our former speach of 4. things requisit to see by:
which also are to be vsed in the other sences. I will only adde a litle of
the fourth thing, which is of the meane that receiueth the obiect of the
sensible quality, and beareth it to the instrument. If those bodies that are
set before our eies, are so thicke by nature that the light can not pierce
through the^, the^ doth the light appeare vpon them, but not in so great
measure, nor so cleare as in the aire and in other bodies, as in glasse, christal
or such like that are not so thicke, that they wil hinder the light fro^
piercing through them.Of colours, and of their nature, varietie, and vse. This part of light that is vpon thicke bodies, is
called colour, which is of diuers sorts, according to ye mixture of light
and darknes that is in them. For first there are 2. kinds of simple colours,
by mingling of which together al other colours are co^pounded. The
one is white, which hath most light in it of all others, and therfore wil
take any other colour. The^ there is black colour, which hath least light
in it: and therfore it wil take no other color.All compound colours made of blacke and white mingled. Now according as these 2.
kinds of colors are mingled together, al other colours, being infinit in
nu^ber, are co^pounded, taking their diuersity and difference as they haue
more white or black mingled in the^. For this cause some are red, others
yellow, these greene, those skie-color, others gray, or blew, or tawny.
In a word, it wold be a difficult matter, yea impossible to reherse al their
differences and varieties. But God sheweth himself yet more wo^derful
in the diuersitie that is seene euen in one kind of colour. For let vs consider
in a medow or garden al the herbs, trees, and plants that are there
with leaues and floures, and we shal see no green in any one of the^, which
differeth not in some thing from the greene of another kind, although
they be all greene. The like may be said of their floures. For whether
they be white, or blacke, or red, or yellow, or azure, or of any other color,
we shall not find one that differeth not in somthing fro^ others of ye
same colour, but of a diuers kind. So is it with diuers fethers and colors of
birds, amongst which there are such sundry colours, that a ma^ cannot
tel what certain name to giue the^: as for exa^ple, we see about the neck
of a Ring-doue. And althogh Painters indeuor as much as lieth in the^,

counterfaite all these diuersities in their printings mingled with many
colours, and howsoeuer, as followers of nature, they come very neere
her, yet they can neuer approch so neere as to be able to represent any
colour so liuely as she brings it forth. Now if the eies were not capable
of light, they could not see any colour, nor discerne one from another:
and if they could not see colours,Nothing seene but by colour. they should see nothing. For nothing
can be seene but by meanes of colours, no more then it may bee seene
without light, of which those are made. And as the eyes cannot well
see if they haue not as much light as is needefull for them: so if they
haue too much, and more then they want, they will see a great deale
lesse: or if it be very great, they will be dazeled, and as it were blinde.
Therefore it must be dispensed vnto them by iust measure and proportion
according to their capacitie: and then through the reflexion of
those thinges which it discouereth vnto them, it imprinteth their images
in them, as the image of a ring is imprinted in sealed waxe. Now
hauing spoken of the principall vse of our eyes, if I shoulde enter into
a more particular consideration of their nature, I knowe not almost
at which ende to beginne. For there is nothing, either in the matter
of which they are made, or in their forme, composition and vse, howe
small soeuer it be, which is not able to cast all men into great admiration.
For first,Of the matter and humours of the eyes. if you aske after their matter, they are compounded
of three sortes of humours, of which the one is like to water, the other
to glasse molten, or to the white of an egge, and the third to
yee or christall: and therefore they take their names of those things
which they resemble. Concerning the Christalline humour, it is
not so thinne, but more firme then the other twaine, much like to
waxe melted. Neuerthelesse it is a great deale more cleare and more
glistering then both the other: so that there is the same difference betweene
these three humours, and that which may bee seene through
them, which is betweene christall, glasse, and water, and that which a
man may see through them.Of the Christalline humour. The Christalline humour is giuen to
the eye to impart light vnto it: therefore it is in the eye, as it were a
little round Christall glasse, very glistering. And although the other
twaine are very bright, so that the light may passe through them, as
it were through water and glasse, yet they haue no light of themselues,
as the christalline humour hath, which coulde not receiue
that light which it doeth from without, if of it selfe also it were not
partaker of light, and if by that participation which it hath, there
were not in it a naturall agreement with the other. The other
twaine are ioyned vnto it not onelie to nourish and moysten it,
that it drie not too fast, but also to helpe to preserue it, and to

moderate the vehemencie both of those spirites and colours that
might hurt it. Nowe because these humours are liquide and soft,
they had neede of fitte vesselles to keepe euery one in his place appoynted,
for the executing of their office.How the humor^ are placed. The christalline humoris in
the middest of the other twaine, because it is the glasse of the eye,
which receiueth the light, and the images of those things that by the
light are disclosed vnto it. Therfore it hath behind it that which resembleth
molten glasse, or the white of an egge, which is not altogether
so soft and liquide, as the other before that resembleth water. Thus
hath God disposed them according to that naturall co^ueniency which
is betweeue them, that they might be so knit one to another, as is meetest
both for them and their vses. And being all ioyned together, they
serue to fill vp that hollow place within which the eyes are inclosed:
so also the other partes, and namely the fat, whereof they are well prouided,
serueth not onely to fill vp voyde roome, but also is appointed
to this end, that the eyes might rest them more at ease, and be moystened
the better.How Gods prouidence appeareth in the eyes. In all which things great wonders of Gods prouidence
appeare most cleerely: namely, in this, that the humors are so distinguished,
euery on keeping his place without mixture or confusion, as
also in this, that the christalline humour, which is partaker of light, and
which ought to receiue it, is so well compassed about and fortified on
all sides. For this cause it is more firme then the other, that it might
both keepe and distribute better the light which it receiueth, and also
preserue it selfe, and helpe the other humors that are ioyned vnto it,
which being as it were Nurses vnto it, doe in like manner helpe it againe.
Moreouer, wee are greatly to maruaile at the prouidence of
God, in considering the coates and skinnes of the eyes, their forme
and motions, their diuers colours, and the sinewes whereby they receiue
sight: the discourse of which matters, I lay vpon thee, ARAM.


Of the tunicles and skinnes of the eyes: of their forme and motions:
of their sundrie colours: of the sinewes whereby they receiue sight,
and of other partes about the eyes. Chap. 11.
ARAM. If we would stand to consider of all those things that are
worthy of admiration, but in one eye onely, aswell in respect of
the matter, as of the forme, and meanes whereby they receiue the vertue
of seeing, and performe their duetie, as the Phisicions she we these
things in an Anatomi^, a man might make a very great booke thereof,
as likewise of all the other members. For there is no member so
little, wherein there is not most exquisite arte, and wherein a man may

not see maruellous workes of Gods prouidence, so that I shoulde bee
wonderfully abashed to see any Phisition proue an Atheist, if he haue
neuer so litle knowledge of the nature of mans bodie, and of the composition
and Anatomie of the partes of it, were it not that God punished
them with the like iudgement that he hath done other great Philosophers,
whome he casteth into a reprobate sence, because through
pride and ingratitude, they abuse that knowledge of naturall things,
which he hath giuen them. Let vs learne therefore to know the Creator
by the knowledge of the creatures, and let vs look vpon the workmaster
in the excellencie of his works. And now to this end, according
to out intent, let vs with the eyes of the minde, behold the eyes of the
body, seeing they looking vpon all things, yet cannot see themselues.
Nowe as we haue perceiued,Of the tunicles and skinnes of the eyes. that God hath disposed the matter
and humors of the eyes according to that office whereunto he hath assigned
them, so he hath appointed tunicles or coates which are little
skins, in which they are contained as it were in their vessels, and compassed
about with them as it were with litle bands, to keepe them vnited
and close together, and to preserue them, that they mooue not
forth, and runne out, and withall to bee vnto them a sure defence.
These skinnes according to their offices and vses are disposed one after
another, and interlaced between the humors of the eyes, according
to that agreement of nature which they haue, both amongest themselues,
as also with those humors which they serue, and which in like
sort serueth them, to the end that neither the one nor the other should
easily receiue hurt.Fiue tunicles. And amongst those fiue seuerall tunicles, which
there are of them, according as the Phisicions and Anatomists distinguish
them, one is very slender, like to a smal spiders web, or to a very
litle fine white skinne, that is betweene the partes of an onion. Then
there is another that is like to a litle threede: and the third resembleth
in colour the stone of a redde grape, I meane the outward side of it.
They are named by the Grecians and Latines according to the similitudes
and likenesse of those things which they resemble. But the chiefest,
strongest, and hardest of them is like to a flender and cleere horne,
I meane that horne whereof Lanterns are made, but that it is not so
hard and thick by a great deale: and by reason of the similitude which
it hath with horne, it is called by the same name. This hath God created
in this sort, both that it might bee a stronger defence to all the
humors of the eyes, and also that it might serue for the light which
they are to receiue, through which it shineth, as the light that is
in a Lanterne besides the horne of which it is made. There is yet another
white skinne, which serueth to keepe in the whole eye vnto the

head, in the place assigned for it: and this is the first, as that like the spiders
webbe is the last, and then the other are placed betweene these in
the same order that I haue named.A testimonie of Gods prouide^ce. Heerein appeareth the woorke of
God, namely his prouidence is to be well marked in this, that he hath
not placed the eyes so farre out in the face and head, as hee hath done
the nose, eares, and lippes, but more inward as it were in holes and litle
dennes, by reason of the humors whereof they are compounded, to
keepe them so much the more fast and close together, because they
are liquide. Therefore they are shut vp in their holes, as the water of a
Well is in that place where it is gathered together. For this cause the
Hebrewes often vse the solfesame word to signifie both the eyes and
fountains.Of the forme of the eye. Next, God hath created the^ of a round forme, both because
it is the fairest, most seemly and most perfect, as also because it is most
moueable, and easiest to turne and returne on euery side, as the office of
the eye requireth. For seeing they are giuen to man and to al creatures
for the direction of the whole bodie, and of all the members thereof,
they ought not to be so fastened in the place where they are, that they
can neuer looke but one way, nor stirre themselues on any side.
Therefore God hath appointed to euery eye seuen muscles, both to
keepe them firme and steady,Of the muscles of the eyes. as also to cause them to remooue and
turne vpward and down ward, on the right hand and on the left, crossewise
and round. And as the round forme is most perfect, so it is most fit
for the office of the eyes, to the end they may see all things better, and
comprehend all sorts of shapes better then if they were flat, or hollow,
or square, or of some other fashion besides round: as a man may iudge
by the diuersitie of looking-glasses, and of their figures and makings,
according to the variety of which, they represent diuersly those things
whose images they receiue. Now because man, as also all other creatures
goe forward, and not backward or sidewise, therefore God hath
not placed the eyes either in the hinder part of the head, or on any side
thereof, but before. And although the eyes be moueable and made to
turne on euery side, yet they neuer turne cleane backward, but onely
sidewise, so farre as they can see and behold well. For they haue nothing
to looke vpon within the head, but only without. Therfore they
haue this aduantage besides, that being set in that place which is assigned
vnto them in the head, they may turne from one part to another,
and see, not onely on the right hand and on the left, but also behinde,
by that motion which the head hath from his sinewes by meanes of
the necke: which motion the head should not haue, if it were seated
vpon the shoulders without a necke: and this is another commoditie
of the necke, whereof we spake not before.

Nowe before wee goe any further in the discourse of those
partes that are about the eyes for their defence and preseruation, it shalbe
good for vs to consider here of the goodly painting, and varietie of
colours that are in them. For first wee haue a white colour, which couereth
the greatest part of the eye: next that goodly smal circle, which
is round about the eye: then the apple of the eye, which the Hebrews
call the daughter of the eye, being in the midst of it, as it were a little
glasse, where in a man may alwayes see some image, as it were in a
glasse when one looketh into it. This little circle is called by some a
Crowne, and by others a Rainebow, because of the diuersitie of colours
that are seene in it: which are not all alike in all men. For some haue
this circle more black, others more gray, others more yealow, or more
redde. Moreouer, besides the sinewes of those muscles that are giuen
to the eyes to moue them euery way, eche of them hath one proper
vnto it selfe, wherby the life and vertue of seeing is communicated vnto
it from the braine, by meanes of the soule that giueth life to all the
bodie.Of the visuall sinewes. Therefore these sinewes differ from all the rest, in that they are
not solide, but hollow within, like to little water pipes, to carry vnto
the eyes the spirites of sight, which are as it were a little flame of
light, whereby they receiue from the brayne, life and vertue of seeing.
Next we are to consider how God hath placed them neere the nose,
to the end they may purge also by that on eche side, aswell as the other
humours of the braine.The vse of the kernels neere the eyes. Therefore there are kernels hard by them
in the head, which serue both to moysten and to water them according
as they haue neede, by reason of their burning nature and perpetuall
motion, and also to retaine and soke in humours, least they should
descend and fall downe vpon them too fast, and so hurt them. Besides
this commoditie, the nose in his place is vnto both the eyes in steade of
bulwarks, and so also are the bones which close them in on euery side,
and the balles of the cheekes, which are higher then the holes of the
eyne, that they also might serue to defend them. Moreouer, God hath
further armed them with eyeliddes, which serue them both for ornament,
and are also in stead of gates vnto them, hauing muscles to open
and to shut them, eyther wholly or in part as neede shall require, both
for sight,Of the cyclids and of their haires. for sleeping and waking, and for defence. And besides the
eyebrowes wherwith God hath couered them aboue the liddes, there
are little haires growing at their brimmes, which God hath not giuen
in vaine. For first, they serue to direct the beames of the sight, that they
may see more directly: next they serue for defence against litle flyes,
against (...), mo^tes, and other small things that might enter in, and
trouble them. Moreouer, they serue for ornament, as it were some pretie

border round about them. And because the haires of the eyeliddes
haue an other office then those of the eyebrowes, therefore they are
otherwise disposed: for they are not so thicke, nor mingled one within
and about another, as the hayres of the eyebrowes are, but they are
raunged and set all in ranke, euen orderly one by another. And as for
the eyebrowes,The vse of the eyebrowes. they doe not onely serue to set forth the eyes, that their
beautie may the better appeare, but also to defend them against the
raine, against the sweate of the head and forehead, and other things
that might descend and fall vpon them if they had not this to stay the^.
And to this purpose we see the agreement which they haue with the
nose on eche side, and how the prouidence of God hath made them
like to a halfe circle, or a halfe moone, or a little arche, or els after the
fashion of a little penthouse, to the end that the sweat and raine might
haue an easie course and descent on both sides, and not runne into the
eyes. And because they should not hinder in steade of helping, God
hath created them of that nature, that they growe not like the haire,
beard, or nailes, but continue alwayes at one stay. What then wil those
women say for themselues, who take so great paines in twitching and
plucking off the haire of their eyebrowes, to the end they should not
be so thick or great as nature hath made them. For they thinke it greater
beautie when they are shorter and thinner.Against the pri^^ of women. But in this, as in all their
paintings and prankings they doe not only lift vp themselues against
nature, as though they would worke her a spite, but also be haue themselues
as if of set purpose they meant to reproch God for creating the^
as he did. Now in speaking of the eyes, let vs beware that we be not
so blind, as that we cannot see that thing by them, which they teach
vs, or take no heede of that which they shew vnto vs. For the consideration
of one of them alone, or of one eyelid or browlidde onely, ought
to teach vs to open and to lift them on high, that they may search out
and contemplate him that created them, and hath giuen them vnto
vs:Psal. 94. 9. euen to him who saith, I that formed the eye, shall I not see? Therefore
we ought to be afraide, least our eyes be giuen vnto vs as Iudges;
to conuince vs of our ingratitude towards God their and our Creator,
and to condemne vs. For there are but too many miracles to be seene
of his almightie power in their creation, and too many witnesses of his
prouidence towards vs, to make vs more then ashamed and confounded.
We haue yet another point to bee noted touching their situation,
which causeth a certaine proportion and agreement to bee betweene
the heauens and the head,Of the proportio^ betweene the heauens and the bead. and betweene the eyes of the great and little
worlde, and those of the body and soule. For it is most certaine, that
they could not be placed more conueniently, then in the highest part

of al the bodie, as it were in the highest towre, seeing they are to serue
all the other members in place of Warders and Watchmen, and of
guides and leaders. Therefore Salomon had reason to call them the
Lookers aut by the windowes.Eccles. 12. 3. For the holes of the head in which they
are placed as it were Looking-glasses, are their windowes through
which they see and behold. We may also say asmuch of the apple of
the eye, which looketh within his litle circle, as it were by a window.
For this cause, as God hath placed the sunne, moone, and all the rest of
the lights aboue in the heauens: so he would that there should bee
some proportion betweene the heauens and the head of man, and betweene
those goodly lights aboue named, and the eyes that are created
to receiue light from them, and to be that in man who is the litle
world, which the sunne, moone, and other lights of heauen are in this
great vniuersall world. Therefore forasmuch as the eyes are as it were
the images of these goodly bodies and celestiall glasses, they occupie
the highest place in this bodie of the litle worlde, as the lights doe
in the great bodie of the world, whereof they are as it were the eyes,
to giue it light on euery side.The eyes drawe neerest to the nature of fire. For this cause also the eyes are more
fierie, and haue more agreement with the nature of fire, then any other
member that belongeth to the corporall senses. And as they
are in a high place, so they are admonished thereby of the place vnto
which they ought to looke, according to that which Dauid saith,
I lift vp mine eyes to thee that dwellest in the heauens.Psal. 123. 1. In all these things
we see a goodly harmonie and agreement between the great and the
litle world, the like whereof we shall also finde betweene the worlde
and the spirituall heauen, whose sunne and light is God, and between
the eyes of the soule and of the mind. Therefore Iesus Christ said very
well,Matth. 6. 22. 23. The light of the bodie is the eye: if then thine eye be single, thy whole body
shalbe light: but if thine eye be wicked, then all thy body shalbe dark. Wherfore,
if the light that is in thee be darknes, how great is that darknes? So that
the eyes being as it were the lanterne, lampe and flame of the whole
body, they could not haue a more apt place, or more conuenient for
their nature, then that where God hath placed them. The like also may
be said of the spirituall eyes of the soule and of the mind. For God hath
lodged the vnderstanding and reason in the braine of man,The agreement betweene the eies of the soule and those of the body. as it were
in a high towre, in which it ought to raigne as a Queene and Princesse,
and guide vnder her lawes all the affections and actions of men,
as the eyes guide all the members of the body And when God, who is
the sunne and light of the world* and of the spiritual heauen, reacheth out
his beames to these eyes of the soule by his eternall Sonne, and giueth
them life, vigour and vertue by his spirite, then is the minde wel lightned,

and then doth she happily and to her proper end direct al the parts
of the soule. Now for the conclusion of our speech, seeing wee haue
spoken largely enough of the eyes of the bodie, and of their nature,
beautie, and excellencie, and what goodly images of the spiritual eyes
they represent vnto vs, let vs yet a litle better acknowledge the greatnesse
of their Woorkmaster, by considering apart the matter whereof
they are made, I meane by it selfe and without the woorkmanship: as
if we should now behold their substance without that disposition and
form which he hath giuen them. What is an eye pluckt out of the head
but a litle clay and mire? as indeed it is the matter whereof it is made.
Now what a wonderfull thing is it, that God hath so appropriated it,
as to make such a goodly piece of woorke thereof, and such faire instruments
for the seruice of men? And therefore our Sauiour Iesus
Christ meant to represent this diuine woorke,Iohn 9. 6. when hee made the
blinde to see by putting clay vpon his eyes. Let vs therefore vse their
sight, which is such an excellent gift of God, to behold his workes,
and those goodly images of the diuine nature, which on euery side,
and continually are before our eyes: and let vs beware that wee
feede them not with the sight of prophane and dishonest things, least
they serue to poyson the minde and soule, whereas they ought to become
messengers, to declare vnto it honest and healthful things. For he
that doth otherwise is woorthy to haue, not onely his bodily eyes put
out, and pluckt out of his head, but also the eyes of his mind, that so he
may be blinde both in body and soule, as it commonly falleth out to
many. But let vs follow our matter propounded touching the senses,
and their members: and speake vnto vs, ACHITOB, of the eares, and
of their composition, offices, and vse.


Of the Eares, and of their composition, offices, and vse.
Chap. 5.
ACHITOB. The wisedome of God is so great, and he prouideth so
wel for al things by his prouidence, that he neuer doth any thing
in vain: insomuch that there is nothing whatsoeuer in all nature, which
hath not his proper vse, and which is not compounded of matter and
forme agreeable thereto, for the instruction of men. But forasmuch as
men are rude of vnderstanding, and by reason of their natural corruption
easily turned aside from the chiefe ende of their being, namely,
the contemplation of celestiall and heauenly things, in place whereof
they betake the^selues to ye care of those things yt are earthly and corruptible,
it commeth to passe, that hauing eyes and eares, they neither see

nor heare any spirituall thing, so that their very light is become (...).
And then how great may we thinke the darknes to be in those
partes that ought to be guided by the^ that are capable of light? Therfore
as we haue learned, that the eyes are the first guides and houshold
masters that God hath giuen to euery one, and the first authours and
inuentors almost of all artes, sciences, and disciplines, because by their
sight we know the light, colour, greatnes, figure, number, situation,
and motion of bodily things, both neere and farre off: so now we are
to know, that the heating and the cares are very conuenient for one
man to communicate his knowledge with another, as if one shoulde
powre wine or water out of one vessell into another. But they are especially
giuen by God to men, that they might serue to receiue the doctrine
and instruction of wisedome, as we may perceiue if we consider
diligently their nature and vse.
The eares then,The situation of the cares. in mine opinion, are also as it were watchmen ouer
the whole body, aswell as the eyes. For it is not onely required, that a
watchman should see, but also that he should both heare and speake.
Therefore are the eares placed harde by the eyes on eche side, aswell
for an ornament to the head, as for the commoditie and vse of the
whole body. For that place is fit for them that they may so much the
more conueniently receiue those sounds that come vnto them, and
cause them to heare, euen as the eyes receiue the light, which causeth
them to see. Therefore as God hath disposed the matter whereof it
pleased him to make the eyes, and hath giuen them such a forme as agreeth
best to that office, which bee would haue them performe, so
hath he done in regard of the cares, as also of all the other members of
the body.Of their making. For this cause hee hath made them of gristles, which are a
great deale harder and more firme then either flesh, kernels, sinewes,
or ligaments: but yet nothing so hard as the bones are, as we haue already
learned by that which was spoken before. Besides, neere about
the place where the eares are, he hath set the hardest and firmest bones
that are about the head. Therefore they are called stony bones by reason
of their hardnesse, and of their naturall agreement with stones:
whereby the cares are strongly fortified, and that very agreeable to
their nature and office.Of their forme. As for their forme, it is halfe round, and very
well compassed. They are also doubled in about the ends, as if nature
had wrought them about with litle ledges turned in of the same matter,
in most excellent and decent maner. And amongst all liuing creatures
God hath giuen vnmoueable eares to none,The cares of men and apes only are without mouing. but only to man, and
to an ape: for the rest can moue them vp and downe. And as for this
externall and eminent part of the eare that appeareth without, if it serued

onely to beautifie the head, the vse of it were not to bee despised.
For it is euident by such as haue their eares cut off,Of their vse. how deformed and
vnseemely the head would bee to looke vpon, if it were not decked
with that part of the ^ares planted there by God for their greater ornament,
as it were two goodly bruches. Heereof it is, that those
men haue this part cut off, who are to be made deformed and infamous
for some notorious offence. But besides the honour and ornament,
which this part of the ^ares bringeth to the head, it serueth also to
couer the brayne which is next to the cares, least it should bee hurt.
And to the ende that they might not bee easily bruzed, or broken,
nor yet hang downewarde, they are, as I haue saide, of a gristly substance,
as are all those partes that are bare and appeare outward, and
which are in daunger to receiue iniuries and discommodities from
without. Likewise this outward growing of the eares bringeth a double
commoditie with it to the rest of that member. The first is, that
it keepeth backe the rayne and sweate of the head, and much
filth that might enter into the eares, if those places were flatte,
and had nothing but the holes of the eares without these bulwarkes,
Therefore their forme is made so, that they ascend and bende vpward
without, but are hollowe within. The other is, that it helpeth
much for the better receiuing in of the soundes that are brought to
the eares by the ayre, because thereby the soundes are better conueyed
vnto that place, which is properly appoynted for the hearing. For
this cause the cares are not pierced straight outright, but their holes
are made winding in, like the shell of a snayle, whose forme they
represent, so that one cannot thrust straight foorth so much as a litle
threede, or the bristle of a hogge. For if they were boared outright,
many inconueniences would befall them. The first is, that the
soundes woulde not be conueyed in so well, as they are in places that
bend and giue backewarde, where they haue rebounds, which causeth
them to stay and sound better. The second is, that the eares should
receiue ouer-great sound and too thick, and so being more confused,
they could not bee discerned and vnderstood so well. Againe, as too
great light doth not onely dazell the eyes, but hurteth them withall:
so ouergreat soundes would marre the instrument of hearing, if they
were not distributed and compassed according to the capacity therof.
For there must alwaies be an answerable and apt proportion between
the sense, the thing subiect to sense, and the meane by which the sense
is made. Hereupon it falleth out ofte^, that many become deafe by hearing
ouergreat soundes, whereof wee haue experience in Smithes, amongest
whome many are thicke of hearing, because their eares

are continually dulled with the noyse and sound of their hammers and
anuiles. The like oftentimes happeneth to those that deale with artillery,
by reason of the continual vse and greatnes of the sound.Of the place of hearing. Moreouer
wee must note, that there is a very litle hole in ech of these stonie
bones,Three small bones in the eares. in which the hearing is properly made, and within which also
there are three very small bones, whereof the one is called an anuile,
the other the hammer, because they are made almost of the same fashion,
so that a man would say, that nature had framed a little anuile
and a little hammer to make soundes, and to cause them to be heard.
The third small bone was founde out by certaine Phisicions and Anatomists,
and being boared in the middest is fashioned like to a litle
stirrope, and is alwaies lesse then any of the other twaine. Phisicions
that write of Anatomie make no mention of this last, or if any
speake of it, they are but fewe, and of late time. And in deede it
is a harde matter, euen for them that are most skilfull and expert, to
look vnto all how diligent and able so euer they be in Anatomie, especially
in the view of many instruments, and of their sundry parts, which
are so small, that hardly can we discerne them with our eyes if we look
not very narrowly vnto them, and that after we are tolde thereof before.
As for these small bones whereof I speake nowe, and namely the
third, a man may perceiue them better in a dry Anatomie, and in some
skull that hath nothing but the bare bones, then he shall in a whole
bodie. Therefore the skilfullest Phisicions and Anatomists confesse,
that the body of man hath such woonderfull arte in it, that euery
day they finde some newe thing in it, which was not obserued by
any in former times. But let vs returne to our speech concerning
that which remayneth of the composition of the eares. Besides
these litle bones,Of two skinnes within the eares. there are two small skinnes full of nerues, which
holde and binde these bones in such wise, that they are as it were a litle
tabour stretched out in that place. These small skinnes haue their
originall from those sinewes, by which the vertue of hearing proceedeth
from the brayne to the eares. For after the sounds are made
in the ayre, they are caried to these skinnes, and then heard and discerned
by them. Heereupon they are made hollowe, to receiue the
soundes that come from without, hauing a nature that agreeth very
much with the ayre, as the eyes do with the fire, I meane in respect
of their vertue which is burning and glistering, albeit their
substance bee moyst. Therefore as the eyes iudge of light and colours,
and by that meanes bring great pleasure and profite to men:
so the eares iudge of sounds and of the voyce,What profite and pleasure is receiued by the eares. of notes, harmony, and
of melodies, whereby man receiueth commoditie and delight. And

if there were but the sundry notes of birdes, what solace doeth hee receiue
by it? But besides, how many instruments are there of most excellent
and melodious musicke, what voyces and pleasant songs, framed
very cunningly, and with great grace and harmonie by the arte
of musicke? For we see by experience, that this science is giuen of
God to men, that it might be chiefly dedicated to their eares, to the
end that by the sounds and songs which they heare, they might be stirred
vp to praise God the giuer of them. Therefore Salomon not without
good reason called them the daughters of singing or of musicke,Eccles. 12. 4. because
of the delight which they take therein, and also because this
whole arte, and all songs and melody would bee vaine and vnprofitable
to the life of man without hearing. But aboue all, the chiefest
profite that the eares bring to men, is by the meanes of speeche,
whereby they communicate one with another all their conceiptes,
imaginations, thoughtes and counsailes, so that without them
the whole life of man would bee not onely deafe, but dumbe also
and very vnperfect, as if man had neyther tongue, mouth nor speech.
And on the other side, seeing man hath alwayes neede of doctrine
and instruction, albeit all the other bodily senses helpe him therein,
neuerthelesse, none is so fitte or more seruiceable to this purpose,
next to the eyes, then the eares. Wherefore if Salomon for the cause aboue
rehearsed, called them the daughters of singing, a man may
also call them the daughters of discipline and of knowledge. For
as man hath nothing more proper then speech, whereby hee letteth
others knowe what hee hath in his minde and heart, so hee
hath nothing more fitte then that, to teach all thinges by, whose
doctrine is alreadie begunne by meanes of the other senses,How doctrine is learned. but
principally of the eyes. For the other senses together with the
sense of seeing, are as masons, that lay the first foundation of
the frame of doctrine, and afterwarde speech buildeth vpon this
grounde-woorke: which it cannot doe, if it bee not holpen by the
eares and by hearing, which agree with the voyce pronounced
by the mouth, whereby speech is sent and conueyed to the eares,
that it may bee hearde and vnderstoode of them.
Thus after the knowledge of things is found out, and artes begunne
by meanes of the sight, after the same manner that was
declared before by vs when wee intreated of the eyes, then the
sense of hearing teacheth a great deale more, both greater matters
and sooner. For wee receiue and vnderstande in a short space, that
which our master who teacheth vs, hath obtayned and prepared
in a very long time. For howe many thinges must wee see,

and what bookes must we reade before we shall attaine to the knowledge
of that,The benefite of Lectures. which we may learne by hearing one lecture, at which
we shalbe auditors onely one houre or lesse? Let vs consider then how
conueniently and bountifully God dealeth with men in this behalfe,
when that thing which is very profitable and most necessary is made
so easie for them. For nothing is more profitable or more necessarie
then to learne much, nor any thing more easie then to heare much.
Therefore Salomon saieth,Prou. 1. 5, 6. That a wise man shall heare and increase in
learning, and a man of vnderstanding shall attaine vnto wise Counsels,
to vnderstand a parable and the interpretation, the wordes of the
wise and their darke sayings. This also is the meanes whereby GOD
hath appoynted, that men shall learne and vnderstand his will. And
therefore, as we heard that eyes were giuen vnto vs, to this ende especially,
that they should contemplate the workes of God, their and
our Creator: so we ought to know that eares were giuen vs, that before
all things we should heare and vnderstand his voyce and worde,
and consecrate them wholly to that purpose: to the end that after the
eares of the body haue heard it, they should be the messengers to declare
it to the eares of the soule and minde,How hearing is framed in the eares. to cause them also to heare
and vnderstand the same. For this cause, as the aire that entreth into
the eares, and bringeth vnto them the sound made in it selfe, when it
is stricken and moued, moueth the litle hammer of the eares, and causeth
seth it to strike vpon the anuile, and so maketh a sound by meanes of
the litle taber, through whose sounde the spirites of hearing are awakened:
so God by inspiration worketh in his Prophets and Ministers,
who receiue his voyce after a diuine manner: and then are
they as it were the hammers that strike vpon the anuiles of mens
mindes and heartes, by which sounde the spirites of the hearers are
awakened and stirred vp. But my desire is, that wee should throughly
consider heere this great secrete of GOD that lyeth hidde in nature,
namely, the meanes whereby the hearing is made and framed
in the eares, which wee cannot see or comprehende as it is in
it selfe. Neuerthelesse, God giueth vs great light thereunto by the
matter and forme of the instruments, which he hath made for the hearing.
Wherefore seeing the eares are framed so artificially as wee
haue hearde, as appeareth to the eye by their Anatomie, wee cannot
doubt but that God would haue their vse and artificiall composition
knowen to them that may beholde with their eies the instruments
of hearing, when they are laid open vnto them, as they are to Anatomists,
to the end that by the view and contemplation of the^, they
might iudge of that secret worke of nature which God hath wrought

in hearing, which cannot bee seene with eyes when it is in doing.
For we knowe by experie^ce whereto serueth a hammer, an anuile,
and a taber, and what sound they make when the one striketh, and
the other is stricken, and howe that hollow things are more fitte to receiue
sounds, and to cause them to be heard better, then things that
are solide and more thicke. So that when we see instruments like to
these in the composition of the eares, we may easily iudge, that God
hath not placed them there, but to doe that seruice which may be
perfourmed by such instruments, to the end we should know the great
skill and wisedome of the Woorkmaster that made them. Now for
the conclusion of our speech, let vs learne, that although our eares
did vs no more seruice then the eares of brute beastes doe to them,
and reached onely to the vse of this life, yet coulde we not sufficiently
acknowledge that good, which God doth to vs by them. But wee
must make a greater account of this, that by the meanes of his worde,
which he will haue declared to our cares, he causeth them to serue to
his honour and glory, and to our owne saluation. Therefore let vs
apply these so beautifull and artificiall members, with all the rest of
our senses to their principall ende, yea to the end of all nature, namely,
to the glory of their Maker: and let them be deafe, and stopped
vp against all dishonest things that might poyson them, and so consequently
our mindes by them.1. Cor. 15. 33. For that which Saint Paul saith, That
euill wordes corrupt good manners, ought to be extended to euery vile,
dishonest, and wicked thing which the eares may heare. Wherefore
they that abuse them so vilely, deserue that God shoulde pluck
them off, and stoppe them, and make them altogether deafe, not only
their bodily eares, but also those that are spirituall, as hee maketh
them blind according to that threatning which he giueth out by Esay.Esay. 6. 9, 10.
Now to follow our purpose touching corporall senses and their instruments,
I thinke we ought to intreate of the tongue, because it serueth
chiefly for speech, whereof we haue already made some mention, and
for the sense of taste, in which we must be instructed. Therfore ASER,
declare vnto vs the diuers vses of the tongue, and what instruments are
necessary both for voyce and speech.


Of the diuers vses of the tongue: of the instruments necessary both for
voyce and speech: how there is a double speech: of the forme thereof:
how the spirit of man is represented thereby. Chap. 13.
ASER. If wee were onely of a spirituall nature as the Angels are,
it is certain we should by and by vnderstand one another, by that

minde and vnderstanding, whereof we are partakers, as they vnderstand
eche other: neither should we need speech, tongue, eares, or eyes, to
heare and see by, no more then those natures that consist only of spirit,
hauing all those things spiritual wherby they communicated both with
God, and amongst themselues. But we can haue no such communicatio^
among our selues by the vnderstanding of the mind and spirit only, because
of that corporall nature which commeth between the soules and
spirits one of another. Wherfore the helpe of speech, aswel as of the other
external senses, is very requisite for vs in euery part of life. Also because
our soule, being kept vnder our flesh as vnder a vaile, vseth cogitations
and discourses, it sta^deth in need of speech, of words and of names,
by means of which it may vtter and publish that, yt lieth bid as it were in a
deep and darke place, where nothing is seene. Forasmuch therfore as the
tongue is the principal instrument wherby God giueth speech to me^,
and without which they would be dombe, and seeing also it serueth the
sense of taste as wel as the roofe of the mouth, it shall not bee without
good consideration, if intreating now of this me^ber, and of ye vse therof,
we place it in the order of our discourses, betweene the instruments of
hearing, whereof we spake before, and those of taste, of which we will
speake hereafter, for the agreement it hath with them both.
God hath giuen ye tongue to man not for one vse alone, but for many:
and namely for three at the least,Three vses of the tongue. which are all very necessary for ye life of
man. The first is to frame the speech: the second, for the taste: the third,
to helpe to prepare the meate that is chewed in the mouth for the
nourishing of the body. And because the first is the noblest of all, and
giuen to man onely, whereas the other twaine are common to him
with beasts, I wil begin with that: whereunto this may be added, that
because of the conueniencie it hath with the hearing, and with the
eares, these two matters will agree the better, beeing ioyned in order
one after another. Next we will handle the other vses that appertayne
properly to the sense of taste and to the nourishing of ma^. Now we haue
first to note, that God hath placed many instruments in the body without
which speech could not be well pronounced and expressed. For first,
speech could not be without voyce, for the which God hath created
many instrume^ts ye are all necessary for that purpose,The instruments of the voyce. as namely, the wesell
of the throate, the windepipe, the throte, the lungs, the breast, and
certaine back-running sinewes appointed therunto by reciprocal motions.
All these partes helpe onely to make the voyce of man, without
any framing of speech, except it be the wesell of the throte, which is a
litle fleshy and spongie bodie, in figure like to a pine-apple, hanging
at the end of the palat, whose vse is manifold. For it serueth first to stay

the aire from rushing in ouer fast and violently into the lungs,The vse of the wesel of ye throte. and from
entring in too cold and ouer sodainly vnto them. Then it serueth also to
diuide and distribute the aire when it ascendeth from the lungs, ye it may
be the better scattered and dispersed into al parts of the mouth. And by
this means this instrument fashioneth the voyce, and causeth it to yeeld
a sound, and so prepareth it for the tongue, that it may be articulated and
framed into speech by ye same. Therfore besides the wesel of the throat
which serueth for these two vses, there are fiue other instrume^ts which
in regard of this present matter serue only to frame ye voice into speech,Fiue instruments requisite to lea^^e the voyce into speech.
that otherwise would be but a confused voyce. The first is the tongue,
which hath the chiefe place among the rest: then the palate, the teeth,
the lips, and the nose. For although a man may speake when hee hath
not all these parts perfect, yet his speech wil not be well framed if hee
want any one of them, as we see by experience in them that haue lost
their teeth, or their lips, or the roof of the mouth, or that haue their nose
cut, stuffed, or otherwise troubled. For this cause the Hebrewes name
their letters, some gutturall, because they are pronounced more in the
throat: others, dentall, because a man cannot wel pronounce the^ without
the teeth: and so they call others, labiall, that is, letters of the lips:
and others, letters of the palat, because they cannot bee well expressed
without those parts of the mouth. The like is in all other languages, albeit
they doe not distinguish their letters by such names. Now in such
varietie of instrume^ts made for the seruice and vse of one only thing, we
ought to acknowledge the great nobility and dignity of speech,Of the dignitie of speech. with
which God hath indued and honored man aboue al other creatures. For
he hath not giuen it to any of them, but to him only, and by that he hath
put a difference betweene him and the beasts, as also by reason and vnderstanding,
whereof he hath made him partaker, and in respect wherof
he hath giuen him speech, which is as naturall vnto him as reason,
which is the spring head thereof, and from whence it proceedeth, as a
riuerfrom his fountaine. For how could men make known their counsailes
and thoughts without speech? And what good should they receiue
by that sense and vnderstanding which God hath giuen them more the^
to beasts, if they had no more speech then they haue, wherby to make it
known? And to what purpose would speech serue them, if they knew
not what to say? And what should they haue to speake, if they had no
more vndersta^ding and reason then other liuing creatures haue? Were it
not sufficient then to haue a co^fused voice only as they haue? Therfore
also we see how God hath ioined these twothings together graunting
speech vnto man, because hee hath created him pa^taker of reason
and vnderstanding. And hauing depriued beasts of the one, hee hath

also depriued them of the other, so that they are partakers neither of
reason nor speech.Ecclus. 17. 5, 6. For this cause Ecclesiasticus hath ioyned these
things together, saying, That God hath giuen to men counsell, and tongue,
and eyes, eares, and an heart to vnderstand, and sixtly, he gaue them a spirite,
and seuenthly, he gaue them speech to declare his woorkes. Hee filled
them with knowledge of vnderstanding, and shewed them good and euill.
Whereby he teacheth vs plainly, what is the right and true vse of speech,
to what end it is giuen to man, and from whence it springeth. For he
placeth counsell in the first place, and next the tongue. Againe, after
the heart and spirite, he placeth speech, that we might know who is
their messenger. Whereupon we may conclude, that the one is giuen
for the other, and both to glorifie God, by shewing foorth his works
and marueilous actes.(...) sermon. To which effect Basil the great saith very well,
that God hath created vs and graunted vs the vse of speech, to the end
we might haue the ability and meanes to lay open one to another the
counsels and thoughtes of our heartes, and to distribute amongst vs
that which is in euery one, by reason of that communicable nature in
which we are created. For the heart ought to bee in man as a secrete
treasurie, or as a larder or pantry in a house, out of which all things
necessary for the vse thereof, and for the maintenaunce of the whole
familie are dayly taken. The heart also is like to a seller or garner,
wherein counsels and thoughts are locked and closed vp, and the
tongue is like to the steward who draweth out and dispenseth whatsoeuer
is to bee distributed. For as wee saide in the beginning of
our speech, our soule vseth thoughts and discourses, which cannot
bee declared so long as it is inclosed in this tabernacle of flesh,
without speech, wordes, and names, by meanes of which, she bringeth
foorth and publisheth that which was inclosed and hidden in the secrete
closet of her vnderstanding.Two sortes of speech in man. And so wee say, that there are two
kindes of speech in man, one internall and of the minde, the other
externall, which is pronounced, and is the messenger of the internall,
that speaketh in the heart. Therefore that which is framed in
voyce* pronounced in speech, and brought into vse, is as a riuer sent
from the thought with the voyce, as from his fountaine. For before the
thought can vtter any outward speech by meanes of the voyce, first
the minde must receiue the images of things presented vnto it by the
corporall senses.The degrees by which we come to ^^eech. And then hauing receiued them by the imaginatiue
vertue that is in it, reason must discourse to knowe and to consider
of them well, and to separate or ioyne things according to
that agreement or difference, that concorde or discord, which they
may haue amongst them. Next, it is necessary that iudgement should

follow this discourse, to make choise of, and to followe that which it
shall iudge to be meete and conuenient, and to reiect and shunne the
contrary. Lastly, all must be vttered by significations apt and conuenient
for euery thing: so that when the minde hath giuen ouer to the
office of the vocall instruments, that which it hath comprised and resolued
vpon in manner aforesaid, the same is manifestly declared outwardly
by the aire framed into voyce, I meane by the moouing of the
articulate and distinct voice, whereas before it was hid and couered.
Now when this voice and speach is pronounced with the mouth, as it
is inuisible to the eyes, so it hath no body whereby the hands may take
hold of it, but is insensible to all the senses, except the hearing, which
neuerthelesse cannot lay hold of it or keepe it fast, as it were with griping
hands, but entring in of it selfe, it is so long detained there whilest
the sound reboundeth in the eares, and then vanisheth away suddenly.
But albeit the sound and the voyce passeth so sodainely, as if
presently it flew away hauing respect to the outward speech, neuerthelesse
the internall speach remaineth, not onely in the spirite, heart,
and thought that ingendred it, not being in any sort diuided, cut off,
or seperated, but also it filleth all the hearers, by reason of the agreement
that is betweene the spirites and mindes of men, and the speach
that is bred there, and because it differeth not much from the minde,
and from the thought where it first beganne and was bred. And thus
the thoughtes and counsailes of the minde and spirite are discouered
and manifested by speach.What voyce is. So that al voice is not speach. For the
name of voyce generally taken comprehendeth all sounds and things
which bring any noise to the eares. Neuerthelesse it is more properly
and specially attributed to those sounds, which all sortes of liuing
creatures are able to make with their throat to signifie any thing therby.
But man onely hath articulate and well distinguished soundes:
vnto which, birdes of all other beastes approch neerest, so that euen
many of them are taught in some sort to frame mans voyce: but it is
without vnderstanding. And because that instruments of musicke do
after a sort imitate the distinct voyce of men, wee attribute voyce to
them: although the sounds which they make be more without iudgement
and vnderstanding then that of beasts.Speach representeth all the partes of the soule. But in men, voyces framed
into wordes are signes and significations of the whole soule and
minde, both generally and specially, namely of the fantasie and imagination,
of reason and iudgement, of vnderstanding and memory, of
will and affections. Wherefore it is an easie matter to iudge by his
speach howe all these partes are affected, namely, whether they bee
sound, or haue any defect in them. For if a man be dull witted, or

haue his fantasie and imagination troubled, and his memory slowe
and heauy, he shall haue much adoe to speake that which he thinketh
and conceiueth in mind, and haue as we vse to say, but a bad vtterance.
Which thing also may happen to good wits, either for want
of exercise and vse, or through some defect that may be in the body,
or in the instruments of the voice, or because the matter whereof they
speake may be profound, obscure, and difficult, so that a man cannot
easily find words fitly to expresse the nature of it, as the woorthinesse
thereof requireth. Which reason oft entimes maketh wise and skilfull
men slowe to speake, because they know what a hard matter it is
to vtter in good sort that which is to be spoken, in so much that they
had rather keepe silence, then speake ill or vnproperly. But a lighthead,
and a cocke-braine that is void of this consideration, wil thinke
hee hath a more ready wit. For he wil speake before he ponder or discourse
in his minde. So that whosoeuer hath not a ripe and stayed
reason, nor temperate and setled senses, hee can not haue his wordes
set in good order, nor his speaches well knit and agreeing one with
another, as we haue example heereof in children and fooles. And if a
man haue reason and iudgement ready at hand, but not stayed and pithy,
hee may well prooue some great babbling pleader, but not eloquent.
For hee onely is to bee accompted eloquent,Who is to be accompted eloquent. who can conceiue
well in his spirite and minde that which he ought to speake, and
then is able to expresse it well, both by apt wordes, and by sentences
that are well tied and knit together. We see then how the voyce and
speach of man lay open his whole heart, minde, and spirite. But the
voyces of beasts haue no significations but onely affections, I meane
such as are in men, and which the Grammarians call Interiections,
because they are not framed into speach, nor well distinguished as others
are. Nowe if wee vnderstand all these things well, they may
help very much to instruct and confirme vs in the doctrine of the Trinitie
of persons, of the Vnitie of the Godhead, and of the eternall generation
of the Sonne of God, who is his diuine and euerlasting
word. Likewise they will cause vs to conceiue more easily, how this
heauenly and eternall word, namely, Iesus Christ, is the Image and
Character of God, the expresse and ingraued forme of his person, as
it is in the Epistle to the Hebrews,Hebr. 1. 3. and not in shadow or painting. For
the glorie, maiestie, and vertue of the Father is alwaies hid from vs, but
only so farre foorth as it sheweth it selfe ingraued in his sonne and
in his word,Of the image of the heauenly word in the speach of man. as the image of the minde appeareth imprinted and ingrauen
in the speach that is vttered. And as the internall word bred in
the minde departeth not from it, neither is seperated, and yet it

imprinteth an image thereof in the mindes of the hearers, to whom
it is declared: so the diuine and eternall worde begotten of the Father,
is alwaye^ resident in God, and yet imprinteth his image in the
heartes and mindes of men, to whome it is manifested by those
meanes which hee hath appointed for that purpose. Thus you see a
gappe laide open into these high and great secrets of God, which wee
ought to marke well, following such phrases of speach as are taken
from humane things, and vsed by the spirit of God in the holy scriptures,
to the end wee might more easily vnderstand them. Wherefore
if there were no other reason, this were sufficient to induce vs to
consider more diligently the excellent worke, and great prouidence
of God, which appeareth in the framing of the voyce and speach of
man, and in the nature and vse thereof, and in those members and
instrumentes of the bodie, which serue to that purpose. Therefore
AMANA, let this matter be the subiect of thy discourse.


Of the agreement which the instruments of the voyce and speach
haue with a paire of Organes: what thinges are to bee considered
in the placing of the lungs next the heart: of the pipes
and instruments of the voyce. Chap. 14.
AMANA. When we consider diligently all the instruments created
by God in the body, as well for the ministery of the voyce,
as of speach, we shall finde amongst them all thinges requisite in the
best and most perfect instrument of musicke that can bee, to make a
good harmony: and we shall know, that no Organs are so wel made,
or disposed in such good order for the compassing of their sound and
melody, as the instruments of the voyce and speach of man are. And
by the consideration of this concordance, wee are admonished alwayes
to haue the same thing in the mouth which wee haue in the
thought, to the end that from such an agreement, as it were in euerie
part of an Organ and of an instrument of musicke,There must be an harmony betwixt the heart and the tongue. there should proceede
a good harmony and pleasant melody. For if there shoulde be
discord betweene the heart, the tongue, and the speach, the harmony
could not be good, especially before God the Iudge of most secret
thoughts, no more then the harmony of a musicall instrument quite
out of tune would be pleasant in the eares of men, and namely of good
Musicions, who can iudge best of concords and discords.
First then wee must note, that the breast, necke, and head are as it
were the instrument and the body of the Organs, within which they

are put and inclosed, and by which they are sustained: next, that the
lungs are as it were their bellows to blow them. Therefore it is made
of two pieces ioyned together, like to a paire of bellowes, to drawe in
and to thrust forth the aire, and to helpe eche other in respiration and
breathing. Wherein we must call to minde howe needeful it was, that
the backebone and breast, and the building of the ribbes shoulde bee
framed in that sort that we heard before, that they might serue to this
vse, and make roome for these bellows to inlarge themselues, and to do
their duetie.Of the nature of the lungs. Wee see also what their nature is, what motion they
haue, and from whence they receiue it. For God hath created them
of that nature, that they moue and remoue of themselues, by the vertue
of the soule and life in the body, without which they woulde bee
voyde of motion, and coulde not do their office, as we see in dead bodies.
And because the lungs are the bellowes that blowe winde into
the instruments of the voyce, without which it coulde not bee made,
therefore they are lodged next to the heart, so that they couer it, to
this end that men should be admonished, that their voyce and their
speach is the messenger of their heart:Why the heart and speach must agree together. and that for this cause the heart
and the mouth, and the voice and speach which proceede from them,
alwayes ought to consent and agree together. For it would be great
dissolutenesse, if the heart, which ought to be the originall and fountaine
of the speach, should thinke one thing, and the speach, which is
the messenger of the heart should vtter and declare another. For before
the tongue and mouth speake, or speach be framed in them, it
must first be conceiued and bred in the heart and minde, and then
brought foorth and pronounced by the tongue and mouth. Therefore
Elihu saieth to Iob,Iob 33. 1, 2, 3. I pray thee heare my talke, and hearken vnto all
my wordes. Beholde now, I haue opened my mouth, my tongue hath spoken
in my mouth. My wordes are in the vprightnesse of my heart, and my lips
shall speake pure knowledge. We see heere, how Elthu ioyneth the heart
with the mouth, the tongue, the palat and the lippes, all which are instruments
of the speach, as we heard before. Therefore there must always
be a good and general agreement betweene al these things. This
good co^cord beginning in our selues, according to euery mans particular
place, ought to stretch it self generally to al, that we may al agree
together, as the spirite of God so often exhorteth vs thereunto in his
holy word.Iam. 4. 11. psal. 12. 2. And therefore it calleth them, men of double hearts, and
double tongues, that are not vpright in heart, nor true and certaine in
word.Matt. 12. 34, 35. luk. 6. 45. Our Lorde saieth, that of the abundance of the heart the mouth
speaketh, and that a good man out of the good treasure of his heart bringeth
forth good thinges, and an euill man out of an euill treasure bringeth foorth

euill things. For as the tree is knowen by his fruite, so speach maketh
manifest both the heart and mind of a man. Therefore hee shall be a
great deale better knowen by his speach, then by the sight of his face.
For his face doth not so wel lay open to the eyes his heart, mind, and maners,
as his speach discloseth the^ to the eares: as we may iudge by that
which we learned to this effect in the former discourse. Therefore before
the bellows of the lungs blow to frame afterward voice and speach
in the tongue and mouth, the draught must be first drawne and framed
in the hart, that the tongue and mouth may represent and expresse
it afterward: otherwise they will speake to no purpose, but onely giue
testimony, that there is litle wisedome and vpright affection in the hart.
Hereof it is, that Salomon sheweth oftentimes, that a wise mans toong
is not lightly set on worke without the direction and counsaile of the
heart and mind, whose seruant and messenger it ought to bee: but a
foole powreth forth al his mind at once. For he vttereth al that commeth
in his mouth, and speaketh before he hath considered what hee
ought to say, so that his words are sooner spoken then thought vpon.
The heart of the wise guideth his mouth wisely,Prouer. 6. 21, 23, 24. and addeth doctrine to his
lippes. Faire words are as an hony combe, sweetenesse to the soule and health
to the bones. The wise in heart shalbe called prudent: and the sweetenesse of
the lippes shall increase doctrine.Prouer. 12. 13. A wise man concealeth knowledge: but
the heart of fooles publisheth foolishnesse.Prouer. 29. 11. A foole powreth out all his mind:
but a wise man keepeth it in till afterward. There are many such like places
in the Prouerbs, which I coulde alleadge to this purpose. And wee
know what is commonly spoken when a man speaketh of a good affection
and in trueth, that hee speakes from his heart: but if hee be
knowen to be a lyar, craftie, and deceitfull, we say that he speaketh not
from his heart. Which is as much as if one should say, that the same
thing is not in his heart, which he hath in his mouth. Although in truth
when those speaches are thought vpon before, such contrarieties are
found as wel in the heart as in the tongue and mouth. For if they were
not first in that, they would not be in the tongue, which is the messenger
of the heart. This is the cause of that double heart which we said
was in wicked, close, and disguised persons. You see then what wee
haue to note, both in regard of the bellowes that blow the Organs of
mans body, and also of the player that ought to blowe and direct them.
Now let vs speake of the instruments and pipes into which the winde
and breath of these bellows doth enter,Of the pipes and instruments of the voyce. and giueth motion and conuenient
sound to euery one of them. They haue bene named all vnto vs before.
Wherefore we haue to consider of that pipe which is called the rough
Artery or wind-pipe,Of the wind pipe which is made like to a flute, and in regard of the

matter, is of the nature of a gristle and of skin. It was necessary that it
should be of such matter, because it is to moue when it receiueth in, or
giueth out the aire, and to be inlarged or restrained as need requireth.
Needful therfore it was that it should be compounded of such skins as
are easie to moue, and to open* and shut, and which might serue for soft and
tender ligaments. And bicause the voice cannot be framed, if the aire
whereof it is made, be not beaten backe with some thing, it was in like
maner requisite, that some gristles should be mingled therewith, and
linked together: as it was needful for the eares to be made winding in,
that the aire might rebound the better, and receiue the sounds, as wee
heard before. For this cause it is called a rough artery, as wel in respect
of the matter whereof it is compounded, as of the figure. For it is
made after the maner of small circles and rings, placed in a ranke one
by another throughout the whole length thereof, like to the taile of a
Creuis: and that with such moderation, that it is thicke, slender, and
dri^, according as neede requireth to make the voyce of a reasonable
bignesse. If it be too drie, it malieth the voyce shrill and hard to bee
pronounced:From whence proceedeth the change of voice in sickenes. as experience sheweth in burning feauers, and in great
droughts. Againe, the pipe thereof is larger beneath then aboue, and
so lesseneth vpward where neede is, like to the pipe of a Bag-pipe, to
the end that the blast should neither be too slow and weake in ascending,
nor yet ouer hastie and ^odaine. For if it be ^lowe and languishing,
it will turne to wind without any noise and sound: and if it be hasty
and sodaine, it will breed sighes in stead of voyce: as it falleth out
to them that are diseased and weake whose breath is short, and to old
men, who haue small vertue of respiration, and much lesse of singing.
Therfore some expound that place of Ecclesiastes where it is said, that
all the daughters of singing shalbe abased,Eccles 12. 4. of the voyce of olde men, and
of the instruments which breede and pronounce it, and of their vertue
and strength: although others will haue it to be vnderstoode of the
eares. But it may be referred to them both. Now the principal instrument
of the voice is in ye head of the rough artery, namely in that place
which is commonly called the knot or ioynt of the necke,The Anatomists call it La^inx. or Adams
morsel, being fashioned likest to an Almaine flute. I abstaine fro^ speaking
more specially of the rest of these pipes and instruments, which are
only quils to receiue the blowing of the lungs, as also of the 3. gristles,
which make the distinction of the voice, and namely that in the midst,
which informe, is like to that end of the bag-pipe that is put into the
mouth, or like to the lips of certain pots made to powre out wine, or of
offe pots and such like things, as we may see in Apothecaries earthen
pots.

Besides, in the midst of that gristle, there is a deepe slit or cleft called
glottis, that is, a litle tongue, because it is the proper instrument of the
voyce, and hath both the sides inlarged or closed vp by muscles proper
to that vse and purpose. As touching the gristle before, it is fashioned
like to a litle shield, so that a man may both see and touch it in the neck.
That which is behind, is of the fashion of a ring which is put vpon the
thumb. And as these gristles are dilated and opened, or pressed and shut
by their muscles, especially both the sides of that cleft whereof I spake
euen now,How the voyce is made great or small. so do they make the diuersities of voices. For as when they
are opened, they make the voice big and obscure, as it were the base
in singing: so contrariwise when they are pressed, they make it small,
cleere, and shrill, like to the countertenor: and as they are more or
lesse restrained or opened, so they make diuers notes of the voice, as
the tenor, the meane, and such like. And because the pipes cannot make
this variety of voyces in this cleft, therefore there are chinkes which
serue for the same purpose. In this sort then, this instrument of ye voice,
which is placed in the top of the Artery and called Larinx by the Physicions,
being aided by gristles and their muscles, and by that litle
tongue whereof I spake not long before, together with these chinkes,
frameth of it selfe as many sundry voices and notes, as al the pipes and
flutes of a paire of Organs being set together, and furnished with all
sortes of pipes,A testimony of the prouidence of God. both great, small, and meane. Wherein wee see a
wonderfull prouidence of God, whether wee consider the instruments
named by vs, or the place that containeth them. For the arterie,
which commeth vp from the lights to the throat, occupieth but
one part of the necke: and yet it doeth as much alone, taking it
whole with the other instruments of which I haue spoken, as a whole
paire of Organs. For in a paire of Organs there must be many pipes,
some great, some small, and others of a middle sort that are greater
or lesser as it falleth out, according to the diuersity of notes for which
they are made, because they can not be either inlarged or restrained,
ope^ or shut, but as they are first framed. Therfore there needeth as many
of each sort as the parts of Musike are diuers, and as there wanteth
variety of notes to fill euery place and to furnish both the base and the
meane, the tenor and the counter^enor. But, as might be gathered
by our speach, the pipe and instrument of the voyce is made of such
a fashion, that when a man is disposed, he may inlarge it for the base,
and then restraine it for a countertenor, or else open and shut it in
middle sort either more or lesse to make the tenor or the meane, and to
cause the voice to ascend and descend according to those notes and tunes
which he would haue it make, and that by the meanes before touched.

The like may be done in speach. For as euery one is disposed to lift vp
or to depresse his voyce, to inlarge or restraine the pipes and instruments
thereof, he may speake either higher or lower, bigger or smaller,
or clearer, and set what sound, tune, and accent he please vpon the
speach, which he will pronounce. Wherefore we may very well say,
that euery one carrieth about with him and within him selfe very
faire and strange Organes,Faire Organs within euery man. vpon which he may play at all houres at
his pleasure, either in singing or speaking: yea they are so whole and
perfect, that they want neither the bellowes, nor the crosse-beame,
nor the cordes, nor the hollownesse for sound, nor the seate, nor the
postes, nor the porters, nor the bearer of the keyes, nor the table
whereon they are set, nor the Organ pipes. For al this is in a few small
instruments which discharge their dueties, yea they are more perfect
in man then in any artificial Organs. And if any Organ-maker could,
I will not say make such, but onely counterfaite them, and make as
many sundry sounds and tunes with one pipe, as others do with many,
all men would greatly admire such a workeman and his worke, especially
Organists and Musicions that vnderstoode the Arte of Musicke.
How much more then ought wee to admire that great and diuine Organist,
that hath made those goodly Organs of mans body, and giuen
them such a good sound? And how greatly ought wee to desire, that
we may be the true temples of God, and good Organ players therein,
to cause these faire Organs to sound againe, and to sing and preach
his praises by them? For I doubt not but that these are the true Organs,
whereby he will be praised and glorified by vs. But there is yet
a great deale more to be considered of this matter, of which both this
and the former discourse hath bi^ made. For these Organs being prepared
as I haue set them in sight, haue nothing more then the sound
of the voyce, as it were an instrument without speach. Wherefore we
must now make a speaking instrument, which hath not his like neyther
in all the workes of nature, neyther in all humane and artificiall
workes. This Arte and office belongeth properly to the tongue, of
whose nature and vse, and of the excellencie, and vtilitie of the Art it hath,
which is speach, thou ARAM shalt giue vs some profitable instructio^.


Of the tongue, and of the nature and office thereof: of the excellencie, and
profite of speach which is the Arte of the tongue: what is to be considered
touching the situation thereof in the head, and neere the
braine. Chap. 15.
ARAM. The Ancients being desirous to extoll eloquence very
much, propounded the image of an Orator, as it were of one that

spake of gold,The praise of eloquence. who in speaking drew out a golden chaine, which comming
from his tongue was fastened to the eares of a great many men
that heard him, whereby he drew and led them after him whither he
would. Thus they compared the speech and eloquence of an Orator
to a chaine of golde, because of the vertue and power which it hath
with men, being able to keepe and stay them, to moderate their affections,
and to guide and gouerne them easily without force and violence,
as if one should leade them tyed with a chayne, whome they would
voluntarily follow not being constrayned, but onely of their owne
good will, which neuertheles should be so drawen that it coulde not
resist. As indeed that perswasion which proceedeth fro^ speech draweth
the willes and affections of men, with a sweet and pleasant kind of
violence, which they follow with great desire, and cannot gaine say it.
Now this arte and office belongeth properly to the tongue, of which
we are now to speake.
The tongue then is a fleshy and muscly member,The description of the tongue. but soft and like to
the substance of a tad-stoole, being full of sinewes, arteries, and veines.
For it had need haue good store of sinewes, both because of those sundry
motions which it hath necessarily, as also for the sense of taste and
of touching, which agree to the nature thereof. Likewise it had need
of many arteries, that so it might haue great abundance of spirite and
heate, by reason of the diuersitie of motions which it hath. And to the
end it should not want nourishment, it hath in like maner great plentie
of veines: and that it should not drie vp through continual mouing,
it hath humidity to wet and moysten it.Of spittle, and the profite thereof. Whereupon we ought to note
well the prouidence of God in this, that although spittle be but an excrement
and superfluitie, which partly distilleth from the braine into
the throate, and partly is sent vp thither from the boyling stomacke,
yet it is not vnprofitable, because it wetteth and moysteneth the
tongue. For being very drye it is more slowe in mouing, as wee see by
experience in them that are subiect to great drought. Therefore God
hath prouided a remedie for that inconuenience, by meanes of two
fleshie kernels like to sponges, on eache side one at the roote of the
tongue, which are commonly called Almonds, because they are fashioned
like vnto them: these through passages ordayened for that
purpose, moysten all partes of the mouth. Moreouer, the tongue is tyed
to a forked bone with many muscles by two branches, which holde
it vp as it were two neere pillars, and that with such a counterpoyse,
that it can moue and remoue it selfe equally on eche side. For if it were
tyed by one branch only, it could not keepe it selfe vpright, but should
go crossewise only from one side. But God hath prouided very wel for

that: and if wee did knowe and consider it well, we are admonished
thereby,Our speach ought to be vpright. that speach pronounced by our tongue ought first to be wel
weighed as it were in a ballance, to the ende it decline not, or turne
on any side more then it ought, out hold it selfe vpright, and directly
followe reason. Moreouer, it can not easily be declared, by what
Arte the tongue stretcheth foorth it selfe so diuersly by the meanes of
muscles, and how it hath so many sortes of motions from all sides,
so ready, and so sodaine, and for so many things as it hath both to
speake and to doe.The profit of speach. But it is farre more difficult, yea impossible to tell
the causes, howe a man can by the tongue frame so many sortes of
wordes and so diuers, which are as it were the markes and paintings,
not onely of all visible thinges, but also of all things inuisible, and of
all the thoughts of man. For if wee woulde intreate of any matter
one with another, we knowe already by that which hath beene spoken,
howe it can hardly be done without speach, as also that we cannot
speake without certaine wordes and names to name and signifie
those things by, whereof wee minde to speake. For if wee haue no
wordes and names to make them knowen by, we must alwayes haue
the things themselues present, that wee may point at them with the
finger, which is impossible. And although it were so that wee had
them alwayes before our eyes, yet that were not sufficient. For wee
should be forced to speake to the eyes by signes, and yet wee coulde
neuer without comparison inuent so many signes, nor counterfait and
imagine so many thinges with all the senses and members of our body,
as the tongue alone woulde affoorde vs by meanes of speach. For
it giueth a name to euery thing. Therefore it is able to make the natures
of things knowen, and to set before vs as well things absent as
present, inuisible as visible, spirituall as corporall. In a worde, God
hath giuen this benefite to man, by meanes of the tongue and the
eares, that they can represent one to another, and cause each other
to knowe and vnderstand as well diuine things as humane. And although
God made this diuersity and confusion of languages amongst
men,Gene. 11. 7. to punish them for their arrogancie and ingratitude, neuerthelesse
hee hath so prouided for this euill, that hee hath manifested the
more his great goodnesse towardes them, and the riches of his eternall
prouidence, by that knowledge of so many sundry tongues
which hee hath giuen them,Actes 2. 3, 4. and chiefely that by them his Gospell
might be published. And if this benefite of God be worthy of great
admiration, ought wee not also to maruaile much at this, that such
a varietie of sounds proceeding out of the mouth of man,A miracle of letters. can be comprehended
in so small a number of letters, whereby so many sortes of

wordes, and such diuerse languages are expressed? By this meanes
also, wee see that speach, which can not bee perceiued by any of the
senses but by the eares, is made as it were visible, so that by the helpe
of Letters a man may speake to the eyes, and not see them, as hee
may also to the eares by meanes of the voyce. And although voyce
and speach flie into the ayre as if they had winges, insomuch that a
man can neyther beholde them with his eyes, nor smell them with
his nose, nor holde them with his handes, neuerthelesse speach is
kept still before the eyes, and may be called backe when a man will
by meanes of writing,The benefit of letters. and by the benefite of letters. Yea, it may be
sent to them that are absent, and as farre as one will, that they may
vnderstand it, euen to them also that are not yet borne. For wee see
how our predecessours teach vs after their death by their bookes and
writings, and howe by this meanes their wordes are not onely visible
vnto vs, but also as it were immortall. Wherefore the lesse we
can conceiue howe this may bee done by the tongue and by letters,
the more ought wee to wonder at this great worke of God in man,
praise him for it, and giue him thankes. Nowe albeit the eye of our
vnderstanding dazell, and can not wholy comprehend this worke of
God, neuerthlesse we see this well enough, that the tongue doeth
so helpe to frame the voyce into speach, and to make the diuersitie of
wordes whereof speach is compounded, as the hand and fingers of
the Organ-player who toucheth the Organs, and of the Musicion
that playeth vpon an instrument of musicke whatsoeuer it be, serueth
to cause the sound thereof to be heard. For although, when one
bloweth the Organs, the pipes thereof will yeelde diuers sounds and
tunes, if they be open, according as they are either great or small,
long or short, wide or narrowe, as we haue saide: yet these soundes
will be but confused, without harmony and melody, if the Organist
doeth not play with his handes, thereby to dispense as neede requireth
that winde and breath which is to be distributed into the pipes,
and if hee touch not the keyes of the Organs according to those tunes
and notes, which hee woulde haue the pipes to make, following the
Arte of Musicke. And this we may see yet more plainely in a baggepipe.
For although it soundeth by reason of the winde, within the
leather bagge, which receiueth and keepeth it as it were a little
sacke, yet it alwayes yeeldeth foorth but one sound, without distinction
and harmony, vntill the Minstrill play with his fingers vpon
the holes of the pipe that belongeth vnto it. Therfore as there is great
difference betwene a simple confused voice, and that which is distinct and

artificiall,The difference betweene voyce and speech. so is there betweene voyce and speech. So that when the
tongue hath receiued the winde and breath, which ascendeth vp from
the lunges by the rough artery, and is fashioned into voyce by the
meanes afore mentioned: then it formeth the same afterward into distinct
speech by such an arte and science, as none can vnderstande,
much lesse expresse it, but GOD onely, who hath giuen it to the
tongue, in which consisteth the chiefe dignitie thereof. For it is that
science, which is the mother of eloquence, which men haue in
such great admiration: and because of this, the artes of Grammer,
Logike, and Rhetorike haue beene published by the best learned
men. For all these three Artes are specially appoynted for
speech: the one to make it proper, pure and nete, namely, Grammer: the
other,The vses of Gra^mer, Logicke, and Rhetorike. namely Logike, to knit well together all discourses made
by speech, and all sentences in them, according as they agree among
themselues, depend and follow one another, and are grounded
vpon good reason: Thirdly, Rhetorike is ioyned vnto them,
to adorne and polish speech, to make it more significant and very
eloquent: so that whereas Logike maketh speech as it were a
simple picture, that hath nothing but bare draughts, which serue to
make it whole, and furnished in regard of euery part and lineament
thereof, Rhetorike maketh it not onely as it were a picture well
set foorthwith faire and liuely colours of all sortes, but also adorned
and enriched with goodly hilles and dales, and such like payntings,
that it may shewe better, and bee made fairer and pleasaunter
to beholde. Wherefore as there is great difference to looke vpon
betweene these two pictures, so is there of speech in respectes of the
eares, as it is propounded eyther more plainely and simply, or more
deeked and garnished. For this cause, seeing God hath vouchsafed vs
so much honour as to giue vs speech, especially to prayse and glorifie
him with our tongue, and to benefite the common societie of
men, we must not be content onely to speake, but we must studie to
speake well, in fit termes, and wisely, to the glorie of God, and to the
good and profite as well of our selues as of them that heare vs. This
cannot be done but by the knowledge of God and of his word, without
which all the Logike and Rhetorik of men is but vaine babbling.We ca^not speake wisely without the knowledge of God and his worde.
But when the one is ioyned with the other, and the artes that teach men
to speak elegantly are appliedto this purpose, then is ye vse therof very
good and worthy of great co^mendation. Therfore we must all acknowledge
our selues to be as it were Organ-pipes, hauing of our selues neither
sound, nor voyce, nor tongue, nor mouth to speake of God, and of
his works as we ought, and to praise and glorifie him, but only so farre

foorth as hee being the Organ-player bloweth within, and inspireth
vs by his holy spirit, giuing vnto vs wisedome and tongue and mouth,
and vertue in speaking. Now heere wee must not onely call to minde
what we haue already spoken of the causes, why the lungs, which is
one chiefe instrument of the voyce, and without which it cannot bee
made, is placed so neere the heart, but also wee must consider howe
neere the tongue, and the other instruments of voyce and speach next
vnto it, are vnto the braine, wherein is the principall seate of the spirit,
and which is chiefly assigned to the minde of man, and to that part of
his soule that is most diuine.Why the tongue is placed neere the braine. For seeing God would haue the tongue
to be the messenger, and as it were the Interpreter of the spirite and
minde, and of all the thoughts thereof, that men might teach one another
both the knowledge of God his worship, and of all other good
things, and seeing hee would haue speach to be the bond of humane
societie and of that communication, which men ought to haue one
with an other, therefore it was very requisite, that being the instrument
of speaking it shoulde be neere the braine, which is the lodging
of all the internall senses, of which, if God will, wee will intreate
heereafter in their place. For as all the externall senses doe carry to
the internall, and the bodily to the spirituall, whatsoeuer they perceiue
by sense according to their nature and office, thereby to admonish
and instruct them, that they may thinke and iudge thereof and
lay it vp in memory: so the internall and spirituall senses carry the
same things afterward to the tongue, that it might declare and make
them knowen to those, vnto whome they would communicate their
minde and cogitation. Hereof it is, that the tongue is oftentimes taken
for doctrine, and for all speach both good and euill: in which
sence Salomon taketh it when he saieth, The tongue of the wicked shall perish.
And Saint Paul calleth speaking with the tongue,1. Cor. 14 2, 14, 15. when one vseth
spech that is not vnderstoode of the hearers: and speaking with the
spirite and with vnderstanding also, when such a language is vsed as is
vnderstoode of euery one, and which serueth to the edification of
them that heare it. Therfore the tongue must not stirre, nor the mouth
open it selfe to speake, before it haue receiued a commandement and
charge from reason,The mistresse of the tongue. which is the Lady and Mistresse thereof, to guide
and gouern it, whose messenger and seruant it is to giue notice of that
which the reason and minde would haue knowen. Wherefore it is very
conuenient that the lady and mistresse of the tongue shoulde haue
her lodging ouer and neere about her, and not to be farre from her, to
the end she forget not her selfe, nor attempt any thing without a commandement
from reason. So that as before wee gaue the heart to be

the gouernour, guide, and counsailour of the tongue: so nowe we appoint
the braine as lord and master thereof, to the end it should haue a
good guide both aboue and beneath it. For no member in al the body
hath greater neede.Iames 3. 6. Therefore S. Iames calleth the tongue a fire, yea, a
world of iniquitie, which defileth the whole body, and setteth on fire the course
of nature, and is set on fire of hell. Such are the fruits of an vnbridled tong
that is misled and ill gouerned: as co^trariwise it is an excellent treasure in
man, when it is moderated and vsed wisely and soberly, and in time and
place conuenient as need requireth. For al these things God giueth vs
good instructions in the matter and composition of this member. For
first, he doth not content himselfe in giuing to man but one only tong
for so many offices as are assigned vnto it, whereas many other members
are double, and yet serue chiefly but for one thing: but also hath
made it tender, soft and pleasant, and tied it fast with many bands, as it
were so many small cords and threeds, to restraine and bridle it, to the
end it should not runne ouer or be too forward, and that it should not
bring forth bitternes in steade of sweetenes, nor pricke and hurt any body.
Therefore it is made blunt on euery side, not sharpe or forked, like
to the stings of scorpions and other venimous beasts. Moreoure it hath
the gummes and teeth, with which it is enuironed and closed in on euery
side as it were with a quick-set, and with a strong rampire to keep
it fast shut within the bounds and limits therof,Why the tongue is so fashioned and fenced on euery side. as it were within a caue.
Besides, it hath lips as it were gates to open vnto it, or to shut it vp and
muzzel it, lest it should take too much licence. Therefore seeing God
doth gard the tong so on euery side, he giueth men to vnderstand that
they ought not to abuse it, and teacheth them what care they ought to
haue of this litle member, seeing that of al the outward me^bers, none is
so hid, couered, co^passed about, and locked vp with such a naturall couering
and inclosure, as that is. And to end our speach, we know, that whe^ ye
heart and mind, which ought to be ye guides and gouernors of the tongue,
shalbe reformed in puritie and true knowledge of God by his grace,
there wil be nothing but good speach and all truth in the tongue, to the
setting forth of the glory of his diuine Maiesty, and to the profit of euery
one according to the duetie of true charitie. But if the mind and
heart be euill, and blinded with errour and ignorance, they will bring
forth like fruits and speeches. Nowe hauing discorused at large of the
first office of the tongue, which consisteth in framing of the speach, we
must consider of the other two vses thereof, which are in tasting, and in
preparing meat that is chewed in the mouth for the nurishment of the
body. Therefore, thou shalt begin, Achitob, to discourse of these two
offices, and of those instrume^ts, which serue the tongue to this purpose.



Of the office of the tongue intasting, and in preparing meate for the
nourishment of the body: of teeth, and of their nature and office:
of the conduite or pipe that receiueth and swalloweth downe
m^^tes. Chap. 16.
ACHITOB. The more we consider the worke and prouidence of
God in the composition of mans body, the more wee shall maruaile
at it, and daily finde therein new matter and occasion to glorifie
his name. Before we considered therof, as of the frame of a house: now
we shal see it as it were a towne or city that hath Milles and Ouens, and
Artificers of all arts and occupations. And, which is more wonderful, we
shall perceiue such industry in many of the members, that oftentimes
one alone will serue for many offices,One member may se^ue for many offices. for the due performance whereof
mans reason woulde require many members: and yet God hath so
well prouided therefore, that one alone doeth better discharge them,
and with lesse trouble then many together could doe. Which may euidently
be knowen by those vses and offices of the tongue, whereof
we are yet to intreate.
One, and that the chiefest reason why the tongue is fitly placed in
the head neere the braine, was declared vnto vs in the former speach:
now we must note others, especially why it is necessary that it shoulde
be in the mouth, as likewise in the head. For the tongue could not
haue satisfied any one office committed vnto it, if it had bene placed
barely and openly in the face, as the eyes, nose, or eares are. And seeing
it was requisite to haue it couered, it could haue no better couering
then the mouth,Why the mouth is the fittest place for the tongue. as may be prooued by many reasons. The first
is, that seeing it is the instrument of speach, which must be holpen by
many other partes to haue it well framed, as we heard before, it was
to be lodged in a place where it might haue neare at hand all instruments
needefull for that seruice. Nowe this vse of speach is proper to
the tongue of man onely, and not to that of brute beasts: but to the
other twaine following, are common to man with beasts, namely the
sense of taste, for which God hath appointed both that and the palat:
for which cause it was requisit also that it shoulde be neare the braine,
and in the head, as the other instruments and members of the senses
are, as also in the place appointed for this preparation of bodily foode.
For it must first iudge of tastes and discerne between good and bad meat,The officer of the tongue.
and betweene good and bad drinkes, to the end, that whatsoeuer is
good for the nourishment of the body, may be kept, and that which
is bad, reiected: and that afterward, which is the last office, it may
help the teeth and mouth to chew the meat, and so to swallow it down.

For the iawes and teeth are as it were the stones of the mill, which
serue to prepare the meate for all the body. Wherefore as there are
two stones in euery mill, namely, one beneath, which abideth alwaies
stedfast, and turneth no way, and another aboue, which alwayes turneth
about to bruze and grind the graines of wheat that are between
them:Of the mill of mans body. so in the mil of mans body there are two iawes like to two milstones,
of which the one is alwayes firme, and the other mooueth. But
there is this difference betweene these and milstones, that the neather
iawe onely mooueth, which is true, not onely in man, but also in all
other liuing creatures, except in the Crocodile, who in this poynt
quite differeth from all other liuing creatures that haue iawes and
teeth. Nowe God hath so appointed this motion of the milstones of
mans body not without good reason. For seeing the braine is so neare,
and that there are so many goodly members in the head aboue the
vpper most iawe-bone, it were to be feared, that the continuall and
great moouing thereof would shake them, and bring them into some
inconuenience. And that the iawes might bruze and breake whatsoeuer
is put betweene them, as the stones of the mill grinde the graines
of corne, the teeth are planted in them to serue them in this worke.
And in steade of winde or water, which driue artificiall milles about,
this naturall mill of which we speake, hath his muscles and sinewes to
mooue it, and to set it aworking when neede requireth. For this
cause Salomon, meaning to shewe the defect of teeth in olde age, and
what small strength olde men haue to chew their meate,Eccles. 12. 3, 4. saieth, that
the grinders shall cease because they are fewe, and the doores shall be shutte
without by the base sound of the grinding. These doores are the lippes,
because they serue the mouth, and the mill which is within them.
For we vnderstand by the mouth, all that is from the lippes vnto the
throat and winde-pipe, wherein not onely the mill of mans body is
contained, but also as it were a part of the bake-house, in which the
meale that is grinded is to be kneaded, and so made ready for the ouen,
that afterward it may be baked in the stomacke, which is as it
were the ouen and kitchin of the whole body to dresse meate for it,Of the kitchin of the body.
wherewith all the members thereof are to bee fedde and nourished.
For foode can not nourish the body if it still continue such as it is put
into the mouth, vnlesse it bee better prepared and dressed in such
sorte, that it may easily bee turned into the substaunce of the body
that receiueth it. As then iawes and teeth are the mill and milstones,
which bruze and turne to meale the wheate that is put betweene
them, that is to say, all kindes of meates, both hard and tender,
for the nourishing of the bodie: so we may say, that the tongue

in this respect playeth the miller, and serueth in stead of a hopper, into
which those graines that otherwise would skatter from betweene the
milstones are put that they may be ground. For when the meate falleth
on any side from betweene the teeth, the tongue serueth to send it
backe againe, that it may be well chewed, and not auoyde the grinding
of the iawes and teeth. Thus wee dayly come to greater knowledge
of strange instruments in the body of man. For we heard before
what Organs and what kinde of musicall instrument God hath made
in him for the voyce and for speech: now wee may see how there are
within him, a mill and a miller, a bakehouse and a kitchin. Hereupon
we ought to thinke, that the Master and Maker of these, hath not created
them that they should be idle, as though he had giuen them nothing
to grinde, or to bake. For he is no such workmaster as to make any
woorke, and not to set it a woorking, or to leaue it vnfurnished of
things necessary: neither any such master or Lord, but that he can casily
doe it.God ministreth food to all creatures. Wherfore although there are as many of these milles and ouens,
as there are not onely reasonable creatures, but also beastes, and
although he hath vndertaken to maintaine them alwayes, euen from
the creation of the world vntil the consummation thereof, yet hee neuer
wanted matter to set them on worke when it pleased him. Hereby
we may know whether we haue a rich father or no, and what cause we
haue to feare that he will leaue our milles and ouens emptie, although
we had many houses full of them, as in deed we haue in our selues, our
wiues and children, so long as we acknowledge him to be such a one,
and that we yeeld obedience vnto him, as becommeth his children. But
we haue further to note, that as our mill is not without a Miller, and
such tooles as are necessary for him, so the Ouen and Kitchen haue
their Baker and Cooke. For first, the teeth doe not onely serue for a
mill, but they discharge some part of a Cookes office, because the
more they chop the meate, and chew it well, it is the better prepared
for the stomack to bake it so much the sooner. Therefore we say commonly,
that the first preparation and digestion of meate is made in the
teeth. For this cause God hath giuen a great number of them to man,
and hath made them of bone, and distinguished them into sundry
sorts, according to that office whereunto he hath assigned euery one
of them.Of teeth, and of theirs diuers kindes. For right afore there are foure aboue, and as many beneath,
that are broade, sharpe, and cutting, which are called Incisorie teeth,
because they are apt to diuide and to cut the meate as a knife doeth:
and these haue but one roote. Then there are other twaine on each
side, commonly called Dogge-teeth, because they resemble the teeth
of dogges, which are broade towardes their roote, but sharpe and

poynted aboue: and these also haue but one roote of a reasonable
length. Their office is to breake the meates and other things, which
by reaso^ of their ouer great hardnes could not be cut by the first. Next,
the other teeth are appoynted to bruze very small those meats, which
haue alreadie passed through the former, euen as milstones bruze
wheate. Therefore they are sharpe, broade, hard, and great, and haue
more rootes then the other. And because of the similitude which they
haue with milstones, they are called by the same name both of the
Grecians and Latines, as also iaw-teeth and grinders. All teeth are planted
in the iawe-bones by meanes of the gummes, beeing fastened
within them as it were nailes, so that they cannot easily bee moued,
shaken, or plucked out. And although bones naturally haue no feeling,
yet teeth are very sensible, by reason of certaine braunches of
small soft sinewes which enter into their substance. For this feeling
is necessary for them, both because they are bare and not couered
with flesh as other boones are, as also for the meates sake and for i^ste^
as they that in some part are seruiceable to the taste, aswell as all the
other partes of the mouth. Thus you see how the teeth serue at one
time both for a mill and a cooke, together with the tongue and the
rest of the mouth.The tongue like to a baker. Againe, the tongue serueth for a baker, hauing
this office layde vpon it, to gather the meate together after it is well
grounde and chewed, and to fashion it round like to pilles or small
loaues that are yet but dough, to this ende that it may with more
^ase be swallowed downe. Wherein it dealeth like a baker, who
first fashioneth his bread into loaues. Next it playeth the part of a baker
and of a peele both together, as that which setteth in the meate,
and causeth it to descend into the stomacke, which is the ouen wherein
it must bee baked, that afterwarde it may nourish the whole bodie
For this cause it was necessarie that the tongue both in breadth
and length, should bee answerable to the whole mouth in such sort,
that it might touch all partes of it to discharge so many offices. Wee
see then that mans bodie is not onely like to such a frame of a
house as wee considered of before, but also like to a great Citie,
wherein there are milles and Ouens, and Artificers of all occupations.
Now vpon this that hath beene discoursed touching this last vse
of the tongue in preparing and swallowing downe meate, wee must
further note, that as there is a pipe that reacheth from the lungs vnto
the mouth for respiration; and for the breath of the voyce, as hath
beene declared vnto vs: so there is another from the stomacke vnto
the same place,Of the Gullet or We^^^^d. properly calle the Gullet, which the Physicions

commonly call by the Greeke name (...): whose office is to cary
the meates and drinkes into the stomacke. And as the other pipe is
in the former part of the necke, that it may goe right to the mouth
to drawe in the aire, so this second is behinde in the necke, that it
may keepe more heate, in it, and it is longer then the first: Neuerthelesse,
many thinke that there is but one pipe for bruath and for
meate and drinke: as there are some also, who albeit they know
well there are twayne, yet they suppose that the one is for meate,
and the other for drinkes, that the lightes also might bee moystened
thereby. Yea, there haue bneene skilfull and great Philosophers,
who seeme to haue beene in this errour, or at leastwise
haue disputed thereof. But because GOD hath so distinguished
these passages, and that the first is the breathing pipe, for the reason
vttered before, this excellent Woorkemaster hath made another
litle instrument,Of the Epiglt or litle tongue. called Epiglot by the Physicions, made of a
grictly matter, reasonable harde and fashioned like to a little
tongue that is of a triangle forme, or like an (...) leafe. This instrument
serueth to couer the pipe for breath, at the very toppe of
Larinx, as it were a couer of a potte. It serueth the pipe to this vse,
not to keepe euery thing out of it, but to suffer no meate or drinke,
or any other thing to enter in in any such quantitie as might hinder
breathing and respitation. For a litle thing will stoppe a mans
breath and strangle him, as appeareth in those whome Histories
affirme to haue beene strangled, some by a litle haire, others by a
stone of a grape, some in supping vp milke, and others by such
like tirfles. Yea, many times wee haue experience of this pevill when
wee eate and drinke, if neuer so litle ineate or drinke enter into this
passage.Good lessions for euery one. Therefore God teacheth vs two things thereby: the first is,
vpon what assenderthreed our life dependeth, seeing so litle a matter
is sufficient to depriue vs of it. The other is, to admonish vs how quier
and sober we ought to be in eating and drinking, not glutton like;
and alsoin speaking, when we take our refection. For then is the danger
greatest, if wee speake whilest wee eate: because wee cannot
speake without voyce, not haue voyce without breathing nor breath
without opening this litle couer. And because the breathing pipe
is formost, the meate and drinke must needs passe ouer this litle tongue,
as it were ouer a litle drawe bridge. So that if this small couer were lift
vp and opened, in stead of going beyong the pipe of breathing, it
would enter into it. But it most not bee so fast shut vp, but that breath
may alwayes issue out, and that some thinne humour and liquor may
enter in, to moysten and supple both the arterie and the lungs: otherwise

potions appointed for that purpose by the Physicions, were vaine
and vnprofitable. Hauing nowe spoken sufficiently of those instruments
which are seruiceable to voyce and speech, and of all the proper
offices of the tongue, it wilbe thy part, ASER, to morrow, to take in
hande againe, and to pursue our matter of the senses, and of their instruments,
and first to instruct vs what the sense of taste is, and what
the palat is that serueth it.

The ende of the second dayes worke.


THE THIRD DAYES
worke.

Of the sense of taste giuen to the palat: what tastes are good to nourish
the bodie: of the diuersitie of them: of hunger and thirst, and of
their causes. Chap. 17.
ASER. It is wonderfull that God causeth all things
whatsoeuer they be to serue his worke in such sort,
that nothin is in vain, idel or vnprofitable: wherof
we haue alreadie seene many testimonies in our
former discourses of the least partes of the bodie.
But which is yet more woonderfull in his prouidence,
hee hath created, made and disposed nothing
throughout all nature without great order, excellent measure,
and modration in all things: which gaue occasion to the first Philosophers
to call the whole frame of the world, Mundus, which is as
much to say, as an Ornament, or a well disposed order of all things. Whereby
God would haue vs especially learne to knowe, how greatly order
pleaseth him, and how he abhorreth all disorder and confusion, and
how greatly he desireth, that men after his example, should obserue
measure and moderation in all their workes. Hereof wee may haue a
goodly instruction in this place, if we consider how all the senses, and
namely, the taste with those sauoury relishes that agree with it, receiue
their strength, vertue and nature from all the elements, according to
that agreement, which their nature and offices have with them: as also
what pleasure wee take in the relish of all things, when it agreeth
with our taste: and contrariwise how it troubleth vs, when it is vnpleasant
and not agreeable to our taste.

Yesterday we discoursed of the corporall senses, and of their members
and instruments: whereupon we spake of the tongue, both because
of the agreement it hath with the eares by reason of speech, as also
because it is the instrument of taste together with the palat,What the palat is. which
is the vpper part of the mouth, made like to a pretie vaute, and to a little
heauen.Iob 12. 11. and 34. 3. Therefore Iob said, Doeth not the eares discerne the wordes,
and the palat tastemeate for it selfe? And again, The eare trieth the words,
as the mouth tasteth meate. The sense of taste then is that sense, whereby
the mouth iudgeth of all kindes of tastes, which are many in number.
And this is a notable gift of God,Of the prouide^ce of God in the varietie of tastes. in that he hath giuen such relishes
to meates and drinkes, whereby not onely men, but also all liuing
creatures can presently know by their taste what things are good
to eate and drinke, and what are otherwise. For if God had not giuen
the sense of taste to all liuing creatures, that they might iudge thereby
of all meates and drinkes, what would their life bee? But wee are to
know this thing further, that men iudge by their taste, not onely of
such things as may serue to nourish them,The sence of taste necessary for Physicions. but also of medicines. For
Physicions knowe the qualities of herbes and simples more by their
taste, then by any other sense: afterward by this knowledge they iudge
easily of their natures and proprieties, and for what remedies and vses
of physicke they wil serue. Therefore this iudgement of the taste is very
necessary for the life of man, especially for the nourishment of all
litting creatures: because all things which the earth bringeth foorth
are not good to feede them. For some things are diuers from nourishment,
as earth, clay, wood and stones: other things are altogether vnsauery,
and haue no taste, and some haue but a very litle. But God hath
prouided a remedy for this, by the meanes of salt, and of sundry fortes
of sawces and spices, whereby they may be made to haue a pleasaunt
taste. There are some things also, which are cleane contrary, either by
reason of their euill taste, as gall and wormewood, or els because of the
hurt which they may bring with them, as those things that are venimous,
and very poyson. But God hath very well met with this inconuenience
both by this gift of the sense of tasting, and also by putting
into such things as might hurt either ma^ or any other liuing creature, a
certaine qualitie, which we call relish or taste, that is contrary and very
vnpleasant to the sense of tasting: as likewise hee hath giuen to those
things that are healthful and good to nourish, a relish that is agreeable
and pleasant vnto our taste. This is to be vnderstoode if our taste bee
not corrupted, either by sickenesse, or by some vnbrideled appetite:
the like is to be said of the spittle,Another vse of the spittle. which beside the vse before named,
hath this also, that it helpeth the taste. Wherefore if it bee already infected

with some euill taste, it will not well receiue others, but will
cause euerything to be of the same taste wherewith it is infected and
corrupted. Now those things are most sauoury, and haue the best relish,
that haue in them the best mixture of heate and moisture, which
two qualities make the relish of things, and without which we see that
all extreme colde and dry things haue no smacke or taste, as flaxe or
towe, and drye wood, or water that is very pure. In other thinges,
those that haue more moisture then heate, haue their taste lesse sharp,
so that according as heat and humidity are tempered together, the diuersitie
of tastes is framed. For if humidity doth not exceede and surmount
earthy drynesse, or both of them be consumed by heate, there is
no taste. So that as all bodily thinges are compounded of all the elements,
and differ one from another, according as they haue more or
lesse of the elements, so is it in tastes. For this cause this sense of taste
answereth to the element of water,How the senses agree with the elements. and holdeth most of the nature
thereof: as the sense of touching hath more affinitie with the earth,
to the ende it might agree better with those thinges that are to bee
felt thereby. For the vigor and sense thereof ought to be close together
and throughout, and such as taketh faster holde then any of
the rest. So likewise the sense of sight agreeth with the fire, and
that of hearing with the aire, as wee haue alreadie touched it.
And as for the sense of smelling, it agreeth both with the fire and
with the thicke ayre, because smelles are stirred vp by heate, as
smoke is by fire, which afterwardes are by the meanes of the ayre
caried to the sense of smelling, whereof wee will speake heereafter.
But let vs goe on with our discourse of tasting, and of such things as
are apt to nourish the body. For wee cannot liue without the helpe of
many things: amongst which, meates and drinks are chiefest: because
that as hunger requireth meate, so thirst desireth drinke. Wee must
therefore vnderstand, that this soule and life which is called Vegetatiue
or nourishing, and which is common to man with all other liuing
creatures, hath two principall instruments in the body,Of heate and humiditie the preseruers of life. namely heate
and humiditie: of which, heate is first and chiefe, belonging properly
to the vertue of nourishing: next, humiditie is ioyned to heate,
that it may feede and preserue it. For life is preserued in the body
by heate, which is the chiefe instrument thereof: so that as soone as
heate is gone, it becommeth starke dead. And because this heate
would easily and quickly consume it selfe, if it were not nourished and
mainteined, moysture is ioyned vnto it in liuing bodies, as it were a
bridle to keepe it back, to the end that life might be prolonged, which

otherwise woulde faile presently after it were forsaken of heate, as
heate also would decay, if it were not nourished and preserued by humiditie,
which it necessarily requireth. For heate draweth humour
vnto it selfe, and sucketh and drinketh it vp: likewise humour refresheth
heate, and slaketh the vehemencie thereof: all which wee
may plainely see in a lampe. For let vs compare the light of a lampe
with life, and then let vs consider, whether this light can bee preserued
without fire, and whether this fire can continue any long
time and not bee extinguished, vnlesse it haue two thinges. The
first is matter, as namely the wieke of the lampe: which matter
cannot bee firme, if it haue no drynesse in it whereof fire may
take holde. For fire beeing hote and drie, cannot haue any fellowship
with coldenesse and humiditie, without some middle qualitie
agreeable to his nature. On the other side it will soone consume the
drie matter, on which it lighteth, if the vehement heate thereof bee
not abated and tempered by some humiditie, which both resisteth
the drynesse, and also by the coldenesse it hath, moderateth the heate
of the fire. Therefore wee see, that the matter of the wicke of a
lampe cannot continue long beeing once lighted, if it be not greased
with some tallowe, or some humide matter to preserue both that
and the fire of which it receiueth light. For when it is burnt out,
the fire also dieth with it through want of nourishment that might
mainteine it. But it is not ynough although the fire haue meet matter
to nourish it. For they must be so well wrought and mingled one
with another, that there bee neyther too much nor too litle of eyther,
but as much as neede requireth. For if there bee a great
deale of wieke and but a litle oyle and tallowe, it will endure so
much the lesse while: and if there bee too much oyle or tallowe in
respect of the wieke, it will slake the fire ouermuch, yea it may be
in such great quantitie, that it will put it quite out. But if due
proportion bee kept betweene the cotton and the oyle or tallowe,
the fire will preserue it selfe verie well, and giue a goodly cleare
light.A comparison betweene a lamp and mans body. The like is done in our bodies. For if they were without
naturall heate, there woulde bee no life in them: and if this heate
had not meete matter to preserue it selfe within them, it woulde
quickely bee extinguished. Nowe seeing it must bee nourished and
mainteined, this cannot bee done vnlesse it haue some solide and
firme matter, which cannot be consumed so quickly, but that it may
preserue it selfe sometime. Againe, forasmuch as there is no matter so
solide and firme, which is able any long time to resist the fire that consumeth
all, if the violence thereof be not moderated, this matter must

of necessitie be moistened. Here then the meate, which is most solide,
standeth in stead of match or weeke to this naturall fire, from whence
proceedeth life to the body: and drinks are as it were oyle in a lampe,
to moysten the meate, to the end that this fire should not consume it
so quickly. And because it must alwayes be kept burning, (otherwise
the light thereof, which is the life, will die together with it) it must
haue new matter continually ministred vnto it, as it were to a fire that
cannot alwayes continue kindled in the chimney and not goe out,
if it be not preserued by wood or coale, or in a candle or lampe, if it
haue not alwayes cotton, or weeke and oyle, or some other tallowy
and moyst matter. Therefore wee see that when either of them beginneth
to fayle, another is put in to supplie the place of it. And thus
as fire and the light thereof are mainteined in a lampe or candle by
meanes of that nourishment they haue both in the weeke and in the
tallow thereof: so life and that naturall fire which giueth life to the
bodie, are mainteyned by that food, which they receiue ordinarily
in eating and drinking. The meate then in mans bodie, is to nourish
and preserue the naturall heate thereof, as the weeke is in a candle
or lampe: and the moysture which it receiueth by drinke, is vnto
it as the ^oyle and tallowe.The causes of chirst and hunger. For this cause if heate bee stronger in a
man, he shall feele thirst, which is an appetite and desire of that which
is moyst and colde, that is, of such qualities as are contrary to the fire,
which is hote and dry. For the moysture must be confirmed and strengthened
to moderate the burning heate, as it is when oyle is powred
into a lampe. And if both heate and moysture consuming eche other,
beginne to waxe faint and to fayle, they must both bee holpen, that
they may gather more strength: as when we put not onely oyle, but
weeke also into a lampe. And this is the cause of hunger, which is a desire
of that which is hote and moyst. But there is difference betweene
the humiditie required in hunger, and that which is required in thirst,
because the moysture desired in thirst is more thinne and lesse earthie,
then that which is required in hunger. And if the moisture be increased
ouer much, so that the heate decreaseth and languisheth, and consequently
the appetite to meate and drinke and to receiue nourishment,
decayeth, it must be restored againe by physicke. For although
all nourishment be as it were physick to the body,Of physicke, and the causes therof. neuerthelesse, there
is this difference, in that foode repaireth the whole person and all the
body, whereas physicke repaireth onely the instruments of the body,
which are to serue for nourishment. For this cause food is alwayes necessary
for all, at all times, and in all places: but besides that all stande
not in neede of physicke, they that want it, vse it but at certaine times

as necessitie requireth. For if those members that serue to nourish the
body be well disposed, and discharge their office so well, that all the
partes of the bodie receiue due nourishment, and the whole body bee
healthie and sound, there needeth nothing but ordinary foode to preserue
the body, and to keepe it in good health. But if any member be
weakened, and doeth not his duetie well, especially any of those that
ought to serue to nourish the whole bodie, it must be restored again to
strength by the meanes of physicke. Now albeit the sense of taste
whereof we haue presently discoursed, be not so apt to teach, especially,
the knowledge of spirituall and diuine things, as the senses of sceing
and hearing, of which we haue spoken heretofore: yet we may receiue
much good doctrine thereby. For as the body cannot liue except
it haue such corporall foode as agreeth to the nature thereof,Instructions from the sense of taste. so
the soule cannot liue if it haue not that knowledge, which God hath
appointed for it. And as life is kept in the body by heate, which is the
chiefe instrument thereof, to the life of our soules consisteth and is preserued
and increased by heate, namely, by the loue and charity of God,
without which it cannot liue that life that is agreeable to it owne nature.
For the soule that is separated from the loue of God, is dead
in respect of the true and blessed life, seeing God liueth not in it, nor it
in God. For this cause this loue must be alwayes nourished and mainteyned
therein by the celestiall and diuine moysture, agreeable to
the nature thereof. Wherefore as it is of a heauenly and celestiall nature,
so the foode thereof must be answerable thereunto. This foode
therfore cannot be had but of God, who is the life of the soule, as the
soule is the life of the body: and the meanes which he hath appointed
to minister this food vnto it, is his heauenly and eternall word, and those
spirituall graces which he communicateth vnto vs thereby. But let vs
follow our matter subiect of corporall senses. And seeing we haue intreated
of the meanes wherby the body is nourished, we ought to consider
more particularly of those things that are meet and conuenient to
mainteine and preserue the body of man, and see how God prepareth
them to this end: in which thou shalt instruct vs, AMANA.


Of helpes and creatures meete for the preseruation and nourishment
of the bodie: how God prepareth them to serue for that purpose: of
their vse. Chap. 18.
AMANA. God being carefull ouer the welfare of his creatures
that haue life, hath put in them a desire to preserue themselues,
to the ende they shoulde followe after such things as are profitable

for their health, and shunne that which is hurtfull and contrarie vnto
it.The equality of heate and moysture preserueth life. Nowe this preseruation consisteth eyther in the equalitie of heate
and moisture, nourishers of life, or els in an inequalitie that may
easily be reduced and brought to an equalitie by that which we eate
and drinke. For if there bee so great excesse of heate or moysture
that the one consumeth the other, death followeth necessarily: if there
be no excesse of either, but a good equalitie, the body is very well affected.
But it is very hard to finde a bodie so tempered. And although
such a one might be found, yet it could not long continue in yt estate,
but that it would quickly change, as we may iudge by that which we
haue learned in the former discourse. But when this change doeth
not bring with it so great excesse and inequalitie, but that it may
be kept vpright by nourishment, the body is neuerthelesse well disposed,
vntiil such time as the excesse is greater then can bee repaired by
foode. For then if foode will not serue the turne, wee must haue
recourse to physicke: and if the inequalitie be so great, that by the
helpe of physicke no remedie can be found, there is no other naturall
ayde to be had.
Nowe this inequalitie that approcheth so neere to equalitie,Of the inequality that is in the nature of the body. is
very pleasaunt, as that which is the pricke and procurer of naturall
pleasures, necessarie for the life of man to incite him to desire
them, and as it were the sawse to make them toothsome. For if
there were alwayes equalitie, wee shoulde neuer be affected with
hunger or thirst, nor with any appetite to eate or drinke. And if
this appetite were not, wee shoulde not haue those pleasures, which
wee receiue by meates and drinkes, and by their diuers tastes
and relishes. So that wee shoulde not haue such a notable testimonie
of the goodnesse and bountifulnesse of God towardes vs, and
of his care, as wee haue by the sense of taste which hee hath giuen
vnto vs. Wherein also he admonisheth vs in such sort of our mortall
nature through the necessitie wee haue of foode for the preseruation
of our life,A testimonie of the great prouidence of God. as that withall hee supplieth this want and necessitie,
that wee may the better know and taste the sweetnesse of his loue towards
vs. For, whereto would those creatures serue that are good for
our nourishment, if we had no vse of them? And how could wee vse
them, if we stood not in neede of them? Therefore seeing the matter
standeth thus, it appeareth euidently, that wee are nourished by such
things as are familiar and like to our nature, and are healed by things
contrarie to that which hurteth vs. For the nearer any thing approcheth
to our nature, the sooner it is conuerted into it. So that amongst
those meates that are familiar vnto vs, they nourish best

that draw neerest to our nature. For this cause babes newe borne that
are litle and tender, haue milke for their foode, which is very meete
for them by reason of the agreement that is betweene it and the
matter whereof their bodies are made.What meate is fittest for infants. For, as wee haue alreadie
heard, the milke is made of the selfe same blood wherewith they
were nourished in their mothers wombe, and whereof they were
before ingendred and conceiued: forasmuch as the parents seede, of
which they were framed, is deriued from their owne blood. Wherevpon
it followeth, that the matter of their bodies is of the same substance:
and so that food which draweth neerest vnto it, is most natural
and meete for them. For this cause we said before, that all things are
not seruiceable for meate, drinke and nourishment, but those only that
haue a nature agreeable thereto, and that for the reasons specified by
vs. Here then we must call to minde that which we haue already touched
elswhere, namely that seeing the body of man is compounded of
all the elements, it is therefore needfull that the nourishment wherewith
it is to be preserued and vpholden, should participate of all the elements,
to the end that all and euery part of a mans body should be maintained
and preserued by yt which is like to it selfe. Therefore God hath wel
prouided to this purpose, as we see in the matter wherof our bodies are
made. For we haue heard what differe^ce there is according to the sundry
parts and diuersity of members in the body: and yet the whole matter
of the^ all is taken from the substance of the same elements, and the
difference betweene them commeth of this only, that some parts participate
more of some elements,From whence commeth the different substance of our members. and others of other elements. Hereof it
is, that the hardest parts of the body, as the bones, are most earthy: and
so consequently of all the other partes, as they haue eyther more or
lesse of all the elements and of their qualities. For this cause all the
parts and members of the body must haue food agreeable to the nature
of the elements whereof they participate, according to the portion
of matter which is in euery one of them. Wherein we see a goodly
testimonie of the bond and agreement that is among all creatures, yea
in all nature it selfe, together with the correspondencie that euerie
creature hath with it like. Therefore if wee want ayre for breathing,
wee drawe it in euen as it is of it owne nature, together
with those qualities which it bringeth with it selfe. If wee desire
drinke, onely to refresh and to moysten the bodie and the meate it taketh,
pure water serueth that turne, which is common drinke for
all creatures, and sufficient for the whole life of man, although there
were no other.Men haue more varietie of drinks then beasts. But God hath giuen this aduantage to men aboue
beasts, that besides this drink co^mon to them both, they haue others,

not onely more pleasaunt to their taste, but also more forceable to
nourish them. For if the question bee of taking sustenance eyther
by meate or drinke, we must haue such meates and drinkes as are
more firme then the ayre and the water, and which are able to sustayne
the body according to it owne substance and nature. For as
the water and the ayre, whereof the bodie is made, could not consist
in the composition thereof, but woulde slide and fall away, if
they were not intermingled with some other matter that is more
earthie and solide, thereby to keepe and knitte them together: euen
so, if foode consisted onely in liquide and moyst things, that had no
other substance of more earthie and solide qualitie, in which the
vertue of heate might remaine, and which might bee conuerted into
the greatnesse and massinesse of the bodie, the liuing creature would
alwayes haue an appetite, and neuer leaue eating. Therefore God
hath so framed those creatures, which he hath giuen to man for meate,
that whatsoeuer is earthy therein doeth not still retaine the nature
of the earth, as if it were nothing but simple earth: and so likewise
that which is of the nature of fire, or of the water, or of the ayre:
but all is so well mingled and tempered one with another, that the
taste and sauour thereof is pleasaunt and fitte for all the partes of
the bodie, that are to bee nourished. And according as the qualities
of the elements are mingled one with another, so the meates
and drinkes compounded of them, haue their sundry tastes together
with their other qualities. For if God had not so prouided for
it, man could haue no taste therein: and if he tasted not, he would haue
no appetite, and so could neither eate nor drinke. And if hee coulde
neither eate nor drinke, he could not liue, as wee may iudge by that
which wee haue alreadie hearde.We must eate neither too much not too litle. Nowe as hee cannot liue without
eating and drinking, so it is requisite that he eate and drinke with that
moderation, that he take in no more meate and drinke then he ought
to doe. For if he take too litle, he cannot be sufficiently nourished: and
if hee take too much, instead of being satisfied, he shalbe burdened,
and in stead of preseruing his life, hee will kill himselfe. Therefore
it is verie necessarie that euery one shoulde alwayes obserue great
sobrietie, otherwise God will correct our riot, our gluttonie and drunkennesse.
But the danger that commeth by not keeping a mediocrity, is
a great deale more to be feared on the one side then on the other. For
there are but fewe that breake not square oftener in eating and drinking
too much then to litle. Nowe to ende this speech, wee haue
farther to gather such good instructions as all men haue in those
things which God hath giuen them for nourishment,The chiefe end of foode. yea in their

mouth also, to the end to render vnto him honour, glorie and prayse.
Whensoeuer beastes doe eate, their tongue serueth to feede them, no
otherwise then that of men doeth helpe them: but they prayse not
God with that tongue which serueth to nourish them, because he hath
not giuen them that gift of speech, wherewith he hath endued man,
and that for the cause which we haue already heard. For as a fountain
cannot be without a riuer, so a riuer cannot be without a fountaine. For
this cause seeing reason, of which God hath made man partaker, is as
it were a fountaine in him, and speech as the riuer that issueth from
it, the Grecians expresse both reason and speech with one and the
same worde, which Saint Iohn also vsed, when speaking of the Deitie
of Iesus Christ,Iohn 1. he said, In the beginning was the worde, and the worde
was with God, and that worde was God. For as all the woorkes of
God are perfect in their kinde, so hee maketh nothing without
cause, and which hath not his vse. So likewise he giueth nothing to
any creature, but withall he giueth the instruments and meanes which
it ought to vse, thereby to be made seruiceable as the thing it selfe
requireth. Heereof it is that hee gaue not speech to beastes, because
hee made them not partakers of reason, without which speech would
stande them in no steade: so that it woulde haue beene a superfluous
woorke of GOD. Therefore seeing it is so, God requireth not of
beastes that they should by speech praise him with their tongue, as
he requireth it of men, vnto whome hee hath giuen the meanes to
performe it. For beastes haue neyther reason to vnderstande what
is spoken, nor speech to vtter any thing thereby, whereas man hath
both the one and the other. He hath both the fountaine, and also the
riuer that runneth from it. Wherefore when hee sitteth downe to
meate, and whilest hee is taking his refection (to which vse his
tongue serueth him, according as we heard before) and when hee riseth
from table, truely he is much more brutish then any brute beast,
if with the selfe same tongue he doeth not prayse and glorifie God,
acknowledging as he ought the goodnesse of that celestiall Father,Vnthankful men are like to hogs.
that giueth him that foode, and that nourisheth him. If he doe otherwise,
hee looketh no more from whence the meate commeth vnto
him then doeth the hogge, who with his snowte alwayes towardes
the earth, feedeth vpon the akornes that are vnderneath the Oakes,
and neuer looketh or considereth from whence they fall. Yea, the
hogge doeth a great deale better discharge his duetie in praysing
GOD then such men doe, that eate and drinke as brute
beastes without giuing thankes to God for the benefites hee distributeth
amongest them. For hee prayseth God in his kinde, as all

other creatures doe in theirs, according as the kingly Psalmist testifieth
in many places of his Psalmes. Neither doeth God require
more of them then he hath giuen vnto them. But seeing he hath giuen
more to man then to all other visible and bodily creatures, he requireth
so much the more of him, and that very iustly. For as it is
written,Luke 12. 48. To whome much is committed, more shalbe demaunded of him.
Wherefore man is not onely too too inexcusable, but more vile and sauage
then any brute beast, if his tongue serue him no farther at the
table for the praysing of God thereby, then if (beastlike) his snowte
and nose were in a cratch or manger. For howe shall the foode in
the vse thereof bee sanctified by the worde of God and prayer, if
hee take it after that sort? And if it bee not sanctified vnto him by
that meane, as Paul teacheth, hee vseth it not as the childe of
GOD, but as a theefe and a very prophane man. For as Euery
creature of God is good when it is receiued with thankesgiuing,1. Tim. 4. 4. so it is
defiled to the filthie, not through any fault of the creature, but of
such as abuse it like to Infidels. But all they abuse it that giue not
thankes for it to the Creator.Food must be receiued with thanke^ giuing. Wherefore as euery thing is cleane to
the cleane, that haue their heartes purified by the worde of God
which they haue receiued by faith, so nothing is cleane to the defiled
and to infidels. But if these men of whome we speake, bee vnwoorthy
to be taken for men, yea, to be compared with hogges, then whom
they are much more vile and detestable, wee may easily iudge what
is to be saide of those that doe not onely not prayse God or giue him
any thankes, but which is woorse, blaspheme, and as it were despite
him in liew of recompensing him for the benefites they haue receiued
of him, which is vsually done by gluttons, drunkards, and swearers.
What shall wee say of such men, but that they deserue rather to
bee called madde dogges then men?Some more like to madde dogges then men. except wee had rather call
them children of the Deuill, whose instrument, tongue and mouth
they are. And as for those that cease not to prattle and babble about
vaine and vnprofitable matters, and that take delight in backbiting
and slandering euery one, wee may with good reason compare
their tongue to the clacket of a mill. For seeing euery one of
vs carrieth a mill in his mouth, as wee shewed before, these men
may truely boast that their mill is better furnished with all kinde
of instruments then others are. But they are not the more to bee esteemed
for that, but rather the lesse, for the reasons which wee
haue alreadie hearde. And when they adde to their clacking euill
speech and backebiting, infecting all tables where they come
with their tongue, they may well bee compared to dogges that doe

not onely barke but also bite. But it is time to draw the last draught of
the pensill vpon the face of mans bodie, by considering the sense of
smelling with the member that belongeth vnto it: wherein we looke
to be instructed by thee, ARAM.


Of the Nose, and of the sense of smelling, and of their profite
and vse: of the composition, matter, and forme of the Nose.
Chap. 19.
ARAM. Forasmuch as beautie is a grace that proceedeth of the
proportion, agreement and harmonie of things, it is then very
seemely in mans bodie,What beautie is, and wherein it consisteth. when it followeth nature onely, and is without
any blemish or defect. Nowe this beautie consisteth in soure
thinges, namely, in figure, in number, in greatnesse and in situation.
For the members of the bodie are well or ill coloured according
to the disposition of the matter. And the correspondencie of the
members one towardes another, aswell in the number, as in the
length and greatnesse of eache of them well compassed and
proportioned together, is one cause also of beautie: as likewise
the placing of euerie one of them in his proper place, most conuement
and agreeable to his nature and vse. For if any thing bee
wanting of all these thinges in any member of the bodie, there
is deformitie in stead of beautie.
But if wee consider onely the beautie of the head and of the face
thereof, whereof wee discoursed yesterday, wee shall not finde any
one member that hath not singular beautie in it, and that agreeth not
very fitly with the rest, being of so good proportion and measure, and
hauing such a great and excellent grace, that a man may truely say
that the whole woorke hath in each part thereof so great perfection,
that nothing can bee added or taken away, nothing can
bee wished to make it more faire, profitable, excellent or perfect
then it is in it owne nature. To the setting foorth of this beautie, the
nose, whereof wee are to speake, serueth very much, yea so much,
that hardly any member in all the face or head so disfigureth a man,
or maketh him more deformed then the nose, if it bee euill fauoured,
disfigured, or taken cleane away. But besides this beautie, which it
bringeth to a mans head, we are to knowe, that it is very seruiceable
to the whole bodie,The nose is very seruiceable to the braine. and chiefly to the brayne lodged in the top thereof,
as it were the Lorde and Master: that as it giueth motion and
sense to all the members, so it might bee compassed about with all the
senses, as it were with seruitours and men of garde. Therefore as it hath

neere about it, the eyes, eares, tongue, and palat, which are the instruments
of seeing, hearing and tasting: so the nose is needfull to serue the
sence of smelling. Neither is it placed so neere the sense of tasting
without the great prouidence of God.Why the sense of smelling is placed so neere to that of tasting. For there are many things in
nature, which if they be tasted onely are deadly, or at leastwise very
dangerous and hurtfull, as appeareth chiefly in thinges that are
venimous and poysonfull. For this cause, albeit the sence of smelling
bee not altogether so necessary for liuing creatures, namely,
for such as are most perfect, as the other sences, so that they may
more easily want it, neuerthelesse GOD hath giuen it them, to
the ende it might bee as it were a messenger to the taste to
shewe what is good for it and what not, and this chiefly for two
reasons. The first is, to keepe men from hazarding themselues
through an immoderate desire to eate and drinke, before they haue
discerned by the smell of such things as are to be taken, whether they
bee profitable or hurtfull for them. The second reason is, to take all
suspicion and feare from them, which otherwise might cause them
to abstayne from those thinges that are good and profitable for
them.Of the agreeme^t of these two senses. And therefore this sense of smelling is neerely conioyned,
and hath great agreement with the sense of tasting. For this is a generall
rule, that, albeit euery thing that smelleth well hath not alwayes
a good taste, yet whatsoeuer a man findeth good to his taste,
the same hath also a good smell: and contrariwise, that which is
founde to haue an ill relish, the same hath also the like smell. For
the taste and smell are giuen not onely for profite, but for pleasure
also and delight. Neyther doe those thinges which serue for delectation,
alwayes bring profite, but sometime the contrarie, principally
through their fault that knowe not howe to vse them moderately.
For they are so subiect to their pleasures,How men abuse these senses. that they can neuer
keepe measure in anything, as wee see by experience, especially
in these two senses of taste and smell. For as the ordinary meates satisfie
not the delicate appetites of men, but they must haue new dainties
daily inuented to prouoke their appetite further, and to cause
them to eate and drinke more then is needefull, to their great hurt:
so men are not contented with naturall odours which nature bringeth
foorth of it selfe, but nowe they must haue muskes and perfumes,
with infinite varietie of distilled waters and artificial smelles, in
regard of which, naturall fauours are nothing set by. And yet if they
were vsed with sobrietie, there were no cause of reprehension, seeing
all the creatures of God are good, if they be vsed moderately, and a
they ought with thankesgiuing. Heereof it is that they are oftes

mentioned in Scripture in the good part. And not to seeke farre off for
examples,Iohn 12. 3. we haue the testimonies of the holy Eua^gelists, as our Lord
Iesus Christ himselfe, who was neither nice nor voluptuous, but the
perfect paterne of al sobriety and temperance, did not reiect nor condemne
pretious ointments and sweete odours, but sometime permitted
the vse of them vpon his owne person.How the spirites are res^est^ed with sweete odours. Moreouer, it is certaine, that
the animal spirites in the braine are greatly relieued and recreated by
those good and naturall smels that are conueyed vnto them by means
of the nose, and of the sense of smelling placed therein: as contrariwise
they are greatly offended by euill odours, yea oftentimes by artificial
sauours, which commonly cause rhumes, catharres, and great headaches.
For the spirits of the head are subtile, pure, and very neate, so
that sweete smelles are good for them, and stinking sauours contrary
vnto them. To this end therefore that the braine might receiue this
benefit of good odours,Of the diuers vses of the nose. God hath placed both the sense and instrument
of smelling so neare vnto it: the instrument to keepe and conuey
odours vnto it, the sense to discerne and iudge of them. Therefore this
sense of smelling hath some agreement both with the fire and with
thicke aire, because smels are stirred vp by heate, as smoke is by fire,
which are after carried by meanes of the aire vnto the sense, and receiued
and kept by the nose. Forasmuch also as the braine needeth aire
to nourish and preserue the animal spirites, the nose in this respect also
standeth it in great steade. Therefore God hath created it not only
to serue the sense of smelling, but also for respiration, that it should be
the principall pipe and passage, by which both the braine and lungs
may draw in or let out breath as neede requireth. For this cause the
braine doeth stretch out and restraine it selfe: and as by stretching
foorth it selfe it draweth in the aire by the nosethrilles, so by keeping
it selfe close together it retaineth the aire. And so the externall aire
being drawen in by the nosethrilles, is distributed by the cranies that
are open in the palat, in such sort, that the greatest part is drawen into
the lungs, and the residue goeth to the braine by the passages and holes
that leade vnto it. And although the mouth serueth also for respiration,
yet the nose is appointed more especially for that purpose, and is
much more fit and apte for the same. Therefore God hath giuen it
both matter and forme agreeable for that office.Of the matter of the nose. For first concerning
the matter, it is not made all of bone, nor all of gristles: because if it
were all of bone, a double inconuenience woulde ensue thereof. The
first is, that the bones would be in danger of breaking, chiefely about
the end of the nose when it should hit against any hard thing because
they would not bend and giue place easily, as sinewes will do. The second

inconuenience would be this, that the endes of the nosethrilles
could neither open nor shut, neither enlarge nor restraine themselues,
but woulde continue alwayes at one stay: whereupon two other mischiefs
would follow. First, the nose could not open and inlarge it selfe
so much as were requisite many times to drawe in great store of aire to
coole and refresh both the lungs and the braine, especially when they
are heated and set on fire. For at such a time there is perill of strangling.
Secondly, forasmuch as the nose is giuen to man that it might
serue the braine in stead of a pipe and spowt to purge it of slegmatike
humours,How the nose is in steade of a spowt to the braine. a man could not by blowing, close it together and straine
it to get the filth out of it, as neede requireth many times. For the humours
that distill from the braine are not alwaies very liquide and running,
but sometimes so grosse and thick, that a man cannot easily purge
the braine or nose, except it be closed and strained hard. Thus you see
two euident causes why it was needeful that the nose should be compounded
of gristles, and not of bones onely, at lest wise from the middle
downward. On the otherside, if this lower part had beene made of
flesh onely, or of kernelles, or of skinnes, the nosethrilles could not so
well haue bin inlarged or re^strained, nor continued so open, as is requisite
for the seruice of all those dueties and offices already mentioned:
besides that those parts could not so well withstand the inconueniences
whereunto they might be subiect, if they were of a more
tender matter. Lastly, as it was needefull that one part of the nose
should consist of that matter for those causes spoken of, so also it was
necessary that the vpper part should bee made of bones, not onely to
keepe the sense of smelling the better, which is in that part, and to be
as it were a buckler vnto it, but also to serue in steade of rampires both
for the eyes and for the braine. As for the inward parts, there are two
nosethrilles distinguished one from another by a gristle which is betweene
them both,Of the nosethrils, and of their parting asunder. as it were alittle wall to diuide them, to the ende
that if the one be stopped, the other may alwayes discharge the offices
assigned to them both. And to the end they may more easily draw in
the aire for the seruice as well of the lungs as of the braine, and also receiue
in the odours, they are larger at the first entrance, and after as
they ascend vp they waxe more narrow, and that not without good
reason of the prouidence of God. For hee hath in a manner taken the
selfe same course that he did in the composition of the eares, which he
made large and wide at the entry, hauing that form, and that hole within,
which we heard spoken of before, together with the causes why. The
self same reason in a maner may be re^dred here. For as it is to be feared,
that ouer great soundes woulde hurt the eares if they entred in all at

once, so the lungs and much more the braine might be ouer cooled
by the ayre that should enter in at the nosethrilles, if it should ascend
vp too fast at once, too sodainly, or too vehemently. By reason wherof
it is requisite, that it should be retained in some sort, to the ende
that by the tariance which it maketh, it should bee heated and better
tempered. The like consideration is to bee had of the vapours and
smelles in regarde of the braine, not onely of euill sauours, but also
of those that are good. For some are so violent by reason of the abundance
of heat in them, which falleth out chiefly in such as are most excellent,
that if they be not dispensed moderately, they hurt the braine.
This commeth to passe in some persons, through the weaknes of their
braine. There are others, and namely such as care not for sweet things,
who take no peasure, no not in good smels, so that oft times the sweetest
and most delicate odours are hurtful to their head. Now God hath
wel prouided for al these things, hauing placed a little bone in the top
of the nose, which is pierced through like to a litle siue. Hereupon it is
called by the Phisicions the siue-bone,Of the spungie or siue-bone. or otherwise, and that more properly,
the spu^gy bone, because the holes therof are not strait, as are those
of a siue, but somwhat slopewise like to the holes of a spunge. And this
serueth for the better and more co^modious discharging of all those vses
declared by vs, and for the auoyding of those discommodities which we
haue heard of. Whereunto may be added, that the humors which descend
from the braine may not fall downe so fast together, but distill
better by little and little, and the good humours be kept more easily
from falling downe all at once together with the euill.Of the muscles of the nosethrils and of the sinews of smelling. I passe ouer
heere briefely the muscles giuen to the nosethrilles to mooue them,
as also the nerues, which are sent from the braine to the sense of
smelling to bring vnto it the vertue of smelling, as the eyes, eares, palat,
and tongue receiue from thence their nerues also, which bring
vnto them that facultie and vertue that is meete for their nature.
Wherein wee may further note one goodly point of the prouidence
of God, in that giuing motion and sense to euery member of the
bodie by the sinewes, hee giueth a speciall and proper sense to those
nerues that are to minister vertue and power to euery one of the corporall
senses, which the other sinewes haue not. For there is none
that giueth the sense meete for sight, but those that are allotted to
the eyes for that purpose. The same may bee said of those that are giuen
to the eares for hearing, and to the tongue and palat for the taste,
and to the nose for smelling. Now to end this speach, wee are to draw
out some instruction meete for the minde, according as we haue done
in our discourses of the other senses of the body. As then wee iudge

by the nose and sense of smelling which God hath giuen vnto vs, what
difference there is betwene a good and a stinking smell, and how the
one is pleasant and delightsome, and the other vnpleasant and abominable:
so likewise we ought to consider what small pleasure God taketh
in the infection and stinch of our sinnes,Notable instructions for the soule. and how he is delighted with
the sweete smell of the iustice and vertues of Christ Iesus, when wee
are prefumed therewith, and when hee smelleth the sauour thereof
in vs. Therefore whensoeuer, and as often as we feele some stinch and
abhorre the same, that euil smel ought to admonish vs of the filthines
of our sinnes, and teach vs to haue them in greater abomination then
any catrion smell whatsoeuer, and to abhorre our selues when wee
present our selues before God, prefumed with such an infernall sauour.
For if we turne our faces aside, and stoppe our nose, and euen
spit vpon the ground when wee meete with some great infection, shal
wee not thinke that God turneth his face from vs when he findeth vs
so stinking and infected? Contrariwise, when wee smell some good
sauour, it ought to bring into our remembrance the odour of Iesus
Christ his sacrifice, and of those vertues that are well pleasing and agreeable
in the sight of God, and stirre vs vp with al indeuour to present
him with such smels, to the end wee may be of good odour before
God and men. Which the holy worde will teach vs, after hee
hath giuen vs a spirituall nose whereby wee may attaine to the right
sense and smel of that good odour of Iesus Christ and of the Gospel,
working in vs the spirit of discretion to discerne truth from lying, that
our soules may be refreshed, as the braine is by those good smels that
are brought vnto it by the bodily nose, and by the sense of smelling
that is therein. Nowe therefore being come to the end of this goodly
matter of the fiue corporall and externall sense, me thinks we should
profit much by a briefe collection of their vse, and of the commoditie
which they bring to men: considering also the diuersitie that is in
their faces and visages, in which these goodly organicall instruments
of the senses are planted: and how their faces are images and pictures
of their heart and mind. The discourse of this matter appertainth to
thee ACHITOB.


Of the vse briefly of all the outward senses for the seruice of man, namely in
purging the superfluities and ordures of his body: of the diuersitie that is in
mens faces, and of the image of the mind and heart in them. Chap. 20.
ACHITOB. When wee taste some pleasure by considering the
workes of God, namely those which wee beare about vs in our

nature, (as indeede such contemplation affoordeth great delight to
their soules that are not buried in ignorance) we ought to thinke that
we haue great occasions and certaine meanes to consider, what pleasure
and ioy it would be to see and behold the Creator and Workmaster,
who hath made and giuen to man such excellent senses, such wonderful
vertues and faculties: what delight ariseth of hearing and smelling
only some smal odour, and of tasting a litle of his prouidence, wisdome,
goodnes, benignity, grace, and mercy much more, whe^ they are throghly
tasted and relished of vs. Which may be performed by them that imploy
all care and diligence in meditating in his eternall worde, and in
considering the workes of his Almighty power, vntill such time as by
the dissolution of this mortall tabernacle of the body, they shall haue
put on immortalitie to enioy true contemplation, that is, to beholde
him face to face, who onely is able to satisfie soule with goodnes
and felicitie,Psal. 16. 11. as the Prophet teacheth vs where he saieth, In thy presence
is the fulnesse of ioy, and at thy right hand there are pleasures for euermore.
Now then we may know by that which we haue hitherto heard
in these our discourses, what testimonies God hath pla^ted of his great
prouidence in all the partes of our bodies, what care hee hath had and
still hath of man,Of the vse of the externall senses. and how he hath giuen him as many corporall senses
as he needeth for the vse and fruition of all those visible and bodily
creatures which he hath created. For he hath eies, whereby he vseth
and enioyeth the light, and the pleasure of such diuersitie of colours as
may be seene in the world, as well naturall as artificiall and compounded,
with the sundry mixtures of naturall things. Then by the eares he
hath the vse of al kindes of sounds, and principally of speech, together
with the pleasure of harmonies and melodies consisting in the variety
of tunes and songs, as well of m^ns voice as of birdes and other creatures,
and also of instruments of musicke, which are so many and of
such diuersitie amongst men And by means of the nose and nosethrils
he hath the fruition and pleasure of odours and smels so diuers in nature,
both naturall and artificiall: and by means of the mouth, tongue,
and palat he enioyeth and iudgeth of all sorts of tastes, which also are
very diuers, and chiefly of meates and drinkes wherewithal he is nourished.
For this good God hath appointed a meane for the preseruation
of mans life, whereunto he hath ioyned pleasure with profite, if
men know how to vse the same with moderation and measure, rather
to make supply no necessity then to satisfie pleasures. The like may be
saide of all the rest of the feelings and touchings of al the bodily members,
of which there is great variety.
But hauing spoken sufficiently of the composition of the externall

parts of mans body, and of the outward members, of the natural senses
of man and of their vses, we ought to consider also what instructions
God giueth by them vnto men concerning their infirmitie.Of the fupersluities that proceede out of the body. For although
the body of man be so beautifull and excellent outwardly as
wee haue declared, yet it hath infection within, which of necessitie
must appeare and breake foorth outwardly, that it may be purged and
vnburdned. For the body cannot reape that profit of the nourishment
it receiueth by al the elements, and chiefely of that which it eateth and
drinketh, as that it can co^uert and turne al of it into nourishment and substance,
and auoyd all those accidents and inconueniences whereunto it is
subiect by reason of the infirmity of it owne nature. Therefore it commeth
to passe necessarily, that the body is ful of excrements, of much
superfluitie and ordure, which would kill it if it were not discharged and
deliuered thereof. For these excrements woulde be poison vnto it in
steade of nourishment. Therefore the prouidence of God hath so prouided
a remedy for the same, that admonishing man of his infirmitie,
to the end he should alwayes remember that he is created of clay and
earth, and that he shal returne vnto it againe, it hath withal ordained the
meanes whereby man should be comforted and discharged of those excreme^ts
and superfluities which might hurt him. And for this cause there
is no member but hath his proper passages appropriated for purgation
and seruing in his place, yea euen the noblest members. For I speake not
only of those members,Of the passages meete to purge the body by. which we account most vile, abiect, and shamefull,
and which nature teacheth vs to couer and hide, being appointed for
the voiding of the grosest, vilest, and most filthy excrements, but also of
those that are the excellentest and chiefest in ye head and face, so that there
is no part of our body out of which there proceedeth not some infection
and filthines. Insomuch that a man may wel say, that our whole body
is within as it were a stinking draught or puddle that emptieth it
selfe on euery side as it were by sinks and gutters. For if we co^sider it generally,
there is no part that is not subiect to sweat, (which oftentimes
sauoureth very strongly) and that purgeth not it selfby sweating from
that superfluitie, which it casteth forth by that meanes. Therefore the
prouidence of God hath so wel prouided for this, that the skin hath in
it litle holes called by the Physicions,Of the pores in the skinne. Pores: which are so subtill and so
small, that they cannot be perceiued by the eie. Through these pores,
the superfluities that are euaporated by sweat haue their issue, so that
it commeth to passe oftentimes, that sicke persons are cured by this
onely remedy, or at least wise they are greatly comforted thereby. But
let vs come to the noblest members in the head, and in the goodliest
part of man, which is the face. The eies, eares, nose, and mouth serue

for pipes and spowts to the braine and head,Of the spowts of the braine and head. to purge it of those superfluities
that otherwise might oppresse it. Wherein wee are againe to
consider of the prouidence of God, and of that care which he hath of
vs. For seeing the head is the principall member of the whole body,
and seeing the braine within the head is so noble a part, God hath giuen
vnto it more passages for the purging of it, then he hath done to al
the other members. Therefore we see what store of flegme doth daily
issue out by the nose and mouth, so that a man is many times much
troubled both in blowing his nose and in spitting. In this respect it seemeth
the nose maketh the face to looke like a Limbeck,The face compared to a Limbeck. albeit the water
that distilleth through it hath no very good smell, neither is pleasant
to looke vpon, no more is the spittle that commeth out of the
mouth. As for the eares, they are not without their filth, so that they
must be oftentimes looked vnto and cleansed, and the waxe that is in
them taken foorth: which differeth much from the waxe that is made
by Bees. For as Physicions testifie, this eare-waxe is nothing else
but the superfluitie of the chollericke humour, which is purged there
by those pipes: as they say also, that the melancholy humour is purged
by the eyes, which are many times watrish and very foule by
reason of the rhumes and sundry humours that fall downe vpon them.
Whereby we see, howe God doeth admonish vs on all sides through
the infirmities of al our members, what account we are to make of our
selues.Good instructions for all men. For if the goodliest and most noble members, if the pleasantest,
most delicate, and neatest parts are so foule and filthy, what shal we say of
the rest that are the basest and most abiect, which are appointed for no
other vses then to be as it were the draughts and sinks of the whole body?
But on the other side let vs consider how God by humbling vs on
the one side, doth yet on the other side prouide for our necessities by
those means of purging which he hath appointed for the body of ma^.
Where we haue further to obserue,The profite of care-waxe. that there are some superfluities and
excrements purged from the braine, which are profitable for those
members that are assigned to be the instruments of their euacuation:
as we see it plainly in that yellow humour that is purged by the eares.
For it defendeth them against fleas, litle flies and other small wormes
and beastes, that might otherwise enter within them.
We haue further to co^sider for our better humiliation, that God hath
so created al the me^bers and instruments belo^ging to our corporal senses,
as that he admonisheth vs therby of their nature, and what they can
do of themselues. For there is not one of the^, but it is in some sort made
hollow, to giue vs to vnderstand thereby, that they exercise their principall
and chiefe office by receiuing fro^ without, that which belongeth

to their nature, and not by sending foorth any thing of their owne. For
when the eies see, they receiue into them the images of those things
that are before them. And if they send foorth any thing, it is so farre
from helping them to see better, that it hindereth and dimmeth the
sight, as we see when men weepe, or when any humour runneth out
of their eyes. Likewise our nose hath no sense of the odours, by means
of that wind and breath which proceedeth out of it, but when it draweth
in the aire with which the odours are conueyed into it. And so it is
of the other senses. Whereby wee are taught to knowe the nature of
our soule, which can bring foorth no good thing, if it haue not receiued
it before of God, to whome shee can giue nothing but onely receiueth
from him. You see then many good lessons, which wee are
taught by the instruments of our senses and by our owne nature: but
wee commonly passe them ouer and neuer thinke of them at all, or if
we muse vpon them sometimes, we say as much indeede, and confesse
it in word, but in the meane time we are nothing humbled thereby.
Now then we haue bestowed doores and windows vpon the frame
of mans body, and may with ease beholde the outward excellencie
and shew thereof, in regard of so many goodly workes as are cut out
and ingrauen in euery externall part of it. We are by and by to looke
vpon the inward furniture, being enriched with all sortes of rare,
great, and sumptuous workes. But for the end of our present matter,
seeing wee are taught that so many profitable and pleasant senses and
members are planted chiefely in the face and visage of man, it cannot
be without fruit and great admiration at the prouidence of God,The diuersitie of faces is wonderfull. if we
consider that amongst so many faces as there are of men, women, and
children, a man shall hardly finde two in all the world, that resemble
each other so neere, but still some difference will appeare to him that
looketh narrowly vpon them. And if therebe any so apparant resemblance
that a man cannot finde any difference, yet that falleth out very
seldome. Neither is this seene only in the whole countenance, but
also in the seuerall parts thereof, and namely in the nose, whereof there
is so great variety,The great variety of noses. as that you shall finde very fewe that are like in all
points: so that it is to be wondered at, that in such great similitude of
faces there is so great dissimilitude. For there is great likenesse in that
they are all humane faces, made of the same matter, and hauing the
same partes: but yet they are very vnlike in respect of the particular
differences, which are in each of them and of their partes. Now if we
haue occasion to admire this diuersitie that is among many, what shal
we say to the dissimilitude and difference of countenance that is to be
seene in one and the same man,Varietie of countenance in one man. as if he had many faces to vse and change

at his pleasure, as we see men may change maskes before their faces?
It is certaine that there appeareth great difference in the countenance
of one and the same man, as he is either yong or olde, sound or sicke.
For as a mans yeares alter, so there will be stil some change in his face,
bearing his countenance according to the health or sickenes that is in
him. But I speake not nowe of this diuersitie, but of another which
happeneth to men in all ages, and at all times. For there is great difference
to be seene in a mans face according as hee is either merry or
sad, angry or pacified, humble and modest, or loftie and proude. For
if hee be quiet and modest, hee will haue a sweete, milde, and gracious
countenance:The description of an angry visage. if hee bee angry, hee will haue a furious face, as
though hee were transfigured into a sauage beast, hauing fierie eyes
as if hee cast from them flames of fire: hee will cast foorth smoake at
his nosethrilles, as if hee had a fornace kindled within him: his whole
countenance will be as redde as if fire came out of it. Therefore it was
not without reason saide of a Philosopher, that angry and furious
men shoulde beholde themselues in a glasse, to the ende they might
know thereby how such passions change their countenance, and how
they are transformed thereby and looke hideous and fearefull. And
if a man be lofty and arrogant,Of an arrogant countenance. his visage will testifie the same sufficiently,
especially his eyes and eie-lids, which will be lifted vp, as if
pride and arrogancie had there placed their seate. For if wee denie
or graunt any thing that pleaseth or displeaseth vs, wee declare it by
them, speaking by signes, as the tongue doeth by woordes. And
although pride be conceiued and bredde in the heart,Pride is seated vpon the eie lids. yet it is seated
on the eye-liddes, where it sheweth and manifesteth it selfe. For
seeing it desireth alwayes to be aduaunced and to be lift vp aboue all,
yea to be alone without any companion, that place is very fitte and
conuenient for it, being high, emiuent, and apparant. But a proud
person ought to consider, that that place is very much declining, to
the ende hee may thinke of the danger of falling downe, as they
that are in some high and sleepe place where they can take no holde.
For it can not bee but that pride will haue a fall, howsoeuer it may
seeme long first. For that sentence of Iesus Christ is alwayes true,
who sayeth,Matth. 23 12. Luke 14. 11. that Whosoeuer will exalt himselfe shall be brought low, and
whosoeuer will humble himselfe shall be exalted. The eyes also do speake
and testifie of the heart within. For if the heart bee humble, modest,
chaste, and well stayed, the eyes will be so answerable thereunto, that
their very lookes will declare sufficiently howe it standeth affected.
Contrariwise, if the heart bee proude, vnchaste, loose, impudent,
and lasciuious, the looke and countenaunce of the eyes will openly

bewray the same. Also wee say commonly of such as haue lost all
shame, that they haue brazen and shamelesse foreheads. And it seemeth
that the French worde Affronteur, is deriued from thence, because
they that are of that occupation must haue good foreheads, they
must be bolde and shamelesse, like to harlots and murtherers. And
as shame is seated and appeareth principally in the forehead and
cheekes,The seate of shame. so is it a note of impudencie when shame is banished from
thence: as that which then possesseth the place assigned to shame and
modestie.
Therefore the Scripture attributeth a brow of brasse and of yron,Esay 48. 4. Ezech. 3. 8. a
hard forehead, and a strong face to them that are impudent and past
grace, to such as are vntractable and rebellious. By these things then
we know how the face is the image, messenger, and witnesse of all the
affections of the heart, insomuch that it is very hard for him, do what
he can, to couer and conceale them. Also it is the image and witnes
of a good and euill conscience. For as a good conscience causeth it to
appeare ioyfull and open, so contrariwise an euill conscience maketh
it sadde and hidden, as it were the visage of a condemned person. We
commonly call Physiognomy the Science whereby men iudge of the
nature, complexion, and manners of euery one, by the contemplation
of all the members of the body, and chiefely of the face and countenance.Of the true Physiognomy.
But there is no Physiognomy so certaine as that which-wee
haue nowe touched, whereby men may bee easily conuinced of that
which they thinke to hide in their heartes, which notwithstanding is
quickely descried in their countenances, as if wee read it in a Booke.
Nowe it is time to enter into our edifice and building, there to contemplate
the internall and spirituall senses, which the foule vseth in
her woorkes and operations. But first wee will make the way more
easie to attaine to so high a matter, by learning briefely what is the
nature, faculties, and powers of mans soule, and what are the sundry
kindes of soules, the burthen whereof I lay vpon thee, ASER.


Of the nature, faculties, and powers of mans soule: of the knowledge
which we may haue in this life, and how excellent and necessary it is:
into what kindes the life and soule are diuided. Chap. 21.
ASER. If God hath shewed himselfe wonderfull in the creation,
composition, nature, and vse of the externall senses and members
of mans body (of which wee haue hitherto discoursed) both in

the matter whereof they are made and in the forme giuen vnto them,
and in all other things that belong vnto them: no doubt but wee
shall haue much more cause to maruaile at the excellent workemanshippe
of his prouidence in the composition, nature, and vse of the
internall senses and members, which lie hidden within the bodie,
whereof the sequele of our speach requireth that wee shoulde intreate.
For these are the principall, by meanes of which the other
receiue life, and are kept and preserued in life. But forasmuch as
the soule giueth life to the whole body and to all the members thereof,
wee are withall to consider of the nature thereof, what faculties
and vertues it hath, and howe it worketh in all the partes of
the bodie, according to that knowledge which GOD hath giuen
to men, both by the testimonie of his worde, and by the effectes of
the soule. For neither the bodie nor any member thereof shoulde
haue any more motion or feeling then is in a blocke or stone, if it
had no soule to giue it life. For this cause after Iob hath spoken of
the creation and composition of his body,Iob 10. 12. hee addeth, Thou hast
giuen mee life and grace, and thy visitation (that is to say thy prouidence)
hath preserued my spirite, This agreeth with that, which we
haue heard before of Moses,Genes. 2. 7. where hee sayeth, That the Lorde made
man of the dust of the ground, and breathed in his face breath of life, and
the man was a liuing soule.
First therefore wee must vnderstand that there are in man three
kindes of faculties and vertues that worke continually within him
and neuer cease:Three sortes of faculties in man. the first is commonly called Animal, the second
Vital, the third Natural. Of these two latter wee will speake heereafter.
Concerning the Animal facultie, it is diuided into three kinds:
the first is called Principall,Of the animal power. the second Sensitiue, the third Motiue.
The Principall is diuided by some into three kindes, by others into
fiue. They which make fiue sortes, distinguish betweene the common
sense, the imagination, and the fantasie, making them three:
and for the fourth they adde Reason, or the iudging facultie: and for
the fift, Memorie. They that make but three kinds differ not from
the other, but onely in that they comprehend all the former three vnder
the common sense, or vnder one of the other twaine, whether it
be the imagination or the fantasie.Of the sensitiue. As for the Sensitiue facultie, it
comprehendeth the vertues of the fiue corporall senses, of which
wee haue spoken before.Of the motiue. As for the Motiue vertue, it comprehendeth
the moouing of all the outward parts of the body from one place
to an other, especially of the feete and legges which is to walke, and
of the handes which is to apprehend and to gripe. This moouing

is done by the sinewes, muscles, and filaments, as we haue already declared:
but not without knowledge and will, as the other that are
more properly called naturall motions, of which we may speake in their
order. And this motion is led by the imagination in regard of beastes,
but in regard of men, by reason. But because we haue already handled
at large these two last powers of the soule, namely, the Sensitiue and
Motiue, when we spake of the externall members of the body, we wil
now speake especially of the first, which comprehendeth the internall
senses spoken of by me euen now, which answere to the externall senses,
according to the bond, agreement, and communication which the
body and soule haue together. And because wee cannot know the faculties
and vertues of the soule,How we come to the knowledge of the soule. but only by means of those instruments
whereby it worketh, as we haue shewed in our former discourses the
nature and vse of the externall members, and howe the soule is serued
by them: so now we will do the like by the internall parts, to the ende
that we may the better knowe the nature of the soule by her operations
and instruments, as the labourer that worketh by his instruments,
and frameth those woorkes that are before our eyes. For the soule
being of a spirituall nature and not bodily, we cannot see it in it owne
substance and nature, nor haue any knowledge thereof but by the
effectes, by which wee may iudge and conclude of their cause, as
also by those testimonies of the soule, which the Lorde affordeth
vs in his worde. And although the vnderstanding of man can not
attaine to an entire and perfect knowledge of the soule, yet that smal
knowledge which wee may haue, doeth exceedingly profite end delight
vs. For seeing it is the most excellent creature that is created vnder
the cope of heauen, yea more excellent then the heauens themselues,
or any of the celestiall bodies, because the soule only is endued
with reason and vnderstanding,The knowledge of the soule how necessary and excellent it is. there is no doubt but the knowledge
thereof is more excellent, profitable, pleasant, and necessary, yea more
worthy admiration then of any other thing whatsoeuer, as that which
alwaies yeeldeth profit to the greatest things that can be. Therfore we
ought not to set light by that knowledge of it which wee may attaine
vnto. For there is in it so great varietie, beauty, and harmony, yea it is
so wel adorned and set forth, that no heauen nor earth is so wel painted
or bedecked with such beautifull, liuely, and excellent images and
pictures, as that is. On the other side, she is the Mistresse and Authour
from whence proceedeth the inuention of all Artes and Sciences, and
of all those wonderfull woorkes that are made throughout the whole
course of mans life. Therefore no man can beholde her or thinke
vpon her without great pleasure and admiration. And seeing the

fountaine and well-spring of all the good and euill that befalleth vs
is in the soule, there is nothing more profitable for men then to know
it well, to the ende they may labour more carefully to keepe this
fountaine pure and well purged, that all the riuers of their actions
and workes may issue and flowe pure and cleane from thence. For
that man can neuer gouerne his soule wel,The knowledge of our selues very, necessary. nor be master of himselfe,
that doeth not knowe himselfe. If wee desire to knowe what workes
wee are to looke for of a workeman, what hee can doe, or what may
befall him, what hee is good for, and for what hee is vnmeete, hee
must first of all bee knowen what hee is. Therefore that sentence of
which we haue already spoken, that saith, Know thy selfe, ought heere
especially to take place and to bee practised. For it is a harder matter
to knowe the nature and qualitie of our soule and of our minde,
the vertues and affections thereof, to enquire and consider of it well,
and to knowe what may be knowen thereof, as also the diuerse and
holow lurking holes, the turnings and windings therein, then to know
the bones, flesh, sinews, and blood of our bodies, with all the matter
whereof it is made, and all the partes and members thereof. Seeing
then wee are to make enquirie of the nature and powers of the soule
by the effects thereof, according as I haue already spoken, and seeing
the principall effect is the life which it giueth to all liuing creatures,
let vs first consider of the difference that is betweene the creatures
void of life, and those that haue life in them. Afterward let vs looke
into the sundrie sortes of liues that are in liuing creatures, as that
which will helpe vs well to the vnderstanding of that wee seeke for.
First then wee must note that all creatures are either spirituall or bodily.The diuision of creatures.
All they are spirituall creatures that are without bodies, and
which cannot be perceiued by any bodily sense, and such are the Angelles
both good and bad, and the soules and spirites of men. The bodily
creatures are all those that are visible, and that may bee felt and
perceiued by corporall senses: amongst which some haue no life, and
some haue life.Of creatures without life. Againe, those creatures that haue no life, differ in
two respects; for some of them haue no naturall motion, as stones,
metalles, mineralles and such like creatures. Others haue their naturall
motion: among which some are mutable, corruptible and subiect
to change, others are immutable and incorruptible, continuing alwaies
firme in their estate during the course of this world. The water, the
aire, the windes and the fire are creatures hauing motion, albeit they
haue no life: but they are subiect to corruption, and so are all the creatures
that are compounded of the elements, whether they haue life or
no. For being made of contrary matters and qualities they corrupt and

change, not in respect of their first matter and substance, which can
neuer perish, according to the testimony of Philosophers, notwithstanding
it alter in forme, but alwayes returneth to the first nature.
Stones and metalles, albeit they be very hard, yet are they not freed
from corruption and consuming through vse.The celestiall bodies are immutable. But the celestiall bodies
are of that matter and nature, that they mooue continually,
and yet abide alwaies intire and in their first forme, not being subiect
to any change in respect of their bodies, neither do they weare or consume
away as other creatures do that are vnderneath them. Insomuch
that none of the celestiall spheres are either wearied, worne or spent
more with all the labour they haue vndergone by the space of so many
yeeres, then they were the first day of their creation. For we must
not take it for a change of their natures and qualities, that according
to their diuerse course, the sunne, moone, and other planets and starres
are sometimes further off, sometimes neerer each to other, that they
haue their oppositions, coniunctions, diuerse and different aspects, according
to the diuersity and difference of their course and motion. We
may say as much of the Eclipses both of the sunne and moone. For the
change that is amongst them is not in their owne bodies, substance, and
qualities,Of creatures hauing life. but onely in regarde of vs and of our sight. Concerning the
creatures that haue life, they are for the most part diuided into three
kindes: but they that distinguish more subtilly make foure kindes.
And because life is giuen by the soule, the Philosophers make as many
sortes of soules as they doe of liues, and call them by the same names.
They call the first, the nourishing or vegetatiue soule or life: the second,
the sensitine: the third, the cogitatiue: and the fourth, the reasonable soule,
or the soule partaker of reason.Of the vegetatiue life. Touching the first, there is a kinde of
life, that hath no other vertue in the creature to which it is giuen of
God, then to nourish and cause it to encrease, and to keepe it in being,
vntil this life faile it. The soule that giueth life with these effects is called
nourishing or vegetatiue: and this is proper to al herbs, trees, and plants
that are maintained and kept in their kinds by the seeds, or by planting,
setting,Of the sensitiue. and such like propagations. The second kind of life named sensitiue,
is so called, because it giueth not only nourishment and growth,
as the first, but sense also and feeling. They that will haue but three
kinds, make but one of this and of that which is called cogitatiue by
them that make foure, who attribute the sensitiue soule to the sea
spunges, to oysters, cockles, and to those creatures which the Graecians
and Latins call by a name, which in our language signifieth as
much as plant-liuing creatures, because they are of a middle nature
betweene plants and liuing creatures hauing life and sense, as if they

were compounded of both these natures together: so that they are
more then simple plants, and yet are not perfect liuing creatures, as
those are to whom is attributed the cogitatiue or knowing soule.Of the cogitatiue. And
this is a soule and life, which not only giueth whatsoCuer the two former
imparteth to the creatures in whome they are, but also a certaine
vertue and vigour, as of cogitation, of knowledge, and of memorie,
that they may haue skil to preserue their life, and know how to guide
and gouerne themselues according to their naturall inclination. This
soule is proper to brute beastes, whome some thinke to be partakers
after a sorte of reason, so farre foorth as it concerneth things belonging
to their nature. But wee will proceede no further at this time
in this disputation: onely let vs note that they which make but three
kindes of soule or life, doe giue to brute beastes that which wee called
Sensitiue, comprehending them vnder that kinde of life, vnto
which they attribute the same vertue and vigour whereof wee nowe
spake, and which is distinguished by others, from that kinde of
soule that giueth onely simple sense vnto the creature.Of the reasonable soule. The fourth
kinde of soule and life is that of men, which hath all whatsoeuer is in
the former kindes, and ouer and besides that (which is most excellent)
it is partaker of reason and vnderstanding: wherein it agreeth
with the life of Angelles, as wee will declare more at large in place
conuenient, and shew also the difference that is betweene them. For
this cause the soule of man giuen vnto him, is commonly called a
reasonable soule, as all the former are called by mans agreeing to
their nature, as wee haue declared. Therefore seeing this kinde of
soule and life comprehendeth all the vertues and properties of the
rest, it may bee called Uegetatiue, Sensitiue, Cogitatiue and reasonable
altogether. But wee must note here, that there is great difference
betweene the soules of men, and those other of which wee spake
before. For beside that the soule of man is partaker of reason and
vnderstanding, with all properties that are in the rest, it hath that
common with the Angelles, who are spirites created of GOD to
liue a spirituall life without bodies, that it is immortall also as well
as they. But of this immortalitie wee hope (GOD willing) to
intreate at large heereafter, as also of the creation and proper nature
of the soule. In these two pointes then of vnderstanding and
of immortalitie,The soule of man differeth from that of beasts, in vnderstanding and immortality. the soule of man doeth much differre from that of
beastes. For although they haue a soule that gyueth vnto them
life, motion, and sense, with all other things touched by mee, yet
it is not partaker of vnderstanding, nor of an immortall nature

as the Angelles and soules of men are, but it is of a mortall nature,
which endeth and dieth with the body. Therefore albeit the soule of
man hath in it whatsoeuer is in the rest, beside that which is proper
vnto it aboue the rest, and that which it hath common with the Angelles,
neuerthelesse it is called onely by the name of that thing which
is the principall, chiefest and most excellent in it: as also the like is
done with all the other kindes of soule and life. But mee thinkes we
ought to consider more fully of that which man hath either common
or diuers in his nature from the soule of beasts, and what are the proper
actions of the soule ioyned with the body, and how it is hindered
by the body without any change of nature. For the consideration
hereof will greatly further our knowledge of the internall and spirituall
senses, of which we are to discourse, that wee may step by step
ascend vp to the highest vnderstanding and knowledge which the
minde of man can attaine vnto concerning the soule. Let vs therefore
heare AMANA of this matter.


Of the two natures of which man is compounded: how the body is the
lodge and instrument of the soule: how the soule may be letted from
doing her proper actions by the body, and be separated from it, and
yet remaine in her perfection. Chap. 22.
AMANA. Albeit the greatest excellencie of man, which farre passeth
that of all other liuing creatures, ought to be valued according
to the soule that God hath giuen him, differing from the soule of
all other liuing creatures, his body being mortall and corruptible as that
of beasts is, yet there are other points of excellencie in the matter,
forme, and vse of all the partes and members of which the body of
man is made, that are not found in any of the other, as wee haue sufficiently
shewed in our former discourses vpon this matter. Whereby
God would teach vs, that hee hath prepared and built this lodging
for an other manner of inhabitant then he built the bodies of beastes,The soule is the proper inhabitant of mans body.
euen for a soule that differeth farre from theirs. For seeing he maketh
nothing without good reason, or that is without his profit, he sheweth
by the instruments prepared for the workeman whom he will set on
worke, what maner of one he ought to be, and what workes he hath to
make. And because hee hath appointed workes and offices for the
soule of man, which he woulde not haue in the soule of brute beastes,
hee hath giuen to man such members and instruments as hee hath not
giuen to other liuing creatures. As for those instrume^ts which he hath
common with beasts, God hath otherwise disposed and placed in his

bodie according to the office euery one hath, as wee may learne by
their discourses.
It is very euident,Two natures in man. that man is not onely this masse and lumpe of
skinne, flesh, sinewes, bones, and of such other matter gathered altogether
in one bodie, whereof we haue spoken alreadie, but that there
is yet in him another nature whose substance is inuisible, ouer and aboue
this bodily nature which we see. For experience sheweth vs
what difference there is betwixt one and the same body when it is aliue,
and when it is dead. When there is no life in it, none of all those
faculties and vertues whereof the former discourse intreated, appeare
within it, as we see they doe so long as life dwelleth therein. And yet
then the body is not depriued of those members which it had before
death, but keepeth them still, vntill such time as they corrupt and
waste away of themselues, and finally faile altogether for want of the
soule and life that shoulde preserue and keepe them sounde. In the
meane time we see, that they are without force, and as vnfit for vse, as
if they were not at all, because they want soule and life, which giueth
them vigour and setteth the^ a working. It is very cleere then by death,
that the body hath no life of it selfe, nor any of those faculties and vertues
which life bringeth with it, but that it receiueth them from another
nature then from it owne. And this nature is called Soule, hauing
sundry offices in man, as we haue alreadie vnderstood, and will hereafter
handle them more particularly and in order. But in the meane time
we must note, that although the soule be not bodily, neuerthelesse it
vseth a bodily nature and instruments which it receiueth from that,
for the performance of those workes that are assigned vnto it: which
the soule coulde not doe without such instruments as are necessary
thereunto. For as we heard in the former speech, that among the creatures
of God some are spirituall, others corporall, so we are to knowe
also,Two sorts of spirites. that among the spirituall creatures, there are two sortes of spirits,
of which some, namely the Angels, were created to liue a spiritual life
agreeable to their nature,The description of Angels. approching neerer to the nature and life
that is in God then any other: not being vnited or conioyned to any
bodies that belong vnto them, vnto which they should giue life, as if
they were creatures compounded of body and spirite. Therefore we
call them not by the name of soules, as wee doe the spirites of men,
which God hath created to dwell in bodies, to giue them life, and to
be ioyned with them in one person made of two natures, to wit, of a
spirite and of a bodie.Mens soules haue alwaies life in the. These spirites, which are also called humane
soules, can liue wel enough, and preserue themselues in their substance,
hauing life alwayes in them, euen after they are separated from their

bodies. But the like cannot bee saide of the bodies, which cannot
liue, nor be preserued in their substance without their soules and spirites.
Therefore Iesus Christ sayde,Matth. 10. 28. Luke 12. 4, 5. Feare not them that kill the bodie
and cannot kill the soule: but rather feare him that can destroy
both bodie and soule in hell. Wherefore albeit wee cannot see the
soule, neyther when it entreth into the bodie, and is ioyned vnto
it, nor when it dwelleth there, nor yet when it departeth; yet it followeth
not therevppon that it is not at all, or that it commeth
to nothing. For the effectes thereof shewe vs the contrarie, so
long as that life which it giueth to the bodie continueth therein. And
albeit wee see no more effectes of it, when it is seuered by death,
yet it followeth not therevpon that the same thing shoulde befall
it that doeth to the bodie, and so corrupt therewith. For it is so
farre from corrupting with the bodie, that it keepeth the same from
corruption so long as it is therein. And being separated, no maruaile
if it effect no more that which it did in the bodie by those instruments
which it had, because it hath them no longer.
Wherefore in this respect it is like to an excellent Woorkeman,The soule compared to a cunning workman.
who cannot labour in his occupation without such instrumentes
as necessarily belong thereunto. Yet in the meane season the
Woorkeman continueth alwayes in the same estate, and hath no
lesse knowledge and arte in him without his instruments, then
when hee hath them, albeit hee vse them not when they are away.
And although hee enioyeth both his instrumentes and his
arte, yet can hee not well vse them, nor perfourme those woorkes
which hee hath to make, if they bee not founde, but corrupted or
spoyled, as wee see in an instrument of musicke. For if the chaunter
or Musicion bee very expert in his arte,To a musicion. and handle his instrument
as hee ought to doe, yet can hee neuer deliuer those soundes,
tunes and harmonie which otherwise hee woulde, if his instrument
were good. And yet that shall not hinder the Musicion from
beeing alwayes as skilfull and expert in his arte, as if his instrument
were very good and sounde.To an inhabitant. Likewise if a man dwell in a
darke lodging, hee cannot see so well and cleerely, as in another
that is very lightsome: and yet hee shall not haue sundrie
eyes, but the selfe same in both places. So that it followeth, that
his dimnesse of sight in the one lodging rather then in the other,
proceedeth not of any defect in his eyes, but of the house and habitation
wherein hee is. The like may bee saide of the soule lodged
in the bodie, whose actions and woorkes therein are much
hindered if it bee badly lodged, if any part of the lodging bee

not good, or if it want those instruments and tooles that are necessary
for it. For although it hath the vertue of sight in it selfe,
yet it cannot without eyes see those thinges, which by meanes
of them it beholdeth. And although it hath in it selfe the vertue
to cause the handes and feete to mooue, and to set them on woorke
according to their office, yet it cannot doe those woorkes by a
maymed and lame hande, which it will doe by him that hath
both his handes, nor cause a lame creeple wanting a foote or legge,
or hauing some defect in those partes, to walke as well as an other
that hath all these sounde and perfect. And a man may iudge
of my speech, by that which happeneth not onely to them that
fall into an Apoplexie, but also to such as haue some quaume about
their heart, so that they faint and sowne, and are for the time
as it were dead: and yet afterwarde plucke vp their spirites, and
come againe to their former estate. But before they be reuiued, they
seeme as though they had no soule in their bodies, because it is
not perceiued by the woorkes thereof, as it is when the bodie is
well affected. And this is chiefly to be seene in a strong Apoplexie,
or falling sicknesse, in which the patient looseth all motion and sense.
Wherevpon it hath come to passe oftentimes, that many haue bene buried
for dead in that case, who were notwithstanding aliue, and some
haue recouered and done well afterward, as wee haue many examples
both in common experience, and in histories olde and newe. Nowe
whilest the soule is thus letted from performing her actions by such
inconueniences, who would not iudge, that she were cleane extinguished
with the body? Neuerthelesse afterward when she can vse her instruments,
shee sheweth plainely that the fault commeth not of her,
but of the instruments that faile her.The soule is the workeman, the body, the toole. Therefore when we speak of the
soule and of the body, we must put the same difference between them
that is betwixt a Workman and his tooles, considering the nature of
both, and what they can doe both ioyntly and seuerally. For an instrument
hath neither knowledge nor force, nor vertue of it selfe, being able
to doe nothing alone, but onely so farre foorth as it is set on
woorke by some Woorkeman. But there is another reason in the
Woorkeman. For although hee cannot vse his arte without those
instruments that are necessary thereunto, yet hee hath alwayes abiding
within him that arte, power, force, and dexteritie, whereby he
woorketh. So that when wee speake of the soule, wee are to consider
what shee can doe of her selfe and of her owne nature without
the bodie, and what shee cannot doe without it. For we learne
in the holy Scriptures, that when Angels appeared to men,

because they are spirits, and haue no speech like to that of men, as being
bodilesse and wanting instruments necessary for the framing therof,
therefore they tooke mens bodies to appeare and speake to men
in and by them. No marueile then if the soule, which is created to
vse the members of the body as instruments, speaketh not without a
tongue, as it doeth with one, and with the other Organs of voyce
and speech. Now forasmuch as wee know, that the soule giueth life,
motion and sence to all the body, and that it hath sundry instruments
in the body, in which and by which it perfourmeth those workes for
which they were created of God, we are now to consider what facultie,
power and vertue it hath in euery part of the body. For albeit that
we cannot assigne to the soule, especially to the spirite and vnderstanding
which is the most excellent part therein, any certaine place of
lodging, as if it were inclosed within any one part, or within all the
partes of the body, neuerthelesse we may iudge of the nature thereof
by those instruments whereby it worketh, and by their nature, and by
the workes it produceth. And in this consideration we haue a goodly
glasse,A glasse to see God in. wherein wee may contemplate God that is inuisible, making
him visible and knowne vnto vs by his workes: euen as the soule is
become as it were visible, and sheweth it selfe to vs by the bodie, in
which it dwelleth, and by the workes which it doeth therein. Therefore
let vs propound vnto our selues this whole visible world as it were
one great bodie, then all the partes as members thereof: next let vs
consider how the soule of all this great body, namely the vertue and
power of God worketh therein, and effecteth all the workes that are
done therein, according to that order he hath set therein, as the soule
worketh in the bodie of man and in euery member thereof. Thus doing,
as we know that there is a soule in the bodie, and another nature
beside that, which is bodily, and which worketh therein, and this we
perceiue by the effects thereof: so let vs marke withall by the works
done in this visible world, that there is another nature that effecteth
them, which being inuisible differeth from all this world wee see, as
that which is farre more excellent, which filleth the whole, and by
vertue and power is in all the partes thereof, as a soule in a bodie. But
in propounding this glasse before our eyes, we must take heede, that
we fall not into their dotage, who haue thought and affirmed that the
worlde is the body of God,The world is not the body of God. and that himselfe is the soule thereof. For
therevpon it would follow, that God is mortall and corruptible in regard
of his body, and that some part or other thereof would alwayes
corrupt, as we daily see corporall things doe. Againe, if it were so, God
should not be infinite and incomprehensible as he is: for the worlde

doeth not comprehend and containe him, but he all the world, whereof
he is the Creator, and by whom the world is and consisteth. Seeing
then the soule is the image of God in man, as the body of man is the
image of this great world, in which God worketh as the soule doeth
in the body of man, let vs co^sider how God hath distributed the powers,
vertues, and offices of the soule in the body, and in euery part thereof,
as he manifesteth his glory, and vertue in all this visible world, and in
all the partes of it.How the soule in the body resembleth God in the world. For first they agree herein, that as there is but one
soule in one body, which is sufficient for all the partes and members
thereof, so there is but one God in the world, sufficient for all the creatures.
Next, if we cannot conceiue howe the soule is lodged in the
body, or how it giueth life vnto it, neither yet howe it worketh and displayeth
therein the vertues which it hath, but onely so farre foorth as
it testifieth the same by those diuers effects, which we see and perceiue
in euery part and member thereof, no marueile then if wee cannot
with our eyes discerne or comprehend how God is throughout all, filling
heauen and earth, how he displayeth his power and vertue, howe
he worketh in all his creatures, and how hee guideth, gouerneth, and
preserueth them by his heauenly prouidence. For if wee cannot comprehend
the creature, nor the nature thereof, how shall wee comprehend
the nature of the Creator? And if it be not in our power to know
the workes of God wrought in vs, neither the woorkes of our owne
soule,The absurd collection of Atheists. how shall we know his works done in the whole world? And if
we be not able to vnderstand or comprehend them, doeth it followe
therefore that he doeth them not? yet there are many that conclude after
that sort. For they beleeue nothing but that which they are able to
co^ceiue, know, and comprehend by their natural reason. And so, because
they ca^not know how ye soule being of a spirituall nature is ioyned with
the bodie, which is cleane of another nature, nor conceiue howe it is
lodged and worketh therein, therefore they must conclude that they
haue no soule, which worketh that in them that is there done. For
they see not, neither can they shewe howe it worketh by those instruments,
which it hath in the bodie, but onely so farre foorth, as they
behold the worke. But we shall haue occasion elsewhere to handle
this more at large. For this time let vs goe forward with our speech
of the powers and faculties of the soule, considering first of the braine,
which is the principall instrument thereof, and the seate of the internall
senses already mentioned by vs, of which wee are to be instructed
particularly.



Of the Braine, and of the nature thereof: of the sundry kinds of knowledge
that are in man: of the similitude that is betweene the actions
and woorkes of the naturall vertues of the soule, and of the internall
senses. Chap. 23.
ARAM. The woorkemanship which God hath wrought in the
whole course of nature, as well in the nature of the heauens as of
the elements, of liuing things, of plants, mettals and other creatures,
doth vndoubtedly containe in it great miracles, and very excellent
and euident testimonies: which shewe plainely vnto vs, that
the nature of all things, yea of the whole worlde, commeth not by
fortune and at aduenture, but that they were created and ordeyned
by a more excellent nature then any can be found in al the world.
But there is not a more expresse and clearer image of the diuine nature,
then in that part of man, wherein are to be found those great and
marueilous vertues and properties,Of the Animall vertues. which are commonly called Animales,
as namely the thought, vnderstanding, and knowledge of numbers,
and of order, reason, iudgement, memory, with the discerning of honest
things from those that are dishonest, of good things from bad,
together with the election or reiection of them. Therefore the contemplation
of these vertues and powers is very necessary for vs,
that by the knowledge of them wee may dayly learne to knowe
GOD the better, by that resemblaunce and similitude of his
wisedome, which hee hath vouchsafed to transferre and to imprint
in mans nature: and that wee might bee induced thereby to
glorifie him: and that wee shoulde labour to the vttermost of our
power, to haue this image shine in vs more and more, and daily
to encrease in likenesse vnto the paterne from whence it is taken.
Nowe let vs followe that diuision which wee haue alreadie made
of the sundry faculties, vertues, properties and offices which the
soule hath in the bodie, namely, the Animall, Vitall and Naturall:
and that diuision also which wee made of mans bodie, vnto
which many attribute three seuerall partes, and call them bellies,
the first and highest of which they place in the head,Three bellies attributed to mans body. for the Animall
faculties and vertues: the second, which is the middlemost
belly, in the breast and stomacke for the Vitall vertues: and the
last, from the Midriffe to the share-bone for the Naturall faculties.
They vnderstande by the first the whole brayne, which they
diuide also into sundrie partes, and call them likewise Bellies, and

little Bellies. Wee haue alreadie hearde of the excellencie of the
head, of the place and situation thereof, of the goodly outward members
wherewith it is beautified, of the bones whereof it is made, and of
the couering wherewith they are couered, that the braine might haue
his conuenient lodging, and such a one as is requisite for the nature
and office it hath: that it might be wel fortified and defended on euery
side to preserue and keepe it well, against all outward inconueniences
that might come vnto it: and to the end also it might haue neere
about it all those seruaunts and senses which it guideth and gouerneth,
and all those instruments which it standeth most in neede of,
both in regard of the workes it is charged with, as also for the purging
thereof. Forasmuch then as it is lodged in the head, we are to know,
that as the head hath a certaine agreement with the heauens, and the
eyes with the celestiall lightes,Of the braine and of the image of God therein. as wee haue already touched, so is it
likewise with the braine. For it is of a more heauenly nature, and approcheth
neerer to the spirituall and diuine nature then any other part
of the whole body, as that wherein a man may finde all those excellent
vertues and Animall powers, of which I made mention in the beginning
of my speech, and which are no actions or workes of a brutish
nature. Whereof also it followeth very wel, that the Woorkemaster
and authour thereof, cannot bee of a brutish nature, without vnderstanding
and knowledge of order, of things honest and dishonest, and
of good and bad. Which teacheth vs moreouer, that hee greatly esteemeth
of the preseruation of nature and of humane societie, and detesteth
whatsoeuer is contrary therevnto, seeing hee hath imprinted in man
such an image of his diuine nature, as hee would not willingly haue defaced
and blotted out. Wherfore, although we cannot throughly know,
either the nature of the braine, or the actions thereof, or of the soule
which it serueth: yet yt which may come to our knowledge will greatly
helpe to confirme more and more this testimony of God and of his prouidence,
which is already imprinted in our hearts by the light and law
of nature. Therfore it were very good and profitable for vs, to consider
diligently of that resemblance of God, which euery one of vs beareth
in a very small image, that wee may giue him thankes, and referre to
their proper ende all those giftes and excellent partes, which he hath
placed in our nature. Wee are to note then for the first poynt,
that as GOD manifesteth more excellently his diuine nature, and
the glorie of his maiestie in the heauens, and in the highest partes of
this great visible worlde, then he doeth in other partes more base and
terrestriall,The braine most resembleth the heauens. as we may easily knowe by the contemplation of them:
so dealeth hee with the head and brayne of man, which is as it

were the lodging of the internall senses already named, which are
farre more excellent and noble then the outward senses. For if liuing
creatures, and chiefly man, should onely and barely apprehend those
things that are before them, without any imagination, thought, or
consideration of them, thereby to know how to chuse or reiect them,
as they may be eyther profitable or hurtfull, it would not be greatly
profitable, to haue them presented to the outward senses. For
this cause God hath ioyned vnto them another facultie and vertue,
which is much more excellent and wonderfull then is the simple apprehending
of them. This facultie and power is giuen for the knowledge
of things, and that to the instruments in the brayne, as it appeareth
by experience in this, that according as the braine and the
partes thereof are well or ill affected, it is perceiued in the internall
senses, of which they are the instruments, as wee will expresse more
plainely in the sequele of our speech. But concerning this present
matter in hand,Three kindes of knowledge. we are to note, that there are three kindes of knowledge.
The first knoweth those bodies onely that are present before
it: the second knoweth those also that are absent: and the third those
things that haue no bodies. Wee see by experience, that although
plants haue a certaine agreement with other liuing creatures, namely
in this, that they inioy the same life with them, which we called before
the Vegetatiue or Nourishing life, neuerthelesse, other liuing creatures
haue this more then they, that they know, see, heare, taste, smell
and touch, which things are without them: whereas the whole life of
plants hath nothing but that which is within them, hauing no sense
or knowledge outwardly.Of the first kinde of knowledge common to all liuing creatures. Concerning that knowledge, which taketh
notice onely of corporall things that are present before it, it is
the same that belongeth properly to the external senses, of which we
spake before, and which are giuen by God to liuing creatures for
their preseruation. For seeing they are bodily natures, and must liue amongst
bodies, hee hath endued them with a certaine knowledge of
those bodies, to the end they may desire and follow after such things
as are agreeable to their nature, and eschewe that which is hurtfull.
Now that which is hidden within anything, is knowen by some outward
means. And therfore the bodily senses were giue^ vnto the^, to the
end that by them they might know whatsoeuer is external, being annexed
to the things that are perceiued. And although God hath not
giuen to all liuing creatures outwarde senses alike, yet they that are
perfect haue all those fiue senses spoken of in our former discourses,
by which they are able to perceiue and knowe all outward things, so
that nothing can bee found, which is not comprehended vnder the

knowledge of these senses. Wherin God hath so prouided, that according
to mans iudgement we see, that all perfect liuing creatures ought
to haue iust so many and not one more or lesse. For if they had lesse, they
should not be so perfect as they are: and if they had moe, they woulde
be superfluous and for no vse, at leastwise so farre forth as our smal capacitie
could conceiue, leauing in the meane while to the incomprehensible
wisedome, and infinite power of God, that which we are not
able to comprehend. For we owe him this reuerence, seeing he alone
knoweth all things that are necessary and expedient for all creatures.
Now besides this outward knowledge of things present,Of the second kind of knowledge. we see plainly,
that there is another knowledge within of things that are absent.
For our owne experience teacheth vs, that euen then when our externall
senses are retired and withdrawen from doing their dueties, the imagination,
thought, consideration and remembrance of those things
we haue seene, heard, tasted, smelt, touched and perceiued with corporal
senses, remaine still in vs both waking and sleeping: as it appeareth
by our dreames, in which the images and resemblance of those
things which the bodily senses perceiued waking, are represented to
our internall senses when we are asleepe. We see testimonies of some
part of this knowledge euen in brute beastes, which causeth them to
haue respect to such things as they neede: but yet they haue it not as
men haue, who haue farre greater knowledge, and moe internal senses
then beasts,Of the third kind of knowledge. as being partakers of reason and vnderstanding. The third
kinde of knowledge, which is of things that are not bodily, is the principal
effect of the vnderstanding, which lifteth vp all the senses of ma^
to the cotemplation of the diuinitie, and of the spiritual and supernatural
things: which kind of knowledge is proper to man and to no other liuing
creature. Of this knowledge we will intreat more at large hereafter,
when we shal speake of those principall and most noble senses of
the soule, namely vnderstanding and reason. In the meane time that
we may the better know the facultie vertue and office of euery one of
those internal senses of which we will intreate, we are to vnderstand,
that the soule worketh by them in their places, almost after the same
manner it doeth in the diuers kindes of her naturall faculties and vertues,
according to the nature of euery one of them. For this power and
vertue which we call naturall,Of the naturall vertue and of the kindes thereof. and which before we saide was the third
facultie that continually worketh in man and neuer ceaseth, is diuided
into three sortes. The first is the vertue of nourishing, the second of augmenting,
the third of ingendring: and these haue sixe other vertues and
faculties common to them altogether. The first draweth vnto it, the
second holdeth fast, the third digesteth, the fourth distributeth, the

fift assimilateth and incorporateth, that is, conuerteth into it owne substance
that which is dispensed vnto it, and so turneth it into the substance
of the bodie that receiueth it: the sixt driueth forth whatsoeuer
is superfluous. For the nourishment which the bodie receiueth would
doe it no good, vnlesse it had some vertue in it to drawe the same vnto
it selfe, as also members and instruments meete for this woorke,
as we will declare more at large by the helpe of God, when we shal
speake more particularly of this matter. Besides, it is not enough
for the bodie to drawe foode to it selfe, but it must also retaine the
same. And because the thinges that are taken cannot nourish the
bodie except they bee turned into the nature thereof, therefore they
must first bee digested and prepared by this meanes, as wee vse to
prepare such meates as haue neede of dressing before wee eate them.
But because they are not sufficiently prepared by this first dressing,
they must bee once againe dressed by the naturall heate that is in the
bodie, without which neyther the heate of the materiall fire, nor
the heate of the sunne will serue the turne, vnlesse this naturall heare
also doe his duetie. Nowe after the meate is thus digested and prepared,
it must bee distributed and parted to all the members, that
euery one may take such nourishment as is meete for it. And because
the matter is diuers in the whole composition of the bodie, as
namely, bones, gristles, ligaments, sinewes, arteries, veynes, fleshe
and other kindes of matter whereof wee haue spoken heeretofore:
therefore must the food also be so conuerted in euery member, as that
it is to bee altered into a substance altogether like to euery seuerall
part it hath to nourish. Nowe forasmuch as all that the bodie taketh
in for nourishment, is not fitte for that purpose, after that nature
hath taken that which may doe her good, shee reiecteth the
residue, wich is not onely not profitable, but also very hurtfull for
her, vnlesse shee did cast it foorth, and so discharge and purge
the bodie thereof. Nowe let vs see howe the like is wrought in the
brayne betweene the internall senses and the Animal vertues.Of the Animal vertues and powers in the internal senses. For
first there must bee some facultie and vertue that receiueth the images
imprinted in the senses, the knowledge whereof is as single
and plaine as may bee, because it is onely of thinges that are bodily
and present, as I haue alreadie declared. This vertue is called Imagination,Of Imagination.
or the Imaginatiue vertue, which is in the soule as the eye
in the bodie, by beholding to receiue the images that are offered vnto
it by the outward senses: and therefore it knoweth also the things
that are absent, and is amongst the internal senses as it were the mouth
of the vessell of memorie,Of Memorie. which is the facultie and vertue that retaineth

and keepeth whatsoeuer is committed to the custody thereof by
the other senses, that it may be found and brought forth when neede
requireth. Therefore Memorie is as it were their treasurer to keepe
that which they committe vnto it, and to bring it foorth in due time
and season. Nowe after that the Imagination hath receiued the images
of the senses, singly and particularly as they are offered vnto
it, then doeth it as it were prepared and digest them, eyther by ioyning
them together, or by separating them according as their natures
require.Of Fantasie and Common sense. They that distinguish Imagination from Fantasie, attribute
this office to Fantasie: others say it belongeth to the Common
sense, vnder which they comprehend both the former faculties,
because the office thereof is to receiue the images that are offered vnto
it, and to discerne the things as they are presented by all the externall
senses, and to distinguish them as they doe. Afterwarde it is requisite,
that all these things thus heaped together, shoulde bee distributed
and compared one with another, to consider howe they
may be conioyned or seuered, how one followeth another, or how
farre asunder they are, that so a man may iudge what is to be retained
and what to be refused. And this office belongeth to Reason, after
which Iudgement followeth,Of Reason and Iudgement. whereby men chuse or refuse that which
reason alloweth or disalloweth. For it belongeth to reason to discourse,
and memory afterward, as I haue alreadie touched, hath this
office to retaine and keepe all. Thus you see the similitude and comparison
that may be considered of betweene the actions and workes
of the naturall vertues of the soule, and those of the Animal vertues
in the internall senses: which may greatly helpe vs to the better
vnderstanding of that which wee haue alreadie touched before, concerning
the spirituall foode of our soules, which properly belongeth
to the internall senses. Nowe because all these senses, faculties
and vertues haue their instruments in the brayne, before we speake
more at large and particularly of their office and nature, wee must
see howe these partes are placed in the head, and what vessels and
members they haue in the brayne: and this ACHITOB shal teach vs.


Of the composition of the Braine, with the members and partes thereof:
of their offices, and of that knowledge which ought to content vs, touching
the principall cause of the vertues and wonderfull powers of the soule.
Chap. 24.
ACHITOB. The actions, faculties and vertues of the soule are so
high and obscure, that their excellency far surmounteth ye capacity

of our vndersta^dings. For we haue no other soule aboue this yt effecteth
these works, whereby we might see and know the nature hereof, as by
this we come to the knowledge of corporall things, whose nature being
of lesse excellencie and more base, our soule which is of a more high
and noble nature is able to know, comprehend and iudge of them. But
because there is no nature in vs more high and excellent then our soule,
none can know it as it is,The nature of the reasonable part in ye soule is hard to be knowne. but onely the creator that made it, especially
that reasonable part of the soule, wherein the image of God is more
liuely, and shineth more clearely then in the rest. Therefore we may in
some sort know by this part, facultie and vertue which is the chiefest,
what is the nature of the rest, that are inferiour vnto it. But because
there is no part in vs aboue that, we cannot perceiue and know how it
vseth the internal senses, with their vessels and instruments, as by this
wee may iudge of the Vital vertue, which it sheweth vnto vs in the
heart, and of the Nutritiue vertue which it discouereth vnto vs in the
liuer, and in other partes and members seruing to these faculties, as also
to the vertue of generation. Therefore wee must waite for a more
ample knowledge of our selues, chiefly of our soules, and aboue all of
that part which is most excellent in it, when we shall by the goodnes
and grace of God beholde face to face the creator that created it, and
shal behold and know our selues in him, and contemplate him in all
perfection and truth. But seeing we vnderstood by the former speech,
that all the Animal faculties and vertues, and all the internal senses
(in the knowledge whereof we desire to be instructed more at large)
haue their seates and instruments in the braine, let vs nowe consider
howe these partes are placed within the head. And first of all wee
must call to minde what wee hearde before of the outwarde partes
thereof. As for that which is within, there are hollowe places, called
Little Bellies,Of the litle Bellies of the braine. distinguished by distaunce of place, as it were diuers
chambers in one building. Therefore there are certayne
membranes or skinnes both to distinguish them and knitte them
together, as also to preserue and keepe them from all hurt and
danger.
Nowe albeit these skinnes haue this office, yet it is much to
bee marueiled at, howe this whole frame can keepe it selfe and
continue so firme, as it were the roofe of a house or Church, considering
that the matter there is great, spongie, and very tender. The
first of these skinnes is a thicke couering, which is one of the chiefest
skinnes that belong to our body. The substance thereof is thicke,
and harder then any other skinne,Of D^^a mater, or the hard mother. and therefore it is called the Harde
mother, because it bringeth foorth and preserueth all the rest.

The vse and profite thereof is to wrap and foulde in rounde about the
whole braine, and to keepe it, that whilest it moueth, it shoulde not
be hurt with the bone of the head, which is commonly called the skul.
For nature vseth to set a meane betweene two contraries,Of the skull. as well to
knit them together, as to preserue both the one and the other. Therefore
because the bones of the skull are hard,Three vses of the hard Mother. and the braine is soft and
tender, God hath placed this couering, which is of a middle substance
betweene them both, and is so tyed to the one and the other, that it
hangeth as it were betweene both, and toucheth neither of them, but
there is space betweene them, to the ende that the motion of the
braine might be free without any let or hinderance. The second vse
thereof is, to serue for a passage to the veines and arteries, for the nourishing
of the braine and gouerning of the vitall spirites. Last of all, it
serueth to distinguish the whole brayne, first into two partes, namely
into that before, and that behinde: then into the right side and the
left. It is of this skinne whereof some men thinke Salomon spake, when
he made mention of a golden Ewer broken in the extremitie of olde age,Eccles. 12. 6.
and so wee expounded it when wee intreated of the marrowe in the
chine-bone.Of Iia mater or ye godly mother. Besides this skinne, there is another named the Godly
mother, which is fine and very slender, wouen of many veynes and arteries,
seruing not onely for it owne life and nourishment, but also for
that of the brayne. Neither doeth it onely compasse and wrap in the
braine round about, as the Hard mother doeth, but entreth also into
the bowels and windings thereof, to tie and knit it togither on al sides.
As for the braine,Of the braine and office thereof. which is the fountaine and beginning of the sinewes
and of the voluntary motion, and the instrument of the chiefest faculty
of the soule, namely, the Animal and reasonable facultie, it is greater
in man then in any other creature, as that which filleth almost the
whole skull. I say almost, because if it filled it full and wholly, the
motion thereof could not be perfect. His office and vse is, to woorke
and make fine the Animal spirite, which is necessary for the whole
body, and to serue as an instrument to the facultie of reason, which is
the chiefest facultie and vertue of the soule. The first part of the
brayne retayneth the name of the whole,The diuision of the braine. beeing diuided into
two partes, namely into the right part and the left. The hinder
part is called the little brayne, and that in comparison of the other
partes. So that when a man considereth the whole brayne,
hee shall finde within the substaunce thereof foure Ventricles, or
hollowe places, which are ioyned together by certaine wayes.
Nowe although wee cannot see with our eyes, nor well vnderstande
and conceiue howe the soule woorketh by her instruments,

neuerthelesse God giueth vs a certain entrance into some knowledge
thereof by the matter and forme which they haue. And therefore it
seemeth, that these litle bellies of the braine haue such wayes from
one to another, to this ende that by them, the spirites that are
made and imprinted by the sensible and intelligible kindes and images,
might passe and bee communicate one with another.
Nowe because they must not onely bee well wrought, but also
throughly cleansed of all excrements, God hath created those vessels
and instruments, in which this woorke is to bee begunne, greater then
the others which are to receiue the spirites alreadie wrought and almost
perfected. Therefore the two first are the greatest, hauing
their situation before, namely on each side one, and being in fashion
like to two halfe moones. The thirde is vnderneath them right in
the middest of the braine. The fourth and last is vpon the bending
downe of the nape of the necke. As for the two first ventricles, they
are so conioyned the one with the other, that they end in one common
pipe or passage, like to two paire of smithes bellowes, And it
seemeth that God hath made them of that fashion, as if hee meant
thereby to shew vs, that the spirite of the saide ventricles hauing receiued
his forme of the kindes and images propounded vnto it, is caried
by this passage into the middle ventricle or bellie. I omit to speak
at large of many vessels and instruments, which serue the brayne for
sundry purposes, amongest the which there is one, which both the
Greeke and Latine Physicions call by a name that signifieth a Presse,Of the presse and Vault in ye head.
because the blood is pressed into it for the nourishing of the braine:
and another called a Vault, both in respect of the fashion and of
the vse. For it is like a Vault or arch-roofe fet vpon three pillers,
and is as it were the roofe and couering of the middle ventricle,
that there might bee a more free and easie space for the motion of
the Animal spirite that is made therein: and also that it might more
easily sustaine and beare the greate quantitie of brayne, that leaneth
vnto eache side of it. I omitte also other instruments, which
serue in like manner to strengthen and support the partes thereof.
There is also one instrument made as it were of many pieces ioyned
together like little wheeles,Of the Like worme and of his office. which is called Like-worme, because
of the likelihoode it hath with those great white wormes
that are founde in rotten wood. It seemeth that this piece was
placed there, to bee as it were the porter, to shutte and open the
passage of the spirites that goe into the hindermost ventricle, to
the ende they shoulde enter therein measureable, and so auoyde

the confusion of the memorie that is placed there: which otherwise
would happen if they shoulde enter in too sodainly and too much at
once.Of the passage whereby the superfluities of the brain are voyded. There is likewise a pipe; to euacuate the grosse and thicke excrements
of the braine, aswell by the roofe of the mouth, as by the nose:
and therefore because it resembleth a litle basin, or rather a funnel, it
is called by those names.
Moreouer, there is a pipe that passeth from the middle ventricle
to the last, which is as it were the chariot of the spirite, to passe
from one to another. In all which thinges, and in many others
particularly obserued by Physicions and Anatomists, in this part
of the brayne, wee may note a woonderfull woorkemanshippe
both for the varietie of instruments, and for their fitte application to
those dueties that are assigned them. Wherefore wee may well
say, that it is in this part of man chiefly, wherein GOD doeth
most excellent manifestly his diuine nature, and the glorie of his
maiestie. And this wee shall better perceiue, by considering particularly
and in order vnto which of the internall senses all these
partes of the brayne are vessels and instruments, in which the faculties
and vertues of the soule are contained and doc shewe themselues.
But as was sayde in the beginning of our speech,None can here attaine to a perfect knowledge of the essentiall power of ye soule. let vs
not heere looke for a sounde and perfect knowledge of that substantiall
power, whereby the soule effecteth so many marueilous
woorkes by the meanes of these senses. For so high a secrete beeing
layde vp and hidde in wisedome and trueth it selfe, cannot fall
within the small capacitie of mans sense and vnderstanding, vntill
the light thereof bee purged from that corporall darknesse wherewith
it is couered and compassed about during this life.
Neuerthelesse by a diligent contemplation of that matter, which
wee haue noted woorthie of admiration, wee shall finde sufficient
wherewith to content our mindes, by causing them to looke to
themselues, in respect of that which it hath pleased GOD heere
to reueale and manifest two manner of wayes. First, because wee
may in some sort take a viewe of nature, by searching out therein
those thinges, of which shee doeth heere set before vs very euident
testimonies: euen those thinges which may bee demonstrated
(although grossely) according to the capacitie of our dull vnderstandings.
The second way, which is the chiefest and most sure, is by that
testimonie which himselfe affoordeth vs in his worde. For let vs
not thinke that the minde can pronounce any thing for certayne, but
as it is directed by the testimonie of GOD, seeing the senses which

hee hath giuen vs, come short herein, and are not able to ascende vp
so high. For the excellencie of this creature, and of the nature thereof
is such and so great,The mind cannot perfectly know it selfe. that it cannot perfectly knowe and comprehend
itselfe, especially where it is of greatest dignitie. So that
if wee desire to haue certaine knowledge, whither should we haue
recourse in this defect of our senses, but vnto him that is able to
certifie vs truely in this poynt. And who can testifie the trueth of
the worke, but the Workemaster that made it, and therefore knoweth
it better then any other, and all the perfection that is in it?
Why then doe wee not yeelde to GOD that honour in a thing not
to bee comprehended by vs, which wee doe to men of whome
wee are well perswaded in thinges which wee cannot knowe but
by their testimonie? For howe manie thinges doe wee beleeue of
which wee knowe not the causes, and for which wee haue no other
reason shewed vs, but onely the testimonie and authoritie of
men, whome wee iudge woorthie of credite, who notwithstanding
may themselues bee deceiued, and deceiue others. But GOD
cannot bee deceiued,God cannot deceiue, nor be deceiued. nor deceiue those that giue credite to his testimonie,
which hee hath not so hidden from men, but that it is manifested
vnto them, yea hee hath chosen some amongst them to testifie
the same from him to others. And if it hath pleased him to haue such
witnesses amongest them, a man may soone see that hee hath chosen
them in whome hee hath caused his image to shine most excellently,
and whome hee hath made more like to himselfe, aswell
by the reuelation of his holy spirite, in all those excellent graces
and vertues wherewith hee hath indued them, as also by those
holy and heauenly woorkes which he effecteth by them, whereby
hee hath as it were marked them with his seale to giue them authoritie,
and to cause them to bee acknowledged of all for his faithfull
witnesses and seruants. If then wee desire to haue certaine and
true witnesses in any such matter, where can we finde them sooner
then amongest the Patriarkes, Prophets and Apostles, with all those
Martyres and other holy personages,The testimony of the scriptures most firme. whose doctrine and life testifie
vnto vs howe farre they differ from other men? But aboue all,
howe highly ought wee to esteeme the testimonie of the very
Sonne of GOD, who is to bee preferred before all others? Seeing
therefore wee haue so many faithfull witnesses, let vs keepe
vs to their testimonie, wayting for that perfect light, and more
cleare and ample knowledge which shall bee reuealed vnto vs in
that heauenly glorie. In the meane time let vs consider howe wee
are able to comprehende the infinite nature of the Creator of our

soule, seeing wee cannot conceiue the nature of the soule, which he
hath created: and let vs reiect those dogges and hogges, those Atheists
and Epicures, who iudge of God and of the soule of man so farre
foorth onely as they are able to knowe and comprehend by their naturall
sense, whereby they see no further into the soule of man then
they doe into the soules of beasts, whome themselues resemble. But
suppose they had no other testimony of the celestiall and diuine nature
of the soule, but that which it affoordeth vs daily by those faculties
and vertues where with God hath endued it, and the effectes it
sheweth vs, yet ought they to learne to iudge otherwise. Now to morrowe
it will be thy part, ASER, to beginne the particular handling of
these goodly internall senses, whose vesselles and instruments wee
haue considered of in this speach: as also thou art to teach vs who be
the chiefe ministers of the soule for all her actions.

The end of the third dayes worke.


THE FOVRTH
dayes worke.

Of the seate of voluntary motion and sense: of the office and nature of
the common sense: of imagination and of fantasie, and howe light
and dangerous fantasie is: of the power which both good and bad
spirites haue to mooue it. Chap. 25.
ASER. The knowledge of many things is so natural to
men, that being borne with them, it is like to a light
attending vpon the minde, as the sight doeth vpon
the eyes. For the knowledge of numbers and of order,
the Principles and beginning of Artes, the knowledge
and distinction of things honest and dishonest,
proceede from such a light. And when Saint Paul sayeth, that the
Gentiles, and all that haue not receiued of God the Lawe of the two
Tables as the people of Israel did,Rom. 2. 15. haue notwithstanding a Law written
in their hearts that doeth accuse or excuse them, no doubt but by this
Lawe hee vnderstandeth that naturall knowledge which men haue
both of God, and of good, and euil, which issueth from a higher spring
then from the outward sences, and which euery one hath for a schoolemistress
within himselfe, euen they also that would extinguish wholly

this light if they could. For although God hath imprinted many
similitudes and testimonies of himselfe in all creatures, whereby hee
manifesteth himselfe vnto vs, yet should we know nothing more then
the brute beasts do, if there were not a light in our mindes that causeth
vs to see and knowe them, and to conclude that which wee doe:
which light is not in beasts, albeit they haue outward senses as wel as
wee. But it is commonly said, that there is nothing in the vnderstanding,
which hath not first beene in the outward senses: that is to say,
that it can know nothing, which is not first discouered and manifested
vnto it by them. But wee must vnderstand that saying of such things
as fall vnder their powers and faculties, which being knowen and
noted by the senses, doe awaken and stirre vp the vnderstanding,
which after by that vertue it hath in it selfe, proceedeth forward,
namely, from signes and effects vnto causes, from accidents to substances,
and from particular things to vniuersalities. But let vs consider
how.
We must first remember the diuision which before wee made of
the animal facultie and power, and thereupon wee note that the sensitiue
and motiue powers,Of the seate of voluntary sense and motion. whereby the soule, vsing the meanes of
the sinewes and muscles, giueth voluntary sense and motion to all the
body, haue no speciall place or seate in the braine, as the other internall
senses haue, but are dispersed throughout the whole substance
thereof. Concerning the chiefe power and facultie we were told before,
how some distinguish betweene Imagination, fantasie, and the
Common sense: and how others comprehend them all in one. But be
it that we ioyne or separate them, let vs nowe consider of the nature
and places of each of them.Of the Common sense and of his office. The Common sense is so called, because it
is the first of all the internall fenses of which we are to speake, as also
the Prince and Lord of all the externall sense, who are his messengers
and seruants to minister and make relation vnto him of things in common.
For it receiueth all the images and shapes that are offered and
brought vnto it by them, yea all the kindes and resemblances of materiall
things, which they haue receiued only from without, as a glasse
doth: and al this for no other cause, but that they should discerne and
seuer euery thing according to it owne nature and propertie, and afterward
communicate them to the internall senses. For although all the
knowledge that is in the minde of man proceedeth not from the outward
senses, as we shewed in the beginning of our speach, neuertheles
they are created of God, to the end they should send to the vnderstanding
the similitudes of things without, and be the messengers of
the minde, and witnesses of experience: and also to the ende they

should awaken and stirre vp the mind to behold and marke the things
that are without it, that by considering of them, it may iudge of, and
correct the faultes. Wee must then obserue, that the externall senses
haue no iudgement of that which they outwardly receiue but by
meanes of the common sense, vnto which they make relation, and
then that iudgeth: so that they ende where that beginneth. In this
manner therefore as the Common sense of all the internall senses is next
vnto the external, so is it the meanes whereby they communicate one
with an other. For afterward it caryeth to the other internall senses
whatsoeuer hath beene communicated vnto it by the externall. Now
after this sense hath done his duety,Of Imagination and of Fantasie. Imagination and Fantasie execute
their offices, both which are taken by many for one and the same facultie
and vertue of the soule, but yet distinguished from the Common
sense: others ioyne them both with the Common sense, because these
three senses, whether they be distinguished or taken all for one, haue
their seates, vessels, and instruments in the former part of the braine.
Therefore there will be no danger if we vse these two names Fantasie
and Imagination indifferently. For Fantasie is deriued from a Greeke
worde that signifieth as much as Imagination: and it is translated by
Cicero into a Latin word, which is as much as Vision. This faculty therfore
and vertue of the soule is called Fantasie, because the visions,
kindes, and images of such things as it receiueth, are diuersly framed
therein, according to the formes and shapes that are brought to the
Common sense.Dan. 2. 28, 29. Therefore Daniel called the dreame of Nebuchadnezzar,
the visions of his head, which hee had vpon his bed, according to
the thoughts whereupon he mused and fell on sleepe. For although
this was a heauenly dreame, yet God vsed therein the internall senses,
which hee had giuen to Nebuchadnezzar, vnto which hee represented
the image of those things hee woulde haue him to vnderstand
and knowe, as afterward they were expounded vnto him by
Daniel. Moreouer this facultie of the fantasie is sudden, and so farre from
stayednes,The giddinesse of Fantasie. that euen in the time of sleep it hardly taketh any rest, but is
alwaies occupied in dreaming and doting, yea euen about those things
which neuer haue bin, shalbe, or can be. For it staieth not in that which
is shewed vnto it by the senses that serue it, but taketh what pleaseth
it, and addeth thereunto or diminisheth, changeth and rechangeth,
mingleth and vnmingleth, so that it cutteth asunder and seweth vp
againe as it listeth. So that there is nothing but the fantasie will imagine
and counterfaite, if it haue any matter and foundation to worke
vpon, without which it can build nothing, as wee may iudge by that
which hath bene already shewed, namely that man can neither think,

imagine, or doe any thing else, of which hee hath not some beginning
and ground in nature and in the woorkes of God, from which
after hee hath his inuentions. But although fantasie can doe nothing
without this gappe and entrance, yet it is a wonder to see the inuentions
it hath after some occasion is giuen it, and what newe and monstrous
things it forgeth and coyneth, by sundry imaginations arising
of those images and similitudes, from whence it hath the first paterne.
So that in trueth,Fantasie is dangerous. fantasie is a very dangerous thing. For if it bee not
guided and brideled by reason, it troubleth and mooueth all the sense
and vnderstanding, as a tempest doeth the sea. For it is easily stirred
vp not onely by the externall senses, but also by the complexion and
disposition of the body.It is very subiect to the motions of good or ill spirites. Heereof it proceedeth that euen the spirites
both good and bad haue great accesse vnto it, to stirre it either to good
or euill, and that by meanes vnknowen to vs. For as wee haue many
meanes to prouoke one anothers imagination and fantasie, which are
not in beastes, neither can be comprehended by them; so these spiritual
natures (by reason of the agreement of their nature) haue one towardes
an other, which wee neyther knowe nor can comprehend,
whereby they haue accesse to mooue our fantasie diuers wayes.
Wherefore as the Angelles haue meanes to represent to our mindes
the images of good, heauenly, and diuine things, both waking and
sleeping: so can euill spirites greatly trouble them by diuers illusions:
the proofe whereof wee haue in many,How sorcerers are deluded by the Diuell. whome badde spirites find apt
and disposed thereunto, and namely in sorcerers, whose minde they
trouble in such sort by sundry strange illusions, that they verily thinke
they haue seene, heard, spoken, and done that which the deuill representeth
to their fantasie, yea such things as neither men nor deuilles
themselues can possibly perfourme: and yet all that while they stirre
not out of their bedde, or out of some one place. But the diuell, hauing
once power ouer them, doeth in such sort print in their fantasie
the images of those things hee representeth vnto them, and which he
woulde haue them beleeue to be true, that they can not thinke otherwise
but that it is so, that they haue done such things, and that they
were awake when indeed they slept. For as God appeareth to his seruants
by heauenly visions, both when they sleep and when they wake,
and printeth in their mindes the images of those things which it pleaseth
him to reueale vnto them: so the diuell, who endeuoureth to
counterfait all the woorkes of God to deceiue men, hath his deuilish
illusions for his visions,The deuill counterfaiteth the workes of God. whereby he mooueth and troubleth the fantasie
and mindes of those, ouer whome hee raigneth through their
infidelity and wickednesse. Therefore it is very needefull, that men

should recommend themselues to God, to the ende these euil spirites
may haue no such power ouer them, and that their iudgements may
be sound to discerne the images of those things, which hee representeth
to their mindes, from all Diabolicall illusions. And surely no maruaile
if wicked spirites so oftentimes deceiue men, when as Iuglers
haue so many waies to abuse them, shewing them such strange sights,
that if they were not wrought by those kinde of men, a great many
woulde take them for miracles. Yea although they be done after this
manner, yet wee wonder thereat, being hardly able by the sharpnesse
of our wits to attaine to the knowledge thereof, so that many are perswaded
that such things cannot be done without the power of the deuill.
But let vs returne to our matter.Of the force of imagination. This imaginatiue power of the
soule, hath moreouer such vertue, that oftentimes the imagination
printeth in the body, the images of those things which it doeth vehemently
thinke of and apprehend, the experience whereof is very euident,
especially in the longings and imaginations of women with
childe. Many times also we see some that can hardly goe ouer a bridge
without falling, by reason of the apprehension of the danger, which
they haue conceiued in their fantasie and imagination. But which is
yet more strange,The strong fancie of women with childe. it falleth out oftentimes, that the fancies and imaginations
of great bellied women are so vehement and violent, that
vpon the bodies of the children they goe withall, they print the images
and shapes of those things vpon which they haue fixed their fancies,
and vnto which by reason of their fancie, they are most affectionated.
Wee see examples heereof a great many continually. Neither
is it altogether without reason which wee vse commonly to say, that
fancie breedes the fact which it imagineth. For wee see many fall into
those mishaps and inconueniences, which they imprint in their fantasie
and imagination. Wee may also obserue heere, howe wee are
prouoked to yawne and gape when wee see others doe so, and driuen
into a desire of many things of which wee should not haue dreamed,
vnlesse wee had beene incited thereunto by the example of others, or
by some obiect presented to our senses, and prouoking vs thereunto.
Yea,Imagination preuaileth much in beasts. this imaginatiue vertue can do much in beastes, as among other
things wee may see it in this, that they desire rather to make water in
a puddle, or in a riuer, or in some other water, or vpon a dunghill or in
a stable, then else-where. For the things that are offred to their senses
soone mooue their fantasie and imagination, which afterward stirreth
them vp, either in respect of the agreeme^t that is betwixt those things,
namely, water and vrine, or because of their custome to doe such a
thing in such a place, which putteth them in minde and helpeth them

to doe it more readily, by reason of the imaginatiue vertue that is in
them.
Nowe if imagination hath such vertue in beastes, wee may iudge
also what it is able to do in the minde of man, which is a great deale
more quicke and ready.Good counsaile for euery one. Therefore we ought to eschew all occasions
of euill, that may be presented to our senses, to stirre vp our imagination
and fantasie to wicked and dishonest things. For one only wicked
looke, or one dishonest speach, is sufficient to trouble our minds with
diuers imaginations and fantasies. Which as it is well knowne to the
deuil, so knoweth he also how to giue occasion, and to offer the means
of stirring all the stuffe in our fancies. But we keep such bad watch in
this respect, that in steade of eschewing occasions of euil, we seeke after
them, and where we should shut the doore against euill, we set it
wide open, that it may enter more easily into vs. Wherein wee followe
not the example of the Prophet, who prayed vnto the Lorde,
saying,Psal. 119. 37. Turne away mine eyes that they beholde no vanitie: but wee rather
take a contrary course to whet our selues forward to all beastlinesse.
Seeing therefore Imagination and Fantasie haue so little holde
of themselues, wee haue neede of an other facultie and vertue aboue
that, to be able to iudge of things imagined and perceiued by sense (of
which wee haue hitherto spoken) and that is reason, the discourse
where of I reserre to thee, AMANA, as also of memorie, which is the
fift and last internall sense of the soule.


Of Reason and Memorie, and of their seate, nature, and office: of the
agreement which all the senses both externall and internall haue
one with another, and of their vertues. Chap. 26.
AMANA. They that haue curiously searched into the nature of
beasts, haue found in them, especially in such as were most perfect,
as many externall and internal senses as are in man: yea they perceiued,
that their braine and all the partes thereof, did not differ much
from that of men, whether wee respect the substance or the fashion.
But all these excellent giftes of nature reach no farther in them,Beasts search only after corporall things belonging to this life. then
to the vses of this present life, and the necessities thereof. For they haue
no reason giuen them to enquire after that which is good, to the ende
their will might followe and embrace the same. Moreouer their Good,
consisteth only in corporall things belonging to the bodie, which they

easily knowe and discerne, as standing in neede of no other reason or
vnderstanding to make enquirie after it, then of that bare knowledge
and naturall inclination that is giuen them. But the Good that belongeth
to man, is hidden in the soule and spirite. For this cause hee must
of necessitie enquire after it, that hee may come to the knowledge
thereof, least he chuse euill in steade of good, for want of knowledge
of his proper and true Good, and so be deceiued by the appearance of a
false Good, which is not so in trueth, but in opinion onely and by errour:
whereby the greatest part of men are commonly beguiled, preferring
the supposed Goods of the body, before the true goods of the
soule, and temporall things before eternall. Therefore as our eyes
stand in neede of light to keepe vs, and to cause vs to see in darkenes,
so our soule and spirite hath neede of reason to guide it in the middest
of errour and ignorance, that it may discerne trueth from lying, the
true Good from the false, and that which is profitable from the contraty.
This facultie and vertue of the soule, so necessary in man, and
which is able to iudge of things imagined and perceiued by the other
senses, (of which we haue spoken before) to knowe whether they be
good or bad,Of the seate of reason and of his office. and what is to be embraced or eschewed, is called, the
Iudging or discoursing facultie, namely, Reason, which is the principall
part and vertue of the soule, and beareth rule among all the other senses.
For this cause he hath his seate by good right assigned him in the
midst of the braine, as in the highest and safest fortresse of the whole
frame of man, to raigne amiddest all the other senses, as Prince and
Lord ouer them all. For it is he that discourseth and iudgeth of trueth
from falshoode, that knoweth the agreement and disagreement of
things, that ioyneth together whatsoeuer is to be ioyned, and separateth
that which ought to bee separated, that distinguiseth things
which followe, or are contrary each to other, by comparing one
thing with another, by considering all circumstances, by referring euery
thing whither it ought to be referred. It is requisite therefore,
that he should keepe his owne place, and not be shuffled vp and confounded
with imagination and fantasie,Reason is the iudge of Fansie. of which hee is the Iudge to
approoue or condemne that which is good or euill, as also to correct,
to stay, and to keepe them in awe. For if reason intermeddle
and mingle it selfe with them, it will be so troubled, that it will not
be able to iudge as it ought of those things, which they present and
bring vnto it, but will bee so carried away, as if it were deposed
and thrust out of it owne place, and as if maides shoulde rule their
Mistresse, and take place before her. The like also happeneth vnto it,

when it is carried away with the affections, which it ought to rule,
moderate, and gouerne. But if it be vpright and sound, after it hath
well considered and debated of the whole matter brought and laide
before it by the former senses, it giueth sentence as Iudge, and iudgeth
finally without appeale. For there is no other iudgement after that.
Hereof it is, that it hath a iudiciall seate in the middest, wherein being
placed it heareth sutes and causes.Of Memorie and of his office. Besides, it hath neare vnto it Memorie,
which is in place of a Notary and Secretary, and as it were a register
booke, in which is entred whatsoeuer is ordained and decreed
by reason. For as we haue neede of such a Iudge as reason is, to conclude
and determine finally in the minde, whatsoeuer may bee called
into question and doubted of, so it is requisite, that the conclusion and
definitiue sentence should be registred in Memory, as it were in a roll
or booke of accompt, that it may alwayes be ready and found when
neede requireth. For what good should we get by that, which imagination,
fantasie, and reason conceiue and gather together, if it shoulde
all vanish away presently through forgetfulnesse, and no more memorie
thereof should remaine in man, then if nothing at all had bene
done?Dan. 2. The like would daily happen to vs, that befel Nebuchadnezzar,
when God reuealed vnto him by dreame in the vision of an Image,
what should become of his Monarchie and Empire, and of those that
followed him. For he remembred well, as himselfe testifieth, that he
had dreamed a dreame, whereupon his spirite was troubled, whilest
he laboured to vnderstand it: but hee was so farre from knowing the
signification of his dreame, that he remembred not what he had dreamed
and seene therein. Where wee see, that his imagination and fantasie
were so mooued by the image and vision represented vnto them
in this dreame, that they imprinted in his memory how they had seene
a vision, and that it was very strange and woonderfull. Yea reason
it selfe iudged, that the vision and image was of another nature, then
those that are co^monly in the imagination or fantasie, or those which
they coyne themselues in sleeping and dreaming, and that it had some
diuine signification. And this did reason imprint in the Kings memorie,
who remembred all these things generally, but when he beganne
to enquire of the matter more specially and particularly, hee could not
call to minde the kinde and manner of his dreame, but confessed that
the thing was gone from him. Afterward, hauing heard and vnderstoode
Daniel hee knewe that hee spake a trueth, and then remembred
what hee had dreamed and was gone from him, because it was
not well imprinted in his memorie, but had passed ouer lightly by it.
Heere then wee see how necessary this secretary and register, whome

wee call Memorie, is for the vnderstanding and spirite, not onely
to marke lightly such things as passe by it, but also to note and ingraue
them,Of the seate of memorie. as it were in tables or pillars of stone or brasse. Therefore
hath God assigned his seate and lodging in the hindermost part of the
braine, to the ende that, after such things as are to be committed vnto
it, haue passed by all the other senses, they should be committed to
it to keepe, as to their secretary. And for this cause that part of the
braine is lesse moist, and most solide and firme, for two manifest and
apparant reasons. First, because it is the fountaine of the marrowe in
the back: bone, of which those sinews are deriued that giue the strongest
motions to al the members of the body. Therefore also it was requisite,
that they shoulde bee of a more firme and solide matter then
the rest that are taken from the substance of other partes of the braine,
which are not to sustaine so great stresse. Secondly, forasmuch as the
memory is as it were the Register and Chancery Court of all the other
senses, the images of all things brought and committed vnto it by
them, are to be imprinted therein, as the image and signe of a ring
or seale is imprinted and set in the waxe that is sealed. Therefore it is
needefull that the matter of the instrument of Memorie shoulde bee
so well tempered,Causes of good and bad memories. that it be neither too soft nor too hard. For if it be
too soft, the images will be soone ingrauen, but they will not stay
there any long time, as they that will be quickely blotted out. Contrariwise,
if it be ouer hard, it wil be a harder matter to imprint them
therein. But when it is well tempered, it receiueth the images easily,
and keepeth them well. For the Memorie hath two dueties as well
as the hand, namely, to receiue and to hold fast. Therefore they that
are of a moist braine receiue more easily into their memories that
which is offered vnto them, and they that haue a drie braine, retaine
and keepe better in memorie.
But following that which wee haue hitherto spoken of all the internall
senses,Of the agreement betweene all the senses. we are nowe to obserue and note this, that the knowledge
of things which wee haue by the outward senses, is as if wee
beheld the shadowes of them: and that knowledge which wee haue
by the common sense, by Imagination and Fantasie, is as if wee did
looke vpon the images, which represent vnto vs those things whereof
they are images moreliuely and cleerely then their shadowes can do.
And the knowledge wee haue by vnderstanding, of which facultie
wee will intreate heereafter, is as if wee viewed, not onely the shadowes
or images of things, but also their very bodies, which is more.
And that knowledge which wee haue by reason is as if, besides all
this, wee sawe their effectes and vertues. Therefore there is as much

difference betweene the knowledge that a man may haue by euery
one of these faculties and powers, as there is betwixt the shadow, and
image, and body, and effects or vertues of one and the same thing,
to the end that the nature thereof may be throughly knowen. For all
these senses and vertues of mans mind agree so well together, that as
the outward senses serue the common sense, so the common sense serueth
Imagination, and imagination fantasie, and fantasie vnderstanding
and consideration, and consideration recordation, and recordation conference,
and conference reason, and lastly memorie serueth them al, as
they also serue memory. Therfore it is not without the great wisdome
and prouidence of God, that the seate and shop thereof is in the hindermost
part of the head, because it must looke to the things that are
past.The memorie is a spirituall eye. So that we haue in that part as it were a spirituall eye, which is
much more excellent and profitable, then if wee had bodily eyes
there, as wee haue before, or else a face before and an other behinde,
as the Poets fained that Ianus had. Thus we may learne by our speach
what reason is, and the discourse thereof, and how it causeth the nature
of man to approch in some sort to that nature which is diuine and
heauenly, making man farre to excell all other nature in the world.
For it goeth from things knowen,Of the effects of Reason. to them that are vnknowen, and
descendeth from generalles to specialles, and from them to particulars,
and mounteth aloft againe by the same steppes from one to another,
and compareth one with another. For after that Imagination
hath receiued the images and impressions of things offered vnto it by
the outward senses, the consideration of Reason followeth, which
enquireth of all that may be in the minde, of the plentie or want that
is there, and causeth it to returne to it selfe, as if it did beholde and
consider it selfe, to take knowledge what it hath, or what it hath
not, howe much it hath, and of what qualitie and nature it is. After
this, reason draweth out and concludeth inuisible things of visible,
of corporall things it concludeth things without bodies, and seeret
things of plaine and euident matters, and generalles of particulars:
then it referreth all this to the vnderstanding, which is the chiefe
vertue and power of the soule, and that which comprehendeth all
the faculties thereof, as wee will discourse in place conuenient, yea,
that which finally resteth in the contemplation of the spirite,Of vnderstanding and contemplation. which
is the ende of all enquirie of trueth, and as it were a setled and assured
view of all those things that haue beene culled out by reason, and
receiued and approoued by iudgement.
Heereof it is that wee say,A double discourse of Reason in man. there is a double discourse of Reason
in man, whereof the one consisteth in speculation, hauing Trueth for

the scope and ende thereof, and goeth no farther after it hath founde
the trueth. The other consisteth in practise, and hath Good for his
ende, which after it hath found, it stayeth not there, but goeth on
to Will, which is an other power of the soule of great vertue, as wee
wil declare heereafter, and is giuen of God to man, that hee should
loue, desire, and followe that which is good, and hate, eschew, and
turne from euill. But these things shalbe handled more at large in the
sequele of our speeches.
Now to resume and finish this present matter, as wee learne that
man by the discourse of reason that is in him, lifteth vp himselfe aboue
the outward senses, yea aboue Imagination and fantasie, and knoweth
well that hee is inclosed within the body as in a prison, which
neuerthelesse can not altogether hinder him from vnderstanding and
contemplating the things hee seeth not: so also hee vseth the helpe
of Memorie to keepe and retaine in his minde whatsoeuer hee hath
knowen by any of the senses, eyther externall or internall. Therefore
is the Memorie compared to a Picture.Memory compared to a picture. For as a Picture by the
sight of the eyes giueth the knowledge of that which is painted therein,
so is it with Memorie, by the sight of the minde endewed with
vnderstanding and knowledge: for it doeth not onely looke vpon
things simply as beasts doe, but considereth of them, and diligently
enquireth into them, and hauing found them, it placeth them in the
Memorie, and there keepeth them. And the better to haue them in
memorie, it often thinketh and meditateth of those things, it turneth
and tosseth them to and fro, that they may bee the better imprinted
therein.What remembrance is. For this cause some Philosophers attribute vnto man beside
memorie both recordation and remembrance, which is one recordation
vpon another, whereby we call to mind that which was slipped out of
it. For it commeth to passe oftentimes, that that which before we haue
seene, heard, and knowen, and euen kept a while in our memory, is escaped
vs and so forgotten, that we thinke of it no more then if wee
had neuer vnderstoode or knowen it, neither should we euer remember
it, vnlesse some body did put vs in minde of it, or some euident
token made vs to thinke of it, Some things also there are, which albeit
they are not cleane gone from vs, but are somewhat better registred
in our memory, yet wee cannot readily remember them and
bring them foorth, without great and long inquirie. Therefore must
the minde turne ouer all the leaues of his Booke or Register of
Memorie, or at leastwise a great part thereof to finde them out, as
if a Chauncellour or Secretary shoulde search all his Papers and
Registers,The minde compared to the keeper of Rolles. and all his Rolles of Chauncery, vntill hee had found

that which hee sought for. And wee see among our selues, what
notes and obseruations wee vse, that they might bee as it were a memoriall
booke vnto our memories. You see then why some haue attributed
to man both recordation and remembrahce, thereby to put
a difference betweene them, and bare memorie without any other
consideration, which they say is in beastes, who forgetting presently
what they perceiued by their senses, when they see those things againe,
that in some sorte putteth them in minde thereof, then they
call them to minde as if they had knowen them before. But nowe
that wee vnderstand the nature, office, order, and seates of the internall
senses of the soule, that all may be more casily perceiued, I thinke
wee ought to shewe by some familiar examples, howe a man may
knowe, that these internall senses are so distinguished, disposed, and
ordained, and that they haue their seats and instruments in the braine
in such sort as wee haue already spoken. Let vs then heare ARAM
discourse to this purpose.


That the internall senses are so distinguished, that some of them may be
troubled and hindered, and the rest be safe and whole, according as
their places and instruments assigned vnto them in the body are
sound or perished: and of those that are possessed with Deuilles.
Chap. 27.
ARAM. Howsoeuer it pleased God to enrich man with heauenly
gifts and graces aboue all visible creatures, yet foreseeing the
future pride of mankinde, he alwayes and in all things gaue him great
matter of humilitie and modestie, to the end that they which knowe
howe to profit thereby, should neuer forget the graces receiued from
the goodnesse of their Creator, and so neuer become vngratefull towards
him. And truely wee ought to be very carefull to keepe our
selues from pride and vaine boasting of the senses of our mind and spirite,
which God hath giuen vs, howe ingenious, excellent, and diuine
soeuer they be: yea, rather humbling our selues before his Maiestie,
wee are to yeelde him continuall thankes, and pray that it would
please him to keepe them alwayes sound and safe, and to augment his
gifts and graces in our minds. For he sheweth vs by experience euery
day, that hee can trouble our mindes with a small matter, yea the
mindes of those that are most witty, prudent, wise, and skilfull, and
the most diuine spirites that can be found amongst men. Howe many
doe wee see daily, yea many times of those that are admired of all

for their singular wit,A good admonition to humble vs. great prudence, knowledge, wisedome, vertue,
credite, and authoritie, that loose the vse of their senses and vnderstanding,
insomuch that they doe not onely growe foolish, as if they
were become litle children againe, but also haue lesse direction and gouernement
in them, then the poore beasts haue? And how many doe
we see, that become frensie and mad, behauing themselues as it were
brute and sauage beastes, and continue in that estate vnto the death?
The consideration of these things will cause vs to vnderstand better
that which wee haue heard of the distinction, disposition, order, and
seates of the internall senses of the soule, and of their vesselles and instruments.
Wee haue then daily great testimonies and very euident
signes heere of in frantike and bedleme persons, in such as are oppressed
with melancholy, in furious folkes, and in all those that are beside
themselues. For there are sundry sortes of them, some being
troubled but in one part of the minde onely,Diuers kindes of madde folkes. hauing the other partes
sound: some more troubled then the former, and othersome that
haue nothing sound and vntouched. Heereof it is that wee see some,
whose imagination and fantasie onely are out of frame, insomuch
that they iudge a thing to bee that which it is not. Therefore they
conceiue strange opinions, which they imprint so deepe in their
braine,The imagination troubled. that they are not easily rooted out againe. Some imagine
and beleeue that they haue hornes: others that they haue a serpent,
or some other beast in their bodies: others that they are become water
pottes or glasses, and thereupon are afraide lest some body should
iustle against them, and breake them in peeces. There haue beene
some that were so verily perswaded in their fancie, that they were
dead, that they coulde neuer after be brought to eate or drinke anie
thing but dyed in that opinion. And yet all these did vnderstand
very well and conceiue what was saide vnto them, and remembred
it as well afterward. Whereby it appeareth, that they haue reason
and memorie more sound then imagination and fancie, as Galen and
other Physicions mention many examples of such, and our selues do
often see some like to those of whome I speake nowe. There are others
also,Reason troubled. that haue their imagination, fancie, yea and their memorie
also sound, but their reason is so troubled, that they can not vnderstand
nor conceiue that which is tolde them, nor make any discourse
themselues, neither examine or conclude anie thing by reason. Galen
alleadgeth an example of one, who after hee had cast downe
out of a windowe certaine glasses and violles, with other vesselles of
brittle matter, threwe downe a little childe, which was slaine. This
man knew well enough that hee helde in his hand glasses and other

vesselles of such matter, and that the childe hee threwe downe was a
childe, and he remembred well what hee had seene, heard, and done:
but hee had not his wittes so aduised nor his reason so stayed, as to
discourse, consider, and iudge thus with himselfe, that bee coulde
not cast those vesselles downe but hee must breake them, considering
the matter whereof they were made, nor the childe, but hee
must kill it. I omit many other examples I coulde alleadge to this
purpose, which many skilfull Physicions speake of in their bookes,
because I meane not to touch this matter but as it were by the way.
Concerning them that loose their memory,The memory lost. and yet keepe the
other partes sound, wee haue many examples of them. For there
haue beene plagues sometimes, whereby many haue lost their memories
in such sort, that they cleane forgat whatsoeuer they knewe
before, yea their owne names, their parents and their friends. And
the disease called the Lethargie bringeth with it forgetfulnesse and
want of memorie, as the name it selfe giueth vs to vnderstand in the
Greeke tongue, from whence it is taken. Therefore wee see howe
the internall senses of the soule may be perished seuerally one without
an other: whereupon we may well conclude, that as they may
bee all sound together, so they may all bee perished at one and the
same time. Example heereof is daily seene in many that are frensie
and madde, hauing all their senses troubled, which sometimes they
had sound and perfect. Yea there are some that behaue themselues
like dogges and wolues as Physicions report, because they thinke they
are transformed into those kinde of beasts, by reason of the violence
of Melancholy, and of that malady, which is thereupon named by
the Graecians Cynanthropie and Lycanthropie. It pleased God to punish
Nebuchadnezzar with this kinde of chastisement,Dan. 4. to beate
downe his glorie and pride, when his wittes were taken from him,
in so much that hee did not thinke himselfe to be a man any more but
a beast, and so indeede liued in the fieldes like a wilde beast. Nowe
therefore wee may knowe by the sequele of our speach, and by the
examples which wee haue alleadged, howe the internall senses are
distinguished one from an other in such sorte that euery one hath his
office apart, as the members that are in a mans body. And if any desire
to knowe more particularly in what parte and place of the braine
euery particular sense hath his lodging and seate for to exercise his office
in,How a man may ^^dge of the ^eats of the senses. wee may iudge heereof somewhat by experience, which
teacheth vs, that they who haue receiued some blowe, or are vexed
by sickenesse about the former ventricles of the braine, haue then
common sense, their imagination and fantasie perished, when the

instruments about those partes eyther suffer or haue suffred violence.
If the same happen to the middle ventricle, the like is seene in the
defect of reason: if to the hindermost ventricle, the memorie faileth,
as it hath befallen many vpon the receit of a blowe in that
place: yea, which is more then that, experience doeth not onelie
shewe this when blowes and diseases light vpon the head and braine,
but it appeareth also in the composition and making of all that part of
the body. For according as the head shall be either well or ill framed
and proportioned either before, in the middest, or in the hinder part
thereof, or in all three together, so shall a man finde greater excellencie,
moderation, or defect, in the internall senses, which exercise
their offices in the head, as well particularly as generally. Therefore
it is not without reason sayde in our common speach of him that
hath a good spirite, sense, and iudgement, that his head is well
made: and contrariwise, that his head is ill made that wanteth these
things. For whatsoeuer the inhabitant or workeman is that laboureth,
the lodging in which hee dwelleth, or the tooles and instruments
which hee vseth, are of great moment to further or hinder him
in his worke.
But nowe that we are in hand with frenetike persons, and haue
saide before, that good and ill spirites haue great meanes, and such
as wee can not comprehend, whereby they mooue the imagination
and fantasie of men,Of such as are possessed with Deuilles. it shall not be altogether fruitlesse, if we speake
somewhat of them that are possessed with spirites. For there are
some who thinke not, that the Deuilles in their very substance enter
into the bodies or soules, heartes or mindes of men. I speake not
heere of such as thinke there is neither God, nor Angelles, nor Deuilles,
but euen of them that beleeue all these thinges: who neuerthelesse
thinke, that euill spirites trouble the heartes and mindes
of men onely by prouocations, temptations, and illusions. Others
there are, that referre all the madnesse of Lunatike folkes to naturall
causes, as if they proceeded either from melancholike or cholerike
humours or some such like causes, as frensinesse, madnesse, and furie,
or some such diseases whereby men are carried beside themselues.
True it is, and cannot be denied, that many are thought to be possessed
with Deuilles, when in deede they are nothing so. For there are
some counterfeit crankes, as many haue beene taken with the maner,
who vpon some occasion haue by meere knauery fained themselues
such. And some also there are that bee but melancholy madde,
and carried away by some disease of the braine: but because their
melancholie and furie is very violent and strange, ignorant people

suppose they are possessed with some spirite. Notwithstanding wee
may not doubt, but that euil spirits, desirous to hurt men both in their
goodes, bodies, and soules, vse al the meanes and occasions they can
possibly inuent and finde out, to execute their malice, when it pleaseth
God to giue them leaue.The power of euill spirites. For they can driue forward and mooue
the hearts and mindes of men, and set them in such a fury, that euen
their reason and iudgement wil be wholly confounded and as it were
cleane extinguished. Heereupon it commeth, that many being caried
headlong with such madnesse, teare, and kill themselues, or their
owne wiues, children, or others, whereof we may daily see many examples.
Neuerthelesse we say not, that the naturall light which God
hath giuen them is wholly put out in them, much lesse in those that
are not so farre gone: but the Deuill doeth stirre them forward with
such violence, that they are as it were taken perforce from themselues,
when they are forsaken of God. Which examples ought to admonish
vs to call vpon God incessantly, that hee woulde gouerne vs by his
sonne Iesus Christ, who is come to destroy the woorkes of the Deuill,
that so the light of reason and of iudgement may not be darkened
or put out in vs, and that our heartes be not so possessed and pusshed
on by Satan, that wee rush our selues through a deuilish furie against
the will of God. And this did our Sauiour teach vs to demaund
of him when hee saide,Matth. 26. 4^. and 6. 13. Pray that yee enter not into tentation:
and when hee taught vs to say, Leade vs not into tentation, but deliuer
vs from euill, For if euill spirits durst set vpon those that were sounde
both in body and soule, after that manner which I haue spoken of,
according to that power that was giuen them, wee may not thinke
that they spare such as are sicke: especially those that are already
troubled in braine and beside themselues. For the Deuill, as our mortall
enemie, continually watcheth for those occasions that are fittest,
and most for his aduantage to hurte vs withal. Therefore he intrudeth
himselfe amidst our diseases and miseries, chiefely when there is
weakenesse of braine ioyned therewith, vsing against vs those weapons,
which hee findeth in our owne nature, as also those which his
owne malice and rage ministreth vnto him, whereof wee haue a very
profitable example in the historie of Iob. Hee declareth plainely by
his speach, that if the feare of God had not kept him backe, he had rather
haue strangled himself, then liued in that miserable estate wherein
he was. And no doubt, if God had not helde a strong hand ouer
his seruant Iob,Iob 7. 15. and brideled the rage and euill will of Satan that persecuted
him, the Deuill had had great power ouer this good man,
to haue perswaded him to make away himselfe desperately, as Achitophel

and Iudas did. Nowe if the Deuill preuailed so farre with
Iob, by that leaue which God gaue him to afflict and trouble him,
wee may well thinke what hee can doe with the wicked and reprobate,
whome GOD wholly abandoneth and giueth ouer vnto
him. We haue a very plaine example in Saul, of whome it is written,
that the spirite of the Lord went from him,1. Sam. 16. 14, 15. and 314. and that hee was giuen ouer
of the Lord to an euill spirite, which troubled and vexed him, and that
in the ende he fell into such desperation, that hee vtterly forsooke God
and slew himselfe. We may know also by that which the holy Euangelists
haue written of such as were possessed, and were healed by Iesus
Christ and by his Apostles, what power euill spirites haue ouer the^,
whilest God suffered them to execute their rage and furie. A man may
easily iudge, that such persons are not onely out of their wits through
sicknesse, but that euill spirites possesse them. For he so troubleth their
minde and spirite, that they knowe (...) more what they doe, then the
veriest bedlems that can be. And although hee horribly vexeth their
bodies, yet they feele not his torments, or if they doe feele them, yet
they cannot abstain from vexing the^selues. So that it is easily knowen,
that the deuill is in them, and that it proceedeth not onely of a simple
frenzie, or melancholy humour, seeing some of them haue done such
things as coulde not possibly bee perfourmed by the power of man,
whereof some of those are witnesses, whom the holy scripture rehearseth
vnto vs. Wherefore it is out of all question, that euill spirites haue
wrought both in them and by them. Therefore we haue good occasion
offered vnto vs by all that hath beene hitherto spoken, to humble
our selues before God, and to pray vnto him continually, as wee saide
in the beginning of our speech. For being as we are, we ought still to
praise God, who distributeth his graces as it pleaseth him, and that by
a most exquisite kinde of iustice.Good instructions for all men. And when wee see those that are
infirme and beside themselues, some for a certaine time, and by fittes,
others continually and after diuers manners, let vs not mocke or despise
them, but rather haue pitie and compassion ouer them, pray to
God in their behalfe, and succour them asmuch as wee can, acknowledging
the grace of God towards vs in keeping vs from such inconueniences,
and beseeching him to preserue and keepe vs continually.
For whatsoeuer befalleth others, shoulde as it were hang before our
eyes, as often as it pleaseth him to beate them with such scourges,
which we our selues haue no lesse deserued then they that are beaten,
yea oftentimes a great deale more. The Lord striketh whome it pleaseth
him, that by them others might take instruction. Therefore if we
cannot profite by such teaching, nor learne at other mens cost to feare

and honour him, to call vpon him and to giue him thankes, it is to bee
feared that he will send vs asmuch, that so we may learne at our owne
charges. Yea and then also he is very gratious vnto vs, if he suffer vs to
haue our vnderstandings, to knowe how to profite by his roddes and
chastisements, and giue vs not wholly ouer into the handes of Satan
our Aduersarie. But enough of this matter. And nowe that wee haue
seene the nature and office of the internall senses of the soule, with
their seates and instruments, the sequele of our speech requireth (as I
thinke) that we should intreate of vnderstanding and will, which are
two faculties and vertues in the highest and most principall part and
power of the soule of man, and in regard of which it is properly called
by the name of a reasonable soule and life: as wee shall presently
learne of ACHITOB.


Of the reasonable soule and life, and of vertue: of the vnderstanding
and will, that are in the soule, and of their dignitie and
excellencie. Chap. 28.
ACHITOB. Although beastes without any iudgement and reason
follow after yt which they conceaue to be agreeable to their
nature, and eschew the contrary, according as their natural inclination
driueth the^ thereunto: yet they passe not those bounds of nature which
God hath set them, nor violate the lawes thereof. Wherby we see, that
through a secret sense of nature, they draw alwayes towards God their
Creator, in that their nature bendeth still towardes that which God
hath appoynted to bee the chiefe Good, vnto which they can attaine.
And no doubt but God hath giuen them such inclinations to
bee as it were rules to direct them to that which is their proper and
naturall Good, which consisteth onely in corporall thinges belonging
to their bodies. Nowe if hee bee thus carefull for beastes, we
may not thinke that hee hath depriued Man of such a benefite, but
that hee hath also giuen him his inclination to leade him to his proper
Good, and to the trueth which in respect thereof is necessarie
for him. For what likelihoode is there, that such a woorkeman as
God is, woulde create Man, the most excellent creature vnder heauen,
in worse estate not onely then beastes, but also then all other
bodily creatures, which are nothing in comparison of the excellencie
which is in him, who notwithstanding following their naturall
disposition,Psal. 148. 8. Prayse GOD and fulfill his worde, as the Psalmist
saith.
As therefore God hath ordayned and prepared a farre greater Good

formen then for beastes, and hath layde vp the same in his soule and
spirite, so hath he giuen them the meanes to enquire and finde it out.
But the difficultie that is in finding it out, proceedeth through their
owne fault. For the darknes of ignorance and error, which sinne hath
brought into their minds, is that which hindereth them, and which had
not taken holde of them, if mankind had continued in the perfection
of his first nature. Neuertheles, what defect soeuer there be, yet we see,
that in the minde of man there shineth alwaies this naturall light that
is giuen vnto him aboue that which beasts haue, I mean Reason, which
serueth to guide the soule and spirite amidst the darknesse of errour and
ignorance, to the ende they may be able to discerne trueth from falsehood,
and the true Good from the false, as we see the light serueth the
eyes to keepe vs, and to cause vs to see in darkenesse. Therefore we
sayde before, that there was a double discourse of reason in man;
whereof the one is Theoricall and Speculatiue,Of contemplation and action. which hath Trueth for
his ende, and hauing found it goeth no farther. The other is Practical,
hauing Good for his end, which being found it stayeth not there, but
passeth forward to the Will, which God hath ioyned vnto it, to the end
it should loue, desire and follow after the Good, and contrariwise hate
eschew and turne away from euill. Therefore when the question ariseth
of contemplation, reason hath Trueth for her vtmost bounds, and
when she is to come into action, she draweth towardes Good, and hauing
conferred together that which is true and good, she pronounceth
iudgement. So that reason considereth of thinges with great
deliberation, and beeing sometimes in doubt which way to take,
shee stayeth and returneth as it were to her selfe, and maketh many
discourses before shee iudge and conclude. But sinne hath so troubled
our spirite, that these naturall rules, which shoulde euermore
cause vs to encline to that which is right and good, are greatly
depraued and corrupted. Neuerthelesse there remayneth in vs a
small remnant of that great Good, which testifieth sufficiently vnto
vs what losse and damage wee receiued by our fall. Therefore
both the internall and externall senses serue vs not onely for the good
of the bodie, and for this life as they do to beasts: but also for the good
of the soule, and helpe vs to lift vp the minde higher, to seeke for a
better life, and for a greater Good, then can be found among all the
creatures,The senses of ^^^serue for ye good of his soule. and in which alone the minde findeth true felicitie, agreeable
to such a nature as it selfe is. Heereof it commeth, that
it cannot content it selfe with that wherwith beasts are contented, nor
stay there where they stay. For after the spirite is somewhat setled
vpon that knowledge, which it hath by his imagination and fantasie,

he lifteth vp himselfe higher by the meanes of reason, namely to the
vnderstanding of spirituall and diuine things. For hee knoweth well,
that because he is as it were shut vp in an obscure prison, and compassed
about with darknesse, he is hindered from attaining to the vnderstanding
and knowledge of many things whereof he is ignorant, and
can neither see nor know that which he would so neerely, cleerely, and
perfectly as if hee were at greater libertie, nor vse that naturall vigour
that he hath, being in this prison of the bodie. In this sort doeth man
consider of himself and of his nature; and from that knowledge which
he hath of the highest and most excellent things in nature, there springeth
in him a loue towardes them, insomuch that the spirit ascendeth
vp and attaineth vnto God, who is the authour and Creator of all. For
this cause there ariseth contention betwixt reason and fantasie.Contention betwixt the spirite and fantasie. For imagination
and fantasie, being neerer to the corporall senses, draw the
soule to those things that are bodily: but reason and the spirite pricke
it forwarde, and cause it to lift vp it selfe to more excellent things. For
the spirite (which the Philosophers expresse by Vnderstanding) mounteth
vp vnto those things that cannot be knowen nor comprehended
of imagination and fantasie, nor of any other sense. Moreouer it keepeth
fantasie brideled* and bringeth it into the right way, which otherwise
wandreth farre wide, and entereth into many turnings and windings.
Neither doeth the spirite wholly yeeld vnto euery present profite,
or decline the contrary, but calleth things past to remembrance,
coniectureth and foreseeth things to come, and searcheth out what is
true and what false to giue iudgement thereafter, and then to followe
after or to eschew that which ought to bee followed or fledde from.
Thus you see what the reasonable soule bringeth to men, which is
not in beastes nor in their soule. Besides, from this vigour and nature
of the spirite, speech proceedeth, which being his messenger, is wanting
vnto beastes, because they are voyde of reason and vnderstanding,
in regard whereof speech is giuen, as wee haue already hearde.
Therefore we vnderstand by the reasonable soule and life, such a soule
and life as hath counsaile,What is meant by the reasonable soule. iudgement and reason, and which was created
to this end, that knowing God her Creator, and louing him in respect
thereof, she might honour and serue him, and finally by degrees
attaine to immortall life and happinesse, which is appointed for her
ende. For as nothing is more excellent then reason, whereof God
hath made man partaker, so there is nothing more beseeming reason
then to know, loue, and honour God, seeing there is nothing greater,
more excellent, or that may be compared vnto him. Therefore as
man differeth from brute beasts in respect of reason, wherewith God

hath indued him, so he differeth from them in that he is capable of religion,
created and borne thereto, which consisteth in the things alreadie
touched. But beasts are not capable of any kind of religion, being
altogether voyde thereof: as on the other side, there is no man but
he hath some sense of it.Proofe that the soule of beasts is mortall, but of men immortal. Whereby wee may gather a good argument,
that beasts are not onely voyde of reason, but also that their soules are
mortall, and the soules of men immortall. For the fountaine and fruit
of the religion and seruice of God, consisteth not in this mortall life,
and therefore it must needes bee in some other that followeth. And
for this cause Reason, which is so great and excellent a gift of God in
man, is not bestowed vpon vs for things of so smal price and so transitorie
as these are, which we vse and enioy in this life, and in which it is
wholly busied: much lesse for those whereby the life of beastes is preserued,
but in regarde of these thinges which I haue nowe declared.
Therefore as God hath not giuen such a life to stones as he hath giuen
to trees and plants,What is in plants aboue stones, and in beasts aboue plants, and in men aboue beasts. nor yet sense, imagination and fantasie to trees and
plants, as he hath done to beasts: so hee hath not graunted reason to
beasts, as he hath to men, and that not without iust cause. For as it is
enough for stones in regarde of the perfection of their nature, to bee
heauie and such as they are, and sufficient likewise for trees and plants
to haue a Vegetatiue soule, seeing they want not that which beastes
haue more then they: so beastes stand not in neede of that which men
haue aboue them. For it sufficeth for the preseruation and defence of
their life and beeing, that they haue some kinde of cogitation ioyned
with imagination and fantasie: although they want reason, which is
not necessary for them as it is for men, for the causes already specified:
and chiefly because they were not created by meanes of the knowledge
of God and of true religion to come to a better life, then their
brutish life is.The end of m^n^ being. Therefore as man is created, to the end that the light of
the knowledge of God might shine in him, and that God might communicate
with him his wisedome and goodnesse, so he would that the
soule of man shoulde bee an euident testimonie of himselfe. For this
cause it was said in his creation, that God made man after his owne image
and likenesse, as wee haue already heard. Seeing then there are
in the reasonable soule so cleere and excellent testimonies of God, and
that by it especially the difference appeareth betweene man and beasts,
as also in the diuers gouernments of their liues, it behoueth vs to con^ider
thereof very diligently. And albeit this glasse of God cannot be
so euidently seen, as those that are made of steele, or of glasse and lead
by the hand of man, to represent the image of our bodies, neuertheles
the actions and works of the soule doe plainly shew, that there is such

a power and vertue in vs, which God hath giuen vs more to vse for
our benefite, then to know it, and that for the causes already touched
by vs.Only God knoweth the soule perfectly. For the true and perfect knowledge thereof belongeth to God
onely, who being aboue it, hath created and giuen it, and will cause vs
to know it better when we shalbe in that eternall light, in which wee
shal know those things that are nowe hidden from vs. In the meane
time let vs in this life consider of and distinguish the actions and
workes of the soule, whereby we are seuered from beasts, and which
being very euident testimonies of God in vs, gouerne the life of man,
and bring foorth all honest sciences and artes. We haue spoken alreadie
of the powers and vertues of the soule which by the vse of corporall
instruments labour and manifest themselues: but it appeareth
euidently, that there is in man another higher power, because
we haue many actions and doe many woorkes,What actions men doe, which beasts cannot. which beastes cannot
performe nor imitate. For man hath the knowledge of numbers
and can reckon, hee vnderstandeth not onely particular things, but
also generall and vniuersall things, he discourseth, that is, gathereth
and concludeth one thing of another, and that very farre, he inuenteth
artes and disposeth them, he iudgeth of his owne reasons and discourses,
and marking his owne faults, he correcteth them, he changeth his
intents and purposes, he discerneth vertues from vices, and honest things
from those that are dishonest: finally hee deliberateth by a long discourse
of reason. As for beastes they haue not these thinges common
with vs, as they haue the vse of the senses, as of seeing, hearing,
smelling, tasting, and other such like things, wherein they oftentimes
excell vs in many respectes. For many of them haue these
senses more sharpe then wee haue. And although they haue some
imagination, fantasie and apprehension of thinges offered to their
bodily senses, yet that holdeth but for the present, and in the place
or fielde where the thinges are offered vnto them.How beasts discourse. The like may
bee sayde of those discourses of reason, which many thinke are in
the perfectest of them. For they haue some kinde of discourse, in
that they can passe from one thing to another. But all their iudgements
are but of particular things, neyther doe they ascend higher. In
like maner, they know not things absent, nor passe from the^ to others,
whether it be from things absent to them that are present, or from present
things to those that are absent. For they take or leaue incontinently
those present and particular things which they know, and make a
stop there without any further discourse. So that this intellectuall and
reasonable power is proper to man onely, and is the highest and most
soueraigne vertue of the soule of man. And although the internall

senses are seruiceable vnto it, as they are serued of the externall senses,
neuerthelesse it hath proper actions, vertues and motions, which
it can and doeth exercise without the helpe of bodily instruments,
when it is separated from the bodie. And euen while it is in the bodie,
it is sometime rauished, as if it were altogether out of it, as it
hath often fallen out to holy men,Ezech. 37. 1. who haue beene rauished in spirite
in the contemplation of celestiall and diuine things, and that by
the reuelation of the spirite of God:Act. 10. 3, 10, 11. 2. cor. 12. 2, 3. insomuch that Saint Paul testifieth
of himselfe, that Hee was taken vp into the thirde heauen and
into Paradise, not knowing whether hee were in the bodie or out of the
bodie, but GOD hee knewe. Wee will consider therefore in this
chiefe and most soueraigne part of the soule, two faculties and vertues,
namely the Vnderstanding and the Will.Of the Vndersta^ding and of Will. For it beeing so that
man is created to attayne to that soueraigne and eternall Good, which
God hath propounded vnto him, therefore hath GOD giuen
him the power and vertue to wishe for that Good, to the ende hee
might desire to applie and ioyne himselfe vnto it. This power and
vertue is called Will. But the soule cannot haue this appetite and
desire, if first it vnderstand or know not that Good which it ought to
desire and followe after. For this cause hath God giuen vnto it another
power and vertue, which wee call Vnderstanding. And forasmuch
as our spirite stayeth not alwayes in one thought, but discourseth
and goeth from one matter to another, it had neede of a receptacle
and storehouse, wherein it may lay vp the first thoughtes when others
come, as if it placed them in a treasurie, that they shoulde
not bee lost, but might bee founde out, and called foorth when
neede shoulde require.The memory co^pared to the rolles of Chancerie. But wee learned by our former speech, that
this office apperteyneth to memorie, which is as it were the Rolles
of a Chauncerie court, in which the seales of images framed by
the thought, are imprinted, and vpon which the vnderstanding
doeth looke as often as it pleaseth. And euen as it serueth to the
other internall senses, vnto which it succeedeth in order, so also it
serueth the Vnderstanding and Will.
Concerning the Vnderstanding, if we consider it generally, it comprehendeth
the whole minde: but beeing taken more specially, we
meane a certaine particular office thereof. For it vnderstandeth the
the thinges that come from without, as we conceiue them: then it laieth
vp that which it hath vnderstoode in some little cofer by it selfe
for a time, out of which it may take them againe when neede requireth.
This repetition and taking againe, which is as it were an inquiry,
and searching out, is called Consideration: and from thence it commeth

to recordation and remembraunce, and so conferreth together the
thinges it hath vnderstood, and compareth them one with another:
which being done, a discourse thereof is had with others, after which
discourse it determineth and iudgeth what is true and what false, what
good and what euill. Then doeth the Will choose that which is good,
and refuseth the euill. And as we come from the vnderstanding to the
will by these degrees, so we must ascend vp by the same steppes, euen
from the last to the first, namely from Will to Vnderstanding. For
Will doeth not follow after or refuse any thing, which the iudgement
hath not first determined to be good or euill: and the iudgement decreeth
nothing before it hath taken aduise of reason, and reason aduiseth
not before she haue conferred the things one with another, and
throughly examined them. Neither can this conferring bee without
consideration, nor consideration without requiring that of Memorie,
which was committed vnto it to keepe, and the memorie will keepe
nothing safe, but that which it hath first knowne and vnderstood. So
that the reasonable soule hath all these things, namely Vnderstanding,
Will and Memorie. And vnder this facultie of vnderstanding, there is
simple and particuler intelligence,What degrees are betweene Iudgement and Will. after which Consideration followeth,
next Recordation, then Conferring, and discoursing after that, next
Iudgement, and last of all Contemplation, which is as it were the rest of
the soule and spirite. Nowe these things being so excellent and wonderfull,
and somewhat obscure withall, deserue to bee discoursed of
more at large, and to be vttered more clearely. And therefore before
wee goe to any other matter, wee shall doe well to consider of the diuersity
that is found in the operations and discourses of the Vnderstanding,
according to that gift of light which is in it, and what is the end
of all discourses. Prepare therefore thy selfe ASER to intreate of
this matter.


Of the varietie and contrarietie that is founde in the opinions, deliberations,
counsailes, discourses and iudgements of men, with
the cause thereof: and of the good order and end of all discourses.
Chap. 29.
ASER. All things whatsoeuer can be rehearsed, are either of this
mutable and temporary nature, or of the other, which is immutable,
perpetuall and aboue that nature. If the question be of the first,
either the varietie and change is such, that no certaine rule or determination
can be giuen, or els there is a perpetuall tenour and constancie
in them according to their inbred inclination, through a stedfast and

continuall order of nature, which is alike in all, according to their natures
and kinds. If the variety and change be very vncertaine, there can
no certain science and knowledge be had of them, nor any determination
set down so general, but that there wilbe alwaies some exception.
For touching the first sort,What knowledge we may haue of variable things. we can haue no sure knowledge of things
that are infinite, and that haue infinite alterations. And because particularities,
and particular things are infinite in regarde of our capacity,
there can no entire and certaine knowledge be had of them all in speciall.
As for generals, howbeit they also are variable, yet some rules
may well bee giuen of them, of which the arte followeth afterward:
and yet no such certaine rules, but often it falleth out otherwise, as we
may see in many artes, and in sundry experiences. For although it
bee ordinarie for women to loue their children, yet there are some
that murder them cruelly. So that howsoeuer it bee very common
to loue them, yet it falleth not out so alwayes. Therefore wee may
well say of a woman, if shee bee a Mother, it is very like, that she
loueth her childe, because it is naturall. But wee cannot conclude
certainely, that it is alwayes so, seeing wee often see the
contrarie. There are also oftentimes many signes, which haue
such apparant significations, that they seeme to signifie things vnto
vs certainely enough, wherein neuerthelesse we are deceiued, as
it falleth out often in our suspicions and opinions, which are not grounded
vpon certaine and firme arguments, and most euident reasons.
Wherefore the knowledge that wee may haue of such thinges cannot
properly be called science,In what things coniecture taketh place. but onely coniecture, opinion, probabilitie
or likelihood, because there is great shew of trueth, but yet not
very certaine.
Nowe albeeit the nature of thinges bee mutable, yet if they alwayes
keepe one and the same tenour and constancie, which continueth
alike alwayes to it selfe, a man may haue a certayne knowledge
of them,Of what things science or knowledge may be had. and that is called science: example whereof wee
haue in celestiall bodies and in naturall thinges, which alwayes
keepe one and the selfe same order and nature, both in the elements,
and in liuing creatures, in plantes also and such like things.
For as for the heauens, although they bee mutable creatures, yet
they haue alwayes certayne courses and motions, which followe
their accustomed order without ceassing. In like manner we see that
all these thinges mentioned euen nowe, are distinguished in their
kindes, and haue their naturall meanes whereby they are mainteyned
and preserued. For it is naturall in man to beget man, and by
this meanes mankinde is preserued. The same may be saide of other

liuing creatures, of plantes also and of such other things which neuer
faile in keeping their order. We haue this light in vs by nature. Wherfore
when I see a childe or a man, I may alwayes say certainly, that no
painter hath painted and fashioned him in that sort, and that it is none
of his worke: but that he was begotten and bred of a man and a woman
that were his parents. For God doeth not nowe create men and
women, as he created Adam and Eue in the beginning, and as wee
shewed in our first discourse, but by the common order which he established
at that time, and in regard of which he instituted the holy estate
of Mariage,In what things wisedome taketh place. as we will intreate hereafter. But if the question be
concerning immutable, perpetuall and supernaturall things, we haue
neede of another light, that is greater and more agreeable to their nature,
which is giuen to men by diuine inspiration. This light or knowledge
is called Sapience or Wisedome. For this cause Saint Paul writing
to the Ephesians saith,Ephes. 1. 16, 17, 18. I cease not to giue thankes for you, making mention
of you in my prayers, that the God of our Lorde Iesus Christ the father
of glory, might giue vnto you the spirite of wisedome and reuelation through
the knowledge of him: that the eyes of your vnderstanding may bee lightened,
that yee may know what the hope is of his calling, and what the riches
of his glorious inheritance is in the Saintes. Wee see here how the Apostle
ioyneth together wisedome, reuelation and illumination of the
vnderstanding,The author of wisedome. the authour of which hee maketh the spirite of God,
by whose reuelation and lightning we obtain true wisdome, of which
the wisedome of the world is not capable. And therefore afterward he
calleth this wisedome,Ephe. 3. 19. the knowledge that passeth all knowledge. For although
by our naturall light wee haue some obscure knowledge of
God, as we haue already touched it, yet it cannot so farre lighten vs,
nor cause vs to ascend so high, except God giue vs this also, of which
I spake euen now. Therefore howe great soeuer the naturall light be
which we haue, yet if we follow it any thing farre, we are presently co^passed
wt darknes,Much darknesse mingled with our natural light. which proceedeth not of the things we are to know,
but from our owne mindes, which being pressed with the heauy burden
of our body, are hindred and made more slowe: or els it is because
our minds are troubled, as if some cloud troubled the sight of our eyes.
So that the more light is in our mind, the greater knowledge we haue
there, and the lesse doubting. If there be no light at all, or so litle that it
be no better then none at al, then ignorance spreadeth it selfe as it were
darknes in an obscure and troubled night, insomuch that there is neyther
science, nor opinion, nor likelihood, nor doubting. Heere of it is
that we commonly say, ignorant persons cast no perils. Thus then as
euery one hath more light in the minde, hee beholdeth obscure

things more clearely,The cause of the diuersity of knowledge and of ignorance in men. because his vnderstanding is better, eyther by
the benefite of nature, or by study and exercise, or by a speciall gift of
God. Others see nothing at all or very litle, no not into those thinges
that are very cleare and manifest, so that they are like to men compassed
and couered with darknes at Midday. This befalleth the^ either through
the ignorance that is in their vnderstanding, or by reason of their blockish
slouthfulnes that neglecteth exercise, or by the iust iudgement of
God, who because of their sinnes hath blinded their minds, giuing the^
ouer to Satan to blind them,2. Cor. 4. 4. who vseth to shut vp the eyes of worldly,
carnal, and vnfaithful men, whom he hath in his power. So that if there
be any errour in the mindes of men, if they approoue and follow after
lying in stead of trueth, and euill in place of goodnesse, this commeth
not from the naturall or supernaturall light that God hath giuen
them, nor of the knowledge they haue thereby, how great or small
soeuer it be, but of the darknesse that is mingled amiddest this light,
which sinne hath made more dark and wholly ouerwhelmed, and the
Deuill dayly increaseth to the vttermost of his power, because hee
woulde gladly haue all light in vs, as well naturall as supernaturall,
cleane extinguished and put out. For as brightnesse breedeth not
clouds and obscurity, so science and knowledge doeth not bring forth
ignoraunce and errour. For contraries are not made one of another.
Wherefore that commeth to passe in the lightning of our vnderstandings,
which wee see to happen in the change of light, in regarde
of our eyes. For according to that which is put betwixt, so doeth
the qualitie and vertue of the light chaunge in respect of our sight.
If it be a verie thicke bodie, which the light cannot pearce through,
then is it wholly taken from vs, and as it is more or lesse thicke,
or thinne and transparent, so doe our eyes receiue more or lesse
light. In like manner the lightening of our vnderstanding is wonderfull
variable,Causes of the variety of mens opinions. because of the great diuersitie of thinges that are
set before it in this life, to hinder it sundrie wayes, in some more,
in some lesse, according to those obiectes that are offered to euerie
one, or as men procure to themselues. From hence it is that there are
so many diuers opinions sentences and iudgements amongst men, in all
deliberations and in al matters, especially when the controuersy of discerning
truth from falshood, good from bad, and what is to be followed,
what to be fledde. Now concerning those things, which chiefly cause
this great diuersity, we haue first to consider of the composition, complexion
and disposition of mans body, whether it bee sound, or whether
it be sick. Also the Age, strength, or weakenesse, the perfection
or imperfection thereof, common custome, the present disposition

of vading qualities engendred by nourishment, time and place, with
those actions and things that may outwardly happen to the bodie.
For wee see by experience, that the vnderstanding and spirite with all
the partes and offices of the soule receiue great helpe or hinderance,
according as the bodie, and all the members thereof are well or ill disposed,The manners of men follow the disposition of their bodies.
and that the manners follow the complexion and disposition
of the body. For God hath so tempered the nature thereof with that
of the soule to make them agree well together, that the one taketh
much of the other, eyther to good or bad purpose, according as they
are either well or ill affected. Concerning the soule, we haue to consider
therein all the affections, besides the nature of the vnderstanding,
whether it be slow and heauie, or quicke and light, and of a ready conceipt
and discourse, and whether it be sharpe or dull. Againe, consideration
must be had of the teaching and instruction which it hath had,
what opinions are already rooted in it, and what perswasions haue forestalled
it, as also how farre the behauiour, custome and authority of others
can preuaile with it. For al these things greatly trouble the minds
of men, and procure not onely diuersitie, but also contrariety of opinions,
sentences and willes of men, which causeth them to change
and rechange so often, insomuch that they doe not only differ and are
contrary one to another, but euery one also to himselfe. For wee haue
dayly tryall in our selues, that wee-change our opinions from houre
to houre, and minute to minute, insomuch that whatsoeuer wee
haue nowe approoued, determined and set downe for a certayne
decree, wee condemne and reiect it by and by after, and vtterly ouerthrowe
it: and contrariwise wee approoue and ratifie that which
we had a litle before condemned and refused. Wherevpon we haue to
note, according to that wee hearde before of the discourse of reason,
which is the proper effect of the vnderstanding, that there are two
kinds of it.Two kindes of discourses. For there are discourses, wherein reason goeth on by degrees
in continuall order, one discourse alwayes following another,
by considering and examining whatsoeuer appertaineth to the matter
in hand, that so a certayne and sounde iudgement there of may bee
rendred afterwarde. Againe, there is another kinde of discoursing,
wherin reason doeth not only run amaine, but withall skippeth hither
and thither, as though it tooke here a litle and there a litle, tasting onely
of things very slightly and by the way, as Bees that flie from one floure
to another, and leaue others betwene vntouched. Which course whilest
reason taketh, it omitteth some step or other which it ought to trace:
and that eyther through ignoraunce of the right path it ought to follow,
or because it thinketh it needlesse to stay about that which it passeth

by, or because it delighteth not, or is not disposed so to doe.
Moreouer, wee must know, that there is great diuersitie of discourses,
according to the varietie of mens vnderstandings. For sharpe
wittes sounde to the bottome, that matter which is propounded vnto
them: wise and subtill heades, euen by small coniectures farre fetched,
conceiue that which they seeke after and attaine thervnto. There
are some also of such great spirites, that conceiue many things at once,
and as it were in the twickling of an eye, and at one looke beholde
all that is pertinent to the matter. Whereby it appeareth, that they
haue a readie imagination and fantasie, their memorie like to an open
treasurie, a quicke consideration, and a perfect and sounde remembraunce.
For if the imagination and fantasie bee slowe, or the
memorie shut vp, or if consideration cease, or recordation be weake,
the discourse will be backewarde, and fall out but badly, as it is with
children, and those that are very aged, with sicke folkes, and those
that haue their mindes troubled.Of the end of al discourses. Nowe the ende of all discoursing in
the minde, tendeth eyther to the inuention or conclusion of the thing
that a man seeketh for. And if hee attaine not to his ende, it is eyther
because hee taketh not the way which hee ought to take, as
they that know not what way to followe, which commeth to passe
by diuers meanes: or because his vnderstanding is not good, but
full of darkenesse: or through some perturbation that troubleth it
for a time, as when the affections are much moued: or by reason of
the varietie of cogitations, which trouble and hinder one another.
There are some also which goe on without any regarde had to that
thing they seeke after, as it falleth out with them that are too much
mooued, and that haue a verie hastie imagination and fantasie.
For these men goe beyonde the place, where they might finde
the thing which they seeke for: and so leauing the chiefe matter
behinde, they fall into vnnecessary and bye matters, into foolish
trifling and strange thinges, without all compasse of reason, and
such as belong nothing to the purpose. Wherefore, so soone as the
discourse is begunne, fantasie is presently to bee bridled and kept in,
and the inquisition also of memory, to the end the vnderstanding may
commodiously take holde of that which it is to followe, and that no
such hastie and light commotion cary it away, and so cause it to loose
all. Wherein we may say, that it falleth out with the vnderstanding,
as it doeth with a hounde that is in chase. For if hee cannot by sent
finde out the game he seeketh, or if after he hath found it and is in chase,
he fall to hunt riot, or if he giue in, either for want of courage, or because
hee is spent, or because the course is too long, hee shall neuer

take the pray for which he was brought to fielde, but lose it without
recouerie:A comparison. So in these discourses of the minde, whereof we speake,
there are others also beside them that are: alreadie mentioned, who,
because they are of a slowe spirite, and the matters they search for are
farre off and hard to find, haue not vigour nor force sufficient to attain
vnto them. The selfe same thing also happeneth to some, not so much
for want of strength and quicknesse of spirit, as because they are commonly
idle and slouthfull, as it is with them that will not be attentiue,
and cannot away to occupie their minds, when they should take some
paines to learne. There are many of these, who beyng more carefull
for their bodies then for their soules, and that they may more freely
attend to the bodie and the desires thereof, are soone perswaded to
giue ouer all care to seeke for and to prouide thinges necessary for the
soule. And if the bodie be neuer so little out of square, yea the verie
feare least they should procure it any griefe, causeth them wholly to
abstaine from labouring the minde in the searching out of wisedome
and trueth, so that they voluntary become ignorant. There are others
that haue running heads, who will neuer continue and stay in one
thing: and some also that when they shoulde hearken to that which
they are about, haue their wittes a wool-gathering, and, as wee
vse commonly to say, are building of castles in Spaine. But aboue all
we must herein acknowledge that God distributeth his giftes and graces
to men, and bestoweth witte and vnderstanding as it pleaseth him.
Nowe that we haue intreated sufficiently of the vnderstanding, and of
the discourses of reason therein, let vs speake of Iudgement which followeth
it, and of his office. This then shalbe the matter subiect of thy
speech, AMANA.


Of Iudgement, and of his office, after the discourse of reason: and how Beleefe,
Opinion, or doubting follow it: of the difference that is betweene
them. Chap. 30.
AMANA. If I iudge aright of the doctrine contained in our former
discourses, which handled the nature, powers, faculties and
vertues of the soule, I finde that the spirite is as it were the chiefe part
therin,The seueral powers of the soule. in which is the Mind, the Vnderstanding, and Memory. The Mind
is as it were a white paper, wherein as a man groweth in yeeres and
iudgement, so he writeth his cogitations and thoughts, which he hath
by learning and by the instruction of wisedome. Vnderstanding is framed
by the knowledge of reason, and last of all Memorie followeth.
For there is great difference betweene that which the senses and the

vnderstanding are able to doe in the time of infancie, and that which is
done by them in other ages, wherein there is greater vse of them. And
although the seeds of al the operations of the soule, are included within
it euen from the beginning of the creation thereof, neuertheles God
hath created it of that nature, that as hee hath ioyned it to the body,
which hath his degrees of growth in euery part thereof, so ye soule hath
some agreement therewith in this respect, touching the manifestation
of her powers and vertues. If then any man bee endued with an excellent
spirite, that is quicke and ready to conceiue, and with a memory
apt to retaine and holde fast, it is a great meane for him whereby to
attaine to the knowledge of the trueth. But for the perfection of these
two great giftes of nature, it is necessary hee shoulde haue a good and
found iudgement, proceeding from a sounde disputing and discoursing
of reason lightened by the spirit of God, and by it purged of errour,
illusion, and of all vaine opinions, which the nature of man hath
of his owne inheritance, and which hindereth him from iudging aright
of the trueth.
Nowe the office of Iudgement is to like or dislike the discourses of
reason,Of the office of Iudgement. and the conclusions which are made thereby. For it belongeth
to Iudgement, to iudge whether reason discourse and
conclude well as it ought to doe. And therefore it is in the spirite
and in the minde, as a rule, or as the skoles in a payre of balance:
and whilest reason is a woorking, it is quiet. But when
shee hath concluded and done, iudgement afterwarde examineth
and considereth whether there bee any fault in the discoursing, or
in the conclusion, or in both, or whether all bee well referred,
before it eyther approue or mislike any thing. And if it finde any thing
that breedeth feare least it be deceiued, then it beginneth againe to
aduise of the matter. Nowe the greatest cause it hath to feare least
it bee deceiued, ariseth of probable reasons, which albeeit they bee
like to bee true, yet indeede are not true. And because there are
some, which haue such great shewe of trueth, that it is a very harde
matter to bee able to discerne them from true reasons, and not
take them to bee such indeede, therefore the Iudgement may
bee often deceiued by this meanes. For it will not easily flippe
aside, but abide constant in that wherein it is once setled, if it
bee not ledde and induced to allowe or disallowe of a thing, eyther
by vertue of true and certaine reasons that may mooue it, or of
such reasons as are so verie likely, and carry so greate a shewe of
trueth,A sound iudgement is an excellent gift of God. that they cannot bee knowne and discerned for others.
Therefore wee may well saye, that a good, vpright and sounde

iudgement is an excellent gift of God: neither is there any thing
more necessary in all artes and disciplines, yea in the whole course
of mans life, and chiefly for the principall end of our being, which
is to know and to serue God. For as Good is a thing agreeable to the
Will, so is Trueth agreeable to the Minde: whereupon it followeth
likewise, that as Euill is contrarie and an enemie to the Will, so
is lying in respect of the minde. Wherefore if iudgement iudgeth that
the conclusion made by reason is true and followeth well, it ioyneth
it selfe thereunto, receiuing and imbracing it as agreeable to it selfe.
This approbation is called Consent. But if it iudge the conclusion to
be false, it turneth aside and reiecteth it, and this refusall may be called
dissent, because it is contrary to consent, when there is no agreement
of sentences,Two kindes of consents. but disagreement and contrarietie. As touching Consent,
we may diuide it into two kindes. For one kinde thereof is firme
and stedfast, and another weake and vnstayed. If the consent bee
firme, certaine and throughly resolued, it is called Beleefe. But there
is difference betwixt that beleefe or faith, which concerneth humane
matters, and that which is of diuine thinges. For then doe wee giue
credite to humane thinges, when wee take them to bee so certaine,
that wee doubt nothing thereof, as namely when wee are so perswaded
eyther by very euident reasons which remoue all doubting from
vs, or els by testimonies which we take to bee most certaine. Wherefore
wee may say,Agreement betwixt Beleefe and Science. that there is great agreement betwixt this kinde of
beleefe and betweene Science, because there is a certaine resolution
both in the one and in the other. For Science is a kind of knowledge in
which the demonstration made vnto vs, compelleth vs to approue that
which is spoken, because we see the reasons so certaine, that we cannot
gainsay them, nor thinke otherwise. The like is done in beleefe, which
is a kinde of knowledge, that causeth vs without doubting to giue
credite vnto that which is tolde vs, because wee are ouercome by
witnesses and by authoritie which wee approue. For if wee doubted
any thing, our consent woulde bee yet weake, and so it coulde not
properly be called beleefe, but rather Coniecture or Opinion. For considering
that in this there is some kinde of consent, which inclineth to
one part rather then to another, therefore it tendeth to disliking, which
is wholly against consent.What Opinion is. For this cause wee call Opinion, a knowledge
that moueth vs to encline rather on the one side, then on the other,
in regard of the appearance and shewe of reason that it hath: so
that wee are not fully resolued therein. Nowe albeeit this consent,
which is called opinion or coniecture, bee not altogether so firme,
as that which wee call beleefe: neuerthelesse it differeth from

Doubting,What doubting is. which is as it were a neuter iudgement, hanging betweene
consent and his contrary, and inclining neither to the one side nor to
the other. As for that beleefe which is of diuine things, there is such
a firme consent required therein, as that all doubting must be vtterly
excluded. For faith is not perfect, if it doe not allowe for certaine,
whatsoeuer God hath reuealed vnto men by his worde, which is a certaine
testimonie of his will.Of saith in diuine things. And although hee hath giuen vnto vs the
same meanes to instruct vs by in these things, that he hath done in humane
things, yet hee goeth further. For hee doeth not onely teach
vs by experience, by reasons and demonstrations, which appeare manifestly
to-our senses both externall and internall, and of which our
minde can iudge as well as of humane things, but he requireth chiefely
of vs, that wee shoulde beleeue his testimony, and those witnesses
which he sendeth vnto vs, and that wee shoulde content our selues
with his authoritie. And because heauenly things surpasse the capacitie
of our vnderstandings,Of the light of faith. God maketh them capable by the light
of faith, which is a supernaturall and diuine light, whereby wee see
that in God, which we cannot beholde in all the creatures, and which
our humane reason cannot naturally comprehend.
Now as much as this light is more certaine then all other naturall
light, either externall of the eyes of the body, or internall in respect
of the eyes of the soule and minde, so much more certaine is our sight
and knowledge of that, which wee see and knowe by meanes of that
light. For this cause when our vnderstandings are lightned with this
light, wee beleeue more firmely that which it manifesteth vnto vs, I
say not onely then that whereunto wee may bee perswaded by all the
humane reasons which can be alleadged: but also then that which we
see with our owne eyes, and heare with our eares, and touch with our
hands. For these externall senses, and those internall senses also whose
messengers the other are, are not so certaine witnesses to our spirite, as
the senses of faith,Of the senses of faith. which are more then humane. For they are heauenly.
Wherefore shee hath eies whereby she seeth diuinely and not humanely,
which can neuer be deceiued as the eyes of the body may.
The like wee may say of her eares and of her handes. For there is no
sense so certaine as all hers are, because she receiueth them diuinely
by the spirit. Therfore as she hath not in her any imagination or fantasie
that can deceiue her, so she can neuer faile, either in her discourses
or in her iudgements whereupon shee resolueth: because she is alwayes
guided in them by the holy spirite, whome she followeth for
her rule in all things, and who assureth her by his testimony, as if she
bare the markes and seales imprinted in her selfe, and in their mindes

and hearts in whome shee dwelleth. Heereof it is that Saint Paul so
often saieth,Ephes. 4. 30. that God hath sealed vs by his holy Spirite, speaking as it
were of a seale imprinted in our hearts and mindes,2. cor. 1. 22. and as of an earnest
and gage which God hath giuen vs, for the best and most certaine
assurance that can bee. No maruell therefore if the children of
God endewed with this true faith become so resolute, so firme and
constant, that no authoritie, power, wisedome, force, eloquence, no
humane reasons, nor any thing that men or deuils can imagine, think,
say, or doe, is able to make them to change their mindes, whereof we
haue most euident examples, especially in the person of all the Martyres,
who could neuer by any violence in the world be ouercome, but
their faith hath euermore gotten the victory and triumphed ouer all
their enemies. And by this wee may assuredly knowe, that it is better
grounded then vpon all the reasons and perswasions of men that may
be.Ephes. 2. Therefore it is not without cause that S. Paul calleth it the gift of
God, neither is it without great reason commended so much in the Epistle
to the Hebrewes.Hebr. 11. For being come to that point, that it hath such
an illumination, as to accompt all that God reuealeth in his worde to
bee more certaine then any thing that wee either see with our eies, or
touch with our hands, and hereof to haue a true sense and feeling of the
testimony of the holy spirit, then doth it exclude al doubting, which is
contrary thereunto, and differeth much from that which we hold only
in opinion,The conclusions of faith are most true and vnchangeable. wherein there is as yet no great assurance. So that we may
conclude hereupon, that according as faith is more or lesse in vs, wee
shall neuer conclude ill, nor at any time giue ouer our conclusions.
For faith neuer concludeth any thing which God hath not before spoken,
whose word and authoritie is vnto it, as in deede it ought to be,
in steade of all reason. For seeing it is that wisedome and trueth which
can neuer faile or lie, it needeth not to doubt in any respect to conclude
alwayes therewith, neyther hath it cause at any time afterward
to forsake or change the conclusion it hath set downe. Wherefore
when our faith is shaken and beginneth to alter, it is a signe and testimony,
that it holdeth more of the nature of opinion then of beleefe,
and that it hath not yet a iudgement throughly resolued in the conclusion
which it hath taken. So that heere wee may learne what difference
there is betwixt beleefe, opinion, doubting, and infidelitie or
incredulitie.Incredulitie contrary to beleefe and opinion. For seeing incredulitie is contrary to beleefe, it goeth
farther then doubting, which concludeth nothing on either side, as
both beleefe and opinion doe, but incredulitie concludeth contrarie
to them both. For it giueth no consent, as beleefe and opinion doe,
but taketh the cleane contrary: and therefore it may well be called

dissent or disagreement, as being opposite to that consent that is in
beleefe.
Now to end this speech, and to take away al doubting that may arise
of this word Beleefe or Faith,Of the diuers acceptions of this word Beleefe or Faith. I will only adde this, that wee are to
know that it is diuersly take^ in the holy scripturs. For the name which
it hath in the Hebrew tongue, is taken fro^ the word, whereby they expresse
veritie or truth, which they also take for constancie and assurance.
The word which the Euangelists and Apostles vse according to the
Graecians in whose language they wrote, signifieth properly Perswasion.
And the name vsed by the Latines, from whome wee haue taken
our Faith, signifieth that constancie and trueth, which men
keepe in their wordes and promises: whereupon they call it the foundation
of iustice. Therefore faithfull signifieth as much as true, constant,
and firme in that which a man hath spoken and promised, namely,
when one hath kept his faith. Heereof it is also that God is so often
in the holy Scriptures called Faithfull, in respect of vs, because hee neuer
falfifieth his faith, but is alwayes firme and constant in al his words
and workes. But when the Scripture speaketh of Faith in regarde of
men towardes God; it doth not onely comprehend a beleefe, whereby
wee beleeue that to bee true which wee heare, and which is spoken
vnto vs, as when one telleth vs some historie, but it is also a trust,
which assureth vs,The description of Faith. that God will performe that vnto vs which he hath
promised vs. Therefore true faith includeth in it a certaine and vndoubted
confidence of heauenly things, and an assured perswasion of
the accomplishment of Gods promises towards vs. Now to prosecute
our purpose, seeing we haue learned, that the knowledge of the truth,
which is the principall obiect of reason and vnderstanding, is verie
hard for men to attaine vnto, let vs consider of the meanes whereby
wee may bee certaine and sure of those things which we are to beleeue.
This discourse ARAM. belongeth vnto thee.


Of the meanes whereby a man may haue certaine knowledge of those
thinges, which he ought to beleeue and take for true: of the naturall
and supernaturall light that is in man, and how they beare witnesse
of the image of God in him. Chap. 31.
ARAM, For a man to knowe himselfe to be ignorant, is a goodlie
science and so necessary for men, that without it they cannot be
truely skilfull. For the ignorant person that knoweth not himselfe to

be such a one,It is good for a man to knowe his owne ignorance. but supposeth hee knoweth that which hee doeth not
in deede, is as vnteachable a beast as can be: because hee will neuer
seeke for a master to be instructed by, but if any offer themselues hee
will reiect them, and rather himselfe take vpon him to teach them.
Therefore Socrates was greatly commended by the ancients because
he saide, that hee knewe but one onely thing, namely, that he was ignorant
and knewe nothing. True it is, that if wee speake of things
which may be knowen by the corporall and spirituall senses of men,
euen as nature hath giuen them vnto vs, and of things belonging to
naturall and morall Philosophie, there are many men to bee founde
whose knowledge therein is so great, that other men in respect of
them may seeme to bee but poore beasts. But when we must ascend
vp to the knowledge of things reuealed vnto vs in Iesus Christ, and
in the Gospell, no sense or vnderstanding of man is able to comprehend
any thing therein, if the spirite of God doe not teach him, and
dwell in him, to seale and to confirme in his soule the doctrine of those
heauenly mysteries, wherein the skilfullest men are no better taught
of themselues, then those that are most ignorant. For that abideth alwayes
true which Saint Paul wrote to the Corinthians,1. Cor. 2. 14. that the naturall
man perceiueth not the things of the spirite of God: for they are foolishnesse
vnto him: neither can hee knowe them, because they are spiritually
discerned.
Nowe I finde foure meanes,Foure meanes to knowe certainely those things that are to be beleeued. whereby men may be made certaine
of those things vnto which they ought to giue credite, whereof three
of them are naturall and according to naturall Philosophie, the
fourth goeth further, and is proper to diuinitie. The first is generall
experience: the second, the knowledge of principles: the third, naturall
iudgement: of these three wee will first speake, and then come to the
fourth.Of generall experience. Generall experience is that iudgement which al men of sound
mindes doe giue all after one sort, of those things whereof they haue
certaine experience by their corporall senses: as is to be seene in naturall
things. For who knoweth not that the fire is hote? And who
woulde not take him for a senselesse man that should affirme the contrary?
Yea, who coulde affirme it, being conuinced of the trueth
thereof by his owne senses? Likewise who seeth not the difference
that is betweene death and life, and what are the effectes both of the
one and the other? For euery one knoweth these thinges by a generall
experience common to all. Wherefore this knowledge is certaine:
and where it is so, there needeth no other proofe or demonstration
fetched farther then from such experience. For God hath so created
the nature of things, that men must needes confesse it to be so, as

generall experience doth declare it to be. And he that will not beleeue
it, let him take triall thereof himselfe, and he shall know whether it be
so or no. So that whosoeuer would stand against this common and generall
experience, he should make open warre against God and nature,
in denying all order which he hath set downe therein. Concerning
the knowledge of principles,Of the knowledge of principles. wee must first knowe that there is vnderstoode
by principles, that naturall knowledge that is borne with
vs, which is the seede of all Artes, and a beame of the light of God in
vs, to the ende that by this meanes all Artes necessary for life, should
be inuented and put in vse. As for example, euery one knoweth naturally,
that the whole of any thing is more then the halfe, or then a
part of it onely: and that three are moe then two. To be briefe, the
knowledge of numbers, of measures, and of other such like things is
naturall vnto vs, and is not found in the nature of beastes: and therefore
they haue neither the inuention nor vse of any Arte, as wee haue
already heard. But let vs proceede farther and consider, whether there
be no natural knowledge in men, whereby they vnderstand, that there
is a diuine nature, wise, iust, true, good, that loueth goodnesse and hateth
and punisheth euil, with which nature the soule of man hath some
agreement, and is as it were an image thereof: for which cause he
ought to be made conformable to God, by folowing after wisedome,
trueth, iustice, goodnesse, and all vertue, and by shunning the contrary
vices,Of the naturall knowledge of God in men. In this respect, he that followeth this rule obeyeth God, doing
that which is pleasant and right in his eies: and he that leaueth this
rule, disobeyeth and displeaseth him, committing wicked and dishonest
things, whereby hee becommeth woorthy of punishment. In a
worde, wee may referre to these naturall principles, whatsoeuer God
hath imprinted in mens hearts and mindes of the law of nature, which
serueth all men for naturall diuinitie, the Bookes of which they carry
printed in their soules. And yet out of all question, this diuinitie will
scarce serue vs but to condemnation, if we go no farther, because the
booke thereof is so blotted in vs, that there is not so much as one small
peece or leafe thereof whole and sound, and which is not very much blurred
and torne. Neuertheles that which remaineth is a sufficient processe
against vs before God, and able to conuince and condemne vs at his
iudgement. Of this wee our selues may iudge, in that wee see, that
there is no nation or people that liue with no religion at all, but they
haue one eyther true or false, whereby they labour to appease the
wrath of God, and to be vnder his fauour and protection, according
to that measure of knowledge, which they haue of him. Whereby
they plainely declare, that there is a certaine lawe within them taken

from the Booke of this naturall diuinitie, which condemneth them in
their hearts, and vrgeth and constraineth them to do that which they do,
euen as we feele our selues pressed and cnndemned by the written law
which God hath giuen vnto vs.The vse both of the naturall and of the written law. Wherefore if wee knew how to profit
by them both, they would both serue vs in steade of a Schoolemaster
to direct and leade vs vnto Iesus Christ. For both of them, if we vnderstand
them wel, testifie sufficiently vnto vs, that we stand in need
of a Mediator, by whom we may haue accesse to God and be reconciled
vnto him, seeing wee feele our condemnation within our selues
and in our owne consciences. As for the third meane to make a man
certaine of that which hee is to accompt for true, which wee saide
was naturall Iudgement,Of natural iudgement. it is the vnderstanding of that order that ought
to be in things, and of the consequence of them, whereby to iudge
in some sort of the agreement or disagreement they haue one with an
other: insomuch that euery one hath within himselfe as it were a naturall
logicke, whereby hee is able to iudge at leastwise of common
things. It remaineth nowe that we learne the fourth meane, which
passeth all the former, and that is diuine reuelation, whereof wee haue
made mention, and those certaine and infallible testimonies, which
wee learne of the holy Scriptures, I meane the Bookes of the Prophets
and Apostles,Of the fourth meane of knowledge. with the confirmation and vnderstanding of them
by the holy Spirite. For it were not enough for vs to haue the worde
of God deliuered vnto vs by them, except the holy Ghost had his
working both in them and in vs. Wherfore although naturally we more
easily and firmely beleeue that which our minde is able to see, knowe,
and comprehend by the naturall light thereof, then that which goeth
beyond it, yet forasmuch as God hath made vs capable of vnderstanding
and reason, wee ought to giue no lesse credite to all that he hath
reuealed vnto vs by his worde, yea much more to this, howsoeuer by
that light of nature which remaineth in vs wee neither see nor knowe
howe true and firme it is, and that for the causes before vttered. Hereof
it is that in the Epistle to the Hebrewes,Hebr. 11. faith is called the substance
and ground of things hoped for, and such an euident demonstration of
things not seene, that it conuinceth men and causeth them to perceiue
and knowe the trueth of them very cleerely. Whereupon wee
haue to note, that this naturall light, and that which wee call supernaturall,
are not (to speake properly) two diuers and different lights,
but one and the same, as wee shoulde well haue knowen, if our nature
had continued in perfection, and in that image of God in which
it was created and framed, farre differing from all other creatures. For
although there is in them some image of God,Of the image of God in man. yet they haue not

vnderstanding to knowe it as it is, neither to knowe God their creator,
who hath imprinted it in them. But it is farre otherwise in man.
For God will be knowen of him, and therefore hee hath so imprinted
his image in his nature, that hee will haue him to see and knowe it.
For this cause hee hath giuen him a minde and vnderstanding able to
to receiue this knowledge. For the greatest likenesse and resemblance
that man can haue with God, consisteth in the agreement with him
in wisdome and iustice, which cannot be but in a nature that is capable
and partaker of reason and vnderstanding. Nowe because God is
good, yea a common and generall Good, hee will not withholde this
good in himselfe without communicating it, but maketh all his creatures
partakers thereof, especially man, with whome it hath pleased
him to communicate this Good of wisedome and iustice, which is the
greatest and most excellent good that is in him. Therefore did God
together with his image imprint his knowledge in the nature of man.
For man could not otherwise know this image and similitude, neither
what it is to be like or vnlike to God, if hee had no more knowledge
of God, who, and what manner a one hee is, then other creatures
that want this knowledge, because they are not capable of vnderstanding
and reason, nor of this image of wisedome and iustice which is
in God, and by which man is made like vnto him. Wherefore the
first degree of this image and similitude that is in man, appeareth in
that power and facultie of vnderstanding which God hath giuen him,
and in that wisedome whereof hee hath made him partaker, and
which hath some agreement with the wisedome of God. So that before
man sinned, the image of God was such in him, that there was
a perfect agreement of all the powers and vertues of the soule betweene
God and him. For the diuine light did so shine in his minde,
that hee had certaine and firme knowledge of GOD, neither was
there any resistance against either in his heart or in his will, but a
sounde and perpetuall concord and consent. So that there was alwayes
betweene the minde and the will an vprightnesse and iustice
agreeable with God, neither was the freedome of the will hindered
or driuen forward to euill, because man had not yet made himselfe
the subiect and salue of sinne. As long therefore as man kept this
image of God within him, the Lord dwelt therein as in his own lodging:
and by that meanes would haue giuen to men such perpetual life
and ioy, as shold neuer haue bin broken off or extinguished either by sorow
or by death, if he had suffred himselfe to be alwayes guided by God,
and neuer turned aside nor seuered himselfe from him. Therefore S. Paul

speaking of this first image and the renewing thereof in man, saith,
Put on the new man,Ephes. 4. 24. which after God is created in righteousnesse and true
holinesse. Seeing then it is thus, there is no doubt but that, if man had
continued in his integritie, the light which is nowe supernaturall in
him, woulde haue beene naturall in all that knowledge of God, which
is necessary for him to that ende whereunto he was created. For hee
had neuer beene ouerwhelmed with darkenesse, which dimmed and
hindered this heauenly light that shined in him, and made him the
habitation and temple of God, but had seene cleerely the image of
the father, of the sonne, and of the holy ghost shining in his soule, in
which it was imprinted, the draughts and beames whereof are yet euident
enough in him, I meane to them that consider of them as it appertaineth,
following the light of the word of God. But forasmuch
as the darkenesse which sinne hath brought with it, keepeth man from
hauing any sound and perfect knowledge of God, or of heauenly
things, as he had in his first estate, it is necessary therefore that hee
should restore and kindle againe in him, this diuine and perfect life
which hee hath lost, by the benefite of regeneration and spirituall renouation,
as if hee created him anew, giuing him a minde to vnderstand
his worde, and a will to followe and to embrace it. This is that,
which I thought we were to note and learne concerning the meanes
that bring vs certaine knowledge of such things as we ought to iudge
and accompt for true. Let vs nowe consider, howe the spirit of man
being enriched in measure with heauenly gifts and graces, doeth finally
attaine to the ende of all inquisition and searching out of trueth,
which is contemplation, that followeth iudgement, as iudgement
followeth reason and the discourse thereof. Therefore doe thou,
ACHITOB* take vpon thee to discourse of this matter subiect, and
so ende all speaches of this dayes worke concerning vnderstanding,
that afterward wee may looke particularly into the will, which is the
second part and vertue of the highest and most soueraigne power of
the soule.


How the vertues and powers of the soule shew themselues by litle and
litle, and by degrees: of contemplation, and of the good that is in
it: of that true and diuine contemplation which we looke for after
this life. Chap. 32.
ACHITOB. I was much troubled oftentimes about the vnderstanding
of these two words Soule and Spirite, in seeking to find
what difference or agreement they haue one with another: seeing that

many times I sawe one of them taken for the other, and also opposed
as repugnant one to another.The difference betwixt soule and spirite. In the ende I learned of skilful men, that
wee might vse the worde Soule to signifie man as hee is borne, hauing
onely the giftes of a humane soule, namely, the humane senses, and
those other powers and vertues both animall and naturall, of which
wee haue already spoken. And as for the Spirite, that wee must vnderstand
thereby, whatsoeuer heauenly grace and knowledge of the
trueth is giuen to man by the spirite of God dwelling in him, which
guideth and leadeth him to the contemplation of the diuine nature,
wherein consisteth his good and felicitie. Moreouer wee may see in
sundrie places of the Scriptures according to the Hebrew phrase,Matth. 10. 39. rom. 13. 1. Esay 40. 5, 6. Iuc. 3. 6. Rom. 8. 6. the
worde Soule taken not onely for the life of man, and for all things belonging
thereto, but also for the whole nature of man: and thus also
is the worde Flesh taken. Therefore when the flesh is opposed and set
against the spirite in man, wee vnderstand thereby, not the body only,
but also the soule of man, I meane such a one as it was at the beginning,
when being left vnto it selfe it followed the corruption of it
owne nature. And likewise by the spirite, wee meane that which is regenerated
in euery part of man, whereby hee being withdrawen from
the peruerse desires and corrupt affections of his nature, is lift vp to the
contemplation of celestiall and eternall things.
But our God vseth in such sort to apply himselfe to the nature and
abilitie of his creatures, that by little and little, and by degrees he dispenseth
vnto them those things, which hee will bestowe vpon them,
alwayes keeping that order, which hee hath vsed and followed in
the creation of the worde.Genes. 1. For, as Moses testifieth, hee first created
it of nothing. Then hauing created the matter of all natures, hee
brought it into a woorke, and gaue vnto it a forme, and so polishing
it by degrees and day by day, at length hee set it in that perfection,
which hee minded to bestowe vpon it. Wee see likewise, that in the
continuation of his woorkes,How God proceedeth in the creation of his workes. hee beginneth alwayes at the basest
and least thing, and so goeth on encreasing, augmenting and ascending
vp vntill hee hath placed them in their perfection, whereof we
haue daily experience, principally in plants and liuing creatures. For
the generation of plants commeth of their seedes, from which they
take their beginning. And when the seede, which is the least part of
the whole plant, is put into the ground, it taketh roote therein and
then commeth foorth, encreasing dayly vntill it come to those
bounds, that are alotted vnto it by the Creatour, which it can not
passe: because it can not attaine to greater perfection being of that
kinde, but then daily falleth to decay, vntill it be wholly consumed

and returned to the elements from whence it was taken. The like is
done in the generation of all liuing creatures, and namely in that of
man. For what is his beginning? and what is his conception, natiuitie,
childehoode, adolescencie, youth, mans estate, and then old-age?
Wee see howe small his beginning is, and howe hee groweth steppe
by steppe, and from age to age vntill hee commeth to the flower of
his age, and to his full strength, as plantes doe: and from thence
the neerer hee draweth to olde-age, the more hee fadeth and decayeth
vntill hee come to death, whereby the body returneth to the Elements
out of which it is taken. For as God hath giuen him a beginning,
so hath hee appointed him limites, vnto which hee may ascend
vp vntill hee come to his highest, and then hee is to descend, as the
ordinance of God shall leade him. As for the soule, the same can not
befall it in regard of bignesse, seeing it is not corporall as the body is,
neither yet in respect of death, seeing it is immortall. For it can not be
resolued as the body may, to returne into the elements, out of which
it is not taken, but it abideth alwayes in that substance and nature
which first it had, because it is of a celestiall and diuine nature. But
if the question be of the faculties, powers and vertues thereof, the
seedes of which it hath in it selfe, wee see by experience howe they
shewe themselues more and more perfect, and howe the vse of them
is greater in one age then in an other.How the powers of the soule manifest themselues. For as long as the infant is in
his mothers wombe, no man can perceiue that as yet hee vseth anie
other vertue and facultie of the soule that is in him, then that which
heeretofore wee called the vegetatiue or nourishing facultie, by which
hee is nourished as plants are. After, when hee is borne, hee continueth
a long time like to other liuing creatures, as though he had only
a vegetatiue and sensitiue soule as they haue. Then by little and little
as hee groweth from one age to an other, those vertues of the soule
whereby hee differeth from beastes, appeare euery day more and
more. And yet hee hath no other soule in substaunce, nor any other
senses and minde throughout his whole life, then hee had when it
first mooued: as also hee hath no other body. But a man may easily
iudge, that this co^meth not of the nature of the soule, but of the instruments
it hath in the body, which in the infancie of man, hinder it from
doing that which it doeth by them in other ages.How they haue their degrees in growth. Besides, wee may
truely say, that God hath created it of that nature, that as hee hath
ioyned it vnto the body, which hath his degrees of growth, so the
soule hath some agreement therewith in this respect, touching the
manifestation of her naturall powers and vertues. Neither is it any

strange thing if God deale so with it in this matter. In the meane time
wee see, that although the soule of man seemeth in nothing or very
little to differ from that of plants, as long as it is in the mothers womb,
nor from the soule of beasts during the time of his infancie: neuerthelesse
afterward it sheweth very well wherein it differeth from them,
and that it hath certaine vertues, which are not in any other soule.
For if this were not so, both in respect of the age and growth of the
body, as also in regarde of that property which is in the nature thereof,
it woulde be alwayes like to that which it is in the beginning, as
wee see it is with plantes and beastes, in whose soule wee can perceiue
no more change in the ende and when they growe vp, then
in their beginning and first birth. According then to that I haue now
saide, we see by experience, that in the gifts and graces, wherewith
GOD daily adorneth and enricheth his children, he doeth not communicate
all at once vnto them, but by little and little and by degrees,
as hee iudgeth it expedient, and as they are capable of reason and vnderstanding.
Therefore it is written of Iohn Baptist,Luke 1. 80. that the childe
grewe, and waxed strong in spirite: which is as much to say, as that
according as hee grewe in age, God increased the graces of his holie
spirite vpon him, wherewith hee had indued him euen from his mothers
wombe.
And when wee haue profited well in his schoole, so that wee are
assured of, and instructed in those things, which wee ought to followe
according to the worde of GOD, wee easily attaine to that
Good, which is the ende of all inquirie of the trueth, namely to contemplation,
which followeth iudgement, as iudgement followeth
reason and the discourse thereof.The difference betwixt reason, and iudgement, and contemplation. For reason discoursing, is as it were
the inquisition of the trueth that is sought for, and iudgement is as the
election that maketh choice of the trueth, and of that which it taketh
to be most certaine: and Contemplation is as it were a quiet and setled
beholding of all those things which were gathered together by
reason, and receiued with approbation by iudgement. For there is
no more place for disputation, seeing all things are certaine and
cleere. Nowe all pleasure and delight proceedeth from the conuenience
and agreement, that is betwixt the thing that pleaseth, and
him whome it doeth please. And because there is nothing more agreeable
to the nature of the spirite and minde of man then trueth,
hereof it commeth, that notwithstanding al corruption that is in him,
there is no man but naturally desireth knowledge and skill, accounting
science to bee excellent and woorthie of great praise, and ignorance
to bee full of shame, yea, hee iudgeth it a verie ill thing to bee

deceiued. Wherefore wee may not doubt, but that as knowledge is
more true and certaine, so doeth the spirite receiue greater pleasure:
and when it hath found the trueth, it delighteth greatly therein. And
if for the causes before touched by vs, it can not find the trueth so certainely
as it desireth, yet it taketh singular pleasure in approching so
neere vnto it as it can. For this cause the more certaine the trueth is
which it knoweth, it is the more agreeable and pleasant vnto it, especially
when it knoweth the true spring and first causes thereof. Therefore
as the mindes of men delight more in those things that resemble
them most, of so much the more noble and excellent nature they are,
yea more heauenly and diuine, and so will take pleasure in such things
as are most excellent and celestiall. Contrariwise, the more earthly,
vile, and abiect they shall be, the more will they delight in mortall,
base and contemptible things, and despise such as are of greatest value.
For this cause many Philosophers haue esteemed more of the
studie of Philosophie and the knowledge thereof,Why some haue preferred Philosophie before riches. then of kingdomes
and great riches, being prouoked and pricked thereunto, by an vnspeakeable
pleasure which their spirite tooke in the knowledge of
those things that were reueled vnto them therein. On the other side,
wee see that ambitious men delight more in honours and worldely
greatnesse, then they woulde doe, at leastwise in their owne opinion,
in all the skill of the Philosophers. A couerous man pleaseth himselfe
a great deale more in telling and beholding his crownes, then in any
other thing whatsoeuer. It is no maruell therefore if ambitious, couetous,
and voluptuous men, and such like doe commonly deride those
that take delight in learning, and chiefly in the doctrine and contemplation
of those celestiall and eternall things, which they set before
their eyes, or if they preferre greatly their owne estate and condition,
before others that take pleasure in such things. For they are pearles
cast before swine, which are not valued as they are woorth, but onely
of such as knowe them and their value.
Nowe if heathen Philosophers haue oftentimes willingly abandoned
all their goodes, that they might wholly addict themselues to
the study of their humane Philosophie, and to the contemplation of such
things as they could know thereby, notwithstanding that it was alwayes
accompanied with some doubting, and that they could neuer
attaine to a certaine knowledge either of the beginning or ende of
things: what ought Christians to do, when the question is of Diuine
Philosophie and Wisedome, the treasures of which are opened and
offered vnto them in the word of God? For it is without all comparision
farre more certayne then any science, and containeth in it other

trueths,Of the benefits that commeth by the contemplation of diuine things. and matters that are great deale more profound, excellent,
and more worthy of contemplation. And they to whome God hath
beene so gratious, as to giue some taste and experience of these things,
are able to iudge well of them, yea farre better then any others. For
it is certaine that euen for a little true knowledge of God, and of the
trueth of those things which hee hath reuealed vnto vs in his doctrine,
wee receiue singular delight, with great ioy, and sweete consolation.
So that euery man may perceiue, howe much greater the pleasure
will bee when the knowledge shall be greater. If then this small
taste, which wee may haue in this worlde of these delicacies and spirituall
delights, bringeth vnto vs such singular ioy, we may easily iudge
howe great it will be in that most happy contemplation, which wee
shall haue in heauen with God, when wee shall beholde him face
to face, and knowe him as wee are knowen, whereas heere wee see
him but as it were in a glasse,Of the contemplation that is after this life. and through a cloude. For that is the
contemplation of all contemplations, seeing it is the beholding of
God, with whome nothing may bee compared. Then there shall be
no cloude of ignorance, when wee shall haue, not a likely or probable,
but a most certaine and true knowledge. For the trueth shall
bee shewed vnto vs most certaine in GOD who is the Authour and
Father thereof, in whome wee shall throughly and perfectly see and
knowe the causes of all things. For our spirites shall be helde no longer
in such an obscure and darke prison, as heere they are constrained
to suffer in our mortall bodies.When all men shall be of one iudgement. Therefore there shall bee no more diuersities,
disagreements, or contrarieties of opinions and iudgements,
that some shoulde condemne that which others approoue, but all
shall be of the same iudgement. But seeing we are fallen into the matter
of contemplation, it shall not be vnprofitable, if vpon occasion
of that diuision, which is commonly made of the actiue and contemplatiue
life, wee note, that although the spirite desireth aboue all
things the pleasure that is in contemplation, as the proper foode and
delight thereof, yet wee must alwayes consider, that wee are not only
borne for ourselues, but also for others, and to this ende, that wee
shoulde all in common serue one an other, both generally and specially.
For God doeth not onely commaund the performance of that
seruice, which hee requireth of vs towardes his owne person according
to that which is contained in the first Table of the Lawe, but he
commaundeth vs also in the second Table to doe that which hee requireth
of vs towardes other men.The actiue life must be ioyned with the contemplaiue. Therefore hee will not haue vs
dwell alwayes in contemplation, but wee must put to our hand, and
discharge vs of our dutie towards euery one, according as he teacheth

vs by his word. Wee are then to learne, that so long as wee liue in this
world, we must not separate the actiue life from the co^templatiue, but
alwayes ioyne them both together, vntil we come to that blessed life,
which shalbe altogither contemplatiue, when we shalbe deliuered fro^
al the miseries and necessities, and from al the troubles and lets in which
wee are wrapped and detained in this mortall life. God graunt vs his
grace to vse all our senses so well, both externall and internall, and
all the powers, faculties and vertues of our soule and spirite, of which
wee haue hitherto spoken, that wee may cause them all to serue to
his glory, and that wee may attaine to that blessed contemplation,
which is prepared for all his elect in his celestiall pallace: and that to
this ende hee woulde dispose in vs our will, and all the affections of
our soule, of the nature of which we will beginne to morrowe to discourse.
And first, ASER, I thinke thou art to intreate of those appetites
that are naturally in man, seeing Desire is the proper subiect of
the Will, as thou shalt instruct vs more at large.

The end of the fourth dayes worke.


THE FIFT DAYES
worke.

Of the Appetites that are in al liuing creatures, and namely in man,
and of their kindes: and particularly of the Naturall and Sensitiue
Appetite. Chap. 33.
ASER. As God and all that is in the worlde, is propounded to
the minde of man, that hee might knowe him so farre foorth as
is needefull for him, so is hee also propounded to the will, that hee
might will,The obiect of the will is as large as that of the mind. desire, and folowe him as farre as his nature is capable
thereof. Wherefore if man had not sinned, but had continued in his
first estate wherein God created him, this great and eternall Goodnes
had shed in our soules that diuine worde, together with his holy spirite:
which worde, being the eternall sonne of God, woulde haue
alwayes taught and shewed vs the Father, of whome bee was begotten
before all time; and woulde haue lightened our mindes with the
light of all wisedome that we might haue beheld and seene him: and

the holy spirite would haue ioyned our hearts and willes vnto the Father
and to the Sonne, through a mutuall loue replenished with all
ioy and gladnesse, and through certaine motions agreeable with the
diuine nature. By which meanes there should haue bin in our hearts
a great fire of loue towardes God, and next to him wee should haue
loued all other good things, according to that order which is shewed
vnto vs in his heauenly wisedome and doctrine, and should haue desired
them for the loue of him. But nowe in the estate of naturall corruption
in which wee are, all this goodly agreement, harmony, and
concord which ought to be betweene God and man, is wholly peruerted
and ouerthrowen.What great confusion is in our corrupt nature. For in place of the true knowledge of God,
there is nothing but ignorance and doubting in our mindes: and as for
the will, it searcheth after and desireth other things whereunto it applieth
it selfe, and seeketh not after God. Neither doeth it keepe any
order in those things which it hath for obiects, and which it setteth
downe in steade of the things commanded in his word. So that while
it thinketh to attaine to that good whereunto naturally it aspireth, it
obtaineth nothing to it selfe but a very great euill.
Nowe when wee spake before of the braine, and of the internall
senses of the soule, and of the principall part and vertue thereof, we
made some mention of the wil, which ought to be directed and ledde
by vnderstanding and reason. It remaineth nowe that we looke more
narrowly into the nature thereof, and of the affections of the soule,
of the vitall vertue, of the heart, and of other members, which are
the seates and instruments thereof, euen as when wee intreated of the
animall vertues of the soule, wee considered of their seates and instruments.
First then we must marke what hath beene hitherto spoken,
namely, that God hath giuen to all his creatures a naturall inclination,
that leadeth euery one of them to that which is naturall and
agreeable to itselfe.Of the desires that are in creatures. Beasts haue an appetite to follow that good that
is fitte for them, and therefore also hath God giuen them the knowledge
of that good, and senses meete for that purpose, to the end they
might shewe vnto them, what is good for their preseruation to followe
it, and to shunne the contrary. Wee haue learned also howe
God hath giuen both the one and the other to man, and vnto what
degree concerning both of them, hee hath lifted him vp aboue all
liuing creatures. For as hee hath created him to enioy a farre greater
and more excellent Good then hee hath beastes, and hath giuen
vnto him a will to wish and desire it, so hee hath endued him with
a deeper knowledge whereby to knowe that Good: because hee
coulde not wish for it and desire it, except hee did knowe it,

and he could not knowe it, if he had not a minde capable thereof,
and endewed with greater knowledge then that is, which hee
hath giuen to beasts. For this cause as they haue a kind of knowledge
agreeable to their nature, and to the qualitie of that Good, which being
fitte for them is the greatest they can attaine vnto: so also hath
man a knowledge according to his nature, and to the ende for the
which hee was created. So that the knowledge that God hath giuen
him, serueth to stirre vp his appetite and desire of that Good which hee
knoweth: and this appetite also serueth his knowledge, so farre
foorth as man being mooued and pricked forward to loue God, reioyceth
and reposeth himselfe in him, huing knowen him to bee his
soueraigne Good.
But to the end wee may the better vnderstand this whole matter,
we must note,Three kindes of appetites. that there are three kinds of appetites among the creatures,
which are commonly called, the one naturall, the other sensitiue,
and the third voluntary.Of the Naturall appetite. As for the naturall, wee may diuide it
into two sortes. For there is one generall to all creatures, whether liuing
or without life, which is nothing else but a naturall inclination
without any action, proceeding from any soule or life: as when wee
say, that heauy things desire to go downeward, and light things vpward,
as wee see it in the nature of the Elements, which are without
soule and life. But beside this naturall appetite common to all creatures,
there is an other that hath action ioyned with the inclination,
which neuerthelesse proceedeth not of any sense. This appetite is proper
to the vegetatiue and nourishing soule and life, whereof plants
are partakers. For wee see by experience, that they haue a naturall
appetite to drawe vnto them, and to retaine that which is meete for
their nature and foode, and to expell the contrary. For if a plant waxe
drie, it desireth to be watered, and draweth and keepeth humour and
moisture necessary for it selfe. Wee see the like in mens bodies. For
when the members want nourishment, they sucke the veynes, and
the veines drawe vnto them blood. And as the members desire their
foode, so they desire to bee vnburthened when they haue too much.
The appetite which we call hunger and thirst,Of hunger and thirst. may be referred to this
kind of naturall appetite, if this be excepted, that we can not say, it
is without sense and feeling. For beside the desire of eating and drinking,
there is withall a sense of this attraction, whereby the members
sucke the veines, and the veines the blood: and this sense is not
without greefe and displeasure. So that euery liuing creature is stirred
vp to seeke for his foode, and to take his refection. Wherevpon
wee may diuide this naturall appetite also into two kindes,

whereof the one shalbe proper to plants that haue no sense,Two kindes of Sense. and the
other belong to liuing creatures that haue this feeling, of which I
made mention euen now, and which differeth from that sense that is
proper to the outward senses already spoken of. The reason whereof
is, because it is properly such a kind of feeling, as those creatures haue,
which keepe a meane betweene plants and liuing creatures, beeing
partakers of both their natures, and yet are neither simply plants, nor
perfect liuing creatures, as it hath beene already shewed. As therefore
we heard in our former discourse, speaking of the growing vp of
mans body, and of the manifestation by little and little of the powers
of the soule, namely that as long as the child is in his mothers wombe,
he is like to plants, so also hee hath then great agreement with these
middle sorts of creatures in regard of this kinde of appetite, and of the
manner of nourishing whereby it is fedde. For the seede, whereof hee
is begotten and conceiued, is nourished and groweth vp as plants do,
vntill such time as the Infant that is fashioned, haue sense and feeling,
much like to that sense of the aforesaide creatures, which are partakers
of the nature both of plants and of liuing creatures. For as yet he hath
no vse of his externall senses,Of the seate of the naturall appetite. vntill such time as hee be borne. Nowe
the seate of this kinde of naturall appetite, is chiefly in the liuer and in
the stomacke, and generally in all the members that serue for nourishment.
For these members haue that appetite that is ioyned with this
kinde of sense, of which I spake euen nowe. And as for the appetite of
the other members, which serue not for the nourishing of the whole
body, but onely for themselues, it is more like to that appetite that is
in plantes. For they feele neither hunger nor thirst as other members
doe. And thus much for the natural appetite and the kinds thereof.
Concerning the sensitiue appetite,Of the sensitiue appetite and kinds thereof. it is that which accompanieth
the sense, and belongeth onely to liuing creatures. There are two sorts
of this. For either it is made with touching, or without touching. Pleasure
and griefe belong properly to the first kinde, and the instruments
and seats thereof are in the sinewes, or els in that small sinewy skinne,
which giueth the sense. For those things delight the sinewes which agree
with their nature, and looke what is contrary vnto them, the same
affecteth them with griefe, which tendeth to their destruction, as delight
procureth their preseruation. So that heate, colde, drynesse, and
moysture, reioyce, helpe and comfort the sinewes, or els grieue, hurt
and indamage them, according as they are eyther wel or ill applied vnto
them.The vse of the sinewes. Therfore the sinewes were created, to the end they might be
instruments of sense and motion, and that they shoulde receiue pleasure
and paine. Now all these sorts of appetites, are not in the will and

power of man, neither proceed they from his imagination. For whether
he will or no, he shall be subiect to hunger and thirst, and shall in
the same manner feele and perceiue thinges as they are applied vnto
him, if he be so disposed in body as he ought to be. True it is he may
wel abstaine from eating and drinking, and from touching whatsoeuer he
pleaseth, but this abstinence in the meane time wil not take from him
that appetite which hee hath, but will increase it the more. For it cannot
hinder, but that all the members will still desire their nourishment,
and the body will alwayes haue this sense and feeling. And
as for the sense of touching, it will alwayes feele that which it toucheth,
and euen such as it is when it shalbe touched. But there are appetites
of an other kinde, which are bredde without any touch at all,
and follow the thought and imagination of a man. These are properly
called affections, and haue their seate in the heart. Therefore they
must bee distinguished from others that hauing sence of delectation
and of griefe, are placed in the stomacke, or in the sinewes, or in the
rest of the body.Of the affections. Now by the affections, we meane properly those motions
of the heart, which follow knowledge, and either seeke after or
reiect, that which is offered vnto them: so that according to the order
of nature, knowledge goeth before these motions. Hereof it is, that we
commonly say, that a man must know before he loue, and that no man
desireth that which he knoweth not. But before we enter into a deeper
and more particular consideration of the affections of the soule,
and of the heart, wee must note this, that all knowledge is giuen of
God to this end,The ende of knowledge. to desire that Good which it knoweth, and in desiring
to followe the same, vntill it hath ioyned and knit it vnto it selfe, as
neere as is possible. For in this manner Good will be good vnto it, and
not otherwise. To this ende sensuall knowledge is giuen for sensuall
goods, and spirituall knowledge for those goods that are spirituall.
And as the knowledge both of the one and the other is giuen to desire
it, so also is it giuen that it might turne aside and flee from euill,
which is contrarie to good, to the ende that the Will might not
ioyne it selfe thereunto, by which meanes euill woulde indeede
become euill vnto it, and coulde not otherwise bee auoyded. For
as good coulde not bee good vnto vs, but onely so farre foorth as
wee did apply it and ioyne our selues therevnto, so fareth it also with
euill. And because GOD hath not created beastes to enioy any other
good then corporall goods, and such as belong to their brutish
life, which goeth not beyonde this temporall life, therefore he
hath not giuen them the knowledge or appetite of any other good.
So that as they haue no other knowledge but that which is sensuall,

so they haue no other appetite but sensuall,The best thingsin beasts are sensuall. which is guyded
onely by naturall inclination, wherein they haue nature onely for
their Mistresse, which pricketh forwarde both their outwarde and
inwarde senses without any direction at all of Vnderstanding and of
Reason. Therefore this sensuall appetite common to all liuing creatures,
cannot properly bee called Will. For as wee cannot call
by the name of Vnderstanding and Reason, that naturall inclination
which is giuen to beastes for their direction, seeing men onely
are endued with Vnderstanding and Reason,Beasts haue no Will. so is it with Will, the
name whereof agreeth not to that sensuall appetite, except wee
woulde call it sensuall Will, in respect of the resemblance of Will,
which it hath, wherein it differeth much from the Will in man:
as the sequele of our speech requireth that wee shoulde now learne,
to the ende wee may knowe the thirde kinde of appetite which
wee set downe in the beginning of this discourse, namely the voluntarie
appetite, which is proper and peculiar to man, and the
subiect of his Will. Thou shalt tell vs therefore, AMANA, what
Will is properly, what her actions are, what libertie and freedome she
hath, and what power Reason may haue ouer her.


Of Will, and of the diuers significations and vses of these wordes,
Reason and Will: of the actions, freedome, and nature thereof:
of the power which Reason may haue ouer her. Chap. 34.
AMANA. The loue of GOD towardes men hath alwayes
beene, and is such, that albeeit hee hath iust occasion to hate
vs as sinners, yet that hindereth him not from louing vs alwayes as
men. For hee considereth man otherwise in the nature and substance
with which hee created him, and as hee is his woorke, then
in that disorder and confusion, which after entered vpon his nature
by the woorke of Satan in him.Matth. 5. For this cause wee see that hee
causeth his sunne to shine aswell vpon the euill as vpon the good, sendeth
raine to the one as well as to the other, and powreth many benefites
vpon all in generall. But besides this loue, whereof euery one receiueth
fruite, there is another more speciall towardes his elect, whom
hee loueth not onely as he loued vs all in Adam the stocke of mankinde,
and as his creatures created after his image, but loueth
them also as regenerated and newe creatures in Iesus Christ his
Sonne, the latter and iust Adam, GOD and man, and the stocke
of spirituall men framed againe by him to the image and similitude

of God. Therefore we must vnnderstand, that God hath and doeth
loue men in regarde of the good hee hath put into them, (which is
wrought chiefly through the benefite of spirituall regeneration) the
remnant of which Good he still loueth. And in louing that he loueth
himselfe, because he is the soueraigne and onely good, which is worthy
to be loued in respect of it selfe. Whereby we may see, what is the
true fountaine of all loue, and of all the desires, appetites and willes of
all creatures.From whence the desires of all creatures ought to be deriued. For they must all bee drawen out of one and the same
spring and fountaine, namely the loue and will of God, and that good
which he loueth and willeth. And the greater the Good is, the more it
ought to bee loued, so that euery Will should desire to ioyne it selfe
therevnto, to follow after it, and to haue the fruition thereof. And because
there can be no Good greater then God, therefore no other can
be loued but that. So that whilest he loueth himselfe, he loueth all the
good that may bee, because there is none but in him and from him.
Therefore this followeth necessarily, that as all good things proceede
from him, so they must bee all referred to him, and returne thither as
to the Wel-head, euen as all waters returne into the Sea from whence
they came first of al. Hauing then learned of our former discourse, that
God hath giuen to man vnderstanding to know good, and will to desire
and follow it, it is his duetie alwayes to referre all the good things
he hath, vnto him that is soueraigne and eternall Good, and to account
nothing good, as in trueth it cannot be, but him that ought to bee so
accounted, and to looke at him as the last and most blessed end.
We vnderstand then properly by Will,What Will is, and how it worketh. that facultie and vertue of
the soule, whereby we desire that which is good, and eschew euill by
the direction and guyding of reason. Therefore there are two actions
of Will, wherof the first is that inclination to good by which it imbraceth
the same, and the second is the turning aside from euill. And
when it is idle and inclineth to neither side, it is depriued of both these
actions. Nowe although we saide before, that reason helde the soueraignty
amongst the powers, vertues and offices of the soule, yet wee
must know, that reason raigneth not ouer Will as Lady and Princesse,
but onely as Mistresse to teach and shew it, what it ought to followe,
and what to flie from. For the will hath no light of it selfe, but is lightned
by the minde,How reason is set ouer the Will. that is to say, by reason and iudgement, which are
ioyned with it, not to gouerne and turne it from one side to another
by commandement and authoritie, either by force or violence, as a
Prince or Magistrate, but as a counsailer or directer, to admonish and
to conduct it. And so the will desireth or refuseth nothing, which reason
hath not first shewed that it is to be desired or disdayned. Therefore

the act of Will proceedeth indeede from Will, but it is iudged of
and counselled by reason: so that a man may say, that it is as it were
begotten by reason, and brought forth by Will. But that wee deceiue
not our selues in these names of reason and of Will, we are to knowe,
that both of them are taken diuersly, as the names of Minde and Vnderstanding
are.Diuers acceptions of the words, Reason and Will. For sometime they are taken for that vertue of vnderstanding
which is in the soule, and sometime for the action thereof and
the thing which it doeth vnderstand: as when we say that wee haue
the vnderstanding of something. So reason is sometime taken for the
minde that giueth direction and counsaile, and for the will which obeyeth
it, and restraineth the affections: and in this sence, it comprehendeth
both the Vnderstanding and the Will. But sometime it is taken
onely for that part, which vnderstandeth and hath knowledge to
conduct and guide, as nowe we must so take it, in making it the Mistresse
and counsailour of the Will. Besides, reason is also taken oftentimes
for the arguments and discourses of reason, as when we say of a
man, He hath good reason in that: or els, He hath proued his saying
by good and pregnant reasons, that is to say, by good arguments. And
if we take reason so, it signifieth not only that power and vertue of discoursing
which is in the soule and in the minde, but also the act and effect
therof. The like may be said of this word Will. For it is commonly
taken, not so much for that power and vertue which the soule hath
to Will, as for the Will it selfe, which is the action and effect thereof:
as when one speaking of tyrants saith, that their Will is all their reason.
For then we meane, that they take nor Reason for their counsailer,
neither follow the aduice thereof, but onely their Will, and that
which pleaseth them. So then wee vse this worde Will for that which
proceedeth from it:Psal. 115. and so likewise it is often taken in the holy Scriptures,
when they speake of the Will of God, whereby we doe not vnderstand
that power of Will that is in him, but that which hee willeth
and commandeth vs.Matth. 6. And therefore we craue that his Will may be done,
and not that which we will. But speaking now of the Will of man, we
take it not in this sence, but we vse it for the power and vertue of Willing
that is in the soule, which power is aboue the sensitiue appetite,
whereof we haue already spoken. For we see by experience, that there
are certaine degrees of appetites, and that the appetite of the senses is
subiect to the Will, as I hope we shall intreate more at large in the sequele
of our speech.The Will is the chiefest appetite^ Wherefore the Will is the highest and most soueraigne
vertue of desiring, farre aboue all other appetites, and that
which woorketh with libertie, after the minde hath shewed vnto it
what it ought to follow, and what to eschew, what to make choyse of,

and what to refuse. The actions thereof are to Will, and not to
Will: and the meane or middle thing which shee hath betweene
them twayne, is to suspend her action, vntill shee decline eyther on
the one side or the other. And as concerning the naturall disposition
of the Will, it is to will that good which is truely good, or
that which seemeth to bee so: and to shunne euill, eyther that
which is euill in deede,The Wil aymeth alwaies at good. or that which it thinketh to bee so. Nowe
if shee choose and followe euill for good, it followeth not therefore,
but that shee woulde alwayes followe the good, as that which
properly appertayneth vnto her, and reiect euill as her enemie. But
the reason why shee maketh choyce of euill for good, is because
shee is deceiued, taking one for another, which commeth to passe
through the ignoraunce and corruption that is in the nature of
man. For albeeit shee can will and not will that thing which is propounded
vnto her, yet shee cannot simply will and not will one and
the same thing all at one time, nor yet make choyse of cleane contraries.
For shee can desire nothing but onely vnder some shewe of
good, nor refuse any thing but vnder some shewe of euill. Wherefore
it may well bee, that it will not desire that which shall bee
shewed vnder some appearaunce of good, but it cannot hate or reiect
it. Likewise it may peraduenture abstayne from reiecting or flying
from that, which shall bee presented before it with shewe of
euill and not of good, but it cannot desire, loue, and pursue the
same.
Wherevpon it followeth,The Will is free and vnconstrayned. that our Will is at libertie and free, and
cannot bee constrayned: yea God the Creatour and Lorde thereof
woulde haue it so, otherwise it shoulde not bee a Will. It is verie
true, that it followeth reason alwayes, because the Will hath no
light of it selfe, but onely so farre foorth as it receiueth the same from
reason, which guideth and directeth it. And therefore it neuer applieth
it selfe to any thing whatsoeuer, but hath reason alwayes for a
guide, whome it followeth. Neuerthelesse it is not so subiect therevnto,
as that it may compell it to followe all the reasons that are propounded
vnto it by reason, or tye it to any of them, but that alwayes
shee hath her libertie to make choyse of which reason shee please,
out of all those that are set before her. And so it is alwayes a Will, although
it change sometime, beeing perswaded by reasons to will
when it was vnwilling, or disswaded from Will to bee vnwilling. But
in the meane time shee willeth whatsoeuer shee will, and that as long
as it pleaseth her to remayne in one opinion. For not onely no creature
whatsoeuer is able to take from her that which GOD her

Creator hath giuen her, but shee cannot depriue her selfe thereof,
no more then she may not be that which shee is. For as God
will haue his image shine in the minde of man by vnderstanding and
wisedome, of which hee hath made it partaker, so hee will haue
his image also to shine in the Will by that freedome and libertie
which hee hath giuen vnto it.Of the image of God in the Will. As therefore hee cannot bee constrained,
but woorketh and doeth what pleaseth him with all libertie,
as beeyng a Soueraigne that hath no superiour, so hee hath appoynted,
that the Will which hee hath giuen to men and Angels, shoulde
bee alwayes franke and free, and not bee subiect to violence or constraint:
to the ende hee might haue them children, not slaues, because
hee requireth of them a voluntarie obedience, and such a seruice
as is not forced or constrayned, but agreeable to his owne nature.
For as hee doeth nothing himselfe by constraint, so hee will
not constrayne those by whome hee will bee obeyed: neither delighteth
hee in any seruice that is not voluntary and proceeding from
a good heart, and from a sincere and pure affection towardes him.
Therefore seeing God hath so loued vs, and done vs so great honour,
as to create vs after his owne image, and likenesse, wee are
vile and ingratefull wretches, if wee doe not acknowledge the same,
and cause our Will to be seruiceable to him that hath bestowed
it freely vpon vs: as wee ought also to perfourme the like seruice vnto
him with our minde and reason, wherewith he hath endued vs for
the ruling and direction of the Will. But when our Will taketh any other
obiect beside obedience to God, it proceedeth from the same
cause that blindeth our minde and reason, namely sinne, which reigneth
in vs through the corruption of our nature, as wee haue already
touched it.Good is alwayes the obiect of the Will. Neuertheles that which I haue said is alwaies true, that the
wil hath Good in such sort for her obiect, that she cannot truly and without
dissembling Will that which is euil, if it hath no shew or reason of
some good. But notwithstanding she hath free libertie, yet is shee so
ordeyned of God, that shee cannot will that which is euill, but onely
that which is good, whether it bee good in trueth, or in opinion
onely. For if shee were not created and ordayned of GOD
to desire and followe after good, there woulde bee no cause why
she shoulde loue or desire vertue more then vice, or loue God, rather
then hate him.Diuers degrees in the actions of Will. But wee must consider diuers degrees in the actions
of Will, and in the freedome theereof. For some there are
whose heart and Will agree so together, that there is no dissimulation,
neither any commaundement of the Will eyther towardes it
selfe or towardes any other, but it heartily desireth or refuseth that,

which it seeketh after or escheweth. As we may say of an ambitious
man, that hee doeth truely and with all his heart desire honour and
glorie, as also a couetous man doeth riches. But there are other actions
of the Will, wherein she commaundeth her selfe, or els the inferiour
powers that are subiect vnto her: as wee see in a man infected
with the dropsie, who beeing verie drye and thirstie, desireth
greatly to drinke. But this appetite that commeth from the senses
of the bodie, is restrayned by the Will that hath power ouer it, which
knowing what hurt would issue thereof to the sicke partie, commandeth
this appetite, and appoynteth that hee shall not drinke. The
reason why she will haue it so, is, to the ende that the patient might
auoyde greater euill then that which hee endureth, knowing well,
that to drinke woulde hurt him more then helpe him, because the
thirstinesse woulde not bee taken from him,How the W^ co^mandeth the appetite. but encreased. Wherefore
although the sensuall appetite putteth the patient in minde to
desire drinke, yet Will following the iudgement of Reason, opposeth
it selfe against this appetite, and commaundeth it selfe to abstain,
and also the outward members, as namely the mouth not to drink,
and the handes not to giue it any drinke. Now if it so fall out, that
the Will giue place to the appetite, it is alwayes with her consent,
and that because shee agreeth rather vnto the sensuall appetite then
vnto Reason. Which agreement proceedeth of her impatiencie and
incontinencie, because she hath not patience to stay for the better, but
rusheth vpon that pleasure, which at that present seemeth best vnto
her and neerest at hand. Therfore it is alwayes requisite that the grace
of God should gouerne our minde and will, to perswade them euermore
to counsaile and to imbrace the best: otherwise wee shall make
choyce of the worst, and of euill rather then of good. Which we shall
easily vnderstand, if we consider what good things the wisest and most
vertuous men, guided only by the light of nature, are able to propound
to themselues and to follow: and what difference in that poynt there
is betwixt them, and those whome God doeth guide and gouerne by
his spirite. The discourse then of this matter belongeth to thee, ARAM.


Of those good things, which both men, guided onely by the light of nature,
are able to propound to themselues, and to follow; and they also that are
guided by the spirite of God: of the power and libertie of the Will in her
actions, both externall and internall. Chap. 35.
ARAM. Among the heathen Philosophers there haue alwayes
beene some great personages endued with excellent doctrine,

who seemed to haue bene led with a burning affection towards good
and vertuous things: this no man can deny. But if we compare them
that haue had none but naturall light,The difference betwixt the natural and regenerated man. with them who beleeuing the
worde of life, haue receiued that light, which the spirite of GOD
hath kindeled in their heartes and mindes, wee shall finde very great
difference betwixt them. For they that followe the light of nature,
take not an infinite, spirituall and eternall good, which is God,
for the obiect of that good which they desire, but a finite, carnall
and temporarie good, and that also no farther then their reason
and sense iudge it good for mankinde, or for the societie of men,
or for themselues, and those whome they loue. The like respect
they haue in eschewing euill, which they iudge contrary to such a
good. And yet there are very fewe that goe so farre, who giue
not themselues to vertue, rather for their owne profite or glorie,
then for the loue they beare to vertue, or to the benefite of the common
societie of men. And surely I thinke, that if glorie had not
more mooued so many excellent men, as haue beene heeretofore among
the Grecians, Latines, and other heathen people and nations,
then their loue to vertue, and to thinges profitable for the common
wealth, they woulde not willingly haue incurred so great dangers
to effect so many valiant deedes as Histories specifie of them:
neyther woulde they haue set vertue at so high a price, if no glorie
or profite shoulde haue redounded to them in following her, or
at leastwise in seeming to seeke after her. If any haue beene founde
to haue done otherwise, as wee reade of some, it is to bee attributed
to a speciall grace that God hath bestowed vpon them in their ignorance,
more then to others. But yet all this would bee nothing, or
very litle, seeing the good which the Will propoundeth to it selfe, and
pursueth in this sort, is not the true and soueraigne good, which of it
selfe is able to make men blessed.
Wee are then to knowe,What is the chief good that meere naturall men seeke after. that the wisest and most vertuous
men, guided onely by the light of naturall reason, doe not propounde
to themselues, nor seeke after any other good then that,
which consisteth in ciuill honestie, in worldly honour and glorie, in
this bodily life, and in the commodities thereof, and in those delightes
and pleasures, which their humane sense and reason desire,
according as some delight eyther in the knowledge of thinges,
or in ciuill and morall vertues, or in honours, or in riches and in such
like thinges. Yea the best that euer were among the Heathen, and
the wisest of this worlde that are like vnto them, neuer went farther,
neyther in deede coulde. For seeing they knowe not GOD

truely, they can neither loue him nor seeke after him) either because
they are not throughly perswaded that there is a God, or if they bee
sure of that, yet they stand doubtfull what he is, whether he haue care
of men or no, and whether he heare and helpe them, when they call
vpon him. And if they be in aduersity, then they loue him much lesse.
For if they thinke that their miseries come from their owne nature,
or at all aduenture, they suppose they are not bounde vnto him, neither
ought to loue him, seeing hee hath prouided no better for their
affayres. And if they thinke, that himselfe doeth sende them because
of their sinnes, they are so farre from louing him, that contrariwise
they hate him, and storme against him: as it is most manifest
by infinite blasphemies contayned in the bookes of Heathen Poets,
Historiographers, and Philosophers, aswell against God, as against
his prouidence, iudgements, and all his woorkes, when they
fell not out to their lyking. Nowe if their Vnderstanding was so blinded
in the Knowledge of God, their Will was much turned out of
the way. For it is alwayes like to a shippe carried hither and thither
by diuers tempests, which seeketh still some hauen to arriue at, but
can finde none. So the Will seeking after the good which it desireth,
runneth and skippeth from one to another without order, and
can finde no rest, except that heauenly light shine into the minde,
which may teach it the true good, and frame it to the seeking and imbracing
thereof.What good men are taught to ayme at by the heauenly light. Therefore when this light is in the spirite of man, it
first presenteth to the Will that infinite good, namely God, in whom
alone shee may satisfie her selfe, and then all other good thinges that
depende of that, all which shee desireth, euery one in his order. Thus
shall God haue the first place, and the next his creatures, all which
wee ought to loue so farre foorth as hee hath created them, and
so consequently are good. And if wee place God in the highest degree
of loue, as the soueraigne good, with whose loue we ought to
be as it were wholly swallowed vp, wee will loue nothing but in him
and by him, and for his sake: and consequently we will desire nothing
but according to his Will, because wee can Will or desire nothing
but that which wee shall loue, and wee shall loue nothing, but that
which wee ought to loue, neither with any other affection nor to
any other ende. Which is the proper effect of the spirite of God in
them that are regenerated and guided by him. And thus when the
darkenesse of our minde is driuen out by light from heauen, which
is brought vnto it by Iesus Christ, and the Will inflamed by the holy
Ghost, then doe our heartes reioyce in the goodnesse of God, and our
conscience resteth therein, then doe we loue him, and beginne to obey

him, not desiring any other thing. Therefore we beseech him to guide
and gouern vs, to reforme vs daily more and more after his own image and
similitude, to ye end we may be made conformable to him both in mind
and will,How we must cary our selues both in prosperity and aduersity. and become true temples for him to dwel in. And whatsoeuer he
sendeth vs, whether it be prosperity or aduersity, we take and receiue al
as from his ha^d, giuing him thanks in prosperity, and not abusing or extolling
our selues against him: and calling vpon him in aduersity without
murmuring or despiting his maiesty, which we adore alwaies, whether
we vnderstand and comprehend his iudgements, or no. Likewise
we are led by him to loue all good things, according to yt order which
is shewed vnto vs by his heauenly wisdome, namely, other men made
after the image of God as we are, and those vertues, life, and things that are
agreeable vnto him, desiring the^ for the loue of God, and knowing that
we serue him in the lawful vse of all these things, yeelding praises and
thanks vnto him, as to the author and creator of them. Neuertheles it co^meth
to passe that we see oftentimes a very great confusion in the maners
and works, euen of the holiest and best men that may be: but yt is whe^
God withdraweth from them his spirite and grace,Of the frailety of mans estate. although it be neuer
so litle a while, or when he doth not manifest and shew forth his vertue
and power in the^. For without God we can doe nothing, and through him
nothing is impossible vnto vs. It is very certain, that there remaineth alwaies
natural infirmity and corruption in man, and that the mind, reason
and memory may be troubled by the affections of the heart, which rese^bleth
a fiery surnce, and is like to a thick smoke ascending out of a great
fire which would dim the eies and make them as it were blind. And whe^
the light of ye mind is thus darkned, reason ca^not discourse so wel, nor
iudgement iudge so vprightly, nor memory retaine so firmly, or bring
forth so readily yt which it hath kept, as if none of them were thus hindred
with darknesse, which compasseth about the light that ought to
guide the^. Now if there be such a let and impedime^t in regard of ye mind,
the Wil is much more troubled by this fire of affections that heateth and
kindleth it, whereby it is made a great deale more vntoward to follow
the counsel and aduise of reason, then reason is wel affected to admonish
and counsel it in that which is to be followed, or to be fled. And when
these two principal parts and powers of the soule are thus troubled and
moued, it is no maruel if man forget God and himself, and if wt al his soule
and body he turn aside from yt which he ought to follow after. As co^trariwise
there is no doubt, but yt as long as the celestial and eternal father
disperseth his diuine light into our minds by his sonne, who is his eternal
word and wisedome, preparing them by his holy spirit to receaue
the same, and by this meanes also kindeleth the heart and Will with

the heate thereof, disposing and framing them to follow this light, no
doubt I say, but there will ensue a good agreement and great conformitie
of the minde and heart, of the Reason and Will, and of all the
affections, yea of all the senses and members of man. But let vs return
to the sequele of our speech, which hath an especiall respect vnto the
Will, we haue then to consider more narrowly of the power and freedome
of the Will, both in her internall and externall actions. For the
first,Of the power of the Will in all actions. if the question bee of deliberating about any thing, it is in the
choyce of the Will to propound the same to the minde, to aduise and
consult thereupon, or otherwise not to propounde the same vnto it.
After whilest the matter is in deliberation, she may command eyther
to prosecute the same, or to deferre it to some other time, or to giue
it ouer quite, and to turne the minde to some other thing, as it were a
Prince among his councell. And if the consultation bee finished, and
sentence giuen by iudgement, yet may the will stay it selfe from desiring
and following after that which is counselled, and iudged to bee
good by reason. So that the whole consultation lieth in the liberty and
choyce of Will. For men are not drawne by an immutable violence of
nature as beasts are, but reason enquireth what way is to be taken or
left, and wayeth and examineth what good or euill is in euery thing,
Therefore Will may goe about againe with that which was once deliberated
of, to the end the first conclusion be not approued and staied in,
but that greater inquiry may be made, to finde out, if it may bee, some
better or more profitable thing. And thus when many thinges are
shewed and set before her, she may choose what pleaseth her, although
it be not that which was best approued by iudgement, and which reason
vpon very euident arguments counselled her to follow. For if there
be another side that hath some shew of good, albeit neuer so small, she
turneth to that if she please: so that vpon one onely coniecture, or opinion
of good, she will lay holde vpon that, and reiect the other side
in which peraduenture the ture good is to bee founde. The chiefe
cause whereof is in the corruption of our nature, and in those impediments
of good discoursing, and of vpright iudging, whereof wee
haue alreadie hearde, and which hinder reason and iudgement diuers
and sundrie wayes. And this also taketh place in respect of
Will, which likewise hath great occasions offered to beguile and
deceiue it selfe, because all the affaires of men are intermingled
with good and euill thinges. Therefore it is very hard to be able to discerne
and separate them well one from another. For men being compounded
of diuers natures, namely of a body and of a soule, they propound
also diuersity of good and euil things vnto themselues: and because

they know corporall and terrestriall things better then spirituall and eternall
things,Why men preferre earthly things before heauenly. therefore they preferre them oftentimes before the other.
Which is the cause why there are so many that loue this life a
great deale better, and those outward good things belonging therevnto,
then they doe eternall life, and those goods, which are able to
leade men thither, and giue them full fruition therof when they come
thither. Therefore in so great diuersity of good and euill things, it is no
marueile if there came nothing into deliberation, wherein reason findeth
not some good or euill, which in the end it counsaileth vs to follow
or to auoyde, according to the circumstances of times, places, persons,
qualities and other such like things. It commeth to passe also oftentimes,
that Will refuseth all counsaile and exhortation to doe that
onely which she pleaseth,Will sometime reiecteth all counsaile. thereby to shew that shee is Lady and Mistresse
and subiect to none. And beeing mounted vp to that pride,
shee accounteth this Lordshippe which shee taketh to her selfe to bee
a great good, and so maketh knowne her power and magnificence, as
it were a tyrannicall prince, making choyce in the meane time of a
false kinde of good, which is no way good, but a very great euil. And
thus much concerning the libertie of the Will in her internall actions:
which freedome also appeareth plainly enough in the outwarde actions.
For after she hath liked of a thing,What freedome the Will hath in outward actions. she may put it in execution, or
stay execution: yea after she hath begunne, she may giue it cleane ouer,
or doe not so much, or so speedily as shee might. And although
it falleth out oftentimes, that men are hindered from executing their
Will, yea are forced and compelled to doe the cleane contrary, yet
their Will, if we consider the matter well, is neither hindred, forced
or constrained. For that keepeth it not from willing still that
which it pleaseth: but the violence offered outwardly, stayeth the
effectes and execution thereof. Hereof it is that wee commonly say,
that a mans Will is taken for his deede, although it bee not put in execution.
Nowe to conclude our speech, wee knowe that the Will
hath hinderances to let her from choosing those good things which
shee ought to followe, and refusing those euils shee ought to eschewe
and auoyde. For Reason beeing appoynted as Mistresse, to
guide and direct Will by her iudgement,The neere coniunction of Reason and Will. the selfesame thinges that
mooue Reason and Iudgement, doe mooue Will also, as if the one
touched the other, or as if there were a certayne knitting and ioyning
of them together, not vnlike to the linkes of a chayne, of
which if yee mooue or touch one, the like is done to the others that
are neere vnto it, by reason of the coniunction they haue one with
another. Wee ought also to knowe, that although the Will often

choose euill in stead of good, yet it ceasseth not therefore euer to desire
good naturally, which is most fitte and agreeable to the nature therof:
but it is deceaued in that it hath no skill to discerne between true and
false goodes,Eu^^ spirites haue power ouer the Will. and to distinguish the greater from the lesse. And as
wee haue hearde, that euill spirites may trouble and mooue the fantasie
and minde, so no doubt they can doe the like towardes the
heart and Will, to induce them to euill, and to driue them to doe greater
thinges then weake nature woulde doe of it selfe, if it were not
holpen by them, euen to cause them to committe such crimes as
nature abhorreth. Therefore wee must without ceassing watch and
pray that wee enter not into temptation, and if wee bee tempted,
that wee fayle not, neither bee ouercome. And this wee may assuredly
beleeue wee shall obtayne, if through regeneration by the
spirite of GOD our minde bee taught, and our Will guyded by
his light. Nowe then hauing spoken enough of Vnderstanding and
of Will, which are the principall powers of the soule, let vs come to
the affections thereof: and first it shall bee good for vs to consider
of the distinction that ought to bee made betwixt all these faculties
of the soule, and betweene their seates and instruments, which
they haue in the bodie. But wee shall learne these thinges of thee, ACHITOB.


Of the distinction that ought to be betweene the Vnderstanding and knowledge,
and the Will and affections in the soule, and betweene the seates
and instruments which they haue in the body: of the agreement that is
betweene the heart and the braine. Chap. 36.
ACHITOB. The heauens, the earth and all the elementes, the
stones, plants, beasts and al the other creatures that want reason and
vnderstanding, obey God in their kind, but yet they know him not: and
the obedience which they yeld vnto him proceedeth not of any knowledge
they haue of his will, or of iudgement in them to discerne good
from euill, but only so farre forth as they are drawne by their natural inclination
in those things that concerne their nature.The difference of mans obedience to God from that of other creatures. But Angels and
Men, in whome God woulde haue his image to shine in euery part of
them, and after all sorts, were created by him of that nature, that hee
would be knowne of them, and that they should follow his Will, not
without Vnderstanding and iudgement thereof, nor without agreement
of their willes with his. Therefore he hath giuen them a nature
that is partaker of Vnderstanding, and prescribed vnto them rules of
iudgement and of certain knowledge, which are vnto them as it were

lawes ordained by a soueraigne Prince for the ruling of his subiectes.
And to the end that these lawes should not be in vaine, he hath placed
in man a Will to execute them, and an affection of ioy, that is brought
to him by meanes of the good which he receiueth or expecteth, when
he obeyeth these lawes that command nothing but iust things. So that
hee would haue the nature of man to leade a ioyfull life, and by this
meanes be preserued, that he might solace himselfe in the knowledge
of God his Creator, and in obeying him, settle and rest himself in him.
As contrariwise, it pleased him to place there an affection of sadnesse,
to take vengeance of rebellion against his lawes, and of the transgression
of them, to the end there might be a flame of anger and griefe to
destroy that nature, when it doeth not conforme it selfe to the rule of
his diuine wisedome and will. Hereby we know by experience, what
difference there is betweene a ioyfull life, and that which is sad and full
of griefe, and how ioy preserueth and maintaineth the one, and sorow
consumeth and extinguisheth the other.
But to the end we may fully vnderstand these thinges, and bee able
to iudge aright of the diuers powers, vertues and offices of
the soule, wee must diligently consider, that as GOD hath distinguished
the Vnderstanding from the Will and affections, and
the Animall vertue and life from the Vitall, so also hee hath giuen
them diuers seates and instrumentes in the bodie.Difference betwixt Knowledge and Affections. There is likewise
great difference betwixt Vnderstanding and Knowledge, and the
Will and Affections, as we see it by experience in common life. For it
falleth out often, that after we know a man, we either loue him or hate
him. And if at the first we loued him wel, yet after hee is knowen vnto
vs, we may fall to hate him: or if wee first hated him, afterward vpon
better knowledge we may receiue him into our loue. Nowe although
these affections of loue and of hatred bee thus mutable in vs, yet the
selfe same knowledge remayneth alwayes with vs. For if wee did
not still knowe him, wee coulde neyther loue nor hate him: because
as a man cannot loue without knowing the thing loued, so
hee cannot hate that which is vnknowen. Therefore it is no difficult
matter to iudge, that the Vnderstanding differeth from the
Will and affections, and that they are distinct offices, and seuerall
properties and vertues of the soule: which haue also their diuers
seates and instrumentes. For the internall senses are ioyned with
that power which the Soule hath to knowe: and the heart
with the power of the Will and Affections. Heereof it is, that
wee see manie endued with great knowledge of honest and vertuous
thinges, but they haue no good affection to followe after

them and to put them in practise:Of the discord betweene the heart and the braine. so that their heart agreeth not with
their braine, nor their will and affections with their vnderstanding and
reason. Contrariwise, there are others that haue not so great knowledge
of goodnes and of their duetie, and yet they haue a good affection
and Will to do wel, but for want of vnderstanding what is right
and iust, they obserue and keepe it not according to that measure of
desire which is in them. Where wee see againe how and in what sort
there is no good agreement betweene the brayne and the heart, and
betweene those powers and vertues of the soule, which wee haue
alreadie named.A comparison. So that wee may compare the former sort of men
to one that hath eyes to guide him, but no legges or feete to goe vpon,
or if hee haue any, yet hee will not set them on woorke. As for
the other sort, they are like to blinde men that long to goe and to
walke, and haue legges to carrie them, but they cannot goe whither
they woulde, because they haue neyther eyes nor sight to direct
them, nor guides to leade them. Nowe by the consideration
of these two sortes of men, wee may well conclude and iudge
with ourselues what they are, that want all these thinges mentioned
by vs, because they haue neyther sounde knowledge of the
trueth and of that which is good, nor Will and desire to haue any,
nor any affection to followe that which is good: whome I woulde
compare to them that are blind, and withal haue both hand and feete
lame at one time. But this matter may yet bee vnderstoode better,
if wee make this our speeche to agree with that which Saint Paul
wryteth to the Romanes,Rom. 1. 18. where hee sayeth, That the wrath of God
is reuealed from heauen against all vngodlinesse, and vnrighteousnesse of
men, which withholde the trueth in vnrighteousnesse. For wee may vnderstande
by trueth, those true and naturall impressions of the
knowledge of GOD and of his lawe, and of good and honest
thinges which are in men as beames of the diuine wisedome, shining
in that part of the soule whereby hee knoweth. But because
the Will and the affections of the heart agree not with this knowledge,
and there are no diuine motions, nor celestiall flames to
stirre vp and to kindle the heart with the loue of God, and to procure
it to followe after that knowledge, therefore men are detayned
in vnrighteousnesse, and yeelde not vnto God that honour and
obedience that they owe vnto him. Wherein they shew themselues
vnthankefull and vnrighteous. And therefore the Apostle expounding
himselfe saieth by and by after,verse 21. That when they knewe God, they
glorified him not as God, neither were thankefull, but became vaine in their
imagination, and their heart voyde of vnderstanding was full of darknesse.

Whereby hee declareth, that their ingratitude and naughty heart
was the cause why they abused that vnderstanding and knowledge
which they had receiued of God, and afterward also he depriued them
of these excellent gifts of his grace, which he attributeth to the heart
for certaine reasons which wee are to note. For wee may see in many
places of the Scripture, and in their writings and exhortations that folowe
the doctrine and stile thereof,How the Scripture taketh the word heart. that the heart is often taken for the
seate of the minde, of the vnderstanding and of reason, as well as for
the affections of the soule. Neuerthelesse the Philosophers and they
that followe them in such discourses, attribute these soueraigne powers
of the soule onely to the braine, which they make the seate of
them, as wee haue sufficiently shewed heeretofore: and as for the affections
of the soule they assigne the seate of them to the heart. Now
one body hath not two, but one soule. Therefore although it haue
many faculties, powers, vertues, and offices, yet they are all comprehended
vnder those two and depend of them, euen as in one body
there are many members appointed to diuers operations. Nowe because
reason ought to be the Gouernesse and Mistresse of the affections,
it is necessary they shoulde agree together. For as reason guideth
before, the affections will followe after. Therefore wee may alwayes
iudge of reason by the affections which it ought to gouerne, as
of the gouernement of a good Prince by the estate of his subiects, and of
a good father of a family by those of his houshold.Matth. 22. 40. Moreouer, seeing
the affections proceede from the heart, there is the seate of that loue
which wee ought to beare as well towardes God, as towardes men,
which comprehendeth the whole lawe of God and all iustice. For he
that loueth God, is not onely afraide to offend and displease him, but
desireth also to serue and please him: and he that loueth his neighbour,
doeth not onely abstaine from procuring him any dishonour or losse,
but laboureth also to aduance his honour and profit. Therefore if the
minde be lightened and inflamed with diuine light, and the reason
also that ruleth therein, then the heart will waxe hote, and burne
with the loue of God and of his neighbour.Of the agreement that ought to be betweene the minde and the heart. Which if it fall out so,
the heart will not be slacke in shewing foorth those heauenly motions
that are within it, and in giuing matter to the soule to glorifie God, and
to the tongue and mouth, which will speake out of the abundance
thereof. Likewise there will be an accord and consent betweene it,
and the voyce and tongue, which then will vtter nothing but the
trueth. And this is the cause of that which wee were taught before,
namely, that God by his prouidence and wise counsaile hath ioyned
neere vnto the heart the chiefe instrument of the voyce, which is the

lungs: as the other instruments that are higher, are lodged neere
to the braine, and cheefely the tongue, as the Oratours and Embassadours
of Kings are placed next vnto them. Wherefore if mans nature
had not beene corrupted through sinne, but had continued perfect
and sound, there woulde alwayes haue beene a goodly concord and
consent betweene the heart and the braine, the voice and the tongue,
the reason and the affections.Why the heart is taken sometime for the seate of reason. Next, wee must note, that seeing the
heart is the first member of the whole body that receiueth life, and the^
giueth the same to others, as also the last that leaueth life: and seeing
it is the shop of all the vitall spirits, without which neither the braine,
nor the rest of the members can haue life, or perforume their dueties, it
is not without cause, that this member is taken to be as it were the
seate not onely of the affections, but also of reason. Therefore it is taken
in the Scripture one while for the minde, as when Moses saieth to
the people of Israel,Deut 29 4. Yet the Lord hath not giuen you a heart to know: and
another while it is taken for the affections, as when our Sauiour Christ
saieth,Matth. 22. 37. Thou shalt loue the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy soule,
and with all thy minde. For wee see heere howe he putteth a difference
betweene the heart and the minde. Sometime they are put indifferently
one for another, or one for both, especially the heart, as when
the Lorde saide to Salomon,1. King. 3. 12. Beholde I haue giuen thee a wise and an vnderstanding
heart, the heart is taken for the senses and minde, as it appeareth
very euidently. For the same cause Saint Paul continuing his
speach of Gods punishment aboue mentioned, against the vngodlinesse
and vnrighteousnesse of men, hee addeth to that before recited,
this saying:Rom. 1. 24, 25. Wherefore also God gaue them vp to their hearts lustes, vnto
vncleannesse, to defile their owne bodies betweene themselues: which turned
the trueth of God vnto a lie. In which place wee see howe the Apostle
maketh the heart to be the seate of the appetites and of the affections,
and howe hee calleth the vnruly and disordered affections of
the heart by the name of lustes; for so hee expoundeth himselfe by
and by after, calling them Vile Affections, vnto which God gaue
them vp. Whereupon wee will note this, that the naturall affections
of the heart, which pricke it forward to the desire of pleasure,
and which minister pleasure vnto it,Pleasure of it owne nature a gift of God. shoulde be no sinne at all
vnto men, but a benefite giuen them of God in the perfection of their
nature, were it not that by reason of the corruption which hath raken
holde of it, such desires and affections cannot containe themselues
within the limites of their sound nature: but there is alwayes
some excesse euen in the perfectest, and that being sinne, is properly
called euill concupiscence, because it continually prouoketh vs to

euill, and causeth vs to goe beyond the bounds which God had set to
our affections. Whereof it is come to passe, that that which should be
a benefite vnto men in their naturall pleasures, is become hurtfull vnto
them. Nowe forasmuch as the order of our discourses hath brought
vs to the tractate of affections which haue their seate in the heart, before
wee goe any further, we must say somewhat of the nature of this
part of the body, as we haue done of the braine, to the ende we may
the better know the seate and instruments of the vital power and vertue
of the soule, and of the will and affections, as those which
belong to the animal power and vertue, haue bene declared vnto vs.
Let vs then heare ASER handle this matter.


Of the nature and composition of the heart, and of the midriffe: of the
tunicles or skinny couerings of the breast, and of the Pericardion,
or cawle about the heart: of the motion, office, and vse of the
lungs, of the heart, and of the arteries. Chap. 37.
ASER. It is not without good and iust cause, that God hath ordained
that reason should lodge in the highest part of the frame
of man, and that the will and affections should lodge lower, namely,
in the heart. For by this order hee would admonish and tell vs, what
part and power of the soule ought to beare greatest sway therein, and
that vnderstanding and wisdome, which teach vs the true rules according
to which wee must square our whole life, ought to raigne and
haue the first place,The end of mans creation. seeing the principall cause wherefore God hath
created vs, is to knowe him, to the end that knowing him we should
loue and honour him as wee ought: and as for the affections, they are
to be (...) and gouerned by wisedome and vnderstanding. Wherfore
if this order appointed by God be confounded and turned topsie
turuy in vs, hee causeth vs to feele and knowe it well enough. For although
sinne be the cause, yet the impression of that diuine image,
which God hath set in the nature of man, cannot be so wholy defaced
in vs, but there will alwayes remaine very euident and wonderfull testimonies
thereof. And therefore presently after we haue ouerthrowne
this order, and that the will lifteth her selfe vp against reason, euen then
doth reason condemne that fault of hers, and compelleth the heart to
take vengeance thereof, and to punish in it her selfe disobedience and
rebellion, with great torments and griefs: insomuch that either it must
consume away and perish, or els returne to his due order and place, and
the wil must know, that she hath a mistres, not onely to teach her, but
also to correct her when she shall do amisse, and peruert her order.

But let vs speake of that, which more particularly concerneth so
wonderfull a part of the body, namely, the heart. First wee must remember
how wee diuided before the internall parts of the frame and
building of man into three bellies and lodgings, of which the first, I
meane the braine,Of the second belly of the body. was shewed vnto vs with all his partes. Nowe we
will come to the second, which is in the middest betweene the other
two, namely, in the breast, which containeth the vesselles and instruments
of the vitall facultie and vertue, and those are the heart, the
arteries, the lungs, the rough artery, with the appurtenances thereof.
Heere of it is that the name of the heart is oftentimes taken in the holy
Scriptures for the middest,Ezech. 27. 4. ionas 2. 4. matth. 12. 40. or for the inward and secret part of a thing,
as when it speaketh of the heart of the earth and of the sea, and of the
heauens. Nowe, as wee haue heard howe reason hath his throne and
iudiciall seate in the braine, what ministers and what secretary hee
hath neere about him, and in what chambers and lodgings they are
placed, as also what ministers and officers are ioyned with him for the
execution of his iudgements and decrees, namely, the wil and the affections:
so also wee must consider what manner of lodgings and habitations
are assigned to these latter sort in the heart. And although
these officers and ministers are not alwayes obedient to reason, but
rise vp against it oftentimes, and doe cleane contrary to that which
it iudgeth and appointeth to be done, yet by that order which God
set downe, they were to obey, and to agree well amongst themselues,
as he sheweth it by the disposition of their lodgings. We haue heard
before, that the heart and the lungs are lodged within the breast, as in a
strong holde, and are compassed rounde about therewith for their
safegard and defence. But wee must note, that there is a partition
called Diaphragma by the Graecians,Of the midriffe and of his vse. which separateth the (...)
of the vital partes, from the nourishing parts that are in the third belly
and lodging of the body, of which wee wil speake heereafter in his
order. This partition is aboue in respect of the naturall instruments
appointed for nourishment, and beneath in regard of the spirituall instruments
that serue the vitall part. And because it is a great rounde
muscle of the breast about the ende of the neather part thereof, it hath
two vses, of which the first and greatest is to be an instrument of breathing:
the second is to helpe to purge and expell the excrements of
the body.Of the skinnes of the breast and of their vse. Next to that there is a tunicle or skinne which is very thinne
and slender, much like to a Spiders webbe, and is spread ouer the whole
capacitie of the breast, out of which two others proceede that diuide
it throughout, to the end there might be two distinct places of receipt,
that if a man had some great wound in one part thereof, whereby the

office of respiration and breathing which it hath, should vtterly perish,
yet the other part that is vnhurt, might at leastwise retaine the one
halfe. These skinnes serue also to couer and binde together all the
vesselles and instruments contained within the breast: and the former
of them, which hemmeth in the ribbes, serueth chiefely to defend
the lungs on that side where it is ioyned to the bones of the ribbes, to
the ende they shoulde not touch the bare bones, when they execute
their office,Of the cawle of the heart. namely, when wee breathe. Concerning the heart, it hath
for his next dwelling house a membrane or skinne called by the Graecians
Pericardion, which signifieth as much as if in our language wee
shoulde say in a worde, a compasse-heart. And therefore this skinne is
made of the same fashion the heart is, namely, very large and ample
beneath, but afterward it narroweth by litle and litle, so that it endeth
pointwise,Of the fashion of the heart. being in proportion like to a pine apple or to a pyramide,
which is the figure of a flame of fire. Whereby it seemeth that God
hath made the heart of this fashion to admonish vs, that it is the place
of that naturall fire which is in the body, and appointed to giue it so
much naturall heate as is necessary for the life thereof. This skinne,
which is also called the litle closet of the heart, is of such capacitie, that
it is seuered from the same on euery side as much as is requisite, that
his motion might in no wise be impeached. Some thinke, that there
is some water within this vessell,Of the water in the cawle of the heart. or some moisture like to a dew to
water the heart, that it shoulde not drie vp through the great heate
that commeth of continuall motion, in which it is without ceasing.
Nowe because this humour cannot be seene but onely in dead bodies,
there be that thinke it is made there onely after death, through the exhalation
and gathering together of the spirites, which are there dissolued.
And in deede it seemeth to be a hard matter to knowe this by Anatomy,
because commonly it is not practised but vpon dead bodies.
And although a man woulde trie the experiment vpon quicke and liuing
bodies, yet they woulde be alwayes dead before he should come
to that part, or at leastwise there woulde be such a change and alteration,
that it would be very hard for a man to giue a right iudgement.
Neuerthelesse this might be knowen by cutting vp that part in some
beast or other. For there is alwayes some moisture found there euen
before it be starke dead, although indeed it cannot liue long after that
part is opened. But let vs returne to that which we begunne to speake
of the heart, which being the roote and fountaine of naturall heate,
disperseth it abroade by the arteries into the whole body, and giueth
life to euery part therof.Of the office of the heart. For albeit the instruments of respiration serue
the voyce, yet they were created principally for the hearts sake, that

the naturall heate which is in it, might bee refreshed, increased and
fedde by them. For this cause hath the Diuine prouidence made the
lungs to be as it were the forge and shoppe of respiration, to this ende,
that the aire without might bee sent euen to the heart,Of the lungs and of their vse. for the causes
and endes before spoken of. For the aire that is to be brought to the
heart, is first prepared in the lungs, to the ende it might moderate
the heate of the heart and spirites, and not enter in thither either too
hote, or too colde, or in too great abundance, whereby it might be
damnified or quite choaked vp. Therefore hath God made the flesh
and substance of the lungs very light, soft and spungie, more then any
other part of the body, so that it holdeth much of the nature of the
aire, and that for two notable causes. For first, seeing the lungs haue
not their motion of themselues, neither are fastned to the body to receiue
motion from it, it was needefull to haue them of such matter,
that they might bee easily mooued and followe the motion of the
breast. Next, they will receiue the aire more easily without any violence,
if at any time it enter in vehemently and in great quantitie.
To conclude this point,How the lungs couer the heart. they are so seated in regarde of the heart,
that they wrappe it and clothe it both on the right side and on the
left, and serue to defend it against all the neighbour-bones neere about
it.
But heere wee are to note the agreement and mutuall relation,
which the heart hath with the heauens, in that as the first motion of
the whole worlde beginneth by the heauens,How the heart agreeth with the heauens. of which all the other
motions that are in nature doe depend, so the heart is that member
in mans body, which first receiueth life and motion, and which is the
wel-spring and fountaine thereof: whereupon also it is the first that liueth,
and the last that dieth.Of the arteries and their office. And because God hath created it to put
into it the vital facultie and vertue from whence the life of liuing creatures
proceedeth, hee hath also appointed the arteries, who receiuing
their originall from the heart, are afterward distributed and
spread throughout all the members of the body, as the sinewes and
veines are, to giue vnto the aire and vitall spirites necessary for life, euen
as the blood is likewise distributed by meanes of the veines that
come from the liuer, to nourish them withall, and as sense and motion
are carried by the sinewes that are deriued from the braine and
marrowe of the backe bone, as wee haue already shewed. Therefore
as the aire hath his motion, and the windes their course, euen
such as GOD hath appointed them in the whole body of this great
worlde:How the vitall spirites agree with the aire and windes. so wee see that the ayre and vitall spirites are in mans body,
which is the little worlde, as windes that haue their course and passages

therein, to bee carried vnto all the members, and to be distributed
and communicated vnto them by meanes of the arteries. Hereof
it is that they heaue and beate in those places where arteries are appointed
to be, so that by their peace and quietnesse, Physitions iudge
of the vertue and strength of the heart, and consequently of the whole
body, of health and sickenesse, of life and death, and of the whole
position thereof. Therefore the heart hath a double motion to serue
for this vse: which I speake, because it hath yet a third motion and
that of another nature,Of the double motion of the heart, and the vses thereof. of which wee will speake hereafter. But as for
this first double motion which is heere mentioned, it is so called because
the one is made when the heart giueth out, and the other when
it shrinketh in. For when it extendeth it selfe foorth, then is it refreshed
and cooled thereby, and when it gathereth inward and restraineth
it selfe, then doeth it expell and driue out those fuliginous and
smokie excrements, which otherwise woulde stifle it. This two-fold
motion is naturall, proceeding from the proper nature of the heart,
and not voluntarie as that of the muscles is, which is gouerned by the
motion of the braine and sinewes that come from it. For the heart
hath his filaments or small threedes, apt and conuenient for that
purpose. Nowe this motion serueth not onely for the vses already
spoken of, but also for the nourishing of the vitall spirite, I meane
to drawe the blood wherewith it is nourished, and also to prepare
foode for the lungs, thereby to returne such mutuall helpe vnto them
as it receiueth from them. For as the lungs serue to send breath vnto
it, thereby to coole it and to further it in the execution of that office
which it hath,An admonition to mutuall loue. so the heart serueth to nourish and feede the lungs.
Whereby wee haue a goodly aduerticement concerning that mutuall
agreement that ought to be in vs, and of that reciprocall helpe which
wee owe one to an other, and howe wee ought to acknowledge the
good turnes that are done vnto vs, and doe the like againe to them,
according to that abilitie which euery one shall haue so to doe. For if
wee deale not in that sorte, it will be all one with vs in humane societie,
as if one should separate in our body the heart from the lungs,
that the one might not doe his duetie towardes the other: which
questionlesse woulde cause the death and ouerthrowe of the whole
body.
Moreouer, wee must note, that betweene these two motions of
the heart nowe spoken of, there is some small space, in which there
is a little rest: and then doeth the heart restraine it selfe and drawe
from all sides rounde about the aire which is drawne in by the lungs,
which it enioyeth and hath vse of. And for this cause the heart,

whose flesh is hard and can hardly suffer, hath three kindes of filaments
called Fibres, which serue for all these motions. Thus you see
the heart that is lorde of mans life, howe hee hangeth as it were in his
coffer, and withdraweth himselfe into his chamber or closet, being in
a manner separated from the rest of the body to which he giueth life,
but onely that hee is ioyned thereunto by veines, arteries, and sinews,
which hee vseth as pipes, some to receiue the benefites that come vnto
him from others, and some to distribute his good things by. Wherein
we haue a faire resemblance of that mutuall communicating which
ought to be among men. For although the heart be as the fountaine
of life, which it imparteth to all the rest of the members and partes of
the body, yet can it not liue alone, without those necessary helpes of
the other members vnto which it is seruiceable. Nowe we are to consider
the substance, situation and countepoize thereof, with the nature
and vse of the vitall spirite: which shall be the matter subiect of
thy discourse, AMANA.


Of the substance, situation and counterpoize of the heart: of the
nature and vse of the vital Spirite, and of the forge, vesselles and
instruments thereof: of the sundry doores and pipes of the heart,
and of their vses. Chap. 38.
AMANA. All men, howe ignorant and brutish soeuer they be, cary
about with them in their hearts a great testimony, that they
haue both a God and a Iudge, who approoueth that which is good,
and punisheth the euill. For although they neuer heard one worde of
his worde, yet they cannot be ignorant of this, which they sensibly
feele and knowe by experience in themselues, that nothing but euill
can befall them for euill, howsoeuer it be long a comming, and that
they cannot feele the euill which their sinne hath brought vpon them,
but they will repent them for committing it, and wish it had neuer bin
done. This is naturall Diuinitie, which no body can be ignorant of.
Whereunto Saint Iohn leading vs, saith very wel, If our heart condemne
vs,1. Iohn 3. 20. God is greater then our heart, and knoweth all things. And we see that
repentance ordinarily followeth sinne, and that a sinner can not but
feele some heauinesse and griefe. Yea nature it selfe teacheth vs, when
wee are displeased for some thing whereof we repent vs,Whereof the striking of the breast arose. to strike our
breast, because the heart is within it, as also to hang downe our eyes
for shame. But the vexation, sadnesse and sorrowe, which after the
fault committed, a man is striken with, because of the hurt that taketh
holde of him, and the punishment he expecteth or endureth already,

serueth not but for a continuall torment vnto him, as if hee were in a
hell, except he change his mind, amend his fault and returne to God againe,
and so betake himselfe againe to that place and order of his,
which God had assigned him. Beholde what good instructions
we haue in our selues, which ought to pricke vs forward to goodnesse,
and drawe vs backe from wickednesse: especially our heart beareth
vs certaine testimony of that which is acceptable in the sight of God.
Now as we haue heard,Of the substance of the heart. that the forme thereof is aptest for the motion
it hath, so the substance and matter whereof it is made, is a kinde of
flesh that hath none like it in all the other partes of the body. For it is
needful it should be so thicke and fast, that it may the better discharge
that office and duety that is laide vpon the heart.The situation of the heart. On the other side, it is
so seated in the breast, that the foundation and foote thereof is directly
in the middest of it: but the narrow end of it bendeth somewhat towards
the left-side. Which is done in regarde of two great commodities,
wherof the one is, that it should not rush against the bones of the
breast: the other, that it should heate the left side the more, seeing the
right side is holpen by the heat of the liuer, which is on that side. And
although the left part of the heart be very bigge, and hard, and consequently
more heauy then the right, which is more subtile, thinne and
soft, and therefore lighter, neuerthelesse God hath giuen it such a
counterpoize,Of the counterpoize of the heart. that both sides are of equall waight: so that although
there be no ligame^t or band to tie it vnto the other parts that are neere
about it, yet without inclining or bending any one way more then other,
it hangeth in the middest of the vessell and skinne that compasseth
it round about. For the left part, which of it owne nature is heauiest,
containeth in it a lighter matter, namely, the vitall spirite, and
the right side that is not so heauy hath in it a more heauy matter,
which is the blood. Whereby wee see howe the prouidence of God
hath so well framed the counterpoize, that both partes are equall, like
to an euen and iust paire of ballance. From whence also we may take a
good lesson concerning the vprightnesse that ought to be in our heart
and wil,A good lesson for euery one. and in al our affections, and with what heart we ought to folow
the ordina^ces of God, and that way which he showeth vs in his word*
how we should continue and abide stedfast therein,Deuter. 5. ezech. 20. and turne neither
to the right hand nor the left, as wee are often commanded in the holie
Scriptures. Moreouer, forasmuch as the skin that co^passeth the heart*
hath the bones of the breast on the one side, and the lungs on the other,
it was requisit that it should be of a matter so wel te^pered, that it might
receiue no harme by ye hardnes of the bones, and on the other side shuld
not be so hard as to be able to hurt the lungs, which are of as soft and te^der

a flesh as any is in al the body. Which teacheth vs sufficiently, that
the prouidence of God hath forgotten nothing in any respect.Of the two voide places in the heart, and of their vse. But we
must further know, that there are two capacities or holow places in the
heart distinguished one from another by a partition, the one being on
the right side, the other on the left. That place on the right side serueth
to receiue the blood that commeth from the liuer to the heart by
veines, both for the nourishing of it selfe and of the lungs, and for the
generation of the vitall spirites, whose forge and shoppe is in the other
void place on the left side, where the hart doth exercise his chiefe
office, which is to ing^nder the vitall spirites of the finest and thinnest
blood, which resolueth it selfe there, as if it came of the sweate that
proceedeth out of the right capacitie.What the vitall spirite is. Now the vital spirit is as it were
a most bright and liuely flame, like to the celestiall nature, which carrieth
heat and life to the whole body, and is the instrument of the chief actions
and works therof.Of the great artery. In this left hollow place there is a great artery,
which is as it were the stocke of al the arteries in the body, which a litle
from the heart diuideth itselfe into two branches, whereof the one ascendeth
vpward, to carry the vitall spirite into the vpper partes of the
body: the other, which is some what bigger, descendeth downeward.
By meanes of these arteries, which are as it were the pipes of the heart,
the greatest benefite of all is communicated to all partes of the
body.
Now because the arteries and veines haue neede one of an others
help, they meet one another, and are so linked and ioyned together, that
the arteries are seldome alone without the veines. For the arteries being
ioyned vnto the veines doe giue them aire and spirite, which
through the vitall heate stirreth the blood, and helpeth to bring it to
perfection, and to preserue it. In like manner the arteries sucke some
small quantitie of blood out of the veines, whereby the vitall spirite is
carried,A^example of ^utuall succour. sprinckled, and increased. Wherein wee haue againe a notable
example and goodly paterne of that mutuall communicating, that
ought to be among men* without which neither nature nor humane
societie can be preserued: the like also heereof wee see betweene the
heart and the lungs, in which there are pipes that passe from the one
to the other for their mutuall helping and succouring one of an other.
For the Arteriall veine, that proceedeth out of the right side of the
hear^, carrieth the blood to the lungs to nourish it: and the veiny artery,
which commeth out of the left side of the heart, carrieth ayre
vnto it from the lungs to refresh it. For after it is brought to the lungs
by the artery or wind-pipe,Of the veiny ^^^ery. the lungs communicate the same vnto the
heart. Likewise by that same veiny artey, the ouer-heated ayre and

fumes are carried from the heart: and serueth besides to carry the
spirite and the arteriall blood vnto the lungs to heate them. Therefore
this artery is not altogether so thicke as the rest are, nor so
thinne as the veines, to the ende it may easily enlarge or straiten it
selfe, or giue and receiue the ayre, and that through hardnesse it
hinder not the motion of the lungs, as also that the foggy blood may
not euaporate and sweate through. For this cause it is called the veiny
artery, because it holdeth of the nature both of an artery and of a
veine, and hath this office belonging properly vnto it, to carry the
ayre and the spirit.
There are also in the heart other small peeces,Of the doores and pipes of the heart. which Anatomists
distinguish from it, as the two little eares, the right and the left,
which are as it were little doores, as there is also in all the pipes
thereof, which are so small, that vnneth may they be discerned by
the eyes. These doores and pipes that are in them ^erue partly to this
ende, that when the heart sucketh such blood as is necessary for it
selfe, the veine wherewith it draweth shoulde not breake, through
any ouer-great, vehement, and sodaine attraction: and partly, that
the ayre might enter in more gently and better wrought, according
as neede requireth. For this cause also it is, why the heart doeth not
drawe the ayre immediately from the mouth, both because if this
space were not betweene, it coulde not drawe so much as it wanteth,
and so woulde bee choaked, as also because it shoulde receiue
it in too colde, whereupon it woulde be greatly hurt. Therefore it
hath pipes, passages, and instruments, not onely to bring this ayre
vnto it, as it is brought to the lungs, but also to dispence and prepare
it as is most conuenient for it, as wee haue learned already by
our speach of the rough artery, and of other instruments of the voyce
and of respiration. Out of which wee are to note two goodly points
of the prouidence and wisedome, whereby hee doeth admonish vs
of that moderation,Goodly instructions for al men. which wee ought to keepe in all things, and
how we ought to behaue our selues, not only in one worke, but also
in all things that wee take in hand. For concerning the first, GOD
hath prouided alwaies throughout the whole worke of mans body in
such sort, that there should be no viole^t thing, but hath so wel framed,
disposed, and linked all together, that no one part or member shoulde
receiue hurt of another, but al might help and support ech other. Therfore
if there be any burthen to cary from one to an other, God hath so
distributed it by little and little, and by such conuenient means, that
no part is pressed:Moderation is (...) be kept in all things. teaching vs thereby, that he loueth moderation and
hateth violence in all things: for which cause hee dispenseth all and

distributeth drop by drop, as it were by destillation. And to the end he
may conioyne in one, things of a contrary nature, hee alwayes placeth
between two contraries, things of a middle disposition which are most
apt to tie them together and to keep them. Besides, we see howe hee
hath ordred al the parts of the body so wel, that one only member and
instrument serueth oftentimes for many offices and vses, as we haue already
touched it. Wherin God doth admonish vs further of two things
wel worthy the noting. The first is, that we ought to looke so wel vnto
al things, that we neither forget nor omit any thing that shalbe requisit
and necessary. The other, that we should imploy our selues about euery
thing that we can and may do, according to those gifts and graces,
which wee haue receiued of God, and that we should vse al things to
euery such purpose as they will serue,Superfluitie to be auoided in all things. and so auoid al vaine and superfluous
charges. For (as it is commonly said) nothing is to be done by
many things, that can be performed by fewer: otherwise there will
be more hindrance then helpe, and greater losse then profit. For this
cause as God hath not giuen to the body one member lesse then there
ought to be, so he hath not giuen it one more. For if there were either
more or lesse, it would not only be monstrous, but there would be eyther
some want, or some let and hinderance. And when as one member
is able to satisfy two offices, he hath not created many to do it, if either
profit or necessitie required not the help of many.Good counsell for Princes. Whereupon gouernours
of Common-wealths ought to learne, that their people are not
to bee burthened with vnprofitable and vnnecessary offices and persons.
If therefore men woulde learne those lessons that God giueth
them in their owne bodies, and in the members thereof, they woulde
alwayes keepe a meane in all things, following this heauenly example,
and neuer offend either with too little or too much. But notwithstanding
wee haue all Nature to be our Mistres, so that shee keepe a
schoole within vs, and teach vs these things her selfe, yet wee profite
little thereby. Nowe leauing this speach, seeing wee haue taken a
viewe of the nature of the body, and of the naturall motion thereof,
which is commonly called the Pulse, and what vse it hath in this corporall
life, as also of other things concerning this matter, it shall be
good for vs nowe to speake of another motion that is in the nature of
the soule, which serueth not onely for this life, but also for the spirituall,
in respect of which especially it is giuen vnto it, an image and representation
whereof wee haue had in this motion of which wee haue
already spoken. It belongeth to thee, ARAM, to discourse vpon this
matter.



Of the second motion of the heart, which belongeth to the affections of
the soule, and of those that goe before or follow after iudgement: of
the agreement that is betweene the temperature of the body, and
the affections of the soule. Chap. 39.
ARAM. As God is not onely an eternall and infinite essence, but
also infinitely good and happy, so hath hee not rested in giuing
vnto his creatures life and beeing, as it were imparting to them some
part of his being, but it hath pleased him also to make them partakers
of that Good which is essentiall in him, and of his blessednesse and felicitie,
according as euery one was capable thereof in his kinde.Man was created not onely to be, but also to be well. For he
will not onely haue them to be, but also to be well. For this cause we
see, that although men desire much to be, and therefore are greatly
afraid of death, as of an enemy that seeketh to vndoe them, yet many
times it falleth out so that they desire death, to the end they might be
no more, because they thinke it a greater good, or at leastwise a lesse euil
to be no more, the^ to be miserable and vnhappy. And by this we may
knowe, that man was not created of God only to be, neither was that
his principal end, but also to be blessed. For this cause as God hath giuen
to the creatures an inclination to preserue themselues in their life,
to the end they might be, so he hath put into them a natural appetite and
desire of that which is good, to the ende they might be well, and that
good might be fall them, but man specially is thus affected: which desire
of good is also ioyned with an eschewing of euill. For in the pursuite
of good, his contrary, which is euil, must of necessitie be fled from.
And of this naturall inclination to good proceede all those affections
of the soule that draw it hither and thither to seeke for it: but because
of her badde iudgement, proceeding of the darkenesse of ignorance
which is in the minde, she chooseth oftentimes the cleane contrary to
that which she desireth,What the affections are. as we haue already touched.
We call then properly by the name of affections, the motions and
acts of that naturall power of the soule, which consisteth in following
after good, and eschewing of euil. For receiuing of God in our first creation
to be and to be wel, we haue still some naturall seedes of the perfection
of these two great gifts, which teach vs naturally, that it is a good
thing for one to preserue himselfe and his beeing, as also to be wel and
happy in his beeing: but this is only generally. For whe^ we are to come
from these generalities vnto particulars, there are wonderful errors and
disorders throughout the whole course of mans life.Two kindes of affections. Now among the
motions of the soule, some go before iudgement, others follow after:
although oftentimes they are so sodaine and headstrong withall, that it

appeareth plainly they haue shaken off the bridle, and neuer expected and
staied for any iudgeme^t. Notwithstanding it is true, that the hart is not
moued before there hath bin some iudgement to determine, whether
that which is then offred vnto it be good or euil. But bicause the motions
of our spirit and mind are very light and sodain, and need not so long
time, as otherwise is requisit for vs if wee will take good heede to our
matters, hereof it is that they seem to vs many times to preuent and goe
before iudgement* giuen,What affections goe before iudgement when indeed they follow it. And as for those
naturall motions, which in truth go before it, they are such as are bred
and borne of the disposition of the body, as the desire to eate in hunger,
and to drinke in thirst, and sorrow in time of sickenes, or the motion of a
melancholike humor, or ioy proceeding from good and pure blood in
the heart. But the other motions follow the aduice of iudgement and as
that is mooued and changed diuersly by such meanes as haue alreadie
bin declared, so the affections alter, and increase or decrease, or otherwise
vanish cleane away and come to nothing. Whereof it followeth,
that they are appeased by the same meanes by which they are moued,
according as they are applied vnto them. But although it behooueth
that the affections should be pricked forward by iudgement, yet it
followeth not thereupon, that they can not be stirred vp, except this
mature and ripe iudgement be alwaies there, which ordaineth things to
be done after the discourse of reason. For it is enough for them if they
haue another iudgement, that obserueth not such an exact and diligent
examination, but onely that which fantasie offereth without any other
discoursing. And this iudgement thus moued by fancie, is most vsual and
ordinary, and that which most guideth and ruleth the affections of men.
Therfore it is a sodain and tumultuous iudgement, of which a man may
truly say, a short sentence of a sottish iudge. Thus fancie, being very turbulent
and skittish, and drawing to it selfe confusedly some shew and apparance
of opinion and iudgement, whereby it deemeth that which is offred
vnto it to be either good or bad, is the cause that wee liue in the
middest of marueilous troubles in respect of our affections of feare, of
desire, of sorrow, of ioy, and that one while we weep, and sodainly we
laugh againe. And because it hath great power ouer the body, as wee
haue already declared, these perturbations doe manifestly incline that
way.Agreement betweene the temperature of the body and the affections of the soule. We see also by experience, that there is great agreement betweene
the qualities and temperature of the body, and the affections
of the soule: insomuch that as the bodies of men are compounded of
the qualities of heate, colde, moisture, and drienesse, so among the
affections some are hote, others colde, some moist, others drie, and some
mingled of these diuers qualities. So that euery one is most subiect to

those affections that come neerest to the nature, temperature, and complexion
of his body. As for example, the affection of ioy is hote and
moist, and therefore they that are hot and moist, as children, yong men,
sound and healthy folkes, and idle persons, are more easily inclined to
that affection. Contrariwise, sorrow is a colde and drie affection, and
therefore they that are colde and drie are most giuen to that affection,
and such are olde folkes and they that are of a melancholy humour,
which is earthy, cold and drie. For the like reason, they that haue a soft
and tender heart, receiue more easily the impression of ioy and griefe,
as wax taketh the print of a seale: and they that haue a ha^d and hote
heart, quickly receiue ioy and keep it a long time. And on the other side,
they that haue hard and cold hearts, receiue sorrowe and grie^e very
soone, and retaine it long, as appeareth in melancholy and melancholike
persons. And as the affections followe the temperature and
complexion of the body,The affections can doe much with the body. so they for their parts haue great vertue and
power ouer the body. Therefore we see, that ioy is as it were a medicine
to the body, and foode to the naturall heate and moisture, in
which two qualities life chiefely consisteth, as we haue already heard.
For it greatly preserueth and increaseth them: forasmuch as it strengtheneth
the animall and naturall vertues, stirreth vp the spirites, helpeth
digestion, and generally profiteth the habite and disposition of the
whole body. For the heart thereby sendeth with the blood, much
naturall heate, and more spirites vnto all parts of the body. By meanes
whereof the members are watred and moistned by the humiditie contained
in the fountaine of blood: whereupon it followeth, that all the
partes increase in bignesse and waxe fatte.^oy good for the body, and Griefe hurtful to it. For this cause Physicions
alwayes exhort sicke persons to be as merry as they may, and to auoide
sorrowe and sadnesse, which being colde and drie is contrary to
life, and so consumeth men. For it drieth vp the whole body, because
the heart thereby is closed vp and restrained: so that no great quantitie
of spirites can bee made there, and those fewe that are there, can
not easily bee distributed and dispersed with the blood throughout
the members. Whereupon the vitall vertue and her companions being
weakened, the liuely colour of the face waxeth wanne and pale,
and in a manner vanisheth cleane away: and so consequently the
whole bodie becommeth leane and consumeth, as if it tooke no
nourishment, yea death oftentimes followeth thereupon. This agreement
therefore, which is (as we see) betweene the temperature and
complexion of the body, and the affections of the soule, ought to teach
vs to be very temperate in our eating and drinking, and in all other
things belonging to our life. For as wee arre either temperate or intemperate,

so will the qualities be whereof our bodies are compounded:
and so consequently according to the temperancie or intemperancie
that is in vs, the affections of the soule also will be more moderate
or immoderate, and the perturbations which they shall bring
with them, will be greater or lesse, and more easie or vneasie to be prouoked
or appeased. Whereby wee might knowe what great agreement
God hath made betweene the body and the soule, For not withstanding
their natures differ much one from an other, yet seein they
must be linked together, it is necessary they shoulde haue some agreement
betweene them, to the end they may be conioyned and vnited
in one. It is true, that by the reasons of humane Philosophie, we know
well howe the coniunction of corporall things and of their qualities,
what contrarietie soeuer it is betweene them, may be effected and
wrought. But as wee cannot see or knowe our soule, or any spirituall
nature, as wee knowe our bodies and bodily natures, so can wee not
iudg so easily of the meanes whereby the body agreeth with the soule,How the agreement betweene the body and the soule may be discerned.
and corporall natures with spirituall, but onely as experience and the
effectes giue vs some sight thereof. For wee see by experience from
whence the good or ill disposition of the body, and health and sickenesse
proceede, namely, from the good or ill temperature of the
qualities thereof, Wee see also, that according to the nourishment
which the body taketh, and that sobrietie or gluttoni^ it vseth in eating
and drinking, and according to the abstinence or the effectes it bringeth
foorth in all things, it is either better or worse affected and disposed.
We see likewise the changes and alterations that befall it, according
to the ages and exercises it hath. Wherefore although we had
nothing else to looke vnto, but to maintaine and preserue our health,
yet ought we to desire to be sober, moderate, and very temperate in
all things, seeing moderation beareth so great sway in all the partes of
mans life. But it ought to be more pretious in our eies, when wee see
that the temperance or intemperance that may be in our bodies, extendeth
it selfe vnto the estate of our soule, and that it can do much eyther
in the helping and maintaining, or in the hurting and troubling
thereof. For wee knowe already by experience, that which is of a
cholericke nature, is more subiect to those diseases that are bredde
of a cholericke humour, then a flegmatike person that is of a contrary
temperature, and that a flegmatike bodie is most subiect to
diseases proceeding of flegme.Naturall qualities breede diseases. The like may bee saide of all the other
qualities and complexions. If then euery one encline more to
such diseases, as may proceede from those naturall qualities which
abound most in his body, it is an easie matter to iudge, what is like

to fall vpon him if they exceede, whereby they are encreased much
more. And if that humour which naturally exceedeth most in a man
(and of which his temperature and complexion hath his name) cause
him to incline most to those diseases that may be bred thereof, a man
may iudge into what disposition of body he may fall through excesse
of other qualities, which are more repugnant to his nature and complexion,
if there be no such counterpoize and equalitie, that one contrary
may serue as a remedy against another. But hauing considered
of these things, we must goe forward and prosecute our speech of the
affections of the soule, which are as it were health and sicknes therein,
according as they shalbe eyther well or ill moderated, and see what
conueniencie there is betweene corporall and spirituall phisicke. Finish
therefore this dayes woorke, ACHITOB, with some discourse
vpon this poynt, which may serue to instruct vs in the matter of the
affections of the soule, of which to morowe we are to intreate particularly
and in order.


Of the Health and diseases of the soule: of the agreement betweene corporall
and spirituall Phisicke: how necessary the knowledge of the nature
of the body and of the soule, is for eueryone. Chap 40.
ACHITOB. It is alwayes in his power who hath giuen vs beeing,
namely God the spring and fountaine of all essences, to preserue
and keepe vs therein, and to take it also from vs when it pleaseth him.
But forasmuch as he delighteth not in destroying the woorkes which
himselfe hath wrought, hee hath giuen vnto his creatures certaine
meanes to preserue themselues in that nature wherin he created them.
And that they might haue those meanes neere at hand, he hath placed
them euen in their owne nature. For they haue by nature an inclination,
that moueth and vrgeth them to keepe and defend themselues asmuch
as they can possible, from euery thing that may corrupt their
nature, that is contrary vnto it, or that wil bring to an end that beeing,
which they haue receiued of God.Men are more carefull for the health of their bodies then of their soules, But that which herein is most to be
lamented in man, is his ouer great care and curiositie in searching out
remedies meete for the maintenance and preseruation of his bodie,
the least griefe and ill disposition whereof seemeth vnto him to be very
burthensome: but as for thinking eyther vpon those means, wherby
God hath appoynted him to attaine to an eternall and blessed life,
or vpon the diseases of the soule, which in steed of life will bring death
vnto it, and are farre more dangerous, stubberne, and vneasie to be cured
then those of the body, he dreameth litle thereof, his care is very

small, he esteemes them not great, and therefore is very slouthfull in
seeking remedie for them.
We are to know then,The affections breed the health or sicknes of the soule. that the affections of the soule are as it were
health and sicknesse therein, according as they are either temperate
or intemperate. For as there is no euill disposition or sicknesse
in the bodie, but contrariwise good health, if there bee not some excesse
in the qualities of which it is compounded, which may destroy
that equalitie that is requisite for the keeping of it sounde: so
is it with the faculties, powers, qualities and affections of the soule,
which according to her nature hath her health and her diseases.
Wherefore when the harmonie, conueniencie and temperature of
her powers and affections, is such as her nature requireth, then is
shee well disposed and in health: as contrariwise thee is ill affected
and diseased, when in place of temperance and mediocritie, there
is intemperance and excesse. Nowe according to that which wee
hearde in the former speech of the conueniencie betweene the temperature
and complexion of the bodie, and the affections of the
soule, wee see that a man of a cholericke nature is a great deale
more easily stirred vp to anger, then an other that is of a flegmatike
or melancholy nature.How the soule receiueth from the body in regard of the diuers temperatures thereof, For seeing the cholericke humour is by nature
hote and burning, like to fire, that man in whome this humour
raigneth is sooner inflamed with anger and wrath, then an other that
is of a contrary nature. For fire will more speedily kindle in a matter
that commeth neerer to it owne nature, and of which it may
more easily take holde, then in another that is more contrarie to it.
It is otherwise with flegmatike or melancholike men, according as
the humours which rule in them, dispose and incline them more to be
caried with one affection rather then with another. Therefore wee
see that they which are of a cholericke complexion, as they are of a
more hote and dry nature, so their affections are more sodain, burning
and violent, like to fire. Flegmatike and melancholy persons as they
are colder, so they are not so easily mooued, but are more slowe and
heauy, and haue also other inclinations and other affections. And as
they that are co^monly said to be sanguine, are of the best temperature
so their affections are for the most part more cheerful and more temperate.
And as there are diuers mixtions of bodily qualities, so there are
sundry sorts of temperatures and complexions of the body, and consequently
of soules in regard of their saculties and affections. Therfore
also there is great agreement betweene corporall and spirituall Physicke.Agreement betweene corporall and spirituall Physicke.
For this cause the Physicions both of the bodies and soules of
men are to follow almost one and the same methode, and obserue a like

order in their arte and practise, euery one according to the subiects propounded
vnto them: insomuch that looke what the one doeth vnto
the body, the other is to deale so with the soule, such things being applied
as best agree with their seuerall natures. Wherein they may further
eche others worke greatly, obseruing that ende at which both of
them aime, which to the one is the health of the body, and to the other
the cure of the soule, considering that the one may helpe the other, as
hath bin already touched. For if the body be not temperant, hardly wil
the soule be: and if the soule be intemperate, the body desireth not to be
temperant. Therefore also we see, that not only Physicions for the body
appoint men diets, both for the preseruation of their bodily health, and
also for ye recouery and restoring thereof again, but also spiritual Physicions
doe the like in regard of the soules health, so farre foorth as bodily
sobriety wil serue greatly to that purpose. For this cause not only ordinary
sobriety and moderation, which ought to be kept throughout the
whole life of man,Luke 21. 34. is so greatly recommended vnto vs in the holy scriptures,
but fasts also,Rom. 13. 3. which being more strict abstine^ces, are very profitable,
yea necessary oftentimes according to times,Ephes 5. 18. places and persons,
For they serue to tame and humble the flesh,Act. 13. 2. that it may be the better
kept in, and lesse hinder the spirit, which thereby is the better inabled to
attend to euery good worke, and to the contemplation of diuine and celestial
things.Iudge. 20. 26. Therfore the people of God and holy men fasted ofte^, wherof
wee haue many testimonies in the scriptures.Psal. 69. 10. And as it is necessary
that bodily Physicions should know wel the te^peratures and complexions
of mens bodies,Esth. 4. 16. and their natures, their health and diseases also,
with their conuenient and apt remedies: so is it needfull, that spirituall
Physicions shoulde knowe the nature of soules, of their faculties,
powers and affections, and the natures of vertues, which are their health,
and of vices, which are their diseases, together with those medicines and
remedies that are necessarie for the preseruation and increase of vertues,
and for the diminution and abolishing of vices. For without this knowledge,
neither of them can be good Physicions, but it may bee feared,
least they make ye diseases worse, or in steed of curing the sick persons,
kill them outright. But we must yet draw more instruction out of this
matter here offered vnto vs. For whatsoeuer hath beene hitherto spoken
concerning the agreement between the temperature of the body,
and the affections of the soule, or concerning the health and diseases of
them both, or the knowledge that is requisit in Physicions to follow a
good method in their art and practise for ye healing of their patie^ts, I say
the vndersta^ding of al these things is not only necessary for ye Physicio^s
both of soules and bodies,The knowledge of physicke necessary for all* but euen for euery one of vs particularly, For if

we were all skilfull in the art of corporall Phisicke, I meane not such
skil as is needful for them that make publike profession thereof to all,
but onely so much as is necessary for the preseruation of our owne
health, I doubt not but we might easily auoyde many infirmities and
diseases, whereinto we fall daily for want of good diet, good gouernment
and the vse of those meanes, which might either retaine vs in
health, or restore it quickly vnto vs, when it is somewhat altered or impeached.
Moreouer we should haue this aduantage besides, if we fell
into any disease, that we should know the better howe to keepe and
gouerne our selues more moderately and wisely, and obey the Physicions
counsell the better, because we should haue greater knowledge
of that which we ought to doe, and of the danger whereinto we might
fall, or which we might easily auoyde. Wee may say as much of the
soules phisicke, the knowledge whereof is a great deale more necessary
for vs, not onely because the soule is more noble and precious
then the body, but also because it is a harder matter to knowe the nature
and diseases of the soule, then of the bodie. And if wee prooue so
happie as to be able to comprehend any thing, wee shall know daily
better and better what things are in vs of God, and what is his order,
as also what there is of Satans, and what is that disorder and confusion,
which by meanes of sinne he hath brought into all things. For
as sinne is cause of that excesse,Sinne is the cause of all disorder, discases and of death. which is in the qualities of which our
bodies are made, and consequently of the diseases that proceed from
thence, which afterward bring death to the bodie, so is it in respect
of the soule, and of the excesse that is in the affections thereof, and in
all the other partes of it, contrary to that nature in which God created
the same. And as sinne is the cause of the disorder and confusion that
is in both of them, so it is the cause that one helpeth to spoile another,
whereas there should be a pleasant harmonie and concord, not
onely of the bodily qualities among themselues, and so likewise of
the qualities of the soule among themselues, but also of the qualities
both of soule and bodie one with another. For God hath put, nor onely
into our soules, but into our bodies also, the seedes of all the vertues,
and the pricks and meanes to incite and to leade vs vnto them, in such
manner and forme as shalbe declared hereafter. Although wee may
learne somewhat by that which we haue heard alreadie of the conueniencie
that is betweene the body and the soule, betweene the temperature
of the one and the affections of the other. For if the one bee
answerable and correspondent to the other, no doubt but God so disposeth
of the temperatures and complexions of the bodie, as he hath
disposed of the nature of the affections in the soule, seeing the one is

to serue the other through that mutuall agreement, which they ought
to haue one with another. Nowe to morrow wee will prosecute our
speech begunne concerning the affections of the soule, to the end we
may fully vnderstand this goodly and large matter, which may procure
to the soule and body, both life and death. And first, mee thinkes
wee are to enter into the consideration of foure things, which are in
the will and in the power to desire, that is in the soule, namely, natural
inclinations, actions, habites, and affections, This shalbe then, ASER,
the subiect of thy discourse.

The end of the fift dayes worke.


THE SIXT DAYES
Worke.

Of foure things to be considered in the Will, and in the power of desiring in
the soule: and first, of the naturall inclinations: of selfe-loue, and the
vnrulinesse thereof. Chap. 41.
ASER. All the actions of the soule are bredde of the
powers and faculties thereof: and therefore by the
benefite of nature, which is the gift of God, she hath
receiued powers for all thinges, which she ought to
doe. Now concerning the facultie of knowing in the
soule, and in the vnderstanding part thereof, of which
we haue intreated heeretofore,Three things to be considered in the facultie of Knowledge. we finde three thinges worthie of diligent
consideration, namely, naturall principles, actions, and habites
gotten by long custome. Wee may remember those sundry degrees,
which we said were in the knowledge of the minde, and how by this
facultie it doeth not only know simple and particular things as beasts
doe, but also compoundeth and ioyneth them together: how it compareth
one with another, separateth them and discourseth vpon them:
finally howe it iudgeth, and eyther approueth or refuseth them. All
which things are actions of the minde, proceeding from those notices,
and naturall principles of knowledge that are therein. Nowe if these
actions be sodaine, and passe lightly, so that the minde doeth not stay
in them, nor acquaint it selfe with them, the bare and simple name of
action belongeth to them. But if the minde doeth one and the same
thing often, museth much vpon it, calleth it often to memorie, and accustometh

it selfe thereunto,How hab^tes are bred in ye minde. so that it is in a manner imprinted in it,
and thereby the minde becommeth prompt and ready in regarde of
thelong continuance therein, then doe these actions take the name of
habite, which is bredde by the often repeating and reiterating of the
same things. Whereby the minde is made more skilful and ready, and
the spirites more fitte and apt to performe those exercises, vnto which
they haue addicted themselues, and wherein they haue continued. So
that such a habite is as it were a light in the spirite and in the soule,
whereby the actions there of are gouerned.
In like manner wee finde in the Will,Foure things to be considered in the Will and desires. and in that power o desiring,
which is in the soule, foure things to be considered, namely naturall
inclinations, actions, habites, and affections which intermingle themselues
in euery one of the other. All these thinges are good of their
owne nature, euen as nature it selfe, being considered as God hath
created her. But as nature was corrupted through sinne, so is it with
these things by reason of that disorder which the nature of sinne hath
brought vnto them.Of natural in^linations and affections. But let vs first speake of naturall inclinations, and
then we will prosecute the rest. As therefore the minde hath his naturall
principles of knowledge, so the will hath her naturall inclinations
and affections, which of their owne nature are good, as they are
taken from that first nature created of God: neither woulde they at
any time bee wicked, if there were no excesse in them proceeding
from nature corrupted, which afterwarde breedeth in vs such inclinations
and affections as are altogether euill and damnable. We loue
our selues naturally, our wiues, our children, our kinsfolkes and our
friendes, yea we are by nature so enclined to this loue, that if it were
not in vs we shoulde not onely not bee men, but not deserue so much
as to bee accounted and taken for beastes, no not for the wildest, most
sauage and venemous beastes that can be. For we see by experience
what great inclination and affection there is in euery one of them towardes
their litle ones. Therefore when S. Paul maketh a beaderoll of
the vices and sinnes of such men as are most vicious and execrable, and
as it were monsters of nature,Rom. 1. 30. 2. he saith expresly, that they are without naturall
affection:Tim. 3. 3. which indeede cannot be cleane rooted out of any nature
liuing, vnlesse it be altogether monstrous and vnnaturall: For it
is an affection which is as it were a beame of the loue that God beareth
cowards all his creatures, and which he causeth to shine in them,
so that it is not possible, that they which are capable of any affection
of loue, should not loue their owne blood and their like, especially
men. Wherefore if this loue and this affection were well ruled and ordered,
it is so farre from being vicious, that contrariwise the spirite of

God condemneth as Monsters, those men that want it. And therefore
God doth not forbid and condemne this loue and affection in his law,
so farre forth as it is ruled thereby, but he approueth it, and appointeth it
to be the rule of our loue towards our neighbour,Leuit. 19. 18. matth. 5. 43. when he saith, Thou
shalt loue thy neighbour as thy selfe. But when this loue and affection is disordered
in vs, it is not only vicious, but also as it were the originall and
fountaine of all other vices and sinnes, whereas if it were well ordered
and ruled according to the will and law of God, it would be as it were the
fountaine and welspring of all vertues. For wee should not loue our
selues but in God and through him, nor consequently our wiues, nor
our children, nor our friends, nor any other creature whatsoeur: wheras
cleane contrariwise, wee set God aside, and seeke nothing but our
selues and the things of the world. Therefore this loue and affection
being nowe so vnruly through sinne, is so violent in vs, that it withdraweth
vs from the loue of God and of his creatures, to loue the deuil
and his wicked workes, because it seemeth to vs, that he is a greater
friend vnto vs then God.Of the v^^^lines of our naturall affections. For whereas the holy spirite doeth resist and
set himselfe against our euil affections, and wil haue vs to bridle them,
Satan on the contrary part letteth them loose, and not onely giueth vs
ouer to follow our peruerse and vitious affections with full sway and
libertie, but also prouoketh and thrusteth vs forward with great vehemencie.
Whereby we may iudge, what loue and affection a man may
cary towardes creatures in those things wherein they may be contrary
vnto him, and with what fury and rage he may be ledde against them
that resist his disordered affections, seeing he carieth such an affection
towardes God his Creator. Therefore Saint Paul speaking of wicked
men that should be in the latter times,2. Tim. 3. 2. saieth first, That they shoulde bee
selfe-louers: and hauing set downe this disordered loue as the roote,
after he commeth to the branches and fruits of such a tree, saying, That
they shall bee couetous, boasters, proude, cursed speakers, disobedient to parents,
vnthankfull, vnholy, without naturall affection, truce-breakers, false
accusers, intemperate, fierce, despisers of them that are good, traitors, heady,
bie minded, louers of pleasures more the^ louers of God, hauing a shew of godlinesse,
but denying the power therof. And in the Epistle to the Romanes he
expresly mentioneth haiers of God.Rom. 1. Thus we see what the loue of me^ is
towards the^selues, being left in ye corruptio^ of their nature, in respect of
yt which ought to be, if it were not vnruly and disordred. For man should
loue himself^ as the gift of God, as also his life and being which God hath
giuen him,Of true loue towards a man^ selfe, and toward^ his. and that blessed estate for the enioying of which hee hath his
being, and that Good wherein it consisteth, and whereby he may at^aine
vnto it, and shoulde loue no other thing, nor otherwise. But the

great excesse that is in the loue of our selues, causeth it to bee cleane
contrary, both to that loue which ought naturally to be in vs, and also
to our loue toward^ God, so that it ouerthroweth and confoundeth all
heauenly order, and the whole course of mans life. Neuertheles, when
it so falleth out that this loue and affection is moderate in vs, although
in deede it be neuer so as it ought to be according to the rule of Gods
will, yet are they acceptable in his sight, as our other naturall affections
and friendships are, which we beare towardes them that belong
to vs: prouided alwayes that they bee ruled and guided by faith and
true loue, and kinded with the flames of the holy Ghost, as they were
in Zacharie and Elizabeth towards their sonne Iohn* and in so many other
holy men, as haue loued both themselues and theirs according to
God,Gen. 22. wherof we haue a notable example in Abraham. For out of all
question if euer father loued his children, hee loued his sonne Isaac.
But he shewed euidently by the effect, that he did not onely loue him
with the loue of flesh and blood, as commonly we loue our children,
but he loued him also in God, towards whome yet his loue was farre
greater, seeing he was very ready to offer him vp in sacrifice vnto him,
whe ^he so commanded it. But although this naturall loue and affection
bee not so pure in vs as in these holy men, but that still there is
mingled with it some thing of our owne because of sinne, which wee
hane by inheritance, yet is it alwaies acceptable to God, so that hee
be first and chiefly loued. For through his mercie he beareth with our
infirmitie, which euermore accompanieth our desires and willes. As
for those that are guided onely by the light of nature, and are not regenerated
by the spirit of God, albeit these naturall affections are too
vncleane in them, yet they doe not so much displease him, as inhumanitie
and crueltie doe, that are cleane contrary to the other, and which
doe vtterly dispossesse men of loue and charitie. We may consider the
same things in all the other naturall inclinations. For wee see that some
are by nature inclined to ciuill iustice, some to liberalitie, and others
to such like vertues.Naturall inclinations are seeds of vertues or vices. Now if these inclinations be well guided, they are
goodly seedes of vertues, but if they bee not well ordered and ruled,
they corrupt and degenerate* ye^ they turne into the vices that are contrary
to those vertues. For iustice, which is neuer without moderation,
may be turned into ouer great rigour, or into crueltie, as wee see it in
many, who being naturally inclined to seueritie, which many times
is very necessarie iniustice, become so rigorous and extreme, that
their seue ritie, which ought to be a vertue, is turned into crueltie. The
like may be ^aid of other inclinations and affections. Now that which
befalleth these inclinations, is procured also vnto them by the humors

and qualities of the bodie, which haue acertaine agreement with the
affections. For a sanguine man, in whose nature blood beareth greatest
sway amongst the other humours and qualities, will naturally be
more enclined to loue, to ioy, to liberalitie, and to such other affections
as are most agreeable to his nature. But if this complexion bee
not moderated and well guided, it will easily passe measure in euerie
affection, so that it will fall into foolish and vnlawfull loues, into excessiue
and vnmeasurable ioyes, and into prodigalitie in steede of following
liberalitie. The same may bee saide of all the other temperatures
and complexions for their part, in that they may bee seedes and
prouocatio^s either to vertues or to vices, according to that correspondencie,
which is betweene the bodie and the soule, and the temperature
of the one with the affections of the other.The originall of all diseases. Therefore we may wel
conclude, that as diseases ingender in the body of the humours that
are in it, according to their change, mingling and corruption: so it
falleth out in the nature of the soule and in the affections thereof. For
as good naturall humors become euil by corruption that seazeth vpon
them, and turne that health which before they affoorded into diseases:
so the inclinations and naturall affections of our soule, which of their
owne nature are good and the seedes of vertues, are turned into vices
and into their seedes, through that corruption which sinne bringeth
vnto them. Behold then what we haue to consider of those natural inclinations
that are in the Will and in the desiring power of the soule, and
of the actions thereof, namely to wil and not to will, and to suspend and
stay her action, and to commaunde ouer the power of the appetites,
of all which wee haue largely intreated in our discourse of the Will.
Wherefore we will come to the habites, of which thou shalt now discourse,
AMANA.


Of the Habite of the soule in the matter of the affections, and of what
force it is: of the causes why the affections are giuen to the soule,
with the vse of them: of the fountaine of vertues and vices.
Chap. 42.
AMANA. If a man will learne any occupation, hee proues not
a woorkeman the first day, but learneth by little and little, and
beginneth to labour therein: afterward by long continuance and custome
he groweth more ready in his arte, and practiseth it with greater
facilitie and ease. A painter waxeth expert in his science by often
painting, and his hand wherewith he laboureth, by long continuance
becommeth more steady, more ready and able, so that he can handle

his pensill with greater ease, and is farre more expert therein then hee
was in the beginning. Wee may note the like in the soule, and in the
chiefe powers and actions thereof. For there are some of them, which
incontinently folow the nature of the faculties of the soule, when they
haue their iust times, and are come, as a man would say, vnto their ripenesse,
as we may see by experience in the corporall senses. For not long
after the childe is borne he seeth and heareth, the reason whereof is
because the senses of seeing and hearing are by nature absolute and
perfect. Therefore in such actions there needeth no exercise to cause
them to performe that which they doe well, but onely a good vigour
and strength, because in them nature is a great Mistres that hath all efficacie.
But there are farre more excellent actions, as science, arte, prudence,
fidelitie, and such like, which had neede of vse and exercise to
cause them to doe readily and well. This vse bringeth custome, which
hath in it a facilitie to worke, and a disposition tending therunto. And
then such actions take the name of habite, which is bred by the reiterating
thereof.
Thus the actions of the Wil and power of desire in the soule, of which
wee haue spoken before, when they are often reiterated, so that they
grow to be firme and stedfast, are called habits, because the Will is so
accustomed thereunto, that it becommeth more constant eithet in desiring
one certain thing, or in eschewing the same. Therefore as the affections
are more or lesse forward, more seldome or often vsed, more
weak or strong,What a habite is. so they are called either inclinations or actions, or habites.
But we are to note, that habites extende not themselues onely to
those things which we doe, but also to those which we suffer and abide,
which displease vs and are contrary to our nature. For custome diminisheth
and moderateth by litle and litle the sense of that griefe and paine
which they bring vs, whereof we haue trial in all diseases, which commonly
seem not so grieuous and intollerable after we haue bin long accustomed
vnto the^,Of the force of custome. as in the beginning of them. And although pouertie
be a heaui^ burthen, neuerthelesse custome maketh it familiar vnto
vs, and familiarity causeth vs to thinke it lighter. Wherefore we ought
not to maruel, if our God doth vsually send affliction to his children to
acquaint them therewith, as also to the ende they might obtaine
the vertue of patience, which is learned by often suffering: insomuch
that there remaineth a habite in men, which being nothing els but a
common custome, causeth them mildly to beare and sustaine all euents.
Whereas there are some that like furious and desperate men are caried
away we great impatience, either because they neuer suffered much before,
or if they did suffer, yet they neuer accustomed the^selues to beare

their afflictions patiently. Moreouer we know by experience, that although
the way of vertue at our first entring thereinto, seeme vnto vs
very difficult to tread in, yet afterward we find it very ^asie, when wee
haue walked in it a certaine time.Sweat is Gentleman-vsher to vertue. For there is no honest trade of life in
which we finde not great difficultie. And the more excellent it is, so
much the more troublesome and tedious it will seeme to our flesh,
whereas the path of pleasure will seeme to bee very delectable and
easie, because it is a great deale more naturall to our corrupt nature.
But howe harde so euer it bee to our flesh to followe after a
vertuous, honest, and sober life, yet custome will make it easie to ouerpasse,
as likewise to forsake that which is contrarie vnto it. Therefore
it hath not without iust cause beene giuen out long since by
wise and skilfull men, that it is very good and profitable to bee accustomed
to good thinges, especially from ones infancie: that it
skilleth much howe eu^rie one hath beene brought vp from his
youth: that nothing is of greater force then custome, eyther to good
or to euill, as that which seemeth to bee another nature. Nowe vpon
this speech of habites wee are to note further,The cause and profite of an habite. that as all other
naturall thinges in the soule are giuen vnto it for the good thereof,
so is this habite, which is no other thing but a custome rooted
therein. For except continuance of time did confirme this power
of the soule, I meane, that it ought not onely to doe a thing, but
to doe it well and as it ought to bee done, that it is to gette a facilitie
therein through vse and excercise, to the ende it may doe the
same thing afterwarde more freely and readily, and bee more willing
to occupie it selfe about the same thing, and that after the
same manner, I say except this bee so, many inconueniences will
ensue thereupon. The first is, that it shoulde labour altogether in
vaine. The seconde, that it shoulde alwayes come rude and vnskilfull,
as it were a newe prentice, to the exercising of these excellent
actions and woorkes. Whereof this woulde followe, that hauing
profited nothing with the time, it woulde not doe any thing perfectly.
And this we ought not onely to vnderstand of those things which
wee doe willingly but euen of that which wee suffer and indure maugre
our willes: where with of all other things we had neede to be best
acquainted. For seeing wee are compassed about daily with so many
miseries, seeing wee must suffer and vndergoe so many sharpe
and vnworthie assaults, howe much greater will our misery be, if long
custome and an habit in suffring should affoord vs no ease and refreshing?
But let vs come now to yt which particularly concerneth the affections
of the soule, that we may be fully instructed in ye nature and sundry kinds

of them. First wee will note, that wee vnderstand by affection that
natural power in the soule, which openeth it selfe towards Good, and
with draweth it selfe from euill, as wee haue alreadie declared before.
Nowe when the actions of an affection are growen to bee habites,What affection is, and fro^ whence vertue and vice first spring.
then are they called either vertues or vices, according as they are either
well or ill done. And from hence proceede good or ill manners,
of which morall Philosophie tooke that name, because it in^reateth
of them. For that sheweth what vertue and vice is, howe manie
kindes there are of them, and what difference there is not onely betweene
vertues and vices, but also betweene the sundrie sorts of them,
as we haue discoursed at large in our first Academical assemblie.The fountaine of morall philosophie. But
let vs vnderstande this, that the knowledge of the soule and of the
powers of it, about which wee nowe labour, is the right springhead
and fountaine of that morall Philosophie and doctrine. This knowledge
therefore is very profitable and necessary, to the ende that by it
we may know the originall and beginning of all vertues and vices, of
their whole generation, and their sundrie kindes. For if wee be well
instructed in all the partes and powers of the soule, we know the causes
of these actions: we knowe how the minde iudgeth, how the will
chooseth and commaundeth, as wee haue alreadie spoken. And thus
we see, that there are most sure and certaine principles of knowledge,
which shine in the minde as it were a light, which are the rules whereby
the soule squareth out her actions, and which discerne betweene
trueth and falsehood, good and euill, to the ende that all the actions
therof might agree with these rules, which are the beames of heauenly
wisedome in our selues. For it is an order which God hath so ordained
and established.Why the affections are giuen to the soule. And forasmuch as the soule was to dwell in the body,
God gaue vnto it this naturall power of the affections, that it might
bee wakened and stirred vp by them as it were with prickes, thereby
to be kept from idlenesse, and from being lulled asleepe and oppressed
with the heauines of the body, and so neglect all care of good things,
and of that which is very expedient and profitable for it self. For this cause
the soule hath her affections of which some serue for spurres to pricke
her hither and thither, and as ofte^ as need requireth: others serue for a bridle
to keep her back and to stay her from rushing vnto euill, and from following
those things that are hurtful for her. And indeede we stand in
need of such spurtes and bridles: but herein we erre greatly in that we
knowe not howe to keepe a moderation betweene these twaine.
For because wee make these spurres too sharpe, and pricke the
horse too much which we haue to guide, the bridle on the other side is
two grieuous vnto him, so that he lifteth vp and girdeth forward ouer

furiously. And this commeth to passe because wee doe not content
our selues with that which is requisite for the succouring of our naturall
necessities, but we adde there vnto infinite superfluities. For vpon
some light necessitie that might soone be dispatched, we torment
our selues a great deale more then neede is, because wee perswade
our selues that our necessities are greater then they bee, and so seeke
after moe remedies and helpes then is requisite. Of this wee haue
daily experience in that care which wee take for thinges necessarie
for this life, which is the cause that wee burne continually with insatiable
couetousnesse, which is such a marueilous spurre vnto vs,
that wee take very little rest for it. For if wee woulde bee contented
with enough, it woulde not put vs to that torment, which wee
dayly suffer.The affections compared to the windes. But nothing sufficeth vs: and therefore the affections
are in our soule, as the windes vpon the sea. For some windes are
very small, and mooue the water but a little: others are more vehement,
and rayse vp certaine waues: and some againe are so tempestuous,
and make such horrible stormes and gustes, whereby the
Sea is so mooued, that sea and sande and fishe and all seeme to bee
turned topsie toruie. The like may bee sayde of the motions of the
soule. For some are so light, that they seeme to bee nothing els but
small beginnings of moouing. There are others stronger which moue
it somewhat more. And some also are so violent, that they altogether
trouble the soule, euen in such a vehement manner, that they
driue her from her seate of iudgement. Therefore these two first
kindes of motions are properly called affections, and the other that
are so violent are termed Commotions and Perturbations.Of commotions and perturbations. For they
bring a kinde of blindnesse with them, which is the cause that iudgement
and reason see neuer a whit. Whereupon it followeth, seeing
neither Reason nor Iudgement beare any more rule, that the
soule is as if shee had no more power ouer her selfe, but were subiect
to the iurisdiction of some other. The Grecians terme such affections
with a worde that signifieth as much as if wee shoulde say
passions. And in deede wee commonly say, that a man is passionate,
when hee is tormented by such violent affections. For as the
whole bodie suffereth when it is mooued, or thrust too and fro, and
stricken on euerie side: so is it with the soule beeng violently mooued
euerie way. And as the moouing is more or lesse moderate, so
shee suffereth more or lesse: and if the motion bee verie violent, confusion
followeth thereupon. Nowe for the sequele of this speech, let vs
consider how the affections are more or lesse moderate, according to
the disposition of the iudgement: and what is the spring and originall

of so many sundry affections, as we see in men. It belongeth then to
thee, ARAM, to handle this matter.


That according to the dispposition of the iudgement, the affections are
more or lesse moderate or immoderate: of the cause of all the motions of
the soule and heart: of the varietie of affections: of the generation: nature
and kindes of them. Chap. 43.
ARAM. Whatsoeuer we doe or wish for, wee doe or desire it for
some Good, whether that which we iudge to bee good bee so in
trueth, or in opinion onely. And therein wee resemble God our Creator,
who is not only good, but also goodnes it selfe, euen the perfection
of all Good Wherefore if we desire to know what is the true Good, we
must vnderstand, that there is but one onely true Good, euen the same,
by participation of which we are first made good, and then of good,
most happie. For we cannot be happy and blessed, which is the end we
all looke for, but we must first become good. For as there is no true felicitie
and blessednes but in Good, being th source and fountaine, yea
the perfection of all happines and contentation, so also there is no felicitie
nor blesse dues but in goodnes, which is as proper to God as his
very diuinitie: because that as he cannot be God except he be good, so
he cannot be good with that goodnesse that is in him, but he must bee
God. And as he is the essence of all essences, so he is the essential Good,
and the essential Goodnes of al Goods and of al Goodnesses. But although
our nature doeth of it selfe alwayes tend to that which is Good, as wee
haue shewed in the handling of the chiefe powers of the soule, Vnderstanding,
and Will, neuertheles we differ much, nay we are cleane
contrary to God, when wee come to the election of Good, because of
the bad iudgement we haue, by reason of the darknes of ignoraunce
wherewith our mindes are blinded.
Hereof it commeth, that the more the iudgement is corrupted, infected,
and deeper plunged in the flesh,How (...) the iudgement can preuaile ouer the affections. the more euill and carnal are
the affections, the moe in number and the more violent: yea such as
doe not onely trouble and peruert the internal senses of the soule, but
the external senses also of the body. This we may obserue in them that
are caried away with loue, who thinke oftentimes, and are verily
perswaded, that they see and heare those thinges, which indeede
are nothing so. Contrariwise, the purer the iudgement is, and
the higher it is lifted vp from the fleshe and from the earth, the
fewe^ and lighter are the affections which trouble and molest it. For
then it taketh greater heed and marketh what trueth or what falsehood,

what good or what euill there is in all thinges. Whereupon
it commeth to passe, that the iudgement is not so often nor so
easily mooued. And when it is mooued, it is not so violent nor headie,
but more mature and moderate.The originall of violent motion^ in the soule. For all great, violent, and turbulent
motions proceede of ignoraunce and inconsideratenesse, or
through a false perswasion, which maketh vs to thinke, that the Good
or Euill is greater then indeede it is. And this commeth for want of experience,
which beeing as it were a darke cloude and mist before
the eyes of our minde, doe greatly trouble it: insomuch that we ayme
not at that certaine Good, after which wee ought to seeke, but contrariwise
we propounde to our selues many sortes of Goods, with many
and sundry endes and meanes to attaine vnto them, which we change
and rechange from houre to houre, very inconstantly, according to
places, times and occasions, whereby it is euident that there is no stayednesse
in vs. Besides all this, there is another great mischiefe, namely
that wee haue not that prudence which beastes haue by naturall
instinct onely without reason or iudgement, whereby to knowe how
wee may keepe our selues from those tempests, which our affections
may moue in vs. For when beastes perceiue any tempest comming,
they sodainly withdraw themselues, and seeke for meanes to auoyde
it.A similitude shewing the perilous motions of of the soule. And they that sayle on the Sea foreseeing the tempestuous
stormes which threaten them, prouide thereafter in good time,
leaft they shoulde bee caried away therewith. For otherwise they
bring themselues within the compasse of this danger, that afterward
they cannot bee Masters of their shippe, neither arriue at their desired
hauen, but rather hazarde the breaking of their shippe against
some rocke, or of sticking fast in some sande, or of beeing swallowed
vp and ouerwhelmed with some whitlewindes and tempests.
The like may bee sayde of the motions of the soule made by affections.
For there are not so manie sortes of windes, whirlewindes,
or tempestes in the Sea, as there is varietie of motions that come
from the affections in our heartes. Therefore wee ought to bee verie
carefull, that when wee see and perceiue any beginnings in our
soules, wee straightwayes giue not our selues ouer into the power
and swinge of our affections. But wee are so farre from looking to
this, that we throwe our selues into the middest of the tempest, that
it may carrie vs, not whether wee woulde, but whether that
will. For seeyng wee enterprise our affayres, not by the appoyntment
and decree of an vpright iudgement directed by reason,
but at the iudgement and lust of our corrupt and crooked nature,
wee are so much mooued as our nature hath power. For naturall

actions are not bounded by our will, but e^tende themselues as far^e
as the power and vertue thereof is able to permitte. But it is cleane
contrarie with a prudent and wise man.The effects of a prudent and wise man. For hee is not deceiued in the
election and choyse of that which is good, because hee chooseth
with good iudgement, and propoundeth not to himselfe many vncertaine
Goodes, but one onely, which is the true and certaine Good.
Like wise hee chooseth not many wayes and meanes to come vnto
it, but a few that are well sifted out and infallible: besides, hee is not
gouerned by his affaires and affections, but gouerneth them, neyther
giueth himselfe ouer into their power, but abideth alwayes in
his owne: insomuch that if any affection beginneth to mooue by vertue
of his naturall inclination, hee presently stayeth it, compelling it
to giue place and to obey right iudgement. Thus much generally
of the nature of affections: nowe it remayneth, that wee shoulde say
something of the number and varietie of them. Surely it is very difficult,
yea impossible to set downe a certaine number of an infinite
thing:Of the variety of affections. although indeede the number of the affections is not infinite
by nature, but onely in regarde of vs, that cannot comprehend them
all. But wee will reckon vp the chiefest of them, which are the
fountaine of the rest.
Heere then we haue first to note,The cause of all motions in the ^oule that all motions of the soule are in
regarde eyther of some good which they seeke, or of some euill
which they woulde auoyde, because it is contrary to that good.
Therefore euerie motion of it selfe tendeth alwayes to that which is
good, or withdraweth it selfe from euill, or els se^teth it selfe against
it, as wee haue alreadie hearde in the handling of Will. Nowe euery
good, and euery euill, is eyther present, or to come, or past, eyther
possible or impossible. And as wee take the absence of euill for a
good, so wee iudge the absence of good to bee an euill. For this
cause the Diuines make two kindes of ^ayne or punishment,Two kindes of punishments. whereof
the first is the payne of losse and damage, and the other is the
paine of sense and feeling. By the first they vnderstande that paine
which a man hath because hee wanteth some good that hee should
and woulde haue. For men account it damage, to loose that profite,
which they ought to haue. By the seconde they vnderstande a
payne which is felt, not onely when some good is wanting, which
a man shoulde or woulde haue, but when some euill is present, that
is contrary to this good, which men fe^le by effect. Therefore
they say that the payne of the losse and damage, is the priuation
of the ioyes of Paradise. For although there were no torments of
^ell for the wicked, but onely a priuation of that eternall life and

happinesse, for the which man was created of GOD, yet were
this no small punishment to bee depriued thereof. But there is a
great deale more, when the wicked are not onely depriued of a
blessed life, but besides that are detained in perpetuall torments, as
a malefactor that doeth not onely want all good company, but is
withall kept in perpetual prison and torture. But let vs proceede with
our matter.
When any good is propounded,Of the generation, nature and kindes of the af^ections. so soone as euer the soule and
minde knoweth it, it is well liked of. And this liking or delight is as it
were a little pleasant winde of motion in the heart, which beginneth
to arise and to followe after this good. Nowe when this pleasure and
liking is confirmed and waxeth strong, it is turned into loue. And the
motion of that present Good, which wee haue already gotten is called
ioy: and the motion of some Good to come is called Desire, which is
inclosed within the bounds of loue. If the matter be of some euill, it is
called offence, because the soule is offended thereby: and therfore she
is displeased therewith and disl^keth it, whereas shee is well pleased
with Good. If this displeasure or dislike be confirmed, it is turned into
hatred. And as griefe is for some present euill, so is feare of some euil
^o come. The motion against a present euill, is anger, enuy, indignation*
and against an euill to come, is confidence and boldnesse. Now
all these affections haue others vnder them. For fauour, reuerence,
and mercy are comprised vnder loue, delight vnder ioy, hope vnder
desire, and desire vnder griefe. As for pride, it is a monster compounded
of diuers affections,How the affections are bred or brideled one of another. as of ioy, of desire, and of boldenesse. And as
the affections are quickely bredde one of an other, so some of them are
brideled and restrained by others. For the first, enuy, hat^ed and anger
spring of loue. For they are motions of the heart that loueth, against
him that hateth or hurteth her who is de^re or beloued. And desire
riseth of reuenge* and the ioy that commeth thereby, proceede from
anger and malice. If a man loue any thing, he wisheth it would come,
and hopeth also that he shall enioy it: and contrariwise, hee feareth
that it will not come to passe. If it come to passe, hee reioyceth. If it
come not to passe when hee thinketh it will, or when hee expecteth
it, he is grieued. In like manner, great ioy is lessened through greefe,
and enuy through mercy* or through feare. And one greefe altereth
another* when it is greater: and feare maketh griefe to be forgotten,
and causeth the lame to runne. To be short, these sundry motions of
affections are like to stormy waues and billowes, which being driuen
one of another, doe either augment, or diminish, or wholy oppresse
one another.Goodly similitudes* Wherefore the like happeneth in the motion of our affections,

that commeth to passe in a sedition and ciuill dissention, in
which no man considereth who is the worthier person to obey and folow
him, but who is the stronger and most mighty. So in the fight of
the affections there is no respect had to that which is most iust, but only
to that which is strongest and most violent, and which hath gotten
such power ouer the soule that it hath wholly subdued her to it selfe:
which thing wee ought to stand in great feare of. But whatsoeuer affections
are in vs, there is alwayes some griefe or some ioy ioyned
with them. Therefore following our matter, it shal be good for vs to
consider particularly of the nature of these two contrary motions, of
which, ioy serueth greatly for the preseruation of life, but griefe drieth
vp and consumeth the heart, euen vnto the death of it, as wee shall
now learne of ACHITOB.


That Ioy, or Griefe are alwayes ioyned to the affections: and what
Ioy and Griefe are properly. Chap. 44.
ACHITOB. The knowledge of the Affections of the heart and
soule is very necessary for euery one, because they are very euill
and dangerous diseases in the soule, but yet being knowen they may
be cured more easily. This cause hath mooued vs, after wee haue spoken
of the heart and of the naturall motion thereof, and of the vse it
hath in this life of the body, to enter into the consideration of a second
motion it hath, which serueth not onely for this corporall life, but also
for that spirituall life, in regard of which it was chiefely giuen, and
of which we saide, that there was as it were an image and representation
thereof in the first motion.The first motion of the heart is an image of the second. Now we shall better vnderstand this
by the subiect of this discourse propounded vnto vs, being handled
particularly as wee intend to doe. For as by the first naturall motion
of the heart, it receiueth such refreshing as is necessary for the sending
of life vnto the whole body, and for the maintenance and preseruation
of the same, as also for the expelling and driuing out of all such
things as might hurt and stifle it: euen so is it in this second motion, as
farre as wee can conceiue of the nature of it. For seeing God hath appointed
ioy as a meanes to preserue life, hee hath likewise put this affection
in the heart, whereby it is as it were enlarged to receiue within
it selfe, and to embrace all Good that is offered vnto it: as also it restraineth
and shutteth it selfe vp through griefe which is contrary
thereunto.
Moreouer wee shall finde, that there is no affection in vs, which is

not intermingled with some griefe or else with some ioy.Griefe or Ioy in all the affections. For seeing
the heart is the proper seate and instrument of all the affections, when
it is as it were stricken and beaten with some vnpleasant thing that is
offered vnto it, then doeth it retire, close vp it selfe and feele griefe, as
if it had receiued a wound, then doeth it flie from the thing it liketh
not. Yea the heart doeth alwayes either enlarge or shut vp it selfe according
to those affections that are within it, the causes of which are
in it owne nature, God hauing so disposed and willed the same, for the
reasons which we haue already touched. For if the heart be ioyfull,
the ioy that it hath, doeth bring so great pleasure vnto it, that thereby
it is opened and enlarged, as if it would receiue, imbrace, and lay holde
vpon that thing which reioyceth it, and bringeth vnto it that pleasure,
which it hath in this ioy. Nowe because there is ioy in loue and hope,
the blood and spirites are gently and mildely dispersed by their moouings,
by reason of the reioycing at the Good that is present, or that is
expected, as if it were already present. And forasmuch as such motions
are made by the enlarging of the heart, whereby we embrace the
thing offered vnto vs,Ioy appeareth in the face. the face also appeareth smiling, cheerefull, and
ruddy. For a man may easily iudge, that the obiect presented to the
heart, mooueth that power whereby it is stirred vp, because that before
the heart doth mooue it selfe, it must know the thing that offereth
occasion vnto it to be moued, either with ioy or griefe, or some such
like affection. For as wee haue learned already, the outward senses
do first perceiue the things that are offered vnto them, and then they
present them vnto the common sense, which presently by a singular
prouidence of God sendeth them to al the other senses, and to al those
powers that are in the sundry parts of the soule and body. This done, if
there be matter of ioy, the heart being striken with that which is acceptable
vnto it, enlargeth it selfe, and being thus gently enlarged,
as it were to embrace the same, it disperseth much naturall heate with
the blood, besides great quantitie of spirites, of which it sendeth a
good portion to the face, if the ioy be so great that it mooueth a man
to hearty laughter.The effects of laughter in the face. For the face it selfe is in some sort blowen vp and
enlarged: the forehead is made cleere and smoothe, the eyes glister
and shine, the cheekes become ruddy, and the lippes gather in
themselues. In a worde, the heart doeth so enlarge it selfe, that it is
represented in the face, as it were in a glasse, or in an image framed to
expresse the ioy and gladnes which it hath.
Moreouer, experience teacheth vs sufficiently, what difference there
is between a cheerfull and a sad countenance. Therfore when we loue
one, wee embrace him, as if wee woulde ioyne him to our selues,

and put him into our bosome and heart, as some deere and very pretious
thing. Which wee see chiefly in mothers, when they holde their
little infants betweene their armes, and embrace them with great affection
of heart. For this cause Saint Paul being desirous to let the Corinthians
vnderstand what good will hee bare them, howe louing,
ready and cheerefull his affection was towards them, what ioy he receiued
thereby, as himselfe speaking plainly doth with his mouth giue
full testimony of his heart,2. Cor. 6. 11, 12 writeth thus vnto them, O Corinthians, our
mouth is open vnto you: our heart is made large: you are not kept straite in
vs. And then complaining of them that their heart was not so bent
towardes him, he saieth: But ye are kept straite in your owne bowels. And
heere we may note,What is meant by bowels in the Scripture. that by this worde Bowels is meant generally all
the internall members and parts of man, especially the heart, and those
that are next vnto it. Now because the heart is the seate of the affections,
and the other members neere vnto it serue for his vse, therefore
the bowels are taken in the holy Scriptures for all the motions of the
heart, and for all the affections of men that proceed from it, but chiefly
for loue, also for ioy, pitie and compassion, which haue their beginning
from loue, whose nature is to open the heart: which in steade of
opening shutteth vp it selfe against those that are not loued, or that a
man hateth. Therefore as loue or hatred is great or small, hote or cold,
so doth the heart open or close it selfe. Hereof it is saide in the historie
of the two women that stoode before Salomons iudgement seat about
their two children,1. King. 3. 26. whereof the one was dead and the other aliue,
that the bowels of the true mother were mooued towardes her childe.
And Saint Paul exhorting the Colossians to charitie and compassion,Col. 3. 12, 13, 14. The true workes of a Christian.
saieth, Now therefore, as the elect of God, holy and beloued, put on the bowels
of mercy (that is to say of tender affection) kindnesse, humblenesse of
minde, meekenesse, long suffering: forbearing one another, and forgiuing
one another, if any man haue a quarrell to another: euen as Christ forgaue
you, so doe ye. And aboue all these things put on loue, which is the bond of
perfectnesse: and let the peace of God (namely that which God hath established
among his) rule in your hearts, to the which ye are called in one
body, and be gracious, or amiable. We see here what vertues accompany
these bowels of mercy, of which hee spake in the beginning, as in
deed al th^se vertues and heauenly gifts are so knit together, that they
cannot be separated one from an other. And Saint Iohn speaking of
that liberalitie and loue, which ought to be among Christians, saieth,
Whosoeuer hath this worldes good,1. Ioh. 3. 17, 18. and seeth his brother haue neede, and
shutteth vp his bowels from him, how dwelleth the loue of God in him? Then
he addeth, Let vs not loue in worde, neither in tongue onely, but in worke

and in trueth. And to this purpose Esaias saith,Isay 58. 10. If thou powre out thy soule
to the hungry, and refresh the troubled soule, then shall thy light spring out in
the darkenesse, and thy darkenesse shalbe as the noone-day. All which places
agree very well to that which wee haue touched concerning the
motion of the heart, whereby it is either opened or closed vp, as the
affections are disposed that mooue it. But let vs consider more narrowly
the nature of these affections of ioy and sorrowe, and what difference
is betweene them, seeing we haue taken them for the ground
of our speach.What ioy is. For the first, let vs know, that ioy is properly a motion or
an affection of the heart, whereby it taketh pleasure and stayeth it selfe
in that Good, which is offered vnto it: or if wee had rather thus, it is a
motion of the soule, proceeding from the iudgement of some Good,
which is already present, or certainely neere at hand. And therefore
when the heart is enlarged therewith, not onely laughter is bred, but
all the body also leapeth, when the ioy is so great that the breast cannot
containe nor keepe in the heart. But when the ioy is moderate, it
purgeth the blood by heate, it confirmeth health, and bringeth with
it a liuely and vigorous heate, which is very wholsome and acceptable
to the heart. True it is, that the heart and will often deceiue themselues
in the choice and election of that which is Good: whether it be
that following reason and iudgement corrupted,How the heart chuseth euil for good. which should shew
what is Good, they embrace their errour: or whether it be that Will
being corrupted of it selfe through sinne, letteth loose the bridle against
the iudgement of reason, and so suffereth her selfe to be carried
headlong by her euill affections, in following some false shewe of
good. Whereupon it commonly commeth to passe, that in steade of
ioy which the heart should receiue of Good, vnto which the will tendeth
naturally, it receiueth great sorrow and griefe after knowledge
taken of the fault. This is the cause why we are so often admonished
by the spirite of God, to renounce our owne sense, reason, prudence,
and wisedome, and to submit our selues wholly to the counsaile and
wisedome of God, and to iudge of good and of euill, of the true and
false Goods according to his iudgement, and not according to our
owne: as also to renounce our owne desires to followe his will. As
for griefe or sorrow, wee may iudge of this affection by the contrary,
which is ioy,What sorrow is. namely, that it is a motion and an affection of the heart,
whereby it is restrained and pressed either with some present euill, or
with some that is in a manner present: which displeaseth the heart as
if it had receiued some grieuous wound. Therefore it trembleth and
languisheth, as a sicke body, who drying vp with griefe by little and
little, in the end dicth, except hee haue some remedy against his sickenesse.

For the like happeneth to the heart of man through griefe as
long as it is within it, insomuch that it neuer forsaketh it, vntil it hath
quite dried vp and consumed the same. And therefore as there is pleasure
and rest in ioy, so in sorrow there is dolour and torment. For it ingendreth
melancholy,Of melancholy. and melancholy ingendreth it, and increaseth
it more, so that wee often see melancholy men very sadde, although
no harme hath befallen them, neither can they giue any reason of their
heauines. Moreouer, this blacke melancholy humor is of this nature,
that it will make the spirit and mind darkish, whereby it groweth to
be blockish, and the heart looseth all his cheerefulnes. And because the
braine is cooled thereby, it waxeth very heauy and drowsie. Now when
griefe is in great measure,The effect of sorrowe. it bringeth withal a kind of loathing and tediousnes,
which causeth a man to hate and to be weary of all things, euen
of the light and of a mans selfe, so that he shal take pleasure in nothing
but in his melancholy, in feeding himselfe therewithall, in plunging
himselfe deeper into it, and in refusing of all ioy and consolation. To
conclude, some growe so farre as to hate themselues, and so fall to dispaire,
yea many kill and destroy themselues. And as the heart by enlarging
it selfe with ioy appeareth in the countenance, so doeth it also
in sorrow and griefe. For as in sorrowe the heart drieth vp and gathereth
it selfe in, so it causeth the face, which is the image of it, to retire
and drawe backe, yea it depriueth the face of all colour, and causeth
it to fall away. Briefly, it marreth all health, and hath for continuall
companions, sighs, plaints, groanes, teares, and weeping, and oftentimes
gnashing of teeth, as it is written of the damned, because of that
sorrowe and indignation in which they are, by reason of the torments
which they suffer. It is true that the most of these things serue as a remedy
against sorrow. For howsoeuer griefe shutteth vp the heart as
we haue said, yet by groning, sighing and weeping the heart doth in
some sort open it selfe, as if it woulde come foorth to breathe, least
being wholly shut vp with sorrow it shoulde be stifled. Againe, teares
are giuen vnto vs to testifie our griefe and to manifest it to others, that
we may mooue them to haue pitie and compassion on vs, and to help
and succour vs. They serue vs further to declare what compassion we
haue of other mens sorrowe and griefe,A commendable vse of teares. which vse is very necessary for
vs to get and preserue friendship one towardes an other, and for our
mutuall comfort and consolation. For we are greatly comforted, when
we see any take pitie and compassion of vs. Wherefore when we can
not otherwise solace them that are grieued, but only by declaring that
wee are sorrowfull for their heauinesse, and for those euilles which
they suffer, yet doeth that affoorde great consolation. And although

it seemeth an easie matter to giue this comfort, yet is it harder then
many thinke it is. For before wee can finde this in vs, wee must first
haue loue in our hearts, which causeth vs to open our bowels, and
mooueth vs to compassion towards our like, that we may weepe with
them that weepe, as we must reioyce also with them that reioyce according
as Saint Paul exhorteth vs thereunto.Rom. 12. 15. For by this meanes we
testifie that vnion and coniunction which we haue one with an other,
as members of one and the same body, and as if wee felt in our selues
all that good and euill which others feele. Nowe because in our definition
of these affections of ioy and griefe, we made two sorts of those
that men feele in their hearts, namely, either of that good and euill
which is present, or if that which they looke for, wee must consider
more particularly of these things, and see first, why God hath put these
affections in the soule, and what is true and present ioy, as also what
that other kind of ioy is, which hath regard to that which is to come,
which is properly called Hope. Now let vs heare thee, ASER, vpon
this matter.


Of the causes why God hath placed these affections of Ioy and Sorrow
in the heart: of true and false Ioy, and of good and badde Hope.
Chap. 45.
ASER. Men haue commonly sharpe wittes to know vaine, earthly
and carnall things: but as for heauenly, true and eternall things,
they are able for the most part to vnderstand nothing. So that wee
may compare the eyes of their soule to the eyes of an Owle,A comparison. which
seeth clearely by night, but when the sunne is risen, seeth neuer a whit.
Euen so man hath some knowledge of the troublesome things of this
worlde, but his sight cannot pierce vnto the celestial and diuine light.
Therefore it falleth out often, that being beguiled by his owne sense
and reason, insteade of Good and Ioy, hee chuseth and followeth after
that which is euill and full of griefe. For when the affection of the
heart, which naturally desireth Good and seeketh after Ioy, is missed
and deceiued by humane reason, it easily embraceth euill in place of
Good, and that vnder some vaine shewe of good, which seemeth to be
in that euill thing it chuseth. And although at the first the heart feeleth
not that which happeneth vnto it, yet hath it leisure enough after
to complaine of the torment, which is alwaies equall both for age and
time, to the fault committed, and to the abuse of those gifts and graces
which God hath placed in the nature of the soule.

Forasmuch then as the heart is the beginning of life, we may well
know, that God hath not without good cause placed therein such vehement
affections of ioy and griefe, which serue either to preserue or to
destroy it, and haue for their companions hope and feare, as wee wil
declare heereafter. For by these affections God would giue vs prickes
and solicitours, to cause vs to thinke seriously of that lesson, which
Dauid giueth vs, when hee saieth, Taste yee and see howe gracious
the Lorde is:Psa. 34. 8, 9, 10. blessed is the man that trusteth in him. Feare the Lorde
yee his Saintes: for nothing wanteth to them that feare him. The Lions
doe lacke and suffer hunger, but they which seeke the Lorde shall want
nothing that is good. What man is hee that desireth life, and loueth long
dayes for to see good? Keepe thy tongue from euill, and thy lippes that they
speake no guile. Eschew euil and do good, seeke peace and follow after it. The
Prophet sheweth here plainely, wherein true life and felicitie consisteth:
and the reason thereof hee setteth downe afterward, namely, that the
Lord looketh both vpon the good and bad, and that as hee preserueth
the good, so hee rooteth out the remembrance of the wicked from off
the earth.Vers. 19. 21. 22. Therefore hee saieth afterward, Great are the troubles of the
righteous, but the Lorde deliuereth him out of all. Malice shall slay the
wicked, and they that hate the righteous shall perish. The Lorde redeemeth
the soules of his seruants, and none that trust in him shall perish.Of the ioy of the godly. Wherefore
as the children of God that are partakers of his promises, can not bee
without great ioy in their hearts, which feedeth and preserueth them,
and causeth them to liue happily, through the testimonie and taste
which they haue of the sweetenesse, goodnesse and fauour of God towards
them: so contrariwise, perpetual sorrow dwelleth in the heart
of the wicked, who cannot haue that ioy in them, because they want
that which should bring it vnto them. For howsoeuer it seemeth that
there is no ioy in the worlde but theirs, yet they neuer haue any true
ioy, neither indeede can haue. For they seeke not for it, neither doe
they knowe what it is. And therefore in steade of seeking it in God in
whome onely it resteth, they seeke it in creatures, and in al kind of vanitie,
and yet finde nothing but in offending the maiestie of God. For
this cause Iesus Christ hath long since pronounced their sentence saying,Lu^e. 6. 21. matth. 5. 4. Esay 61. 3.
Wobe to you that laugh, for ye shall weepe. Contrariwise, ye that weep
are happy, for yee shall laugh. Blessed are they that mourne: that is to say,
that feele their miseries, and seeke for ioy and consolation in God: for
they shal bee comforted. After speaking to his disciples, he sayeth, Verely,
verely I say vnto you that ye shall weeepe and lament,Ioh. 16. 20, 21. and the world shall reioyce:
ye shall sorrow, but your sorrow shal be turned into ioy. And then he
compareth their sorrowe and their ioy to that which a woman with

childe hath, which is pained so long as shee is in trauaile, but when
shee seeth it borne, shee receiueth ioy, and soone forgetteth her anguish.
Whereby the worde of God teacheth vs, that the griefe of
good men shall be turned into double ioy, that their sorrow shal be
short, and their felicitie of long continuance. For there is one ioy euen
in being deliuered from euill, although it be not so great as when
any Good happeneth vnto vs. But the ioy is doubled, when besides
this deliuerance, there commeth vnto vs some ioy which we had not,
which is procured vnto vs by meanes of that paine and euill which we
suffered. Therefore our Sauiour saieth further to this effect, Yee are
nowe in sorrow: but I will see you againe, and your hearts shall reioyce, and
your ioy shall no man take from you. If this ioy can not be taken away, it
is eternall, so that death it selfe can not abolish it. Whereupon it followeth,
that it remaineth yet after death, and that there is an other
life after this in which wee shall haue fulnesse of ioy. Therefore wee
may well call it our owne, seeing it alwayes continueth with vs. For
if it were not so, Iesus Christ who is the trueth it selfe shoulde not bee
true. But as hee cannot lie, so wee may assure our selues of his promise.
For seeing it is grounded on him, and vpon his grace, resurrection,
and immortall life, we may bee as certainely perswaded of it, as
wee are assured of his resurrection, and of his eternall ioy and life,
wherein hee liueth and raigneth for euermore. Wherefore all those
to whome it is promised, and that are assured of the fruition thereof
by faith in him, haue iust occasion to liue in great ioy So that Saint
Paul not without good cause saieth,Philip. 44. Reioyce alwayes in the Lorde, and
againe I say reioyce. But of the ioy of carnall men wee must say as Salomon
writeth,Eccles. 7. 4, 6. Prou. 6. 25. That it is better to go to the house of mourning, then to the
house of feasting. And that there is away that seemeth right to a man,
but the issue thereof is the way of death: yea, in laughter, the heart
shall be greeued, and the ende of ioy is sorrowe. The heart of the
wise is in the house of mourning, but the heart of fooles is in the house of
mirth. For they thinke of nothing but of iollitie, whereas wise men
meditate on the miseries of this worlde. Therefore wee may know
howe greatly Epicures,How worldlings deceiue themselues. and such as giue themselues to pleasures and
dissolutenesse beguile themselues. For they thinke there is no ioy
nor pleasure but in their life, and that there is no life more sadde or
melancholy, then that of the children and seruants of God. But it is
cleane contrary. For they that feare and honour GOD, haue more
ioy in their heart in the middest of their greatest sorrowes, by reason
of that sense and feeling ingrauen in them of heauenly and eternall
ioy, which thy certainely expect and beginne already to taste here.

then all worldlings and carnall men can haue in the greatest triumphs
of al their pleasures. Now, as there are two kinds of ioy in the
hear of men, so are there also of sorrows. For we do not only feele ioy
for some Good, or sorrow for some euill, which we now taste of, but also
for that which we attend and looke for. Concerning this latter kind
of ioy,What hope is. it is properly called Hope, which is an affection and motion of
the heart, whereby it wisheth some Good to come, and prepareth to
open it selfe and to receiue it. Therefore wee saide before, that Hope
was comprehended vnder desire, vnto which it giueth forme and being.
For Hope is a desire ioyned with confidence, that the Good which
wee wish for will come to passe. Therefore the motions of Ioy and
Hope are very like, seeing Hope is alwayes mingled with Ioy, neither
is there any difference but in the time,Difference betweene ioy and hope. because the one is of a present
Good, and the other of that which is looked for. In the meane time
Hope hath no euidence or science, but is grounded onely vpon coniecture
of opinion, or likelihoode and probabilitie, or possibilitie. And
yet there is nothing so light, or so small, or strange, vnto which the
heart will not easily ioyne it selfe and take holde of it, when it seeketh
for helpes and proppes to ground and stay it selfe vpon. Neuertheles
there is great difference betweene hauing already, and hoping for a
thing, namely, in respect of men, and of hope, which hath no other
grounds, then those of which I nowe made mention. But when the
expectation is grounded vpon God and his promises,Of the true and certaine hope. it is as sure of that
which it expecteth, as if it did already possesse it: which is very comfortable
to a man, in respect of that which hapneth to them, who can
haue no certaine hope or expectation of Good. For although there bee
hope, yet if it be not grounded vpon God, it can bring no certaine ioy,
or of any long continuance. Besides, when such a one shall faile of his
hope, his griefe wil be doubled. Wherefore they that build not their
hope vpon the word of God, can haue no true and certaine hope, but
they feed the^selues only with their fantasies, as they that dreame they
find great riches, which vanish away whe^ they awake. Such is the hope
of the wicked, and of al worldly and carnall men. Neuerthelesse the perswasion
of hope,The profite and necessitie of hope which holdeth vs vp with the expectation of better
things, is very pleasant and necessary for the life of man, in the midst of
so many miseries, of so many sharpe and almost intolerable paines and
trauailes which accompany them. So that it bringeth great comfort to
men, and is in steade of sawce vnto them, without which they woulde
find al things to be not only without taste, but also of a very bitter and
vnpleasant taste. Therefore hath the prouidence of God prouided a
remedy for this, namely, that hope shuld breed of very light causes, and

should leane and stay it self easily vpon them: as if it self were very light,
or very hooked and gluish, being ready to take hold of, and to retaine
whatsoeuer it meeteth withall, or can lay hands vpon, to ground and
leane thereon.
Nowe if men finde so great comfort in hope such as it is, and being
laide vpon so weake a foundation, it is easy to iudge, what ioy the
faithful receiue by that most certaine hope of eternall life, and of al the
good things that God hath promised them: in regard whereof S. Paul
saith,Ephes. 4. 4. There is one body and one spirit, euen as ye are called in one hope of your
vocation.Rom. 5. 3, 4, 5. It is not then without cause that he saith in another place, We
reioyce in tribulations, knowing that tribulation bringeth forth patience, and
patience experience, and experience hope, and hope maketh not ashamed: because
the loue of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost, which is
giuen vnto vs:Psal. 25. 3. as if he should say, that they which stay themselues vpon
such a hope, shal neuer be ashamed nor deceiued. For the expectation
thereof is neuer frustrated, but it hath alwaies a good and a happy issue.
For when we perceiue that we are deceiued of our hope, we are ashamed
and confounded. But this neuer hapneth to true hope, which proceedeth
of a sound faith in Iesus Christ,Rom. 5. 2. by means whereof we haue accesse
through him vnto this grace wherein wee stand, and reioyce vnder
the hope of the glory of God, as Saint Paul said alitle before. Therefore he
exhorteth christia^s to reioice in hope,Rom. 12. 12. and 15. 13. and calleth God the God of Hope,
praying that he would fil the Romans with al ioy and peace in belieuing,
that they may abound in hope through the power of the holy ghost.
And in the epistle to the Hebrews,Hebr. 6. 19. hope is compared to a sure and stedfast
ancre of the soule. For this cause God is so often called in the holy
Scriptures the hope and fortresse of his people and of his.Ier. 17. 7, 13, 17. psal. 65. 5. and 91. 2, 9. psal. 31, 1. and 71. Psal. 118. 8, 9. It is written also,
that they which hope in the Lord, do reioyce. For hee that hopeth in him
shalbe healed and preserued. Therefore it is not without cause, that the
spirite of God so often repeateth vnto vs this sentence, Blessed are they
that put their trust in the Lord: for they shal neuer be confounded. It is better
to hope in him then to put any confidence in Princes. But vnfaithful and
wicked men can neuer be partakers of such a Good, because they haue
no such hope.Prou. 10. 28. Iob 8. 13, 14, 15 For it is written, The expectation of the iust is gladnesse,
but the hope of the wicked shall perish. And againe, The hope of the hypocrite
shall perish, his confidence shal be cut off, and his truct shall be as the
house of a spider. He shall leane vpon his house, but it shall not stand, he shall
holde him fast by it, yet shall it not endure. But to prosecu^e our matter,
nowe that wee haue seene the hope of good men together with their
ioy, let vs consider what remaineth to the wicked of their vaine and
false ioy, namely, Feare, which is the second kinde of sorrowe mentioned

by vs. Tell vs then, AMANA, what Feare is, with the nature
and effectes thereof.


Of Feare, and of the nature and effects thereof towards the body, the
minde, and soule, and how it troubleth them: of the true harnesse
and armour against Feare. Chap. 46.
AMANA. As wicked men can haue no certaine hope of any good
they looke for, so they neuer haue any true ioy of any present
good, because they alwayes forsake the true Good, and stay in that
which is not Good but in their opinion and fantasie, neither doe they
at any time ref^rre the ende of good things vnto God, but looke onely
vpon the things themselues. Therefore it is neuer in their power to
reioice in that ioy which they accompt to be their true ioy, but only by
offending God, as we heard before. Which is the cause why they seek
after nothing more then to hide themselues,The wick^d can not abide to speake or heare of God. and to depart from him as
much as they can possible, so that they would neuer heare any speech
of him, but desire to bury the remembrance of him for euer, because
they can heare nothing spoken of him but as of their iudge, neither
think of him, but he awakeneth their co^science, which they labor with
might and maine to rocke asleepe. Wherein they take a cleane contrary
course to that which they ought to follow to obtaine the true Good.
For seeing God is the soueraigne Good of all creatures, what Good can
they finde that is greater, wherein they can fully reioyce and satisfie
themselues? Or what other Good dare they promise to themselues to
finde without him, and when they haue him for their enemy? But
they are like to drunken men, who cannot vnderstand this Diuinitie,
vntill they haue slept out their wine, and are awaked out of their
drunkennesse. Then shall they knowe what is true and false Ioy,
what is good and badde Hope, when their ioy shall bee turned into
sorrowe, their expectation and hope into feare and terrour, wherewith
the wicked shall be continually haunted, as the Spirite of God
teacheth vs.
Nowe, as sorrow is a griefe for some euil which a man presently
feeleth, shutting vp the heart as vnwilling to receiue it: so feare is a
sorrow,What feare is. which the heart conceiueth of some looked for euill, that may
come vnto it. Therefore it restraineth the heart also and closeth it vp,
as being desirous to auoide the euill. Wee see then that there is the
same difference betwixt sorrowe and feare in respect of euill, that is
betweene Ioy and Hope in regarde of Good. So that we may well say,

that Feare is not onely a fantasie and imagination of euill approching,
or a perturbation of the soule proceeding from the opinion it hath of
some euill to come, but it is also a contraction and closing vp of the
heart, which commeth from that which euery one iudgeth to be euill
for himselfe, when hee thinketh it is at hand and will light vpon him.
Therefore first of all it draweth in and shutteth vp the heart, and so
weakneth the same. Whereupon nature being desirous to relieue and
succour it, sendeth heate vnto it from the vpper partes: and if that bee
not sufficient, shee draweth away that heate also which is in the neather
parts.How palenesse, colde and shaking are b^ed in the body. By which doing she sodainely calleth backe the blood and
spirites vnto the heart, and then followeth a generall palenesse and
cold in all the outward partes, and chiefly in the face, with a shiuering
throughout the whole body. For seeing the first moouing thereof is in
the heart, the other alwayes followeth: so that when the heart trembleth,
the whole body doth so likewise. Whereupon it followeth, that
by reason of the great beating and panting of the heart, the tongue
faltereth and the voice is interrupted.How death commeth through feare. Yea it commeth to passe sometimes,
that present death followeth a great and sodaine feare, because
al the blood retiring to the heart choaketh it, and vtterly extinguisheth
naturall heate and the spirites, so that death must needes ensue thereof.
Therefore we cannot doubt but that feare hath grea^ power ouer
all the body, and ouer life it selfe. For this cause Esaias, after he had denounced
the iudgement of God against the Babylonians, and the comming
of the Medes and Persians, by whome their citie shoulde be taken
and themselues slaine,Esay 13. 7, 8. saieth thus: Therefore shall all handes be
weakened, and all mens hearts shall melt: which is as much to say, as that
their hearts shall faile them for feare. And therefore hee addeth, They
shalbe afraid: anguish and sorrow shall take them, and they shall haue paine, as
a woman that trauaileth: euery one shalbe amased at his neighbour, and their
faces shal be like flames of fire.A place of Esay expounded. But here we will note what he meaneth
by these flames of fire. For if the face waxe pale through feare, as it
falleth out for the most part, it seemeth that it cannot be enflamed, for
then it would be red rather then pale. But we are to know, that when
nature will strengthen the heart, she sendeth vnto it from all parts, succours
of heat and blood, to encourage it the more. Therefore they that
haue but a little warme blood in the heart are naturally the greater cowardes:The cause of cowardlines, and the signe of courage.
so that it is a better token of courage when the face is pale
through feare, then when it waxeth redde. For this cause Cato misliked
that a child should becom pale in the face through shame, in stead
of being red: and that a souldier should looke red in time of danger, in
stead of being pale. For as it is a token of impudencie in a child not to

blush for shame, so is it a signe of cowardlinesse in a man of warre to
looke redde when hee seeth himselfe in any danger. Therefore a pale
countenance sheweth that the blood and naturall heate are gone to
the heart to strengthen it: but when it is redde, that argueth that the
blood and heate are not much gone inward to strengthen the heart:
whereupon it is made more weake, and so the feare of it is greater
and the trembling much more. And because the blood and naturall
heate mount vpward in steade of descending, therefore doth the face
looke red. Which argueth want of courage and a fainting heart:
as it befell the Babylonians, whose heartes were possessed with feare
and terrour at the comming of their enemies, because God woulde
giue them ouer into their hander. Wee might also referre this rednesse
and inflammation of visage to the paines and griefs which they
were to endure. For when one is pressed with griefe, his countenance
is redde and fierie: because men are then as it were shut vp in a
fire.
And as the face is red through Feare, for the reasons set downe by
vs: so if the naturall heate leaue the heart and goe downeward, the
feare is not onely encreased, but it bringeth withall a loosenesse of
the belly. Therefore it is written in the Booke of Iob, where it is spoken
of the feare that Liuiathan bringeth vpon men,Iob 41. 16. that the mightie
tremble at his maiestie, and purge themselues through his moouings: that
is, through feare of him. Hereupon a heathen Poet, when hee would
note a fearefull and dastardly fellowe, saieth to this purpose, That his
heart was fallen into his heeles.Effects of Feare in the soule. Nowe if feare mooueth all the body in
this sorte, no doubt but it greatly mooueth also the minde and the
whole soule of man. For it so troubleth the minde, that it confoundeth
all the thoughts thereof: as wee may trie by this, that many
times the least fancie of euill that entreth into our braine, is enough
to trouble the minde very much. For as imagination and fancie beare
great sway ouer the affections, so they shewe what power they haue,
chiefely in the affection of Feare. And surely among all liuing creatures,
none hath such a confused feare, or is more amazed therewith
then man is. Therefore we may well say, that no misery is greater,
no bondage more shamefull, seruile or vile, then feare is. For it
maketh men very abiects, flatterers, and suspicious, and so daunteth
their courage, that it leaueth them as it were halfe dead, yea, causeth
them sometimes to despaire vtterly, so that they are as it were
Images destitute of counsaile, not knowing which wayes to helpe
themselues. For this cause the holy Scriptures make often mention

of a heart that is powred out like water for feare,Iosua 7. 5. Psal. 22. 14. Ierem. 4. 9. or that melteth like
waxe. And in Ieremy it is saide, In that day, saieth the Lorde, the heart
of the king shall perish, and the heart of the Princes, and the Priests shall be
astonished, and the Prophets shall wonder. For truely if a man be once
possessed with feare, especially if hee bee enclined thereunto by nature,
but aboue all, if GOD terrifie him, a man may well exhort
him to boldenesse and to take courage vnto him, and alleadge all the
reasons that can be to strengthen him against Feare, but it will be to
small purpose. Therefore one saieth very well, that no harnesse can
be founde, which is able to incourage feare and to make it hardy. For
if any Armorers had the skil to make such harnesse, they should want
no customers. But onely God is able to arme vs against this, because
it is he that giueth or taketh away the heart of man, that sendeth feare
or boldenesse, as pleaseth him. For although hee hath sowed the
seedes of them both in the nature of the body and soule of man, with
the meanes also that leade thereunto, yet he hath not subiected himselfe
to all those meanes, no more then hee hath to the whole order
of nature: but hath alwayes reserued in his power both Feare and
faintnesse of heart, and boldenesse and assurance, which are their
contraries.The definitions of assurance and boldnesse. For assurance is a certaine perswasion and trust, whereby
wee are confirmed in danger against euilles that threaten vs and
come neere vs: and boldenesse is a confidence, which pricketh forward
the courage either to repulse euilles, or to followe after good
things, which are excellent and harde to obtaine. Therefore when
GOD is minded to punish men, hee taketh away their heartes
whome hee will destroy, causing them to tremble and to flie for
feare: as it is written in Ioshua, where Rahab speaking to the spies
of the Israelites that were sent to Iericho,Iosua 2. 9. vseth these wordes: I know
that the Lorde hath giuen you this land; for the feare of you is fallen vpon
vs, and all the inhabitants of the land faint because of you. Contrariwise,
our GOD heartneth and emboldeneth those by whome hee
will ouerthrow others, and to whome hee mindeth to grant victorie.
Therefore it is written,Psal. 53. 5. that hee will cause the feare of his seruants
to fall vpon his enemies, that the wicked and such as haue
not called vpon GOD, shall feare where there is no cause of
feare, and shall tremble and flie for feare, although there be none
that persecute them. So that if wee doe desire to finde a harnesse
that will arme our heart thorowly against all feare, let vs put on
the armour of the true feare of GOD, and of sounde Faith in
him.Psal. 112. 1, 7, 8 For as the Prophet Dauid sayeth, Blessed is the man that

feareth the Lorde: the iust shall liue in assured hope: hee shall neuer be moued,
hee shall not be afraide of euill tidings, for his heart is fixed and beleeueth
in the Lorde: his heart is stablished, therefore hee will not feare. For
whosoeuer feareth God and walketh in innocencie, God is with him:
and hee that hath God on his side, what can hee or ought he to feare?
For when hee is with vs, who shalbe against vs? May hee not well say
with Dauid,Psal 56. 3, 11. and 118. 6. prou. 14. 26. When I was afraide, I trusted in thee. In God doe I trust, I will
not be afraide what man can do vnto me. In the feare of the Lorde, (saith
the wise man,) there is assured strength, and his children shall haue hope.
Therefore Iesus Christ saieth to his Disciples,Iohn 14. 1. Let not your heart bee
troubled. And then hee sheweth them the meanes, saying, Ye beleeue
in God, beleeue also in me. For nothing but faith in God through Iesus
Christ is able to giue vs this assurance. On the other side, if wee
be not armed with the feare of GOD, and with true faith, that wee
may be certaine of his helpe and prouidence, and of his loue towards
vs, there is nothing that can assure vs: but rather that which is
written in the Lawe will befall vs,L^uit. 26. 36. I will, saieth the Lorde, send a
faintnesse into their heartes in the land of their enemies, and the sound of a
leafe shaken shall chase them, and, They shall flee as fleeing from a sworde,
and they shall fall, no man pursuing them. And in an other place where
mention is made of them that despise the Lawe of GOD, and rebell
against the Lorde, it is saide, The Lord shall giue thee a trembling
heart,Deu. 28. 65, 66, 67. and looking to returne till thine eies fall out, and a sorrowfull mind,
Thy life shall hang before thee, thou shalt feare both night and day, and
shalt haue none assurance of thy life. In the morning thou shalt say, would
God it were euening, and at euening thou shalt say, woulde God it were
morning, for the feare of thine heart which thou shalt feare, and for the
sight of thine eies, which thou shalt see. Therefore when wee see, that
in many great and dangerous affaires, the boldest and most couragious
are oftentimes the greatest cowardes, and most astonished
and carried away with feare and terrour, and euen many times without
any great cause are amased and voyde of counsaile, whereas contrariwise
cowardes by nature growe to bee most hardy in the middest
of dangers, thereby GOD sheweth very well, whether
strength and courage come from him or from men,God is the authour of courage. and who is to
haue the praise thereof. But nowe that wee haue seene the first motions
of the heart, in the affections of ioy, of sorrowe, of hope, and
of feare, and knowe that they haue respect to good or euill, either
present or to come, let vs learne in the next place, that as contemplation
consisteth in the rest of the Spirite after the discourse of reason
and iudgement, so after the heart hath the fruition of that Good

which belongeth vnto it, it is still and quiet, resting it selfe therein:
which rest is called Delight or pleasure, of which the order
of our speech requireth that thou shouldest dilate, ARAM, at this
present.


Of the delight and pleasure that followeth euery ioy, and of the moderation
that is required therein: of diuers degrees of pleasures, and howe
men abuse them, especially those pleasures, which are receiued by the
corporall senses. Chap. 47.
ARAM. It is certaine, that all the affections which God hath placed
in the nature of man, were giuen vnto him in regarde of so
many good things, which were meete and conuenient for his will to
long after and to desire. For ioy and hope, which affoord pleasure and
consolation to the heart, were bestowed vpon him to bee spurres and
sollicitours to induce him to seeke after God his soueraigne Good,Why God hath giuen men affections. in
whom alone he may finde all delight, rest and pleasure. As for sorow
and feare, they are sure testimonies vnto men of the iudgement of
God, and executioners of his vengeance: to this end that the feare of
euill, which may come vnto them, should keepe them in awe, and that
sorow and griefe for euill which they haue already committed, should
be vnto them both hangman and punishment. It is true that these affections
being naturall in euery one, bring forth contrary effects both
in the good and in the bad. For the children of God neuer separate his
power from his goodnesse, and the feare which they haue of him, is
not ioyned with hatred,The diuers effects of feare in the godly and in the wicked. but with trust in his mercie, which mooueth
them to be grieued for offending him, and to loue him, to seeke him
and to reioyce in him, and to haue him in singuler honour and veneration.
But the wicked who feare and tremble, like to malefactors fearing
their iudge, hate and despite God, desiring nothing more then to
escape his hands, and to flee from him as farre as they can. If they be
grieued, it is because they may not enioy false ioyes, and vnlawfull
pleasures. Therefore that which is giuen them for Good, is turned by
them into sinne and euill, and pleasure into paine and griefe.
But here we must call to minde what we haue spoken already concerning
the signification of this worde Good, as it is commonly taken,
not considering whether it be true or false, but onely according to that
opinion which men haue of it. For there are many, whose fancie is
sufficient to affoord them as much pleasure, as if indeed they enioyed
that Good,A fantasticall Good. which they thinke to haue. We see many such fooles in the
world. For some are Popes or Cardinals by fantasie: others Emperors

or Kings and great Princes, or otherwise very riche, or possessours of
some such great Good. And yet such fantasticall fellowes are better
contented and pleased with that which they thinke they haue
in their foolishe imagination, then they that haue them in trueth,
vnto whome commonly they serue for nothing but to torment
them more. Therefore I knowe not which of them I shoulde esteeme
more foolish and fantasticall.Who are to bee accounted wise men. For none ought to bee taken
for truely wise men, and of ripe iudgement, but they who
knowe that all thinges in the worlde and vnder the sunne, are onely
vanitie, as Salomon sheweth in his booke of the Preacher. Therefore
hee saieth thus:Eccles. 2. 1. I saide in mine heart, Goe to nowe, I will prooue
thee with ioy: therefore take thou pleasure in pleasaunt thinges: and behold
this also is vanitie. I said of laughter, thou art mad, and of ioy, what is
this that thou doest? But to goe forwarde with our matter, let vs consider
what delight and pleasure is, so farre as men may enioy it in this
life. It is then a rest which the heart taketh in the enioying of some
Good that it liketh: euen as contemplation is the rest of the spirite after
the discourse of Reason and Iudgement. Now wee are to note, that
there is no delight and pleasure in any thing,Of delight and pleasure what it is, and how it is receiued. except there be some agreement
betweene that part or power that receiueth pleasure, and
that which bringeth the same vnto it. This agreement cannot bee
without good proportion of the one with the other, whereby there
is some similitude and resemblance betweene them. For this cause
also, the thing that bringeth delight must not exceede too much,
either in greatnesse, or in smalnesse aboue the power which receiueth
it, in regarde of that part or instrument whereby the pleasure
is receiued.
Heereupon when wee spake of the eyes and eares, wee shewed
that light was to bee dispensed to the eyes, and sounde to
the eares, in good measure and moderation. For if the light bee
too great, the eyes cannot receiue it: insomuch that they will bee
hurt and offended, in steade of receiuing delight. On the other
side if it bee too little, it will not suffice them: and therefore it must
bee betweene both. And as euery mans sight is sharper and stronger,
or more dull and weaker, so must the light bee dispensed according
to that measure. The like may bee sayde of soundes in regarde
of the eares, and of all other thinges in respect of those sences
vnto which they agree. And if this moderation bee requisite for
the outwarde sences, it is no lesse necessary in respect of the inward
senses, and of all the powers of the soule. Therefore as God is incomprehensible
and infinite, so is hee receiued with delight of that

part of the soule, which commeth neerest vnto his nature, and
which is most incomprehensible, most ample, and most infinite in
regarde of other partes, and that is the Spirite and Vnderstanding.
On the other side,How God communicateth himselfe vnto men. because there is no proportion or agreement
in greatnesse and infinitenesse betweene GOD and the Soule,
shee receiueth and comprehendeth him by such meanes, whereby
hee may bee applied vnto her, and shee made after a sort capable
of him. For if hee shoulde present himselfe vnto her, such as
hee is in his high and diuine maiestie, especially man beeing in this
estate wherein hee is in this mortall life, shee coulde not beare so
high maiestie, as beeing too exceeding great for her. So that insteede
of receiuing pleasure, ioy and delight, shee shoulde not onely
bee very much frighted, but euen wholly ouerwhelmed and
swallowed vp as a droppe of water woulde bee consumed beeyng
throwen into a great fire: as wee may iudge by so many examples
as are in the holie Scriptures to this purpose. For when God manifested
himselfe to the Patriarkes, hee neuer appeared vnto them
in the greatnesse of his maiestie, but tooke vnto him alwayes some
shape, and vsed such meanes as were agreeable to their nature.
Therefore also it is verie requisite, that GOD shoulde descende
and applie himselfe vnto our small capacitie, to the ende wee may
enioy him and his Goodes, and take pleasure and delight in them.
For this cause, hee hath not onely appointed the ministerie of his
worde and Sacraments to shewe and communicate himselfe vnto vs
by them, applying himselfe vnto our nature and capacitie, but hath
also manifested himself in flesh, in the person of his sonne Iesus Christ,
to become more like vnto vs, and to drawe neerer vnto vs in our
owne nature, to this ende that wee might enioye him and all his
benefites the better, and receiue more true and entire delight in
them.
And thus much for this poynt of the agreement that ought to bee
betweene the thing that delighteth, and that which receiueth
pleasure. Next wee are to note, that a man may take pleasure by
all those partes whereby hee may knowe, as well by the internall
as the externall senses, and by all the powers of the minde
and soule.Of the diuers degrees of pleasures according to euery mans nature. Whereupon it followeth, that as euerie one is more
or lesse addicted to any of these partes, so hee delighteth most in
those pleasures, which hee may receiue by that part vnto which
hee is most giuen. Therefore wee see that the baser and more vile
sort of people, and such as are most rude and ignoraunt, are
more mooued by corporall and externall thinges, which moue the

bodily senses, then by spirituall and high things, that are more meete
for the spirite, and wherein it taketh greater pleasures. But with prudent
and wise men, and such as are more spirituall, it is otherwise. So
that as euery ones nature is more noble and excellent, or more vile
and abiect, and according to the nature of those things wherein euery
one delighteth, so is the delight, either more noble and excellent, or
more base and contemptible, more pure and quiet, or more impure and
troublesome, of longer or of shorter continuance, and hath moe or
fewer pleasures,The delights of the bodily senses. and those either more or lesse tedious. Now among
those delights which a man may take by the bodily senses, the basest
and most abiect of all, is that which is receiued by the sense of touching.
For as it is most earthy of all the external senses, so are the pleasures
that are taken by it. That delight which is taken by the sense of
tasting, is a litle more honest and lesse contemptible, and yet is it brutish
enough. As for the delight that may bee receiued by the sense of
smelling, it is very light, and nothing so pleasant, as the yrkesomnesse
that commeth of the contrary, is vnpleasant. For a good smel bringeth
not so great pleasure, as an euill smell causeth displeasure: besides, that
this sense of smelling is not so sharpe in man as in beasts. And concerning
those pleasures, which a man may receiue by the eares, they haue
some more beautie and excellency in them. For the more they holde
of the nature of the ayre, they are so much the lesse earthy and brutish.
And those which we receiue by the eyes, are yet more excellent
then all the rest, because the eyes are of the nature of the fire, which
commeth neerest to the celestial nature. And thus much for those pleasures,
which a man may receiue by the corporall senses, of which the
noblest and best are baser and of lesse excellency then the least of those,
which we may receiue by the basest parts and powers of the soule.The delights of ye internall senses. For,
as much as the soule is more noble and more worthie then the body,
so much is the least thing in it greater and more magnificall, then that
which is most noble and most excellent in the bodie. And as there are
diuers degrees of pleasures according to the varietie of the externall
senses, and according to the difference that is betwixt them and the
powers of the soule: so is it betweene the powers of the soule, as some
of them are more noble and more diuine then others. For those which
appertaine to the nourishing and generatiue powers, are more corporall,
earthy and brutish, then those that belong to the vitall partes and
to the heart. And those that are proper to the spirite and minde, are
purest and best of all: among which, that delight that is in contemplation
is the chiefest,Co^templation is the greatest delight of the soule. as we may iudge by that which we haue alreadie
spoken. Wherefore if we would consider well of all these degrees

of delight and pleasure, and could iudge well of them, we should not
be so deceiued in them as commonly we are, preferring the least before
the greatest, the basest before the noblest, those that are most earthy
before them that are most heauenly,Of the abuse of pleasures. and those that fade soonest
before them that continue longest. Besides, the very enioying of euery
one of them ought to suffice to make vs know their nature, and the
difference betweene the one and the other, and how farre one is to be
preferred before another. For how do we see men giuen ouer to those
pleasures wherein they delight, not onely in eating and drinking, in
dainty morsels and delicate drinkes, but also in other carnall pleasures
that are more earthy and vile, especially when they are excessiue
and vnmeasurable, as they are in whoredome? For those which wee
receiue in eating and drinking, belong to the sense of taste, which is
brutish enough: but these others to the sense of touching, which is a
great deale more brutish We know by experience also, that these senses
are sooner wearied and tyred with their pleasures, then any other,
and that such delights commonly bring with them more yrkesomnes
and loathing, then ioy and pleasure: leauing many times behind them
a long and shamefull repentance for pollutions receiued by them.
The pleasures that belong to the other senses, as they are of longer
continuance, so they weary not a man so quickly, especially those that
delight the sight. Yea the baser and more vile the pleasures are, the
sooner doe they loathe a man,Against the immoderate vse of pleasures. as they know by experience that are giuen
to whoredome. For how insatiable soeuer they be, yet can they
not but be glutted therewith: neither are they able to continue their
vnrulinesse so long in that pleasure (howsoeuer they want no goodwill)
as in the pleasures that come by eating and drinking. Neither
can the greatest gluttons, drunkards, and daintie mouthed persons follow
so long together after the delights of their gluttony, drunkennes,
and daintie diet, as they may after those which they receiue either in
smelling, or in hearing, or in seeing. As for the pains yt are to be taken
in the obtaining and vsing of these pleasures, the more earthy and brutish
the delight is, the greater labour is to bee had about it: and the
more excessiuely the pleasure is vsed, the greater hurt commeth thereby,
as wee daily see in gluttons, drunkards, and whoremongers, by
the testimonie of those diseases which take holde of them through
their excesse. Thus then we may learne by the vse of those pleasures,
which are receiued by the bodily and outward senses, which of them
are to be preferred before others, with the agreement necessary therein,
and the moderation that alwayes ought to bee obserued in them.
But to goe forward with our matter, we are now to compare together

the delights and pleasures that are receiued by the spirituall and internall
senses, and to vnderstand what difference there is betweene the
vse of the pleasures of the spirite and of the body, and howe the one
driue away the other. Nowe let vs heare what ACHITOB will tell
vs of this point.


Of the comparison of pleasures receiued by the internall senses: and howe
men descend by degrees from the best to the basest pleasures: of the difference
betweene the vse of spirituall delights and corporall: and howe the
one chase the other. Chap. 48.
ACHITOB. Experience daily teacheth vs, that we need but a little
griefe to diminish a great pleasure, or otherwise to take it
cleane away, and to change it into great displeasure, yea to turne a
great ioy into extreame sorow and sadnes. But few there are that meditate
and knowe the cause thereof.The cause why a little griefe is stronger in vs the^ a great pleasure. The trueth is, we can thinke of no
other cause, then of the corruption of our nature, of the estate and
disposition of our bodie, of the course of our age and life, which decline
continually and waxe worse and worse. Therefore a small griefe
findeth greater strength within vs to cause our heart to giue back and
to close vp it selfe, and wholly to cast vs downe, then a great ioy and
delight is able to open and inlarge it, and to sustaine and holde vs vp.
For a little force will throwe downe this shaking and reeling bodie,
but there had neede to bee a great deale of strength to vnderproppe
and stay it vp firme and stedfast. On the other side wee can more
easily want pleasures, then not feele their contrary griefes. For
wee doe not perceiue so much the want of a good which we haue
not, as the presence of an euill, which wee suffer. For in the first,
it seemeth that wee want nothing, but in the other the sense is afflicted,
and the sounde estate and disposition thereof is cleane taken
away and ouerthrowne. Nowe if wee desire to feele such
griefes as little as we may, and to approach as neere as our nature will
permit, to true delight and pleasures, wee must withdrawe our selues
from vile and abiect things, and contemplate most high and excellent
things.
Nowe as we haue learned by the former discourse, that those delights
and pleasures which are receiued by the chiefest senses that sauour
least of the earth, are of longer continuance then the other, so
we are to knowe,Of the pleasures of fantasie. that the pleasures of the fancie are more stable and
firme then those which come by the corporall senses. Hereof it is, that

men are cloyed a great deale sooner not onely with the pleasures
of eating and drinking and of other more abiect thinges, but also of
sweete smelles, of musicke, of harmonicall soundes, and of the beholding
of goodly sights, then with those good that are in the fancy and
in opinion, whereby the minde is deceiued, as namely the getting
and possessing of siluer, of riches, of power, of honours, and of glorie.
For these Goods are goods rather in opinion then in truth. But because
fancie propoundeth them vnto her selfe for Goods, therefore shee taketh
pleasure and delight in them. Therefore the couetous man delighteth
in his golde, siluer, and riches: and the ambitious man in his
power, gloy and honours, which are the pleasures of fancie: and
with which she is not so soone wearied, as the bodie is with corporal
pleasures: but contrariwise, the more shee hath, the more her delight
encreaseth,The pleasures of reason and of the minde. and becommeth insatiable. But the pleasures of
reason, of the minde and of the spirite, continue a great deale longer
then they: because the spirite is not wearie or tyred, but is recreated
and refreshed. But none can iudge well of this, but those
that haue had experience thereof. No maruaile therefore if such
men as are addicted to these other more base and earthly pleasures,
mocke and deride them that contemne their delightes, and make
so great account of these spirituall and heauenly pleasures, that
they are content to renounce all the rest, and to forgoe all the goods
in the worlde that they may enioy these, as wee see it was with those
holie personages that haue tasted of them. As for those carnall and
beastlike men, wee may say of them as wee doe of hogges, that
delight more in a puddle or sinke, then in pretious stones or sweete
odours, namely that they followe that which is most agreeable
to their naturall disposition, because they want iudgement to discerne
the value of those thinges which they contemne and make no
account of.
Nowe among the pleasures of the spirite, those that consist in
contemplation are of their nature by which wee shall become blessed
in the the life that lasteth for euer. Therefore it is no straunge
thing, if manie of the Philosophers affirmed, that this kinde of life
was the best of all and most excellent: and if Aristotle placed the
end of all Goods and of beatitude in contemplation. Now if these Philosophers
that neuer knewe what was the true and chiefe Good, did
notwithstanding mount vp so high, what a shame is it for vs to whom
the soueraigne Good is reuealed from heauen, if wee staye and as it
were rotte in these base, brutish and supposed pleasures? Therefore
we must consider, how we come downe by degrees from the highest

vnto the lowest steppe, by reason of this heauie burthen wherewith
our nature corrupted through sinne, is sore charged: wherevpon she
is driuen downewarde to seeke for delights and pleasures,How we descend from true pleasures to false delights. and to recreate
her selfe in these earthly things. But according as she retaineth
more or lesse of her first puritie and nobilitie, so she keepeth higher, or
descendeth lower from the contemplation of the highest and most
excellent thinges, to those that belong to the affections of this life.
Therefore some take pleasure in the administration either of the common
wealth, or of their domesticall affaires. There are others, who
not beeing able to soare vp so high, delight themselues in the knowledge
and remembrance onely of those thinges that were done by other
men, yea many times in histories and fables. Some take pleasure
in handy-works, and in such artes and occupations as belong to the^.
There are many, that cannot apply their mindes to so good things as
those, but giue them the bridle to recreate and delight themselues either
in vnprofitable sports and pastimes, or in vile and abiect idlenes.
Yea there are others that come lower. For they suffer themselues to be
ouercome by the allurements of their corporall senses, so that they fal
into brutish pleasures, as if they were become brute beastes, and as if
their minde and spirit were wholly swallowed vp and plunged in the
most bottomlesse gulfe of immoderate and excessiue pleasure. And
when a man is come downe solowe, hee can descend no lower. But
yet he may seeke after pleasures crosse-wise,Of pleasures which men seeke crosse-wayes. and turne cleane out of
the way from reason and iudgement, feeding and delighting his fancie
and imagination with false opinions. From hence it is that he hath
found out nobilitie, renowne, glory, popularitie, fauour of Princes,
and all other vaine things that consist in externall goods. Yea if hee
could, he would gladly be depriued of that spirite and minde which
God hath giuen him, that he might not retaine and keepe any grauitie
or seueritie beseeming his nature, but plunge and giue ouer himselfe
with full saile to follow all kinde of pleasure, voluptuousnesse and
delight. For his nature is become so nice and tender, that he can away
with nothing that would molest him: so that euery litle burthen waieth
very heauy vpon him. Againe, it is already so pressed with the fardell
of corruption, that of it selfe it draweth downeward continually,
and needeth not be driuen that way by any other meanes. Therefore
a great many, that of themselues would not seeme to stoope so lowe,
fearing to loose any part of their reputation, if they should not keepe
that grauitie that beseemeth their person, finde meanes to doe that by
others which they durst not doe of themselues. Hereof it commeth,
that they delight in Mummers, fooles, tumblers, and othes of like

trades, which are not onely vnprofitable for the life of man, but very
hurtful also, by reason of the corruptions which they bring with them.
In all which thinges wee may see the vanitie of our corrupt nature,
and of those pleasures it taketh delight in. But there are other notable
reasons, whereby we know what difference there is betweene
the pleasures of the minde and spirite, and those of the corporall
senses.Of the vse of the delights of the spirite. For the spirite needeth no space of time wherein to intermit
his pleasures, and then to take them in hande againe, but onely
changeth them from one to another, namely from the greater to the
lesse, or from the lesse to the greater. In the meane time I say, there
is no intermission, but it is continually busied: onely it changeth from
one delight to another. For seeing our spirite is in continuall motion,
it can in no wise cease from doing, vnlesse the power from whence
the motion thereof proceedeth, bee stayed by some impediment of
the instruments which it vseth.How the spirit is hindred in his actions. As in deede it falleth out in a drunken
man, whose spirite and minde is as it were buried by those vapours
that trouble it, of which the braine is full. The like is in an Apoplexie,
or falling sicknesse. For these are violent thinges, and such as resist
the nature of the spirite. But presently after the violence ceasseth
which hindereth his power, hee falleth to his accustomed action
againe, for the doing whereof he needeth no externall ayde, but
onely that all lettes and impedients shoulde bee remoued and taken
out of the way. Which being remoued the spirite and minde cannot
bee idle, but necessarily thinketh of somewhat continually, about
which it is occupied. Therefore whosoeuer laboureth to stay it altogether
from thinking, so that it shoulde not bee busied about something,
it is all one as if he went about to change the nature of the fire,
and to keepe it from burning, after it hath founde conuenient matter
and is alreadie kindled. For either it will bee vtterly extinguished,
if the impediment it hath bee stronger then it, or els beeyng
of greater force it will make way for it selfe. Therefore we had need
to bee well aduised alwayes what matter wee minister to our spirite,
and looke that it bee agreeable to the nature thereof, and beseeming
the same, least it shoulde bee distracted and wander after
those thinges that might hurt it.How the spirite must bee occupied. And when wee woulde recreate
the minde, seeing it is in continuall action, wee must so change the
matters about which it is to bee employed, that they bee good and
honest, howsoeuer they be diuers and sundrie. But it is not so with
the corporall senses. For they must necessarily haue some space of
time to rest in euen from their pleasures, and to cease for a while
from vsing them: becaue they are more fresh and pleasant after they

haue abstained for a time. But the spirite cannot rest. In the meane
time the pleasures of the bodie, and those of the soule and spirite
haue one another in chase.How corporall and spirituall pleasures chase each other. Therefore they that are addicted to corporall
pleasures, haue lesse knowledge and feeling of those that are
spirituall: and contrariwise they that delight in spirituall pleasures abstaine
from those that are corporall. For these delights are in continuall
combat one against another, so that they cannot be acquainted together,
because they are contraries. This combat is such another as
that which is betweene the flesh and the spirite.
Moreouer, wee see by experience, that those delightes which wee
receiue of naturall thinges haue more force and are purer, and continue
longer then artificiall pleasures. For let a man shewe vs the
goodliest woorkes that can bee, either of golde or of filuer, or pictures,
or garments, or houses as curiously wrought as can bee deuised,
eyther for beautie or cost, yet when wee haue seene them
foure or fiue times, wee beginne to bee full of it, and take not so
great pleasure therein as wee did. But who is euer wearie of beholding,Natural pleasures are more purethen artificiall.
I will not say the heauens, the sunne, the moone, and the
starres, but the earth, the sea, riuers, mountaines, valleyes, gardens,
trees, herbes and flowres? The cause heereof is the agreement
of nature. For wee being naturall, naturall things are more agreeable
vnto vs then artificiall. And because wee were created and
made, not by the hande of a Paynter and mortall man, but by the
hande of the liuing God, who paynteth liuing images and pictures,
therefore wee take greater delight in his handie woorkes, then in
the woorkes of any other, howe excellent a woorkeman soeuer hee
bee. And indeede they are are of farre greater perfection then those
that are made by the arte of man. Therefore Arte laboreth alwayes
to follow nature, and to expresse her workes as neere as it can: insomuch
that they are accounted the best woorkemen, and men delight
most in their doings, that come neerest vnto nature. Howe
much more then ought wee to like the woorkes of nature, and
consequently God himselfe, who is the Author and Creator of nature,
and of all her woorkes? For the least woorke of his in nature
is more excellent in his kinde, then the perfectest woorke that
humane arte is able to shewe. Nowe if wee come from his naturall
woorkes, to those that are supernaturall and aboue the reach of nature,
wee shall finde in them a great deale more matter of all kinde
of delight.Degrees to ascend vpto sound and perfect delight. For if wee coulde consider aright of these thinges, we
woulde ascende vp from artificiall thinges, and from that delight
which they affoorde vs, euen vnto naturall thinges, and from these

vnto the Author and Creator of them and of all nature, and there
wee woulde seeke for our true delight and pleasure. Herein nature
her selfe is our good Mistresse, as shee that leadeth vs thereunto as
it were by the hande. But our inconsideratenesse, our blockishnesse
and ingratitude is the cause, why wee cannot learne this lesson of
her, and why wee haue not the maruellous and excellent workes
of GOD and nature, in such due admiration as wee ought to
haue.
Whereupon it commeth to passe also, that wee take not so great
delight and pleasure in them, and that custome, which ought to increase
this delight in vs, is a meane rather to diminish the same. And
by this meanes also wee are kept from that admiration, which wee
ought to haue of God the Woorkemaster of them, and of that delight
and pleasure, which wee shoulde finde in him, if we mounted
vp so high and sought him there. But because wee are alwayes musing
about vile and abiect thinges, wee haue no leasure to consider of
and to contemplate higher and more woonderfull thinges. Nowe to
ende this dayes speech, seeing wee are taught that God hath giuen
vs the affections of ioy and of sorowe, to induce and mooue vs to
seeke him, to the ende that by eschewing the euill that is contrary vnto
vs, we might attaine to that soueraigne Good, which he hath prepared
for vs, and to that true delight, pleasure and blisse, which wee
may finde in him, let vs knowe, that we haue good occasion to pray
vnto him incessantly, that he woulde vouchsafe so to lighten our senses
and minde, and to rule all our affections and willes in such sort, that
we may at the length attaine thereunto. For then we shall not onely
be deliuered from all sorowe and griefe, but haue the full fruition of
perfect ioy and perpetuall delight. And to the ende that we may goe
forwarde to morowe with our matter of the affections of the heart
and soule, thou shalt intreate, ASER, of the affections of loue, which
follow those of which we haue alreadie spoken.

The ende of the sixt dayes worke.



THE SEVENTH
dayes worke.

Of the affections of loue, of the nature, kindes and obiect of it: of the
beginning of friendshippe: of the vertue and force of alluring that
is in likenesse and in beautie: of the agreement that is betweene
beautie and goodnesse. Chap. 49.
ASER. If wee know not throughly the affections of
our soule, which, by reason of the corruption of our
nature, are so many diseases in vs, wee shall neuer
know our selues well, nor the image of God, which
is imprinted in our soule, nor the affectio^ of his goodnes
towards vs.The knowledge of the affections very requisite. Likewise wee can neuer learne what
pure and sound parts of the nature of the affections remain yet in man,
and what is added thereunto by reason of sinne that is in vs, neither yet
what vertue and vice are, except we truly know the nature of the affections.
Moreouer, without this knowledge, we can neuer make choice of
good from euil, or of truth from lying. For being, as we must needes be
during this life, subiect vnto and tossed on euery side with an infinite
number of strange passions, if they be vnknowen vnto vs, we cannot
discerne amongst a multitude of contrary opinions, which of them is
soundest, euery one of the^ pretending some shew of good and of truth.
Therefore as we saw yesterday the affections of ioy and of sorow, of
hope and of feare, and of delight and pleasure, which folow ioy, wherby
we may conceiue the contrary vnto it, namely griefe and torment
which follow sorow, so this day we are to proceede in learning what
other affections there are of the heart and soule.
I wil begin then with the affection of loue,What loue is. which is a motion wherby
the heart lusteth after that which is good indeed, or which seemeth
vnto it to be so, desiring to draw the good to it selfe, to the ende it may
enioy the same. This affection commeth neere to the nature of hope,
but it is a great deale more hote. Therefore after the heart is once moued,
it presently draweth vnto it that thing which is offered for good,
labouring as it were to haue the fruition of some great Good. But
let vs consider howe this affection is bredde in the heart. After that
Iudgement hath iudged a thing to bee good,How loue is engendred. so soone as the same
thing is presented to the Will, it doth by and by moue, allure, and draw
the same vnto it selfe by a certaine naturall agreement, euen as the
like is betweene the minde and the trueth, and betweene the eye and
beautie. This motion of the heart and will, hath euen then ioyned

with it a certaine kinde of reioycing, as testifying thereby, that the
thing pleaseth it, and is very good and agreeable vnto it. Now when
this reioycing is confirmed, it is called loue, which is an inclination or
a proceeding of the will towards that which is Good. For it fareth with
the Will, as if it went before to meete with the good that is comming,
to receiue and to embrace it. Wherupon ariseth a desire of coniunction
to knit the same thing to it selfe: and this loue is called, Cupiditie, Lusting,
or Coueting. But because this affection is so out of square in this
our corrupt nature, these names are commonly taken more in the euill
then in the good part.Of the kindes of desire. Nowe this affection of desire or coueting,
hath respect either to that good which we enioy alreadie, or which
we haue yet in hope onely and in expectation. If it be already present,
this cupiditie breedeth a desire to retaine and keepe it still: if it be yet
in expectation, it bringeth forth a desire and longing to enioy it. And
in this sort we loue all those things, which we esteeme and take to bee
profitable for vs, either for the soule, or for the body, or for the external
goods.Of the loue of men towards God. For this cause many loue God, because they know that it is he
who giueth good things vnto men. But this is not that true loue wherwith
we must loue him. For although they are very wicked and too
vnthankfull, which loue him not, at leastwise with such a loue and for
that cause, yet if we goe no further, we loue our selues more then wee
doe him in this kind of loue, seeing the chiefe cause for which we loue
him, is not in respect of himselfe, but of vs. For we loue him by reason
of that good, which we receiue from him. But true loue is that, which
causeth vs to loue a thing, because it is good in it selfe, and not in respect
of any profite that may come vnto vs thereby. With this loue
we ought to loue God, and our neighbours and friendes: and of this
loue wee haue a very cleare and manifest image in the loue of Fathers
and mothers towards their children.The loue of parents towardes thir children. For they loue them, not because
they haue respect to some good, which they may receiue of them,
but because they are their children. For although they receiue nothing
but trouble by them from the time of their childehood, and expences
rather then profit, yet that letteth them not from louing them
tenderly and with great affection. Nowe if by this loue grounded vpon
such a cause, we iudge the like of the loue of God towards vs,The loue of God towards men. seeing
it is hee that hath imprinted the same in the heartes of parents towards
their children, as an image of his loue towards vs, we conclude
well. For seeing he is the fountaine of all true and perfect loue, all other
loues are but as it were little riuers, which flowe from this liuely
spring. But there is none so expresse an image thereof in all the creatures,
as in the loue of fathers and mothers towards their children. For

doeth God loue vs in respect of any profite, which hee looketh for at
our hands? Hereof it is that he setteth forth himselfe vnto vs as a Father,
to the end we may the better know, that he loueth vs with a right
fatherly loue. Therefore also hee will haue vs to call him Father, and
so to accou^nt of him: yea hee will not haue vs to take any other for
our Father of whome to depende wholly, but him alone. And no
doubt but we shoulde receiue wonderfull ioy and consolation, if we
coulde as well feele within vs that loue which this good Father beareth
vs, as we feele the loue which we beare towardes our children.
Now when loue is reciprocall and mutuall,The originall of friendship. so that he which is loued
doeth also loue for his part the partie that loueth him, then is friendship
bred of loue, wherein there is mutuall beneuolence and goodwil.
Wherefore as God loueth vs, so muust we for our partes loue him, seeing
this is the chiefe cause why he hath created man according to his
image and similitude, and hath giuen him a soule that is immortall,
and endued with vnderstanding and reason, to knowe him first and
then to loue him. Therefore if wee consider by what steppes wee ascend
vp to God, we shall finde, that as by the loue which he first bare
vs, we descended from the highest to the lowest, so likewise we mount
vp againe from the lowest vnto the highest by that loue which wee
beare him.In what sort by loue we ascend vp to God and descend againt. For our soule descendeth from the highest, which is God,
vnto the lowest, which is the bodie, by the loue of the Creator towards
her, who by meanes of this descending and coniunction communicateth
his blessednesse both with the soule and with the bodie.
And as she came downe from him, so through the knowledge which
she hath of God, and loue which she beareth him, she ascendeth vp again,
and returneth to her first birth. Co^cerning those degrees by which
we come thither, we begin first at materiall and corporal things, as the
beginning of mans generation and birth teacheth vs: then we come
to the senses of the bodie, by that vse which we haue of them. Afterwarde
we vse imagination and fantasie, and from that we come to
reason and iudgement, next to contemplation, and last of all to loue.
Heereby we may learne also to know the steppes of descending, seeing
they are the same, but begunne at the contrarie ende. Wherefore
if iudgement bee gouerned and ouercome by the affections, and reason
by fantasie, the estate of the soule is wholly ouerturned and peruerted,
as if the bodie beeing minded to walke, shoulde set the
head vpon the ground, and lift the heeles vpwarde. So likewise is
it if in steede o mounting vp to God by loue, we descend in such sort
to the creatures,Of the vnion that is in loue. that we ascend vp no more to him, that wee may bee
one with him. For loue maketh all things one. Therefore if we be vnited

with God, there must needes be perfect friendshippe betweene
him and vs. For as he loueth vs, so we loue him, and then our selues for
loue of him. And from the loue of our selues springeth our loue towards
our wiues and children, as though they were a part of vs, as
also towardes our like and towards our woorkes.Similitude is a cause of loue. For similitude and
likenesse is a great cause of loue, seeing that when one resembleth
vs, it is as if wee our selues were another: because similitude maketh
many things to be as one and the same thing. Wherefore seeing
God hath created vs to his image and likenesse, it cannot bee but
that he loueth his image and similitude in vs, and vs also in respect of
that, as if it were himselfe. For this cause the more this image is reformed
and renewed in vs, the more (no doubt) hee loueth vs: and the
like also may be said of our loue towards him.Beautie draweth loue. In like manner beautie
hath great vertue to procure loue, and that for many causes. For first,
the beautie which appeareth without in any body, is as it were a witnesse
and testimonie of the beautie in the soule, according to that
which we haue already spoken of the agreement of the powers and affections
thereof with the temperature of the bodie. For God hath created
all things in such manner, that he hath commonly ioyned beautie
and goodnes together. And as it is written in Genesis,Gen. 1. That he created
nothing but that which was verie good, so there was nothing made,
but it was very beautifull in his kinde. Therefore as there is agreement
between the body and the soule, so bodily beautie is as it were an image
of the beautie of the soule, and promiseth after a sort some good thing
of the inwarde beautie.Beautie a flower of goodnes. For internall perfection breedeth the external.
Whereupon the internal is called goodnes, and the external beauty,
which is as it were a floure of goodnes that is the seed. It is true that
this which we say doeth not alwayes fall out so, but that oftentimes a
man may see the cleane contrary: whereupon wee haue this common
prouerbe, Proper fellowes at the gallowes, and faire women in the stewes. For
ordinarily the goodliest me^, and such as are best furnished with the gifts
of nature in the disposition of their body, are most wicked and vicious:A caueat for faire women.
and more beautiful women are strumpets, then foule wome^, at leastwise
they are in greatest danger, and haue much more a doe to keepe their
chastitie. For there is alwaies great strife betweene chastitie and beautie,
which is so much the more increased, as beautie is the greater, because
it is so violent,The force of Beautie. that oftentimes many desire willingly to die for
the beautie of others: and some are so tossed and tormented, that they
become senselesse and out of their wits, being ouertaken with looking
vpon a beautifull face, which hath such prickes, that they pearce euen
to the liueliest part of their heart and soule.

Wherevpon it commeth to passe that poore silly louers are so tormented
and ful of passions, that they stand altogether amazed, and are
like to them that are rosted by a soft fire: yea their soule is so subiected
to their concupiscence and desire, that she must obey them, as if shee
were some poore chambermaide and drudge. Whereby wee may
know what good there is in such beautie, and what good commeth
with it, also what coniunction and agreement it may haue with goodnesse,
and whether a man may not truely say according to our common
prouerbe, That beauty without goodnes is worth nothing. But we are
to consider what is the cause hereof. For we speake not of that which is
now done,The causes of the abuse in beautie. but of that which should be done, if the nature of man had
continued sound: and of that which yet would most commonly bee
put in vre, were it not that euill education, besides that naturall corruption
which is already in euery one, did infect euen that little good
of naturall inclination which remaineth in man. But howsouer it be,
bodily beautie doeth alwaies promise more good of the soule, then
deformitie doeth. If it fall out otherwise, it is because God will shew,
that all good things come from his onely grace and not from nature:
and therefore he doeth not alwayes followe one course and one selfesame
order without any change. Besides, he commonly recompenceth
in one thing, that which is wanting in another, so that he supplieth that
in the spirite, which is wanting in the body, or in the body which is
wanting in the spirite. On the other side, because many abuse that
beautie of the body which God hath bestowed vpon them, as they do
all other his giftes, hee letteth them fall oftentimes into great vices,
whereby they shew the deformitie of their soule,Beautie maketh vice more vgly. which bringeth also
their bodily beautie into great obloquie and shame. For as beautie
causeth vertue to appeare more faire, when it is ioyned therewith, so
contrariwise, it maketh vice more vgly and loathsome to looke vpon.
Therefore Socrates had reason to say, that it was good for euery one
to beholde himselfe in a glasse,A good vse of Looking-glasses. that they which sawe themselues faire
shoulde bee the more afraide to blotte their beautie with vices, and
that they which were foule shoulde labour to beautifie themselues
with vertues. Nowe seeing we are entered into the causes why beautie
draweth loue, following this matter, we woulde knowe of thee,
AMANA, what other thinges are to bee considered heerein, with
the sundrie degrees and kindes of beautie, and what is the proper effect
of loue.



Of other causes why Beauty procureth Loue, and of diuers degrees
and kindes of Beauty: howe it is the nature of Loue alwayes to
vnite, and what other effectes it hath: howe Loue descendeth
and ascendeth not: what power it hath to allure and breed Loue.
Chap. 50.
AMANA. Many amongst the Philosophers haue made three
kindes of good, or of good things: namely, that which is pleasant,
profitable, and honest. Hereupon, forasmuch as Loue is a desire
of good or goodly things, or at leastwise of things so accompted: they
haue also made three kinds or fortes of Loue,Three kindes of Loue. of which the first is towards
delightful and pleasant things, and such are those things which
tickle and delight our senses, being properly called the goodes of the
body. The second kinde of Loue is towardes profitable things, as honours,
riches, greatnesse and such other like things, called externall
goodes or the goodes of fortune. The third kinde is towardes honest
things, as wisedome, prudence and other vertues, which are the goods
of the soule. As for the two first kindes of Loue, wee may well place
them amongst the perturbations of the soule, because so many euill
affections spring from them, that al confusion proceedeth from them,
yea euery mans life is thereby made miserable. But to loue and desire
good and honest things, is that which truely maketh a man famous.
For this loue maketh the chiefe part of his soule excellent, euen that
part whereby he is man, and which is farthest remooued from bodily
matter and from obscuritie, and neerest to diuine brightnesse, I meane
the spirit and vnderstanding, which of all the other partes and powers
of man, onely is voide of the blot of mortalitie. The consideration of
the diuers degrees and sundry sortes of beautie doth prepare the way
whereby we may come to this laudable and honest loue. For by them
wee may ascend vp from the lowest to the highest, and turne our corporall
and earthly loues into spirituall and heauenly.
They that are most ignorant know that Loue is a desire of beauty,
and that Beauty draweth Loue.God created the world by Loue. Yea some of the learned Heathens
haue taught, that it was Loue which mooued God not onely to create
the world, but also to create it beautifull, and of so goodly a forme in
euery part of it. And the name whereby it is called, yeeldeth testimony
of the beauty of it. For worlde signifieth as much as a goodly and
well decked ornament. Therefore seeing God hath created and framed
it by loue, no doubt but loue is dispersed and shedde throughout the
whole world, and is continually drawen and procured by beauty, to

the ende it might bee conformable and like to the fountaine from
whence it came. On the other side, all beautie is as it were a beame of
that infinite and diuine beautie that is in God: and therefore as the
diuine forme draweth vnto it true and perfect loues, so the image and
similitude thereof draweth the images of loues. And that loue whereby
almightie God was mooued to create all things, proceeded from
his owne goodnesse. Nowe forasmuch as beautie is a beame of that
goodnes which is shed ouer all, as the sunne spreadeth his light by his
beames, the goodlier any thing is, so much the more amiable and louely
it is. For the mother of Loue is goodnesse, and the mother also of
Beautie is goodnesse: so that both of them are bredde and borne as it
were of one mother.Diuers kindes of beauty and loue. And according to the diuersity of natures created
by God, so are there diuers kindes of beautie, which are all as it
were beames, flames, and lights of that heauenly and infinite beautie,
which is fountaine of al the rest. The first, chiefest, and most excellent
kinde of all, is that beame of heauenly beauty, whereby the spirit and
minde is adorned and polished with vnderstanding and contemplation.
The secondis, in that illumination whereby the soule receiueth
knowledge. Therefore the vnderstanding mounteth vp to those two
first degrees of Loue; which is drawen by such beauties: and from
thence proceedeth the loue of spirituall things. The third kind, which
is as it were an other beame of diuine beauty, appeareth in the effectes
of lower degrees, which are in that fruitfulnesse, which God
hath giuen vnto the creatures, putting into them seedes to preserue
and to encrease their kindes. The last and lowest, yea, the most troublesome
and earthly kinde, is in corporall matters, which are purtraited
and painted with great varietie of formes and shapes. And as the
vnderstanding ascendeth vp to the two first degrees, of which I haue
already spoken: so the imagination stayeth it selfe in the two last, and
from thence proceedeth the loue of the body and of bodily things,
and the affection to beget of that goodly thing, thereby to drawe
out a forme like to that beautie towardes the which a man is affectionated.
Nowe when wee shall consider aright of all these degrees and
beames of beauty, it is certaine that wee wil striue to ascend vp from
the lowest to the highest, whereas commonly wee descend from the
highest to the lowest, feeding our spirites with corporall and terrestriall
loues,Loue tendeth to vnitie. which differ from their nature, in steade of spirituall and
celestiall loues, which is their proper foode. But we must note further,
that the greatest, last, and chiefest force of loue, is of many and diuers
things to make one and the same. Therefore he that loueth our friend,

or doth him any good, seemeth to do that to vs which is done to him,
and we esteeme of it, as if we receiued it our selues. For it is the nature
of loue, which way souer it turne, alwayes to ioyne and knit vnto it
selfe: as on the contrary side hatred is of this nature, that it will euermore
disioyne and separate. For this cause Iesus Christ prayed so earnestly
for his vnto his Father,Iohn 17. 21. to the ende (saieth he) that they all may be
one, as thou O Father arte in mee, and I in thee; euen that they may be also
one in vs. And Saint Iohn saieth likewise of him,Iohn 11. 52. that hee shoulde gather
together in one the children of God which were scattered. For seeing hee
came to destroy the workes of the deuill,1. Iohn. 3. 8. (as he saieth elswhere) and
seeing it is the nature of this enemy of mankind to scatter, to disioyne
and separat, by reason of the enuy and hatred which he beareth to God
and men, it must needs be that Iesus Christ should gather together that
which the deuil hath scattered, and vnite in one that which he hath separated:
to the end that as man was one with God, before he was seueuered
by sinne through the enuy and malice of Satan, so hee might returne
into vnity and vnion with his Creator by the abolishing of sinne,Sinne the cause of our seperation from God.
which is the cause of the seperation, and by the likenesse of vertue with
God through the meanes of Iesus Christ. Therefore so great goodnes
and beneficence of God toward vs, ought to enflame our loue towards
him, and moreouer to encrease the same, when wee daily feele new benefits
powred vpon vs, which proceed and come from his burning loue
and charitie wherewith he loueth vs, although he receiue no benefite
thereby. For we are to vnderstand, that although he which hath receiued
a benefit from another, ought to carry greater loue towards him,
then hee that bestowed the benefite is bounde towardes the other
to whome hee hath done a good turne, yet the contrary oftentimes
falleth out.A double ground of loue. The cause whereof is, because his loue that bestoweth a
good turne proceed^th from his owne bountie and goodnesse, whereas
the loue of him that receiueth a benefite, commeth of necessitie.
So that the one hath a great deale better foundation then the other.
For that loue which proceedeth of necessitie respecteth our selues, because
wee loue for the good which wee haue receiued, and not in regarde
of the person from whome the good commeth. And this loue
proceedeth from the loue wee beare to our selues, so that it ought rather
to be called Loue of concupiscence, then true Loue. For as wee
loue the person that doth vs good, because of the good which wee receiue,
so we loue him, and wish his good, not so much for it selfe as for
ourselues, and for that profite, which wee hope will come to vs thereby.
But after wee haue begunne with this kinde of Loue, it serueth
vs oftentimes as a steppe for to passe by afterwardes vnto true and

perfect loue. For acquainting our selues to loue them that doe vs
good, wee learne afterward to loue them, not onely for loue of that
good which they doe vnto vs, but also because of themselues: insomuch
that we will not cease to loue them although it fall out so that
they can doe vs no more good, yea although they stand in neede of
the like good at our hands againe. Now when wee are come to this
degree, our loue is a great deale more pure, yea, then is it true loue
which nowe loueth not the person beloued onely for loue of it selfe
but for loue of him, euen with the like loue wherewith it hath beene
and yet is loued of him. And as he that loueth, is voide of true Loue,
if he loue onely in respect of the good hee receiueth,Loue is free. so hee that doeth
good, loueth not with true loue, if hee do it to receiue some profite
thereby, and with hope of recompence, and not meerely for his loue,
to whome hee doth it. For such a man respecteth himselfe more then
him whom he pretendeth to loue. Such is the loue of hypocrites towards
God. Therefore they honour and serue him as hirelings doe,
so long as hee vseth them wel, and they see rewarde: as Satan accused
and slaundered Iob before God,Iob 1. 9. as though hee serued him for no other
cause but for the benefites, which hee receiued of his goodnesse.
Whereupon it pleased God to take trial of that loue which his seruant
bare vnto him, to confound the slaunderer, and to propound to euery
one in the person of his seruant Iob, an example and patterne of true
feare,Two sortes of hired loue. of true loue, of true faith, and of true patience. We see then that
there are two sorts of hired loue, because it may be such, not onely in
respect of him that receiueth a benefit, but of him also that bestoweth
it, when hee doeth it for the causes aforesaide. But he that doth good
onely of charitie and loue hath no such scope, but looketh only to the
good, which he delighteth to communicate to others in respect of that
goodnes which is in himselfe. Therefore he hath a more sure and excellent
beginning of his loue, namely, his owne goodnes and will, then
he hath that receiueth the good, whose loue beginneth at neede and
want. That Loue also which is grounded vpon goodnesse goeth on
more easily, and with greater courage from good to better, then that
which commeth from necessitie proceedeth to good. For he that doth
good, imparteth the same frankely of his owne good will because hee
will do so: and therefore it redoundeth to his great honour. But hee
that receiueth a good turne, taketh it because hee hath neede of it: and
therefore hee must acknowledge himselfe bound to his Benefactour.
For this cause he is somewhat ashamed of his neede and want. For as
Saint Paul witnesseth, according to the saying of Iesus Christ, It is a
blessed thing to giue rather then to receiue.Actes 20. 35. Therefore that may well bee

said in this respect, which is commonly spoken, namely, that although
Loue be of the nature of fire, which alwayes mounteth vpward,Loue descendeth but doth not ascend. yet
doeth it descend but neuer ascend. For Fathers and Mothers alwayes
loue their children, yea their childrens children better then their children
loue them. The like may be saide of others that are in the place
of parents. And by a greater reason this may be spoken of the loue of
God our Father towardes vs, as also of the loue of Christ Iesus. For
he did not onely loue vs before we loued him, yea, euen then when we
were yet his enemies, but nowe also wee come farre short of loui^^
him as hee loueth vs. Therefore hee is called by Saint Iohn,1. Iohn 4. 8. not onely
louing and charitable, but euen Loue it selfe. For as he is the Creator
of all things, so he loueth, perfecteth, and preseueth them all, and turneth
them vnto himselfe.Loue breedeth Loue. But among all other things which drawe
Loue, nothing is of greater force then Loue it selfe. For as one fire
draweth another, so is it with loue: for one draweth and engendreth
another. Therefore if wee would be loued, wee our selues must loue.
But when the contrary falleth out, nameely, that we are hated of them
towards whome wee are well affected, it is because hee that is loued
doeth not knowe nor feele the loue that is borne him. For likenesse
hath such force and vertue in loue, that it is as it were the mother therof.
For seeing euery one by nature loueth himselfe greatly, and similitude
is as it were the same in many, it causeth him that resembleth vs,
to be as it were our selues: whereupon it followeth, that the same likenesse
which causeth vs to loue an other, induceth him also to loue vs.
And againe, loue causeth him that doth loue to engraue and imprint in
his heart,The heart of a louer compared to a looking glasse. that face and image which he loueth: so that the heart of him
that loueth is made like to a looking glasse, in which the image of the
party beloued shineth and is represented. Therefore when hee that
is loued and beholdeth and acknowledgeth himself in him that loueth
him, he is mooued and whetted on to loue him againe, as one within
whome he knoweth himselfe to be as it were Inhabitant, yea, as a second
selfe. Moreouer, he that loueth, doth as it were depriue himselfe
of himselfe, and giue himselfe to him whome hee loueth. Therefore he
that is beloued accompteth him deere, and is as carefull of him as of a
thing of his owne. So that if wee loue God, we shall be in his heart,
as if our image were engrauen there: and his image also shall bee in
ours, yea, hee will be carefull of vs, as of his owne children, as wee
likewise wil be very careful of his honor and glory. And the more we
know his loue towards vs, the liker we shalbe vnto him, and shall loue
him the more: as he in like maner wil loue vs the more. Nowe because
men can neither see nor know one anothers heart and wil to iudge of

their loue,Loue ought to shew it selfe by workes. we must declare the same by outward workes. For none
but God knoweth the hearts and willes of men. Neuerthelesse he wil
haue vs to manifest by workes our loue towardes him and our neighbours,
as hee hath shewed vs his loue by giuing himselfe with all his
benefites vnto vs. Therefore wee must yeelde testimony of our loue,
by obeying his worde and keeping his holy commaundements, the
fulfilling of which consisteth in true and perfect charitie. But forasmuch
as the loue of men is so disordered nowadayes, wee are to take
(...) heede, and to looke diligently that wee deceiue not our selues,
by louing that which wee ought not to loue, esteeming that to bee a
good thing which is wicked, and well done that which is ill done:
to the ende, that our loue be not inordinate, and bestowed vpon false
and euil things, and so prooue a vicious desire rather then true loue.
Therefore it shall be good, if following our matter, we consider what
this affection of cupiditie or desire is properly, and what are the kinds
of it, and how wee may separate it from Loue. Let vs then hear ken
to ARAM discoursing of this matter.


Of Desire and Coueting, and of the kindes of it: of the infinitenesse
of mens desires, and what Good is able to satisfie and content it: of
the difference betweene Desire and Loue, and of the vtmost limit
and ende of Loue. Chap. 51.
ARAM. As at the entry of a forrest some one path may seeme to
be broade and beaten enough, yet afterward when a trauailer is
well entred into it, he beginneth to loose it by little and little, and being
amazed the farther hee walketh on, the more he wandreth out of
his way: euen so when as sensualitie inuiteth vs to the fruition of some
obiect, we thinke it an easie matter to attaine thereunto, and hope to
get some great good thereby: but the further wee enter into and follow
that path, which our concupiscence doth shew vnto vs, the worse
we find the way to be, and can see nothing before vs but a large field
full of thornes and thistles, which notwithstanding seeme for a time
vnto sore eies to be faire floures of very goodly fruit. But the tasting of
them alwayes bringeth with it a long and late repentance in the ende.
Nowe as the body of the sunne when he first riseth may be easily looked
vpon, but after being mounted vp certain degrees in the Zodiake,
dazeleth the eies of them that behold it: so we may in some sort know
our euill when it beginneth first, but when it hath gathered full force
it wholy dimmeth our reason,Euils must be resisted in the beginning. and yeeldeth to no counsaile. Therfore
before any passion grow to be strong, wee must labour, that whatsoeuer

shall be rashly desired, may be suppressed by a prudent and an
aduised discourse.
We haue heard by our former speech,What Desire is. that Desire and Coueting
is an appetite or longing to obtain some Good, which we iudge is profitable
vnto vs, or to preserue it if wee haue it already.Diuersitie of Goods. For this cause
we must always consider aduisedly what Goods we want, whether they
be necessary for vs or no, whether we seeke after them, either because
we need them, or for profite sake, or else o^ly to satisfie the vanitie of
our minde, and our foolish and carnall affections. For there are some
Goods so necessary for vs, that without them wee can neither liue, nor
preserue our life. The necessitie and want of these is fitly called naturall,
and ought rather in deede to be termed appetites then desires. In
the number of these Goods are meates,Good^ belonging to this life. drinkes, clothing, dwelling places,
Physicke, fire, water, and such like things which mans life cannot be
without. Therefore our appetite to these things is awakened as it were
by a certaine naturall instigation, which pricketh and prouoketh the
soule to make it desire and seeke them, so that they stay not vntill iudgement
haue giuen sentence, but proceede on forward as wee may see
by experience in hunger and thirst. It is not therefore without cause
saide, that the belly hath no eares. But there are other goods not altogether
so necessary for mans life, which yet wee cannot be without
when neede requireth, and they serue to this vse, that men might liue
more commodiously and better at ease: as wine, exquisitenes in dressing
and preparing of meates, spices, and many such like things. For it
is certaine, that although there were no wine nor any artificial drinke,
yet nature would be content and coulde well away with water: and
although meate be not so delicate, nor so well and finely dressed as it
might be, yet will it nourish well enough, so it be naturall. The same
may be saide of the rest, of which there is great vse in the life of man,
and of those pleasures and delights which wee take by all the corporall
senses. The desires of these things are not to be condemned, seeing
they are naturall also, prouided alwayes that moderation be kept
in them. For God hath not created any creature, which hee will not
haue man to vse, so that hee abuse it not, but being contented with
those pleasures which hee permitteth vnto him, keepe himselfe within
the limits thereof, and fall into no excesse, neither lash out beyond
all reason and measure.
There is yet an other sort of goods wherof we haue spoken before,Goods of fanci^ and in opinion onely.
which is more in fancie and in opinion the^ in any other thing, namely, ye
getting and possessing of siluer, of riches, of power, of honor, and of glory.
These goods fil men ful of innumerable desires, which haue neither

measure, terme, nor ende, insomuch that amongst all creatures liuing
none is so burthened with them as man: who notwithstanding might
wel satisfie himself with a few, if he could be content with that which
wil suffice nature and followe her. And therefore of all these sortes of
desires mentioned by vs, we may well say, that those which concerne
naturall things haue some limitation, but such as concerne things
found out and inuented by men, haue no bounds nor measure at all in
them. For what ende is there in the coueting of riches, honours, glory
and such like things? True it is, that of their owne nature, and as being
the creatures and giftes of God, they are not ill: but they become
such through the fault of men, I meane through their insatiable coueting
and abusing of them, and through that false opinion, which commonly
we haue of them. For we propound these things to our selues,
that we may liue with greater ease, pleasure, and rest: but it falleth out
cleane contrary. For being such goods as reach not vnto the spirit, they
cannot profit the same: or if they do reach vnto it, yet the profit that
commeth by them is very light and vaine. For they are not able to
sound the bottome thereof, it is so profound and capable: much lesse
are wee to thinke that they can make vs happy. Nay, they are so farre
from performing this, that it is impossible to beleeue how troublesom
it is to the spirit to search and finde them out, and to obtaine and keepe
them.The effects of ambition and couetousnesse. For after that ambition and couetousnesse be once mooued and
pricked forward through false opinions and vaine iudgements, they
growe and waxe disordered out of measure. For the spirit thinketh in
it selfe, that if once it could get either those honours and glory, or that
mony and riches which it wisheth for, it shoulde be very happy, and
liue at great ease and rest. But when it hath obtained that, it is not only
in the same estate wherein it was before, but oftentimes farre worse,
and lesse contented. The reason is, because the spirit considereth not,
that those things which it laboureth to get, are vnable of their owne
nature to affoorde that which it requireth of them. Whereupon, not
knowing his owne vice and foolish imagination, it it perswaded, that
this falleth out so in respect of the greatnes and excellencie of that thing
whereunto it aspireth, and therefore not hauing gotten so much as is
requisite fully to satisfie the desire it hath, it setleth it selfe to get more.
And when it hath proceeded in this sort, yet is it alwayes newe to beginne,
being as farre from contentation, yea a great deale further then
it was before. So that we may conclude, that desire or coueting is bottomlesse,
and voyde of all stay. Therefore wee must knowe, that the
meere wants of this life, doe neither breede nor encrease these desires
in vs, but they proceede from a false opinion and perswasion, which

we haue of them. For it is certaine, that the opinion wee conceiue of
those wants, which we imagine wee may haue, breedeth such a fear^
in vs, as engendreth and encreaseth these desires.Of the false opinion of want. And the carking
care to preserue those things that are without vs, namely, externall
goods, proceedeth from the same fountaine. For our foresight stretcheth
it selfe not onely to vrgent necessities, or to such as wee verily
thinke are to come to passe, but euen to all those that may any way
happen: so that we propound to our selues all the wants in the world,
as if heauen and earth shoulde faile vs. Besides, many doe not onely
looke to those necessities which they may feare, but also to those
pleasures, which they would haue. For they suppose that by meanes
of power, riches, authoritie, and dignities, they may attaine to the
fruition of all the pleasures and delights they wish for. And when a
man hath tasted of pleasure, this taste doth breede an other desire to
continue therein, and to preserue those meanes whereby they may alwayes
enioy such pleasure. Whereby wee may iudge howe the desire
and coueting that is in man, wandereth and goeth astray, when as
notwithstanding it is giuen him of God, to the end he might wish for
that which hee iudgeth to bee good for him, and that hee might followe
after it, and hauing obtained the same, might holde and keepe
it fast.
Now Forasmuch as God is the true,The right vse of coueting. stedfast, and firme good of
man, hee doeth naturally wish and desire him: and because this good
is infinite, it falleth out thereupon that the largenesse, length, and
depth of our coueting is infinite, and can be filled with no other thing
but with God. Wherefore when it is come thither, there it stayeth
and resteth it selfe. But whilest it wandreth hither and thither, there
wil be no end, but one desire begetteth another: insomuch that there
are infinite kindes of them, which take their particular names of those
things which they couet.The diuerse kinds of Desires. For the vnmesurable coueting of honours
is called ambition: of golde and siluer, couetousnesse: of meates and
drinkes, gluttony and drunkennesse: the vnlawfull and immoderate
desire of coniunction betweene man and woman, is called Whoredome:
which also hath diuers kindes vnder it, according to the degrees
of their filthinesse and enormities in whome it aboundeth. The
vertues opposite and contrary to these vicious desires, are iustice, liberalitie,
continencie, chastitie, and temperance: of which vertues and
vices, and of others proceeding of them, we haue discoursed at large
in our fist morall institution. Therefore to conclude that which hath
beene hitherto spoken of Loue and of Desire, I thinke wee ought to
make two sortes of Loue, the one in vertue the other in vice.Two sorts of Loue. For that

Loue proceeding of Desire and Coueting, such as we see commonly
in men, is false and fained. And because it counterfaiteth often the actions
of true loue, therefore wee ought to be very wary, that it beguile
vs not, and that wee take not the one for the other. Concerning the
first, wee must remember, that all loue is begotten of Good, that it
bendeth and draweth towardes Good, as wee haue already learned.
Now Good is of that nature, that it breedeth in vs a desire to bee ioyned
vnto it, in regarde of that agreement which it hath with vs: of
which agreement and coniunction commeth delight, and then blessednesse
and felicitie.The last ende of Loue. So that the vtmost bounds and limites of Loue
is to be knit together in vnitie as much as may be. And the straighter
and closer the bond of loue is tied and conioyned in one and the same
essence, so much the more truely and perfectly is loue come vnto his
ende, and consisteth in the perfection of his nature. Therefore the desire
of coniunction which is in Loue is giuen to man, to the ende hee
shoulde wish and couet to be vnited with God his true Good, that being
made as it were a little God like vnto him, hee might be partaker
of his eternall blessednesse. This is the true, firme, and fruitfull coniunction
of loue, and the great and excellent reward thereof. For all
the rest are nothing in comparison of this, but onely vaine and fruitlesse.
Nowe the Loue of the body desireth the coniunction of the body,
and the loue of soules desireth to be ioyned with soules, that there
may be as it were one soule in many bodies. And this coniunction is
the greatest, truest, and of longest continuance, which causeth but one
heart and one will among friends, as if they were one onely body, and
one onely soule, and as if hee that loueth were the same party that is
beloued. Therefore it is written of the first Christians that were in the
Church of Ierusalem,Acts 4. 32. that the multitude of them that beleeued were
of one heart and one soule; neither any of them saide, that any thing
of that which he possessed, was his owne, but they had al things common.
Neither is it saide without reason in common Prouerb,Communitie among friends. that all
things are common among friendes: which is the cause that a friend calleth
and accompteth as his owne, whatsoeuer belongeth to his friend,
whether it be in prosperitie or in aduersitie. Therefore also it is commonly
said, that a stedfast friend is tried in doubtfull matters. Wherevpon
it commeth to passe in true loue, that friends lift vp into great
dignitie, are more carefull of those whome they loue (how base soeuer
they be) and of their affaires, then of themselues and of their particular
estate. Moreouer we are to knowe, that as it is the nature of
Loue to ioyne together,Loue bringeth equalitie. so doeth it also bring equalitie with it, so
farre foorth as the nature of those things that are conioyned, will

beare: insomuch that the highest stoope downe to the lowest, to lift
them vp vnto themselues, and they that are equall associate themselues
together. Therefore, as we haue often saide, that the fountaine and
patterne of all true loue is in God, so in this point it doth chiefly shew
it selfe vnto vs. For hee abaseth himselfe to our smallnesse, as though
he would reach vs his hand from heauen, to drawe and lift vs vp vnto
himselfe by the meane of Iesus Christ, vnto whome and by whome
wee are truely vnited with him. But heere wee are to knowe, that the
desire, lust, or coueting which is bredde of Loue groweth to bee vicious
through the corruption of our nature, which otherwise being directed
by good meanes and by reason according to the will of God,
and ayming at the right Good which is God,Loue must first beginne at God. woulde cause vs to loue
God first for his owne sake, and then his creatures in him, and for the
loue of him. Neither shoulde wee euer couet worldly goods with an
vnbrideled desire, but woulde rather accompt all mortall things vnworthy
to bee cared for by our immortall soules. Whereunto wee
shall be the rather perswaded, if following that which wee haue begunne
to speake of true and false loue, and of the difference betweene
them, wee consider what good things are to be found in the one aboue
the other, what sundry rewards men propound vnto themselues
in loue, what knowledge is required therein, and howe the one is encreased
by the other. This then shall be thy matter subiect, ACHITOB,
which thou shalt take to make an end of our discoursing of the
nature of Loue.


Of the good things that are in true Loue, of the diuerse valuations
of Loue, and of the benefits which it procureth: what knowledge
is requisite to allure Loue, and howe one Loue groweth by
another: of the friendship that may be both betweene the good
and the bad. Chap. 52.
ACHITOB. Good is loued so much as it is knowen, and as wee are
able to vnderstand what it is. For things are first knowen, to the
end they may be loued.Three meanes of knowledge. Now there are three meanes of knowledge in
our soule, namely, by sense, by reason, and by the mind. From the sense
springeth appetite, which is common to vs with beasts: from reason
groweth election, which is proper to man: and from the minde and
spirite, in which the image of the diuine essence is engrauen, proceedeth
the will. As then sense knoweth none but sensible and corporall
things, so the appetite desireth only the same things: and as the mind

of it owne nature enclineth to the contemplation of spirituall and
intelligible things, so the will feedeth and contenteth it selfe onely
with eternall and heauenly goods. Now Man, that is to say the soule,
by nature reasonable, being placed as it were in the middest of these
two extreames, and sustaining wonderfull assaults and combates
through the impression of these two contraries, taketh part one while
with the desires of this side, an other while of that, according as hee
inclineth by his election either to this part or to that, by stooping
downe to the sense, or by lifting vp himselfe to the minde. But because
of the darkenesse of errour, which shadoweth his reason, it is
very necessary that the spirite of God worke mightily therein, to this
ende that by the power and vertue thereof, the naturall affection of
earthly things, which offer violence to all the powers of the soule,
might be transported and lift vp to the desire of celestiall and eternall
things.
Truely forsomuch as Good is the obiect of Loue, good reason it is
that wee should lift it vpward, and separate it from the earth as much
as we may. For as so many rash affections, which are the spring of all
vices,The benefites that come of true loue, whose scope is God. haue their beginning from earthly loue: soco^trariwise celestiall
and heauenly loue adorneth the soule with two excellent ornaments,
namely, wisedome and vertue, the ground of all true Beauty, in
which all good, all contentation and felicitie consisteth. And this
loue which hath God for his ende and scope, hath three great benefites
among many others, which are not to bee found in any other
loue, especially in that of concupiscence. For first, there is no good so
excellent in the enioying of earthly things, but it is mingled with
some thing that may displease vs, or some way harme vs. Whereupon
taking it to be a lesse benefite, and not altogether so good for vs,
wee are of this iudgement,The first benefite of true loue. that it is the lesse to bee wished for of vs.
But there is no such thing in God. Therefore if the soule of man did
beholde him by contemplation, not such a one as hee is (for that is
impossible) but as shee might contemplate him notwithstanding she
is enclosed in this body, shee woulde bee rauished in her loue with
greater vehemencie, then shee is stirred vp to embrace that, which
of all mortall and transitorie things shee iudgeth best and most certaine.
For she should know, that God is a Good, wherein there is nothing
mingled, that may breed yrkesomnesse, or be hurtful, but is altogether
profitable and full of pleasure. Although it can not be gainsaide,
but that the contrary seemeth to come to passe oftentimes, when
we see that they which loue God as they ought, and which by means of
this loue are driuen forward and induced to procure his honor and glory

with all their might, are commonly most visited with griefes, losses,
and sorrowes. Whereof it commeth to passe, that many are alienated
from this loue, because they greatly dislike that troublesome estate.
But we must know, that this humane and friuolous consideration proceedeth
only of this,Diuers estimations of Loue. that the price of loue is diuersly valued. For there
is one kinde of loue that is perpetuall and firme, and another which is
temporary, according as the present motion of the heart pricketh one
forward to followe any thing, because at that instant it seemeth vnto
him to be good, or in regard of the profit, which he seeth therein, or of
the appearance of good, which he imagineth is in it. As for example,
we know well, that health is a greater good, then is the swallowing
downe of dainty morselles, the pleasure whereof passeth away very
quickely.
And yet it commeth often to passe, that our appetite stirreth vs forward
with such vehemencie, that meere lickerishnes causeth vs to eate
such meats as we know are contrary to our health. The reason hereof
is, because we compare not the good that is in taste and in dainty fare,
which sodainely passeth away, with that which is in health, which is
of a longer continuance: or else because wee thinke there will not
come so great hurt thereof as there may come, or else we hope easily to
remedy the same.The cause of mens errour from the true Good. And thus is it with them that consider not what
great good there is in God, but forget him, or els suppose that they ca^easily
recouer that which they shal lose, by folowing after a terrestriall
and transitorie Good, which causeth them to turne aside from God.
For if they thought well vpon it, and knewe what losse they receiued,
they would neuer suffer themselues to be gouerned by their appetites
and worldly desires. But the bare imagination and consideration of
honors and of earthly goods doth so dazell the eyes of their mind, that
they can not knowe the greatnesse and excellencie of celestiall goods,
which they forsake for those other. Whereas contrariwise, if they
were not altogether blinde, they should perceiue, that this light affliction
of good men, which passeth away in a moment, bringeth foorth
in them an eternall waight of most excellent glory, and maketh them
partakers of God, who is the perpetuall and stedfast reward of their true
and holy loue.The second benefite that is in true Loue. Now touching the second benefit, which being in his
loue, is not to be fou^d in the loue of creaturs, we are to know, that this
latter is alwayes in feare and care for that thing which it loueth, lest
some euill should befall it. So that notwithstanding any securitie that
may be had, yet there is alwayes some vexation in al loue towards men
and towards mortall things. But in that loue which is towardes God
there is nothing but delight without care, griefe, or disquietnesse. For

we are very certaine, that all things are most safe there, full of ioy
and lasting happinesse.The third benefit. And for the third, wee see that in the loue of
concupiscence, there is commonly enuy and euill iealousie (which is
one kind of it) because many couet that which one alone would wholy
possesse. But it is cleane contrary in the true loue of the soule, wherein
is vprightnes and fellowship. For he that loueth vertue and a vertuous
man, is so farre from being iealous, that he would not onely haue
many companions, but wisheth that all the men in the worlde were
like affected with him. The same may be said of him that loueth God.
For he would haue al men his companions in that amitie, and iudgeth al
those to be miserable and wretched, which are estranged from it. As for
that friend, who would alone loue his friend, hee loueth not perfectly,
but rather loueth some thing in him that is profitable to himselfe, as
namely to enioy alone whatsoeuer good he iudgeth to be in his friend:
which is the nature of the loue of concupisce^ce that looketh inwardly
to it self. But true friendship looketh outwardly vpon him whom it loueth,
insomuch that he which loueth doth die by litle and litle in himselfe,
but that which he loueth, liueth in him. Wherfore S. Paul not only
knowing the nature of true loue, but also hauing felt by experience
the vehemencie therof,Galat. 2. 20. saith, I liue, yet not I now, but Christ liueth in me.
For he that truly loueth, careth no more for himselfe, but for that thing
which he loueth.The highest degree of Loue. This degree of loue may be rightly called Rauishing,
in which the louer is so rapt out of himselfe, that he sorgetteth himselfe
altogether, being wholly in him whom he loueth, and he whom he loueth
being in him.Knowledge requisit in Loue. But as we said in the beginding of our speach, Good
is loued so far forth as it is knowen, and as we can vnderstand what it is,
therfore it is necessary that the knowlege of it should be so great, that
it be sufficie^t to draw loue, which encreaseth by thinking often of that
thing which is beloued. For thereby it is planted and rooted more deeply
in the heart. Wherefore there is nothing more contrary to loue then
forgetfulnes, the mother of ingratitude, especially in our loue towards
God. For the more we thinke of him, the more do we call to minde his
goodnes towards vs: whereupon also our loue doeth encrease and is inslamed
in vs towards him. And the greater and more burning our loue
is, the nearer are we vnited and linked vnto him. Therfore we may well
conclude, that we loue God according to that measure of knowledge
which we haue of him and of his benefits, and according as we consider
and remember them: and if we want these things, we loue him not
as we ought. Now whe^ we are ioyned vnto the thing that is deare vnto
vs, according to the end of loue, we know it a great deale better, because
we behold it neerer: and then are we said to enioy it.

Hereupon we may note two kinds of knowledge in loue:Two sortes of knowledge in Loue. the one
first, the other last. By the first, we beleeue that thing to be good, which
we do know: and by the last we haue experience of it, which is of great
force in al loue: because the fruit thereof is the fruition of the thing beloued.
This enioying, is the action of delight and of pleasure, which is
not onely of the will, but also of the vnderstanding, as it is in GOD.
And if wee take it so, Loue shall be as the meane betweene the first
knowledge which is onely begunne, and the last, which is full and
perfect: which consisteth in the vnion of him that loueth with him
that is beloued, and wherein the desire that is in loue, and which afflicteth
and tormenteth the party louing, is alwayes abolished, not the
loue it selfe: but being vnited, the greater number and the more excellent
it findeth the goods in regarde of those which the first knowledge
affoorded, the more is it encreased and inflamed. Heereof it is
that we put a difference betweene Loue and the Desire that is in loue,The difference betweene Loue and Desire.
because when wee loue a thing, wee desire therewithall the fruition
and possession thereof. And if there be delaie made, so that wee cannot
enioy the thing so soone as wee woulde, this delay tormenteth
vs by reason of the desire, which presseth and pricketh vs forward to
get the possession of it. But this torment commeth not of Loue, then
which there is nothing more sweete and pleasant, but of that desire
which endeth in the vnion and fruition of the thing beloued. In the
meane time as long as this desire lasteth, the loue from whence it proceedeth,
causeth the torment to be abated, yea it is not without some
pleasure, especially when there is some hope that at length it may bee
obtained and brought about. And the more confident this hope is,
the greater solace, yea the greater delight and pleasure it bringeth
withall. For as loue hath great delight in vnion and fruition, so is it
not small in hope, because it propoundeth vnto vs the enioying of the
thing as being present, euen as if our imagination had already led vs
vnto it. Therefore forasmuch as the hope of Gods children is certaine,
they are nowe beeing in this worlde as it were blessed in heauen, although
the desire which they haue of greater goodes hoped for yet,
and to be enioyed in that full vnion and coniunction which they shal
haue with God in the life euerlasting, causeth them to groane and to
sigh continually with all the creatures,Rom. 8. 22. waiting for their full and perfect
deliuerance from all corruption and from this miserable life. So
that wee can not doubt but that our loue towardes GOD will bee
farre greater and much more vehement, when as wee shall haue
this full fruition of God our soueraigne Good, and when wee shall
bee perfectly vnited vnto him by true Loue, not seeing him obscurely

in a glasse onely,1. Cor. 13. 12. or knowing him in part, as we do nowe, but
beholding him face to face, and knowing him as we haue bin knowen
of him. For the knowledge which we haue nowe of him is yet but begunne,
in respect of that which we shall haue fully and wholly in that
glorious and immortall life. And then also wee shall be wholly swallowed
vp with his loue. By the same reason we may wel beleeue, that
the loue and charitie which the godly beare one towardes another in
this mortall life and pilgrimage, shall be a great deale more enflamed
in the other life, then euer it was in the holiest and most perfect that
euer was amongst them in this world. For the better men friends are,
the more stedfast and firme is their friendship, which among good
men is alwayes of long continuance: but contrariwise with the wicked.
And to speake properly there is no friendship betwixt them,Of friendship betweene wicked men. but
onely some familiaritie and fellowship, or to speake better, a conspiracie
against right, and common peace. Howsoeuer it be, whether familiaritie
or fellowship, it is very short and weake, because it hath no
good foundation. Wherefore they can not long continue vnited and
knit together. We haue daily testimony heereof in worldly and carnall
men, who hauing made for a time profession of very great friendship,
vpon a Yea or a Nay, assault one another euen vnto death.
But wee are not greatly to maruaile at it. For seeing their amitie and
vnion is ill grounded, as it cannot be of long continuance, so they can
receiue no great ioy or delight. But it is contrary in the friendship of
good men, as that which hath a farre better foundation, namely, God
and his word.What foundation the friendship of good men hath. Wherefore if the better men that friendes be, the greater
their friendship is and more firme euen in this world, no doubt but
it will be greater, more burning and constant in that blessed and eternall
life, which wee expect, where we shal be much better men and
more perfect then wee are heere, better linked one with an other, as
also we shall be altogither a great deale more conioyned with and in
God.1. Corint. 13. 8* For this cause Saint Paul had good reason to say, that Loue
doeth neuer fallaway, though prophecyings be abolished, or tongues cease,
or knowledge vanish away. Wherefore in this respect hee concludeth,
that loue is the greatest of these three, Faith, Hope, and Loue. But wee
haue spoken enough of the nature of Loue for the subiect of our discourse
of the naturall historie of man. Nowe I thinke it will not bee
vnprofitable, if wee say somewhat of other affections that are neere
neighbours vnto Loue and ioyned with it, as of fauour, reuerence, honour
and pitie, which haue such good or ill qualities in man, as the nature
of that loue hath which bringeth them foorth, as ASER will giue
vs to vnderstand.



Of fauour, reuerence, and of honour: of their nature and effectes: of those
outward signes whereby they shew themselues: of pitie and compassion, and
how agreeable it is to the nature of man. Chap. 53.
ASER. I cannot marueile enough at the drowsines of many great
spirits, who are so delighted with the vaine dreames of their own
fancies, that they employ all the giftes and graces of their minde, to
lift vp euen vnto the heauens the pleasures that are receiued in the
loue of humane and mortall things, especially in the fruites of concupiscence,
and yet the least of them cannot be gotten without a thousand
troublesome discommodities, besides that they leaue alwayes in
man an insatiable desire of them. I would aske of them gladly, when
the most voluptuous man of them all, hath not, euen in the middest of
his pleasures, sighed and bene subiect to passions, desiring some other
thing besides: or when there was euer founde betweene twaine that
loued ech other corruptly, that conformitie of wils, that communication
of thoughts, those continual agreements, and that concord of life,
which is necessary in all true loue: especially seeing it is a hard matter,
yea impossible to see a wicked man, that is not daily at variance with
himselfe, insomuch that if he could leaue himselfe, as two men forsake
eche other, there are many, who vpon euery occasion woulde leaue
themselues to take another body,A similitude shewing the vanity of the loue of worldly delights. or another soule. And as when one
being very desirous to eate, and thereupon falling asleepe, dreameth
that he is feeding and yet is not satisfied, because it is not a dreame of
meate that will content the sense and appetite, which seeketh to bee
appeased, but substantiall meate it selfe: euen so it falleth out when
men dreaming in spirite, which is as pernicious a thing as the sleepe of
death, giue themselues by a certaine natural inclination which they
haue to the loue of Good, to seeke for the beautie, contentation and delight
thereof vpon earth, when they are not to be found in the whole
worlde. As for their shadowes, which in some sort appeare in corporall
and earthly things, and in those delights which proceede of them,
they doe not feede their mindes with sound and good thinges, but rather
abuse and deceiue them. Therefore we ought to take great heed,
that wee set not our heart and affection rather vpon those miserable,
corruptible and deceiueable pleasures, wherein worldlings and carnal
men doe glory, then vpon that great and infinite brightnesse, of
which the sunne is but a very small beame, and vpon those singular,
blessed, and heauenly trueths, which the worde of life doeth teach
vs, and which are the onely true and solide meates that can content

and satisfie our spirits eternally.
It is certaine, that nature mooueth vs to set our affection chiefly vpon
some one thing rather then vpon another: forasmuch as loue is
a gift bestowed by the Creatour vpon all natures at the time of their
birth. Nowe vnto Loue many other affections are ioyned, among
which Fauour commonly hath the first place.What sauour is. This affection is a
kinde of good will and liking, which springeth from a iudgement
conceiued of some Good, so that wee may call it a loue begunne.
For in this iudgement of Good, wee esteeme well of him, towardes
whome our fauour is extended, and iudge him woorthie of
some good thing, and by this meanes wee beginne to loue him.
Wherefore although fauour may bee without true loue, yet loue
cannot bee without fauour. Notwithstanding, when wee fauour
one before wee loue him, euen then wee enter into the way that
leadeth to loue him. And for the least shadowe of loue in our heart
towardes another, wee fauour him: as wee see it in those that are
linked vnto vs by some degree eyther of consanguinitie, or of affinitie,
or by meanes of some acquaintance and knowledge. Now
forasmuch as GOD loueth vs, he beareth vs fauour also, although
not in the regarde or for the iudgement of any good,Why God fauoureth vs. which hee
seeth in vs or in our corrupted nature: but because of the loue hee
beareth vs in Iesus Christ, his welbeloued, in whome by his grace
hee hath made vs acceptable to himselfe. Therefore this fauour
bringeth with it the perfection of all Good vnto vs. For what can
hee want that is fauoured of God, who can doe all things? This
fauour which God beareth vnto vs, is called grace and blessing in
the holy Scriptures, which comprehendeth all those benefites which
wee receiue of his goodnesse. For they proceede all of this fauour,
and this fauour of the loue hee beareth vs in Iesus Christ. Reuerence
also commonly accompanieth loue,Of reuerence. whereby we vnderstand
an affection proceeding from the iudgement of some great good,
that hurteth vs not. For if wee thought it woulde hurt vs, there
woulde bee feare ioyned with hatred, and not true reuerence. For
although there is euermore in all reuerence, some feare mingled
with shamefastnesse, neuerthelesse this feare bringeth no hatred
with it. This reuerence is bredde in vs by comparing the greatnesse
of another with our smalnesse, as if wee admired those excellent
thinges that are in him. For as the heart doeth enlarge it
selfe through the consideration and opinion it hath of it owne
greatnesse, so doeth it restraine and close vp it selfe vpon the reputation
and conceipt of another mans greatnesse, so it bee good,

or at leastwise without hurt. Therefore if wee compare our greatnesse
with some other mans that is farre greater, we know our owne
smalnesse thereby.
Whereupon it commeth to passe,The caause of humilitie. that we doe not onely esteeme
woorse, but euen dislike and contemne our selues: by which
meanes wee become more humble, whereas before wee were
puffed vp with pride through the opinion of our greatnesse, of
which wee haue experience as often as wee compare our selues
with GOD, and lift vp our spirite euen to the consideration of
his diuine maiestie, comparing that with our basenesse. For then
beeing rauished with admiration of his highnesse, and infinite greatnesse,
wee honour and reuerence him by reason of his power, vnto
which wee ioyne also his wisedome and goodnesse. And according
to that reuerence wee beare towardes him, wee reuerence those also
in whome wee see the same giftes and graces shine. For power breedeth
reuerence, and goodnesse loue. Wherfore if we iudge, that power
and greatnes are ioyned with goodnes and tempered therewithall, we
shal not onely be moued to reuerence, but this reuerence also will engender
loue, as it is in the hearts of the faithful towards God: because
that as they consider him almighty and the greatest of all, so they behold
him most wise and most good. But as I haue already touched, if
we thinke that this greatnesse or power either is or wilbe hurtful vnto
vs, there is another kind of reuerence, which only hath feare that breedeth
hatred, as it is in them that consider the power of God only, and the
rigour of his iudgement, not meditating of his clemencie and benignitie.
Therefore as the great excellency, which in all things appeareth in
God, especially in power, wisdome and goodnes, induceth vs to reuerence
him aright:A good lesson for princes. so if we would haue men to honour and reuerence vs,
there must bee excellent vertues in vs, in which men may see the image
of God to shine, that so he may be honoured and reuerenced in vs
and we in him. For therein consisteth that true honour, and that true reuerence
which we ought to seek for and to desire. And although reuerence
hath respect principally to the diuine maiestie (at the name of which
euery knee ought to bow) and to those superiorities which are images
thereof, vnto which they that are of lesse degree, estate and condition,
ought to giue honor,Reuerence requisite in true friendship. and seruice, neuertheles mutual reuerence is necessary
in al true friendship, aswel in respect of ye party beloued, as of him
that loueth. And indeed we see howe that true friendes reuerence and
honour one another, and all because of that good opinion which they
haue conceiued eche of others desert. Concerning this word Honour,
it is properly a token, whereby we testifie that we iudge him to bee

endued with vertue whome we honour. Wherefore as the consideration
of vertue breedeth honour,Of honour and of maiestie. so honour breedeth reuerence, and
then honour and reuerence breede maiestie, which is the highest degree
of honour, and encreaseth continually according as those vertues
and good things excell, which induce vs to honour them. For if
the vertues be meane, wee honour them with a more simple honour,
if greater, we adde thereunto reuerence: and then maiestie is that honour
which can be giuen to the greatest of all. And as this affection of
honour is in our heart, wee shew it foorth by diuers outwarde signes,
whereby we signifie and testifie, that we acknowledge their greatnes
and excellencie whom wee honour, and that we submit our selues
thereunto. Therefore the more humble and modest a man is, the readier
he will be to yeelde reuerence and honour to them vnto whom it
is due. Contrariwise, the more drunken a man is with the loue of himselfe,
the more he will presume of himselfe: and the greater this presumption
is in him, the lesse wil he desire that another should be more
excellent then himselfe, and wilbe the hardlier perswaded to beleeue
it is so. Therefore he will hardly yeelde to giue him honour and reuerence.
But Saint Paul admonisheth the children of God to goe before
one another in giuing honour,Rom. 12. 16. and to be of like affection one towardes another,
not being high minded, neither wise in themselues, that is to say, arrogant
and selfe-weening, presuming very much of themselues. So that as
pride or humilitie aboundeth in vs, God, our superiours and friendes
shalbe more or lesse honoured by vs. As for those signes, whereby we
testifie this honour and reuerence, we are to note that they are many,
according to the diuersities of nations and countries, and of their maners.Of the signes of honour and of reuerence.
Most commonly we vse to bend the knee, in testimonie that we
abase and submit our selues to those vnto whom we doe this honour.
Likewise we vncouer the head, which is a token of seruitude, according
to the custome of the Grecians and of the Romanes. There are
many other such like signes, as to rise vp, to giue place, to accompanie,
to salute, and infinite others, which would be too long to rehearse,
and without profite: all which we call bearing of honour and reuerence,
or yeelding of reuerence. Wherefore although God looketh
chiefly to that which is within, and not to that which is without, yet
will he haue vs by externall signes to declare that honour, which we
owe and beare vnto him, and by them to yeeld him homage. Thus he
requireth that we should testifie our faith and our loue towards him,
by confession of mouth and by all good workes, that there may be alwayes
an agreement betweene the body and the soule, betweene the
heart, mouth and hands, and betweene the workmaster that worketh,

and his instruments and woorkes, to the ende that the one may bee
knowen by the other. For if the outwarde signes agree not with the
heart, we make them false witnesses, as the tongue is when it lieth.
For they beare witnesse to that which is not: which is right hypocrisie,
displeasing God and men. Therefore we must beware of this vice,
and take heed that we make no other outward shew, then will stande
with the affection of the heart.
Now hauing spoken of honour, reuerence and maiestie, by reason
of that coniunction which they haue with loue, as also of fauour and
grace,Of Mercie and Compassion. it remaineth now that we should speake somewhat of Mercie,
and compassion, seeing that also hath great agreement with loue.
Mercie then is a griefe conceiued in our heart in respect of some euil,
which (as we thinke) is befallen one that hath not deserued it: and
this we call also pitie and compassion. Now because this affection moueth
vs to aide, succour, and to doe good to them that are afflicted, as
also to pardon such as haue offended vs, therefore Mercie is often taken
in the holy scriptures for ayde, succour, fauour, grace, beneficence,
good will, benefiting, friendship, benignitie, as also for the affection
and inclination of the heart to doe good and to succour all them that
haue neede of helpe, and this proceedeth of charitie. Therfore Saint
Paul saith,Rom. 12. 8, 9, 10. He that sheweth mercie, let him doe it with cheerefulnesse. Let
loue be without dissimulation. Abhorre that which is euill, and cleaue to
that which is good. Be affectioned to loue one another with brotherly loue:
not slouthfull to doe seruice: feruent in spirite, seruing the Lorde: distributing
to the necessities of the Saintes: giuing your selues to hospitalitie.
Whereby he admonisheth vs, that all the succours which we giue to
others, ought to proceede from a sincere and cheerefull affection of
the heart, which should prouoke vs to perfourme the same: and this
cannot be in vs without the affection of pitie, of mercie and of compassion.(...)
In regard whereof the name of almes is taken from a worde,
which in Greeke signifieth Mercy: and therefore also almes signifieth
asmuch as mercie, or that succour that is done of mercy and compassion,
wherewith we are affected in respect of the miserie of our like.
Whereupon it followeth, that as euery one is of a more tender heart,
so he is more mercifull: as contrariwise hardnesse of heart extinguisheth
mercie and compassion. As for this word Compassion, it signifieth
asmuch as alike compassion, that is, a like sense and feeling of euil
and of griefe, as if we our selues suffered that which we see others endure,
by reason of that coniunction which we ought to haue one with
another,1. Cor. 12. as members of one and the same body, among which there is
such agreement that if one suffer all feele it, and so all are carefull for

it. Therefore it is written in the Epistle to the Hebrewes, that brotherly
loue continueth.Heb. 13. 3. Bee not (saith he) forgetfull to lodge strangers. Remember
them that are in bondes, as though ye were bound with them: and
them that are in affliction, as if ye were also afflicted in the bodie. Wherefore
we may well conclude, that this affection of mercie is very necessary
for men, yea as sweet, as milde, and as profitable an affection as any
can be amongst them, which they haue receiued of God for their
mutual succour and consolation, in the midst of so many miseries as
commonly happen in the life of man.Math. 5. 7. And this hee commaundeth
vs expresly in infinite places of his woorde,Luke 6. 36. that the image of his vnspeakeable
mercy might shine in vs by our mercy towards others.Prou. 21. 21. Hitherto
we haue spoken of man,Iam. 2. 13. as of man and of those affections that
are most humane in him, now others remaine, which often make him
more brutish, then any sauage beast that is. For seeing they come of the
opinion of euill, they prouoke and stirre him vp greatly, making him
marueilous wilde and vntamed. To the end therefore that we may enter
into the discourse of this matter, we will first see what Offending
and Offence is in the heart and soule, and consider what degrees it hath,
and what good or euill may be in this affection. This we shall learne
of thee, AMANA.


Of offence in the heart and soule: of the degrees of offence, and of the good and
euil that may be in this affection: of contempt that is bred of it, and of mockery,
which followeth contempt. Chap. 54.
AMANA. The Philosophers haue set downe foure causes of al the
troubles of the soule, from whence all the residue proceed, and into
which they returne and haue their end:Foure causes of all the troubles of the soule. namely, immoderate desire,
vnbrideled ioy, vnmeasurable griefe, and extreame feare. These, as they
say, proceede through imprudence or ignorance of the minde, and
pusillanimitie of heart, from the opinion of good or euill things, present
or to come, which we imagine to be in the things of this worlde,
being vnperfect and of small continuance. Now forasmuch as these
foure causes are the springs of all vices and sinnes, into which men
plunge themselues in this life, they are called perturbations of the
soule, which if they be not mastred by reason, doe so carie the soule
hither and thither, that in the ende they constraine the reasonable
power thereof to giue ouer all authoritie and libertie, and to obey
the lustes of the sensuall and vnreasonable Will. Nowe desire and
ioy, they commonly accompanie the perishing goodes of the bodie.
For they are of that nature, that they inflame the soule with

an insatiable lust, inso much that the obtaining of one thing is the beginning
of a new and vehement desire of hauing another.The nature of corporall goods. And the enioying
of them besotteth the spirite with a sugred poison of fained delight
and pleasure, vnder the yoke of which it easily suffreth it selfe to
be ouercome, to be bound and to be gouerned, As for griefe and feare,
although they also be not farre remooued from such false and vading
goods of the body, yet for the most part, they respect those aduersities
and miseries, which in our opinion wee iudge to be in the want and
priuation of those goods. For they fill the soule with trouble and disquietnesse,
as she that thinketh her estate to be most miserable, if she
obtaine not the ende of her carnall and inordinate affections. So that
if the body endure neuer so little, shee casteth foorth strange cries
and complaintes. And although the bodie suffer nothing at all,
yet is shee alwayes in extreme feare, least some euill shoulde befall
it.
But these very passions may bee diuided into good and badde.How the passions may be good.
For honest desire, modestioy, and moderate griefe and feare, are naturally
in vs, for the preseruation of our being. Yea all these affections
are endued with the qualities of commendable vertues, if they respect
the soueraigne Good of man, as we may learne by our former
speeches touching this matter, which were chiefly of good affections,
and of such as are most natural in man. Therefore following our matter
subiect, we must from hencefoorth consider of a great number of
other affections of the heart, which for the most part make men more
beastlike then the very beasts themselues, that are voyde of all vnderstanding
and reason, yea then the wildest beastes that are. All which
affections take their beginning from the opinion of euill, as these that
are good proceed from the opinion of Good. For the feare of euil doth
wonderfully prouoke a man, and when he is touched therwith, he waxeth
very sauage and wilde. Now the first sting and byting of euill is offence,
by reason that the heart is offended, euen as when one rusheth
against a thing and hurteth himself.Of offence. Therfore by offence we vnderstand
properly a certaine griefe of the soule and of the heart, which commeth
through some touch of euill that agreeth not to our nature. This first
sence of griefe is like to the first pricking of ones bodie: and is contrarie
to the first pleasure, which we receiue of some Good that is offered
vnto vs, and is agreeable to our nature. So that as this pleasure,
when it is confirmed, is turned into loue, so out of this first feeling
of griefe, which I call offence, the other affections that are
ioyned with griefe doe budde foorth afterwarde, namely, anger,
hatred, enuie, indignation, reuenge, crueltie and such like. The euill

that may offend vs,What euill may offend vs. is whatsoeuer we iudge to be contrary to vs and
to our nature, as well in regard of the body as of the soule. For as the
bodie is offended by those euils which trouble the harmonie and temperature
thereof, and which bring griefe and hurt vnto it: so is it with
the soule, and with all the powers, senses and affections thereof. For
she may be offended in her imagination and fantasie, in her reason, in
her will, and in her affections. Nowe because euery one followeth his
affections, or his natural inclination, and not the right rule and iudgement
of reason, it is an easie matter to offend and displease many, and
that in many things, but not so easie to please them. For there is but
one onely reason, or at leastwise it hath no great diuersitie in it. But
the naturall dispositions of men are infinite, and wonderful diuers and
disagreeing, yea cleane contrarie one to another. And because there
is nothing in all the life of man, in which both good and euill are not
mingled together, or at leastwise some shew of them, therefore also
there is nothing that may not be taken both wayes,Why men are so easily offended. eyther this or that
way. Whereupon that which pleaseth some, displeaseth others: beside
that the want of the true knowledge of things, and of examining
throughly what good or euill is in euery one of them, is the cause of
this errour that beguileth men so. But howsoeuer it be, we ought to
be very warie that we offend no man by doing euill, and by turning
aside from the dueties of true charitie. And that which offendeth, is so
much the more grieuous,What offences are most grieuous. as it pearceth more inwarde and deepe into
the thing offended. For the chiefest part of any thing is that which is
most inward. Wherefore that which entreth in so farre toucheth the
quicke indeede, and so offendeth and hurteth. For this cause that offence
and hurt is very grieuous: but those offences that are in the will,
are greatest of all. As for those that are in the reason, they are not so
grieuous: and those that are in the other senses, especially in the senses
of the bodie, are lesse then they. Nay, we thinke not our selues offended
at all, if our will be not offended. Therefore we will suffer many
things done by some, which we will not abide in others, according
as we esteeme them to be friendes or enemies, and as wee are well or
ill affectioned towards them. Likewise many things please vs that are
done or vttered by our selues, which would offend vs if they were spoken
or done by others. And forasmuch as there is no offence but
where there is sense and feeling, therefore they are soonest offended
and most difficult to please,Of the nature of mankind, and how hardly it is pleased. that are most tender and delicate both of
body and soule, whether they be so naturally, or through custome, or
of weaknesse. And surely amongst all liuing creatures man is most testie,
and can suffer least. For hee can beare with nothing, and himselfe

is intolerable to all. Wherefore if all men generally be so harde to
serue, no marueile if there be nothing so well, so iustly and holily
spoken that can please a whole people, or a great multitude. But
some are so accustomed to contemne all things, that they are offended
at euery thing, and grieued without any iudgement or distinction.
Yea there are some to be found amongst them, that thinke it a
poynt of great wisedome to doe so, and to like of nothing howe well
soeuer it be done. Nowe when men are ledde with such a frowarde
and peeuish affection, they are very carefull to enquire diligently into
all things, but with an vniust iudgement, to see if they can finde any
thing to condemne: thinking thereby to shewe their great witte,
which notwithstanding none will commend but fooles and ignorant
persons. For they must needes be so who admire such a kinde of people,
whereas they ought thereby to be moued not onely to despise
them, but also to hate and condemne them. For as we vse to speake
in common prouerbe. That it is an easier matter to reprehende then to
imitate, so it is easier for euery one to condemne all, or to commende
all indifferently, then to discerne aright betweene the good
and the euill, and to giue a good iudgement thereof: because there
is none so ignoraunt, or blockish, or malicious, which cannot doe
the first with ease, but the last is not so easily done but by men of good
wittes and vpright of heart. Nowe hauing saide, that offence is the
first sense and feeling of euill, let vs shewe that it is not without certaine
degrees, by which it ascendeth vp higher. The lowest degree
then that is in it, is simply to turne aside from that which displeaseth
it:Of the degrees of offence. and this degree may bee called Dislike or Trouble. The
next aboue that, is when offence waxeth hote in it selfe, and kindleth
the heart in such sort, that all the body is mooued therewith. And
when offence is as it were shut vp, that it cannot range at will, then
it turneth into rage, and offereth violence to it selfe, extending it
selfe euen vnto those that haue not offended it at all. For it is stirred
vp and waxeth sharpe in it selfe, and by this meane it encreaseth
more and more continually. So that in the ende it is like to a madde
dogge, which byteth as many as it meeteth withall. And although
this affection doeth then testifie sufficiently, that it sauoureth wholly
of the corrupt nature of man, neuerthelesse if it were well ordered
and did not exceede measure, it were commendable, so that wee
might iustly place it amongest the affections of nature beeing sound,
which ought to bee the seedes of vertues in vs.How offence may be wel^ vsed. For God hath giuen
it vnto man, to the ende he shoulde presently withdrawe himselfe, as
soone as hee perceiueth any euill, euen at the first taste and touch of it,

that so it may goe no farther, least through custome he growe into
a liking of euill, and afterwarde followe it with might and mayne.
For if he sodainly retire, as if he touched a serpent and feared to be
bitten, he will depart so farre from it that it cannot hurt him: but
if he stay in it and like it neuer so little, hee cannot withdrawe himselfe
in such due time, but that hee shall feele some hurt thereby. For
euill is like to thornes, which a man cannot come neere vnto, or handle
them, but hee shall bee pricked: as likewise no man can touch
pitch and not be defiled therewith.The remedy to cure offences. But the remedie to cure offence
so farre foorth as it is vicious, is the moderation of the heart, whereby
it becommeth so deepe and so well tempered, that it is able with
ease to swallow vp and to digest those troubles and offences, which
others can in no wise beare or endure. But nowe that we know what
this affection is, we may easily conceiue howe it breedeth contempt.
For contempt is an offence and displeasure conceiued of some euill
that cannot hurt,What contempt is. and thereupon is esteemed to be vile and abiect. So
that it proceedeth of an euill whereof wee are not afraide. For we vse
not to despise them whome we feare, but them onely of whome we
make small account, because they haue not abilitie to hurt vs howsoeuer
they want no good will. Therefore although wee desire not
to doe him good whome wee despise, yet wee will not hurt him, if
there bee in vs but onely a simple contempt of him. Wee thinke
it enough for vs to mocke him, and to shew what small account wee
make of him, and what small regard is to be had vnto him.
Heereof it is that proude persons are such great despisers and mockers
of others. For seeing they esteeme of none but of themselues,
it cannot bee but that they disdaine others, and so consequently
mocke them.Of mockery. For derision and mockerie followe contempt, and
they are expressed by manie outwarde signes, and by diuers kindes
of behauiour, which oftentimes are hardlier borne withall and suffered,
then greater euils and iniuries which men may receiue: as
indeede they are blowes and woundes, which pearce euen vnto
the heart and soule. Therfore contempt and mockery engender commonly
anger in them that cannot digest them with modestie and
patience: as the true seruants of GOD doe, and followers of Iesus
Christ, who sustained so patiently all the contempts and reproches
that were offered vnto him, that no euill worde or voyce euer
came out of his mouth, whereby hee gaue any signification or signe
of wrath,Esay. 53. 7. but was alwayes quiet and dumbe, as it were a sheepe before
her shearer, according as Esaias had foretolde. Which ought
to be vnto vs an example of all modesty and patience, to the ende we

may know how to bridle our anger and wrath in time conceiued against
all them that offend, contemne and mocke vs. But let vs now
consider of other affections, which we said were ioined with grief, and
followed offence. And first let vs learne what anger is, what are the
nature and effects of it, and for what vse it may serue man: and this we
shall vnderstand of thee, ARAM.


Of anger, and of the vehemencie and violence thereof: of the difference
that is betweene anger and rancour: of the affection of reuenge that
accompanieth them: of the motions of the heart in anger, with the effects
thereof: wherefore this affection is giuen to man, and to what vse it
may serue him. Chap. 55.
ARAM.Diuers opinions of the Philosophers touching the affections. There hath beene alwayes great contentions and disputions
amongst th^ best learned of all the Philophers, to knowe
whether the affections and passions of the heart and soule were necessary
to pricke forward and to helpe men to the effects of vertues, or otherwise
hurtful and contrary vnto them. Aristotle and all the Peripatecians
mainteyned, that all the affections of the soule were not onely
naturall, but giuen also by nature to great purpose: as among
the rest, anger and choler, which serued for a pricke to prouoke
and stirre vp fortitude and generositie. And because vertue was a
habite of that which is good and comely, yea the mediocritie of the
affections, therefore it ought not in any sort to bee without these motions,
neither yet to be too much subiect to passion. For the priuation
and want of desire, would haue made the soule vnmoueable and without
cheerefulnes, euen in honest things: as ouer vehement desires altogether
trouble it, and set it as it were beside it selfe. The Academikes
and Stoikes contended harde against this opinion, alleadging
manie great arguments against it: as this among the rest: That all
is eyther vertue or vice, and that there is no meane betweene
them: that one of these cannot bee the cause of the other, seeing
they are directly and in all thinges contrarie, hauing nothing common
betweene them, and therefore that vertue neuer proceeded
of vice. And concerning Fortitude and Generositie, which were
bred in the heart by mature consultation and election of reason, that these
vertues could by no meanes bee holpen by anger or choler, but rather
troubled and hindered in their actions, because such passions
did neuer vse any consultation, but performed all things inconsideratly
and at aduenture. There are many yet to bee founde amongest vs,
that woulde take part with either opinion of these Philosophers,

but vnlesse they studie throughly the booke of nature, and haue the
spirite of God for their master and teacher, they shall neuer be able to
yeeld causes and certaine reasons of their resolution, nor of the wonderfull
effectes wrought by the powers of the soule, as we may learne
by the sequele of our speech.
First then we must know,What anger is. that Anger is a vehement motion of the
heart, because it seeth those good things which it hath, to be contemned,
wheras it iudgeth them not to be such as ought to be so lightly set
by. And herein it thinks it selfe despised. For euery one valueth himself
according to the opinion of those good things which he iudgeth to
be in himself: therfore there is no anger which commeth not of offence.
But all offence is not anger.How it differeth from offence. For offence is more general, and anger more
speciall, albeit they are commonly confounded and taken one for another.
But there are many things that dislike vs, with which notwithstanding
we are not angrie, because there is no contempt of vs ioyned
with them. For oftentimes we are grieued by those things that haue
neither sense nor vnderstanding, when some thing happeneth against
our minde and offendeth vs: and it seemeth that wee are prouoked
to anger against them, but this is not anger properly, seeing
there is nothing but simple offence without contempt of vs. Also it
falleth out often, that our blood is heated, and our heart pricked forward
and inflamed to doe some great worke, for the performance
whereof it is requisite that it should be much moued, but this is only a
kindling of the heart without anger and offence, because it is not stirred
vp thereunto by any euill. But when a man letteth loose the
bridle vnto this affection in such sort, that hee accustomes himselfe
thereunto,Of rancour. this vse and custome turneth it into rancour, which is an inueterate
anger that hath taken roote in the heart. Nowe the better
that a man thinkes of himselfe, the sooner hee is offended at euery
thing, and the readier he is to bee moued to anger, as taking himselfe
to bee despised. This is a very vehement and violent affection.
For it ouerthroweth very often the whole minde and soule,The violence of anger. so that it
forgetteth all right, iustice and equitie, all good will and amitie, and
pardoneth not, no not women or children, neither yet kinsfolkes or
friends Therfore Salomon saith,Prou. 27. 4. That anger is cruel, and wrath is raging:
but who can stand before enuie?Ecclus. 8. And Ecclesiasticus, Contend not with a cholerick
man: for he esteemeth the sheading of blood, as a matter of nothing and
hee will fall vpon thee in a place where there shall be none to helpe thee.
To bee short,The fruites of anger. after that anger hath once got the bridle at will, the
whole mind and iudgement is so blinded and caried headlong, that an
angry man thinks of nothing but of reuenge, insomuch yt he forgetteth

himselfe, and careth not what he doeth, or what harme wil light vpon
himselfe in so doing, so that he may be auenged. And many times hee
will murmure against heauen and earth, and against all the creatures,
because they are not mooued to reuenge his quarell: yea, which is
worse, he despiteth God himselfe and waxeth wroth against him, blaspheming
him, because he taketh not pleasure in seruing his reuenging
minde. Which is as much as if he should spette against heauen: and
therefore it is very necessarie, that his spettle, proceeding from such
a stinking mouth, shoulde returne and fall backe vpon his owne
face. And when this passion of anger is verie vehement, it leadeth
a man euen to furie and rage, and procureth vnto him not onely manie
diseases, but oftentimes death it selfe. Therefore although wee
knewe not what hurt this affection doeth to the soule, yet the euill
which it bringeth to the bodie, ought to bee of sufficient force
to turne vs from it.What effect it hath in the body. For it is a vice that hath woonderfull effectes in
the bodie, and such as are verie vnbeseeming a man. For first of all
when the heart is offended, the blood boyleth round about it, and
the heart is swollen and puffed vp: whereupon followeth a continuall
panting and trembling of the heart and breast. And when these
burning flames and kindled spirites are ascended vp from the heart
vnto the braine, then is anger come to his perfection. From hence
commeth change of countenance, shaking of the lippes and of the
whole visage, stopping of speech and such other terrible lookes to
beholde, more meete for a beast then for a man. For this cause the
Philosopher that counselled an angry man to beholde his face in a
glasse, had reason so to doe. For hee that beholdeth his owne face
and countenance when he is in choler, shoulde finde matter enough
to be appeased. Now because anger is a griefe proceeding of the contempt
of those good thinges that are in a man, who thinketh that it
ought not to be so, therefore hee desireth to shew that they are not
lightly to be esteemed of, which he supposeth may be done this way,
by making his power knowne, especially in hurting. Whereupon
this appetite of reuenge is engendered,The fountaine of the appetite of reuenge. which is common to anger
with offence, hatred and enuie: so that anger is alwayes mingled with
sorow and with desire of reuenge. And indeede reuenge is a motion
of the heart, whereby it doeth not onely turne aside and withdrawe
it selfe from that which offendeth, but laboureth withall eyther to
repell it, or to ouercome and vanquish it, and to punish him that is
the cause of it. Wherefore we may note herein two motions, as there
are two respectes, namely, the one to eschew the euill that offendeth,
and the other to pursue with great violence him that is the authour

thereof. Hereof it is, that some when they are angry become pale,
because the blood retireth vnto the heart:The causes of looking pale and red. and these are most couragious,
and most dangerous. Others waxe redde, because the blood
ascendeth vp to the head: therefore these are not so full of stomacke,
nor so much to be feared, in respect of those causes, which were shewed
before when we spake of Feare. But howsoeuer the difference is,
yet in anger the blood doeth not wholly goe backe vnto the heart, as
it doeth in feare and sorow, but disperseth it selfe outwardly. For the
heart is as if he stroue to goe out of his hoste or campe, not vnlike to
a Prince or Captaine that is desirous to marche forwarde in battell aray:
whereupon hee sendeth foorth the blood and the spirites, as his
men of warre, to repell the enemie: which is not done without great
mouing and tumult, and much stirring in the heart, which setteth
it on fire, and inflameth the blood and spirites.
Whereupon it followeth, that by reason of this motion of the
blood, and of the confusion of the spirites, which ensue thereof, the
actions and motions of all the members of the bodie are troubled.
But the braine is chiefly offended,How anger troubleth the braine. because that also is heated by
the inflamed blood, and by those burning spirites which mount vp
thither, by whose motion it is stirred vp and disturbed, as also by
the sinewes which come euen to the heart. For howe hote soeuer
the heart and breast are or may bee, yet man abideth alwayes still
and quiet, if the heate pearce not vp to the braine. For it falleth
out herein as it doeth with a drunken bodie, who is not saide to bee
drunke, because hee hath taken in store of wine, except it ascende
vp into his head, and trouble his braine and senses. Heereof it is,
that vehement anger is often accompanied with frensinesse, and
with the falling sickenesse. And because the heart beeing inflamed,
the blood and spirites also are set on fire, they cause the whole bodie
to tremble, yea the very bones themselues. For the blood that
boyleth in the breast, puffeth vp and thrusteth forwarde the Midriffe,
whereupon it followeth, that the motions of angrie men are
verie troublesome, like vnto those of drunkardes. Nowe because
there are many meanes to stirre men vp to anger and wrath, and seeing
it is so dangerous a passion, it is very needefull for vs to haue manie
good remedies against it, as indeede there are many to be found.
Although wee shoulde not stande in neede of so manie,The best remedy against anger. if wee
woulde onelie consider who wee are, and compare our selues with
God, and marke narowly howe many wayes wee offende him daily,
what causes wee giue him to bee bitterly incited and kindeled
with wrath against vs, and howe hee beareth with vs, turning his

anger into pitie and compassion towardes vs. For if wee enter into
this consideration, first we shall be greatly ashamed that we are angrie,
secondly our anger will bee easily appeased. For who can despise
vs as wee deserue, and moue vs to anger, seeing wee despise
God vnto whome wee owe all honour and reuerence, and whome
wee ought to set at so high a price aboue all other things, that we
shoulde esteeme all the worlde as nothing in respect of his value?
And yet wee shewe plainely, howe farre we are off from this, seeing
we stande in so little awe to offende him, yea, are more afraide
to displease men then him. Beside, wee commit no offence against
him, in which there is not great contempt of his maiestie, euen hie
treason against his diuine maiestie. Whereas if wee feared, loued
and honoured him as wee ought to doe, we shoulde rather feare to
offende him then to die. But there is nothing which wee care for
lesse. Wherefore questionlesse before him, who is a terrible auenger
of his contempt, wee are all lost, if hee shoulde pursue vs in
his anger, as wee deserue, and as wee pursue others, and not
change his anger into mercie. If wee consider well of these things,
we shall knowe what occasion we haue to swell with pride like toads,
and to thinke so well of our selues as we doe, or to be so soone kindled
with choler against them that haue offended vs: wee shall know what
excellencie and dignitie can be in vs that are but dust and filth, whereby
we should be so soone prouoked when we see our selues despised
and wronged of others. Moreouer, when we know, that we are vtterly
vndone, except GOD extende his grace and mercie towardes
vs, shall wee not, in steade of anger and reuenge, bee ashamed
to craue pardon of him, if wee continue still to bee angrie, and
vse no pitie and fauour towardes them that haue offended vs, as we
desire that God should shew fauour vnto vs? And indeede what cause
haue we to hope for it vpon any other condition?Ecclus. 28. For it is written, that
the Lorde will take vengeance of him that reuengeth himselfe, and
will obserue his offences narrowely. Forgiue thy neighbour his
misdeede, and when thou prayest, thy sinnes shall bee forgiuen thee.
Shall man keepe anger against man, and will hee aske remission
at the Lordes handes? Hee will take no pitie vpon his like, and
shall he demaund pardon for his sinnes? Seeing hee that is but flesh
keepeth his anger, and yet sueth vnto God for pardon, who will blot
out his iniquities?Another remedy against anger. But this ought not to be forgottten of vs, to cause vs
to abstaine from all anger towards them that by offring vs iniury prouoke
vs thereunto, namely, yt we acknowledge the^ to be ye scourges of
God to chastice our faultes, which are worthy of greater punishment.

Thus let vs alwayes looke to the first cause of our affliction, and to
God who visiteth vs iustly (whatsoeuer the meanes are which hee vseth)
and not to second causes and to the next meanes, to the ende
that we doe not as dogges doe, which runne after the stone throwne
against them, that by byting it they may be reuenged of it, not looking
vnto him that threwe it. For if we consider that the blowe giuen
vnto vs commeth from God, we will let the stone goe, and not
followe after it with anger and reuenge, but turne vnto God who
threwe it, not to stirre vp our selues to despite him, or to bee auenged
of him, but to craue for pardon and grace at his handes. And
this is the right way which wee are to take for the quenching of
our choler, that so wee may bridle our anger, and keepe our selues
quiet. Nowe for the ende of this matter, it remayneth that wee
shoulde knowe whether this affection bee altogether vicious, and
wholly proceeding from our corrupt nature, or whether it haue within
it any seede of vertue,Why the affection of anger is naturall, and what good commeth by it. as well as the rest. It is certaine, that it
is giuen of GOD to man, to stirre him vp to the desire of excellent
things, to the ende that when hee seeth himselfe despised and
reiected for base actions and abiect things, and is grieued for the
same, hee shoulde endeuour to leaue and forsake them, and to addict
himselfe to better and more noble things, which can not bee
contemned, nor hee despised in regarde of them. And this kinde
of anger is verie good. For beeing angrie in this sort, our anger is
turned vpon our selues onely, to blame and reprehende our selues
for our slouth and loosenesse, and for our other vices and imperfections:
and by this meanes our anger should not bee sinne, but being
acceptable vnto God, it woulde be vnto vs a Schoolemaster, and
as a spurre to sollicite and perswade vs vnto vertue, and to such things
as beseeme vs, and that estate whereunto we are called. If then wee
would be angrie according to the will of God, let vs first be angrie against
our selues for our faultes and imperfections: and when wee
haue iust occasion to whet our selues against others, let our anger bee
turned against their vices, not against their persons. And such an
anger will shewe zeale for the honour of God, and the saluation
of our neighbours. Nowe the sequele of our speech requireth, that
wee shoulde speake of hatred and of enuie, which for the most part
followe offence and anger. Let vs then heare ACHITOB discourse of
these affections.



Of Hatred, and of the nature and effects thereof: of a good kinde of
Hatred, and of the remedy to cure the euill Hatred: of Enuy, and
of the kindes and effects thereof: of the difference betweene good
and euill Enuy. Chap. 56.
ACHITOB. Forasmuch as nature, wisedome and goodnes teach,
that men ought to be knit together by loue, as wee haue seene
heretofore, and that we are by the selfe same nature framed and fashioned
thereunto, as wee may learne by that which we haue heard of the
forme and disposition of the heart, wee must needes confesse, that the
spirite of man can bring foorth nothing more vnworthy it selfe, then
to suffer it selfe to be ouercome of Hatred and Enuy, which are so contrary
to loue, that they comprehend vnder them all generall iniustice
and wickednesse of men. For from these wilde plants nothing can
proceede (by reason of the corruption of mans nature) but effects that
draw vs cleane contrary from wishing well to our neighbour. So that
if we plucke out of our heart the cause of this naturall obligation concerning
the succour we owe one to another, namely, Loue, what can
be either found or placed there but hardnesse, inhumanitie, crueltie,
and all kinde of barbarousnesse, which are to bee accompted and taken
for monsters in mans nature? For howe strange and monstrous a
thing were it, to vnclothe a mans heart of Loue, and to put vpon it
hatred, enuy, extreame backebiting, bitternesse and crueltie, which
proceede all from one fountaine? Neuerthelesse we see, that men are
enclined rather to Hatred then to Loue: but let vs search out the cause
thereof.
There are many that take Hatred to be an inueterate anger,What Hatred is. because
it is a habite of anger, wherby the heart escheweth something as
euil, and desireth to repell and driue it away. Wherefore this affection
is directly contrary to loue, and so likewise is anger. For it is an offence
rooted in the hart, which causeth it to wish greatly his hurt by whom
it taketh it selfe to be offended. Nowe because contempt doeth often
accompany hatred, and enuy is neuer without it, besides that it breedeth
strife, contentions, manslaughters and murthers, therefore in the
holy Scriptures hatred is often taken for all these things.The causes of it. As for the vehement
causes of hatred, they are in euery one according as a man esteemeth
of the things he hateth. Therefore prowd and enuious persons
are alwaies very much enclined to hatred. Some men also are of
such a hatefull nature, that they scarce wish wel to any body: and surely
these are very deuillish natures. Some likewise are giuen thereunto

of custome, which they haue gotten by reioicing at other mens harms.
But the cause why it is easier for vs to hate then to loue,Why it is an easier matter to hate then to loue. and why Hatred
taketh deeper roote in our heart then loue, is because hatred findeth
a better soile there, and a more apt foundation to bee laide vpon,
then loue doth, and that chiefly for two reasons. The first is the corruption
of mans nature, which being left vnto it selfe, fauoureth more
of the nature of Satan, who is hatefull, a lyar, and enuious from the beginning,
then of the nature of God, who is loue, trueth, and charitie.
Therefore Saint Iohn saith,1. Ioh. 3. 10, 12. that Cain hated his brother and slewe him, because
he was of the deuill, and Abel was of God. This hatred will be
alwayes in those that haue one and the same Father that Cain had, against
all good men and children of God. The second is, because
the infirmitie of our nature will not permit vs to enioy any good
things in this worlde, that are pure and of long continuance: and
therefore they suffer vs to haue but a little sense and taste of them. But
it is cleane contrary in regarde of euilles. For they quickely finde
whereupon to stay and to plant themselues within vs, and to spreade
their rootes so deepe and broade, that they cannot easily be plucked
vp. Whereupon they are felt a great deale more, and continue longer
in our heart and memory. Not without cause then doe men say,
that the pleasures, seruices, and good things done vnto vs are madeof
feathers, and therefore they are easily carried away by reason of their
lightnesse: but offences, euilles, and displeasures are made of lead, and
therefore they abide in the bottome of the heart by reason of their
waight. And forasmuch as loue proceedeth of that which is good, and
hatred of euill, whether it bee euill in trueth, or in opinion onely, as
euill is commonly greater and of longer continuance then Good, for
the causes spoken of, so is it with Loue and Hatred, and with their
rootes and long abode.
Now of Hatred commeth backebiting and euill speaking,The fruits of Hatred. which
being kindled, bringeth foorth bitternesse and crueltie: and as loue
whetteth a man on to doe well, so contrariwise Hatred turneth men
aside from well doing, and prouoketh them to hurt. For this cause it
soweth the seedes of enmitie, and laboureth craftily to cause the party
hated to fall into danger. For it desireth to hurt him, and to bring
euill vpon him, either by it selfe or by an other, secretely or openly.
In a worde, seeing it is wholly contrary to Loue, wee may without
any long discourse knowe the nature thereof, by that which
hath beene spoken of the nature of Loue, taking it cleane contrary
thereunto. But let vs see whether the affection of hatred bee altogether

together euill of it selfe, or whether a man may reape any profite
thereby.
We may say of this as we did of anger,Of a good kinde of hatred. and of other affections already
spoken of. For it is giuen to man to cause him to withdrawe
himselfe from all euill that may hurt him, to flee from it and to repell
it,Rom. ^2. 9. as being contrary vnto him.Amos 5. 15. Therefore Saint Paul sayeth, Hate
that which is euill, and cleaue to that which is good. For true and perfect
hatred shoulde hate nothing but that which is euill indeede, as true
loue shoulde loue that onely which is good indeede. But contrariwise
wee commonly hate the Good and good men, and loue the
Euill and the workers thereof. Besides, wee are faulty in this, that
in steade of hating mens vices, wee hate their persons. Wherefore it
is needefull, that in this matter of Hatred, wee shoulde put that in
practice which wee haue already saide of Anger, namely, that wee
shoulde aboue all things hate our owne vices, and that euill which
is in vs and in ours. But wee that practise the cleane contrary,
change Loue into Hatred,How loue is turned into hatred. and Hatred into Loue. For when wee
supporte and beare with our owne vices, or with the vices of our
friendes and kinsemen, which are not to be suffered or borne withall,
it seemeth that this toleration proceedeth from the loue wee
beare either to our selues or to others: but it is farre otherwise. For
if wee loued our selues well, and our neighbours as our selues, wee
woulde bee carefull to remooue all hurtefull things farre from our
soules, and to furnish them with that which is conuenient and wholsome
for them, and so likewise for our friendes: whereas wee procure
vnto them that which turneth to their dishonour, hurt, and ouerthrowe,
by nourishing them in their vices through our dissembling
and bearing with them. And thus much for that profite, which
wee may receiue by this affection of hatred, being well guided according
vnto the will of GOD, and to a sound and reasonable nature.
Nowe against the passion of euill Hatred, amongest a great number
of remedies which may very well bee applied thereunto, we haue
two principall ones,Remedies against the euill kinde of hatred. that are very good and profitable. The first remedie
is, the example of the loue of GOD, and of Iesus Christ
towardes vs, of which wee haue spoken already, with those holie
Preceptes which doe commaunde Loue and forbidde Hatred.
The second remedie is, the contempt of all earthly things, and the regarde
that is to be had vnto the things that are Celestiall and Eternall.
For if wee shall set light by all mortall and corruptible things,
and lift vp our heartes to higher thinges, wee shall verie easilie

breake off all hatred and enmitie, neither wil we take any thing greatly
to heart, but when we see God offended.
Now as concerning Enuy,Description of Enuy. that alwayes accompanieth hatred, it
is an affection quite contrary to mercy, which is a sorrowe conceiued
by reason of the miseries of an other, whereas Enuy is a griefe arising
of other mens felicitie. Therefore it doth naturally reioyce at another
mans harme,Diuers sorts of Enuy. and is grieued at his good: so that according to the varietie
of good things that may befall other men, so there are diuers kinds
 of Enuy. For first, some are enuious, when other mens profite is so
 great that it hindreth theirs. There is also a kinde of enuy at the wellfare
of another, which albeit it neither hurt nor hinder vs, yet wee are
grieued because the like is not befallen to vs, or not rather to vs, or not
aswell to vs as to another to whome it is happened. And this is a spice
 of couetousnesse. There is yet a third kinde of Enuy, which maketh
vs vnwilling that others shoulde obtaine that good which wee haue,
or which wee desire, or haue wished for but coulde not get it. And
when the question is of those good things, which it seemeth we shuld
enioy but doe not, or which we thinke belong to vs, but are bestowed
vpon others, then is our enuy greater, and may also be called iealousie,
 Moreouer, there is a fourth kinde that is worst of all, to which the
name of Enuy agreeth more properly, as being often bredde of the
former kindes, when a man giueth them the bridle, and suffereth them
to raigne too much ouer him. This enuy is a griefe conceiued at anothers
good without any regard of it owne profite, but onely because
it iudgeth it selfe hurt when others receiue good or do good. And this
is the very enuy of the Deuil and of his children: which is an affection
that is mingled of hatred and of ioy. For it hateth vertue, and reioyceth
at vice, and at the prosperitie of the wicked. Contrariwise, it is
grieued at the felicitie of good men, and glad of their miseries. But
what kinde soeuer of enuy is in a man, there is in him griefe, and as it
were a biting that gnaweth him, by reason that the heart in this affection
shrinketh in as it were, and closeth vp it selfe at the good and benefit
of another.Enuy is neuer without griefe. So that sorrowe is alwayes ioyned therewith. The
goods against which enuy rusheth most, are such as are in greatest reputation
amongst men, as honour and glory, insomuch that it is more
moued at the good renowme, honour and praise giuen to men, in respect
of the good things that are in them, then at the good things
themselues, in regarde of which men are honoured and esteemed. For
the enuious man careth not for the vertues that bring renowne and
glory, but onely for the honour and glory which follow them, as the
shadow doeth the body. Forasmuch then as a prowde man desireth

still to be preferred before all, therefore hee is more greedy of these
goods, of honour, and glory, then of true goods of which the other
are but shadowes. Hereof it is, that a prowde man is naturally enuious,
because enuy springeth from such a desire of preferrement: yea,
it is commonly bredde of pride. Yea, the farther a man is off from that
which hee woulde be thought to be, and the lesse endued with those
good things for which he woulde be honoured,Against what good things Enuy is most bent. the more enuious he
is. But amongst al the good things against which enuy striueth most,
and for which it is most stirred vp, those of the soule are the chiefest,
because they are more excellent then those of the body, and such as
neuer haue end. Therefore also the reputation and honor which men
obtaine by their meanes abide with them continually. But the contrary
falleth out in corporall and externall goods, as they that haue more
narrowe bounds. Wherefore, as they cannot growe to that greatnes
vnto which the other doe, so their vse also is nothing so great, and consequently
the price and reputation that proceedeth from them is not
so great. Therefore if the question be of honour and glory, no man of
any good iudgement but will more willingly giue ouer that which
may be gotten by corporall and outward things, then that which foloweth
knowledge, wisedome, vertue, and the other goods of the
soule. So that enuy may stand vs in steade of a witnesse to testifie and
shewe vnto vs, which are the greatest goods of all, seeing it is alwayes
busied about the highest, noblest, and most excellent Good. Now as
there is no wicked affection, which carrieth not about, it owne torment
to take vengeance thereof by the iust iudgement of God, so this
of enuy passeth all the rest in this respect. Therefore it was well saide
of them that taught, that enuy is most iust, because of selfe it is the
same punishment to the enuious man,How an enuious body is tormented. which it deserueth. For first, it
is vile and seruile, because an enuious man knoweth this in himselfe,
that he iudgeth the good things in an other to be greater and more
excellent then his owne, or at leastwise, hee feareth least it shoulde so
come to passe. Therefore there is no affection in a man, which he dare
lesse disclose then this of enuy: so that hee receiueth lesse comfort in
this then in any other. For by opening our heart to an other wee receiue
solace and comfort: whereas the enuious person iudgeth his
affection of enuy to be so vile, that hee dare not discouer it, but hideth
and concealeth it as much as hee can. If hee be angry or hate any one,
he will declare it a great deale sooner. And albeit feare be thought to
be dishonourable, yet will a man rather disclose this affection, then
he will enuy. The like may be saide of sorrow and of loue. But the
enuious body is constrained to bite on his bridle, to chew and to deuoure

his enuy within himselfe, and to locke vp his owne miserie in
the bottome of his heart, to the ende it breake not foorth and shew it
selfe,The countenance of an enuious man. whereby the body receiueth great detriment. For it becommeth
pale, wanne, swart, and leane, the eyes sinke into the head, the lookes
are askew, and the whole countenance is disfigured. And within the
heart the furies are enclosed, which giue him so small rest, that greater
torment can not be imagined. Therefore Salomon saieth very well,
That a sound heart is the life of the body:Prouer. 14. 30. but enuy is the rotting of the bones.
And Ecclesiasticus saieth,Ecclus. 30. 17, 24. That death is better then a bitter life: that enuy
and wrath shorten the life, and that carefulnesse bringeth age before the
time. To conclude, although al the euil affections trouble and corrupt
the minde very much, yet none of them offendeth it so much as enuy
doth. Which commeth not to passe so much because it selfe iudgeth
or esteemeth good to be euill, as because it desireth that others should
so esteeme thereof. But howsoeuer this vice be very vile and infamous,
and hurtful both to the body and soule, yet in this affection of enuy, we
must put a difference betweene that part of it, which proceedeth from
sound nature, as it was first giuen of God to man, and that which is in
it through the corruption of nature.Of a good kinde of enuy. For there is a kind of enuy, which
serueth vs in steade of spurres to pricke vs forward, and to worke in vs
a wil and desire both to obtaine and to keepe great good things. And
this enuy is very good, when wee apply our selues to the true Goods,
and are not grieued at the prosperitie and vertues which wee see in others,
but are mooued by their example to desire and to seeke after the
selfe same Goods, yea greater if the meanes be offered, prouided that
all be referred to the glory of God, to our owne saluation, and to the
profite of our neighbours. Vnto this kinde of Enuy Saint Paul exhorteth
vs, when he writeth to the Corinthians, speaking of the diuersity
of gifts wrought by the spirite of God in his Church.1. Cor. 12. 31. Be enuious of the
best gifts: albeit in our vsuall translation it be Desire, yet the Greeke
worde signifieth to enuy: but the sense is in a manner all one. And the
same Apostle speaking of the reliefe and collection made for the poore,
saieth,2. Cor. 9. 2. Achaia was prepared a yeere agoe, and your zeale hath prouoked
many: that is to say, the emulation and enuy, which they haue conceiued
by your example: and this was a good, holy, and christian enuy.
But if we seeke our owne glory, and in that respect are grieued
that others excell vs in vertues, and in the gifts and graces of GOD,
onely because we would haue that honour which they haue, and be equall
with them, or aboue them, this is a peruerse and Satanicall affection,
declaring euidently that we seeke our selues and our owne glory
more then the glory of God. For if we had respect to that which wee

ought, it woulde be all one to vs who were the instruments either
our selues or others, so that God were glorified, and that were well
done, which ought to be done. As for the euill sorts of enuy of which
wee haue spoken, they are placed by Saint Paul amongst the woorkes
of darknesse and of the flesh,Roman. 13. galat. 5. 21. where he saieth, that They which are defiled
with them shal not inherit the kingdome of God. But forasmuch as in this
discourse we placed Iealousie amongst the kindes of Enuy, and yet it
is often taken in the good part, proceeding as it were of true loue, as
Zeale also is bredde thereof, it shall be good for thee, ASER, to begin
the dayes worke to morrow with a treatise of these two affections.

The end of the seuenth dayes worke.


THE EIGHT
dayes worke.

Of Iealousie, and of the kindes thereof: howe it may be either a vice
or a vertue: howe true zeale, true iealousie, and indignation proceede
of loue: of their natures, and why these affections are giuen
to man. Chap. 57.
ASER. The holy Scripture applying it selfe to the capacitie
of mans vnderstanding,Esay 3. 16. and 48. 4. describeth mens affections
oftentimes by those testimonies,Ezech. 3. 8, 9. which their
outward members affoorde, conuincing them of vices
rooted in their heart, by the carriage of their eies,
of their eie-liddes, of their forehead, and of their
whole countenance. Which is to this ende chiefly, that when they
know, that men may reade one in anothers face as it were in a Booke,
that which is couered and hidden in the heart, they shoulde perswade
themselues, that God soundeth and seeth more easily the most secret
thoughts of their heartes, and that they can hide nothing from him.
Likewise the holy spirite to condescend to our rudenesse,Psal. 34. 15. and to teach
vs to knowe God by our selues,1. Pet. 3. 22. not onely by our soule which we see
not,Esay 29. 23. but also by our body which wee see, speaketh often of his high,
infinite,Exod 13. 14. and incomprehensible maiestie, as it were of a man, attributing
vnto him eies,Iob 40. 4. eares, a nose, a mouth, armes, legges, feete, hands,
a heart, and bowelles. Moreouer, albeit this pure, simple, and eternal
essence be in no wise passionated with affections, yet the same heauenly
word doth not only attribute vnto him wrath, reuenge, anger,

iealousie and other affections, but doth oftentimes propound him vnto
vs as an yrefull man,Exod. 15. 7, 8. hauing the face, behauiour, and whole countenance
of one greatly stirred vp to wrath and reuenge,Iob 9. 17. yea euen to great
fury. Which is done to this end, both, that by the knowledge which
we may haue of the nature of these affections whereunto wee are enclined,
and of the effectes which they bring foorth, and causes from
whence they proceede, wee shoulde meditate the same things to bee
in God when wee offend him, and knowe what rewarde wee are to
looke for: and also to teach vs that right rule of all our affections,
which wee haue in his diuine goodnesse.
Nowe if wee remember what hath beene declared vnto vs of the
nature of Loue, wee heard that true and pure loue was without iealousie,
and that this affection sprang of the loue of concupiscence: and
yet it was tolde vs yesterday, that Iealousie was placed amongst the
kindes of enuy. Let vs then see what this affection is properly, and
whether all iealousie be vicious.What Iealousie is. I vnderstand by Iealousie, a feare
which a man hath, lest an other whome hee woulde not, should enioy
something. This commeth to passe two wayes, namely, either because
wee our selues woulde enioy it alone, or else because we would
haue some other, to whom we wish the same thing to enioy it alone:
the reason heereof is, because we iudge it hurtfull either to our selues
or to those whome wee loue, if others should enioy it. As if the question
were of some honour, or of some other good, which we would
haue to our selues alone, or for some one whome wee loue, and should
be greeued that an other enioyeth it, and thereupon enuy him, either
because wee are afraide hee shall enioy it, or because hee enioyeth it
already, heerein appeareth enuy and euill iealousie, which bringeth
with it great mischiefes.Iames 4. 1, 2. For as Saint Iames saieth, From whence are
warres and contentions among you? are they not hence, euen of your lustes
that fight in your members? yee lust, and haue not: ye enuy and are iealous,
or haue indignation, and can not obtaine: ye fight and warre and g^t nothing.
Wherefore to auoide this enuy and euill iealousie, wee must
consider of what nature that Good is, which stirreth vs vp to this affection.
For according to the nature thereof, our iealousie may be either
a vice or a vertue. For if the question be of some Good thing, which belongeth
in such sort to mee alone, or to any other whome I loue, that
none may enioy it except it be vniustly, and to the dishonour of God,
it is no euill iealousie if I feare lest any shoulde abuse it,A good kinde of iealousie. or bee grieued
when it falleth out so. If it concerneth some body whome I l^^ue, who
is abused by another to the displeasure of God, and to the dishonour
and hurt of the party beloued, I haue yet greater occasion to feare, to

bee greeued, and euen to bee iealous both ouer my owne Good,
and ouer the good of the partie beloued. And as I haue iust cause
of Iealousie in this case in that thing which properly belongeth vnto
mee, so also I haue like occasion when an other vniustly enioyeth
that Good which belongeth to him whome I loue, and of
whome I ought to bee carefull, and be greeued when any reproch
or wrong is offered vnto him. As for example: seeing the husband
hath such an interest in his wife, and the wife in her husband,
as no other eyther may or ought to haue the like, both of them haue
iust cause to beware that no other haue the fruition heereof but
themselues, to take the matter heauily if it fall out otherwise, and
to bee very much offended and full of indignation against him that
shoulde attempt any such thing. For that can not be done, as not
without the great dishonour and dammage of the parties so knit together,
so also not without the great dishonour of GOD, whose
lawe and couenant is thereby violated.What mutuall loue ought to be betweene man and wife. On the other side, that mutuall
loue which ought to be betwixt the husband and the wife, doth
binde them to desire and to procure the honour and profite eache of
other, and to keepe backe all dishonour and hurt that may befall
them. Wherefore both of them haue iust cause to bee offended with
those that seeke to procure any blemish in this respect. The like may
bee saide of fathers, mothers, and children, and of all that haue anie
charge ouer others, or that are linked together by friendship. But
on the other side a man must beware, that he be not too suspicious, and
that hee carry not within himselfe matter of Iealousie, and so torment
himselfe and others without cause: as likewise hee must bee
very carefull, that hee giue no occasion of Iealousie to any other.
And thus you see howe there may be a good iealousie, notwithstanding
that in this case it be mingled with loue and anger. For Iealousie
causeth the party that loueth, to be angry with him by whome
that thing which hee doeth loue, receiueth any dishonour or detriment.
Therefore this anger commeth of loue, which inciteth him
to set himselfe against him that offendeth the thing beloued. So that
these affections are alwayes commendable, arising of this cause and
being ruled according to that Zeale and Iealousie, which the holy
Scripture attributeth vnto GOD in regarde of vs. For hee is called
a iealous GOD,Why Iealousie is attributed to God. not onely in regard of his honour and glory, which
hee will not haue giuen to any other besides himselfe, (and indeede
all the creatures ioyned together are not able to diminish or to adde
any thing thereunto whatsoeuer they doe) but also because hee loueth
vs, hee is iealous of our saluation, and desireth to reserue vs

wholly to himselfe, and to make vs partakers of his immortall blessednesse.
Therefore hee will not haue vs spoyle him of his glorie,
and forsake his seruice, in regarde of that hurt and dammage which
shoulde befall vs thereby. For hee beareth that affection towardes vs,
which a good Father doeth towardes his children, who loueth them
not for any profite comming to him thereby, but only for their owne
good, and because hee both will and ought to loue them. This loue
then, which God beareth vnto vs, causeth him to be iealous ouer vs,
when, through impietie and wickednesse of life, wee leaue him and
ioyne our selues vnto his aduersary the deuill. Whereupon hee doeth
not onely become angry, but is full of indignation also, both against
him and vs.What Indignation is. For indignation is a griefe wrought in vs, when wee see
some good thing befall to an vnworthy person, and him that is worthy,
depriued thereof. This affection therefore proceedeth from the
same roote from whence compassion springeth, namely, from the
iudgement of that which is good, and from the loue thereof. But the
diuersitie of both their obiects causeth them in some sort to be contrary
affections: forasmuch as indignation is bred in regarde of some
good that hapneth to one that is vnworthy of it, and compassion or
pity ariseth of some euill that befalleth or is procured to him that hath
not deserued it.From whence Zeale proceedeth. And of these two contrary affections mingled together,
a third affection is bred, which in holy Scripture is called Zeale
and Iealousie, being taken in the good part.
Hereof it is, that the loue and compassion which God hath of his
children, when he seeth them go about to bereaue themselues of that
good, which he wisheth them, and the indignation that hee hath in
regarde of the good, which hapneth to the wicked in the accomplishment
of their euill desires, (for to them euill is in steade of good) causeth
him to be mooued with iealousie and to bee auenged thereof. For
this cause the Prophet Ioel saieth,Ioel 2. 18. Then will the Lorde be iealous ouer his
land, and spare his people. And the Prophet Esay, hauing declared to Ezechias
the deliuerance of Ierusalem, and the succour which GOD
would send him against Senacherib,Isaiah 9. 7. saith, That the zeale of the Lorde of
Hostes will perfourme this. In like manner, when the true children and
seruants of God beholde a confusion in steade of that order which
the Lorde woulde haue obserued, and which hee hath prescribed vnto
his creatures, they are greatly mooued in regarde of that zeale,
which they beare as well towardes GOD, as towardes their neighbours.What Zeale is.
For Zeale is nothing else but an indignation conceiued in respect
of those things, that are vnwoorthily done against him that is
deare vnto vs, and whome wee loue. Therefore if wee loue GOD

and his Statutes, if wee loue the Common-wealth, our Princes,
our Parents, and all others whome wee ought to loue, wee will
bee iealous for them, and can not beholde without indignation aniething
done against them, that ought not to bee. This Indignation
and Iealousie will induce vs to set our selues earnestly against all
iniustice, and to ouerthrowe it with all our might. With this Iealousie
Saint Paul was affected towardes the Corinthians when hee
wrote thus vnto them,2. Cor. 11. 2. I am iealous ouer you, with godly iealousie: for
I haue prepared you for one husband, to present you as a pure virgine
vnto Christ.
This kind of Zeale is very requisite in all the true seruants of God,
but chiefely in them that haue any publike charge,A good lesson for Princes and Pastors. whether it be in
the Church or in the Common-wealth. For except they bee endued
with great Zeale towardes the glory of the Maiestie of GOD,
towardes iustice and all vertues, they will neuer haue that care
which they ought eyther of the honour and seruice of GOD, or of
publike benefite, or to reprooue, correct, and punish vices, or lastly,
to maintaine good Discipline, vpright iustice, and good conuersation,
in such sorte as becommeth them. For this cause hath GOD
giuen to the nature of man, this affection of Zeale and Indignation
for the communion that ought to bee in the societie of men, to
the ende there shoulde bee a right and indifferent distribution of all
good things, so that none of them shoulde light vpon the vnwoorthy
that vse them ill, but to such as deserue them and knowe howe
to vse them aright.
Nowe when these affections are thus ruled, they are very good
and profitable:The abuse of Indignation and of Zeale. but commonly they are abused vnto vice. For Indignation
is quickely bredde of Enuy, which being vniust, is also of a
corrupt and badde iudgement, so that an enuious bodie thinketh
that whatsoeuer good thing an other hath befallen vnto him, hee is
vnwoorthy of it. And so in like manner the Zeale that is without
true knowledge, bringeth foorth most pernicious effectes. For it
proceedeth from a loue which iudgeth not aright of the thing that
mooueth it, but esteemeth it to bee euill and woorthy of hatred,
whereas it is good and woorthy of loue. Of this Zeale Saint Paul
speaketh when hee sayeth of the Iewes,Rom. 10. 2. I beare them recorde, that
they haue the zeale of God, but not according to knowledge. For being
deceiued in their iudgement, and calling themselues defenders and
louers of the lawe of GOD, they persecuted the Gospel, (which
was the accomplishment of the Lawe) and also them that beleeued
in Iesus Christ: insomuch that their very Zeale was through their

ignoraunce turned into Crueltie and Tyranny, which is a very dangerous
zeale, and ought most carefully to bee shunned of vs, as
that whereinto the best minded men of all doe commonly fall, when
they are blinded with ignoraunce: as the Apostle Saint Paul propoundeth
himselfe in this case for an example before hee was conuerted.1. Timot. 1. 13.
For hee freely confesseth, that hee was a blasphemour, a
persecutour,Act. 26. 10, 11. and an oppressour, but hee did it ignorantly, and through
vnbeleefe.
There haue beene many such, not onely amongest the Iewes,
but euen among the Heathen. For albeit their Religion was altogether
superstitious and idolatrous, yet they alwayes maintained and
defended it with very great zeale, persecuting such as professed
Christianitie among them, and condemning them as the vilest and
most detestable men vpon the earth. But if the Lord be greatly offended
when as wee beare hatred and enuy against any body, wee cannot
doubt but that this doeth likewise displease him, when we commit
these things, being blinded with ignoraunce: and that hee is
carried with greater indignation against vs, when wee maliciously
cloake these vices with a false title of zeale, of religion, and of his glory,
thereby to reuenge our selues, and to exercise our cruelties much
more easily. But let vs nowe proceede to consider of other affections
of the heart, and first of Reuenge, Crueltie, and Rage. And
because Reuenge is appointed to punish offences, and euery vice findeth
a Iudge within it selfe, wee will speake also of the affection of
Shame which commonly followeth euery vile acte. It belongeth
therefore to thee, AMANA, to intreate of this matter.


Of Reuenge, Crueltie, and Rage, and what agreement there is among
them: what Shame and Blushing is, and why God hath
placed these affections in man: and of the good and euill that is
in them. Chap. 58.
AMANA. If euery one might be a Iudge in his owne cause, and execute
his own decrees, the malice of men doth declare sufficiently,
that there would be no iustice obserued in the world, but robbery publikely
put in practice, insomuch as the strongest would alwayes carry
away the spoile. For that blind loue, which euery one beareth towards
himselfe, causeth vs that we cannot see clearly either into our owne, or
or into other mens affaires, so that wee are alwayes more ready to
doe wrong to others, then to depart from anie thing of our owne.

Euen so, if wee might be suffered to reuenge those iniuries, which oftentimes
without cause wee suppose wee haue receiued, it is certaine
wee woulde obserue neither measure nor meane, but suffering our
selues to be guided by the passion of anger and wrath, wee would fall
into more then brutish crueltie and rage.Hebr. 10. 30. For as God hath reserued
vengeance to himselfe, and promised to recompense it, so no man
carrieth that minde to doe it iustly that is in him, neither indeede can
any: because it is the spirite of a man that offereth iniury to an other,
whereas the body is but the instrument of the minde, and as it were a
sworde vnto it, which the spirite manageth and causeth to cutte.
Whereupon it followeth, that the party offended can not reuenge
himselfe of his chiefest and greatest enemy. For God onely is able to
take vengeance of the soule,Matth. 10. 28. and to throwe it together with the body
into hell fire. Moreouer, when wee thinke to hurt the body of our enemy,
which is but the executioner of the euill disposition of his Spirite,
wee hurt our owne soule, making it guiltie of the iudgement
of God,Luke 21. 19. prouer. 20. 22. who forbiddeth vs all reuenge and commaundeth vs to possesse
our soules in patience, and neuer to requite euill for euill, but to
waite the Lordes leasure, being assuredly perswaded that he will saue
and deliuer vs.
Nowe looke what the affection receiueth and embraceth, the
same doeth it desire to returne and send backe againe where it did receiue
it, whether it be good or euill. Therefore as a good affection
both wisheth and doeth well to him of whome it receiueth good will
and beneficence: so a naughty affection desireth to returne euill receiued,
vnto him of whome it hath receiued it. For this cause when the
heart is wounded with griefe by any one, it desireth to returne the
like to him that hath hurt it, and to rebite him of whome it is bitten.
This affection is a desire of reuenge,What reuenge is. which being put in execution,
is reuenge accomplished: namely, when wee cause him that hath offended
vs to suffer that punishment, which in our iudgement he hath
deserued. This punishment is to damnifie him eyther in soule, or in
body, or in his goodes, yea, sometimes by all the meanes that may
bee. And when power to reuenge is wanting, there are some that
fall into outrageous speeches, into horrible and execrable cursings,
crying out for vengeance eyther at GODS hand, or of some other
that can perfourme it. Euery offence therefore that ingendereth hatred,
anger, enuy or indignation bringeth with it a desire of reuenge,
which is to render euill for euil, and to requite griefe receiued with the
like againe.
And when the offence is growen to that passe, that nothing can

asswage the extremitie thereof,What Rage is. nor stay it from breaking foorth into
reuenge and hurting by all the meanes that may bee, then is this
Reuenge turned into Rage. For a man in such a case is not much
vnlike to a madde dogge. For because Reuenge can not take that
effect which it woulde haue, it vexeth and closeth vp as it were the
hart, bringing great griefe and great torment to the whole body, so that
a man so affected is as if his heart and body were ready to burst asunder.
Nowe,Of Crueltie. when the heart is hardened with Reuenge, it is turned
into Crueltie, which is a priuation of pitie and compassion. For
when Offence and Anger are set on fire, they exclude all good
thoughtes out of the minde, and perswade to all kinde of Crueltie,
of which there are three degrees.Three sortes of Crueltie. For there are some that procure it,
who neuerthelesse woulde not execute it themselues. There are others
that execute it. Besides, there is a third kinde of Crueltie, when
wee faile in perfourming our duetie towardes them that are in necessitie,
whome wee both ought and might helpe and succour, whether
this come of euill will or through negligence. For thereby wee
shewe that wee are without pitie and compassion. Heereof followeth
inhumanitie, which is as if wee shoulde lay aside all humane affection
and bee transfourmed into brute beasts. Therefore wee may
well conclude, that all priuate Reuenge proceeding of enuy, or of
hatred, or of anger, is vicious and forbidden by God, who commaundeth
vs to render good for euill, and not euill for euill. For hee
hath ordained the meanes, whereby hee will haue vengeance execucuted
among men. Therefore hee hath appointed Magistrates to execute
it according to his Lawe, and following his ordinaunce, not
with any euill affection, but with iust indignation proceeding from
loue, and from true zeale of iustice. For to punish the wicked is a very
acceptable sacrifice,How magistrates ought to punish. so that there be no intermingling of our own
passions withall, and that wee exercise not our enuies, rancours, and
reuenges vnder the name and title of Iustice and of the glorie of God.
For if wee doe so, wee cease to exercise the punishments and corrections
of the Lorde, and put our owne in practice. Wee must therefore
followe his example. For hee suffereth not euill to goe vnpunished,
if men auoide not punishment by his grace and mercie, and by those
meanes which he hath appointed for the obtaining thereof. Therefore
it is often saide of the wicked in the Scripture, that GOD will
returne into their bosome the euill which they haue done: and his
children and seruantes desire him also to perfourme the same. But
when hee doeth it, hee is not mooued with any euill affection, but
onely with the loue hee beareth to iustice and vertue, and to his children,

and with pity and compassion towardes them in regarde of
the iniuries done vnto them.With what affection God punisheth offendors. And as himselfe commeth in iudgement
to take vengeance, so hee woulde haue them that supplie his
place among men, vnto whome hee hath committed the sworde for
the defence of the good and punishment of euill doers, to followe
his example. But whether they doe so or no, there is no sinne that
can auoide punishment, and that findeth not a Iudge euen in him
that committed it, to take vengeance thereof, by meanes of the affections,
which God hath placed in man to that ende. Among which
Shame occupieth a place, which we ought well to consider of.
Concerning this affection,What Shame is. there are some that are ashamed in
regarde of some feare of dishonour, of which there followeth no
dammage: or in respect of some griefe or perturbation of the soule,
arising of some thinges that seeme to bring some dishonour with
them. Forasmuch therefore as Shame is a feare of dishonour, it is of
great force in them that loue honour. For the more they loue it, the
more doe they feare dishonour, which is the contrary thereof, as a
very great euill. And for this cause there is in Shame not onely a feare
of villanie, but indignation also, after the committing of some fault.
For hee that is faulty, chafeth, and is angry with himselfe, because
of the dishonour hee receiueth through his offence. And this kind of
Shame is the simplest and lightest, and may be called Blushing, being
very common especially in children and virgins. Now for asmuch as
herein the spirits withdraw themselues vnto the hart, as vnto a center,
and presently as it were in the same instant returne backe againe, the
face is painted with a vermillion colour,Blushing commendable in some persons. which is very pleasant and
comely, namely, in that age and in those persons. Therefore is this colour
rightly called the colour of vertue. For God hath placed this affection
of shame in the nature of men, to the end it should be vnto them
as a bridle to stay them from committing vile things, and as a Iudge
and Reuenger to punish them after they haue done such things. Therfore
also there is yet another kind of shame more veheme^t,A second kind of Shame. which approcheth
neare vnto the affection of anger, and is mingled with wrath
and feare. For it is a motion of the heart, in which he that feeleth himselfe
guiltie of any dishonest crime or act, is angry with himselfe for
the same, and punisheth and reuengeth himselfe vpon himselfe: and
withall feareth the iudgements of others, and the rebuke and dishonour
that may come vnto him for it. For as we haue heard already, God
hath placed in the nature of man sundry affections, of which some
are sweete and pleasant, to the end they should be vnto vs as it were
spurres vnto vertue: others are bitter and vnpleasaunt, that they

might bee vnto vs in steade of punishmentes, and that the greefe
which they bring might teach vs to knowe more cleerely what diuersitie
there is betweene vertue and vice, and what difference wee
ought to put betweene good and euill deedes. Therefore there is not
a woorse thing in man, nor any disease more dangerous to the soule
then impudencie, which is wholly contrarie to Shame and Blushing.
For whosoeuer is once past all Shame,Impudencie a very dangerous disease. hee hath no care at all of his
honour, much lesse of the honour of GOD. Heereof it is that the
holie Ghost by the Prophetes doeth greatly accuse the impudencie
of the wicked, saying vnto them by way of reproch, that they had
whoores foreheads,Ierem. 3. 3. and woulde not bee ashamed: that they were
impudent children and stiffe hearted,Ezech. 2. 4. and 3. 7. and that they did glorie in their
wickednesse after they had done euill, in steade of being ashamed
and amending their faults. Nowe whereas wee sayde, that Shame
painteth the face with a vermilian colour,The cause of rednesse in the face in blushing. wee are to knowe, that
the passions and affections of the soule breede great change in our
bodies, as they that mooue the spirits and the naturall heat, by opening
and shutting vp of the heart: whereby the spirits are eyther inlarged
or restrained.
Thus it commeth to passe, that the colour of the face is changed,
it being a propertie of the heart to set in it certaine markes
and signes of the affections that are in it, as wee haue already heard.
Therefore doeth Shame paint the cheekes with rednesse, because the
danger that springeth of feare is of that nature, that the heart standeth
in neede of helpe to repell and driue it away, namely, of that heate
that retireth backe vnto it. Nowe forasmuch as there is perturbation
in Shame, by reason of the opinion and feare of dishonour and
blame, heate is drawen vp to the head, and so from thence it is dispersed
ouer the face. And although Shame doeth not trouble the
heart and minde so much as feare doeth, yet doeth it confound the
head, and causeth it oftentimes to forget what it thought and was
purposed to haue done. As wee see it sometimes in very wise and
skilfull men, when they are to speake or to doe something before
personages or companies whome they reuerence. And this is incident
for the most part to such as are most modest, and to them that
presume least of themselues, who indeede can not heare their owne
praises without shame and blushing,A cause of feare in men. such is their nature and modestie:
or else it is because their hearts are very litle, which maketh them
also fearefull.
Nowe although too much shamefastnesse, when it is causelesse, is
woorthy of blame, because it often keepeth them that are ouertaken

therwith from doing many good things, and from imploying the giftes
which they haue receiued of God as it becommeth them: yet is it more
praise-woorthy then impudency, which as it maketh men altogether
shameles and brasenfaced, so it vsually accompanieth proud and arrogant
persons. For it is cleane contrary to modesty. Seeing therfore we learn,
that shame is a feare of dishonour and blame, and of doing that that
might procure it, we must take good heed that we iudge aright of that
which is to bee accounted vile and dishonest, and of that which may
bring vnto vs honour or dishonour, praise or dispraise. For our nature
being ful of darknes through sinne that raigneth in it, our natural iudgment
is not so intire and vpright as it ought to be, to iudge well either
of that which is truely honest, and which bringeth with it honour and
commendation, or otherwise of the contrary vnto it. Whereupon it
commeth to passe, that we oftentimes take one for another, and so light
vpon that, which we least sought for or desired. Therfore let vs know
and learne this, that there is nothing honest but vertue, nor any thing
dishonest but vice: and that as nothing is more beautifull and of greater
renowme then vertue, so nothing is more ilfauoured, dishonourable
and infamous then vice. But forasmuch as there is great diuersitie
of opinions, what is to be accounted honest and dishonest, what vertue,
what vice, what praise what dispraise, let vs learne to frame our
iudgement out of the law and word of God,The rule of all true iudgement. which is the rule of all iustice
and trueth. Otherwise it will come to passe, that we shalbe oftener
ashamed of well doing then of euill doing, and of vertue then of
vice: which were a vile shame, and such a one as that we ought to be
greatly ashamed thereof. For in well doing we must neuer be afraide
of that shame,Shame of well doing. which the wicked think to bring vpon vs, but rather account
it honourable and glorious. Yea themselues shall bee ashamed
and confounded when their vices and vile actions shalbe discouered
by our honestie and vertue: whereas if we ioyne with them, we shall
cause them to bee voyde of shame when they doe ill, yea, they will
boast and vaunt of it before vs. But enough of this matter. Now forasmuch
as arrogant and proude persons are farthest off from vsing aright
any of those affections of the heart, of which wee haue hitherto
discoursed, especially of shame, I am of opinion that we are to looke
into the nature and effects of the passion of pride. Therefore, ARAM,
this shal be the subiect of thy discourse.



Of Pride, with the consideration thereof as well in nature entire, as corrupted:
of the originall thereof, and of such as are most inclined therevnto:
what vices accompanie it, how great a poison it is, and what remedie
there is for it. Chap. 59.
ARAM. There is nothing more easie then for a man to deceiue
himselfe. For looke what a man earnestly desireth, hee supposeth
it is alreadie as it were come to passe, or at least hee promiseth to
himselfe that he shal easily obtaine it. But oftentimes things fall out
otherwise then men looke or hope for.The cause why men deceiue themselues. Now the chiefe cause of their
errour heerein is that presumption, which commonly they haue of
their owne wisedome and vertue, whereby they are lift vp with vaine
confidence and puffed vp with pride. For when men are caried away
with an inordinate and blinde loue of themselues, they are soone perswaded
that there is nothing in them worthy to be despised, yea they
thinke that their ignorance is wisedome: insomuch that knowing nothing,
they suppose they know all things, and hauing no dexteritie to
performe one commendable work, they presume very inconsideratly
to set their hand to euery great matter. But the more care and diligence
they bestow, being led with a desire to shew great skil and thinking to
winne honour and renowne, so much the more they discouer their ignorance
and blockishnes, purchasing to themselues shame and infamie.
Now the trueth of God teacheth vs to consider otherwise of our
selues, namely, that we want both sound vnderstanding, and strength
also to accomplish any good thing. Which knowledge ought to keep
vs backe from all presumption, and ouerweening of our owne wisedome
and strength, and take from vs all matter of pride and glorie,
to leade vs vnto modestie and humilitie. This rule wee ought to
follow if we will attaine to the white of good iudgement and well
doing.
Now as shame and confusion is bredde of some vile and dishonest
fact,What pride is. as we haue heard, so vice fetcheth his beginning from pride. I call
pride a puffing vp of the soule and heart, proceeding from the opinion
of some excellent good thing in vs more then is in others, whereby
a man is in estimation and honour, whether this good thing be present,
past, or to come. But we are to consider of two fountains and first
causes of this inflation and affection of the heart, namely of one that
proceedeth from nature pure and intire, and of another that commeth
from nature as it is corrupted.Two kindes of pride. So that we may boldly say, that there is
a kind of pride which is no vice but a vertue, or at leastwise the seede

of vertue. For there was no vicious or euill thing in the first nature as
it was created of God, but euery thing in it was vertuous, and the seed
of vertue, as we haue alreadie shewed in the former discourses alreadie
made by vs. Wherefore that naturall pride of man, beeing such as
hee should haue beene if hee had continued in his first nature, woulde
bee an excellent vertue, and as it were the mother of all the rest,
whereas nowe it is the most vgly and monstrous vice that can bee
founde in the whole nature of man corrupted, by meanes of which
it is become the father of all vices and sinnes. For seeing GOD
hath done this honour to man aboue all other bodily creatures, as
to create him in regarde of his soule, of a celestiall and diuine nature
(for which cause the verie Heathen affirme that mankinde is
of the linage and parentage of God) hee woulde not haue him ignoraunt
of the excellencie of his beeing, and of those great and
woonderfull benefites, which hee hath receiued of him in his creation,
and of which hee hath made him partaker chiefely for three
causes.Three causes why God created man so excellent. The first, to this ende that knowing what grace and honour
God his Creatour hath bestowed vpon him, hee might be moued
continually to acknowledge and honour him as it becommeth
him. The second, to the ende that knowing the excellencie of his
nature, and of the stocke from whence hee came, hee shoulde loue
himselfe in God his Creator, and in him thinke himselfe woorthie of
true goodes, euen of the greatest and most excellent that may bee,
namely of heauenly and eternall goodes: and that hee shoulde
knowe that hee was created for them, and that through the knowledge
and consideration thereof he might be prouoked to wish for and
to desire them with great courage. The thirde, that by this meanes
hee might feare to degenerate from so high and noble a linage as
that is from whence hee is descended, and to fall from so high a degree
of honour and dignitie into dishonour and shame, and to loose
those excellent goodes whereunto hee was allotted, if hee committed
any thing vnbeseeming so noble and so excellent a nature as was
the nature of God according to the image of which hee was creted.Of a good kind of pride.
This then is that holie pride, which ought naturally to remaine
in man, and whereby hee might well haue desired to bee
like vnto GOD, especially in goodnesse, and that by those
onelie meanes by which the Lorde woulde haue him bee brought
vnto this similitude, and which himselfe had taught him: namely
obedience, and that so farre as was agreeable and meete for
his nature. But our first parentes giuing eare to him, who first
degenerated from this holie pride, vnder colour of beeyng equall

not to the goodnes but to the power and greatnes of God, were soon
perswaded to beleeue the promise, which this lyar had made vnto
them of a farre greater and more excellent estate, then was that wherin
God had created them: insomuch as their humilitie and obedience
whereby they were vnited and conioyned in great glory with God,
was turned into arrogancie and disobedience. Whereupon doubting
of the trueth of Gods worde, they hearkened to the Diuels counsel,
propounded vnto themselues the selfe same meanes and degrees to
make themselues equall with God their Creator, which this wretch
and his angels had taken before, and whereby he fell from the highest
estate of glorie to the most bottomlesse gulfe of miserie. And this
is that bastardly and earthly pride that is entred into mans nature, of
which it is saide,Ecclus. 10. 14, 19. That pride is the originall of sinne, and hee that hath it
shall powre out abomination, till at last he be ouerthrowen. And a litle after:
Pride was not created in men, neither wrath in the generation of women.
And indeede God hath made man of a milde and communicable
nature, apt to societie, and to liue with companie not solitarily as
sauage beastes vse to doe.Of the euil pride. Therefore there is nothing more contrarie
to his nature, and to that ende for which he was created, then this vicious
pride, whereby he is so puffed vp and swelleth in such sort, as if
he were of some other nature and condition then humane, and as
though he meant to liue in some other estate and degree then of a man.
By which doing hee degenerateth from that first nature in which hee
was created:Ecclus. 10. 7. whereupon Ecclesiasticus concludeth, That pride is hatefull
before God and man. Now the more arrogant and proude a man is,
the more ignoraunt may he bee saide to be of true goods, and such as
are eternall; and whereas he should wish for and long after these, his
whole affection is turned to the desire of worldly glory and of earthly
things. Which desire proceedeth from that inconsiderate loue that euery
one beareth towards himselfe, which keepeth a man from the
knowledge of himselfe. For if be knew himselfe well, he might see
in himselfe nothing but such matter as shoulde cause him to abase and
to humble himselfe, not to be puffed vp and to presume of himselfe in
any respect.Who are most giuen to pride. Hereupon it followeth, that they are naturally most enclined
to pride, which are most ignorant, most rude, most abiect, most inconsiderate,
most hastie and headstrong. For they that are skilfull and
wise, sharpe witted, moderate and well stayed, who looke into and
take a viewe of themselues, and know well what is within them, such
men vnderstand and are able to iudge very well, that there is nothing
in man that should cause him either to swell or to be blowne vp with
pride. Therefore we commonly see, that they which haue most excellent

vertues in them, that haue greatest gifts of God, and could finde
in themselues most matter of pride, are notwithstanding most modest
and most humble. And contrariwise the greatest blockheads, and
such as are most vnapt to euery good thing, most destitute of all good
and excellent giftes of nature, are for the most part the loftiest and most
proude: so that a man may well say of them that they are proude pesants,
especially when they are blowne vp like bladders with some
winde of prosperity, when their noses are perfumed, or their eies dimmed
with some smoake of honours, or of worldly wealth. Many other
causes of pride might be noted in the nature of man.Causes of pride. For those that are
of a hote and burning nature, as cholericke persons are more subiect
to this vice then many others, and that chiefly for two reasons. For
holding of the nature of fire, which alwayes ascendeth vpwarde, if
they followe their naturall inclination, they will take also of the nature
thereof, aspiring continually vnto high matters. And as the fire
is light, quicke and violent, so will their iudgement and all their affections
be, which will carie them away headlong and greatly trouble
them. It is very requisite therefore, that water should be cast vpon this
fire.What vices follow pride. Now as pride breedeth arrogancie, so enuie, ill will, anger, rancour,
and desire of reuenge doe followe and accompanie it, together
with impatience, indignation, selfe-will, obstinacie, and other such
like vices. For a proude person waxeth enuious at the good of another,
as if he thought himselfe only worthie, or as if hee accounted all
greatnesse in others a hinderance to his owne. And because hee supposeth
that he is neuer so well esteemed of as he deserueth, he waxeth
very angry, being desirous to reuenge himselfe if there be any meanes.
Besides, to the end he might alwayes seeme to be better then others,
he neuer ceasseth boasting and bragging. For pride being nothing els
but winde that puffeth vp the heart (euen as fire causeth water to
swell and to send forth great waumes) if the proude man should not
finde some issue for this winde, hee woulde burst asunder. Therefore
he speaketh bigge, he chideth and threatneth, thundreth and lighteneth,
and waxeth so insolent, that both for his wordes and deedes hee
becommeth vntolerable vnto all. And because he cannot giue place to
any, if he stand in co^tention for any thing, he holdeth his opinion with
inuincible obstinacy: insomuch that no authority whatsoeuer, no truth
how apparantly soeuer it be laid before him, no benefit or profit shalbe
able to turne him from that which he hath once imagined. For his
desire to be preferred before all, and in all matters is so hote and feruent,
that he feareth nothing more then to be accounted inferiour in
any one matter to any other body whosoeuer he be. And this causeth

him also to bee vnteachable and vnapt to learne. For by reason of
his pride, he is ashamed to learne. Besides, the ambition and insatiable
desire of glorie that is in him, causeth him that hee cannot suffer
any admonition, but continueth resolute in that which he had once
taken hold of. And he is so farre from suffring patiently, that any man
should condemne him, or any word or deede of his, that hee will haue
his vices taken for vertues, and looketh to bee commended for them.
Yea some are so passionate, and caried away with so great impatience
and furious indignation, that they storme and rage not onely against
men,Pride lifteth men against God. but also against God, euen so farre foorth as to despite and blaspheme
him openly. For the ignorance and inconsideratenes that engendreth
pride is so blockish and rash, that it giueth vs no leisure to consider
of and to iudge what good things are in vs, neither from whence
they come, or who it is that giueth them, or in what manner, or for
what reason. To be short, God commeth not at all into our thought,
neither doe wee attribute anything vnto any other besides our selues.
And although many proude persons dissemble these damnable affections,
and dare not oftentimes lay their heartes so open, but rather
thinke there is no such matter in them, neuerthelesse it is so in trueth
and in effect, so that all men woulde iudge them to bee such, if they
were able to see and knowe as God seeth and knoweth. Moreouer,
we are to note, that pride is such a vice, that it is a harder matter for
a man to bee at peace and concord therewith, then with any other
whatsoeuer.Prou. 13. 10. Whereupon Salomon saieth, That onely by pride doeth
man make contention. Yea there is alwayes strife and dissention amongest
the proude themselues, when euerie one desireth to bee
preferred one before another, and cannot. As for humbling and abasing
themselues, there is no talke of that, vnlesse they drawe a little
backewarde that they may the better leape forwarde, and debase
themselues, that they may ascende vp higher. And as for friendship,
a proude man hath neuer any in him that is true and sounde, but
onely that which is counterfeite and fayned, towardes them that
submit themselues vnto him through flatterie.Pride bred of vertue. But that which is
most dangerous in pride, is when it is bredde of humilitie, of modestie,
and of vertue. For there are manie, who considering their
owne modestie and other vertues, and condemning pride and other
vices, are delighted therewith after an insolent manner, and
are puffed vp with pride thereby. Whereby wee see what windings
and slipperie turnings are in that olde serpent the Father of pride,
into howe manie fashions hee changeth himselfe, and in what
manner hee hath infected and poysoned our heart. For hee hath

brought it to this passe,A similitude. that as venimous beastes turne all they eate
howe good soeuer it bee into venime, so the proude man turneth
all his thoughtes, wordes and deedes into pride. For hee draweth
and referreth euery thing to his owne honour and glorie: and
therefore Saint Chrysostome verie aptly compareth Vaine-glorie to
a Mothe. For as the mothe marreth and consumeth that cloth
in which it is bredde, so vaineglorie sometime springeth of vertue,
and afterwarde corrupteth it. For there is no vertue so excellent,
which is not turned into vice and made abominable before GOD,
so soone as it is mingled therewith.
Seeing then pride is such an horrible monster, as that which
breedeth and bringeth foorth so manie other monsters, wee ought
to seeke diligently after all remedies for it that may possibly bee
had, whereby it may bee tamed and kept vnder, and so our soules
cured of such a dangerous disease and plague. Nowe forasmuch
as it proceedeth of ignoraunce and of inconsideratenesse, and
through the want of the due knowledge of God and of our selues,
wee must redresse this euill by the vertues contrarie to these vices,A remedy against pride.
namely by the true knowledge of God, of his worde and of our
selues. Which wee shall obtaine if hee deale so gratiously with vs
as to fill vs with his holie spirite, and to giue vs an humble heart,
that renouncing all pride and all arrogancie, wee may learne to
walke in his feare, and in all obedience to his holie will, so that wee
wholly consecrate our selues vnto him both in bodie, soule, and spirite,
in will, heart and all our affections. Nowe hauing spoken sufficiently
of that matter into which wee fell whilest wee handeled the second
bellie, which God hath placed in man for the lodging of the vital
partes, and namely of the heart, which is the seate of the affections,
it remaineth, that we consider of the third beilie, which is the seate of
the naturall powers and vertues of the soule: of which thou shalt beginne
nowe to discourse, ACHITOB.


Of the naturall powers of the soule, and what sundrie vertues they
haue in the nourishment of the bodie: of their order and offices: of
their agreement and necessarie vse: where the Vegetatiue soule is
placed in the bodie, and what Vertue it hath to augment the same.
Chap. 60.
ACHIT. The dispositio^ and placing of ye principal parts of our body,
and of yt noblest me^bers therof, is a goodly schole, wherin we may

learne, how much more carefull wee ought to be of heauen then of
the earth, and of the spirite then of the bodie. We haue already heard,
how the internall partes of man were deuided into three bellies and
lodgings, of which the two former, namely the braine and the heart,
together with the vertues, offices and works of the soule in them, haue
beene declared vnto vs. It remaineth that we consider of the last lodging
of the bodie, which properly beareth the name of belly, and which
is the seate of these naturall powers and vertues of the soule, which we
call Vegetatiue and nourishing,Three kindes of the Vegetatiue facultie in the soule. and is diuided into three kinds, namely,
into the vertue of nourishing, of augmenting or growing, and of
engendring. Nowe when we see this order and disposition in our nature,A profitable meditation.
we ought seriously to thinke, that seeing God hath placed the
heart betweene the head and the belly, the Vitall vertue of the soule
betweene the Animal and Nutritiue, and the will betweene the vnderstanding
and the most sensuall part in vs, therefore the heart, affections,
and will ought to looke alwayes on high, and not downward,
to the ende they should ioyne to the most noble, celestiall and diuine
part, and not to that which is most base, sensual, and earthly. Whereunto
that also ought to induce and leade vs, which we learned before
of the agreement between the highest and middlemost of these principal
and more noble parts of the body, vnto which this last is inferiour
in all kinde of excellencie, beautie, and dignitie.
This belly of which wee are nowe to discourse,Of the third and last belly of the body. containeth all the
members and instruments that serue for nourishment and generation:
whereupon it is termed the Kitchin and Nurserie of the body, and the
seminary and welspring of mankinde. But before we enter into a particular
consideration of these members and instrumentes, wee are to
looke into the naturall powers of the Vegetatiue soule that is in them.
And first we will note that which we spake of elsewhere,The office of heate in man. of the office
of heate and moysture in the nature of the bodie, that as moysture
keepeth heate within it, so heate drinketh and soaketh vp moysture
as much as it may, digesting and dispelling it by the vertue and action
of it owne nature. Now whilest this moysture is thus digested by the
heate, there is a separation made of that which is profitable in the bodie,
from that which is superfluous, and consequently, hurtfull to the
bodie. That which is profitable for it, is the iuyce and humour that agreeth
with it, in regarde of the similitude and likenesse that is betweene
them. Whereupon it followeth, that all moysture that is greatly
diuerse or contrary to the body, is hurtfull for it, as also all drye
matter, which likewise hurteth the health and life thereof. So that
this vertue of the soule, which we call naturall, or otherwise Vegetatiue,

and which comprehendeth vnder it the vertue of nourishing,The power, order and office of the Vegetatiue soule.
of augmenting and of engendring (euery of which hauing sixe others
tending all to one ende as we heard alreadie) this vertue I say, causeth
that which is profitable for the nourishment of the bodie, first to
bee distributed vnto the members, and then to bee turned into the
bodily substance of the liuing creature, because that vertue and power
of the soule doeth imbrace and receiue it, acknowledging it alreadie
to bee a part of the bodie. Therefore the vertue of drawing
nourishment that is in the soule, hath for an helper the vertue of retaining
and keeping, vntill there bee a conuenient change thereof
made by the facultie, and power of digesting, and as it were dressing
of it. For otherwise the attractiue and retentiue power, were
to small purpose. Now when the meate is digested, so much of it as is
pure must bee separated from that which is impure, by the vertue of
purging: and that which is impure, must bee deliuered ouer to the
expulsiue vertue to bee cast out, and the rest which is pure to the vertue
of distributing, after which the vertue of incorporating executeth
his office and duetie.
Thus you see howe all these particular vertues, seruing to the generall
vertue of nourishing, doe their dueties one after another according
to that order, which nature hath assigned them. For except
this agreement and order were kept, there woulde bee great confusion,
and the bodie coulde not receiue his due nourishment. Therefore
doeth one of them attende vpon and helpe another, yea all of
them tende to one and the same ende by diuers meanes. For after
the meate is receiued, attracted and retained, it must bee digested
before it bee separated; so that the expulsiue vertue is to attende vpon
this separation and distinction. Neither can the attractiue or
drawing vertue doe his office well, vnlesse the bodie bee first emptie:
neither the vertue of concocting or preparing, if the bodie bee
not purged of the meate receiued before. And if any of these vertues
doeth not his duetie, the residue are made more dull, slowe and
languishing. For there is such agreement betwixt them, and they
are by such equal proportion tempered throughout the whole bodie,
that nothing can befall any one of them, but the residue will feele it.
Neither can that which is wanting in one bee supplied by an other.
For GOD hauing assigned to euerie one his proper office,
they deale not one in anothers affaires, but euery one abideth in his
owne office, and goeth not beyonde his appoynted boundes and limites:A similitude taken from (...).
as the like is to bee seene in the printing house and amongest
them that stampe money. For if the Compositor faile in the (...)

of his letters, the Printer that putteth ynke vpon the fourmes, doeth
not correct the faultes of the Compositor. And if the Printer doeth
not distribute his ynke well, hee that draweth the sheetes from the
presse correcteth not his fault. For euery one hath his office apart,
with which onely hee medleth. So likewise in Coyne, if hee that cutteth
prepareth and fineth the mettall faile in his duetie, hee that cutteth
it in pieces will correct nothing, but diuideth it as it is deliuered to
him. Then hee that maketh it flatte, that it may bee fitte for him
that stampeth it, doeth nothing but that which is committed to his
charge: and if hee that stampeth it, findeth it not so flat or so round,
as it ought to be, yet doeth hee nothing but marke it, and so leaueth
it as he found it.
Moreouer,A good lesson for euery one. wee are to note well, howe God giueth vs euen in
our nature, a goodlie instruction concerning that order and concord
that ought to bee amongest vs all, by doing euery one his duetie, and
helping eche other so farre as wee may. For wee may learne three
principall poyntes in that order, which God hath set betweene the
vertues of the Vegetatiue soule for the nourishing of the bodie,
which serue greatly for the preseruation of humane societie, First,
howe euerie one ought to behaue himselfe in his office, and not
leaue others to performe that woorke which is enioyned him. Secondly,
howe euerie one of vs ought to keepe his ranke and order,
not making ouer much haste nor beeing too slacke, and without anie
confusion of offices, or vsurping any thing of that which belongeth
to others. Thirdly, the consideration of those inconueniences
which may befall euery common-wealth and societie of men, if
this order bee not well kept and obserued. For the like will happen
vnto it, that doeth to a bodie, which is not nourished as it ought
to bee, and in which the naturall vertues doe not their duetie, as I
haue declared. For from thence proceedeth all the confusion that
is in the life of man, and all those miseries which wee dayly see
therein.
Concerning the seates of these vertues of the nourishing soule
mentioned by vs,Of the seates of the naturall vertues. wee are to knowe, that although they bee greater
and more apparant in some partes then in others, yet they are
spredde throughout the whole bodie, but after a diuerse manner. For
in perfect liuing creatures, the concoction of the meate is first made
in the stomacke, that so it may bee prepared for the liuer; the seconde
is made in the liuer, that it may bee turned into blood: the
thirde is in all the members, that it may bee changed into their
substance. So that there is no ende or stay in the bodie of concocting,

and consequently of purging the meate, and of casting out
that which is superfluous. For the heate doeth continually warme,
and as it were seethe the moisture: neither is there any meate so pure,
which hath not alwayes some excrements and superfluities, that are
to be seperate and eiected.
Heereof it is, that the whole body of liuing creatures is as it were
bored through, and hath diuers pipes to the ende there might be more
open passages for the auoyding of these excrements according to that
purging which is done day and night by the partes appointed therevnto,How excrements are voyded.
as wee haue alreadie touched it, speaking of those members
whereby such purging is performed after a diuers manner, especially
when wee spake of the braine. Nowe besides that purging which is
vnder the armepittes and in the groyne, we see howe the thinnest excrements
voyde at euery part of the bodie, as wee may iudge by that
filth which daily is seene in the head, handes, feete and in all the rest of
the body. For wee cannot busie our selues so much in washing and
cleansing all the partes and members of the bodie, but still wee may
finde somewhat to wash and to make cleane. Therefore wee stande
in neede of daily nourishment, that whatsoeuer diminisheth continually
from vs, may from time to time bee restored and made good againe.
But this vertue of nourishing, is the first and simplest of all the
naturall vertues of the Vegetatiue soule. For there are two others necessary
for the life and preseruation of liuing creatures, of which we
haue already spoken, namely the power of augmenting, and that
other of engendring.Of the growing of bodies. So that liuing creatures are not onely nourished
by that foode which they receiue, but they growe bigger and
begette their like. For there is no liuing creature that hath a bodie,
but it groweth vp vntill it come to a certaine greatnesse and
measure. For this cause the vertue of augmenting and growing
was added to the nourishing vertue: and the vertue of engendering
to them both,Wherein the natural vertues differ ech from other. but so as they differ in manie poyntes. For
first, although the vertues of nourishing and of augmenting agree
in this, that they are both giuen to euerie liuing creature,
yet they differ heerein, that the vertue of nourishing continueth
alwayes so long as the creature liueth, euen from the beginning
of it vnto the end. But the vertue of growing greater, although it beginne
with the other, yet hath it a set time limited, wherein it staieth:
and as before the creature waxed bigger and increased in greatnesse
and vigour, so after it commeth to the appoynted time, it beginneth
to fall and to diminish, and as it were to retire backe, and
to restrayne it selfe. And as for the vertue of engendering, it

differeth from both the other, first in that it is not giuen so generally
to all liuing creatures as they are, and then in that it beginneth not so
soone. For it commeth then when the liuing creature through nourishment
and growth, hath attayned to those vertues that are necessary
for generation.
Besides, it hath this common with the vertue of augmentation, that
it hath certaine limites and bounds, vnto which after it is once come,
it weakeneth and in the ende decayeth vtterly. Wherein it differeth
from the nourishing vertue. Nowe the vertue of growing greater
hath as many other particular vertues vnder it for the execution of
it owne office, as the vertue of nourishing hath according as
was touched before. Whereby wee learne, that bodies growe
not greater, neither augment by the heaping vp of much matter
outwardely applied, as when a house is set vp, wee see timber
ioyned to timber, and stone to stone in the building of it, but
this is done by the same hidden and secrete arte and cunning in
nature, whereby wee are nourished. For in this poynt there is
no difference betweene the vertue of nourishing, and that of augmenting,
but onelie heerein that in nourishment the meate is turned
into the substance of the bodie,How meate nourisheth the body. and in augmenting the foode
beeing thus turned, doeth from within stretch foorth the quantitie
of the bodie outwardly. And so this vertue of augmenting dependeth
of the nourishing vertue. For meate nourisheth as it is a substance
with qualities meete for nourishment, and augmenteth by
reason of the quantitie it hath. For this cause hath God created the
bodies of liuing creatures with such a substance, that as they haue
sundrie passages and holes in them like to sponges, to the ende to
purge by them, so he would that the substance they receiue by their
foode might passe by the same holes, that they might augment and
grow greater. So that all of them haue their pores and litle holes albeit
they appeare not to the eye, whereby nourishment entreth and extendeth
it selfe in greatnesse, length, and thicknesse. The consideration
hereof hath caused some skilfull men,How mettals and stones growe. to place mettals and stones
in the ranke of liuing creatures, because they growe in the earth, as
the bodies of plants and liuing creatures doe. Neither is their opinion
without some shewe of reason. For wee knowe that they grow and
increase and that inwardly: which seemeth not to bee done without
drawing vnto themselues some inward nourishment, as liuing creatures
vse to doe. Besides they haue also their pores and passages to
stretch foor^h and augment themselues by. Notwithstanding all this
there is greater reason to place them in the ranke of those natures and

creatures, which augment and grow greater by adding and ioyning
of matter vnto them, as wee see fountaines and riuers to increase:
and so likewise fire. Which albeit it seemeth to be nourished and augmented
with that matter which is put vnto it, yet is it not nourished
as liuing creatures are by meanes of that foode which they receiue.
For they haue their boundes of growing set them which they cannot
passe, as wee see the like also in plantes: but fire hath no limites,
as that which alwayes increaseth, as long as it findeth any matter to
burne.
Whereby we may conclude, that naturall heate in man or in other
liuing creatures, is not the cause of their nourishing and growth, but
onely the instrument;The true cause or nourishing in creatures. and that the true cause, in regarde of second
causes, is in the soule next after God, who is the first cause of all
things, yea the cause of causes. Therefore it is hee that hath alotted
out to euerie man the terme first of his life and growth, and
then of his declining and death: so that according as hee will eyther
prolong or shorten our life, and cause vs to encrease or diminish,
so hee disposeth the seconde causes, and those meanes whereby
hee will bring it to passe. Nowe wee must consider what instrumentes
the soule vseth to execute in the bodie of man, her naturall
woorkes of nourishing and augmenting it, (of which wee haue nowe
spoken) and after what manner shee vseth them. First then wee will
looke into the ventricle and stomacke, and see what figure, what Orifices
and filaments it hath. This matter then, ASER, belongeth to
thee to intreate of.


What instrumentes the Soule vseth in the bodie about the naturall
woorke of nourishing and augmenting: of the Ventricle or stomacke,
and of the figure, Orifices, and Filaments it hath: of the coates
of the stomacke, and of what substance and nature it is: of the
causes of hunger, and of appetite: of the inferiour Orifice.
Chap. 61.
ASER. Wee shoulde bee very happie if wee knewe howe to followe
that order in all our doings, which God hath set downe in
all his woorkes, and whereof he giueth nature vnto vs for a Mistresse.
But if the simplicitie of our vnderstanding bee not able to attaine to
so high wisedome, at the least we may knowe howe farre short euery
one of vs commeth of our duetie, and from whence proceedeth all
the confusion that is in the life of man, and all those miseries which
wee commonly beholde. On the other side, nothing coulde hinder vs

were it not a voluntarie and malicious ignorance, in that wee consider
not, what a marueilous and excellent Woorkemaster, God the
Creator sheweth himselfe to bee, in this part of the soule whereof
our present discourses are, and in that order, which hee hath
set therein, and in those vertues which hee hath bestowed vpon
it. For his woorke is so excellent, and woorthie of so great admiration,
that no wisedome or power whatsoeuer is able so much as to
imitate it. Wherefore wee are to account it a very great and noble
blessing, to haue onely some knowledge of it, and to bee able to
comprehende some thing thereof by our vnderstanding. For there
will be alwayes enough whereat to marueile greatly, and namely in
the consideration of those instruments, which the soule vseth in the
nourishment and growth of bodies, as we shall know in the sequele
of our discourses.
Therefore as heeretofore wee haue handled and spoken of the
diuers powers of the soule, and of those instruments it hath in regarde
of the Animal and Vital partes, as of the braine, heart, head,
and other externall members of the bodie, so nowe wee are to consider
of the internall instruments, which serue the naturall powers
of the soule.The instruments of the naturall powers of the soule. And first, it hath the liquors and humours of the bodie
tempered together by a certaine Lawe and reason of the Creator
that created them. Secondly, the other instruments of the soule,
are those members both externall and internall, which are framed and
haue their seuerall proportion, euery one as neede requireth, for the
office assigned vnto them by God their Creator. For before the soule
bee clothed with the bodie, these instrumentes are fashioned and
made fitte for it by nature in those things wherein it coulde doe nothing
of it selfe. For the soule cannot create her bodie. But after
that God hath created the bodie for it, and that by his appoyntment
nature hath disposed and fitted the same for the soule, so farre foorth
as is requisite, before it can shewe what vertue it hath, and settle
it selfe to worke in the bodie, then is shee left to doe that which
shee is able to performe by the powers of her presence, and to exercise
her selfe therein, beginning alwayes at the least and basest
of her offices, before shee apply her selfe to the chiefest, by
displaying her principall powers. For whilest the childe is in his
mothers bellie, the soule practiseth vpon it her Vegetatiue and
nourishing vertue by which it is nourished and groweth in greatnesse,How the soule vseth the instruments of ye body.
as wee see the like in plantes. And when it is borne, it receiueth
besides from the soule the power of moouing and of sence,
as we see beastes haue: and last of all by litle and litle the soule displayeth

her other principall vertues. But to speake of our matter
subiect, and to handle particularly those instrumentes of the
soule, which shee vseth in the nourishing and augmenting of the
bodie, wee will beginne at the Ventricle, commonly called the stomacke.
Nowe because this name is vsed diuersly,Of the Ventricle and stomack^ wee are to note, that
the Physicions, who distinguish the partes of the bodie more exactly
and properly, apply this name of stomacke more specially to
the vpper mouth of it, and call the whole by the name of Ventricle,
whereof wee will speake anon. Oftentimes also they take
the stomacke for the whole passage and pype, called Oesophage or
the throate: but commonly the whole Ventricle is called by that
name. Therefore I will vse it indifferently, thereby to apply my
selfe the better to the vsuall manner of speaking. Wee are to
knowe then first of all, that amongest all the members seruing to
nourishment, GOD hath appoynted this to bee the first, as that
which receiueth the meate and drinke sent vnto it by the throate.
And to the ende wee may the better knowe the prouidence of
God, in the offices and commodities of this member, I will first
speake somewhat of the figure and forme thereof, then of the situation
of it,Of the figure of the stomacke. and last of all, of the substaunce of it. The figure of
it is rounde and long much like to a bagge-pipe, as that which is
beeing somewhat larger at the bottome, and arising vpwarde towardes
the left side, groweth narrower by litle and litle. For seeing
it was to occupie the whole pace that is betwixt the liuer and the
spleene, it was requisite that it shoulde bee long, to the ende
it might not trouble that place which is assigned vnto them, but
giue them place. Likewise it was requisite that it shoulde bee
rounde, both because the rounde forme is most capable, and also
because it will not so easily be broken and marred as other formes
will be.
Vnto the stomacke is ioyned this narrow, pipe called Oesophage, to
the end it might receiue into it thereby, all kinds of meate and drink,
as wee declared when we spake of the pipes in the throate, and of
meates and drinkes.Of the mouths of the stomacke. For this cause there are two mouthes or doores
in the stomacke, called Orifices, of which the one is called the higher
Orifice or mouth, because it is vppermost, and the other for the
same reason is called the lower Orifice. The first is to receiue
the meate that is sent to the stomacke by the Oesophage. And
this is that which the Physicions call by the proper name of stomacke,
as wee hearde before, although commonly it is called

the heart.How the name of the heart is abused. For when wee feele any weakenesse there, or anie
desire to vomite, wee commonly say that wee are ill at the heart,
or that something lyeth vpon our heart. But this sense of griefe is
not at the heart, but in that part of the Ventricle, which is called the
vppermost Orifice or stomacke, whose seate and place is on the left
side neere to the backe-bone. And this Orifice or mouth of the
stomacke, is a great deale more large then the nethermost, because
the meate is oftentimes not well chewed, besides many great
and hard morsels that are swallowed nowe and then. Againe, this
part is verie sensible,The originall of appetite. because there is the originall and place of appetite,
by reason of those nerues of which it is chiefely made, that
growe together like vnto nettes. Heereof wee may note this, that
the prouidence of God hath so well prouided for all the members
and instruments of nourishment, that there is not one of them, but
it hath some small sinewe to giue it sense, whereby it may feele
and perceiue what humours are hurtfull vnto it, that by the griefe
which it receiueth, men may be moued to haue recourse to such remedies
as are able to releeue it.
But to returne to our matter,The doore of the vpper Orifice. wee are to knowe, that the vpper
Orifice hath the Midriffe ioyned vnto it, which is in steede of a
doore to close and shutte it vp, that when it is full of meates and
drinkes, they shoulde not ascende vp againe by the throate. Concerning
the nethermost Orifice it is both by the Greeke and Latine
Writers called by a name that signifieth a Doore-keeper,Of the lower Orifice. being
made to let out the meate concocted in the Ventricle together with
the superfluities and excrementes. Therefore also it is narrower then
the vpper Orifice, and compassed about with a certaine kernelley
fleshe, to the ende that nothing shoulde passe by which were
not well digested before, and that by meanes of the mouth of it
made in the manner of a ring. It is situated on the right side vnder
the hollownesse of the liuer, a little lower then the other Orifice.
But it is not at the very bottome of the Ventricle, but a little
higher, to the ende the foode beeing retayned and kept at the bottome,
might bee heated and digested there. So that after the stomacke
hath receiued into it the meate and drinke, both these doores
as well aboue as beneath are shut, that the heate within might be retained
and kept close.Of the small strings of the Orifices. For this cause there are certaine filaments or
small stringes, of which some are direct and straight, hauing in them
a marueilous secret vertue of nature to drawe vnto them: others are ouerth
wart, and passe cleane crosse the former through certaine little
corners that lie long-wise. Their office is to close vp the vpper part

from the body of the stomach. Besides, there are other crooked filaments,
which through oblique corners passe alongst the sides of both
the other: and these, because they close the whole body of the stomacke,
haue power of retaining, and serue to shut vp the mouth of the
stomacke. So that these filaments or threedes in regarde of their office,
may be compared to the strings of a purse whereby it is shut. And
because the stomacke, being closed and shut vp, digesteth the meate
a great deale better then if it were gaping and wide open, therefore
nature hath prouided in this sort.The stomake compared to a pot on the fire. Wherein wee see it resembleth a pot
set to seething, which retaineth the heate, and seetheth that which
it containeth better when it is close couered, then when it is without
a couer.
Now we are further to knowe, that the stomacke is made of two
coats or skins one within an other, consisting partly of a fleshy, and
partly of a sinowy substance. The innermost is fuller of sinewes and
thicker, hauing straight filaments within, wherewith as it were with
fingers, it draweth the meate downeward: and without, it hath certaine
oblique filaments, which compasse it about, and serue to holde
it in. The outward coate, which is more fleshy, hath ouerthwart filaments
that serue for expulsion. For when the stomacke is sometime
ouercharged with meate, so that it is not able to embrace and keepe
it for digestion, then by meanes of the expulsiue vertue, it driueth out
that which is superfluous, and prouoketh a man to vomite, to the end
it be not stifled through the waight and burthen of the meate it beareth.
For this cause the throate is a pipe appointed for the moouing of
things vp and downe, not hauing any attractiue force in it, but being
onely a meere way and place of passage, through which meates and
drinkes passe to and fro as neede requireth.
Concerning the seate of the stomach,Howe the stomacke is placed. it is placed in the middest
of the body betweene the liuer and the splene, and that in such sort
that the liuer embraceth and warmeth it on the right side, and the
splene doeth the like on the left side.Of the substance of it. As for the substance of it, it is of
the nature of sinewes, that is cold and drie. For it is very conuenient it
should bee so, first, because of the sense and feeling, that it might bee
incited by such things as agree with it, reiecting all others: secondly, in
regarde of appetite, that it might be the greater and of more efficacie.
Moreouer, it was requisite that it shoulde be of such matter, to
the ende it might bee the harder, and receiue the lesse hurt from the
hardenesse and sharpnesse of meates.How it is warmed by other neighbour partes. And besides the naturall heate
which it hath of it selfe, it is heated also by the neighbour partes, to
the ende it may the better perfourme that duetie that lyeth vpon it.

For this cause it hath on the right side the liuer, which is vnto it in
steade of a boyling pot or cauldron: and on the left side it hath the
splene for the same purpose: the muscles of the chine bone are behind
it, and before is the skinne commonly called the Kell. Likewise as the
heart is not farre from it, so the midriffe lying ouer it, doeth greatly
heate it by continuall motion. Whereby we see, how the prouidence
of God hath well fenced and clothed it on all sides, that it might
haue as much heate as is needefull for it. Touching this skinne called
the Kell,Of (...) Kell or Kall. it is a double coate or couering, spreading it selfe wholly ouer
the intralles, being in fashion like to a purse, by reason that it is double
and wouen like to a nette, consisting of fatte, of veines, of atteries
and of a skinne. Moreouer, the stomach is warmed by the spirits
that enter into it in great abundance, by reason that it is knit vnto the
neighbour partes by veines and arteries.The causes of appetite in the stomach. Nowe because it serueth to
the nutritiue facultie, the naturall vertue thereof is to desire foode,
the sense and feeling of which appetite is in the vpper Orifice, into
which many sinewes are wouen that come downe from the braine.
Therefore when the members of the bodie being empty desire nourishment,
and labour to drawe it from the veines, and the veines from
the liuer, and the liuer from the stomach, and the stomach from the
Orifice, then is there a certaine contraction and wrinckling as it were
of the Orifice, by reason of the veines that sucke it. In which contraction
and gathering together of the stomachs mouth, there is by
meanes of the nerues a kinde of sense and griefe,The originall of hunger. which we call Hunger,
whereby liuing creatures are stirred vp to seeke after foode and
nourishment. I make no repetition heere of that which hath beene
spoken before, namely, of the drawing, reteining, altering, and expulsing
vertues of the vegetatiue soule. For by our discourses wee may
easily vnderstand, how euery one of them doeth his duety both in the
stomach and liuer, and in all the other members of the body. But the
altering vertue is the chiefest, whose office is to change in the stomach,
and to conuert into iuyce and liquor, that meate which it hath
receiued.
This liquor is called by the Physicions Chylus, which is a Greeke
worde, and resembleth the reme of a ptisame: it is concocted in the
stomach, vntill it bee so well prepared that it may be sent vnto the liuer.
Which concoction is first and principally made by the naturall
vertue of the stomach, as it appeareth in this that euery stomach doth
after a wonderfull manner embrace and warme all the meate, which
it receiueth,The stomach compared to a wombe. euen as the whole wombe embraceth her burthen and
fruite vntil it come to ripenesse: and when the time of birth is come,

the expulsiue vertue thereof driueth it foorth. So fareth it with the
meate in the stomach, excepting this difference, that the stomach
needeth not so long a time to finish his worke in, as the wombe doth.
Afterward this naturall vertue of the stomach, is holpen and warmed
by those meanes before declared. And when the stomach hath finished
this first concoction,The office of the lower Orifice. whereby the meate receiued is so duely
prepared that it may bee sent into the liuer, then the lower Orifice
and doore called the Porter, openeth it selfe, and sendeth this liquor
into the intralles and bowelles, which are ordained as well to
receiue it, as to purge foorth the superfluities and excrements. Therefore,
AMANA. thy speach shall be of these, that so wee may goe
forward with our matter of those instruments of the vegetatiue soule,
which shee vseth in her naturall workes.


Of the intralles and bowelles, and of their names and offices: of
the nature of the three smaller guttes, and of the other three that
are greater: of the instructions which wee may learne by these
things. Chap. 62.
AMANA, If there were no other reason but this, that the poorest
and basest persons amongest men are the creatures of GOD,
and created after his image and likenesse, as well as the richest,
mightiest, and highest in dignities and honours, and that as well
the one as the other, are members of the bodie of mankinde, it
were enough to with-holde vs from contemning any person,The poorer sort are not to be contemned. of what
condition, estate or qualitie soeuer hee bee, so that his vocation bee
of GOD, and profitable for mankinde. For in contemning any
creature and his estate, GOD, who created him and ordained his
vocation, is contemned and iniuried thereby, considering that hee
is his worke, which cannot be mocked, but the workemaster that
framed it must needes bee scorned. Besides, wee are to consider,
that many of them that are taken to bee the vilest and basest persons,
are a great deale more profitable and necessary, and so likewise their
callings and offices, then many others that are in greater reputation,
and more honourable according to mans iudgement, who notwithstanding
might more easily be spared, then those of whom there
is lesse accompt and reckoning made.
The like may be said of the vse of the members of our bodies, and
of the necessitie and need which we haue of them that are accompted

most vile and abiect: which albeit they be lesse honourable then the
rest, yet are they more necessary for this life of ours, then many others
that are a great deale more noble and more excellent. For wee
may liue without eies,The necessitie of the bowelles. without eares, without handes, without feete,
and without many other goodly members: but not without the intralles
and bowelles, which are but the sinkes and wide-draughts of
our bodies, although there be but one of them onely wanting. For
there is not one of them but it is profitable, yea necessary for vs, insomuch
that no other can doe that office which lieth vpon it: the Lord
hauing so disposed it, that euery one of them must discharge his owne
office by himselfe.
Of these intralles and guttes there are sixe in number,The number and names of the guttes. neere
vnto the stomacke, namely, three small and three great ones, being
all of a round and hollowe figure, according to the greatnesse and
thickenesse of euery one of them. They are called the instruments of
distribution and purgation, because they distribute the foode, and
send foorth the superfluities and excrements. Nowe to conteine all
these in their place, they are couered and wrapped about together
with the other entralles of the naturall partes, with two coats or couerings,The bowelles haue two couerings.
namely, with that which is called the Kell, whereof mention
was made in the former discourse, and which couereth the bowells,
stretching it selfe euen to the priuie partes: so that it executeth the
same office vnto them, that it doeth vnto the stomacke, as wee were
giuen to vnderstand. Besides, there is an other coate or skinne called
Peritone,Of the Peritone or inner ^ine of the belly ioyned to the kall. because it is spread round about the lower belly, and enuironeth
the stomach, the bowelles, the kall, the liuer, the splene, and
the kidneys: in a worde, it couereth all the members from the midriffe
downe to the sharebone. The vse of this is great. For first it serueth
for a couering to couer all the members: then it serueth also for the
muscles that are laide vpon them. Moreouer, it causeth the superfluities
of drie meates to descend more speedily. Fourthly, it keepeth the
stomacke and bowels that they swell not easily:The vses of it. and fiftly, it knitteth
together and conioyneth all the members within it, as we haue seene
howe the other partes of the body are separated and clothed with
skinnes and membranes. For this cause it is framed and fashioned like
to an egge, and hath his beginning from the ligaments, which binde
together the turning ioynts of the reines, and is knit vnto them. So
that the vse of it is to tie and knit vnto the backe the members of the
inferiour belly. Nowe concerning the intralles and bowels, although
they ^e vnited to the stomacke, and so ioyntly followe each other, yet
they ^iffer in figure, in situation, and in offices. True it is, that their

substance differeth little from that of the stomach.The substance of the bowels. For they are of a
certaine whitish flesh, hauing no blood in any of them: neither is
there any other difference, but onely in this, that the bigger guts are
more full and fatte,The bowels are made of two coates. and the smaller are otherwise. Againe, they haue
all this in common together, that they are made of two coates, which
God hath giuen them for the greater preseruation of them, and of the
life of liuing creatures. For oftentimes vlcers and sores breede, chiefely
when some great inflammation hath gone before, so that they putrifie
and fret, and one of the coats be spoiled. Neuerthelesse a man
may liue by the other that continueth sound, and dischargeth well enough
all his dueties.
Nowe forasmuch as they are instruments appointed for the purging
of the body, the fibres or little strings both of the inner and vtter
coats, are all in a manner crosse-wise, except some fewe intermingled
long-wise, to the ende that the purging might be moderated in such
sort,Of the three (...) gut^. as that it neither be too much nor too little. The three smaller
are placed vppermost, which because they were made that the meate
being turned into liquor might be conueyed through them, therefore
it was requisite they shoulde be so slender, and that chiefely for two
causes. The first, to the ende the passage might bee more easie: the
other, because that in the very passage some concoction is made of
the liquor and foode: so that they are the sooner warmed, by reason
of their slender and thinne making.Of their names. Nowe concerning the name and
peculiar office of euery one:The Duodene or stomacke gut. the first is called Duodene; because of the
length of it, which is without any folding or turning. It is as it were
a part of the stomach hanging downe, or as a changing of the stomach
into a gut, being twelue fingers long, whereupon it was so called
by the ancient Physicions, although nowe there is none found of
that length. It beginneth at the porter of the stomach, and is so seated
beside the liuer, that looke where that leaueth, and the other following
(called the hungry gut) beginneth, there is a passage from
the bladder of gall, to bring the yellow humour thither called choller,
to the end it might help forward the meate, and make cleane the gut.
The second,The hungry gut. called the hungry gut, is so termed, because it holdeth but
a litle foode in regard of the other following, so that it may be said after
a sort to fast: whereof there are three causes. The first is, the great
number of Meseraicall veines and arteries, which are in greater number
about that gut then about the rest. Whereupon they sucke out
more speedily the liquor and foode which passeth through that, then
if they were fewer in number. The second cause is, because the liuer,
which is neerest to that gut, doeth likewise drawe nourishment from

it, which is sooner done then from the rest that are farther off. The
third is, the falling downe of the chollericke humour into it, which
intermedleth not it selfe with the liquor and foode, but glideth
downe by the side of this gut vnto that which is called Colon, to the
ende it may thrust forward the excrements and purge the humours:
which it perfourmeth because it is sharpe and biting. Now by reason
it continually prouoketh this gut to expulsion, it falleth out to be more
empty then the residue.
Then followeth the third small intralle,The Ileon or folded Gut. called Ileos by the Graecians,
both because it hath many fouldings, as also for the manifolde
knitting of it to the Mesenterium from whence sundrie veines
come into this. The hungry gut and this haue both one office: onely
heerein they differ, that the hungry Gut is sooner sucked then
this, which retaineth a longer time, that liquor and foode that it
receiueth. For this cause it is of a greater length, and hath more
foldings and turnings, to the ende it may the better concoct the liquor,
and bee tempering with the foode the longer time: whereby
it shall not neede to bee filled, and stuffed presently with other
meates. And heerein wee haue to note the good forecast of nature.
For if wee were presently to returne againe to the Table after we had
taken our meate, wee shoulde doe nothing all our life time but eate
and drinke. Therefore some of the ancient Philosophers haue in this
respect acknowledged the prouidence of GOD, saying that these
foldings, plites, and windings were made to this ende, that men
might not liue ignorantly as beastes that are destitute of all knowledge:
which would follow vndoubtedly, if they were of necessitie to
attend alwayes vpon the belly.
Nowe let vs speake of the other three great Guts, which followe
the small ones.Of the three great Guts. These then are lower, more fleshie and thicke, because
their chiefe office is to receiue the excrements of the aboue named
Guts, and to retaine the same vntill the iust time come to send
them foorth: euen as it is the office of the three former to distribute
the liquor and foode by the Meseraicall veines. The first of these
great ones is called the Blinde Gut,The blinde Gut. because that being large and
great, it hath but one way, both to receiue in, and to let out the
matter receiued: whereupon it is commonly called by some the
Sacke or Budget Gut. His office is to receiue the excrementes from
the last lesser Gut, and hauing drawne out some nourishment from
them to cast foorth the rest to the other Gut called Colon. For this
cause the doores and holes of these three last Guts, concurre well

together in a hollowe place.
Nowe because this blinde Gut is wide and round, and hath many
foldings, among other things it standeth in steade of an other stomach,
to keepe and to preserue meate in it against some want and
necessitie to come,The fift gut called Colon, or the great gut. and to distribute it to the neighbour-members
after a long hunger. Whereunto the Gut called Colon doeth also
helpe, both by reason of the capacitie of it, as for the oblique situation
thereof, as also because it keepeth within it foode and nourishment.
Concerning the name of it, the Greeke worde from whence
it is taken signifieth Gaine, because it is greater and more capable
then any of the rest: or else it may signifie as a man woulde say,
Cut, because it is as it weree cut into sundry holes, and hath diuers
turnings. For it receiueth the excrementes, and to the ende they
shoulde not passe away by and by, it sendeth them by little and little
through straight passages. The chollericke humour descendeth
out of the hungrie Gut into this, whereby the dirt is both coloured
and driuen foorth.
Of this Gut called Colon,The colike and Ileacke passions. the Colike passion taketh the name:
as the Ileaca passion doeth of the Gut Ileon. Nowe because this Gut
is puffed vp more then any of the rest, and is very painefull to them
that haue it stopped, it hath certaine straight threedes wouen amongest
the ouerthwart Fibres, which strengthen the coates and skinnes
thereof, to the ende they shoulde not breake or cracke, when they
are blowen vp and strained. Whereby wee see againe howe the
counsaile of Gods prouidence hath notably prouided for all things,
whose excellent maiestie hath not despised these most base, earthly,
and brute parts.
Nowe it remaineth that wee shoulde consider of the third Gut,The straight gut.
called the Straight Gut. For although it proceede from the Gut
Colon, yet it differeth from it both in place and figure, and is
called the Straight Gut because of the straightnesse of it. Some call
it the Fatte Gut, because it is passing fatte in beastes. It reacheth
vnto the very fundament, at the ende whereof is placed a muscle,
being fashioned rounde like to a Ring, to keepe in, and to
retaine ventositie and excrementes vntill Nature please: to this
ende that expulsion of them might not bee made vpon euery occasion,
and in euery place indifferently, against our wils, and contrary
to naturall and ciuill honestie.The vse of it. For the vse of the straight
Gut is to carrie and throwe foorth cleane out of the bodie the filth,
dregs, and grossest excrements thereof, being such as are altogether

vnprofitable, and hurtfull to the body. Nowe forasmuch as it is the
lowest gut and most burthened, by reason that it must holde all the
grosse excrements of whatsoeuer entreth into the body by the mouth,
and is oftentimes very much blowen and stretched vp, therefore the
diuine prouidence hath giuen vnto it more threedes and fibres of all
sortes then to any of the rest, and hath made it strong and able to
beare the charge. So likewise his heauenly counsaile hath prouided,
that amongst all the members of the body, those should be strongest,
that haue the greatest burthen and stresse to beare. And for this cause
also this straight gutte hath this muscle, which the Physicions call
Sphincter,Of the muscle Sphincter. being taken from a Greeke worde that signifieth to restraine
and close vp, because it is an instrument of voluntarie motion,
that openeth and shutteth as wee will, when neede requireth.
Nowe for the ende of this speech, if wee consider well of those
partes whereof wee haue spoken, wee shall finde that wee carrie about
with vs sundrie sortes of sinkes, which are oftentimes ilfauouredly
looked vnto. And this ought to put vs in minde of our infirmities
and of those goodly shoppes wee haue in our bodies full of stinking
drugges,A lesson against pride. which ought to take from vs all matter of pride. Moreouer
wee may learne here, that which was spoken of in the beginning
of this discourse, namely, the vse of these members, and the necessitie
of the basest and lesse comely partes. Therefore if there were no
other respect to be had but this of necessitie, wee ought to be so farre
from despising them, especially the workemaster that hath made and
disposed them, as that wee ought rather thereby to acknowledge
his great prouidence, and the care hee hath had of vs, seeing it hath
pleased him euen from the high degree of his maiestie, to prouide for
the least and last necessities and infirmities of our bodies.Against the contempt of inferiour persons. So likewise
by admiring his so great bounty and goodnesse towardes vs, wee
haue good occasion by his example, to doe the like one towardes an
other, in the performance of all dueties appertaining to a holy and
true friendship. Nowe that wee may prosecute our matter subiect,
let vs looke into the other naturall powers of the soule. First let vs
consider of the Mesentery, of the Meseraicall veines; of the sweete
bread, of the liuer, and of their natures and offices. The handling of
these things belong to thee, ARAM.



Of the Mesentery and Mesareon: of the Meseraicall veines, of the
Pancreas or sweet bread, and of their nature and office: of the liuer,
and of his nature and office: of the rootes, bodies, and branches of the
veines, of their names and vses, and of the similitude betweene them
and the arteries. Chap. 63.
ARAM. When we consider how the prouidence of God reacheth
so far vnto those things that are profitable and necessary in our bodies,
that it forgetteth not, neither omitteth the least thing that is in
them: we should be very blinde of vnderstanding, if we doubted that
our God prouided not aswell for all things that are profitable and necessary
for our soules, for the spirituall foode and growth of them, and
for their perfect purging and saluation. For albeit there is no superfluity
or excrement, in that spiritual food wherewith the soule is nourished,
yet is it requisit and needful, that the soule be purged from those excrements
and filthines of sin, wherwith the deuil hath infected and filled
it. And so indeed is it purged in Iesus Christ, who hath washed and clensed
vs from our sins by his blood, and doth daily purge vs by his holy spirit,
and by those means which he hath ordained in his church. Therefore
I am out of doubt, that God meant to put men in minde of these
things, by the order and necessitie which he hath appointed in the nature
of their bodies, both in regard of their food and of their nourishment:
and that we shal alwaies find good and holy instructions for the soule,
by considering the nature and office of euery part of the body. Let vs
then consider of other instruments of the naturall powers of the soule,
then hitherto we haue spoken of.
After the entrals and guts,Of the Mesentery. the Mesentery foloweth, which is placed in
the midst of them, whereupon it is so called of the Graecians, as if you
would say, dwelling in the midst of the guts. And because it is carried and
lift vp into the middle of all these vessels,Of the Mesareon. it is also called by some Mesareon,
which name signifieth the selfe same thing in Greeke. Others
take Mesareon to be the highest part of the Mesentery, which is also
called Calicreas by the Graecians, because the flesh of it is very pleasant
to eate, according as the name giueth vs to vnderstand. So that it is
no entrall or gut, but a coat and folded couering in the midst of them:
or rather a thicke white flesh, of a sinowy and kernelly substance, that
beareth fat, distinguishing the entralles, and knitting them vnto the
backe.The chiefe vse of it. But it was chiefely created to beare vp and sustaine the Meseraicall
veines and arteries, with the sinewes that are in that member:
which because they are in danger of breaking, through the vehement
motions of the body and such other accidents, therefore the prouidence

of God would not haue them without a foundation, prop, and defence
to countergard them. For this cause he hath fortified and fastened the
branches and diuisions of the veins, by such a member and instrument,
which serueth in steade of a band and stay both to the great and little
ones.Other vses of the Mesentery. Besides, his action and vse also is to fasten and keepe the entralles
euery one in his place, and to conuey vnto the liuer by the meseraicall
veines, that are called the handes thereof, that liquor which
the Graecians call Chylus, of which wee haue already spoken. For as
the bodies of trees haue their rootes, which spread abroad in the earth
to drawe nourishment from thence: euen so there are branches dispersed
throughout the Mesentery, and deriued from the liuer veine,
which are ioyned to the bowelles, as it were small rootes to drawe
foode,Of the Meseraicall veines. being much like to haires or cob-webs. These braunches or
small rootes are the Meseraicall veines, so called, because they are
placed in the vpper part of that member and instrument that is called
Mesareon,Their vse. whereof I spake euen nowe. Their office and nature is to
draw and sucke out nourishment from the guts, and to carry it to the
liuer, from whence they haue all their beginning, as appeareth by
Anatomie: howsoeuer there are that thinke, that some of them come
not from thence. The flesh of the Mesentery is kernelly and fatty, not
only seruing in steade of a munition and defence, as hath beene said,
but also to moisten the entralles and guts, and to preserue the heate
both of the bowelles and veines. So likewise the arteries are ioyned
to the veines, to giue them heate, and to the guts also to concoct the
liquor and nourishment. Besides, the nerues and sinewes there, serue
to giue sense to the guts. There is moreouer a kernelly flesh, which
the Physicions call Pancreas,Of the Pancreas or sweet bread. because it doeth wholly resemble flesh,
as the Greeke name importeth. It is placed in the hollow part of the
liuer, that it might be as it were a cushion vnto it, and a preseruer of
the diuided partes thereof, by filling the void places that are betwene
the stomach,The vses of it. the liuer and the spleene, to the ende it may vphold and
protect the meseraicall veines, and keepe euery thing from breaking either
by falles or by violent motions. Nowe touching the liuer, it is a
very noble member.Of the liuer and excellencie thereof. For it is the principallest member of all the naturall
partes, and the chiefest instrument belonging to the vegetatiue
and nourishing power of the soule. It is the first of the nobler partes
that is made perfect, when the childe is framed in the mothers womb:
it is the author, shop, and forge of the blood, the originall and fountaine
of the veines. Therefore the substance of it is a soft and red flesh,
like to blood newly pressed out and clodded. Neuertheles in it own nature
it is perfect flesh, hauing sundry, different veins dispersed throughout

as it were threeds, and arteries also ioyned vnto the^ for their refreshing.The seconde coction is made in the liuer.
Now after the stomach hath finished the first concoction of meat,
and turned it into liquor as it hath bin declared vnto vs, the second is
made in the liuer, after it hath receiued this liquor so prepared by the
stomach and guts as we said, and turned it into blood. This concoction
is perfected in the small veines, that are dispersed throughout the
body of the liuer. And because God hath inioyned this office to this
member, he hath compounded it of such a flesh and matter, as hath giuen
vnto it this proper and peculiar vertue, to conuert into blood that
foode and nourishment that is brought vnto it, to the end it may bee
the instrument of the generation of that thing wherewith the body is
nourished. Hauing thus transformed the liquor receiued, it maketh
it redde like vnto it selfe: as contrariwise, blood is made white in the
breasts of a woman, both by reason of their nature and substance, as
also for other causes touched by vs. The temperature of the liuer is hot
and moist, such as becommeth the blood and concoction it hath to
performe, which is like to boiled meat. Now forasmuch as this instrument
and member is the chiefest in the kitchin of mans body, GOD
hath giuen vnto it such a nature and property, as if there were in it a
harth,Foure degrees of concoction in the liuer. a table, a knife, and a wagoner, as some name them, hauing regard
to the diuerse actions thereof, and to the sundrie degrees of concoction
made therein. They call the first action or degree of concoction
by the name of a harth, because it serueth to heate the foode, as a
harth doth in a kitchin. The second is called a table, namely, when the
food beginneth to gather it selfe together in the liuer, and is there placed
as it were vpon a table to be sent vnto the members. The third action
hath the name of a knife giuen vnto it, because it diuideth and maketh
a separation of the humors. And the fourth is as it were the wagoner,
because there is the carriage and conueiance of all from thence
into the hollow veine. For the naturall vertues and powers gouerne
the humors very well, conducting and leading them to their due places.The fountaines of the blood and veines, spirites, and arteries.
For this cause the liuer is the fountaine of blood, and the spring
of all the veines by which it is distributed throughout the body as the
heart is the fountaine of the vital spirits, and the originall of the arteries,
whereby the spirits necessary for the body are conueied into it, as the
blood from the liuer. Wherfore euen as the arteries are a kind of veins
to carry and to distribute the aire, breath, and vital spirites: so likewise
the veines proceeding from the liuer, are ordained to distribute the
blood into all partes of the body. These two are lincked together
with such a neere alliance and agreement, that the veines administer
matter to the vitall spirit, which is ingendred in the heart of the purest

and most spiritual blood, as the spirit likewise helpeth the blood by his
heat in the arteries. Therfore they haue mouths ioyning each to other,
to the end the spirit, as it were a litle flame, may receiue norishme^t out
of the veines, and that the veins may draw spirit and heat from the arteries.Our life compared to a lamp.
For as we haue already touched, our life is much like to a flame in
a lamp, that receiueth food from the oile put into the lamp: euen so the
vital spirit, which is as a flame within vs, draweth and taketh norishme^t
from the veins. Wherein we haue a goodly example of that mutual societie,
which we ought to haue one towards another in this life. Now
of those veins that deriue their originall fro^ the liuer,Two great veines in the body. there are 2. principall
ones that are very great, of which the others are but as it were
branches, that from the liuer spread the^selues vpwards and downwards
through all the partes of the body. These two veines comming out of
the liuer take their beginning from many little veines, which being as
it were their rootes, ioyne together afterward into two trunks or great
bodies, that diuide themselues againe into diuers boughs and branches,
whereof some are greater and some lesser, after the maner of trees. The
first is called the Port-veine,The Port-veine. because it is as it were the doore of the liuer
out of which it proceedeth, being placed in the hollow part thereof.
The vse and profit of it is to receiue nourishment prepared by the
stomach and guts, and then to keep it vntill the liuer hath turned it into
pure blood, for to send it afterward to all the body by the other great
veine called the Caue or hollow veine.The hollow veine. And this proceedeth from the
outside of the liuer, resembling the body of a tree, and diuiding it selfe
into two great branches, of which the lesser ascendeth vp to the vitall
and animall parts, and to the ends of them, and the bigger branch descendeth
downe alongst the hinder part of the liuer, vpon that part of
the chine bone that is betweene the kidnies, and so goeth to those
partes that are contained vnder them. Forasmuch therefore as the
arteries and veines are the principall instruments, whereby the soule
giueth life vnto the body, some learned men expound that of the vitall
and naturall parts,Eccles. 12. 6. which Salomon speaketh of the siluer coard not
lengthened, of the golden ewer broken, of the pitcher broken at the
well, and of the wheele broken at the cisterne.
Wee haue already spoken of the siluer chaine and of the golden
ewer, when wee discoursed of the chine bone of the backe, and of the
marrowe of it.A place of Salomon expounded. Touching the residue, they vnderstand by the well
the liuer, which is the fountaine of blood: and by the pitcher, the
veines, because they are the vesselles whereby the blood is taken
out of the liuer and drawne thence, that it may be distributed to all
the bodie: and by the cisterne is vnderstoode the heart, and by the

wheele, the head. For we may already perceiue by that which wee
haue already saide of the heart, howe seruiceable the liuer is vnto it,
considering that the heart is the fountaine of the vitall spirits and the
originall of the arteries, (as the liuer is of the bloud and of the veines)
and that the vitall spirits are engendred in the heart of the purest and
most spirituall bloud, which it draweth and receiueth from the liuer.
Moreouer, these vitall spirites are by meane of the heart sent vnto the
braine and the head, to serue the animal powers that haue their places
and instruments there, and to serue all the senses as well spirituall as
corporall. Therefore the head is aptly compared to a wheele, both
for the roundnesse of it, as also because it draweth and receiueth the
vitall spirites from the heart, which sendeth them vnto it, as the water
is drawne from his fountaine, well, or cisterne by meanes of the
wheele. Further, as it is needefull, that there shoulde bee a coard to
reach from the wheele downe to the well, and a pitcher or bucket at
the ende of the coard to drawe water withall: so the arteries reaching
from the heart vp to the head, are like to the coarde and pitcher,
whereby the braine draweth vitall spirites from the heart. For the
great artery,Of the arterie Aorta. called Aorta by the Physicions, which commeth out
of the heart, and is diuided into two great branches, of which the
one goeth vpward, to carry the vitall spirite to the superiour partes,
and the other downeward to doe the like belowe, forasmuch as it
ioyneth vnto the heart, may bee taken for the pitcher that draweth
from thence the vitall spirites, as from a well; and the branch that ascendeth
vpward may bee taken for the coard ioyned vnto the wheele.
The like may bee seene in the liuer. For the great veines of it are
as it were the pitcher, and the veines that ascend vp vnto the head,
as likewise the arteries, are the coarde that draweth vp the blood
from out of the liuer. If then wee ioyne that which wee haue already
heard of the siluer chaine or coarde, and of the golden ewer, with that
which wee speake nowe of the pitcher and of the well, of the wheele,
and of the cisterne, wee may bee well assured, that Salomon hath
most wisely comprehended in so small a number of wordes, all the
internall partes of the body, and all the powers both animall, vitall,
and naturall, together with all the instruments, which they haue in
the bodie and in the members thereof. For first beholde, the braine
signified by the golden ewer: then the pith of the chine bone and the
chine bone it selfe by the siluer coard: uext, the liuer by the well, which
hath also his pitcher: and lastly, the heart which is signified by the
cisterne. As for that particularly spoken of the pitcher and wheele
broken, which drawe water out of the well and cisterne, it is all one as

if he had saide, that when the fountaine of blood in the liuer waxeth
drie and decayeth, the wheele aboue, namely, the head, is broken,
because all the senses both exteriour and interiour, and the animal vertues
faile in the body. For the soule wanteth sound instruments to giue
life, motion, and sense vnto it, they being worne and consumed by those
meanes and causes, which we shal vnderstand heereafter. But to follow
our purpose, and not to depart from the matter, we must intreate
of the nature of blood, and of other humors in the body, and of their diuersity
and nature. This then, ACHITOB, shal be the matter subiect
of thy discourse.


Of the blood and of other humours in the body: of their diuersitie and
nature, and of the agreement they haue with the elements: of the similitude
that is betweene the great garden of this great world, and
that of the little world, touching the nourishment of things contained
and preserued in them. Chap. 64.
ACHITOB. If in many of our discourses wee sawe great testimonies
of the image of the great worlde in man, the matter we haue
now to handle will set before our eies such as are most cleere and euident.A similitude.
For looke howe the sea is as it were the great fountaine and
womb of all waters, and of the floods and riuers that issue out of them to
water the whole earth: so likewise the liuer is as it were the fountaine
of the blood and veines, which are like to brooks and riuers, to carry and
distribute the blood throughout the whole body, to the ende that all
the partes of it might be moistned, soaked, and nourished according
to their seuerall natures. So that the liuer in mans body, and in man, who
is the litle world, is as the sea in the great world, and the veines are like
to the floods and riuers. Neither are the parts of the body by this means
moistned, watred, and nourished with blood only, but also with all the
other humors, wherewith it is tempered, and without which the body
ca^not liue. For the blood carieth al the rest with it. But that we may the
better vnderstand this matter, and what is the proper nature of blood,
we must first know what a humor is, and how many kinds of it there are.
We vnderstand by a Humor,What a humour is. a liquide and running body into which
the foode is conuerted in the liuer, to this ende that bodies might bee
nourished and preserued by them. And as there are foure elements of
which our bodies are compounded, so there are foure sorts of humors
answerable to their natures, being al mingled together with the blood:
as we may see by experience in blood let out of ones body. For vppermost
wee see as it were a litle skimme like to the floure or working of
new wine, or of other wine when it is powred foorth. Next, we may

see as it were small streams of water mingled with the blood. And in
the bottome is seene a blacker and thicker humour, like to the lees of
wine in a wine vessell. So that if we knowe how to consider wisely of
these things, it will bee easie for vs to vnderstand the distinction of
these sundry humours,Of the nature of blood. and their nature. Now concerning the first of
them, wee are to knowe that the proper nature of blood is to bee hote
and moist: wherein it answereth to the nature of the aire. It is temperate,
sweete, and fatty, as also the best and chiefest part of nourishment.
For albeit all the other humours doe nourish likewise, and are
carried of the blood, neuerthelesse that humour which is properly called
blood, is the chiefest part of nourishment. For it is requisit that nourishment
should be sweete, or at leastwise tempred with sweet liquor.
Next,Of the cholericke humour. that thinne skimme which is seene on the top of it, resembling
the floure of wine, is that humour that is called yellow choller, or the
cholericke humor which is hot and drie, of a bitter taste, and answering
to the nature of fire, which is of the same nature. For it is bred
of the hottest and driest parts of that liquor, in which the nourishment
of the body consisteth, when through their great heate they boile together.Of the flegmaticke humour.
Moreouer, those smal streams of water, which we see mingled
in the blood, proceede of the flegmaticke humour that is colde and
moist, like to water of whose nature it holdeth. For this humour is
in part concocted for the turning of it into blood, but not wholly perfected.
Hereof it commeth that the colour of it remaineth white, much
like to water, and without taste, or as some affirme, it is some what
brackish,Of the melancholicke humor. but not fatty. Lastly, the blacke humour and most earthie
which looketh like the very bottome of a deepe, redde, and thicke
wine, or like the lees in a vessell full of wine or oyle, is the melancholike
humour, or as some terme it, blacke choller, being colde and
drie like to the earth, with which it hath some agreement, and of
taste somewhat sharpe.
Nowe in this diuersitie of these humours mingled altogether with
the blood,The agreement betwixt the humours and the elements. two things are worthy to be well marked. First, the agreement
and conformity which they haue with al the elements of which
the body of man is compounded: so that each of them hath his proper
element agreeable to his nature, to the end they may nourish and preserue
all the parts of the body, according to the nature of the elements
of which they hold. The other point is, not only the disagreement, but
euen the manifest contrariety that is between al these humors, as there
is betwixt the elements: and again the vnio^ that appeares to be betwene
the^ in the midst of this contrarietie, as the like is among the elements,
whose nature they followe. Moreouer wee see, that betweene light

and darkenesse, day and night, colde and heate, drienesse, and moysture,
betweene the diuerse and contrarie seasons of the yeere, besides
sundry other such contrarieties that are in nature, and in al other things,
I say betweene these so contrary, God frameth notwithstanding such
a wonderfull concord, tempering and knitting them in such sort one
with an other, that they are so farre from defacing and destroying
each other, as contrariwise they coulde not possibly bee preserued,
except they were tied together with such a knot and coniunction.
Nowe beside that which wee haue heere spoken of the nature of these
humours, wee haue further to note, that they doe not onely agree
with the elements in qualities, but also in regarde of their places in
mans body, I meane in the whole masse and distribution of the
blood, and in the coniunction they haue together, euen as the elements
haue their places each after other.How the humours and elements agree in places. For as the fire of it owne nature
is light, and therefore laboureth alwayes to ascend vpward, to attaine
to his naturall place: so the cholerike humour, which agreeth
with the nature thereof, occupieth the highest place among the humours
mingled with the blood, as we may perceiue by that that hath
beene already spoken of the floure and skimme of blood, according
to that comparison which wee made betwixt blood and wine. The
like may be saide of the rest. For as the aire is lightest next to the fire,
and the neerest element vnto it and to the rest of the celestiall fires: so
the blood properly so called, keepeth the place of the aire among the
humours of the body. For it is not so light as the fire, nor so heauie
as the water or the earth. And so consequently the flegmatike and
melancholike humours occupy the lower places according to their
degrees, as the water and the earth doe in this great world. For this
cause all these humours besides their common offices and effects, haue
others more speciall agreeable to their nature, as (God willing) we wil
declare heereafter. And namely, the flegmatike humour that holdeth
of the nature of the water, is to be considered of. For as in this great visible
world, there are waters both aboue and beneath, I meane those
that are contained and retained within the clouds in the ayre, and those
that are in the sea and in riuers, kept within their bounds assigned them
for their course: so the like is to be fou^d in the litle world, which is ma^.
Nowe hitherto haue wee learned, howe the water and the other
humours are carried with the blood throughout the body, aswell
vpwarde as downewarde, by meanes of the veines which water
all the partes of it, howe high or lowe soeuer they be, and therewithall
carrie vnto them their foode and nourishement. And this agreeth
fitly to the woonderfull worke of GODS prouidence in

nature,Agreement betwixt the great garden of the world, and that of the litle world. which, of the vapours arising out of the earth, gathereth
the cloudes together, and these like to sponges sucke vp vapours
from the waters of which themselues are engendered, and which
afterward they cary about (as it were in chariots) to distribute them
into all quarters of the worlde, according as it shall please God to dispose
of them, by sending his blessing vpon the earth by the meanes
of raine, wherewith being watred, it nourisheth all those herbs, trees,
plantes, and fruites which it bringeth foorth, not onely for the sustenance
of men,A goodly conte^plation in nature. but also of beasts. Let vs then imagine before vs a garden
wherein is infinite varietie of trees and plantes of all sortes, and
that this garden is watred either by raine from heauen, or by pipes and
conduites whereby the water is brought thither and dispersed in all
places thereof. We shall see that in this great diuersitie of nature, there
is but one and the same nourishment for them all, and but one place.
And albeeit the liquor that affoordeth this nourishment to so many
sorts of plants be but one, neuerthelesse it is conuerted into the nature
of all those things which it nourisheth, so that the nature of it is changed
according to the distinct propertie of each of them. For there are
plants and herbes of all qualities, and of all tastes and colours. Some
are hote, others colde, some drie, others moist, either in the first, or second
or third or fourth degree, or else are tempered and intermingled
according to their seuerall natures. As for their tastes, some are sweet,
others sharpe, or bitter, or of no certaine taste. In a worde, there are of
all kindes of tastes, both simple and compound. And yet the humour
or liquor is but one that receiueth all these qualities, as in wormwood
it becommeth bitter, and in the Vine or Figge-tree sweete. And if the
herbes bee either for food, or for physicke, or of a poysonfull nature,
the same may be saide of the humour that nourisheth them. The like is
seene also in colours. Neither doe wee obserue all this by experience
onely in some great diuersitie of trees, and of all sortes of plantes, but
euen in eche of them seuerally. For I pray you what difference is there
in euery herbe, or in euery seuerall tree, I meane betweene the roote
and the stalke, the body and the branches, the boughes and the leaues,
the floures, seedes and fruites? And yet all these sundry partes receiue
nourishment from one Mother, and from one and the same substance
and liquor.Of the heart of plants. Moreouer we see, that as man and all other liuing creatures
haue their heart in the midst of their bodies, which is the fountaine of
life, so all trees, herbes and plantes haue their heart in the middest of
them according to their nature, without which they could not liue.
For we call their heart the inwarde part, within which their pith remaineth,
which is vnto them as the heart is to liuing and sensible creaatures.

Whereupon we haue further to note in regard of those herbes
that haue weak stalks, especially hollow ones, or such as haue strawes
insteede of stalkes, that the prouidence of God hath giuen vnto them
knots, seuered as it were into sundry smal knees which are vnto the^ in
place of their stomack, and of other nutritiue members to reteine their
nourishment the longer, and to concoct it the better, as also to strengthe^
them thereby. And this we may euidently see in all sorts of corne and
pulse. Euen so doth nature, or rather the prince therof worke in a mans
body,The body of man compared to a garden. which is as it were a garden that hath a soule. Wherein the Creator
of this whole frame sheweth himselfe no lesse wonderful, nay rather
much more then in this great garden of ye whole earth, and of the
great world, of both which he is the Gardener that watreth them, to
nourish all the fruits they bring forth, and to cause them to grow. For fro^
whence proceed, or are nourished the bones, gristles, ligame^ts, sinews,
arteries, veines, flesh, kernels, fatte, together with all the other partes of
which the body is compounded? May not the like be saide of the eyes
and of their coats and humors, of the eares, nose, tongue, teeth, belly, stomack,
guts, liuer, spleene, kidneies, and of all the other bowls and inward
parts? And if we come to the hands and feet, and to the other outward
members, and to al the other parts called Instrumentall, and distinguished
according to their office, we shall finde that onely through the alteration
of their foode into liquor, they all receiue such nourishment as
is proper to eche of them. Yet notwithstanding one and the same sustenance
is offered to so many sundry members, beeing made familiar
and of the same nature with that part vnto which it is ioyned. For if it
goe to the eyes, it becommeth of the same temperament, that the
nerues and spirites belonging to the sight are of, which bring the facultie
and vertue of seeing vnto the eyes: as likewise it is of the same
temperament with the coats and humors of which the eyes are compounded,
being diuided and distributed to eche sundrie part by a naturall
propertie inherent in them. The like is done in the eares and in
other members and instruments of the corporal senses, and in all the
other partes of the body, euen to the very nailes and haires thereof.
Wherein truely wee see wonderfull alterations, and a most admirable
woorke of Gods prouidence, whether it bee considered in the
whole earth, and in this great world, or in man, who is the litle world.
Now for the sequele of our speech, before wee come to speake of the
speciall offices and effectes of the three humours ioyned with the
blood, of which wee haue heere spoken, wee are to consider besides
this distribution made of the nourishment by meanes of the
veynes, as it hath beene tolde vs, of another meane by which these

humours, and especially the flegmatike, ascend vp vnto the braine:
whereby it commeth to passe that in man, as well as in the great
world, there are waters aboue and belowe, which are the cause that
mans life swimmeth in the middest of a great danger.Mans life in the midst of two waters. Also wee are to
knowe why the soule and the blood are often taken eche for other,
and to be instructed in the temperature of the humors, necessarily belonging
to the bodie for the health and life thereof: as likewise to
consider of the causes of health and sicknesse, and of life and death.
But this shall bee for to morowe, when thou ASER, shalt vndertake
the discourse of these things, so farre foorth as is requisite for vs to
know.

The end of the eight dayes worke.


THE NINTH
dayes worke.

Of the vapours that ascend vp to the braine, and of the waters and cloudes
conteined therein, and in what perils men are thereby: why the soule and
blood are put one for another: of the temperature of the humors necessary
for the health and life of the body: of the causes of health and of diseases,
and of life and death. Chap. 65.
ASER. It is the saying of an ancient Philosopher, that
they which saile vpon the water, are not aboue two
or three fingers breadth distant from death: namely
so farre off as the thicknes of the plankes and timber
of the ship is, in which they are caried into the Sea.
For if that timber were taken from vnder them, they
cannot auoyd drowning vnlesse they can swimme like fishes. But not
to saile on the sea, or vpon a lake or riuer to approch neere to death,
we haue it a great deale neerer vs, when we cary about vs infinite causes
and meanes, whereby we are euery houre in danger of stifling, and
as it were of drowning, and that both waking and sleeping, eating and
drinking, within doores and without, at all times and in al places whersoeuer
we become. Insomuch that of what estate and disposition soeuer,
men are, we are oftentimes astonished to heare tydings of a mans
death, sooner then of his sickenesse, whom wee saw not long before,
mery, cheerefull and in good health.

Now we may learne some chiefe causes hereof by this dayes handling
of that matter Subiect, which was yesterday propounded to bee
discoursed vpon. And first we must know, that besides the distribution
of all the humours together with the blood into all parts of the bodie
by the veines, and that for the causes before learned, there is yet
another meane whereby these humors, especially the flegmatike humour,Vapours ascending vp to the braine.
which is of the nature of the water, ascend vp vnto the braine,
by reason of vapours arising vpward out of the stomacke, like to the
vapour of a potte seething on the fire with liquor in it, and like to vapours
that ascend vp from the earth into the ayre, of which raine is engendred.
Now when these vapours are come vp to the braine, they returne
to their naturall place, and into the nature of those humours of
which they were bred, as the vapours that are held in the aire turne againe
into the same nature of water of which they came. Therefore as
the waters are contained within the cloudes in the region of the aire
allotted vnto them,Watry clouds in the braine. so is it with our braine which is of a colde nature,
and of a spongie substance fitte for that purpose. So that we alwayes
carie within it as it were cloudes full of water, and of other humours
that distil and runne downe continually by the members and passages,
which God hath appointed to that ende, as wee haue alreadie hearde.
And these places albeit they serue especially to purge seuerall humors,
as hath beene tolde vs, yet oftentimes they voide them altogether,
both by reason of their mingling and coniunction, as of their ouer great
abundance. Yea many times they are so plentifull, namely the flegmatike
humour, that because the braine cannot sufficiently discharge
it selfe of them by the ordinary way, these humors ouerflowe on all
sides wheresoeuer they can finde any vent and issue, euen as when a
thundering cloude bursteth asunder. So that the water runneth not
downe as it were a milde and gentle raine, but as a mighty flood that
bringeth great ruines with it, or as a riuer passing his ordinary course,
breaketh downe both banke and wall, and ouerfloweth euery where.
Therefore we may well say, that many times we haue floods of water
enclosed within our heads and braines, when wee neuer thinke of it,
nor yet consider in what danger we are. Which the more secrete and
vnknowen it is vnto vs, the more perillous it is, and greatlier to be feared,
especially considering it is so neere vs, and that wee haue fewer
meanes to auoyde it, as wee haue daily examples in many, who being
in health and mery, are sodainely choked by catarrhes, which like to
floods of waters,Inconueniences that come from the braine. runne downewards, as the very name deriued from
the Grecians doeth import as much: or by some sodaine Apoplexie,
how healthy soeuer before they seemed to bee. Others also there are,

who if they be not presently choked with such floods from the brain,
yet they are taken with palsies, lamenesse, and impotencie in all their
members, or at leastwise in some of them, as if some waterflood had
caried them away, so that nothing had beene saued but the bare life,
and that more fraile and miserable then death it selfe. I speake not of
gowtie persons, who although they be not assaulted with such great
and vehement floods of waters, and with euill and superfluous humours,
so that some few droppes onely (of which they are so called)
fall vpon some partes of them, yet are they greatly tormented and constrained
to crie out, and that oftentimes in extreme distresse. Which
consideration ought to stirre vs vp to know wherein our life and preseruation
thereof consisteth, and of whom we holde it. And on the other
side, although we had no examples of floods and inundations of
waters, of earthquakes and such other iudgementes of God whereby
he punisheth men,Instruction for euery one. neuertheles these water-floods which we alwaies
carie about vs, ought to admonish and induce vs to feare him, to call
vpon him by prayer, and day and night, yea hourely, to recommend
our life vnto him, seeing he can take it from vs by stopping our breath,
yea by a very small matter: or at least depriue vs of all motion and
sense, as though our bodies had neither soule nor life in them, but
were like to poore dead carkases. For the doing hereof hee needeth
not to thunder or lighten from heauen against vs, but onely to cause
a small showre of water to powre downe from our head, which is the
highest, the goodliest and most noble part of all the bodie, and as it
were the heauen of the litle world: or if it please him to cause a fewe
droppes onely to distill downe vpon the sinewes and ioyntes, it will
torment men more grieuously then if they were in some continuall
torture, as the daily songs of such gowtie persons doe testifie, who are
impatient and voyde of the feare of God.Testimonie of the prouidence of God. Now besides this profitable
aduertisement, which euery one may take by that which hath bin
here vttered, wee ought on the other side to consider the prouidence
and goodnesse of God towardes men, in that as he holdeth vp in the
aire and cloudes, the water that hangeth ouer vs, not suffering them
to breake downe vpon vs all at once to ouerwhelme all the earth by
them, with all the beastes and other creatures conteined in it, but distributeth
them by good and iust measure: so dealeth he with the humours
that ascend vp continually, and are kept in our braine, where
they haue their vessels to retaine them in, as it were in sponges, which
yeeld foorth water according as they are either loosened, or restrayned
and closed together. And as for that which is said of the testimony
which we haue of the frailtie of our life, appearing in the principal and

most noble part of our bodie, as the like was shewed vs before in that
instruction, which we learned by the office that God assigned to our
lungs, and to the passages allotted by him for the taking in end letting
out of the aire: so wee haue a very notable lesson in the consideration
of the liuer and of the blood, of which that is the forge and
fountaine, and of the distribution thereof into all the partes and
members of the bodie by meanes of the veynes, as wee hearde yesterday.
For as a man may iudge by outward appearance that the life
of man consisteth in his breath, and that he giueth vp both soule and
life when hee dyeth, as it were in giuing vp the last gaspe: so it seemeth
also, that it is placed in the blood, as that which goeth as it
were with the blood, so that when the blood is drawen out of a mans
bodie, the life also may seeme to bee drawne out therewithall. Herevpon
as the soule is oftentimes in holy Scripture put for the life,
because it giueth life to the bodie, so it is also put for the blood,
and the blood likewise called soule, because it is the instrument and
meanes whereby the soule giueth life: and when the Lorde forbiddeth
his people to case the flesh with his soule,Gen. 9. 4, 5. that is the blood thereof.
Whereby his meaning is to teach men, to abhorre the effusion
of mans blood: and therefore hee sayeth further, I will require
your blood, euen the blood of your soules. Wherefore hee that sheadeth
blood, doeth as much as if hee drewe the soule out of the bodie.
Nowe forasmuch as the blood is so necessarie vnto life, wee are
likewise to vnderstande, that as it is either pure and sounde, or vnpure
and corrupted, so is it disposed either to health or sicknesse,
and to life or death. For as the naturall life of man consisteth, especially
in heate and moysture, so a man may easily iudge, that as
euery thing is bred by meanes of them, chiefely liuing and sensible
creatures, so nothing can bee preserued in this bodily life without
these two qualities, that are proper to the ayre and to blood, as wee
haue alreadie hearde. But these qualities must bee so tempered,
that there bee no excesse on either side. And for this cause GOD
woulde haue all the humours to bee mingled together with the
blood,The mixture of the humors necessary. that so it might bee tempered as is requisite for the life of
man. For if it bee too hote and drie, or too moyst and colde, it cannot
doe that office, for the performance whereof it is ordayned: but
in steede of bringing health and life, it will breede diseases, and
in the ende cause death. For naturall death commeth onely of diseases,
amongest which olde age is to bee reckoned, which is an incurable
sicknesse that lasteth vntill death. Neither doe diseases
proceede, but onely of the distemperature that is in mens bodies,

and in the humours of which they are compounded.The causes of health and of sicknesse. For as long
as they are in a good, moderate and proportionable temper, and
are distributed to all the partes of the bodie, according as neede
requireth, so that none of them exceedeth, then is there an equalitie
in all the bodie, which doeth not onely preserue it in life, but
in health and good disposition. For there is the like concorde and
harmonie betweene these humours, that is betweene the partes of a
good consort of musicke agreeing well together, or of an instrument
of musicke well tuned, from which you shall heare nothing
but pleasaunt melodie. Whereas if all the partes thereof agree not
well together, there will bee no musicall harmonie, but onely a
very vnpleasant discorde. The like may bee saide of all the concordes
and discordes that may fall out in the humours of our bodies.
And therefore GOD had so tempered them in the first creation of
man as was requisite, so that hee, woulde haue preserued him in
a perpetuall life, if by true obedience hee had alwayes beene knit
and vnited vnto God his Creatour.Sinne the cause of all the discord in the world. But since man fell at variance
with God through sinne, all this goodly concorde, which God
had placed not onely in mans bodie, but also betweene the rest of
his creatures, hath been troubled and turned into discord by meanes
of sinne. So that all this, goodly temperature and harmonie of the
humours in which mans bodie was created, was dissolued and broken
asunder, and that in such sort that it was neuer since sounde
and perfect in any man, of howe good constitution soeuer hee hath
beene. For euen in the best complexions there is alwayes some defect
or excesse in some of the humours: so that if there were no other
cause,The causes of death. yet no body coulde naturally bee immortall. For alwayes in
the ende the excesse or defect that is in it, woulde cause it to decay,
and finally bring it to corruption. But besides this, there are so many
other wantes and superfluities throughout the whole life of man,
whereby this euill alreadie become naturall, is so much augmented,
that there die moe without comparison of ordinarie, diseases
and of violent death, then of olde age and naturall death: and all this
by meanes of sinne.
Therefore we may well conclude, that health is the effect and fruite
of peace and concord betweene all the partes and humors of mans bodie,
and so consequently is life: as contrariwise, sicknesse and death proceed
of discord, dissention, and warre betweene them. For as concord
bringeth peace, and peace all good things with it, so contrariwise,
discord breedeth warre, and warre a heaped measure of all miseries
and euils. Wherefore a sounde body of a good constitution is like

the bodie of a whole people and societie, that hath the members agreeing
well together, so that euery one keepeth his ranke, not hurting
one another. But a sicke and diseased body, is like to the body of
a mutinous and seditious people, that breaketh the order it ought to
keepe,A politike instruction. and goeth beyond the appoynted bounds. Therefore we haue
a goodly image of peace, and of that peaceable life whereunto men
are created and borne; in the disposition and temperature of the humors
and members of our bodie, whereby wee ought to learne what
great account we are to make of peace, amitie and concord, and howe
we ought to hate and abhorre all warre, discord, and dissention, seeing
the one is as it were health and life, and the other as diseases and
death. Now let vs see the vse and profite, the particular and speciall
properties of the humors ioyned with the blood: and what vessels are
assigned vnto them, together with their nature and offices. It belongeth
to thee, AMANA, to handle this matter.


Of the vses and commodities of the humors ioyned with the blood, and
what vessels are assigned vnto them in the bodie, and of their nature
and offices: and first of the cholericke humour, of the gall and vessell
thereof: next of the melancholike humour and of the spleene: then
of the flegmatike humour, and of the kidneyes and other vessels, which it
hath to purge by. Chap. 66.
AMANA. As we ought to labour to cut off all discord, and to nourish
all concord, that wee may enioy peace and those benefites
that proceede thereof: so wee must be very carefull to preserue all the
partes of our bodie in such a temperature, as may keepe them in a harmonie
and concord, that we may liue in health. For this cause as God
hath tempered all the humors one with another, so he hath assigned
to euery one his proper place and seate, both to withdraw it self therin,
and to performe the office enioyned vnto it, and also to purge and
clense it selfe, and to discharge the body of superfluities and corruptions
that otherwise might hurt it. Nowe we haue alreadie heard, how
he hath assigned the liuer to be the seat of the blood, because he hath
appointed the blood to water all the body, and to giue life and nourishment
vnto it, out of which also the vital spirits arise, as smal and mild
windes proceed out of riuers and fountaines.
As for the cholericke humour,Of the cholericke humor. it is ioyned with the blood for the
concoction of humors that abound, and to awake and stirre vp the bodie
least it become heauie, sleepie and dull, as also to penetrate and open
the passages when it goeth with the blood, and therewithall to

nourish those members that agree with the nature of it, as the lungs,
with whose nourishment cholericke blood doeth better agree then any
other. Whereby it appeareth euidently, that this humour holdeth
of the nature of fire, which giueth vnto it this quicknesse and
vertue. And because it is hote and drye, it serueth also to temper the
moysture of the blood, and to meete with all colde that might come
vnto it, and helpeth to preserue it in his naturall heate. Nowe forasmuch
as it is not all caried and distributed with the blood, but the
greatest part of it remaineth for other vses, God hath assigned a vessell
vnto it, into which it retireth and is contained therein so farre foorth
as is requisite. The ende hereof is, that the blood should not bee infected
with too much choler mingled therewith, as also that it might
descend into the guttes, by those passages that are giuen vnto it to
that purpose to be voyded by them, and to prouoke them to discharge
those excrements which they receiue, and so to purge the whole body.
For this cause there is a bladder in fashion like to a long peare,Of the Gall and of his bladder. placed
vnder the middest of the liuer, about the hollowe part of the right
side of it, within which it is halfe hidden. This bladder is the vessell
into which that yellowe humour withdraweth it selfe, and is conteined
therein, which wee call Gall. And as this bladder hath his filaments
and threedes, both to draw vnto it and to reteine, as also to
expell forth, so it hath two branches comming out of the necke of it,
the one vpwarde to draw away the cholericke humour in the purifying
of the blood, the other downeward towardes the guttes to carie
this humour vnto them, both for the thrusting forwarde of nourishment,
and for the casting foorth of the excrements. For it was necessary,
that the great abundance of this humour should retire into some
place in the purging of the blood: and therfore it was as requisite that
it shoulde haue a fitte vessell to retire into, wherein it was not to remaine
vnprofitable.The vses of the cholericke humour. For besides the vses alreadie spoken of, it serueth
not onely to cleanse all the guttes of ordure, but also to heate the liuer,
and to hinder the putrefaction of the blood. Besides, experience sufficiently
sheweth, how needefull it is that the blood should haue such
a vessell wherewith to purge it selfe. For when the passages thereof are
stopped, great diseases followe thereupon, as inflammation of the liuer,
and the dropsie, but especially the yellowe iaundies. For when
this humour is not duely separated from the blood, so that it is not
purged thereof as nature requireth, then doeth it beginne to corrupt:
whereupon it cannot send such foode to the members as is necessarie
for them, but that which is corrupted by this gall, whereby they are
driuen out of their naturall disposition. And this wee may see chiefely

in the yellowe iaundies by reason of this yellowe and bitter humour,
that maketh the bodie yellowe, into which it is dispersed by
meanes of the veynes, in steede of beeing nourished with good
blood.Of the melancholicke humor. The like may bee saide of the melancholicke humour, which
is as it were the lees of the blood. For if the blood bee corrupted and
infected, great inconueniences ensue thereof vnto the whole bodie,
through which this humour is dispersed after the same manner that
the cholerick humour is: insomuch as it becommeth blacke thereby,
as the cholericke humour maketh it yellowe, and for the like cause,
breeding the like disease, the difference of humours onely excepted.
Nowe because we haue not in our vsuall speech a speciall name to declare
this difference, this disease is commonly called the blacke iaundies.Of the spleene.
Therefore God hath assigned the spleene for a seate to this
blacke humour, which beeing placed on the left side conteineth this
humour in it, hauing proper pipes and passages, both to drawe from
the liuer this dregges of the blood, and also to communicate the
same vnto the stomacke, thereby to prouoke appetite, as likewise
to purge it selfe by diuers meanes. The chiefe vse of it is to receaue
the grosse and muddie blood, and to that ende there is a great veine,
which beeing the pipe of this blood, goeth from the Port-veine to
the spleene, which is nourished with the best of it, and concocteth
the aboundance of this humour. Therefore God hath created it
with such a flesh as is meete and apt for that office: and further
hath holpen it with certaine arteries, whereby it is heated and made
warme. And when it hath taken so much of this grosse blood to
nourish it selfe withall as is requisite, the rest is partly reteyned still,
and partly thrust out and sent to the bottome of the stomacke, by a
veyne seruing for the same purpose, to the ende that from thence this
humour may bee voyded out of the bodie.What effects follow the oppilation of the liuer. Now when these veines
are stopt, daungerous diseases follow thereupon, chiefely when this
happeneth to the first veine whereof I spake euen nowe. For when
the liuer is not purged, his whole office is hindered, and it selfe
decayeth by little and little, by retayning still the excrementes
thereof: from whence the vapours ascending vp to the brayne trouble
it very much, and cause it to fall into very strange and foolish
conceiptes. And when the body is burdened with this humour, it
causeth that man to bee very melancholicke, and sadde, and many
times bringeth that yrkesomnesse vpon him, that he desireth nothing
but death. It was very requisite therefore, that God shoulde
giue both a vessell and passages to this humour, which is not without
his great commodities, if it bee tempered and distributed as it

ought to bee.The commodities of the melancholike humour. For it serueth to stay and to retaine the floting spirites,
which arise out of the blood, least if they shoulde bee made
more pure and subtill, then is expedient for the bodie, they vanish
and passe away altogether. It is profitable also to thicken the blood,
and to helpe to restraine and keepe it from running ouer hastily: besides,
it nourisheth therewithall the melancholicke members,
which holde most of the nature of that humour, as namely, the
bones and the spleene.
Likewise, the drinesse both of this and of the cholericke humour
standeth the blood in some steade: and the coldnesse thereof serueth
to coole and moderate the heate of the blood, and of the cholericke
humour.Of the flegmatike humour and profite of it. As for the flegmaticke humour, which is also called Pituita,
it is not without his commodities. For first, it is the matter whereof
the blood is made, when it is by little and little concocted better: it
mitigateth the heate of the blood, and is vnto it in place of nourishment,
and in steade of a bridle to restraine the burning and deuouring
heate thereof from present consuming of all. Besides, it keepeth
the blood from beeing too thicke and drie: and beeing caried
with the blood, it nourisheth the flegmatike and colde members,
such as the braine is. And as the other humours ioyned with the
blood, haue their superfluities and vessels to keepe them in and
to purge them, so is it with this. For this humour is not onely caried
with the blood to keepe it from ouermuch thicknesse, that it
may the better passe through the veynes: but there proceedeth also
from the whole masse of blood, an excrement like to very thinne
water, which by reason of the thinnesse of it, can no way bee profitable
to the bodie. For it is a water that differeth as much from
blood, and from the flegmatike humour ioyned with it, as whay
doeth from milke, when the butter and cheese with all the substaunce
that can bee had from it, is drawen out of it. For it is
like to sweate, with which it hath some resemblaunce. Therefore
it hath his proper place assigned vnto it in the kidneyes,Of the kidneyes. which
drawe to themselues the watrish matter from the blood, thereby
purging it from water that woulde corrupt it, and fill the veynes
in steade of good blood: as wee see it in the dropsie, which bloweth
vp the bodie that is stuffed with water in steade of good nourishment,
which by the veynes it shoulde drawe from the blood, if
the liuer were well affected, and if all the other partes that ought
to helpe it, did well performe their dueties. And to the ende, that the
kidneys may the better do their dutie, God hath not only created two,
but hath so placed them by his prouidence, that the right kidney is

higher then the left, so that they doe their dueties one after another.
For if they wrought both together, if they were both in one place, and
if both drewe vnto themselues with equall force, in steede of mutuall
helpe, they woulde greatly hinder eche other: which inconuenience
the prouidence of God doeth very well meete with. And
as all the inwarde partes, of which wee haue hitherto spoken, haue
their pipes both to drawe from the liuer that humour that is meete
for them, and to sende it where neede requireth, and also for to
purge themselues: euen so the kidneyes haue their passages apt and
meete for the performance of all these things. For first they haue Emulgent
veines,Emulgent vcines. so called because they drawe this waterish superfluitie,
as a child sucketh milke out of the breast, and hauing receiued this
water separated from the blood, they sende it vnto the kidneyes. It
is true,How the vrine is made yellow. that a little blood passeth together with it to nourish the kidneyes
withall, with which there is some yellowe choller mingled,
that serueth afterwarde to helpe expulsion, and the water beeing coloured
therewith, is made yellowe and brackish, and then it is rightly
called Vrine. Nowe after the kidneyes haue drawen from the liuer
this water, whereby the blood is purged, and themselues also
in part nourished with some little of the blood, and that by meanes
of the veines and passages giuen vnto them for that purpose, they
haue two other passages,Of the Vreteres and of the bladder. called Vreteres, or Vrine pipes, whereby
they purge and discharge themselues of that water that is called Vrine,
after the blood is wholly separated from it. This done, these
pipes sende the water vnto the bladder, which is a vessell meete for
the receipt thereof, and which doeth as it were distill the same by litle
and litle through these pipes that enter into the bladder, both on the
right side and on the left. Moreouer the bladder hath a necke and passage
neere to the two vrine pipes, whereby it dischargeth it selfe of
this humour, after it hath kept the same awhile, voyding it forth of the
body as a superfluous excrement. For if this were not so, after the body
were full of this water ouerflowing in it, not onely many partes
and members woulde bee broken, but men also shoulde bee stifled,
by reason of the compression and contraction of the Midriffe. I
speake not heere of the stone which wee carie in our kidneyes, or of
that which oftentimes breedeth both in the kidnes and in the bladder,
I meane of such stones as bake there as it were in a Tilekill,
or potters fornace. I omitte also the passions of the kidneyes,
and the extreame paines proceeding from thence, which are further
instructions vnto vs of our infirmities and miseries, and of the frailetie
of mans life: but the handling of these things properly belongeth

to the Physicions.Of the necke of the bladder. I will onely adde to that which I haue spoken of
the necke of the bladder, where the Vrinary pipes ende, that the
hole thereof is full of wreathings and turnings, to the ende it may the
better holde and keepe in the water. And for this cause also it hath a
muskle, as well as the fundament, to open and to shut, and to yeelde
and retaine the vrine according to natures will, euen as it is with the
other excrementes that are purged by the bowels. Wee propounde
these things as it were a generall Anatomie of the bodie, because
if I should lay them open at large and by peece-meale, eche member
hath in it sufficient whereof to make a great booke. For as I haue
alreadie declared, the artificiall woorkemanship of mans bodie is incredible
and incomprehensible, if a man consider all the partes of
it. For there is nothing, bee it neuer so small, but the woorke of it is
very marueilous, the vse great, and so fitted to the purpose as cannot
possibly be better. But wee neede not discourse more particularly
of the composition and nature of mans body, and of the partes of
it,What it is to be a naturall diuine. seeing our intent is not to become Physicions, but in some sort naturall
Diuines, by learning to knowe the prouidence of God in his
woorkes, especially in our creation, composition, nourishment and
preseruation, that wee may glorifie him in them, as becommeth vs.
Nowe in all that wee haue hitherto propounded of the foure naturall
humours of the bodie, wee haue spoken of them according as
naturally they are, and ought to bee without corruption, and such as
are necessary for the life of man. But forasmuch as they are of great
vertue and power in regarde of the affections and manners of men,
whether they abide in their right nature, or whether they be corrupted,
wee must speake somewhat of their corruption, and of the
hurt that commeth thereby, not onely to the health and life of the bodie,
but also to that of the soule: considering withall what are the
sundry naturall temperaments of men. Marke therefore, ARAM, what
you haue to say vnto vs concerning this matter.


Of the names wherby the humors of the bodie are commonly called, with the
causes wherefore: of the comparison betweene the corruption and temperature
of the humors of the body, and betweene the manners and affections
of the Soule: of the meanes whereby the humours corrupt, and of the
Feuers and diseases engendred thereby: of the sundry natural temperatures
in euery one. Chap. 67.
ARAM. The nourishment of mans body hath many degrees,
and passeth through many pipes and vessels, before it bee perfect

and conuerted by true generation into the proper substaunce
of euery member whither it is caried, as wee may iudge by that
which wee haue alreadie hearde to this purpose. But there is such
an accorde betweene all the members of the bodie, whereby euery
one executeth his office, and such a communion of all their
powers, that eche member keepeth his ranke and order, neyther
doeth any one retayne, and keepe to it selfe more nourishment
then is requisite, but sendeth as much as is needefull vnto the rest,
euen vnto the nayles, and haires and vttermost excrements. Nowe
if through some defect or corruption falling out in their nature,
any of them breake the order of this equall distribution, a common
detriment seazeth vpon the whole bodie, and vpon all the
members generally, so that those partes also taste of the hurte,
that offered wrong vnto the residue. For they cannot liue alone,
nor without helpe from others.What communion ought to be among men. The like is seene in the Common-wealth,
and in the members thereof. For what is the cause that some
are readie to burst for farnesse and multitude of meates, whereas others
are emptie and die of hunger? that some haue so much wealth,
that they are greately troubled therewith, and others are so poore?
Nay, what is the cause of all the confusion in the worlde, but
that euerie one raketh to himselfe, and no such equalitie and communion
is obserued, as becommeth the estate of euerie one?
Wherefore as sundrie diseases are bredde in mans bodie, whereby
in the ende it is vtterly ouerthrowen, when there is no such
communion betweene the members thereof, nor any such distribution
of the nourishment as there ought to bee: so is it with the
bodie of the Common-wealth, when some oppresse others, and
when euerie one hath not that that belongeth vnto him. For, first
there followeth great confusion, and of confusion, subuersion, as
diseases followe faultes committed by the members, and after diseases
death it selfe.
Nowe the infinite number of infirmities and ordinarie diseases,
whereby moe violent deathes are procured then naturall, by reason
of the defectes and excesses brought in by sinne into the whole
life of man, causeth men to speake diuersely of the foure humours
of the bodie, necessarie for the preseruation and nourishment
thereof. For they are more often taken for the vices and excesses,
whereby they are corrupted, then for the true naturall humours,
which are the chiefe instruments of the soule, whereby it
giueth life and nourishment to the bodie.Why the humors are taken in the euill part. The cause whereof, as
I thinke, is because men doe sooner and more easily perceiue and

marke what is euill and hurtfull vnto them, then that which breedeth
their good and profite. And indeede it falleth out commonly,
that they knowe not the good thinges they haue vntill they
haue lost them, or else are become hurtfull vnto them. No marueile
then if they knowe not from whence these good things come,
or of whome they haue receiued them, and so become ingratefull
towardes GOD. Wherefore let vs not woonder when God
withdraweth them from vs, or suffereth them to corrupt and to
bee spoyled that they might hurt vs in steede of helping vs, to the
ende that by this meanes wee might learne to acknowledge that
good which before wee knewe not, and not to despise it when wee
haue it, I meane that wee shoulde learne this by the euill that succeedeth
after wee haue lost the good.The cause of mens ingratitude. For wee are such scholers as
cannot otherwise imprint in our mindes those good thinges which
God bestoweth vpon vs, but by beeing depriued of them, and by our
owne hurt.
Heereof it is that wee alwayes learne to our owne cost, as wee
say, because wee cannot conceiue so well, as wee ought to doe of
the free goodnesse of God. Nay, it were well if all coulde learne aright
by their owne harmes. For there are but fewe that profite thereby
as they ought. Howe manie are there that in steede of amendment,
waxe woorse through the chasticements of God? But in
the meane time our vsuall manner of speaking teacheth vs, that
men haue more knowledge of corrupt humours that hurt them,
then of the good ones that nourish them, and continue in their
naturall soundnesse, seeing their names are more often taken in
the euill part then in the good. Nowe when wee spake before of
these humours in the bodie, it was as they are and ought to bee naturally,
and such as beeing voyde of corruption, are necessarie
for the life of man. And forasmuch as they are of great force in
regarde of the affections and manners of men, whether they abide
in their owne nature, or whether they bee corrupted, wee
will speake somewhat more of their corruption, and of those
hurtes which they bring to the health and life of the bodie: afterward
we wil consider of their effects in the soule.The agreement betweene the maners and humors of the body. But we must here
cal to mind what we heard before of the agreement between the maners
and affections of the soule, and the temperature of the bodie,
and howe the one serueth the other. Whereby we may gather, that
it is so with the affections in regarde of the soule, as it is with
the naturall humours in regarde of the bodie. For according

as these humours are well or ill tempered, so is the bodie well or
ill affected: and according as they increase or diminish, so the
health of a man is more sounde and stedfast, or more crasie and inconstant,
and so readie to turne into more grieuous and dangerous
diseases. The like may bee sayde of the stayednesse or vnstayednesse
of the affections of the soule, and of the spirituall health and
diseases thereof. For this cause, if wee ought to bee so carefull
to reduce our bodie to a good temperature when there is anie defect:
and beeyng so, to preserue it in the same estate still, and
so likewise for the equalitie and agreement that ought to bee betweene
the humours from whence it commeth, so that wee desire
to obtaine health when wee are sicke, and to keepe it well
when wee haue it: then ought wee to bee much more carefull for
the temperature and moderation of the affections of the soule,
and of the spirituall health that proceedeth thereof. And therefore
in the corruption of the bodily humours, wee are to consider
diligently of the corruption of manners, and of the affections of
the soule. For there is great agreement betweene the one and the other.
But to come to the chiefe poynt of this present speech,By what meanes the naturall humors corrupt. wee are
first to note, that the naturall humours corrupt two manner of
wayes, when they leaue the order of nature and change their naturall
properties. For that commeth vnto them, eyther because their
proper substaunce degenerateth without any mixture of other humours,
or through the mixture of some other vicious and corrupt humour.
Nowe howe much the more requisite the humour is, and necessarie
for the bodie of man beeing in his naturall soundnesse, so
much the more hurtfull is it when it is corrupted. Therefore forasmuch
as the blood, which is properly so called amongest the humours
of the bodie, is more conuenient, apt and necessary for the life
thereof then any of the rest, as hath beene declared vnto vs, it followeth
that the corruption thereof is more dangerous then of anie
other humour. Nowe it degenerateth from his owne substaunce,
when (the pores beeing shutte) it putrifieth within the veynes,
and is turned into a certayne cholericke humour, not naturall but
corrupted:The originall of Feuers and other diseases. whereupon the continuall Feuer arisech. Besides, it
corrupteth after another manner, namely, through the mixture
of some other humour, as when the first masse of blood is corrupt
through the aboundance of a rawe humour that is not well digested
in the liuer, whereof the dropsie followeth, as likewise
the yellowe iaundies is bredde of the blood corrupted through

too great aboundance of the cholericke humour.The corruption of the flegmatike humour. In like manner
the flegmaticke humour is corrupted in his substaunce, when
it ouerfloweth and giueth vpwarde in mens bodies, and continueth
rawe for want of good concoction and digestion: it being sometimes
more thinne, and sometimes more thicke. From hence commeth
spettle, snattines of the nose, catherres, and distillations, and oftentimes
vomiting, when it is grosse and thicke. Besides, this flegmatike
humour corrupteth through the mixture of the cholericke or melancholicke
humour: and then it waxeth salt or sharpe, according to the
humour that is mingled therewith. And as the continuall feuer is
bredde of blood corrupted in substance, so the quotidian ague proceedeth
of the corruption of the flegmaticke humour.Of the cholerike humour. As for the cholericke
humour it degenerateth of it selfe, when it burneth and is turned
into a vicious melancholike humour that is like ashes, thicke and
biting. And because this alteration groweth by little and little, either
by reason of age, or of violent motions in them, that are naturally very
cholericke, it commeth to passe that such persons are in their olde
age subiect to a furious kinde of anger. On the other side, this cholericke
humour corrupteth when it is mingled with some other humor,
as when it is mixed with flegme, which as it is either more thinne, or
thicker, so is the colour of the choller more or lesse yellow, pale, or
greene. The like may bee saide of the mixture of all the other humours.
Nowe as the tertian ague, I meane the right and perfect tertian, is
engendered of the cholericke humour corrupted in his substance: so
the bastard tertian is bredde of the same humour, when it is mixed
with a vicious and corrupt flegmatike humour.From whence all sortes of agues proceede. And truely this is very
strange, that the corruption of euery seuerall humour doeth in this
sort breede sundrie kindes of agues according to the diuersitie of the
humours. For as there are foure sundry sorts of humours, so there are
foure kinds of ordinary agues that haue their seuerall relations to ech
of these humours. So that as the continuall feuer is bredde of blood
corrupted, and the quotidian of flegme, and the tertian of the cholericke
humour, so the quartane proceedeth of the melancholicke humour
corrupted.
Nowe besides these ordinary feuers, there are others mingled and
compounded, according as the putrified humours of which they are
bredde, are mingled and compounded together. From hence spring
demy and double tertians, and quartanes and such like. And sometime
one and the same man shall haue sundry sortes of feuers in one
disease, according to the diuersitie and abundance of corrupt humors

that are in him. Wee may say as much of all other diseases that are
bredde of corrupt humours, according as they are either simpler, or
more mingled and compounded.The corruption of the melancholie humor. Therefore as the other humors corrupt
in such sort as we heard before, so when the melancholicke humour
putrifieth, either it burneth of it selfe, or else by the mixture of other
humours, insomuch as it waxeth grosse and biting, and holdeth
of the nature of ashes.
Nowe when a body subiect to choller,From whence madnesse commeth. flegme, or blood, waxeth
melancholicke, that man, by reason the fumes can not euaporate
and get out, falleth into frensies and madde fittes, and those of
diuers sorts. For as the melancholike humour is mixed, either with
blood, or with flegme or with choller, so is the melancholie person
more or lesse merry or sadde, heauier or lighter, colder or hotter, and
his fits and furies either more moderate, or more vehement and violent.
But howsoeuer it be, we see by daily experience, that there are
many sorts of melancholike persons, of madde, senslesse, and furious
people. And besides the mixture of vicious humours, wee must consider
also the sundry naturall temperaments of euery one. For as wee
see that wines are diuersly tempered according to the varietie of countries,
lands, and aire where they grew, and that albeit they are always
wine, yet there is great difference in the one from the other, both in
substance, nourishment, colour, smell, vertue, and strength: euen so is
it with the humours of the body. For the same humors are more pure,
or more moderate, or more noble and exquisit in some then in others,
according to the natures of their bodies, and not onely of their owne,
but also of their parents bodies from whence they were deriued. For
children commonly take much after their parents. I speake nothing
of that which the temperament may take of the heauens, and of all
the celestiall bodies, and chiefly of the speciall grace of GOD, the
prince of nature, who ruleth ouer all temperaments and complexions.
But it is time, that following our purpose, wee consider what
effectes the humours haue towardes the soule, and that wee looke
into the diuersities of the temperatures and complexions of men,
according vnto the nature of those humours that raigne most in
them, and to that disposition which naturally they doe woorke in
them eyther to vertues or vices. This wee shall learne of thee
ACHITOB.



Of the diuerse temperatures and complexions of men, according to the
nature of humours that beare most sway in them: of the disposition
whereunto they are naturally mooued by them either to vertues or vices:
of the meanes to correct the vices and defects that may be in our
naturall inclinations. Chap. 68.
ACHITOB. It is not without great shew of reason, that the Philosophers
made three principles and beginnings that effect mens
actions,Three chiefe workers of mens actions. namely, powers, habits, or qualities, and affections, or passions. For
we see plainely by experience, of how great force these things are in
man so long as he liueth. Concerning powers, they come to vs by nature,
and are effectiue principles of all actions both good and badde: yea
by them we knowe in children, during their yong yeeres, the signes
and tokens of some vertue or vice, that will raigne most in them afterwards,
which we commonly call Inclination or Disposition. The passions
and affections are likewise naturall in vs, being forcible prickes
to prouoke men to embrace either good or euill, whereof we haue already
spoken sufficiently. As for the habites or qualities, they are accidentall
in man, as they that are gotten by a long and continuall custome
of doing good or euill, whereupon also they take their names of
good or euill habits.He speaketh of such goodnes and vertues as were ^o esteemed of by the heathen that knew not their naturall corruption. Nowe wee commonly see some to be naturally
enclined to one vertue and not to another, or to one vice and not to an
other. For it seemeth sometimes that nature hath bredde some to be
temperate, others to be liberall, and contrariwise. And when a man
endued with natural powers tending to good, obtaineth qualities answerable
thereunto, hee is woorthy of commendation, because vnto
his inclination hee hath added greater helpe, namely, care and study,
by meanes whereof he is come to some perfection. So likewise hee
that being naturally borne impotent, attaineth to those vertues that
are contrary to his impotency, deserueth greater praise: because fighting
as it were with nature, he remaineth conqueror ouer himselfe, and
becommeth vertuous with greater difficultie. But contrariwise, if a
man that is naturally ill disposed to some particular vice, doeth adde
further a habite to his badde inclination, hee is woorthie of blame,
because hee hath not resisted euill, but pleasing himselfe therein hath
made it greater. As likewise hee that hath excellent graces and giftes
of nature to doe well, and suffereth them to vanish away through
his negligence and custome in euill, is much more to bee blamed,
because that voluntarily hee suffereth himselfe to bee ouercome of
vice.

But wee must consider of these things somewhat higher, and by
the selfe same reason iudge of the natural temperaments, which in the
former speech wee heard were diuerse in euery one. For wee ought
to acknowledge one God, Prince, and Authour of nature, who ruleth
in all and ouer all.God ruleth in all, and ouer all. Therefore as he hath appropriated to the soule
those instruments, which he hath giuen vnto it in the body, to worke
in them and by them: so himselfe disposeth and ordereth those instruments,
which he will vse amongst men, yea, euen from their mothers
wombe,Ierem. 1. as it is written of the Prophet Ieremy, and of the Apostle
Saint Paul,Galat. 1. whome our Sauiour also called achosen instrument to be are
his name before the Gentiles,Actes 9. 15. and Kings, and children of Israel. No doubt
therfore, considering the agreement which we haue heard is in the affections
of the soule with the temperature of the body, but that the
more temperate the complexion of euery mans body is, and the neerer
it approcheth to the perfectest temperature, the more quiet and
moder^^e, the more gracious and comely will his affections and maners
be naturally, yea all his gestures and whole behauiour. True it is,
as we haue else-where touched, that no body is so framed, or hath
such an harmony and equalitie throughout, but that there is some
disagreement and inequalitie. But we account those natures to be well
tempered, which approch neerest to the perfect temperature: and as
euery humour ruleth more or lesse in euery one, so he is called either
sanguine, or flegmaticke, or cholericke, or melancholicke. Againe,
as the other humours beare sway next vnto the principall, so is a man
saide to be either flegmaticke sanguine, cholericke sanguine, or melancholike
sanguine. The like may be saide of the other humours according
to their temperature, as also of the affections which haue
some agreement with them.The nature of flegmatike persons. Heereof it is, that when there is excesse
of the flegmatike humour in men, their natures are commonly slouthfull,
they shunne labour and giue themselues to bodily pleasures, they
loue dainties, and delicate meates and drinkes, they are tender and
effeminate, and cleane contrary to stowt and valiant men. And if
there be excesse of the cholericke humour, their natures are easily prouoked
and stirred vp to wrath:The nature of a cholericke complexion. but their anger is as a fire of thornes,
that being soone kindled and making a great noise, is by and by quenched
againe. Their gestures also are more quicke and vehement, and
their hastinesse is commonly foolish and turbulent: they bablemuch,
and are like to vessels full of holes, vnable to hold in and keepe anie
secret matter: they are fierce in assailing, but inconstant in sustaining
the assault, in some sort resembling the nature of dogges, which
barke and bite if they can, and afterward flie away. And if there bee

excesse of the melancholike humour,The nature of the melancholicke body. the natures of such are sadde, still,
hard to please, suspicious, conceited, obstinate, some more and some
lesse. And if the cholericke and melancholike humours be corrupt and
mingled together, their natures become monstrous, prowd, full of enuy,
fraud, subtilties, venemous and poisonfull, hatefull and diabolicall.
And when the malignant spirits know mens natures thus disposed,What natures are most abused by euill spirites. no
doubt but they take occasion thereby to intermingle themselues, if
God permit them, and purpose to vse them for the punishing of men:
I say, they will ioyne themselues vnto them, and make them their instruments,
as God on the other side vseth those natures that are most
moderate and best tempered, making them instruments of his glorie.
Now we may call to mind what we learned before almost to the
same ende, touching the meanes whereby euill spirites might trouble
the imagination, fantasie and mindes of men. We may say as much of
the humours of the body, whose motions and nature they knowe very
well. Whereby they can so much the more easily abuse them in their
damnable worke and will, as wee may iudge by the example of him
that was possessed and lunatike,Matth. 17. 15. mar 9. 20. luke 9. 39. of whom the Euangelists make mention,
and whome they call by those two names. And by that which
they wrote of him, it seemeth that he was subiect to the falling sickenesse,
that returneth oftentimes according to the course of the moone,
which naturally hath great affinitie with the humors, and great power
ouer them. And therefore it is very likely, that the euill spirit which
tormented this poore lunatike, watched the occasions of his disease to
afflict him the more, and to cause him to fall either in the fire or in the
water, as he did indeede, thereby to worke his death if he had could.
Which example sheweth vnto vs what is the malice of the deuil,How vigilant the Deuil is to hurt vs. what
pleasure hee taketh in hurting of men, what meanes and what occasions
he seeketh for and maketh choice of, and what accesse vnto vs
we may offer him through our corrupt nature, through our vices and
sinnes, and through our inclinations and manners that are naturally euill
and peruerse, if God letteth him loose the bridle by his iust iudgement:
seeing he spareth not the little children, as it appeareth in that
which is written of him, of whom we spake euen now. For this cause
we ought to take good heede, that we giue not our common enemie
those occasions that he seeketh to haue from vs, to the ende that hee
abuse vs not, nor any thing that is ours, and which God hath bestowed
vpon vs.What profit we reape by the knowledge of our complexions. This is the reason why the consideration of our temperature,
complexion, and naturall inclination is very necessary for vs:
because the knowledge hereof affoordeth vnto vs many good instructions
that may stand vs in great steade throughout our whole life, as

well for the preseruation of the health of our bodies, as for the rule
and gouernement of our affections and manners, as also in regarde
of the familiaritie and acquaintance which wee haue one with an other.
For through the contemplation hereof, wee may knowe, not
onely the causes of health and sickenesse, of the life and death of the
body, but also of that of the soule. For as the good humours corrupt
in our bodies according as wee haue heard, and breede in them sundry
diseases, which finally leade them vnto death: euen so by means
of sinne all those good and naturall affections, which ought to bee
the seedes of vertues in vs, are corrupted and turne into vices, that
are the diseases of the soule, and bring vnto it the second and eternall
death: as contrariwise vertues are the health and life thereof.
But as GOD hath prouided corporall medicines for the bodie,
so hee hath prepared spirituall Physicke for the soule against all the
diseases thereof. Therefore when wee consider with our selues vnto
what vices wee are inclined by nature, wee must labour to correct,
and bridle them, and to quench such inclinations, as much
as wee can, through sobrietie, vigilancie, and continuall practise to
the contrary: least wee nourish and encrease them, when as wee
ought to diminish and wholy to abolish them. For the common prouerbe
is not without reason, that Education passeth Nature, or that
it is another nature. Wee see by experience what Education and
Instruction are able to doe both to goodnesse and vice, according as
they are either good or euill. For as there is no nature so good, which
can not bee corrupted and peruerted through euill education and
teaching: so there is none so vicious and euill, which can not, at
the least in some measure, (through the helpe and grace of GOD)
bee corrected and amended by good education,What natures we are to eschew. instruction, and
discipline. And because conuersation and familiaritie are of great
efficacie in this point, wee are diligently to consider with what persons
and natures wee acquaint our selues, and bee carefull to eschew
such natures as are vicious, prowd, fierce, enuious, hatefull, malicious,
suspicious, disloyall, and traiterous, as well in regarde of the
corruption of manners wherewith wee may bee infected by them,
as also in respect of other harmes that may befall vs, by reason they
are vnsociable natures, or at the least very difficult to conuerse withall,
being indeede such as towardes whome no man can beare any
true loue or firme friendship. But when wee haue vsed all the diligence
wee can possible about these things,The true meanes to cure our vices. the chiefest point wherein
the whole consisteth, is this, that wee haue recourse to Iesus
Christ the eternall sonne of GOD, to the end that by his holy Spirit,

hee woulde correct, represse, and quench in vs all the vicious affections
and disordered motions, that wee haue contrary to his holy
will: according to that promise which is made vnto vs, wherein it is
saide,Matth. 7. 11. that if fathers knowe howe to giue good gifts to their children and
such things as are necessarie for them,Luke 11. 13. much more will our heauenly Father
giue his holie Spirite to them that aske it of him. And this is the
true meanes wee ought to keepe for the correcting of these vices and
defectes, that are in our naturall inclinations. Now wee haue spoken
sufficiently of those things which concerne the naturall powers of the
soule, in respect of the nourishment and growth of the body, and of
those instruments which it hath in the same for the performaunce of
her actions. It remaineth nowe that wee consider what effectes it
hath in Generation. First then ASER, thou shalt handle the restauration
and reparation of all natures by that vertue and power of Generation
that is in them, and namely, in man: to the end wee may
after proceede with those other points that concerne this matter.


Of the restauration and reparation of all natures created by the Generatiue
power and vertue that is in them, and namely, in man:
what Generation is, and what the Generatiue power of the soule
is: what the seede is, and how Generation proceedeth of strength
and of infirmitie. Chap. 69.
ASER.Psal. 127. 1. When Salomon sayeth in the Psalme entituled with his
name, Except the Lorde builde the house, they that build, labour
in vaine, wee must not thinke that by the building whereof he speaketh,
hee vnderstandeth a frame of stone and wood to make a lodging
and dwelling place of it, but hee respecteth specially that building
that consisteth of houses and families, through the generation of
children, and their good education and instruction: as himselfe sheweth
plainely when by and by after hee sayeth in the same Psalme,
Beholde,Verse 3. children are an inheritance from the Lorde, and the fruit of the
wombe a rewarde. Whereby wee haue a sure testimony, as in many
other places of the Scripture, that wee must acknowledge the Generation
of children to come from God, and not from nature, and the
fruitfulnesse and barrennesse both of men and women.
By our former speeches we may learn what was the creation of the
the first man and first woman, with the lawfull coniunction betwixt
them, by means whereof God would haue mankind preserued and multiplied

by good order, and not by a brutish confusion, such as is amongst
the beasts. Now it remaineth, that folowing the order of our
discourses, we speake of generation, whereby we shall know the vertue
that God gaue for that purpose to our first parents, when hee saide
vnto them,Genes. 1. 28. Bring foorth fruit and multiplie and fill the earth. Which hath
had such power and vertue, that from thence haue issued all the men,
women,The vertue of the blessing of God for generation. and children, that haue bene since the beginning of the world,
that are now, and that shall be vnto the end thereof. The like also proceeded
from the blessing which God gaue not onely to al other liuing
creatures, but also to al herbs and plants. For we haue already heard,
how after the liuing body is growen vp to his full vigor and strength,
it beginneth then by little and little to faile, and to tend vnto death,
whereby in the end it falleth away altogether. For, according to that
comparison and similitude, which hath bene already propounded vnto
vs of a lamp, the flame whereof cannot be ioyned stil with the week
except there be some cleauing moisture to knit the parts together: so
there is in a liuing body a certaine humiditie that holdeth of the nature
of the aire, which moisture is very good, and is dispersed throughout
the whole body, hauing his propagation of the seede, and ioyning together
all the parts of the body.Of the Radicall humour. This is commonly called the Radicall
humour, because it is as it were the roote of life, and hath the celestial
and quickening heate brought immediately and directly vnto it: so
that when this moisture is extinguished, the heate also vanisheth, and
fadeth away. And looke as the heate drinketh vp and consumeth by
litle and litle this humidity, so doth the heate it selfe diminish and languish
away, because his foode faileth that is in the moisture: euen as
the flame lesseneth and looseth his vigor,Of the defect of mans life with the causes therof. as the oile, or tallow, or wax
faileth in a lamp, or in a candle. And although this radicall humiditie
be nourished by the ordinary food which the body daily receiueth, neuerthelesse,
forasmuch as that nourishment which euery member receiueth,
is not so pure nor so fit, nor so naturall as the radicall humour
it selfe, neither can wholy restore that which diminisheth and consumeth
thereof, it must needes bee that life shoulde faile in processe of
time, by reason that neither the vigour of the heate, nor the purenesse
of his nourishment continueth sound and entire. For the same thing
agreeth to this radicall humour, which we see by experience in wine,
which so long as it is pure and in his naturall strength, doeth easily
turne a litle water into it owne nature, so that it can not be perceiued
that there is any water at all in it. But if yee continue still powring in
of water and mingling it therwith, it will weaken by litle and litle, and
alwayes loose of his pure substance, so that in the ende it will bee no

better then water. And thus the radicall humour and the naturall
heate destroy one an other. For the humour that is gotten by sustenaunce
differeth much from the Radicall that was consumed by naturall
heate. Whereupon it followeth also, that this naturall heate
hath not so good and pure nourishment as before, so that it must
needes growe weaker: and being thus weakened, it hath lesse vertue
to concoct well, and to turne that humour into nourishment
wherewith it ought to be maintained. By this meanes it commeth to
passe, that the radicall humiditie and naturall heate faile and perish both
together. Wereby wee may easily vnderstand why mens bodies abide
not alwayes in their strength, but faile and waxe old, and so death followeth
olde-age. Wee haue already spoken somewhat before both of
the length and shortnes of mans life, and of naturall and violent death:
but we will speake more fully of them hereafter, God willing.
Nowe wee are to consider, howe the prouidence of God hath
prouided for this defect of nature through that vertue of Generation,
which by his blessing hee hath giuen vnto it, and whereof I spake euen
nowe, to the ende, that the whole race and seuerall-kindes of
things created shoulde not perish.What is meant by nature. Whereupon wee may well say,
that that nature which hath this vertue, is no other thing then the
blessing of God, whereunto all honour is to be giuen. For as GOD
hath created all things by his mightie worde, so by the selfe same
worde hee hath created and placed in the first kindes of the creatures
that hee hath created, those seedes whereby hee woulde haue euery
one preserued both in the whole and in his seuerall kinde.Genes. 1. And therefore
as in blessing the earth after hee had created it, and commaunding
it to bring foorth herbs, trees, and plants with their fruits according
to their kindes, hee did therewithall endue it with vertue to doe
so, as it hath alwayes done so hitherto, doeth so daily, and will doe
so to the end of the worlde: euen so is it with that blessing which hee
hath giuen to all the plants, and to all liuing creatures, and namely,
to man and woman, and with that commaundement which he hath
giuen them to growe, to multiplie and to fill the earth. Wherefore
wee ought without ceasing to consider and to contemplate God the
Creator in the generation of all things, and principally in that of man,
as if we beheld him daily pursuing his worke of creation. For although
he worke now by other meanes then he did in the first creation of the
whole frame, yet he is no lesse nowe the Creator of all men, and of all
other creatures that grow daily in the world by generation, then hee
was of the first man and first creatures, which he created of nothing in
the beginning. For he created vs all in Adam and Eue, and shut vs vp

as it were in a store-house, or in a spring or fountaine, or as in one
stocke of mankinde, out of which hee produceth men continually.
Wherefore wee ought diligently to consider of this woorke of
GOD, and of this vertue which hee hath giuen to Nature by his
worde and blessing to ingender like, and to encrease the whole race
and kinde thereof. For this cause as it is the office of Nature in the beginning
to nourish bodies, and then to cause them to encrease and
augment: so in the ende it is her duetie to preserue the seuerall kindes
of things as long as shee may,What Generation is. by Generation of the like. Whereby it
appeareth, that Generation is a worke of liuing creatures after they
are come to their growth and vigour, as wee see the like also in plants
themselues. For in the beginning of the Spring al their vertue is in the
root, and from thence it commeth after into the boughes and leaues, next
into the floure and fruit,What the generatiue power is. and lastly into the seed, which being sowen, another
plant is brought forth like vnto the first. Wherfore wee may say,
that the Generatiue vertue is a power in liuing creatures that engendreth
his like, being ordained for the preseruatio^ of the same kind. So yt
wee must diligently meditate and often set before our eyes this goodly
order of nature, according whereunto the nourishing facultie is first
giuen to the soule for the preseruation of euery particular. Next, the
power to cause it to grow and to augment to a iust and sufficient greatnesse:
and lastly, the generatiue vertue whereby the kind is preserued.
For albeit the order that is throughout the whole course of nature bee
an euident testimony, that neither the worlde nor any thing therein,
standeth vpon chance or fortune, yet among others this is most singular
and excellent, in that the same kinds of al things abide continually,
and that euerie one begetteth and multiplieth his like, without any maner
of confusion amongst them: which could not be eschewed, if so be that
creatures were bredde and borne at aduenture, without the counsel
and prouidence of their Creator, and of him that wrought such a worke.
Nowe wee are to vnderstand,What seede is. that the seede is a body that hath
in it selfe a vegetatiue soule, which body in Generation is turned
into an other like to that from which it is taken: and because nourishing,
growing, and engendering are the effectes of foode and sustenance,
they are contained vnder the name of a vegetatiue soule,
which is a facultie and power,What is meant by a vegetatiue soule. that not onely conuerteth foode into
the substaunce of the liuing bodie, for the good thereof, and by that
conuersion augmenteth, that it may attaine to a conuenient bignesse,
but also engendereth an other body of the same forme and
kinde. And therefore after that this vegetatiue power hath doone
that duetie which it ought to perfourme about the growth of the liuing

body, then hath it time and meanes enough to gather together
into a small roome many of those qualities that keepe the soule in the
administration of the bodie, out of which it can soone drawe and
engender a like kinde, so farre foorth as the qualities of the matter
will be able to beare. For when they are repugnant to the qualities
meete for that kinde, whatsoeuer commeth thereof degenerateth, as
we see it in the earth, when in steade of wheate, whereof it receiued
the seede, it bringeth foorth darnell, or some other hearbs of an other
nature, and as wee see it also in monsters, that are borne both of women
and of other liuing creatures.Of the cause of monsters. For there are in many countries
(namely, in Sicilia, and in the kingdome of Naples, and in Flaunders,
as many Authours worthy of credite haue testified) women in whom
haue beene bredde oftentimes sundry kindes of beastes in steade of
children, and sometimes together with the childe either liuing or
dead. Which thing commeth to passe in such women as abound with
euill humours that are putrified and corrupted, either by reason of
the ayre, or of badde meate, or of excesse in eating: as in such bodies
wherein wormes, and such other filthinesse breedeth. The Astrologians
referre this vnto constellations, as they doe all other things. I
leaue the secret iudgements and punishments of GOD, whereby
such things may come to passe: neuerthelesse these things ought to
admonish women to pray vnto God, to recommend themselues to
him, and to be sober. The moone calfes in the womb, which fall out
often, proceed also of the like causes. In like maner it falleth out oftentimes
that the kinde degenerateth through corruption of the seede.
But to go on forward with our matter of the Generation of liuing
creatures, and namely, of man, wee must knowe that forasmuch as
the male hath naturally more heate in him then the female, hee
is also by nature the chiefest in Generation. For this cause when
the holie Scriptures speake of mankinde, it is ordinarilie comprehended
vnder the name of man. And when mention is made of his
generation, they speake as though all proceeded onely from man:
as when Malachie speaking of his creation sayeth,Malach. 2. 15. Did not hee make
one? and wherefore one? because hee sought a godly seede. And Saint
Paul, He hath made (saith hee) of one blood, all mankind. Neuerthelesse
GOD hath put in nature such a temperature betweene the male
and the female, that if both their natures were altogether alike, there
could be no Generation. For it consisteth in force and in infirmity.
But the wisdome of God hath so wel prouided, as that it knoweth how
to draw strength out of weaknes, so that the one can do nothing without
the other in generation, because he hath so willed and ordained it.

Nowe I leaue to thee, AMANA, to discourse vnto vs more particularly
of such things as are most worthy to be noted in this maruailous
worke of God, and of the principall cause why he hath giuen to man
the Generatiue power.


Of the powers of the Generatiue vertue, and of their offices: of the
principall cause why God gaue to man the power of Generation: in
what sense the reines are taken for the seate of Generation: how we
ought rightly to consider of the generation of man. Chap. 70.
AMANA. As noueltie causeth a man through the errour of iudgement,
to thinke that rare things are greater and more woorthie
of admiration: so most men imagine those matters to bee small and
not worthy to be wondered at, which fall out daily before their eyes.
But ignorance is the cause of both these effectes.Two effectes of ignorance. For as a man admireth
that which hee neuer knewe coulde be perfourmed, so hee maketh
no reckoning of that thing which he vsually beholdeth, because
hee hath alwayes beene ignorant of the secrets of nature, or rather of
his Author and Creator, who appeareth woonderfull in the least of
his woorkes, euen in the very Ant or Pismire. This selfe same ignorance
is the cause that so fewe contemplate as they ought the forme
and fashion of their beeing, or that giue due glorie to him who daily
bringeth them into the worlde by such woonderfull workemanship.
Neither is it possible that men shoulde giue such glorie to GOD as
they ought, except they esteeme all those workes which hee effecteth
daily amongest them, to be so many miracles woorthie admiration,
which way soeuer they turne their eies. Moreouer, let them
knowe, that what measure of knowledge soeuer they are able to get
of his woorkes, yet that which they doe knowe is very little, yea,
almost nothing, in regarde of that whereof they are ignorant: euen
in that which concerneth their creation and generation.
Nowe following that which wee haue already heard touching
this matter, we are to consider a maruailous prouidence of God, in the
similitude that is betweene the creature engendering, and that which
proceedeth from it. Where by the way we may obserue this, that there
is greater resemblance in the Generation of plants then in that of liuing
creatures, and more in that of beasts then in that of men: forasmuch
as plants are void of imagination,Of the similitude that is in generation. and that imagination which
is in beasts is more firme and staied then that which is in men, because
our mindes are more floting and vnstable. But it is woonderfull

to consider what great similitude there is, insomuch as we commonly
see, that the infirmities of some members in the parents are founde
also in their children: and that oftentimes they expresse their very
lookes, countenances, and gesturs. Which also may serue for a further
confirmation of that which wee haue already touched, concerning
the agreement of euilles with the complexion and temperature
of the humours of mens bodies. Againe, it appeareth by the strength
or weakenesse that is founde to bee as well in children as in their fathers
and mothers, that the seede of which they are begotten descendeth
not onelie from the braine,From whence the seede commeth. as some haue thought, but that
it is also taken from all the other members, and from all partes of
the body. And because it is a profitable superfluitie taken from the
nourishment of the blood scattered throughout the whole body after
the fourth digestion, it hath peculiar vesselles in the body, some to
drawe it, others to perfect and preserue it for generation, and some
to expell it out. And as this expulsiue vertue is necessary in Generation
on the behalfe of the male, so in regarde of the female it is requisite
that there shoulde be a vertue to containe and preserue, and secondly
to change, mingle, and temper it with the womans seede, so
farre foorth as shall bee expedient for the temperature of the whole
bodie,The seuerall vertues of the generatiue power. and of euery member thereof. Besides, there must bee another
vertue to fashion into members all this matter mingled and
tempered, and to giue vnto them that figure and shape which agreeeth
to euery one of them. Lastly, there is an other vertue requisite,
which shoulde driue out the childe after it is fashioned, at the time
which GOD hath appointed in nature for that purpose. And these
are all the partes with their offices, which are to bee founde in the
Generatiue power of the vegetatiue soule. Nowe because there are
so many sortes of them, it is very meete that they shoulde haue sundrie
places and diuerse instrumentes in the bodie for the exercise of
them. For this cause there are, to serue all these offices, sundrie partes
and many members, composed with woonderfull Arte, and distinguished
in most admirable fashion both with figures and qualities.
But our meaning is not to make any long particular narration,
both by reason of the matter which woulde bee very long, as also because
sinne hath made the Generation of man so full of shame, that
men can hardly speake of it, or of those members that serue thereunto,
especially of one part of them, without shame. Neuerthelesse,
as before wee haue considered the counsaile and prouidence of God,
in that hee hath ioyned to man created to immortalitie, that part
wherein the light of his diuine wisedome shall shine, the loue of God

shall be feruent, and righteousnesse shall dwell for euermore, with
the kitchin of mans body, whose vse shall passe away after this life: so
wee must consider the cause why hee hath ioyned vnto this kitchin
the Generatiue power,The chiefe cause why the generatiue power was giuen to man. and wherefore hee hath giuen it to man. Let
vs knowe then, that as man was created for an other ende then plants
and beastes, so God hath giuen to him the power of Generation to
an other ende then hee hath to them, vpon whome it is bestowed
onely for the preseruation of their kindes. For it was especially giuen
him, because the Creatour of the whole worlde purposed to collect
and gather together a perpetuall Church out of mankinde, that is,
a companie of men begotten after this manner, to bee dedicated and
consecrated vnto him. Therefore wee ought diligently to meditate
and to thinke often vpon this woonderfull counsaile of GOD,
and to yeelde him praise, in that hee hath manifested himselfe vnto
vs, and of this weake and corrupt masse of flesh hath assembled and
culled out an euerlasting Church: and in that hee aydeth, nourisheth
and preserueth vs, yea, is carefull ouer vs, and heareth vs calling
vpon him. Neyther doeth hee onely preserue the whole course
of nature for our sakes, but also giueth himselfe vnto vs: which are
such benefites as exceede all the imagination and eloquence of man.
Wherefore wee ought so much the rather to awaken our mindes to
consider them well, and bee very much displeased with our selues,
because wee do^ not so well as wee ought, beholde this presence
of GOD in that obscuritie and darkenesse wherein wee liue; as also
because wee are no more stirred vp to loue, serue, and honour
him, in regarde of that true and great loue wherewith hee loueth
vs.
But to goe forward with our matter of Generation, wee must
call to minde what wee heard before of the vse of the kidneis for the
purging of blood, in respect whereof wee call all that part of the body
wherein they are seated,Of the seate of Generation. by the name of Reines. And by reason
of the neerenesse that is betweene them and the seede vessels seruing
for Generation, which are many in number, all that part is taken,
chiefely in the holy Scriptures, for the seate and spring thereof, and
as it were for the seminary of mankinde. Therefore it is written in the
Hebrewes,Hebr. 7. 10. that Leui was yet in the loines of his father Abraham, when
Melchisedec met him.Genes. 35. 11. And Moses speaking in the person of the
Lorde, of the promise made to Iacob, sayeth, Kings shall come out
of thy loines. Dauid also minding to shewe what knowledge God
hath of men whome hee hath created,Psal. 139. 13. saieth, Thou hast possessed my
reines: thou hast couered mee in my mothers wombe. And Iob declaring

the selfe same thing more fully, and speaking of the seed whereof he
was begotten,Iob* 10. 10, 11* after hee had saide, Hast thou not powred mee out as
milke? and turned mee to cruddes like cheese? he addeth presently, Thou
hast clothed mee with skinne and flesh, and ioyned mee together with bones
and sinewes. This is that couering whereof the Psalmist spake, which
was giuen him of God in his mothers wombe after her conception.
Whereupon wee haue to note, that these holy men speaking in this
manner, teach vs sufficiently what is the chiefe part of man, which
they accompt to be the true man.What is man properly. For they declare vnto vs euidently
that the soule which dwelleth in the body is truely man, and that
the body in comparison thereof is but his couering, and the lodging
wherein hee dwelleth. Therefore the Heathens themselues compared
mans soule to one placed in a garrison, in which hee is to abide
vntill hee be called from thence by the Prince and Captaine that placed
him therein: meaning thereby to teach vs, that wee must abide
in this life and discharge our duetie therein, so long as it shall please
God, who hath brought vs into it, to haue vs to continue therein.
Truely, if wee consider well of those maruailous woorkes, which
GOD effecteth daily in the Generation of men, wee may well say,
that it is a great miracle of God in Nature, and ought to be diligently
considered of, as Dauid testifieth that hee did so in his owne person.
Therefore he saieth,Psalm. 139. 5. Thou holdest mee straight behinde and before,
and layest thine hand vpon me: shewing throughout the whole psalme,
that there is nothing in man so hidden and couered, which is not
discouered before GOD, and which hee knoweth not and searcheth
not vnto the bottome, to the ende that men deceiue not themselues
through their hipocrisie, thinking to hide themselues before
him. For this cause hee sayeth in the beginning, that he is so knowen
to GOD on all sides, both within and without, that there is not
so much as one motion in him, nor one thought or affection, which
is not wholly manifested vnto him. And to prooue and confirme his
saying, hee taketh his argument from the creation of man, giuing
vs to vnderstand thereby, that forasmuch as GOD is his Creatour
and Maker, it can not bee but that he shoulde throughly know
his worke. Whereby wee haue a certaine testimonie of that which
wee spake in our former discourse, of the creation of all those men
that are dailie created by Generation, according to the order of
Nature appointed by GOD. For the Prophet doeth no lesse acknowledge
that GOD hath made him, then Adam the first man
did. So that looke what the Prophet speaketh of his owne person,
it is also to bee vnderstoode of euerie one, both in regarde

of his creation, as also of that knowledge which GOD hath of all
things in man, be they neuer so hidde and couered. Afterward hee
addeth,Verse* 6. that this knowledge is too woonderfull for him, and so high that
hee cannot attaine vnto it. Nowe wee may iudge well, both of the
composition of mans body, and also of the nature of the soule, by
those discourses which wee haue already made. And if wee did consider
but of the body by it selfe, yet had wee iust cause to say as much
as Dauid sayeth heere. What then might be spoken if wee ioyned the
soule with the body, and considered onely of that which might generally
be knowen by such meanes as are already set downe? For by
that which we doe knowe, wee shall iudge well enough howe farre
this knowledge exceedeth our capacitie, and what remaineth yet behinde,
which we cannot comprehend.
Forasmuch then as the Prophet woondereth so much at this great
and high skill, whereof God giueth vs so excellent testimonie in the
creation and generation of men, wee ought not to thinke it superfluous
and vnprofitable, but well beseeming a Christian man, to enquire
after that which God would haue vs know, and which we may
know, and to consider well of his woorkes wherein he manifesteth his
prouidence and wisedome, especially in man, who is, as wee haue
heard, the chiefest of all his workes amongst the visible creatures, and
as it were an other worlde created within this. Nowe as Dauid from
the creation of man, inferreth the knowledge which God hath of
him, so Iob in the same place that I alleadged euen now concludeth,
that forasmuch as God is the Creator and Artificer that made man, he
delighteth not in destroying his woorke.Iob* 10. 8. Thy hands (saieth hee) haue
made mee and fashioned me wholly round about, and wilt thou destroy mee?
Which is as much as if he had saide, is it possible that I who am the
woorke of thy hands, shoulde be brought to nothing by thee? For
besides that this were against nature,Psalm. 36. and 138. the Scripture testifieth vnto vs
in many places, that he is not onely a preseruer of that which he hath
made, but also that hee leaueth not his woorkes vnperfect: and that
hee is so farre from defacing them, that contrariwise it is his manner
to leade them to perfection.A good lesson to be learned from our creation. Whereby wee ought to learne, that the
onely consideration of the worke of our creation ought greatly to solace,
comfort, and confirme vs in all afflictions and aduersities, how rigorous
soeuer the hand of God should be vpon vs. For first, we ought
to be throughly resolued of this, that no affliction can come vnto vs,
but by his good will and from his hand, whatsoeuer the means and
instruments are, of which hee maketh his roddes and scourges, and
by which he striketh and beateth vs. Nowe then seeing the hand that

toucheth vs is the same that hath made and fashioned vs, wee knowe
well that he setteth not himselfe against a strange woorke vnknowen
vnto him, but against his owne wherewith he is very wel acquainted.
Whereupon we may certainly conclude, that it proceedeth not of crueltie
and furie that he striketh vs, nor yet without good cause: as hee
that is neither cruell, nor furious, nor voyde of reason. So that it followeth
necessarily, eyther that we haue giuen him great occasion, or
that it is very requisite for vs.The afflictions of Gods children turne to their good. But howsoeuer it be, he euer knoweth
well howe to turne all the afflictions of his children to his glorie, and
to their great honour and profite, as we haue many notable examples
hereof in all the seruaunts of God, and namely in those two personages
Dauid and Iob, of whome wee haue spoken in this our discourse.
Which we continuing so farre forth as it respecteth the work of mans
generation, are to consider more narrowely of the admirable secrete
of nature therein, so much as daily experience and diligent searche
hath learned men to knowe. Tell vs then, ARAM, of the fashion of
a childe in the wombe.


Of the fashion of a childe in the wombe, and how the members are framed
one after another in the mothers bellie: of the time and dayes, within
which a childe is perfectly fashioned.
ARAM. I cannot marueile enough at the pride and presumption
of many, who thinke themselues to bee such great Philosophers,
and so skilfull in the knowledge of natural things, that they perswade
themselues, that nothing is so secrete in nature which they knowe
not, and whereof they are not able to shewe the causes and reasons.
But experience sheweth vnto vs daily, how farre short they are of that
which they thinke, and in what ignorance the best learned are wrapped
at this day. For how many things are daily manifested vnto them,
which the greatest searchers of nature, that euer haue beene, were ignorant
of, vnto whome notwithstanding they that nowe liue are but
disciples? And how many things doe continually come to passe, into
which the chiefest, sharpest sighted, and most expert haue no sight at
all,No mans knowledge perfect. or very small? And among them that suppose they haue good
knowledge, howe are they deceiued oftentimes? Howe many are
doubtfull in many thinges whereof they haue but small coniectures,
whereupon they gesse at all aduenture, and as they imagine? We may
easily iudge hereof by this, that continually one reprehendeth and correcteth
another, and that the later writers condemne sundry things in
the former. But not to seeke afarre off for examples, we may see them

daily in the science of the Anatomie of mens bodies. For there was
neuer yet Physicion or Anatomist either olde or newe, that attayned
to perfect knowledge, and coulde render a reason of euerie
thing that is but in one bodie, notwithstanding that they are continually
conuersant in that matter. Therefore, to leaue vnto God that
secrete which is hidden from our vnderstanding, let vs consider of
that which wee may knowe touching the forme of a childe in the
wombe.
If wee looke narrowely into that order that nature followeth in
the framing of man, who is the little worlde, wee shall finde it like
to that which the Authour of nature obserued in the creation of the
worlde, which Moses calleth the generations of the heauens and of
the earth.Gen. 2. 4. For in the beginning the earth was without forme and voyd,
and couered with a great gulph of waters,The creation of the world, and of man compared together. so that the earth and waters
and matter of all the elements, and of all creatures created afterwardes,
were mingled and confounded together in this great heape.
Vnto this the Almightie afterwards added a forme, and created so manie
goodly creatures, and of so diuers natures and kindes as are to bee
seene in the whole worlde, which hee hath adorned with them, and
endued with so great beautie that it hath receiued the name of that,
which is as much as Ornament or Order of things well disposed. After
the same manner doeth nature, or rather God by nature, woorke
in the creation and generation of men. For the seede of which they
are formed, and which is the matter prepared, disposed and tempered
by the same prouidence of God for the worke he hath in hand,
receiueth not fashion presently vpon the conception, but remaineth
for a time without any figure or lineaments, or proportion, and
shewe of a humane body, or of any member thereof. The naturall
Philosophers and Physicions, who haue searched most carefully
into this woorke, and haue had greatest experience, they say that
there are certaine membranes and skinnes that are wrapped round
about the infant in the wombe, which some commonly call
the Matrix, others call the Mother: and that within these skinnes
(which are three in number as some Anatomistes say, others but
two) as it were within certaine bandes, the fruite is preserued vntill
the birth.An argumont of the prouidence of God. Wherein wee are to acknowledge the prouidence
of GOD, who hath so disposed of nature, that euen from our
mothers wombe, shee is in steade of a mother to vs, folding vs vp
within bandes before shee that hath conceiued vs can perfourme the
same.
But let vs proceede on with our matter, so farre foorth as wee haue

learned of the fashion of the childe in the discourse of Philosophers
and Physicions. They say then, that after the wombe hath receaued
the seedes ioyned together, of both which the childe is to bee
framed, it commeth to passe that the heate of the Matrix warmeth
all this matter as it were in a litle fornace, and so rayseth a skinne
ouer it which beeing as it were rosted by little and little, waxeth
crustie and harde rounde about the seede.Of the forme of an infant. This causeth the whole
matter to resemble an egge, by reason that this skinne compasseth
about the seede, which boyleth inwardly through the abundance
of naturall spirites that are within it.Of the Afterburthen. This is that skinne
which is commonly called the Secundine, or After-burthen, beeing
ioyned on euerie side to the wombe, by reason of a great number
of Orifices, veynes and arteries reaching thereunto, to the ende
that by them the blood, spirites, and nourishment shoulde bee
conuayed to the infant. For as the whole wombe imbraceth the
seede, so likewise it heateth and nourisheth the same. Therefore
this skinne that serueth in steade of little bandes hath two vses:
the first is to take fast holde of the wombe: the other, to serue for
the nourishment of the burthen, and of the childe. For this cause
there are two veynes and two arteries in it (besides a passage in the
middest) which are as it were the rootes of the burthen, and make
the Nauill.
This woorke with other circumstances belonging thereunto,The first sixe dayes work from the conception. which
wee omitte for breuitie sake, is brought to passe the first sixe dayes
of the conception. After this skinne, they that make three, speake
of a seconde skinne that is in the middest, which they saye was
created to receiue the vrine of the childe, which in the former monethes
is voyded by the Nauill, and in the latter moneths by the
ordinarie passage. This voyding place is ordayned to this ende,
that the vrine might not frette and rent in sunder the tender skinne
of the infant, who is therefore couered with a thirde skinne next
to the other, and that is very tender. So that the vrine toucheth not the
infant, but is voyded by the middle way, as I haue alreadie declared.
Thus you see the beginning of the conception, before the burthen
bee wholly formed like to an infant. Whereunto that saying of
the Prophet hath relation:Psal. 139. 16. Thine eyes (sayeth hee) did see mee when
I was without forme: for in thy booke were all things written, which in continuance
were fashioned, when there was none of them before. Then
hee compareth the secrete partes seruing for generation, especially
the bellie, and wombe of the woman, vnto the earth, and to an obscure,
secrete and hidde place, euen to deepe and darke caues in the

ground. For as the earth hauing receiued the seede in which is the vigour,
keepeth, cherisheth, and increaseth the same: euen so fareth it with
the wombe and with the mother. On the other side, as these parts are
lowest in regard of the trunke of the body, and of all the receptacles
and vessels thereof, so are they very secret and hidden, and as it were
in the midst and center of the body, if the whole be considered together,
namely the trunke with both endes thereof. For this cause the
worke that is there wrought by God, is so much the more marueilous,
because euen in that obscure place, it receiueth the goodliest and
most perfect forme that can be imagined. And who will not bee abashed
to consider, that out of that slymie seede of man there shoulde
come bones, sinewes, flesh, skinne, and such like things so diuers one
from another? But yet it is a farre greater marueile to see all this great
diuersitie of matter, to bee framed in so many sundrie members,
and of so many sundry formes, and that with such excellent beautie,
so profitable and so fitte for those offices that are assigned vnto them,
as wee haue learned in our former discourses. Nowe as God did not
create all creatures in one day, although he coulde well haue done it,
if it had so pleased him, so doeth he in the generation of men. For albeeit
that the members are fashioned all at once,All the members receiue their forme together. so that not one of
them is framed before another, neuerthelesse because there is great
varietie betwixt them, both in respect of their dignitie, and of their
strength, nature their mother doeth not set them forwarde all alike.
For in displaying her power generally towards all the partes of the bodie,
it commeth to passe, that her worke, and the figure giuen vnto it,
appeareth sooner or later in some members more then in others. Hereof
it is that the greatest and chiefest members appeare naturally before
the rest, albeit they are not the first that are fashioned. So likewise
all the members are not beautified and made perfect at the same time,
but some after others, according as they haue heate and nourishment.
Nature therefore obserueth this order, that the worthiest partes and
such as haue in them the beginning of motion, shew themselues first,
and then those members that are profitable, and seruiceable to the former,
and are created for their cause. And according to this order the
highest partes are seene sooner then the lowest, and those within before
them without, and they that receiue their substance from the seed
before those that haue it from blood. These also amongest them that
are most excellent are first, notwithstanding many times they haue
their accomplishment and perfection after the other, as it appeareth
in the Nauill.The nauill first made perfect. For although the heart, liuer, and braine, beeing the
chiefest partes of the bodie, haue their beginning before that, yet is it

the first amongest them all that appeareth perfect. Nowe then after
the Nauil with his pipe or passage is formed and fashioned within the
first sixe dayes, the blood and spirite are next drawen by those veines
and arteries, whereof we spake euen now, to be sent to the seede, and
mingled therewith, that the principall members might be figured, as
the liuer, the heart, and the braine, which begin first like to little bladders,
and so consequently the rest which are fashioned by litle and litle
according as they receiue nourishment. For the veines whereby
the burthen is nourished, may well be likened to small rootes, whereby
plants are cherished: as also the burden it selfe may bee compared
vnto plants in this point, as we haue alreadie learned. So that the seed
receiuing this forme alreadie spoken of in the first sixe dayes, during
which time it is called by no other name then seede, nine dayes after
that the blood is drawne thither, of which the liuer and the heart receiue
their forme: so that after twelue dayes added to the former, a
man may discerne the lineaments and proportion of these two members,
and also of the braine, albeit they are not then altogether fashioned.
At this time the burthen is called Faetus of the Latines,When the seed is called Embryon. and Embryon
of the Greekes, which is as much in our language as Sprouting
or Budding. Next after this, within the space of other eighteene daies,
all the other members are fashioned and distinguished. So that about
fiue and fourty dayes after the conception, the members receiue their
perfect fashion: and then doeth the burthen beginne to liue not onely
as plants liue,When the burthen is called a child or infant. but also as other liuing creatures. For it hath sense and
feeling about the sixe and thirtieth day, and from that time forward it
is called an infant. But as yet it is voyde of motion. For by and by after
it is formed, it is very tender, vntill that by vertue of the heate it
waxeth more dry and firme, which is by reason that the moysture,
wherby it is made so soft and tender, consumeth away by litle and litle,
so that the nayles beginne to take roote at the fingers endes, and
the haires in the head.When the childe f^^st moueth. Now after the childe is come to the thirde moneth
if it bee a male, or to the fourth if it bee a female, it beginneth to
stirre it selfe according to the testimonie of Hippocrates, because then
his bones are more firme and somewhat harder. But this is not alwaies
alike in all women with childe. For there are some that alwayes feele it
stirre about the two and fourtieth day, others neuer feele the same vntill
the middest of the time from the conception to the birth. Yea in
the same woman the same time and order is not alwayes obserued.
For according to the strength and good complexion of the child, and
the nature and disposition of the mother, these things change, and not
onely because of the sexe. Neuerthelesse it is most ordinary and vsuall

for male children to moue within three moneths or thereabouts, as
likewise to bee borne at the ninth moneth: whereas females are commonly
somewhat slower both in stirring and also at their birth, the
reason whereof is this, because male children are naturally a great
deale more hote then females.Galens opinion of the birth of sonnes. Galen attributeth the cause of the generation
of sonnes to the strength and heate of the seede, and saieth
that they are caried on the right side of the wombe, as the daughters
on the left, which is the colder side, as being farthest remooued from
the liuer. He yeldeth also this reason why some children are more like
the father, and some the mother, because of the greater strength of
seede which they haue either from the one, or from the other. And
when it commeth to passe, that the wombe receiueth seede at two sundry
passages which it hath, then are twinnes engendred either at one
conception or at twaine, so that the later bee not long after the former,
according to the opinion of the Philosophers, and namely of Aristotle,
who rehearseth many examples thereof in his seuenth booke of
the historie of liuing creatures, saying that a whore was deliuered
of two children, whereof the one was like the father, and the other
like the adulterer. But nowe wee are to consider of the childe-birth,
which is as wonderfull a woorke of God in nature as any other. It belongeth
then to thee, ACHITOB, to ende this dayes worke by a discourse
tending to this purpose.


Of Child-birth, and the naturall causes thereof: of the great prouidence
of God appearing therein: of the image of our eternall natiuitie
represented vnto vs in our mortall birth. Chap. 72.
ACHITOB. Men are of that nature, that they cannot acknowledge
what they are themselues, or what they haue receaued
of God, except they bee brought backe to that first dust and earth,
out of which they are taken, euen to their first creation and generation.
Therefore the holy spirite doeth esteeme it a thing not vnworthy
his diuine maiestie often to instruct and to admonish vs by his worde,The word profitable for all.
and that so plainely and familiarly, as no man, be hee neuer so skilfull
or so ignorant, but he may greatly profit in this schoole, at leastwise
be made altogether inexcusable, if he learne not that which the spirit
doeth there teach him. For concerning them that are most ignorant,
he speaketh very plainly to be vnderstood of them, propounding that
vnto them whereof they cannot be ignorant, although they woulde,
at leastwise which they cannot easily know. And as for the skilfuller
sort, who by their knowledge are able to vnderstand more then others,

they are so much the more guiltie, if they will not giue credite
to the woorkes of God, as they are propounded vnto vs in the holy
scriptures. For what idole of nature soeuer they frame to themselues,
yet must they alwayes come to this first beginning of man, which is
clean contrary to the reason of humane sense and vnderstanding, and
so giue glory vnto God: otherwise the fruite of all their studie will bee
nothing els but confusion and ignorance. Now the more we consider
of the daily generation of men, the more like we shall find it in all admiration
to their first originall and creation. For who coulde euer, I
say not beleeue, but onely thinke or imagine, that out of pressed milk
and cruds as it were, such as the beginning of man seemeth to bee,
there could proceede any liuing creature at all, especially such an image
of God as man is? And yet we see this daily come to passe. Now
from whence commeth this milke? Wee cannot for shame speake
it without blushing. So that if the worke and prouidence of God bee
woonderfull in the conception and fashioning of man,Mans birth a woonderfull worke of God. and in the life
and preseruation he affoordeth him in his Mothers belly, as wee haue
shewed heeretofore, surely it is no lesse admirable in his natiuitie and
birth, as we may now vnderstand.
Wee haue already heard, howe by the faculties and powers of the
soule, and generatiue vertue thereof, the seede is retained and preserued,How the childe is nourished in the wombe.
and how the child is formed thereof in the wombe. Now all this
while it is nourished by blood, which is drawne vnto it by the veins of
the nauill ordained to that end: and therfore also the issue of this blood
commonly ceasseth in women with childe, as that which is then diuided
into three partes. For the childe draweth the purest thereof to it
selfe, and is therewithal nourished. Secondly the wombe by veins leading
directly to the breasts, sendeth that part which is lesse pure, wherof
the milk is prepared that feedeth the child after it is borne. The third
part which is the worst, staieth still in the wombe, and so soone as the
child is borne, it issueth forth also. This foode which the childe receiueth
thus in the wombe, caused Galen to allege an ancient sentence
out of Athenaeus, saying, That the childe receiueth more from the mother
then from the father, euen as the plants draw more from the earth then
they doe from the husbandman. For this menstrual blood first encreaseth
the seede, and after serueth towardes the growth of the members by
ministring food vnto them. And for this cause this Authour teacheth,
that naturally the loue of the children is very great towardes their
Mothers, and so of the Mothers towardes their children, as also
in respect of the exceeding great mixture of their substaunce. But
when the childe is nowe encreased and growne so great and strong,

that he is well able to moue himselfe, and to receiue his foode at the
mouth, as he is waxen greater, so he must haue more store of nourishment
then he is able to draw in at the nauil. Likewise forasmuch as naturall
heate is more augmented, he had neede of the more aire, and to
receiue it in by respiration and breathing, so farre foorth as is necessary
for his refreshing.The cause of child-birth. Whereupon the childe stirreth and moueth with
greater strength and violence, so that it breaketh the skinnes and bands
wherein it was wrapped, and some veines also, and so maketh an issue
and way for it self, as that which cannot any longer be kept in the
wombe. Now when the child feeleth that aire entring in which it desireth
and seeketh, for the reason before alleadged, it mooueth it selfe
towardes the mouth of the wombe;Which is the easiest kinde of child-birth. which is the most naturall and
easie way of birth, by reason that it is borne with the head forwarde.
Nowe so soone as it is come into the light it cryeth, as if it did prognosticate
and foretell of the miseries of that life into which it is entered.
The Philosophers and Phisitions referre the cause of this weeping to
that motion which driueth it to the birth,Why children cry when they are borne. as also to those handlings
and touchings wherewith it is receiued, which cannot bee without
some sense of griefe conceiued by this litle tender bodie. Which body
so long as it is in the wombe, is bowed round as it were in a lumpe, so
that the heeles of it ioyne to the buttockes, and the handes lay fast
holde of the knees, towards which it doeth bow downe the head so
lowe, that the eyes are ioyned to the thumbes as if they were fastened
to them, and the nose is thrust down betweene the knees. Now when
it hath attained to the ninth moneth, so that it may no longer tarie
there, for the reasons before mentioned, it turneth it selfe in the womb,
first with the head downeward, and stretching out the legges and other
members vpward. Then when the houre of child-birth approcheth,
the babe by kicking and turning it selfe more violently, maketh
many ruptures by litle and litle, so that the skinnes wherein both the
Vrine and the sweate are contained bursting asunder, whole streames
gush out, which shew that the birth is hard at hand. For presently vpon
the renting and breach of the After-burthen through the violence
of the childe, because there is nothing els that holdeth it vp, the babe
falleth downe, euen as an apple or a peare falleth from the tree when
it is ripe. And as the childe doeth his best to come foorth at that time
which God hath prescribed vnto it, so the wombe and the mother of
the child doe their partes as much as lieth in them to performe by the
prouidence of God,A testimonie of Gods prouidence in the wombe. who hath prouided accordingly. For during the
space of those nine monethes wherein the childe is contained in the
wombe, it is shut vp, and embraceth the burthen as close as it may.

And when the time of birth commeth, the wombe doeth not onely open
it selfe by litle and litle, but all the top of it doeth gather it selfe as
close together as it can, and so thrust the babe towards the mouth of it,
wherunto also the neighbour parts lend their helping hand. The woman
likewise laboureth, and helpeth as much as she is able; and the
childe falling downward with his head turned towardes the mouth of
the wombe, maketh way for all the rest of his bodie, and so casteth
it selfe foorth, at whose issuing out, the humour wherewithall it was
before abundantly moistened, helpeth very much, by reason that both
the childs body, and the way also is thereby made more gliding and
slippery. Wherein wee haue a great argument of Gods prouidence to
be obserued. For the childs head being of a round fashio^, his comming
forth cannot be so hindred, as we see it is when the child offreth it selfe
crosse-wise, or when the armes or legs come forwarde. Besides, all the
rest of the members are greatly benefited hereby, both because ye way
is alreadie made before them, as also because themselues are thereby
the better placed to preuent all impediments with which otherwise
they might encounter. For we see by experience what inconueniences
fall out in childbirths, in what dangers the mothers and children are, and
how often the death of the one or the other, or of both ensueth, when
the child commeth otherwise then by this order, which is most naturall
and most ordinary. Wherefore women with child haue great occasio^
offred to recommend themselues vnto God, especially at that time. For
howsoeuer the child co^meth, we must then acknowledge the almighty
hand of God, and his help and assista^ce both towards the mothers and their
children. For let there be neuer so good concord and agreement in the
ioynt-labour of ye child, of the mother, and of the womb, yet the work being
so difficult, who wil not wonder that euer it could be borne? Who
would euer beleeue yt a child should come forth, or yt it could be drawn
out of the mothers belly, without cleauing the same asunder in the
midst, or without the death of the one of them if not of both, but
that wee see the experience thereof daily before our eies? Galen,Gal. de vs^ (...). lib. 15. who
made such an idol of nature, confesseth that he knoweth not how the
child can find any issue and passage out, and therfore wondreth at it very
much, Auicenna thinketh that there is an opening of some bones, but
he is deceiued: for it cannot be so, neither hath experience euer shewed
the same.An argument against Atheists. Wherfore both Philosophers and Physicions, but especially Epicures
and Atheists, must needs be driuen into an astonishment at this,
and haue their mouthes stopped and closed vp, except they wil open them
to giue glory to God,Psal. 139. 17, 18. and 22. 9. and to acknowledge and magnifie his great prouidence
and goodnes towards men, singing with Dauid, O God how precious

are thy thoughts vnto me! how great is the summe of them! If I shoulde
count them they are moe then the sand. It was thou that didst draw me out of
the wombe: thou gauest me hope, euen at my mothers breasts. But wee haue
here to note, that there are many causes which hasten forward ye child-birth,
but we speak here of the^ that are most co^mon and ordinary. Children
that are borne at the sixt moneth or sooner, liue not, as not hauing
then their whole perfection. They yt are borne in the seuenth moneth
may liue, for then is the fruit perfect. And yet they that are borne at
the eight moneth, commonly die: and the reason is, because the child
stirreth very much in the seue^th moneth, preparing it self for the birth.
So that if the child be of a strong nature it commeth the^ into the light:
but if it be yet weake, it cannot come forth, but tarieth two moneths
longer in the womb to gather new strength. For it remoueth from the
one side of the wombe to the other. Therfore when the child after the
seuenth moneth is presently borne in the eight, it cannot liue. For nature
was weak in the first endeuour: neither could it be to purpose, before
the matter receiueth motion after the criticall time, with which
name the Philosophers call the seuenth moneth. Moreouer, double
motion weakneth the strength of the childe. For it had remoued vnto
the other side of the womb as is said, and presently after it came into the
light: but the nature of the child cannot sustaine two brunts one in the
neck of another, so that death followeth thereupon. The Astrologians
likewise allege these reasons why the seuenth moneth is critical, namely,
either because the sunne is caried into a signe that is opposite to the
signe of conception: or els because euery planet answering his seueral
moneth, the eight moneth is giuen to Saturne, who is an enemie to
them that are borne.Two things to be considered of in our birth. Now for the end of this matter, we wil consider
two things in our generation and birth, which offer vnto vs great cause
both of humilitie and of spiritual ioy. First then we see how God would
haue vs humbled in our generation, by creating vs of a matter that is
but slime and dung, wherunto notwithstanding he hath giuen such an
excellent and goodly forme, to the end that his powerfull vertue, wisdome,
iustice, and kindnesse should bee so much the better manifested
vnto vs, and that in our selues, so that we shal not need to seeke for testimonies
thereof elsewhere. So that as our beginning ought to take
out of our heart all swelling and pride, euen so the forme and beautie
wherewithall God hath honoured this mire of which hee hath made
men, and the great graces which hee hath communicated with them,
especially in regarde of the soule which hee hath ioyned to the body
ought to teache vs to acknowledge and to celebrate incessantly his
prouidence and great goodnes towards vs. To conclude, wee ought

to consider the image and similitude we haue of our eternall natiuitie
in this our mortal birth,What similitude there is betweene our spirituall and our natural birth. and that birth whereby we are borne vnto an
immortal life, as here on earth we are borne to enioy a life that is subiect
to mortality. For first, as man is formed and fashioned in dark places
in the belly of his mother, that afterward he might come forth and
enioy the light of the world: so likewise being come hither, he is after
a manner so vpon the earth, as if he were to be borne againe. For this
worlde is vnto him as his mothers wombe, wherein the light is to him
as darkenesse and as a very obscure night, in comparison of that other
diuine and eternall light, in which he is to enioy a happie and an
immortall life. And therefore as the childe is prepared in the darkenesse
of his mothers bellie, that after hee may come foorth into the
light of the world, so are we prepared in this dim light, that wee may
attaine to that other diuine light, which is farre greater and more excellent
without comparison. Againe, when the time of birth approcheth,
the life and vigour of the wombe, which is as it were the childs
mother, withereth and decayeth, and the childe likewise is as if hee
were dead, in regard of that kinde of life which he enioyed in his mothers
bellie. For as he liueth no more after that fashion, so hee is in an
estate that differeth much from the former. So fareth it with man
when hee is to depart out of the life of this worlde, as if hee were to
bee deliuered of it in childbirth for another life. For hee dieth in regarde
of this life, to the ende he may liue another life, which as farre
excelleth this, as this is better then the other, which hee enioyed before
in his mothers bellie: yea it is so much the better and of higher price,
in that the length of time of this second and blessed life shalbe eternall
and endles. Moreouer, as a childe commeth out when hee is borne, so
doth a man when he dieth. And in comming forth both of them enter
into a new and vnacquainted light, and into a place where they finde all
things much altered and farre differing from those which they vsed to
haue in their other kind of liuing. For which cause both the one and the
other being troubled and scared wt this nouelty, are vnwilling to come
forth of their clapper and to forsake their closet, were it not that they are
vrged and constrained thereunto by the arte, lawes and rights of nature,
wherby God hath better prouided for our affaires then wee our selues
could conceiue or co^prehend, both in our natiuity and life, and also in our
death. The ignorance whereof causeth our spirit to abhorre the departure
out of this life,Why we abhorre natural death. in regard of this great cha^ge that is therein, because
it knoweth not what good is brought to it thereby, no more then the
litle child knoweth wherefore he is borne into the world, or what he
shall finde there. And therefore albeit nature presseth to come foorth

neuerthelesse according to that sense which it can haue, it weepeth by
and by after it is borne, as if it were fallen into some great inconuenience,
and that some great euil were fallen vnto it: as we doe also at our
death, for the cause before alleged, not considering that it is our second
and better birth* Thus you see what I haue thought requisite to
be noted in the discourse of our generation: and to morow, God willing,
we must looke into the life and death of mans bodie. But it shall
not be without profite, if first we speake somewhat of the causes why
God created man naked, and with lesse defence for himselfe then hee
did other liuing creatures. It belongeth then to thee, ASER, to speake
of this matter.

The end of the ninth dayes worke.


THE TENTH
dayes worke.

Why God created man naked, and with lesse naturall defence then hee did
all other liuing creatures: how many wayes he recompenceth this nakednes:
of the generall beautie of the whole bodie of man, ioyned with profit
and commoditie. Chap. 73.
ASER. As often as men shall consider in such sort as
becommeth them, that they are borne men, and not
brute beasts, they wilbe suffcie^tly admonished of the
ciuil and sociable nature, in which God hath created
them, and of that humanitie for which he hath endued
them with such a nature, so that they wil keepe them
selues from being transformed into sauage and cruell beasts to hurt one
another, as commonly they do. Truly it is not without some great and
notable cause, yt among al liuing creatures there is not one to be found,
that hath a more delicate and tender skin, and lesse furnished wt couerings
for the defence thereof, then man hath: considering that God himselfe
created him as his principall woorke amongest all visible creatures,
and made him as it were Lorde of the whole worlde. And yet hee is
of that nature, that the skinne wherewith he is clothed is not so sufficient
a garment for him as is necessary to keep him from heat and cold,
and from other inconueniences that might happen vnto him, except he
be clad with some other couering then that which he bringeth fro^ his

mothers belly. For hee neither hath feathers as birds haue, nor wooll
as sheepe haue, nor bristles as swine haue, neither yet any skin or hide
so hard, nor so well couered and furnished with haire, as foxes, wolues,
beares, bulls and other foure footed beasts haue. Neither hath he any
skales as fishes haue, nor any shells as cockles, sea creuisses, tortoises,
and such other creatures haue.The first point to be considered touching mans nakednes.
But we haue foure things to consider of touching this point. The first
is, that if man had not sinned after that God by creation had in great
larges made him partaker of his heauenly giftes and graces, he should
not haue bene subiect to the want either of garments, or of any such
like thing whereunto he is nowe after a sort brought in subiection, at
leastwise he should haue had all these things without paine and griefe.
For this cause it is sayd in Genesis, that after our first parents had transgressed
the ordinance of God, by eating of the forbidden fruite, they
knewe that they were naked and couered themselues with leaues. And for a
punishment of their offence it was sayd vnto them,Gen. 3. 19. that they should eate
their bread in the sweate of their face: vnder which worde of bread was
comprehended all things whereof they stood in neede for the maintenance
and preseruation of their life: as we vnderstand it in that prayer
which we dayly make to God, when wee demaund of him our dayly
bread.The second point* The second point which we ought to note in this matter touching
the nakednes of man, is this, that God would admonish him,
not onely by the whole frame and composition of his body and of all
his members, but also by his very skinne, that he created him to liue in
company and felowship, and in peace with those of his owne kinde, to
helpe all and to hurt none. Therefore hee did not create him with naturall
weapons, as he did other liuing creatures, vnto whome he gaue
all things necessary for their defence and preseruation. For some of them
haue strength and weapons by nature to resist their enemies: others
wanting this haue swiftnes to conuey themselues out of all dangers:
and some wanting both these, haue yet subtiltie and places of refuge to
defend themselues withall. As for man, God hath placed him in this
world vnarmed and naked, so that if men be disposed to hurt and to
warre one vpon another,Man by nature hath least defence for himselfe. they must deforme themselues, and borowe
weapons from others, wherby they transforme themselues and become
monstrous, as though they were transfigured into sauage beasts and into
monsters. For they haue not (as hath bene said) hard and strong hydes
as some brute beasts haue, neither prickles and darts in them as Hedgehogs
and Porcupines haue. Neither are their feete, hands and nailes like
to the hoofes of Horses, Asses, and Mules, or to the tallents of birds that
liue by praye, or to the pawes of wild beasts, neither yet are their teeth

like to theirs. God hath not giuen them sharp bils like to birds, neither
hath he armed them with stings or with venim, as he hath done venimous
beasts. True it is that man hath an aduantage aboue other liuing
creatures, namely his hands giuen him of God for ye doing of any work
that he will,A commendation of the hand of man. as we haue already declared. Wherefore if he be to fight
against beasts, his hand will furnish him with moe weapons, then all
theirs are, which they haue by nature, although they bee put all together.
For he can not only make weapons of all sorts, but handle them
also, and manage them as pleaseth him in his own defence, both against
beasts, as likewise against those of his owne kind. And I would to God
he vsed them but in his owne defence, and did not abuse them as hee
doth to his own hurt very vnnaturally.The third point. But let vs proceed forward and
come to the thirde cause, why God hath thus created man all naked:
which is, that he would admonish him thereby of his naturall infirmitie,
in regarde of those wants and necessities that hemme him in on euery
side, vnto which he is more subiect the^ any other creature. Which
instruction ought to worke two things especially in him:A double vse to be made of our wants. first, it ought
to induce and mooue him to that peaceable and sociable life with his
kinde, for the which God created him. Secondly, by this meanes he is
the more bound to acknowledge the prouidence, bountie and liberality
of God towards him, whereby he bringeth to passe, that the necessitie
and want, which seemeth to be greater in man then in any other liuing
creature, declareth him to be the richest, and best prouided for, yea to
be Lord of all. For all the garments of beastes of what quality soeuer
they be, and whatsoeuer els they possesse, belong to him. Whereas if
men were not subiect to such necessities as are incident vnto them,
what vse should they haue of so many creatures as God hath created
for them? or what seruice should they haue of their hands? For here again
we see how that by them he prouideth for their garments, by setting
on work ye skins, wools and hairs of al other liuing creatures, besides
the silkes of wormes, and other matter which the fruits of the earth affoord
vnto them, as flaxe, hempe and such like. And if necessitie did not
teach them the vse of all these things, howe woulde they consider the
power, wisedome, goodnes and prouidence of God in his works, and in
his creatures, to praise him and to giue him thankes? For although they
haue necessitie and want for their schoolemistres, to the end they might
learne this science in their schoole, yet doe they profit very litle thereby,
but rather become most ingratefull towards God their Creatour,
who is so bountiful and liberal a father towards them. Whereupon we
haue further to note, that God hath not giuen to men many thinges
belonging particularly to beasts, because he hath inriched them with

so many other things, of which all other creatures are altogether destitute.
For besides the helpe he hath of the composition and placing
of those members, which he hath giuen to their bodies, being so conuenient
to performe that which beasts cannot doe with theirs,Wherin men excell all other liuing creatures. he hath
endued them with speech and reason, whereby, not onely all that is in
other creatures which is not in them, is more then recompenced, but
they haue more in them, then all other liuing creatures haue being put
together. For albeit they haue no fethers and wings to flye and mount aloft
by as birds haue, yet how many means haue they to ascend and to
descend to goe and to come whither they wil? And as for swiftnes and
nimblenes, how many beasts are there with whose swiftnes they may
help themselues? And although they haue not finnes wherby to swim
in the sea, and in waters like fishes, yet they haue skil and hands, whereby
they can make and guide ships, and so conuey themselues whither they
wil. Now as for strength which they want to cary heauy burdens afarr
off, how many waies is it recompensed both by land and by water, and
that by means aswel of beasts whose seruice they vse, as of artes and sciences
wherin they are skilful? When by we see that God hath put more
within a man, namely in ye sense and vnderstanding wherwith he hath indued
him,The fourth point* then he hath put without in al beasts. Concerning ye fourth
point of which I haue to speak touching this matter, it is this, that as it
pleased God to giue vnto man a farre more excellent body for beautie
then he did to any other liuing creature, so he would haue this beautie
also to appeare in al the parts therof. For first this body, was not fashioned,
either to flye in the aire as birds do, or to glide vpon the earth, and to
draw it self vpon the belly as creeping things doe, nor to march vpo^ al
foure as fourefooted beasts do, nor with the head bending downward
as theirs is, but to stand and goe vpright with the head lifted vpwards
towards heauen, to the end he might be admonished, that his true beginning
and birth came higher the^ from the earth, and fro^ other corruptible
elements,What we ought to learne by the proportion of our bodies. namely fro^ heauen. He is also admonished hereby, that
he is not borne to serue his belly as brute beasts doe, and to follow after
gluttonie, drunkennes, whoredome, and such other carnal and more then
brutish pleasures, wherein licencious men commonly obserue lesse
moderation then beasts that are altogether without reason and vnderstanding.
For although the matter whereof a mans body is compounded,
diffreth nothing from that whereof the bodies of brute beasts are
made, neuertheles seeing it pleased God to lodge within it a soule of a
diuine and celestial nature, that is farre more excellent then all natures
and creatures with bodies, he would it should haue a lodging agreeable
to the nature of it, whereby also man might bee admonished

of his excellencie, and that he was created, not onely to looke downe
vpon the earth as beastes doe, but to lift vp his eyes vnto heauen, and
to beholde therein the high workes of God his Creator, and to doe
the like in the residue of the whole world. For as we haue heard, man
is not properly this body which we see,What man is? but chiefly the soule and spirit
which we see not, and which hath the body for his lodging. So that
if we consider both the house and the inhabitant, wee shall see that
the things giuen of God to beastes and denied to men, doe bring
great beautie both to beastes because they haue them, and to men because
they haue them not. For if the beastes were depriued of their
armour and naturall ornaments, they should lose all their beautie and
profite that redoundeth vnto them: as likewise man should be deformed
an vgly, if in any sort hee were made partaker of that which is
proper and agreeable to other creatures. But because God hath created
man so that he might be eternal and immortall, he hath armed him inwardly,
euen in that part that shalbe the meanes vnto him of eternall
life. Neither would hee clothe him with naturall garments, nor arme
him with corporall weapons, both because that had bene superfluous
hauing giuen vnto him that which is farre better, as also because his
beautie had bene thereby much diminished, and his spirit should not
haue bene so well knowen as now it is, by meanes of that skill and of
those artes of which God hath made it capable. For what could he inuent
and doe, and wherein should he shew that naturall light and dexteritie
that is in him, if nature had furnished him with all those things,
wherewith his reason giuen vnto him, is able to inrich him? But to conclude
our speech, hauing spoken sufficiently of the creation, generation,
and birth of man, let vs looke into this beautie that is in the forme
and figure of mans body, by calling to remembrance our former discourses.
And let vs know, that both for the matter, and also for the forme
and composition thereof, there is not the like worke in all the worlde,
none so goodly,The excellent frame of mans body. so proper, nor so well vnited and knit together: none so
wel proportioned and polished in euery respect, and in euery part thereof.
So that when we consider thereof from one end of it vnto ye other,
we shal find that the workemaster that made this body, hath throughout
the whole worke ioyned beautie and profit together. But there is
yet another excellencie worthy of great admiration, in that hee hath
not only beautified this body with so goodly a shape as we see it hath,
but hath also endued it with vertue and abilitie to make other bodies
altogether like it selfe, as we heard yesterday. Wherefore men shewe
indeede,Who they be that know not themselues. that they knowe nothing of the excellencie of their nature,
and that they haue altogether forgotten or at leastwise very ill considered

of that instruction, which God hath giuen them by the composition
of their bodies, but principally by the soule that is lodged
therein, if despising celestiall and eternal things for which they are created,
they affect, and seeke after earthly and transitorie things, preferring
the earth before heauen, as commonly they doe. Which is all one
as if they declared openly, that they are displeased that God hath
made them men, and not beastes ramping on the earth, or marching
vpon all foure, and turning their snoute alwayes downeward, because
they haue nothing in them that sauoureth of a diuine and celestiall nature
as man hath: and so they deale no otherwise then as if they would
reproch God for that honour, which hee hath bestowed vpon them,
by creating them differing from brute beastes, vnto whome notwithstanding
they had rather be like. But enough is spoken of this
matter. And seeing wee may be sufficiently instructed by all our former
discourses, what are those principall partes, powers and offices of
the soule, I meane the animall vitall and naturall vertues, as also what
instruments they haue in mans body, let vs nowe looke into the life
and death thereof, and consider more narowly then hitherto we haue
done, what are the causes both of the one and the other.


Whether the life of the body can proceede either of the matter, or of the composition,
forme, and figure, or of the qualities thereof, or els of the harmony,
coniunction and agreement of all these: whether any of these
or all of them together can be the soule: of the length and shortnes, of the
diuers degrees and ages, and of the end of mans life: of death, and of
the causes both of life and death: of the difference that is betweene naturall
and supernaturall Philosophie in the consideration of things.
Chap. 74.
AMANA. Iesus Christ purposing to teach vs, that we cannot haue
life but in him, and by him, who is the life, and who hath the words
of eternal life,Ioh. 15. 1, 2, 3, 4* compareth himselfe to a Vine, and his disciples vnto Branches.
For as the branch hath life and vigor, and beareth fruite, so long as it
remaineth in the vine, and receiueth nourishment from thence, so if it receiueth
no sap from thence, or if it be cut off, it withereth and dyeth.
We may say the same of the members of the body, if the soule be not
in euery one of them, and if it giue not life, vertue, and vigor to them
all for the performance of their offices. For if it fall out so, that it withdraweth
it selfe altogether from any one part of the body, that part is
without life: as we see by experience in a member dried vp, or putrified,
or cut off from the body. And so is it with the whole body, when the

soule is separated fro^ it. But we are to handle this matter more at large.
By our former discourses wee may learne the nature both of the
soule and of the body, what is that vnion and coniunction which they
haue together, albeit their natures, substances, and essences are diuers
and very different: also we haue learned that the one of them, namely
the spirituall essence, is a great deale more excellent then the other,
which is corporall.The soule proceedeth not of the matter. Wherefore we may well conclude, that the life
in the body proceedeth not of the matter whereof it is made, nor of
the qualities ioyned vnto it, nor yet of the composition forme and figure
thereof. For if the life and soule were in the matter of the body,
the larger and greater mens bodies were, and the more matter they
had in them, the more life and soule, the more wit, spirit and vnderstanding
should be in them. But we see by experience that it is farre
otherwise, and that there is no more life and soule in a great body then
in a litle. And if it were so that the life proceeded from the matter, a
dead body should bee as well a man,Nor of the qualities. as a liuing body. We may say the
same both of the qualities ioyned to the matter according to the nature
of the elements, as also of that conformation and agreement that
is betweene all the members both within and without: And as for the
harmony coniunction and concord that floweth from the diuersitie of
these qualities,Nor of the harmonie. and from their temperature, it may be increased and diminished.
Wherefore that cannot be the effect of nature, which causeth
a thing to be that which it is, and giueth vnto the same thing his
forme and kinde, that continueth alwayes in his estate and naturall
disposition. For if it were otherwise, the nature of kindes might bee
changed, which neuer any of the Philosophers did so much as imagine,Nor of the composition of the body.
or thinke to affirme. And as for the composition and figure of
the body, there is yet lesse reason to say it commeth from thence, forasmuch
as that continueth the same in a dead body which it was in a
liuing. Againe, those liuing creatures, that resemble most the nature
and forme of the members of mans body, and the matter thereof, are
oftentimes farther off from the nature of humane sense and vnderstanding,
then they that do lesse resemble the^. Which we may easily know
by considering the natures of a Hog and of an Elephant.The nature of a Hog. And of an Elephant. For they that
through want and famine haue bene constrained to eate mans flesh,
haue testified that no flesh or meate whatsoeuer approcheth neerer in
taste, or is more like it then the flesh of a Hog. And if we consider the
inward members and parts, there is no beast, if we will giue credite to
them that haue had the experience thereof, that hath them liker to
those in man, then the Hog hath, both for substance, disposition, forme
and figure. Contrariwise, wherein doeth the Elephant resemble man

either for forme or composition of body, or of the members both internal
and external, in comparison of a Hog? And yet there is no beast
more teachable then the Elephant, or that approcheth neerer to the
sense and vnderstanding of man: as on the other side there is no beast
further off in this respect, nor more hard to be taught and more brutish,
then is the Hog. And if any man thinke that the industry and docilitie
of an Elephant proceedeth, either from the greatnesse of the
matter whereof it is made, or from the abundance of the qualities ioyned
vnto the matter, or from the harmony, coniunction and concorde
that is betweene them, or lastly, from the composition, forme and figure
of his body and of the members thereof, wee will oppose vnto him the
Ant, which is one of the least among the creatures of the earth, as the
Elephant is the greatest of all, as farre as we know. The like may be said
of the Bee. For, are there many creatures although greater in substance,
that yet haue such industrious and ingenious natures, as these litle
beasts haue, that are to be reckoned among the smallest of them? And
by this it appeareth plainly,The soule of a beast differeth from the substance and nature of his body. yt the soule of beasts is of some other substance
and nature then their bodies, notwithstanding there is great difference
betwixt ye soule of beasts and the soule of me^. But we haue further
to note touching the soule of man, yt the spirit doth not only not folow
the nature of the body, but which is more, gouerneth, carieth and recarieth
it whither it pleaseth: yea, it withstandeth the affections, which approch
neerest to ye corporal and terrestrial nature.The facultie of sense commeth not from the body. And as for ye facultie of
sense and of the senses, it is a vertue that surpasseth all bodily power and
vertue, and all things depending of the body, so that there is no facultie
of the body that is able to expresse the actions thereof. What shall we
say then of the vertue of vnderstanding, which is the highest and most
soueraigne facultie that is in man? Which wee cannot say is a body
compounded of matter and forme. For that thing is the fountaine and
original of life, which first mooueth a liuing creature to the works belonging
vnto life. So that when wee inquire what this fountaine and
spring is, then doe we seeke to know what the soule is. Nowe we may
soone know by that which hath bene spoken, what the soule is not:
but as yet we cannot perceiue what the proper substance and nature
thereof is. And in deede it is not that which wee haue to speake of at
this time, hereafter we may say somewhat of that matter. Let it suffice
for this present,The cause of the life of the body. that we know that the true cause of the life of the body,
in regard of second causes, is in the soule next vnto God, who is
the first and principall cause of all things. Therefore it is hee that hath
ordained and limitted to euery liuing creature his appointed time
wherein to liue and to grow, and next to decrease and to dye: and as

it pleaseth him either to prolong or to abridge their life, so doeth he
dispose of the second causes and meanes whereby hee will haue it
brought to passe. Wherefore although euery one hath his certaine
bounds and terme of life set him, yet none but God onely can attaine
to the knowledge thereof. For all come not to the last age, which hee
hath appointed to be the ordinarie end of euery ones life, following
those degrees into which it is diuided,The degrees of mans age. according to that diuision
which we make of dayes and yeeres. For the infancie of man may be
resembled to the morning, and to the spring time of the yeere: mans
age to midday and to the sommer: olde-age to the Euening and to
Autumne: and death to night and to winter. Therefore Iob sayth very
well,Iob 14. 5. speaking of man, the number of his moneths are with thee: thou hast
appointed his bounds, which he cannot passe. Nowe if it be demaunded
what is the ordinarie terme of life appointed by God, we are to know,
that nature by the ordinance of God appropriateth the matter being
in the forme of members, vnto the soule, that is, to giue life vnto the
whole body. Nowe when the soule is entred into it and hath taken
possession thereof,The cause of the length and shortnes of life. by little and little it prepareth and maketh fit the
internall instruments, vntil at length it hath brought them to that perfection,
which the qualitie, constitution and composition of the matter
is able to receiue and to beare. And after these instruments are come
to their greatest perfection, by vsage they waste and consume away, returning
by little and little vnto their first nature, and so in the end wholy
corrupt and dye. Thus you see how the members are appropriated in
the belly of the mother, howe the spirits and humors are fitted in the
time of infancie: after which the flower of age in youth is as it were
the vigor and vse of the perfection of the instruments, and olde-age is
the decreasing age, wherein they decay continually and become worse
and worse, euen vntill they come to their corruption, which is death.
And this death we call naturall,What naturall death is. when following this course it attaineth
without violence to these bounds. Nowe although this bee no
long course, yet there are but very fewe that hold out to the vttermost
end thereof, in regard of them that stay by the way: of whome some
are cut off, euen before they haue begunne their course, others presently
after they haue begun it, and some in the midway: and that through
so many sortes of sicknesses with other inconueniences and accidents,
that a man cannot possibly comprehend or conceiue them all. Therefore
Moses sayd long since,Psal 90. 10. that the time of our life is threescore yeeres
and ten, and if they be of strength, foure score yeeres: yet their strength is
but labour and sorowe: for it is cut off quickly, and we flee away. And after
hee hath compared man to a streame of water caried violently away,

to a Morning dreame, to the grasse that florisheth and groweth in the
Morning, and in the Euening is cut downe and withereth, he giueth the
reason of all this, saying,Psal. 7. 8, 9. for we are consumed by thine anger, and by thy
wrath are we troubled. Thou hast set our iniquities before thee, and our secret
sinnes in the light of thy countenance: for all our dayes are past in thine
anger: we haue spent our yeeres as a thought. Iob also agreeth well with
Moses in this point when hee sayeth,Iob 14. 1, 2. Man that is borne of a woman,
is of short continuance, and full of trouble. He shooteth forth as a flowre, and
is cut downe, he vanisheth also as a shadow, and continueth not. Nowe it is
certaine, that if we looke to the causes of the life and death of men layd
downe by vs, we shal thinke that all this is done naturally, and that there
is a certaine order of nature, vnto which we must all be subiect, and a
naturall necessitie which none can eschew. But wee see that Moses
mounteth aloft, and searcheth higher for the cause: for hee seekth it in
God and in his determination, yea in his wrath conceiued against our
sinnes. Therefore the children and seruants of God, that haue bene instructed
in his worde, doe not onely consider of that in death, which
prophane men beholde there: but they mount vp euen to this highest
cause, and behold there the wrath of God against sinne, and against all
mankinde for the same. So that wee may knowe by that whith hath
bene sayd,Of the true difference betweene naturall and diuine Philosophie. what difference there is betweene humane and naturall
Philosophie, and that which is diuine and supernaturall: and wherein
they deceiue themselues, that stay altogether in naturall Philosphie.
And hereby also wee may learne the cause why so many become Atheists
and Epicures thereby,The cause of so many Atheists. whereas it should serue them in place of
steps and degrees to cause them to ascend vp to that Philosophie that
is supernaturall and heauenly. For their noses are altogether poring in
this base kitchin, of which we haue intreated in our former discourses:
as though God had not created men for another life and end then hee
hath done beasts. Whereupon we may imagine, what true ioye and
consolation they can haue, I say not only in death, but also throughout
their whole life, seeing their life, wil they nill they, must passe through
so many dangers and miseries. For whether they will or no, they must
be subiect to this sentence passed from God against all mankinde, in
the person of our first parents,Gen. 3. 17, 18. when hee sayd to Adam, Cursed is the
earth for thy sake: in sorow shalt thou eate of it all the daies of thy life. Thorns
also and thistles shall it bring forth to thee, and thou shalt eate the herbe of
the fielde. In the sweate of thy face shalt thou eate bread, till thou returne to
the earth: for out of it wast thou taken, because thou art dust and to dust shalt
thou returne.Iob 5. 6. Therefore Eliphaz sayth in the booke of Iob, that miserie
proceedeth not out of the dust, and that affliction buddeth not out of the earth.

Which is asmuch to say,The cause of barrennes. as that the cause of barrennes of ground proceedeth
not from the earth, but from the sinne of man. Wherefore
men cannot lay the blame vpon any other beside themselues, as being
the cause of all the euils which they suffer, because they beare the matter
of them in themselues. Now if any thinke, that this sentence pronounced
by God against all mankinde is not so much executed vpon
the wicked that are without God, as vpon others, because wee see
commonly that they are richest, and liue in greatest ease, in pleasures and
in delightes, we must know that they are not therefore exempted from
those miseries, whereunto the life of man is subiect, and which are all
comprehended vnder this sweate of the face mentioned in the holy
Scriptures. For there is not one of them to be found, that can so saue
himselfe, but that he hath alwayes his part and portion in these things.
And if we could consider wel the whole course of their life, who seeme
to be the happiest amongst them, and had the patience to waite vntill
the end of their race, we should still finde by experience the trueth of
that we speake of. But let vs goe on with our speeches touching the
causes of the length and shortnes of this bodily life, and of naturall
death, as also of that which is violent, whereof wee haue not yet spoken.
Also let vs consider of the things that are chiefly required for the
vpholding of this bodily life, and without which it could not consist.
This then shallbe the matter subiect, of which thou, ARAM, shalt take
vpon thee to discourse.


Of the causes generally of the length and shortnes of bodily life: of naturall
and of violent death: in what manner the life of man consisteth in his
breath: of the principall things required to life, and without which it
cannot be: of the difference betwixt the life of men and the life of beasts:
of the image of the spirituall death in the corporall: of the true comfort
which we ought to haue therein. Chap. 75.
ARAM. This lawe was layde vpon nature by GOD the Creator
thereof, that the things which it should bring forth in this inferiour
world, should haue small beginnings at the first, and after growe
by litle and litle, and when they were come to their full greatnes should
stand a while at a stay, and then fall by litle and litle, and returne to
their originall and first beginning: as we see a patterne hereof and an
example twise a day in the Ocean sea. For after it is mounted vp to the
highest, and hath spread it selfe in length and breadth as much as it
may, it returneth againe vnto the fountaine and wombe from whence
it came, and there closeth vp it selfe. For God hath compassed it with

certaine bounds beyond which it cannot passe.Nothing abideth still in the same state. So likewise euery thing
hath his course and set time of continuance: neither doe we see any
thing vnder the Moone, either of the workes of God, or of the inuentions
of men, which keepeth not this course. And so is it with the body,
which being created by litle and litle, decayeth after the same maner,
as it were by the same degrees by which it mounted vpward. And
that which we see in euery particular body, the same we perceiue to be
in the whole frame and course of the world, and in all the estates thereof.
For the world hath had his infancie, next his youth, then his mans
estate, and now he is in his olde-age. For we see howe all things decline
dayly, and continually waxe worse and worse, as it were approching
to their end. In like maner if we would consider the course and
estate of all Common-wealths, Principalities, Kingdomes, and Empires,
and of all the greatest and chiefest Monarchies, that euer were
from the creation of the world, we should finde that all of them were
very small and weake in their beginnings, and that afterwards they
increased and mounted vp vntill they came to their highest degrees:
and after they had attained thither, they descended and fell by litle and
litle continually, vntill in the ende they were wholy ruinated. Nowe
the first causes of all these things proceeding from God and from his
eternall counsell, we know that the second causes are in the nature of
euery thing that hath beginning and must end, and chiefly in the nature
of mens bodies.
By our formmer speech wee haue learned already howe this corporall
life consisteth in the preseruation of those instruments which
the soule vseth in the body: and that the chiefest of them is heate, the
second moysture agreeable to the heate, which must needes haue
something to feede it and keepe it in a moderate stay. Lastly wee learned,
that the nourishing and cherishing of the heate is the preseruation
of the moysture: and therefore those liuing creatures that are best
able to mainteine and keepe these two qualities within themselues,
are of longest continuance in life.The cause of the length of life. So that the chiefe naturall cause of
the long continuance of life, consisteth in euery mans composition,
namely if it be hot and moyst by due proportion, both in the sinewes
and in the marrow, in the liquors and humors, and in the spirits. The
second cause consisteth in the long continuance of this temperature,
which being interrupted and marred by diseases, the instruments of
life are thereby also spoyled, and so they failing, life it selfe must needes
cease. Whereupon death ensueth: euen as when the instruments and
tooles of some handicraftes man are worne and faile him, it cannot be
but that his arte and occupation should also be at an ende. So that

death is a defect of those instruments of the soule,What death is. whereby life is prolonged.
For the soule leaueth the body by reason of the defect of instruments,
and not for any disagreement that is betweene the body
and it, as may appeare by this, that it was not any proportion or agreement
that ioyned the soule and the body together. For albeit a workeman
vseth his instruments, yet there is no proportion and agreement
betweene him and them, in regard of the matter and forme of him and
of his tooles: vnlesse peraduenture this proportion may be imagined (...)
be betweene the arte of the workeman, as he is a workeman, and betweene
the aptnesse of the toole he vseth, whereby it is made fit for
the doing of that which the workeman hath in hand. Seeing then all
life consisteth both in heate, as we haue already sayd, and also in moysture
requisite for the heate,Naturall death. wee call that naturall death, when heate
faileth by reason that the moysture is dryed vp through the heate that
drinketh it vp, which heate also in the end vanisheth away, euen as a
lampe doeth when the oyle of it is consumed. But that is called a violent
death,Violent death. when through some accident, either the moysture is
drawne out of the body, or the heate is put out and extinguished either
by some inward, or els some outward oppression and violence.
Internall violence is either by poyson, or by gluttony and drunkennes,
or by such excesse: as a when a lampe goeth out because there is too
much oyle powred into it. And if this oppression be done outwardly,
it is called externall; as when the ayre and breath that refresheth the
heart, is shut vp and reteined, either in the sharpe artery, or in the
mouth. For it is as if a fire were suddenly couered and choked by some
great heape of stones, or of earth, or of ashes layde vpon it. We heard
before, that if the Lungs had no respiration by the mouth and nostrils,
no man could breath, but he should be choked by and by: as we see it
by experience in them that are strangled. The reason hereof is, because
the pipe that reacheth from the Lungs to the throat,Of the windpipe. is so closed vp, that
it is altogether stopr, or at least so narrow and strait, that there is not
space enough for the ayre and breath to passe in and out by. We see also
dayly how this windpipe is troubled, if whiles wee eate or drinke,
there fall into it a litle crumb of bread, or meate, or els a drop of water
or of wine, or of any other drinke, yea although it were but a little
drop of our owne spettle. For the breath that ascendeth vp from the
lungs by this pipe, will not suffer any other thing to enter in thereat,
except it be as subtill and thinne as the ayre is, but it driueth it vpward,
insomuch as when that happeneth to any man, hee is in great paine
and as it were stifeled for the time. We see the like also in the cough.
For from whence proceedeth it but onely of those distillations that

descend from the braine vnto the lungs by this pipe?From whence the cough commeth. And truely the
consideration of all this, ought to be vnto vs in place of an other speciall
testimony of the infirmitie of our nature, that wee may alwayes
learne the better by this to humble our selues. For what an excellent
gift is this life, which God hath giuen to man? and yet a matter of
nothing will depriue him of it. For let his breath onely bee taken
away, which is but a little winde, and beholde hee is stifled and
dead by and by. And for the taking away of his breath, and so of
his life withall, there needeth nothing else but the stopping of his
mouth and nosethrilles, or of his windepipe onely, which is soone
done, and hee is dispatched presently without all help and remedy by
man. Therefore Esay hath a good speach: depart (saieth he) from the
man whose breath is in his nosethrilles:Esay 2. 22. for wherein is hee to be esteemed?
In a worde, his meaning is, that man is but as it were a little winde and
blast, as if hee had his life in his nosethrilles, and as if it were as easie
a matter to take away his life as his breath. Moreouer, the mixture
and temperature of all the elementary qualities and of all the humours
is so necessary for life, as wee haue already heard, that if anie
one be wanting,The blood necessary for life. our life can not continue. But the chiefest and most
necessary of all, are heate and moisture placed in the blood, which
is so necessary for the maintenance of life, that after it is out of the
body death followeth presently.
Concerning the members of the body, it hath beene tolde vs already,
that there are som of the^ without which the body can not keep
life, nor bee kept therein, amongest which the heart is the chiefest
of all,The difference betweene the death of beasts and of man. for the reasons, which wee haue already heard. Nowe these
things standing thus, wee must consider what difference there is betweene
the death of bruite beastes, and that of man: namely this,
that the soule of beastes perisheth vtterly in their death, as doeth the
vigour of mens senses in the death of man. But the soule of man suruiueth
after the death of his body, and continueth alwayes in beeing
and in life. For, considering that beastes doe in this life all
that can bee done by them, according to those giftes, which they
haue receiued of nature, therefore they liue and die heere altogether,
hauing nothing bestowed vpon them for an other better life.
But forasmuch as GOD hath giuen vnto man a diuine and immortall
spirite, which hath heere great impediments and can not well
exercise all his offices, it is requisite that it shoulde haue an other life
wherein it may display all the vertues it hath, and enioy whatsoeuer
GOD hath prepared for it, euen that which is most agreeable and
proper to the nature thereof. Wherefore wee may say, that the

death of man is a separation, or a departure of the soule from the body:
wherein GOD propoundeth vnto vs a perfect image of our separation
and departure from him, which commeth by the meanes of
sinne. For wee see what becommeth of the body when the soule is
gone from it, and what it is during the time that it is ioyned therewith.An image of our spirituall death in the bodily.
The difference is very great. Let vs then propound our soule,
as if it were in the place of the bodie, and imagine that God were insteade
of the soule in it, as wee fee the soule is in the body. Then let
vs consider what might be the estate of the soule both when it is ioyned
with GOD, and when it is separated from him. For there is
greater difference betweene the soule separated from GOD, then
betweene a body separated from his soule. Forasmuch as there is no
bodie so stincking nor so infected, when it is separated from the soule,
as the soule is when it is separated from GOD, if wee will compare
spirituall things with corporall things. And contrariwise wee may
iudge of the estate thereof when it is ioyned with God, by the estate
of a body ioyned with his soule, and by that difference which is betweene
a dead body and a quicke.
Nowe if wee woulde well consider these things, and compare
the corporall death of the bodie with the spirituall death of the soule,
wee woulde abhorre sinne in greater measure then wee doe, and bee
more afraid of it then of anie thing that may come vnto vs.Only sinne hurteth the soule. For there
is nothing either in heauen or earth, that can hurt vs but sinne: as in
deede nothing can bring dammage to vs, but that which can hurt the
soule. But it is sinne onely that is able to hurt the soule, because by
it those meanes are taken away from the soule, whereby GOD bestoweth
spirituall life vpon it. Therefore wee ought not to thinke
that bodily death can anie way hurt the soule, vnlesse it be in regarde
of the euill life past. It is true, that seeing GOD hath created
man to bee of such a nature, as to be compounded of a bodie and of a
soule, and that his true and perfect estate consisteth heerein that they
shoulde liue vnited and ioyned together, it is very like that there is
some euil in the seuering of the^ asunder, especially if any of them corrupt
and perish, and the euill may seeme to be doubled, if both of them
should corrupt and perish, as many epicures and atheists would haue it.
For if it be euill to haue but halfe a beeing, the euill and imperfection
is much more, not to be at all, seeing there is nothing more goodly
or more excellent then to haue a beeing. And if it be an excellent
thing to bee,What it is to be well. then to bee well, is a farre more goodly and excellent
thing. For therein consisteth the perfection and absolute felicitie of
man. Nowe there is no sound or perfect estate of anie man, but

onely that in which, and for which GOD created him. And although
man bee fallen from that estate, yet it hath pleased GOD
not onely to restore him againe thereunto by his Sonne Iesus Christ,
but also to make it vnto him more entire and more perfect, yea much
more sure and stedfast then it was in the beginning. For this cause,
if besides the benefite of creation wee consider also that of regeneration,
and of the restauration and repairing of man, wee shall
finde therein ample matter of true and sound consolation against
death.A comfort against death. For wee knowe that this tabernacle of our body, which is
infirme, faulty, corruptible, fraile and tending to putrifaction, shall
bee destroyed and as it were pulled downe, to the ende, that afterwardes
it may bee restored vnto a perfect, firme, incorruptible and
celestiall glorie. Wee see that by death wee are called backe againe
from a miserable exile, to the ende that wee may dwell in our countrie,
euen in our heauenly countrie. In a worde, wee are assured by
death to enioy such a blessed and permanent estate, as the like whereof
appeareth no where vpon the earth. And if the brute beastes, euen
the insensible creatures as Saint Paul teacheth vs,Rom. 8. 22. as wood and
stone, hauing some sence of their vanitie and corruption, doe waite
for the day of iudgement that they may bee deliuered from the same:
shall not wee bee very miserable, hauing both some light of nature,
and also boasting that wee are inspired with the spirite of GOD, if
wee doe not lift vp our eyes aboue this earthly corruption, when the
question is concerning our beeing? Shall wee not contemne and
disdaine the vanitie of the worlde, to aspire after the good beeing
of the immortalitie to come? Let vs knowe then that wee can not
finde any true and sound consolation without this consideration and
hope which is most assured to them that beleeue in Christ Iesus.
Therefore they that went not beyond the boundes of naturall Philosophie,Naturall philosophie affoordeth no found comfort against afflictions, or death.
coulde neuer enioy anie true consolation, either against the
miseries of mans life, or against corporall death. And although they
beleeued, that together with the body whatsoeuer is in man, was extinguished,
or otherwise that after the death of the body, the soule remained
immortall, yet notwithstanding some haue done nothing else
but mourne and complaine in this life, insomuch as they haue laid violent
handes, as it were, vpon Nature, reuiling her and calling her the
stepmother rather then the mother of mankind: and others haue doubted
of their future estate and condition, not being able to learne and
knowe whether their soules should liue either in ioy and rest, or els in
paine and torment, but only by opinion. Of which if we would discourse
at large, and consider particularly of their reasons, we should be confirmed

more and more in that true consolation, that ought to bee in
the heart of euery Christian against the honour of death. Therefore
I greatly desire ACHITOB, to heare thee discoursing vpon
this matter.


Of the chiefe consolations, which the wisest amongst the Pagans and Infidels
coulde drawe from their humane reason and naturall Philosophie
against death: of the blasphemies vsed by Atheists and Epicures
against God and Nature: what Nature is, and who they bee
that attribute vnto it that which they ought to attribute vnto God.
Chap. 76.
ACHITOB. Trees haue their seasons, in which they beginne
to budde and afterwards do blossome: which blossome in conuenient
time taketh the forme and fashion of the fruite, and after that
it continueth growing, vntill it becommeth ripe: and beeing come
to the greatest maturitie and ripenesse that it can haue, it falleth down
of it selfe, and still consumeth more and more. The same may bee
saide of leaues. But this happeneth not to all, nor yet altogether after
the self same maner to all those vnto who^ it doth happen. For some
fruits perish euen in the very bud, or els in the floure: and some after
they are come to the fashion of fruit. And of these latter sort, some fade
away sooner, some later, according to their sundry accidents. For some
are eaten by wormes, other by noisome flies, and some through diuers
kinds of creeping things, which bred in the fruite it selfe. Againe, some
are shaken downe violently, either through great and mighty showres,
huge stormes, blustering windes, or els by haile and tempest, beeing
plucked forcibly from the trees before they can come to any ripenesse.A profitable contemplation in nature.
By all which things God propoundeth vnto vs, a goodly picture
and representation of the whole course of mans life, yea of all
estates and conditions of men in the worlde, both generally and
particularly. For although in our former speech wee hearde what
order nature vsually followeth in naturall thinges, and namely, in
that which respecteth the estate of Empires and Monarchies, yet
if wee looke well into it, wee shall there finde also this very difference,
which we haue obserued to bee betwixt naturall death, and
that which wee call violent death. For as amongest men all come
not to the vttermost of olde age, but manie are stayed by the
way, so is it with estates. Wee see some men ascende vp through
all degrees, euen vntill they attaine to the highest: and then by
the same degrees descend againe, vntil they come to the ende and

period of all. But we see others that are staied in ascending, or if they
come to the highest degree, are sodainely throwne downe. Moreouer,
among those fruites which attaine to maturitie and ripenes, all
haue not one and the selfe same time of rypening, but euery one hath
his proper season: and those that are most forward and soonest rype,
are of shortest continuance; and quickly gone. This selfe same thing
also we see to be obserued in the life of men, and in the course of this
world.The miserable estate of Atheists that haue no hope of another life. Wherefore if we had no hope of another life besides this, our
estate would be more miserable, not onely then the estate of beastes,
but also then that of trees. For as trees decay yeerely in regard of their
flowers, fruites and leaues, so they are yeerely renewed, whereas many
men perish after that manner, that being once dead they shall neuer
be raised vp and renewed againe to glory. For although they haue
some opinion of another life, yet if by the certaintie of faith they doe
not apprehende the fruition of eternall happinesse, which is prepared
for the blessed through the grace of Christ Iesus, they can neither liue
nor die without some doubt of that which they desire most to be perswaded
of.
When the greatest and most skilfull Philosophers, the wisest and
most vertuous personages that haue byn amongst the Heathen, went
about to comfort either themselues, or their friends in their great afflictions,
and chiefly in death, this was thought to be one of their strongest
reasons, that the lawes of nature are vnauoydable, and that it must be
so. For they had no hope of the resurrection of their bodies: as indeed
it is a doctrine yt humane Philosophy doth not vnderstand. And as for
the immortalitie of the soule, albeit the best Philosophers, and most
learned men amongst them were of that opinion, which also was for
the most part generally receiued of the people, yet they were neuer so
assured thereof, but that still there remained some doubt in them, because
they had no certaine knowledge of it, but onely so much as they
could get by their naturall light and humane Philosophie. Therefore
when such as excelled others amongst them laboured to comfort and
strengthen men against the feare of death, and would perswade them
that there was no euill in it, they vsed for their principal reason this disiunctiue
speech,Philosophicall reasons against the feare of death. saying: Either man is wholly extinguished by death, or
els some part of him remaineth afterwards. If he perish altogether, so that nothing
of him continueth still, then he feeleth no ill: and so death hurteth him
not, but deliuereth him from all those euils whereunto he is necessarily subiect
in this life. But if some part of him abideth still, so that he die not altogether,
then is death no death vnto him, or at leastwise it is not euill vnto
him, seeing his principall part, which is his soule, and in regard of which he is

man, liueth and abideth whole and sound. Nowe these are very leane
and slender consolations. For seeing GOD hath created man of
that nature that hee is compounded of body and soule, no doubt but
his true and perfect estate consisteth heerein, that these two natures
be vnited and lincked together:Sinne the cause of death. as in deede they shoulde haue done,
had it not bene for the sinne of our first parents, who thereby brought
vpon man both bodily and spirituall death. And it is against reason to
thinke, that a separation of these two natures so well knit together
coulde bee made, and that one of them shoulde corrupt and perish,
and all this without griefe. Nowe if they perish both together, the
euill that followeth thereupon is the greater. For nothing can bee imagined
to bee more goodly and excellent then to haue a beeing.
Nowe can any body call that thing excellent which ceaseth to bee,
or which hauing a beeing, fadeth incontinently? But what a horrour
is it to a man onely to thinke of death? And howe much more will
his horrour bee encreased, when he shall thinke that hee must so vanish
away by death, that no part of him afterward shall haue any more
beeing, then if hee had neuer beene at all? And what profite ariseth
to him that was neuer borne,Atheists more miserable then beasts. more then to the brute beast? But yet
the estate of this man is more miserable. For to what ende shoulde
the reasonable soule serue, which God hath giuen him, as also the
vnderstanding, reason and all the other vertues wherewith God hath
endued it aboue the soule of beastes, but to make him more miserable
and wretched then if hee had beene created a beast? For seeing
beastes haue no minde, vnderstanding or reason, to conceiue and
knowe what a benefite and gift of GOD it is to haue a beeing and
to liue, they haue no such vehement apprehension either of death as
men haue, or of the losse of any good thing, which they are in danger
to loose. And by this reason it followeth, that the more blockish
and brutish men are, the lesse miserable they shoulde bee: as contrariwise,
the greater spirites they haue, and the more they acknowledge
the excellencie of mans nature, and those gifts wherewith God
hath endued it, so much the more miserable and wretched shoulde
they be, instead of receiuing greater ioy and consolation. Whereupon
it commeth to passe, that they are more ready to despite and blaspheme
God, then to praise and glorifie him for those graces and benefits
wherewith hee hath adourned mankinde. We see howe Epicures
and Atheists, and all they that consider in man this present life
onely, and goe no further, drawe neere to this point of which wee
speake.The common sayings of Atheists. Therefore some of them say, that it were best for a man not
to bee borne at all, or else to die so soone as hee is borne. Others set

themselues against nature and speake euill of her, saying that shee is,
rather a badde stepmother then a good mother to mankinde. And
because they knowe not what GOD is, they set vpon Nature,
through whose sides they wound him, speaking euill of him, and
blaspheming him vnder this name of Nature. Thus you see what
comfort and consolation they finde, who looke for no other life after
this. And as for those other that haue but some bare motion and
slender opinion of the immortalitie of soules, what greater ioy or
contentation can they haue? Nay there are three things that doe
greatly diminish their comfort. The first is, their doubting wherewith
they are continually possessed, which hindereth them from hauing
any assurance of the same. The second is the seperation of the
soule from the body, whereby they conceiue and imagine, that the
bodie doeth so turne into corruption, as that it wholly perisheth without
anie hope of the resurrection thereof, or of conioyning it againe
with the soule from which it was disioyned. The third is the ignorance
of the estate of soules after this life. For albeit they were verie
certainely perswaded that our soules are immortall, yet they haue
no assuraunce of their estate, neither knowe they whether they liue
in ioy and rest, or in paine and torment, but onely by opinion, as
they esteeme by euery ones merites, which they measure according
to that knowledge they haue, and that iudgement which they are able
to affoorde of their vertues and vices.Naturall reason not sufficient to stay the conscience. Therefore, whatsoeuer
they thinke or hope, seeing they are not very sure and certaine, neither
indeede can bee, if they haue no better assuraunce then by their
naturall light and reason, they must needes bee subiect continually
to sorrowe and griefe, which way soeuer they turne themselues.
For if they are of opinion, that there are punishments for such as
haue ledde an euill life in this worlde, who can assure them that they
shall bee exempted and freed thereof? For howsoeuer they labour
to enforce (as it were) their conscience, and striue neuer so much
to rocke it on sleepe, and flatter themselues in their sinnes, yet can it
not affoorde them anie such peace and quietnesse, as will altogether
satisfie and content them.
And as for perswading themselues that there is no punishement
for the wicked, they are neuer able to doe it. For the same naturall
light and reason whereby they iudge soules to bee immortall, doth
likewise constraine them to acknowledge, that there is a God a iust
Iudge, who suffereth not euill vnpunished, as also he will not passe
by that which is good without accepting of it as it is. So that seeing

they cannot assuredly know, that God will approue and receiue their
workes as good, or refuse them as euill, they must of necessitie bee alwayes
in feare,Two sorts of Atheists. whatsoeuer they beleeue. Therefore as the one sort
endeuour with all their power to bee perswaded of this, that mens
soules are mortal as well as their bodies, and that after death there remaineth
no more of the one then of the other, thereby to deliuer the^selues
of this feare, and of the torment that accompanieth feare: so the
other sort that haue a better opinion of the immortalitie of soules, labour
to perswade themselues that there is no Hell nor punishment for
soules after this life, but that they are onely poeticall fictions and
fables. But although Poets vsed fictions in that which they wrote
of Hell, and of those infernall furies and torments, yet they deriued
the grounde and foundation of them from that testimonie, which
God hath planted in the nature of vs all. So that none ought to flatter
and seduce themselues by meanes of such opinions as ouerturne all
nature: for that were to take away all difference betweene good and
euill,Why there must needes be a second life. vertue and vice, things honest and dishonest. For if there bee no
reward either for the one or the other, or if it be all one, it followeth
either that there is no difference betwixt all these things, or that there
is no iustice in God. But both these are impossible, whereupon it must
needes be concluded, that not onely there is another life after this, but
also that in the second life there is ioy, rest, and felicity for the one, and
greefe, paine, and dolour for the other. Wherfore we must not thinke,
that because the Kitchin and Nurserie of this mortall bodie is by the
appointment and prouidence of God, ioined with the soule that is immortall
and diuine, therefore there is no other life for man besides this
bodily life, or that the soule which giueth life and mainteineth it in
the body, is no more immortall then the body that receiueth the same
from it, and that the body in like maner ought not to expect another
life after this. But I hope that these things shall hereafter bee better
declared vnto vs in those discourses, which wee are especially to make
touching the immortalitie of the soule. Now to end this speech, forasmuch
as in this and in our former discourses, we haue oftentimes made
mention of Nature, which for the most part men ioyne as companion
with God, when they speake of the counsels of his prouidence ouer all
things created according to that common prouerbe, that God and Nature
haue made nothing in vaine, I say in this respect it shall be good for
vs to know,What Nature is. what Nature is, to speake properly, and into what detestable
errour they fall, who attribute that to it, which appertaineth to
God alone. And first they that vse this prouerbe might speake more
directly and Christianly, if they attributed the whole to God only, not

ioyning vnto him nature for a companion, as though he had neede of
her helpe, and coulde not well finish all his woorkes alone, and as
though hee had not beene able to haue done all that hee hath done,
without her. It may bee they will say, that they doe giue this honour
vnto God, and that they speake not of Nature, as Galen and many other
Heathen Physicions and Philosophers, or rather Epicures and Atheists
doe, who place Nature in God his stead: but that they speake
of her as of a means created of God, by which he performeth all these
things. But there is no such necessitie to ioyne Nature with God as his
fellow worker. For when hee created the first man, what Nature had
he with him that did helpe him to make this worke? Besides, the verie
name of Nature doeth it not declare,Nature is a creature. that it is a thing borne and created,
and so consequently hath her creation and birth from God as all
other creatures haue? For if we take Nature for that diuine vertue and
power, which appeareth in the workes of the creation, and in their preseruation
and order, we must of necessitie take it, not for a thing that
is borne and bred of others, but that giueth birth and beeing vnto others.
And if we take it so, then God and Nature shalbe taken to be all
one. Wherefore in this respect it were better to let the name of Nature
alone: and to speake of God onely, to whom Nature is but a seruant,
and seeing that by him it was created, and that all things were
made before Nature had her being. Otherwise we are like to fall into
that errour of Galen and others his like in these dayes,The error of Galen, and such like Atheists nowe adayes. who albeit they
be conuicted and rauished with admiration, through the contemplation
of those wonderfull workes, which they beholde in all the partes
and powers of mans body, are notwithstanding so vngratefull, that insteade
of yeelding vnto God that honour that belongeth vnto him, it
seemeth they woulde despite him to his face, and seeke all possible
meanes to put out their owne eyes, and wholly to blinde their vnderstandings,
to the end they might not be constrained to acknowledge
that there is a God, the Creator and maker of this so excellent a piece of
worke, and so to glorifie him as becommeth them. Nowe rather then
they would giue him this honour, they will make an idole of Nature,
thereby to cast a vaile before mens eyes, that they should not see and
acknowledge God in his workes. They will rather put out their owne
eyes then follow this Nature, which they forge vnto themselues as a
soueraigne Mistresse, whereas she is but the meanes to leade them to
God her and their Creator, of whom shee is but a seruant, and a verie
small image.
Thus much I thought meete to bee knowen concerning Nature,
that wee might learne to speake better and more reuerently both of

God and of his woorkes,What we are to iudge of Nature. and that we might know that Nature is nothing
els but the order and continuance of the woorkes of God. Now
that wee are instructed in the causes of life and death, and what true
comfort and consolation we may haue against the horrour therof; and
so haue finished our discourses concerning the frame of the body, and
of the powers and faculties of the soule therein, we must enter into a
particular contemplation of the nature of the soule, and learne what
is the creation and immortalitie thereof, so farre foorth as the minde
of man is able to comprehend, and as the worde of trueth shall affoord
vs sure and certaine doctrine thereof. First then, it is necessary
and very profitable for vs to consider, that there is but one soule in
one bodie, which hath all those powers and vertues of which the effects
are daily seene: also what place the soule hath in the bodie, and
what vnion there is betweene them. Nowe ASER, this shall bee
that matter Subiect, which thou shalt haue to continue our speech
withall.


That there is but one Soule in euerie seuerall bodie: that one and the same
soule hath in it all those vertues and powers, whose effectes are
dayly seene: of the seate of the Soule in the bodie, and of the principall
instrument thereof: of the vnion of the bodie and Soule: of
the diuers degrees of nature, and of the excellencie that is in it; of
the fountaines and bounds of all the powers and vertues of the Soule.
Chap. 77.
A SER. Saint Paul maketh a prayer in the end of his first Epistle to
the Thessalonians, which agreeth very well both to that matter
whereof wee haue alreadie intreated, touching the nature as well of
the soule as of the body, and to that also which wee haue yet to handle
concerning the nature, creation, and immortalitie of the soule.
Now the very God of peace (saith he) sanctifie you throughout:1. Thes. 5. 23. and I pray
God that your whole spirite, and soule, and bodie, may be kept blamelesse vnto
the comming of our Lord Iesus Christ. Where first he sheweth vs, that
none but God, who onely is holy, sanctifieth vs through Iesus Christ
his sonne the most Holy,Dan. 9. 24. and that by the vertue of his holy spirite.
Moreouer hee teacheth vs, that as we are to acknowledge all sanctification
alreadie begunne in vs to proceede from God alone, so wee
must expect from him the accomplishment of that woorke, which
he hath begunne in vs. For as hee is the beginning, so from him must
proceede the perfection, which comprehendeth all the partes of
man. Therefore the Apostle heere maketh a diuision of three members,

placing the spirite first,Man diuided into three parts. in the second place the soule, and in the
third the bodie. Then he teacheth vs, that the entire and absolute sanctification
of all these partes of man shall be in the comming of Iesus
Christ, in which it shall obtaine the last perfection. Nowe we vnderstand
already sufficiently by our former discourses, that man is compounded
of two diuers natures, namely of a body and of a soule: and
yet heere wee see that Saint Paul setteth downe three partes, and ioyneth
the spirite vnto the soule, as if they were two diuers and different
thinges, as well as the soule and the bodie are. Therefore wee
must searche out the cause of this diuision of man after this manner.
But before wee enter into this matter, it shal be very profitable
for vs to refresh our memorie with those things wee haue alreadie
intreated of, so farre forth as they may serue for the vnderstanding
of this, and that according to the matter subiect propounded to discourse
vpon.
Wee hearde before howe the bodie is the lodging and instrument
of the soule, and howe the soule serueth it selfe with all the members
thereof,One soule in one bodie. and setteth them on worke. And as for the Soule, albeit there
be but one in each seuerall body, neuerthelesse that one soule hath
diuers faculties, powers and vertues, which wee also call partes
and offices thereof. Wherefore as wee saye not, that there are so
many bodies in one bodie of a man, as there is diuersitie of partes,
members and offices therein, but account them all ioyntly together,
as one and the same bodie: euen so wee meane not that
there are so manie soules, as there are powers and offices in the
Soule, or according to that varietie of effectes that appeareth in euerie
part and member thereof, albeeit wee knowe verie well,
that they are distinguished one from another both in time and
place. For we perceiue by the effectes thereof, that the sight is in the
eyes, hearing in the eares, vnderstanding and cogitation in the
braine, and the like is to bee sayde of all the other partes and members
of the bodie, according to the nature and office of euerie
one, and according to the offices of the Soule in them: as wee
haue alreadie shewed when wee handeled all the powers thereof
particularly. Moreouer, wee see howe the childe, so long as
it is in the Mothers wombe, differeth almost nothing at all from
plantes: and after it is borne, howe it differeth but a little from
brute beastes, as else-where it hath beene alreadie declared vnto
vs. Neuerthelesse, as in euerie bodie there is but one and the same
kinde, fashion and essentiall forme of nature, whereby it commeth
to bee that which it is: so there is but one onelie Soule in

euery liuing creatures body, by which it doeth liue, but yet this soule
is distinguished according to the vertues and offices thereof. Wherein
it falleth out with the soule as it doeth with a man that hath many
charges and offices,The soule like to a man yt hath many offices. or that exerciseth many Artes and occupations,
which hee practiseth in seueral places, at sundry times, and by diuers
instruments and seruants. Yea, the very varietie of those instruments
which the soule vseth, and the repugnance that is betweene the actions
thereof, doe shewe manifestly that there is but one workemaster
from whome the whole proceedeth, and which gouerneth and moderateth
all, as a liuing creature ought to doe. For there could not be
so great agreement in such diuersitie, if there were diuers workemen,
and so many soules as there are effects and actions in all the partes of
man. Besides, if there were such diuersitie of kindes of all things, as
there is diuersity of effectes, the number of them woulde bee infinite:
whereupon there woulde great confusion follow in the searching out
of nature, and of naturall things. Therefore seeing there is but one
soule in euery body, we must learn whether it hath any certaine place
and seate in the body, or whether the whole body be the lodging for
it.Of ye seate of the soule in the body. Now as euery forme of each body is in the whole body, so the soule
is wholly in the whole body, in which the true forme and principall essence
of man consisteth. For if there were any part thereof that had no
soule within it, that part should haue no life: as we see it by experience
in a member that is dry, or putrified, or cut off from the body. So that
as an Husbandman hath his sundry instruments for the trimming of
the ground,The soule compared to an Husbandman. and by them effecteth diuers works, according to the vse
of each seueral instrument: so fareth it with the soule in the bodie. For
the husbandman worketh another woorke with his plough, then hee
doeth with his harrowes, and otherwise with his spades and shouels
then with the other aboue named instruments: so that according to
the diuersitie of his tooles he worketh diuers workes. And yet all this
while there are not so many husbandmen as there are sundry instruments,
but one alone vseth all these to serue his turne. And hee that
should demand in which of all his instruments the Husbandman were,
should he not (thinke you) mooue an impertinent question? For hee
may be both without his instruments and also with them: and when he
vseth them, he applieth them to himselfe, and himselfe vnto them. And
to aske which of his instruments is the chiefest, were not to speake very
much to purpose. For euery one of them is principall in his vse, and
for that worke whereunto it it is applied: and so is it with the soule and
with the instruments thereof. For it can be both with them, and without
them, in that maner that hath beene already declared. And as the

plough is the chiefe instrument which the Husbandman hath to cutte
and diuide the grounde into furrowes, and the pickaxe to digge in
hard places,The chiefe instruments of the soule. so the eye is the chiefe instrument, the soule hath for seeing,
the eare for hearing, the brayne with the thinne, cleare, and bright
spirits therein, for all kinde of vnderstanding and knowledge, and the
heart for the fountaine of life. Nowe because the soule hath so many
sundry powers, offices and actions, it is also taken in diuers sences and
significations, but especially in the holy scriptures, as (God willing)
we shal learne hereafter. In the meane time that vnion which it hath
with the body, is marueilous, and ought to be diligently considered of
vs. Wee are to know then, that all things whatsoeuer are ioyned together
in nature, are alwaies so knit and vnited by some means: which
meane consisteth either in this,Two kinds of vniting things together. that the essence of two extreames doe
participate one of another, and ioyne together, or els in the agreement
of action and of worke. Now as the bond of the first meane is between
the elements themselues, and also betweene them and that matter
whereof bodies are compounded, because there is betweene them an
agreement and participation of nature, euery one in his degree, according
as they are neerer or further remoued off one from another: so
we haue the bond of the second meane, betweene the body and the
soule,Of the vnion betweene the soule and the body. namely the agreement of action and worke. Let vs then consider
of the coniunction and agreement that is betweene a workeman
and his worke, together with those instruments whereby he effecteth
his worke. For there is an agreement and coniunction betweene the
painter and his picture, by reason of the pensill wherewith hee woorketh.
And the like may be said of all other workmen. Euen so the form
and kinde of all things is as it were the Workemaster in regard of the
matter: and the qualities and fashioning of the matter, are the instruments
whereby the Species or kinde of any thing is vnited and knit vnto
the matter.How the soule is ioyned to the bodie. Now the soule is ioyned to the body as light is vnto the
aire. For by reason of the coniunction of the aire and light together,
the aire is made cleare and lightsome: and yet the aire and light remaine
whole and perfect, without any mixture or confusion of the one
with the other. For they are not mingled together as the elements are
in naturall mixtures, or as hearbes that are beaten together into powder,
or drugges of the Apothecary in a medicine, that lie mingled and
confused one within another. But the vnion and bond of two substances
ioyned together, is a great deale more neere in other kinds and creatures
then in the soule, wherein it is remooued farther of, by reason
that the nature of corporall things admitteth of a neerer coniunction
and agreement among themselues, then there can be naturally betweene

corporall and spirituall thinges. So that the greater agreement
of natures there is, the straiter is the bonde and vnion-betweene
them. Nowe wee may knowe of what nature euerie kinde
of thing is by the offices and actions thereof. As if the question
were touching the nature of that soule,Diuers degrees of nature in ye soule. which heeretofore we called
the Nourishing and Vegetatiue Soule, it appeareth by the office
and actions thereof that it is hote, and that it taketh part (as also
all the actions thereof) of the nature of fire, which is the highest
and purest element, and that which approcheth neerest to the celestiall
natures. But that kinde of soule, which wee called Sensitiue
and Cogitatiue, such as it is in brute beastes, ascendeth yet
higher and by agreement is linked neerer to the heauens, and to the
nature of heauenly bodies. And therefore beasts haue not onlie sense,
but some kinde of knowledge also, whereby they doe in some
sort marke and perceiue the course of the heauens, and heauenly
bodies, and doe seeme after a sort to vnderstande them. For they
haue knowledge both of the day and of the night,Beasts haue some kinde of knowledge. of Winter and
of Summer, yea, they haue some sense and perseuerance of the alteration
of seasons, according as they fall out by the course of
the spheres: but yet not by any such knowledge and vnderstanding
as is in man. Nowe sense and knowledge cannot proceede of
the power of the elements, but is deriued from some higher thing.
For it is by meanes of a more celestiall power that beastes are distinguished
from plants, holding more of the excellencie of their
Creatour, declaring it a great deale more. But man hee mounteth
vp much higher. For hee ascendeth vp aboue all the heauens, euen
vnto God and to those spirituall natures, by meanes of reason and
vnderstanding, which make his soule capable of heauenly light and
wisedome, and of diuine inspirations.
Whereupon it followeth that the originall and birth of the
Soule is celestiall.The originall of the powers of the Soule. And therefore in this diuersitie of the faculties
and powers of the soule and life of man, wee must note this, that
the lower kindes of the soule and life are not the Well-springs and
fountaines of the highest, as if those powers and faculties did first
set these latter awoorking; or as if the highest did spring of the
basest, and receiued their vertues from them: but they are onelie
certaine aydes and degrees of helpe, whereby the highest and
chiefest descende and ascende. So that the Vegetatiue and nourishing
life and vertue, is not the originall of the sences, and sensitiue
vertue: but onelie a degree by which the facultie of sense is deriued
to the bodie, and by little and little ascendeth vp to her powers

and offices. The like may bee sayde of the vnderstanding and
of reason in regarde of the sensitiue facultie. For euerie sort and
kinde of life, and euerie power of the soule hath beginning of it
selfe,An admirable worke of God. and certaine boundes within which it is conteined. Wherein
we haue to consider a marueilous woorke and prouidence of GOD,
in that hee hath ioyned and linked togethet in man things that are
so diuers. For wee take this as graunted, that the soule of man is a
spirituall nature and not corporall, that it is immortall, and created
for the contemplation of celestiall and eternall things. On the other
side, wee see, howe this so excellent and diuine a nature is ioyned to
that part and power that is called Vegetatiue and Nourishing, which
seemeth rather to bee corporall then spirituall, to bee more terrestriall
then celestiall, and to bee as it were the Kitchen of the bodies
of liuing creatures, and the Store-house and Originall of their generation.
So that there is no man of any sounde minde, who knowing
this marueilous coniunction of nature in thinges so diuers, and
considering that it cannot come to passe by happe-hazard and at aduenture,
but hee must needes bee rauished with great admiration,
and acknowledge an admirable prouidence of God the Creator and
Lord of nature.
But they that are instructed in the holie worde,Why God hath ioyned the body to the soule. and in the doctrine
of the Church, haue yet a further consideration of these
thinges. For they knowe well, that albeeit this Kitchin of mans
bodie shall haue no necessarie vse in the life to come, neuerthelesse
God hath established this order, and woulde haue it thus ioyned to
the soule and spirite, to the ende that those beginnings of eternall
life, and of that true and perpetuall wisedome, which hee hath put
into vs, shoulde bee kindled and inflamed in this mortall life. For
they shall not shine foorth in anie there, who haue not heere had
some beginnings, but haue suffered those to bee cleane extinguished,
which they haue receiued of GOD. For this cause doeth the
voyce of God and of his heauenly doctrine sounde in mens eares,
and to these endes hath hee ordayned that gouernement, which
ought to bee amongest them, and hath bounde and fortified it with
manie bondes and rampires. Wherefore wee stande in neede of doctrine
of instruction and discipline,The naturall knowledge of mans body very profitable. vnto which things the consideration
of mans nature may greatly helpe vs. For there is no science
or humane wisedome, howe great soeuer it bee, that is able
to rehearse and comprehende the great profite, which this consideration
can affoorde to men, euen so farre foorth as they may verie
well learne and knowe. And of this wee may the better bee

resolued, if we consider well of that which hath alreadie bene handled:
yea we may the better iudge hereof, if wee perfectly vnderstand
that diuision of man made by S. Paul, and mentioned by vs in this
discourse. Therefore, AMANA, proceede you in the residue of this
matter, giuing vs first to vnderstand what is the nature and offices of
those pure, animal, cleare and bright spirits, which we saide were seruiceable
to the soule for all kinde of vnderstanding and knowledge.
Afterwardes you may more easily instruct vs at large and teach vs,
what difference there is not onely betweenethe soule and the instruments
thereof, whereby it worketh, but also betweene the instruments
themselues, and their nature and offices, and which of them are
nearest, or remoued farthest from the soule.


Of the nature and varietie of the animall spirites, and how they are onely
instruments of the soule, and not the soule it selfe: of the nature of those
bodies wherein the soule may dwell and worke: of the difference that is,
not onely betweene the soule and the instrumenes by which it woorketh,
but also betweene the instruments themselues, and their natures and
offices, and which of them are neerest or farthest of: of the degrees
that are in the vnion and coniunction of the soule with the bodie.
Chap. 78.
AMANA. It is requisite that workmen should haue instruments
answerable to those works which they are to make: and if they
haue taken in hand but one single and simple worke, they neede but
one toole fitte for that purpose: as to sawe timber, there needeth but
a sawe. But they that are to make many workes, or one woorke that
is full of varietie, stand in need of many instruments: as painters, ioyners,Why the soule worketh with sundry instruments.
carpenters, masons and such like. The same may bee saide of the
soule: and therefore it hath many members in the body, that are giuen
vnto it as instruments to serue for those woorkes, which it hath
outwardly to perfourme. Moreouer, the soule hath humours to preserue
and vphold the members, and to keepe them alwayes ready for
their worke, by those meanes which we haue heard already: besides,
it hath vital spirits of which the animall spirites are bred, which serue
in steade of a light to garde and conduct it in the actions both of the
external and the internall senses. And as there is great force in a toole
or instrument to cause a good or euil worke, so is there in the humors,
spirites, and members of the bodie, whereby we are made fitte to exercise
and to execute all actions whether they concerne life and sense,
knowledge and vnderstanding, or will and affections. For it fareth in

this matter as it doeth in the disposition of the aire, which the thicker
and more obscure it is, the lesse cleare will the light appeare vnto vs:
and contrariwise the more pure and thinne it is, the brighter and more
shining it will shew it selfe vnto vs.
Nowe for this matter, wee must call to minde what wee heard
concerning the generation of spirites both Vitall and Animall, in
those discourses of the nature and office of the heart. And as they
are thinne vapours, engendered of blood, concocted, and sette on
fire through the vertue of the heart, that they might bee as it were
little flames, hauing diuers actions in diuers members: so according
to the puritie and impuritie of the blood in the composition of the
bodie, wee are to iudge of the spirites that proceede from them.
And albeeit they haue all one and the same fountaine, namely the
heart in which they are bredde, neuerthelesse they change according
to those places and members wherein they woorke, and being
so changed, they haue diuers and seuerall actions. Wee vnderstand
then by the Vitall spirite,Of the Vital and Animal spirites and of their operations. a little flame bredde and borne in the heart
of the purest blood, whose office is to carie naturall heate to the other
members, and to giue them vertue and strength to put in practise
those actions and offices, which they exercise by the same heat.
It hath beene tolde vs also before, that the arteries serue to carie
this vitall spirite to all the members. But wee are farther to learne,
that when the vitall spirites bredde in the heart, are in part transported
to the braine, others are engendered of them, which are
called Animall spirites, in that sence in which wee called those
Animall faculties and powers, from whence the Soule deriueth
her vessels and instrumentes in the brayne. For after the spirites
sent by the heart, are come thither, they are made more cleane
and bright through the vertue of the braine, and agreeable to the
temperament thereof: and then beeing infused into the brayne
by meanes of the sinewes, they are insteade of a light whereby
the actions of the sences are incited and stirred vp, as also those
motions which are from place to place. And as wee haue hearde,
that a good temperature of the blood and of other humours doeth
much helpe forwarde and profite the manners and conditions of
men, the same may bee saide of the heart and of the spirites proceeding
from the same. For when the heart is in good temper, so
that it is not troubled either with anger, or sadnesse, or any other euill
affection, it is manifest that the spirites are a great deale the better
in the braine.
Nowe let vs consider the woonderfull woorke of God wrought

in man by meanes of the Vitall and Animall spirites.The effects of the Vital and Animal spirits in man. For what are
the chiefe actions effected in him? Are they not the preseruation of
life, nourishment, and generation: and then sense and motion,
with cogitation and the affections of the heart? And what were
all these thinges without spirites? Hence it commeth that in the
holy Scriptures the heart is taken for the fountaine not onely of
life, but also of all the actions of men, as it hath beene alreadie
declared vnto vs. And for this cause also some haue sayde, that
these spirites and little Vitall and Animall flames were the soule
it selfe, or the immediate instrument thereof, that is to say, the
verie next whereby it woorketh immediately, so that there is none
betwixt them twayne.The Vital and Animal spirits are not the soule. But the latter is more certaine and more agreeable
to trueth then the former. For if the soule were nothing
else but the Vitall and Animall spirites, it shoulde fayle and perish
with them as the bodily life doeth: and so it shoulde not bee
immortall. But seeing they are but the instruments thereof, as the
humours of the bodie are, and namely the blood from which
they proceede, the soule can well bee without them: albeeit they
cannot bee without it, and although it cannot without them perfourme
the woorkes it doeth with and by them. And forasmuch
as God hath giuen them to bee as it were a light, it is certaine
that the light of these surmounteth the light of the Sunne, Moone
or starres: and that all these lights haue great agreement one with
another.
But it is yet a farre more woonderfull woorke of GOD,A wonderfull worke of God. when
not onelie the soule vseth these instrumentes for the life of man,
but also when the celestiall spirite ioyneth it selfe vnto them, vsing
them in the elect, and making them more cleere by his heauenly
light, that the knowledge of God might bee more euident,
that their assuraunce and trust in him might bee more firme,
and that all the motions of his children might bee kindeled the
more towardes him. So likewise the euill spirite knoweth well
howe to take occasion by the badde temperature of the humors to
abuse men, as wee haue alreadie declared, thereby to set forwarde
their ruine, when hee possesseth the heart, troubleth and poysoneth
the spirites in that and in the brayne. Whereupon hee attempteth
to hinder reason and iudgement, to bring men to furie
and madnesse,1. Sam. 18. 10. and 31. 4. and to thrust forwarde their heart and their other
members to committe foule and execrable factes. Whereof wee
haue examples in the furie of Saul,2. Sam. 17* 23. and in his death: in the death
of Achitophel,Matth. 27. 5. of Iudas, and of manie others whome hee hath

brought to slaye themselues: as likewise in manie other horrible
factes dayly committed by men. Therefore it is very requisite,
that wee shoulde diligently consider our nature, and bee carefull
to gouerne and guide it well. Wee are to knowe that our spirites
are the habitations of the holy spirite, and therefore wee are
to pray to God through his sonne Christ Iesus, to repell and keepe
backe euill spirites farre from vs, and to inspire his diuine and celestiall
spirite into our spirites, heartes, and mindes, that it may
guide and gouerne them. And this agreeth verie fitly with that
prayer,1. Thess. 5. 23. which wee hearde alreadie vttered by Saint Paul, touching
the entire sanctification of the whole man, whome hee diuided into
spirite, soule and bodie. So that, if wee haue throughly tasted of
the former discourses, as well concerning the nature of the bodie as
of the soule, wee may perceiue wherefore the Apostle hath thus
diuided the whole man. For first wee cannot doubt but that the
soule beeing the principall Woorker, is such a substaunce and nature
as dwelleth in a bodie apt and meete to receiue life in. I speake
this purposely, because all sortes of bodies are not capable of soule
and life: and they that are capable, are not yet capable of euerie
kinde of soule and life, but onelie of such as are agreeable to their
nature, hauing those instrumentes in themselues which may bee vsed
by them according to their nature. Wherefore the soule of man
must of necessitie haue another bodie, with other instruments and
of another nature, then the soule of beastesmay haue: and the soule
of beastes another then the soule of plantes, according as euerie one
of them differeth from other both in nature and offices. But of
what nature soeuer eyther the soule or the bodie is, the soule hath
this propertie* like a busie woorkeman to bee in the bodie, hauing
all her instrumentes therein.A comparison of the soule and a workeman. Nowe when a woorkeman woorketh
with his tooles, hee must haue within himselfe the vertue and skill
to doe that which hee doeth, because it is not in the instrumentes
whereby he worketh. For albeit they be appropriated and fitted to the
woorke that is wrought, yet of themselues they can doe nothing at
all, except they bee set on woorke by the woorkeman, because
they haue not in them any vertue to woorke. But this power
and facultie is onelie in the woorkeman, to whome it belongeth
to perfect his woorke. So if the vertue of woorking were not in
the soule, it coulde woorke no more with instrumentes then without.
Therefore albeit it seemeth that the natural heate, the humors and
the spirits woorke in the body, and effect something therein, yet wee
must knowe, that they doe nothing there of themselues, but that they

receiue of the soule whatsoeuer they haue.A similitude. As when a Paynter
draweth a picture, his pensill and colours haue it not of themselues
to doe that which is done by them, but of the Painter. The
soule then is the Woorkeman that worketh, receiuing her vertue and
facultie of working not from without, but euen in the selfe-same bodie
in which it is. Therefore, to speake properly, we may say that shee
dwelleth in the bodie, because shee abideth therein, as in her house
with all her implements and houshold instruments: so that shee must
needes haue the bodie appropriated and made fitte vnto her nature.
For euery soule cannot be indifferently ioyned to euery forme and figure
of a bodie, to exercise and execute therein the woorkes of life:
but it must woorke by that order of nature, and according to those
lawes which the Creator of all things hath ordained from the beginning
of the world.Against the transmigration of soules. Whereupon wee may note, that if wee had no other
reason but the consideration heereof, against the Pythagoricall
transmigration of soules from one bodie to another, it were sufficient
to make knowne the greatnesse of this foppery, and what error there
is in that opinion. For if it were so, there would be no difference betwixt
the soules of men, of beastes and of plants, neither shoulde
there bee any proprietie and aptnesse of bodie, and instruments more
to one soule then to another. Whereupon all nature touching this
poynt and order appoynted by God heerein, shoulde bee confounded
and ouerthrowen.
But to returne to our matter,The aptest instrument for the soule. forasmuch as the temperature of liquors,
humors and qualities, (vnder which I also comprehend the spirites)
is most inward and profound, aswell in the body as in the workmanshippe
of nature, it is vndoubtedly the fittest instrument the soule
hath, and such a one as is neerest linked by agreement and coniunction,
with the workman that vseth the same. Insomuch that if the soule
want this instrument, it departeth away: and if the soule bee gone
and so bee wanting to it, then must it also necessarily fayle presently,
although the members abide yet after the departure of the
soule. For the confirmation and strengthening of the members
both internall and externall, is separated farther from the Soule:
but the mixture of the humours and spirite that is in the members,
is more neere and more inwarde. True it is, that the humours
and qualities are instrumentes of the soule, as well as the members:
but the humours are such instrumentes as set the rest on
woorking,The necessary vse of the humours. I meane the members, yea, by meanes of them the
soule vseth the members. Wherefore if the humours fayle; the
members are verie vnprofitable, as it appeareth in them that

are drie or puffed vp, or taken with the palsie, or oppressed with any
other maladie. For the members are fitte instruments for outwarde
vses and excercise, but the temperature and mixture of the humours
and spirites, is ordained to preserue such instruments, to the end they
might alwayes bee apt and readie to doe their dueties.The humors are in continuall motion. Therefore the
humours and qualities are in perpetuall motion, but the members
are not. For the humours must alwayes keepe the members in a readinesse
to woorke, if neede require. Nowe in the consideration of all
these things, wee see wonderful degrees in the vnion and coniunction
that is betweene the bodie and the soule, and the instruments
which it vseth in the bodie. For as all the elements haue their combinations,
and are linked together, according to that agreement of
nature which they haue one with another, euery one in his degree
from heauen downe to the earth, and so likewise all the humors and
qualities of all things: euen so is it with the soule and bodie, and with
those instruments and meanes whereby they are ioyned and knitte together,
euery one in his degree, according as their natures are more
or lesse corporall or spirituall,What partes of the body come nerest to the soule. terrestriall or celestiall. For as the vitall
and animall spirites approch neerest to the nature of the soule, secondly,
the humours come neerest to the nature of the spirites, thirdly,
the members next to the humours: so all of them keepe their ranke
and order in their degrees, and in that coniunction which the bodie
and soule haue together, as also the instruments whereby the soule
woorketh in the bodie: whether wee consider them either in ascending
vpwarde from the lowest to the highest, or els in descending
from the highest to the lowest, as wee consider the vnion and coniunction
that is betwixt all the elements from the earth to the heauens,
and from the heauens to the earth. Whereby wee dayly see more
and more the great marueiles of God, and by what meanes and arte
hee ioyneth the heauens with the earth, and bodily natures with
spirituall. This beeing thus, wee are to learne, that all the instruments
of the soule are prepared for it in the bodie, as it were for a
Woorkeman that is to doe some woorke, and that there is none but
the soule that doeth vse them. So that it is verie euident, that the
soule is the perfection of this aptnesse of the bodie, and that there
is great agreement betweene the soule and the bodie, and betweene
all the partes and faculties of both. Forasmuch then as there
is such a coniunction, and that GOD hath created them both to
bee glorified in them, Saint Paul hath good cause to pray for sanctification
in them both, to the ende that God might be serued and honoured,
and that both of them might be glorified in the day of the

Lorde. But that our speech may yet bee better vnderstoode, wee
must consider in what signification the names of soule, spirite and
heart are commonly taken, namely in the holy Scriptures, and
howe wee may and ought to vse them. This will helpe vs greatly
to attaine to the knowledge of the nature and immortalitie of
the soule, wherein wee are to bee instructed before wee dissolue
our present assemblie. Teach vs therefore, ARAM, what diuisions the
scripture maketh of the whole man, aswell in regarde of the soule as of
the bodie, and in what significations the names of soule, spirite and
heart are taken, with the causes wherefore.


Of the diuisions of man made in the holy Scriptures, as well in respect of
the soule as of the bodie: in what significations the names of soule, spirit
and heart are vsed therein, and the causes why: of the intire sanctification
of man: howe the soule is taken for the life, and for the members
and instruments of nourishment, and for nourishment it selfe
Chap. 79.
ARAM. Forasmuch as God so honoureth our bodies, as to call
them Temples of his holie spirite,1. Cor. 6. 19. I thinke they cannot bee
such in deede, except they bee wholly dedicated and consecrated
vnto him, so that wee separate them from all filthinesse and
pollution, by giuing our selues to all kinde of sanctimonie and honestie
of life. For then is the body wholly sanctified, when all the senses
and members applie themselues onely to good and holy woorkes
commaunded by God, and when they abstaine from the contrarie.
Whereupon it commeth to passe,Of the entire sanctification of mans bodie. that the eyes turne aside from beholding
all vaine things, and take pleasure onely in seeing that, which
may rauish man with admiration at the excellencie of the woorkes of
God, and induce him to well-doing. The like may bee sayde of
soundes, of voyces, of wordes, in regarde of the eares. And as for
the tongue, it is not polluted with vile speeches, with lying, slandering
and blasphemie: but prayseth God, and rehearseth his works
and woonders, speaking alwayes with a grace to the edifying of all.
In like manner, the mouth serueth man for the selfe-same vse, as the
stomacke also and the bellie, with all the rest of the members that
serue for the nourishing of the bodie, are not defiled through gluttonie
and drunkennesse.The body liueth not to eate, but eateth to liue. So that the bodie liueth not to eate, but eateth
to liue, and to make supplie to those necessities vnto which GOD
hath made it subiect. Therefore it obserueth sobrietie, and is contented

to minister to the naturall affections, that God may bee serued
in this life. Neither doeth it abuse the members of generation to
whoredome and villanie, but conteineth them within their office and
lawfull vse. And as for the feete and hands, with all the rest of the externall
members, it keepeth them also within the compasse of their
duety. But seeing the whole body and all the members therof, take from
the soule all their actions and vses, they cannot bee sanctified for the
seruice of God and of holy things, vnlesse the soule be first sanctified,
which giueth vnto them life, motion, and sense.
For this cause Saint Paul speaking of the sanctification which he
wisheth to the Thessalonians,1. Thes. 5. 23. before hee maketh any mention of
that of the bodie, hee beginneth with the Spirite and Soule, as wee
haue alreadie heard. Now because the soule hath diuers powers, he
vseth two wordes the better to note them out, especially the chiefest
of them. For as it hath beene alreadie declared vnto vs, albeit
the soule hath manie powers and offices in the bodie of man, yet
there are not so manie soules in the bodie, as there are faculties
and effectes thereof, but one onely soule which doeth all that.
For this cause the name of soule is diuersly taken in the holy scriptures.The name of Soule taken diuersly.
Sometime it is taken for that spirituall substaunce that is ioyned
with the bodie to giue life vnto it, and for all the powers
thereof: and sometime againe for one part of those faculties and
powers. The like may be sayd of the name of spirite, and of heart,
and that for the same reason. Thus doeth the Scripture sometimes
diuide the whole man into two partes onelie, namelie into bodie
and soule:Math. 10. 28. as when Iesus Christ sayeth: Feare yee not them which
kill the bodie, but are not able to kill the soule: but rather feare him, which
is able to destroy both soule and bodie in Hell.Gen. 6. 17. And often also the same
holie worde taketh the one of these two partes for the whole,esai. 40. 6. luc. 3. 6. leuit 4. 2. euen
in that signification wherein wee take the name Person in our
tongue.ezech. 18. 4. For this cause wee reade so often in the worde, All flesh
and euerie soule,rom. 13. 1. for euery person.Gen. 14. 21. and 46. 27. Also, Giue mee the Soules, for
giue mee the persons: And all the Soules of the house, for all the
persons thereof. Nowe because the vnderstanding and the will are
the principall faculties and powers of the soule, when the Scripture
meaneth to set them downe distinctly, and to expresse them
together with the nature and vertue of the soule, it taketh the spirite
for the one, and the soule for the other: namely the spirite for the reason
and vnderstanding, and the soule for the wil and affections. For otherwise
how should euery man be entire and sou^d, vnles his thoughts were
pure and holy, all his affections rightly ruled, and finally his whole bodie

made obedient, and seruiceable to euerie good woorke? For wee
haue hearde alreadie what Lordship is attributed to the reason and
to the vnderstanding: then howe the will and affections are in the
middest to commaund, and lastly the bodie to serue and obey. So
that a man is then altogether pure and sounde,When a man is perfectly sanctified. when he thinketh nothing
in his minde, desireth nothing in his heart, neither executeth
any thing with his members, but that which pleaseth God. Wee
haue a place in Esay which teacheth vs verie clearely, that the spirite
and soule are so taken and distinguished as wee say:Esay. 26. 8, 9. The desire of
our soule (saith he) is to thy name, and to the remembraunce of thee. With
my soule haue I desired thee in the night, and with my spirite within me will
I seeke thee in the morning. We see how first he attributeth desire to the
soule, thereby to declare the affection of the people towardes the
Lorde. Then hee maketh mention of the remembrance and memorie
that hee hath of God, which is in the minde. So that it seemeth
hee comprehendeth the vnderstanding, and will in the first verse
vnder the name of Soule. Afteward in the verse following, he distinguisheth
them more specialy, attributing desire to the soule, then watchfulnesse
and diligent inquisition to the spirit, which is not without
thinking and discoursing that appertayne to the minde. Wherefore
the Prophet minding to signifie how he was wholly addicted to the
Lorde, with all his senses and vnderstanding, and with all his
heart and will, and that all his affection was towardes him, hee vseth
this distinction betweene the soule and the spirite. Likewise
wee finde these two names Soule and Spirite, ioyned together in
this signification in the Psalmes: and I am perswaded, that for the
same reason the blessed Virgine ioyned them together in her song,
when she sayd,Luk. 1. 46, 47. My soule magnifieth the Lord, and my spirit reioy^eth
in God my Sauiour. Nowe as the Scripture vseth this distinction the
better to expresse the faculties and powers of the soule, so Saint
Paul* sometimes distinguisheth them into three,The soule deuided into three partes. that they may the
better bee knowen: as when hee writeth to the Ephesians in these
woordes,Ephe 4. 17, 18. This I say therefore and testifie in the Lorde, that ye henceforth
walke not as other Gentiles walke, in vanitie of their minde, hauing their
cogitation darkened, and beeing strangers from the life of God through
the ignorance that is in them, because of the hardnes of their heart. We see
here that in the first place he putteth the mind, by which he meaneth
vnderstanding and reason, which is the principal faculty and power of
the soule, and that which is so much magnified by the Philosophers, that
it is called of the^ the Queene, Dame and Mistres. Neuertheles S. Paul testifieth
clearely, that all of it is vanity without Christ: so that a man

may well iudge, what wee are to esteeme of the rest that is in man.
Therefore also wee see, howe from the minde hee commeth to the
thought, whereby hee comprehendeth both imagination and memory,
and all the faculties and powers of the internall senses, which
he testifieth to be shadowed with darkenesse,Iohn 1. 9. and 8. 12. and 9. 5. and 12. 46. so that there is no heauenly
light at all therein without Iesus Christ, who is the light of the
world. For which cause also he affirmeth that they are estranged from
the life of God: that is to say, from that life by which he liueth in his,
and which he commaundeth and approoueth. Afterward hee referreth
the cause thereof to their ignorance, which he ioyneth with darknesse
and with the thought obscured thereby. Finally hee commeth
to the will and affections, which he comprehendeth vnder the name
of heart, to whose hardnesse hee referreth their ignorance as to the
fountaine thereof. For by reason that through their malice and contumacie
they reiect the light of God that is offered to their hearts and
mindes, they blinde themselues by the iust iudgement of God, by
which also they are made blinde, as they iustly deserue, seeing they
loue darkenesse more then light, and lying more then the trueth.
Now when al these faculties of the soule are reformed with the body,
according as we haue already declared, then is man come to that
entire sanctification of which Saint Paul speaketh in the place before
alleadged, which is requisite for the true children and seruantes of
God. But it seemeth that in all these diuisions and distinctions of the
faculties and powers of the soule rehersed out of the Scriptures, there
is not one of them wherein any mention is made of the naturall powers,
by which the soule giueth life and nourishment to the body, notwithstanding
that this office also is assigned vnto it as well as the rest.
Heereof three reasons may be rendered.Why the naturall powers are not mentioned in these diuisions. The first is, that the word of
GOD maketh expresse mention of the chiefe faculties and powers,
which most properly belong to the nature of the soule, and are giuen
vnto it more specially to knowe and honour God by, and which appertaine
not onely to this life, but also to the other. The second is, because
these naturall powers may bee comprehended vnder the vitall,
and vnder the seate of the affections, by reason of that communication
which they haue both with the spirites, and with the humours vsed
by the soule in the body, not onely to nourish it and preserue life
in it, but also to serue for all other things spoken of before. The third
reason is, that forasmuch as these naturall powers are more terrestriall
then celestiall, and more corporall then spirituall, and the vse and
profite of them endeth with this humane life, we may comprehend
them vnder the name of body, as things more neerely ioyned to it for

the vse of this life, and of which it shall haue no neede after this life,
when it shall bee made incorruptible and immortall. And because
this power of the soule appeareth more in this life, then any of the
rest, therefore it is better knowen. For this cause the name of soule
is oftentimes taken not onely for this naturall power which wee call
Vegetatiue and Nutritiue, but also for the life it selfe, and for all
the commodities and desires thereof, yea, for the whole estate of
life.
We may call to minde what wee heard before of the soule which
is in the blood. And when Reuben sayde to his brethren that woulde
haue slaine Ioseph,Genes. 37. 21. Let vs not strike his soule, it is as much as if hee
had saide, Let vs not kill the soule. Nowe it is certaine, that the
soule can neither bee slaine nor striken: therefore by the soule hee
meaneth the life. And so his speech was all one as if hee had sayde,
Let vs not take his life from him: as himselfe declareth it by and by
after in the verse following where hee sayeth, Shead not blood.
Also when Moses speaketh of the Lawe that requireth punishment
like to the euill committed, as hee sayeth, Eye for eye, tooth for
tooth, hand for hand, and foote for foote, so hee sayeth, Soule
for soule,Deut. 19. 21. that is, life for life. And to seeke the soule of one, in many
places of Scripture signifieth to lye in waite for the life, and to
pursue it vnto death:Ierem. 11. 21. as it is written of the enemies of Ieremy, and
of Herod against Christ Iesus.Matth. 2. 20. There are infinit such like places, both
in the olde and newe Testament, in which the soule is taken for this
corporall and naturall life. Nowe because the soule giueth life by
meanes of the stomach, belly, and other members and instruments
of nourishment, of which wee haue spoken before, therefore it
is often taken for them also:Esay 5. 14. as when Esay sayeth, Therefore Hell,
(that is to say the graue) hath enlarged his soule, and hath opened his
mouth without measure, and their glorie, and their multitude and their
pompe, and hee that reioyceth among them, shall descend into it. The
Prophet propoundeth heere the graue as a great and horrible monster,
that hath a throate, with a stomach and belly, as it were a deepe
gulfe and bottomlesse pit to swallowe vp and to consume all. And
therefore as hee sayeth, that hee hath opened his throate or mouth,
so hee sayeth, that hee hath enlarged his soule, that is to say, his stomach
and belly, that it may bee more capable to receiue greater store
of meate. The same Prophet in an other place, meaning to set downe
the vaine hope, that shall deceiue them that band themselues, and
enterprise any thing against the people of GOD, and that looke
for aide and deliueraunce from any other besides him,Esay 29. 8. sayeth, that

They are like to an hungry man, who dreameth that hee eateth, but when
hee awaketh, his soule is emptie: or to a thirstie man, who dreameth that
hee is drinking, but when hee awaketh, beholde hee is faint, and his soule
longeth. Which is as much as if hee had sayde, that such a one supposing
hee hath well eaten and well drunke, findeth his stomach and
his belly emptie, and is still as hungrie and thirstie as hee was before.
Also when Ieremy saieth,Ierem. 31. 25. I haue satiate the weary soule, and haue replenished
euery languishing soule, it is certaine that by the soule he meaneth
the members and instruments of nourishment, with the bodie
that receiueth it and the life that is preserued: for the soule neither
eateth nor drinketh.Ezech. 7. 19. But Ezechiel sheweth vs this yet more clearely,
saying, They shall not satisfie their soules, nor fill their bowelles. For
himselfe expoundeth that by the worde Bowelles, which before hee
called soules.
Moreouer, wee haue further to note, that forasmuch as the soule
can no more giue life to the body without foode, then without these
members and instruments by which it distributeth and deliuereth the
same, it is likewise taken not onely for the foode of the bodie, but also
for those instruments and meanes whereby men get and obtaine
foode. Therefore it is written in the Lawe of the hired seruant that is
poore and needy,Deut. 24. 15. leuit. 19. 13. Thou shalt giue him his hire for his day (that is, the
same day hee laboureth) neither shall the sunne goe downe vpon it: for
hee is poore, and therewith sustaineth his soule: as if hee shoulde say,
it is his life and foode whereby hee must bee sustained. So that hee
which beguileth him of his hire, taketh away his soule and life from
him, as much as in him lieth. It is written also, That no man shall take
the neather nor the vpper milstone to pledge:Deute. 24. 6. for this gage is his soule. By
which phrase of two milstones that serue to grinde the corne, the
Lorde comprehendeth all those instruments wherewith men get their
liuing by their labour, of what occupation and trade soeuer they be.
For as a man can not grinde without a milstone or without corne, to
haue meale for breade to maintaine life withall: so poore Artificers
and Handicraftsmen can not grinde, nor consequently liue, if those
tooles and instruments bee taken from them, whereby they must get
both their owne liuing, and the liuing of their wiues and children.
Therefore God sayeth that such a gage is the soule, by which he vnderstandeth
the life, and by life the foode and nourishment that preserueth
it, and consequently the instrumentes by which poore men
and Artificers get their liuing. To conclude, it seemeth that this
kinde of phrase vsed by the Hebrewes, agreeth well enough with

our common speech, in which we often take the life for foode and
charges to maintaine life. As when wee say, that a man getteth and
purchaseth his life or liuing with the sweate of his face. We say likewise,
that we giue life to those whome wee feede, and take life from
them whom we depriue of foode and nourishment, and of the means
to get it. But wee must learne some other significations of this worde
soule, taught vs in the holy Scriptures. And first, what is meant by a
liuing soule, and what by a naturall, or sensuall body: and what is a
spirituall body: and howe the name of soule is taken for the desires of
the flesh, and for all things belonging to this life. Therefore it belongeth
to thee, ACHITOB, to discourse vpon this matter.


What is meant by a liuing soule, what by a sensuall and naturall body,
and what by a spirituall body: howe the name of soule is taken for all
the desires of the flesh, and for all things belonging to this life: and not
onely for the whole person aliue, but also for the person being dead,
and for a dead corps: and lastly for the spirite separate from the bodie.
Chap. 80.
ACHITOB. Men may well study in the schooles of the most
skilfull and excellent Law-makers, Philosophers, Oratours, and
Doctors that are in the worlde, yet they shall reape small profit thereby,
except they come to that schoole where the spirite of God is our
master and teacher. For this cause Iesus Christ, after he heard the confession
that Peter made of him,Matth. 16. 17. saide thus vnto him, Blessed art thou
Simon, the sonne of Ionas: for flesh and blood hath not reueiled it vnto thee,
but my Father which is in heauen. Nowe in that hee opposeth flesh and
blood to the Father in heauen, hee declareth sufficiently, that according
to the manner of the Hebrew speach, hee vnderstandeth by these
two words, whatsoeuer is in man, that is of man. As when Saint Iohn
saieth,Iohn 1. 12, 13. that as many as receiued Christ, to them hee gaue power to bee the
sonnes of God, euen to them that beleeue in his name, which are borne
not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of
God.1. Cor. 2. 11, 12* And to confirme this it is saide elsewhere, What man knoweth
the things of a man, saue the spirite of a man which is in him? euen so the
things of God knoweth no man, but the spirite of God. Now we haue receiued,
not the spirite of the worlde, but the spirite which is of God, that wee
might know the things that are giuen to vs of God. To this purpose when
Saint Paul opposeth a spirituall man, to him whome he called before a
naturall man, and altogether vncapable of the spirite of God, he saith
that the spirituall man discerneth all things, and is iudged of no man.

For being such a one, he hath certaine knowledge of heauenly things,
to be able to discerne light from darkenesse, and trueth from lies, that
hee be not deceiued by a false shewe of trueth. Neither is hee iudged
of any body, because the trueth of God is not subiect to the iudgement
of men, how skilfull and conceited soeuer they be, without the
spirit of regeneration.
Nowe then as wee haue heard, that the soule is taken in sundrie
significations declared by vs, wee may nowe knowe, that it is taken
oftentimes in the holy Scriptures for al the vertues, for al naturall gifts
and graces, for all affections and desires, for all pleasures and commodities,What is meant by liuing soule.
and for other things appertaining to this life. For this cause liuing
soule signifieth in the Scriptures as much as creature,Genes. 1. hauing soule
and naturall life, and it is so taken for all liuing creatures of what nature
and kinde soeuer they be. And Saint Paul in the place alleadged
and in the fifteenth of the same Epistle,1. Cor. 15. 44. calleth a naturall man and a
naturall body, that man and that body, which liueth with such a soule
and such a life: vnto whome hee opposeth diuersly, a spirituall man
and a spirituall body.What is meant by a naturall and by a spirituall man. For by a naturall man hee vnderstandeth a man
not regenerated by the Spirite of GOD, and by a spirituall, a man
regenerated: and by a naturall body hee meaneth a body that liueth
by this corporall life, such as it is in this worlde before the death and
resurrection thereof. By a spirituall bodie, he vnderstandeth not only
such a body as men haue that are already regenerated in this life,
but also such a one as it shall bee after the resurrection, when it shall
bee fully regenerated and made immortall, and like to the glorious
body of Iesus Christ. For besides the humane soule wherewith it liueth
heere, and in regarde of which Saint Paul called it naturall, it
shall haue also a diuine vertue, that shall wholly change in it all corruptible
and mortall qualities, and all humane infirmities, vnto
which it is subiect in this life, into incorruptible and immortall qualities.
And so doeth the Apostle expound it saying in the same place,
The bodie is sowen in corruption, and riseth in incorruption: it is sowen
in dishonour, it riseth in glorie: it is sowen in weakenesse, and is raised
in power. It is sowen a naturall bodie, and is raised a spirituall bodie:
there is a naturall bodie, and there is a spirituall bodie. As it is also written,Genes. 2. 7.
The first man Adam was made a liuing soule: and the last Adam
was made a quickening spirite. Whereupon wee haue to note, that
Saint Paul speaketh still of the selfe same bodie, which remaineth alwayes
one in substance. But forasmuch as it altereth in qualities and
kinde of life, therefore as hee calleth it spirituall, in regarde of the
Spirite of Christ, and of his spirituall and heauenly vertues, by which

hee changeth the first qualities of it, as the Apostle teacheth vs by
such as are opposed against them: so it is also called an animall or naturall
body, of the soule, which giueth vnto it onely that naturall
life that it hath in this worlde, and not that spirituall and immortall
life, which it shall haue after this. For the soule, which nowe can
giue none but this mortall life by reason of sinne, shall then haue another
vertue, when sinne shall bee wholly abolished, to giue vnto
the body an immortall and blessed life, by meanes of that spirituall
and diuine vertue of Iesus Christ, whereby it shall bee quickened,
that it may quicken the body with the same life. But because this
worde Animal deriued from Anima, that signifieth the soule, is not
very common in our English tongue, wee finde in the vsuall translation
of these places of Saint Paul alleadged by vs, these wordes naturall
and sensuall insteade of animal, which the Greeke worde properly
signifieth.What is meant by an animal or naturall man. Therefore in expounding the sence of these kindes
of speech vsed by the Apostle wee must vnderstand, that hee doeth
not call animal, or sensuall and naturall, the body of man onely, or
man by reason of his body onely, but the whole man compounded
of body and soule. For hee is altogether animal, that is, naturall and
sensuall both in body and soule without Christ Iesus: but being in
him, so long as hee liueth in this worlde, hee is both animal, that
is to say, naturall and sensuall, and also spirituall. First, hee is animal,
both because hee is not yet perfectly regenerated, as also because
hee is not yet immortall and glorified, as hee shall bee after his resurrection.
On the other side hee beginneth euen nowe to bee spirituall,
because hee hath a beginning of regeneration wrought in him,
which being once made perfect, hee shall bee regenerated much
more absolutely, and made wholly conformable to Iesus Christ
both for immortallitie and eternall happinesse. For then hee shall be
no more animal, naturall, sensuall, and spirituall altogether, but
onely spirituall, according as I haue already declared. Wherefore let
vs knowe, that euery one shall retaine still the selfe same body and
soule, which hee hath in this life, but by reason of that change of
euill qualities, which being in both shall bee made in the other life,
Saint Paul calleth it spirituall, and not for any conuersion that shall
bee of the bodie into the spirite. For as a man is called animal, in regarde
of the soule that is giuen him, because the soule is the chiefest
thing in him: so hee is called spirituall in respect of the other life, and
of the excellencie that shall be added to the soule, and by the soule to
the body, through the heauenly and spirituall vertue and power of Iesus
Christ.

Nowe then seeing the soule is taken in the holie Scriptures for the
naturall life,The soule put so the affections. which is not without affections, wee may see it sometimes
also put for them. Therefore when the worde of God woulde
expresse a great affection of loue,Gen. 34. 3. it sayeth of the sonne of Sichem,
that his soule claue vnto Dinah: and after it is added, that hee loued
her and spake to the heart of the maide, that is to say, kindely, and
as her heart coulde wish.Gen. 44. 30. In like manner it is written of Iacob, that
his soule was bound to the soule of Beniamin his sonne: to signifie,
that hee loued him tenderly, as his owne soule and life. And of Ionathan
it is saide,1. Sam. 18. 1. that his soule was knit with the soule of Dauid:
which phrase is afterward expounded by the Scripture where it is
saide, that Ionathan loued Dauid as his owne soule. Wee are also
commaunded to loue GOD with all our soule,Deut. 6. 5. as also with all our
heart and minde.matth. 10. 39. Therefore Iesus Christ sayeth, that whosoeuer
seeketh and saueth his soule,mar. 8. 35. shall lose it, but hee that hateth and
loseth it for his sake,luke 9. 24. shall finde it and saue it vnto eternall life.iohn 12. 25. In
which wordes, the soule is not onely taken for the life, but also for
all the commodities thereof, and for the desires of the flesh, such as
are glorie, honours, riches, pleasures, delights, ease, and all kinde of
prosperitie: for the obtaining of which things many turne aside from
the way of saluation, and take the path that leadeth to destruction.
Also we reade many places in the Scriptures, in which the soule is taken
not only for the whole person liuing, but also for the person dead,
yea for the dead body, and sometimes for the spirite separated from
the body.
But wee must well consider in what sence there is mention made
of the death of the soule.How we are to vnderstand that the soule dieth. Balaam wisheth that his soule might die the
death of the iust:Num. 23. 10. but hee speaketh after the manner of the Hebrews,
who vse many times to say My soule and thy soule, for my selfe and
thy selfe: or for my person and thy person, according to that before
mentioned, that the name of soule and of flesh, are often taken for the
whole man, and for that which wee call Person. For this cause whereas
Moses sayde,Gen. 22. 16. that GOD sware by himselfe, Ieremie and Amos
say,Ierem. 51. 14. that hee sware by his soule,Amos 6. 8. in the same sence and signification.
Likewise,Leuit. 21. 1. the name of Soule is not onely taken for a liuing person, but
also for him that is dead:The name of soule put for the dead body. as when it is written in the Law, Let none of
you be defiled by the dead among his people, it is in the Hebrew, ouer the
soule of his people, that is, ouer the dead body of any of the people, by
touching it after it is dead.Iob 33. 18, 22. And when Iob saieth, that the soule of a man
draweth to the graue, and his life to the buryers, and that God deliuereth

his soule from going into the pit, he taketh not the name of soule for that
spirituall essence that giueth life vnto man, but for the life it selfe; or
for the man and body it selfe, which is laide in the graue after death.
So that his meaning is no other then to say, that God deliuereth man
from death, whereby otherwise he should be brought into the pit. And
when Dauid saith,Psalme 30. 3. Lord, thou hast brought vp my soule out of the graue,
hee sheweth after very euidently what he vnderstandeth by his soule
when he saieth,Psalm. 56. 13. and 22. 20. Thou hast reuiued me from them that goe downe into the
pit. Hee taketh this worde Soule in the same sense when he saieth, that
God deliuered his soule from death and from the midst of lions: and when
he prayeth him to deliuer his soule from the sword, his desolate soule from
the power of the dogge. For it is easie to iudge by these wordes, that he
taketh not the soule in these places for the essence of the soule and
proper substance thereof: because the soule can not be smitten with
the sword, nor deuoured of lions, nor carried away by dogges. Therefore
seeing the soule is so often put in the Scripture for corporall life
which endeth with the body, and which the soule giueth vnto it by
meanes of those instruments, which it hath in the body, the name of
Spirite is many times vsed therein,What is meant by Spirite in the Scriptures. to signifie more specially this essence
and spirituall substance, which wee call the soule, and which
may be separated both from the body and blood, as that which liueth
after the death of the body.Psalme 31. 5. Therefore Dauid did so vse the word
Spirite,luke 23. 46. when he recommended his soule to God by the same wordes,
which Iesus Christ vsed vpon the crosse. Afterward Saint Steuen tooke
it in the same sense when he saide,Actes 7. 59. Lorde Iesus receiue my spirite. For
this is that spirite of which Salomon saieth,Eccles. 12. 7. that it returneth to God that
gaue it, after that the body is returned to the earth and to dust of which
it consisteth. And yet this difference is not alwayes obserued in the
Scriptures. For as wee haue already heard, both the heart, and soule,
and spirite are oftentimes generally and indifferently put for all the
partes and powers of the soule, and not onely for those of men, but also
of beastes: as when the Wise man attributeth spirit vnto them, hauing
regard to this corporall life. For when Salomon speaketh so, it is in
consideration of this life that consisteth in breath, which is also called
Spirit in the holy Scriptures, which vse one and the same word to signifie
both wind and breathing, and whatsoeuer we call spirit, taking it
both for the soule of man, for the Angelicall natures, and for the Diuine
nature.Iob 27. 3, 4. Therefore Iob speaking of this present life sayth, So long
as my breath is in me, and the spirit of God in my nosethrilles, my lippes surely
shall speake no wickednesse, and my tongue shall vtter no deceit. But when
Saint Paul saieth,Rom. 8. 16. The same spirite beareth witnesse with our spirite, that

wee are the children of God, hee taketh the worde Spirite in an other
sence then Iob did in the place nowe alleadged. For in the first place
hee taketh the name of Spirite for the Spirite of GOD, and in the second
place for the Spirite of man, which signifieth the humane soule.
It is true that in this place hee taketh it for the soule and for the spirit,
such as it is in regenerate men: but when hee saieth elsewhere, that
the spirite of man knoweth the things of man,1. Cor. 2. 11. hee taketh the spirite
simply for a humane Spirite, and for the vnderstanding part thereof.
Likewise the name of soule is put, not onely for this naturall life and
for the will and affections, but also for the selfe same thing that is
comprehended by this worde Spirite, when one woulde signifie
thereby the greatest excellencie of the soule. As when Dauid sayeth,
Our soule waiteth for the Lord,Psal. 33. 20, 21. for hee is our helpe and our shield. Surely
our heart shall reioyce in him, because wee trusted in his holie name.
And againe, My soule reioyceth in the Lorde, and is glad in his saluation.1. Pet. 2. 11, 12.
And when Saint Peter sayeth, Abstaine from fleshly lustes, which
fight against the soule, and haue your conuersation honest among the Gentiles,
hee taketh the name of Soule for the spirituall man, who hath
his minde and all his affections well ruled according to the will of
GOD. As then wee haue heard in what sort the soule may die, in regarde
of this corporall life, according to the phrase of the Scriptures
and of the Hebrewes, so by this which Saint Peter saieth, that fleshly
lustes fight against the soule, wee may learne after what manner the
soule may be said to die and to be slaine. For nothing can bring death
vnto it but sinne. Wherefore it is not said without good reason in the
Booke of Wisedome,Wisd. 1. that the mouth that telleth lies slayeth the soule.
Albeit then the soule is immortall, in that it can neuer be without life,
no more then the Angelles, who are spirites like to it: neuerthelesse it
is after a sort mortall,How the soule is after a sort mortall. so farre forth as being farre off separated from
God through sinne, it liueth no more that blessed life, wherewith it
shoulde liue if it were vnited and ioyned vnto him by true faith and
sincere obedience. For it shoulde enioy the selfe same life, which the
heauenly Angelles, with the soules and spirites of the blessed doe enioy.
As contrariwise the soules of the wicked liue with the same life
that the Diuelles doe, which is called dead, because it is a more accursed
life then death it selfe, and therefore called the second and eternall
death.
Nowe wee may thinke our selues sufficiently taught touching the
diuerse significations in which the name of Soule is taken. It seemeth
to mee, that wee haue spoken enough of the Anatomy of the bodie
and soule, of which the most of our discourses hitherto were made:

which may suffice for the contentation of euery one, that will keepe
himselfe within the bounds and limits set downe vnto vs by the wisedome
of GOD in his word. But to finish this whole matter concerning
the soule, which we haue chiefly considered in her parts, powers,
and effects, we are further yet to be instructed in the creation, generation,
nature, and immortalitie thereof. And because they are marueilous
difficult matters, and such as are not without great contrarieties
of opinions euen amongest the learned, I am of opinion that these
things are to be discoursed of, according to that manner of teaching
of the ancient Academickes,The ancient Academicall kinde of teaching. which wee followed in our first meeting:
namely, vpon the theame propounded vnto vs, to ballance the arguments
on the one part, with the reasons of the other side, that so we
may diligently search out the trueth. Notwithstanding it shalbe lawfull
for vs to deliuer our opinion, so long as wee ground it vpon the
infallible testimonie of the worde of God, leauing to euery one his
libertie to iudge which is best, and to embrace and follow the same.
For our entrance therefore into so goodly a matter, thou shalt beginne,
ASER, to morrowe to declare vnto vs what thou shalt thinke
good concerning this proposition, namely, whether the soule is begotten
with the body, and of the seede thereof: or whether it be created
apart and of another substance, and what is requisit for vs to know
therein.

The end of the tenth dayes worke.


THE ELEVENTH
dayes worke.

Whether the soule of man is engendred with the body, and of the same
substance that the body is of: or whether it be created by it selfe and
of another substance: whether it be needfull for vs to know what the
soule is, and what is the essence thereof, or onely to know of what qualitie
it is, with the workes and effects thereof. Chap. 81.
ASER.P^at^n Phad. I am of opinion, that in discoursing philosophically
concerning the knowledge of the soule, we
ought to practise that which Socrates saide, being
tired with the consideration of the nature of things,
namely, to bee very carefull lest it happen to vs as it

doeth to them that are busie beholders of the Sunne eclipsed, whose
sight is dazeled thereby except they beholde the image thereof in
water, or in some such like thing. For euen the Spirite that is wholly
giuen to the vnderstanding of it selfe, is often as it were amazed
and carried farre out of the way of true contemplation, vnlesse it
knowe howe to consider it selfe in the glasse of all brightnesse,The word of God the true glasse for the minde.
layed open in the sacred worde of GOD, and not stay altogether
in the discourses of naturall Philosophie and humane reason,
which many times blinde euen the sharpest wittes of men. True
it is, that wee haue many things in Nature that affoorde vs euident
testimonies of the creation, nature, and immortalitie of the soule,
which haue greatly mooued, not onely those Philosophers that
haue borne greatest reuerence to GOD, and acknowledged him
to bee the Creatour of all things, but euen those also that were most
prophane, and made the greatest Idole of Nature. Neuerthelesse
the knowledge of so high and difficult a matter,Who know the soule best. coulde neuer bee
perfectly comprehended, but of them onely that haue heard the doctrine
of the Spirite of GOD, and haue receiued the testimonies of
his worde, as certaine demonstrations of those thinges, which the
sense of man is not able to conceiue. For in deede wee can not
pronounce anie thing certaine of so high a nature as is that of the
soule, except it bee by his testimonie who hath created it, and who
onelie knoweth it, as the workeman knoweth his worke. Yet wee
ought not to contemne naturall reasons founde out by the learneder
sorte, which are as it were beames of that true light: but rather diligently
consider of them, as helpes that may greatly further vs in
the vnderstanding of that wee seeke, and serue for the confounding
of so many Atheists as impudently dare to deny the immortalitie of
the soule, and that iudgement of God, which shall be to the euerlasting
happinesse and ioy of the good, and to the perpetuall griefe and
torment of the wicked.
Nowe albeit the soule of man hath no partes nor members into
which it may bee diuided as the body may, neuerthelesse in the sequele
of our discourses concerning the Anatomy of the body, wee
haue also made as it were an Anatomy of the soule, in regarde of her
faculties, powers, and offices, whereby wee may attaine to some
good measure of knowledge touching the nature thereof, and of the
difference that is betweene it and the soules of all other creatures that
haue soule and life. But there remaine yet very great difficulties concerning
the creation and substance thereof, vpon which points it shal
be very profitable for vs to be well resolued.

Wee knowe well enough by that which wee heard before, that
the soule of man can not bee of any corporall nature, or compounded
of any corruptible nature, as the body is. For if it were so, then must
it necessarily bee mortall as the body is, and be farre from doing that
which it doeth. Besides, it woulde followe thereupon that the soule
of man differed in nothing from the soule of beastes. But wee knowe
by the effectes of it that there is great difference betweene them, yea
greater then betweene heauen and earth:The soule is not bred of corporall seede. which being so, it followeth
well, that it is not engendered with the body of the same substance
with it, and that the substaunce of the soule is not deriued from the
same seede. Againe, if the soule bee created of some other substance,
and not begotten with the body of any humane seede, a man may
aske from whence then commeth that pollution that is in it through
sinne, whereby the whole race of mankinde is corrupted, and what
power Originall sinne ought to haue ouer it. For if GOD daylie
createth soules for those humane bodies that come into the worlde
continually, as wee doe beleeue, and that to place and lodge them
in those bodies euen from the wombe, surely hee createth them no otherwise
then hee did all other creatures,Genes. 1. which hee created good.
Whereupon it followeth, that hee created not soules corrupted and
infected with sinne, but pure and sound, as those were of our first
Parents before sinne entred into the worlde. Neuerthelesse wee see
that the chiefe corruption and infection in man through sinne, is in
the soule. For if the soule were not infected, the body shoulde not
bee stained therewith, as that which is but the lodging and instrument
of the soule, and as it were the seruant thereof. Wherefore
when the soule is cleane and pure, the whole man, both bodie and
soule is altogether pure: but when that is defiled, all is defiled. From
whence then, will some man say, doeth the soule receiue this infection
of sinne, wherewith shee is polluted after her creation? Hath she
it of her selfe, or of the body after shee is lodged therein, and of the
corruption of that seede, of which the body is begotten? These are
very profound questions and woonderfull difficult, about which many
great Diuines haue troubled themselues a long time. But the wiser
sort enquire soberly into them,Modestie requisite in searching the trueth. so as they giue euident testimony of
that modesty, wherewith they seeke after the vnderstanding of the
great secreats of God, rather then make profession that they haue
found them out. Others there are, who one while with coniectures
according to their fancie, an other while with reasons drawne from
the nature of things, set downe for a certaine trueth whatsoeuer commeth
into their minde.

Nowe then being to heare what reasons can be alleadged, wee
will omit and passe ouer, as well them that walke wholy in the darkenesse
of ignorance, as those that will not goe faire and softly, and as
it were feeling with the hand, but runne on swiftly whither they
please, without feare of downefalles. Wee wil take a middle course,
neither too high nor too lowe, keeping our selues within the limites
of the worde of trueth, which teacheth vs that wee incurre originall
sinne, because wee are all the children of Adam, to whome, and to
whose posteritie God gaue originall iustice,How we become guiltie of original sinne. which made man obedient
to God, and the body subiect to reason. But it was giuen him
with this condition, that if he kept not the commandement of God,
both he and his posterie shoulde bee depriued of that gift and priuiledge:
euen as if some nobleman hauing committed treason shoulde
be disgraded from the title of Nobilitie, both hee and his children.
This depriuation of gifts bestowed vpon man by God, of which wee
shoulde haue beene the Inheritours,What originall sinne is. but for the sinne of our first Parents,
is called by the Diuines, Originall sinne. To proceede then
with our former matter, first I say, that in my minde, it is not so necessarily
required of vs to knowe what the soule is, or what is the essence
and substance thereof,How wee must learne to know the soule. as to knowe of what qualitie it is, and
what are the actions and woorkes of it. And that this is so, wee may
iudge by that bountifulnesse, which GOD the Lorde of nature vseth
towardes vs, and which hee manifesteth vnto vs on euery side
by manifolde signes and testimonies. For whatsoeuer is expedient
for vs, the same hee propoundeth vnto vs both very abundantly, and
with such facilitie, that wee may easily finde it out and bring it into
vse. Wherefore wee can haue no more euident token, that a thing is
not profitable or not very necessary for vs, then this that it is rare, farre
off, and hidde from vs, yea very hard to finde out and to attaine to the
vse of it. So that when wee are admonished to knowe our selues, we
must not referre this to the knowledge of the essence of the soule,
which wee are not able to knowe or comprehend, but to the knowledge
of the effectes and woorkes of it, thereby to knowe howe to
frame our manners and our whole life, to the ende that chasing vice
away, we might followe after vertue. And this by the grace of Christ
Iesus, will leade vs to that life in which wee shall bee perfectly wise
and good, and liue immortall and blessed with GOD for euermore.
Then, as wee shall see the Creatour of all things face to face, who
otherwise is incomprehensible vnto vs, so wee shall knowe our selues
perfectly in him.When wee shall know our s^lues perfectly. True it is if wee vnderstand well the principall cause
that is taught vs in his worde, why hee created man after his image

and likenesse, and gaue him an immortall soule partaker of vnderstanding
and reason, wee shall bee well instructed in that point wee
desire to knowe touching the nature of the soule. So that although
wee can not throughly knowe or define what is the essence or substance
thereof, neuerthelesse seeing it was created of GOD, that
being ioyned vnto him it might haue eternall happinesse; wee must
needes say, that it is a substance in some sort capable of the diuine
nature, and that may bee ioyned therewith. For being indued with
the knowledge of the diuinitie, the loue of the same is bredde within
it, by which loue the soule is so ioyned vnto GOD, that it is indued
with perpetuall happinesse.
And thus wee may say,What the soule is. that the soule of man is a spirit that giueth
life to the body whereunto it is ioyned, and which is capable of the
knowledge of GOD to loue him, as being meete to be vnited vnto
him through loue, to eternall felicitie. But let vs consider the diuersitie
of opinions of the best learned, as well vpon this matter, as vpon
the doubts mentioned by vs in our speech.Varietie of opinions touching the essence of the soule. For the first, there are many
who thinke, that wee take our generation and birth of our fathers
and mothers, not onely in regard of our bodies, but also of our soules:
and that soules are produced of soules, as bodies are begotten of bodies,
being ledde by the reasons before spoken of. For they can not
conceiue howe originall sinne, which is the pollution of our nature
that before was good and pure, by reason of the hereditary corruption
of the first father of men, can bee deriued from Adam to all his
successours, and from father to sonne, if the soules of children take
not their originall from the soules of their Parents, as the bodies do of
their bodies: considering that the soule is the chiefe subiect of originall
sinne, and of all the rest that proceede from it, as riuers issue from
their fountaine. Wherefore, as wee set Adam before our eyes for
the first stocke or roote of all mankinde, in regarde of mens bodies
that haue all their beginning from him: so these men doe the like
with his soule, and the soules of all other men, as if soules were deriued
from soules, and bodies from bodies. And in deede at the first
blush a man might thinke, that Christ Iesus was of this minde when
hee saide,Iohn 3. 6. That which is borne of the flesh, is flesh, and that which is borne
of the spirite, is spirite: if it bee so that the name of flesh in that place
ought to be taken for the whole man, comprehending vnder it the
body, soule, and spirite, and whatsoeuer excellent thing is in man, being
considered in his corrupt nature, as the worde flesh is commonly
taken in the holy Scriptures, when it is opposed to the spirite, or to
God. And for this cause many do not take this worde flesh so largely,

neither in this place, nor in any other like to this, as if the spirite of
man and the chiefe power of his soule were comprehended therein:
but they restraine it to that part which they call sensuall, vnder which
they vnderstand not onely the body of man, but also those powers of
the soule, which we haue common with beasts. Therefore they doubt
not to say, that the soule, which is called Vegetatiue and sensitiue, like to
that of plants and beasts, is produced of the same seede that the body
is: and that it is aswel contained in the seede, as the matter and nature
of which the body is compounded. Whereupon it would follow, that
in this respect there is no difference betwixt the soule of man and the
soule of beasts and plants. They say well, that euery liuing creature
hath but one onely soule, albeit there be diuers powers thereof in certaine
creatures,Why one soule is called vegetatiue, another sensitiue, the third reasonable. in some more, in some lesse. Hereof it is that they call
that of plants by a more speciall name Vegetatiue, because it hath but
this vertue and office only of which it taketh the name. And albeit the
soule of beasts hath the same vertue also, yet they call it not by the
same name, but onely sensitiue, vnder which they place the vegetatiue
soule that is in plants, as a power and propertie thereof. So likewise although
the soule of man hath both these together, yet they call it not
either vegetatiue or sensitiue, but onely reasonable: vnder which they
place the vegetatiue and sensitiue soule that is in beasts, for powers and
properties thereof, as before I said, they placed the vegetatiue vnder the
sensitiue. But I woulde very gladly, AMANA, bee instructed in that
which thou canst deliuer very well to this purpose, following this excellent
matter: which will serue greatly to cause vs more specially to
vnderstand the nature and immortalitie of the soule, the chiefe obiect
whereat we aime.


Whether there be any thing mortall in the soule of man: of the distinction betweene
the soule and the powers of it: of the opinions of Philosophers, and
what agreement is betweene them touching the soule of brute beasts, and
the nature and substance of it: of their opinion that deriue the soule of
man and the soule of beasts from one fountaine: of them that ascend higher,
and of their reasons. Chap. 82.
AMANA. That which wee read of Iesus Christ his saying to Nicodemus
in these woordes,Iohn 3. 12. If when I tell you earthly things, yee
beleeue not, howe shoulde yee beleeue, if I shall tell you of heauenly things?
may giue vs occasion to say in like maner, that if wee can not knowe
the earth, neither the body and soule of man, nor the nature and vertue
thereof, howe shoulde wee attaine to the knowledge of Heauen

and of those spirituall natures, of God and of his workes? And if wee
can not comprehend in our selues the woorkes of our soule howe
shall wee vnderstand the woorkes of GOD in the whole world?
And if wee be not able to conceiue them, doeth it followe therefore
that hee doeth them not? and yet there are many that conclude
after that manner. For they beleeue no more then they are able
to knowe and comprehend by their naturall reason, according as
they deale also with their soule. For because they vnderstand not what
is the proper essence of it, neither can see it after it is entred into the
body and ioyned therewith, nor yet when it departeth away, therefore
they conclude, that it is no other thing, but as it were a fire that
lasteth so long as there is matter agreeable to the nature of it, and is
quenched when that faileth.
But for that which you deliuered to vs, ASER, of the sayings
of certaine touching the diuerse kindes of soules, and the powers of
euery one of them, it seemeth to mee that (vnderstanding them as
you say these men doe) one of these three things will followe of
their opinion.Of the distinction of the soule from the powers there of. For they must of necessitie yeelde to this, either that
the soule of man is partly immortall and partly mortall: or that a man
hath three soules, one immortall and two mortall: or lastly, that the
powers of the reasonable soule, which wee call Sensitiue and Vegetatiue,
are not of the proper essence and substance thereof, but onely
of the body, and that they are instruments of the reasonable soule,
as members thereof. For I doubt not but they will readily confesse
this, that the soule is immortall: and if that part of the soule which
they call Vegetatiue and Sensitiue, be of the selfe same essence and substance,
in that respect it shall be mortall. Nowe if wee so distinguish
all these three sortes of soules in man, that wee make three kindes of
them, the first and principall shall be immortall, and the other two
mortall. And if they will say, that they take not the vegetatiue and
sensitiue soule in man, for two diuerse kindes of soules, but onely
for two sundry powers of the reasonable soule, I demaund of them
whether these two powers are so ioyned vnto it, that it may be a soule
as it is, both without them and with them, euen as before we said that
it might be with the body and without the body. I doubt not but euery
one will answere mee to this question, according to that opinion
hee hath conceiued of the nature of mans soule. If the question be
made touching the soule of beastes, the Philosophers agree well amongst
themselues heerein, that it is of the same matter of which their
bodies are compounded,The soule of the beast is of a corporal substance. whether it bee deriued and taken from the
same, or whether it bee the proprietie of the matter. Therefore

they meane, that it is the Vitall spirite onely therein that giueth life
vnto them, which is of a corporall matter and substaunce: or else that
it is the temperature or temperament of the whole bodie generally,
which is the proprietie of that matter. And so the soule in beastes
shalbe the life it selfe, of which the Vitall spirites, or the temperament
are the instrumentes. Which seemeth to agree well with that which
Moses saieth,Gen. 9. 4. That the soule of the flesh in the blood thereof,Leui. 17. 14. that is to
say, the life, according as we shewed when we spake of the nature of
blood, and of those meanes by which it giueth life to the creatures.
For when Moses speaketh so, a man might say that it is as much in effect
as if he saide, that the blood is as it were the pipe and instrument
that conueyeth life to the bodie, and that the Vitall spirites are the
thing that giueth motion and sense to the bodie, which is the same that
we call Soule: neither is there any inconuenience to yeelde to this in
regard of the soule of beastes. And albeeit wee see not with the eye
howe these Vitall spirites, or the temperament of all the partes of the
bodie, doe giue vnto it that life which it hath, yet a man may iudge
and haue some knowledge heereof by the things wee see in nature,
which haue some agreement and resemblance with this. For we conceiue
well,The Vitall spirite compared to the flame of a lampe. howe the flame is nourished by the oyle and match that
is in a lampe, or by the waxe and weeke that is in a candle. In which
we see two sortes of matter differing one from another, ioyned both
together. Besides, we see how that by meanes of this coniunction, and
of the temperature and agreement that these two matters haue eache
with other, the flame being kindled in them, is nourished and preserued.
So likewise we propound the Vitall spirite in the bodies of liuing
creatures,It is engendred of the blood in the heart. as a thinne flame engendered of the blood by vertue of the
heart: and this flyeth as it were throughout all the partes of the bodie,
distributing vnto it Vitall heate, which quickeneth it, and endueth it
with that vertue by which it hath motion and sense, and exerciseth all
her actions, so that euery member doeth his office. Nowe we see well
in this comparison the matter that is in the lampe or in the candle, and
the temperature and agreement that is betweene the partes of it, and
howe the flame is fedde and mainteyned after it is lighted. Wee may
see also from whence this flame is brought to the lampe, and how this
matter is lighted, and that neither the matter, nor the agreement and
temperature thereof breede this flame of themselues, but that it is
brought from elsewhere.
In like manner, we may easily conceiue that which hath beene told
vs of the vitall spirite, and of the blood whereof it is bredde, and of the
vertue and power of the heart in the generation of it. But one may

say vnto mee, that there is great difference betweene the comparison
we made of a lampe or candle, and of his flame, and betweene that
which we haue spoken of the generation of the vitall spirite, because
this flame, which we cal the vitall spirit, springeth of the self-same matter,
by which it is nourished and preserued, and is kindled there. And therfore
it were requisite that we should further knowe what is the cause
of this, as also why the life and motion that are therein, are inflamed
by this vital spirite, and not by any other means whatsoeuer, whether
it be the blood or the flesh. And yet this spirite is as well of a corporall
and bodily matter, as all the rest, of which the body is compounded:
so that it hath his originall of the selfe-same elements from whence
that matter is deriued, out of which it springeth. But of such inquisitours
I woulde likewise demaund, from whence the heauens, the
Sunne and Moone, with the other planets and starres haue their motion,God the author of nature.
their light and properties. It is very certaine they can yeeld mee
no other true cause, but that God hath created them of that nature,
that hee hath so framed them, and that hee alwayes preserueth them
such, by the diuine vertue and power of his prouidence. So I say to
them, that wee ought not to searche for any other cause or reason of
that we mentioned before, or goe any further, or mount higher in the
inquisition thereof. But forasmuch as that which wee haue nowe
deliuered of the nature and matter of the Soule, is proper to that
Sensitiue and Sensuall soule which wee attribute to beastes, we must
come more particularly to that that is proper to men, which wee
call the reasonable soule. This is that matter and poynt, about which
the greatest and most ingenious wittes haue most laboured and disputed
from time to time.Sundry opinion of the reasonable soule. For they that affirmed the soule of man
to bee no other thing then the Vitall and Animall spirites, by means
of which the body receiueth life, or the temperature and temperament
of the humours, and matter of which the bodie is compounded,
these men put no difference betweene the soule of beastes, and
the soule of men. And as for them that take it to bee the breath, or
a fire of which the naturall heate proceedeth, they iumpe in opinion
with the former, who place it in the Vitall spirites. And they that
say it is in the harmonie of the whole bodie, are of the same minde
with them that place it in the temperament. So that according to
the opinion of all these, the soule of man is nothing els but naturall
heate, or els the Vitall spirite that is in the blood: as the Physicions
commonly take it, whose consideration reacheth not farther
then to that they can comprehend by their naturall reason, following
therein Hippocrates, who agreeable to this opinion saieth, that the

soule is daily engendered, after that manner, which wee haue alreadie
declared. But they that more diligently looke into the properties
and excellent giftes,The soule proceedeth not fro^ the elements. wherewith the reasonable soule is endued,
know assuredly by their naturall reason, that these opinions are very
vnworthy the noble excellencie thereof, and that they are of no force
in regarde thereof. For they iudge very well, that the vnderstanding
and reason with the discourses thereof, that the iudgement and such
memory as it hath, that the discerning of good and euill, of thinges
honest and dishonest, of vertues and vices, with the knowledge of humane
and diuine thinges whereof it is partaker, are woorkes and actions,
which cannot proceede from such matter as the elements
are, as we haue touched else-where. Whereupon it followeth, that
it is some other thing then the Vitall spirite, or the temperament of
the bodie: and that it is of a farre differing nature from that of beasts,
which consisteth in these thinges. And by the same reason also they
conclude, that if the soule of man were of any such matter as to be the
Vitall spirite, or the temperament of the bodie, it would follow that it
were mortall like to the bodie, and that nothing shoulde remaine of
it after the death thereof. Which thing they finde to be too much contrarie
vnto that, which a man may iudge of the nature and substance
of the soule by those effectes of it, that were euen nowe mentioned:
which effectes are such as cannot agree to a corruptible and mortall
nature, nor to any other then to a celestiall and immortall nature,
like to that of the Angels aud blessed spirits, which are endued with
such vertues. But I desire to heare thee, ARAM, vpon the things now
spoken of, that thou maiest goe on with the matter of our discourses.


Of the opinion of Galen, of Plat^, and of Aristotle, touching the substance
and nature of mans soule: of the opinion of Occam touching
the Vegetatine and Sensitiue power thereof, and of the distinction of
soules he maketh in man: of the sentence of the Platonists, and of Origen
touching the creation, birth and nature of the soule: of the coniunction
of the Soule with the bodie, and the estate thereof in the same.
Chap. 83.
ARAM. The Ancients speaking of man, often call him a great
miracle: and indeede the more wee bend our mindes to consider
of it, the more marueilous weshal find it to be. Insomuch as in the
particular contemplation of the soule, which is truely man, I woulde
gladly aske whether it were better, either to discourse Philosophically
of this matter hauing store of argument, or by way of admiration to

crie out with S. Paul,Rom. 11. 33. O the deepenes of the riches, both of the wisedom, and
knowledge of God! Neuerthelesse being drawen on with the same desire
that hath hitherto pricked vs forward, to search out and to be instructed
in the trueth, according to my knowledge I will goe forward
ARAM, with thy speech.
For the causes then alleged by thee, out of them that consider more
diligently ye properties and excellent gifts of the soule,Galens opinion of the soule. although Galen,
who otherwise was a prophane man in respect of the knowledge of
God, and an idolatrous worshipper of nature, durst not boldly determine
what the reasonable soule was, yet as for that which is commonly
called the vegetatiue or nourishing,Gal. d^ pl^s* Hip. and the sensitiue or sensuall
soule, he feareth not boldly to affirme, that it is no other thing then
either the naturall and vitall spirits, or the temperament. But as for
the reasonable soule, he leaueth it in doubt whether it be of a bodilie
nature, or of some other that is not corporall, and which subsisteth by
it selfe being seperated from the bodie. Neither doth he conclude
any other thing, but that it is either a shining substance, and an ethereall
body, that is to say, of a more pure and celestiall nature then any
of the elements: or els that it is of a nature that is not corporall, but
yet hath this body, by which he meaneth the animal spirit, to be as a
chariot to carie it.Platoes opinion touching the soule. Plato before him sayd, that soules were litle portions
taken from the substance of the celestiall fires: and hee maketh
three parts of a mans soule, diuiding them according to the principall
parts of the body, and those instruments which they haue in the same.
Which diuision is vnderstood of some, as if he made so many sorts of
soules, as we haue shewed that there are principall powers and offices,
which haue their seuerall seats and places assigned vnto them in
the body. Therefore Galen mainteineth, that the vegetatiue and sensitiue
soule is no other thing then the temperament of the liuer and of
the heart, which are assigned to be the seats and chiefe instruments of
the nourishing and vitall power and vertue. And as for the animall or
reasonable power, whose seat is commonly placed in the braine, we
haue alreadie shewed his opinion. Now of this part, there are many,
euen of them who greatly magnifie it, that are not yet well resolued
whether they ought to take it for the animal spirit, or for the temperament,
or for an incorporeall nature that commeth elswhere then from
the body.Aristotles opinion of the soule. Aristotle he calleth the soule by a new Greeke name, that
signifieth asmuch as a perpetuall motion, and sayth that it proceedeth
from a fift nature and beginning, which he calleth Heauen. But he
speaketh not so plainly, that a man may iudge by his words, what he
thinketh of the reasonable soule in man, whether it be mortall or immortall.

Neuerthelesse he confesseth, that there is great difference betweene
that power of the soule, which we call more specially by the
name of spirite, and betweene the other twaine, which he calleth the
Nutritiue and Sensitiue powers. For he vseth this worde Powers, and
affirmeth, that these two first proceede onely from the bodie, and are
bredde there, and that the Vegetatiue soule and power is more in the
seede and burden, then the Sensitiue. But as for the third, hee saieth
plainely, that it onely commeth from without els-where, and that
this onely is diuine, not communicating her action with any corporall
action.
Thus we see sufficient agreement betweene the Philosophers and
the Phisitions concerning the Vegetatiue and Sensitiue soule or power:
but there is not so good accord about the reasonable soule and power.
Yea many great Diuines and Doctors agree with them in the two first
points.Occams opinion of the soule. For this cause Occam saith plainly, that there are two distinct
soules in man, the one reasonable, the other sensuall: the reason is, because
it is manifest, that the Sensitiue soule hath no actions, but instrumentall,
that is to say, by meanes of those instruments whereby shee
exerciseth her actions, and from which she hath them. Whereupon he
concludeth, that this sensuall soule seemeth to haue her originall and
generation from the seede, and that it is either the temperament, or
some facultie and power in the bodie. He confirmeth this opinion by
another argument taken from the contrarie appetites and desires of
the reasonable and sensuall soule: out of which he draweth this conclusion,
That it is very likely that these are two distinct substances, because
it seemeth inconuenient, in one and the same nature not diuided or distinguished
to place appetites so wholly contrary each to other, Hee addeth farther,
that it is a thing very agreeable to nature, that euery liuing creature
shoulde beget his like: therefore man begetteth man like himselfe, at
leastwise in respect of the Sensitiue soule, if not of the reasonable
soule. Whereupon it followeth, that the Vegetatiue and Sensitiue soule
proceede from the nature of the seede.Of the creation of soules according to the Platonists. The Platonicall Philosophers
were of opinion, that soules were bred in heauen, and were taken out
of the diuine nature as a portion thereof, and that there they were instructed
and adorned with sundry sciences, with knowledge and vertue:
and that afterwarde beeing giuen of God, they descended from
thence into the bodies of men, as into stinking, filthy, and contagious
prisons. Whereof it followed, that through the infection of these prisons
they were corrupted by euill affections, as it were with the filthinesse
of them. So that they forgate all those gifts and celestial vertues
where with they had been endued and adorned in their first birth, and

which they had brought with them. And being thus detained as prisoners
in this darke and filthy prison, they could no more vse all those
goodly gifts, but onely so farre foorth as they were taught and instructed
againe by doctrine, which in respect of them may be compared
to a light brought to prisoners kept in a darke dungeon, to light and refresh
them. For this cause those that were of this opinion affirmed, that
the knowledge of men is but a remembrance and calling againe to
minde of that which their soules had learned and did know in heauen
at their first birth, before they entred into their bodies, according as
we heard euen now. For being descended into this base and obscure
prison, and hauing forgotten that which they knew, their memories
are rubbed vp by doctrine and instruction bestowed vpon them,
which kindleth againe these celestiall sparkles of their mind, and portions
of the diuine fire, by inflaming them and causing them to burne,
that were almost vtterly quenched. Wherupon like Philosophers they
conclude, that soules so infected by descending and entring into their
bodies, cannot returne againe nor be receiued into heauen, and into
the place assigned for the blessed spirits, vnlesse they returne pure and
cleane, and decked with the selfe-same ornaments wherwith they were
adorned at their first birth. And this (they say) may bee wrought by
good instruction, by vertue and by good workes: or otherwise they say
they haue sundry purgings being separated from their bodies. Some diuines
among the Grecians haue followed, at least wise in some part, the
opinion of these philosophers,Lib 11. chap. 23. of the citie of God. and by name Origen, of whom S. August.
thus writeth: But we may marueile much more, that some beleeuing with
vs, that there is but one only beginning of all things, and that no nature which
is not God, can haue any being but from the Creator, neuertheles would not
beleue rightly and simply this point of the creation of the world that is so good
and simple, namely, that God creating all those good thinges that were after
him, although they were not the same that God is, notwithstanding they were
al good. But they say, that the soules not being parts of God, but made of God,
sinned in departing from the Lorde, and so by sundrie degrees according to
to the diuersitie of sinnes, from the heauens vnto the earth, haue merited
sundry sortes of bodies to be as it were their chaines and fetters. This say
they, is the world, and this was the cause of making the worlde, not to the
ende that the good things might be created, but that euill things might be
stayed and repressed.Origens opinion of soules. Of this opinion is Origen, who is worthily to be blamed.
These are the very wordes of this great Doctor of the Church.
And by that which followeth in the same place, hee plainely confuteth
Origens errour, who in his first booke of Beginnings writeth,
that things without bodies were first made of God: and that amongst

spirituall things, our spirites or mindes were also created,
which declining from their estate and dignitie were made or named
soules, of which the Greeke worde (...) signifieth, as it were to grow
colde, and to decline from a better and more diuine estate; beeing so
called, because it seemeth that the spirite or mind is waxen cold, and fallen
from this natural and diuine heate. Therfore the soule lieth now in
this estate and condition, but when it is repaired and amended, it shal returne
againe to the condition of a spirite or mind. Which being so, it
seemeth that the departing and declining of the soule is not alike in
all, but is turned either more or lesse in the soule: and that some spirites
or mindes doe yet retaine somewhat of their first vigour, other
some, either nothing at all or very litle. These soules by reason of many
defects of the spirit, stood in need of more grosse and solide bodies:
so that for their sakes, this visible world was made and created so great,
that it might containe all those soules which were appointed to bee
exercised therein. And forasmuch as all of them did not depart alike
from goodnes, the Creator of all things tooke vnto himselfe certaine
seedes and causes of varietie, to the ende that according to the diuersity
of sinnes, he might make the worlde variable and diuers. This is
Origens sentence concerning soules, which self-same opinion we may
reade also in Saint Hierome writing to Anitus: whereby wee may see
howe this opinion agreeth in part with that of the Platonists. For the
greatest disagreement betweene them consisteth heerein, that these
Philosophers attributed the cause of the infection of soules to the bodies
into which they were sent frrom heauen. And Origen, with many
that followed him, supposed that the soules were sent into bodies as
prisoners, to bee punished for their offences committed in heauen.
From such fancies haue issued so many dreames about soules as are to
be read in infinite writings. But doe thou, ACHITOB, take occasion
hereupon to continue our discourses.


Of the opinion of the Platonists, and some others touching the substance of
mens soules: in what sence not onely the Poets and Heathen Philosophers,
but also S. Paul haue saide, that men were the generation and Image of
God: of their errour that say, that soules are of the very substance of God:
of the transmigration of soules according to the opinion of the same Philosophers.
Chap. 84.
ACHITOB. It is woonderfull to consider, howe harde a matter
it is to finde out the trueth of such thinges, as are commonly
disputed of, because notwithstanding any solution or answere that is

made, yet still some doubt may arise in our mindes: insomuch as there
is no poynt howe doubtfull soeuer it bee, but that a man may alleage
likelihood both with it and against it. But this commeth to passe, especially
in matters of greatest reache, the difficultie of which is so
much the harder to be defined, as the true knowledge thereof is more
necessary for vs. Those men therefore are happie, who are assured of
that which they beleeue, by certaine testimonies cut of the worde of
trueth: especially when the question is concerning the soule, which is
the instrument of God whereby he worketh in vs, and lifteth vs vp to
the contemplation of his diuinitie.
Nowe my companions, by your three former discourses wee may
gather both what agreement and what difference there is amongest
those whome you haue mentioned, touching their opinions, as well
in regarde of the birth of soules, as of their distinction, diuision, and
corruption. For they agree herein, that they are not engendred with
the body, neither of the same seede and matter, at leastwise the reasonable
soule: but say that it is of a celestiall, diuine and immortall nature.
But herein they disagree, in respect of the nature of the matter,
and about the time, creation, and birth of the soule, and also in regard
of the meanes, by which it is defiled and infected with sinne. The
Platonists affirme,The Platonists opinion of the soule confuted. that the soule is so extracted out of the diuine nature,
that it is a part and portion thereof. Which thing cannot agree
with the nature of God, because it would folow therupon, that it were
not one, but might be diuided into diuers parts: and that those partes
of which the soules should be created, might be subiect to the pollution
of sinne, a thing too contrary to the nature of God. Or else they
must say, that there is but one soule in all and through all, and that God
is this soule. And this were to f^l into their opinion who said, that God
was the soule of the world,God is not the soule of the world. and that the worlde was his bodie: which
is farre from the trueth. For if it were so, then must God bee mortall
and corruptible in respect of his body, and that still one part or other
should be corrupted, as we see corporall things daily to corrupt. On
the other side, God should not then be infinit and incomprehensible,
as he is: neither is it the worlde that comprehendeth and containeth
him, but it is he who comprehendeth and containeth the world. Wherfore
neither is the world God, neither is God the world, but the Creator
thereof, and he by whome it is and doeth consist. So that forasmuch
as all these opinions are very strange, and vnwoorthie the diuine
nature, they deserue not that we should stay any longer in them,
as they that ouerthrowe themselues. But I knowe well, that some
would haue that place alleged out of the Poet by Saint Paul, to serue

their fantasticall opinion,Act. 17. 28. where it is said, that We are the linage and generation
of God.Arat. For Saint Paul doeth not alleage it onely as an opinion
of an Heathen Poet,Phae. but doeth also approoue and confirme
the same, taking his argument from thence, that our soule beeing of
a spirituall and diuine nature, wee ought to make the same account
of God,How men are the linage of God. whose linage and generation wee are. Nowe albeeit
the Apostle speaketh thus, yet his meaning is not that the
soules of men are of the verie substaunce and essence of God, as
wee say that the Father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghost, are one
and the same essence and substance in the the vnitie of God, beeing
distinguished, and not diuided into three persons. Neither doeth he
meane, that the soules are engendred of the proper essence and substance
of God, or that they proceede from it, as wee say that the
sonne is begotten of the Father, and that the holy spirite proceedeth
from the Father and the Sonne, according as it is testified vnto vs in
the holy Scriptures. But hee woulde haue vs learne, that the soule of
man is of another nature and substance, not onely then the bodie of
man is, but also then the soule of beastes, and that the nature and
substance thereof is celestiall and diuine, not because it is drawen
from the very substance and essence of God, but by reason of that
difference which is betweene the soule of man, and the bodies and
soules of beastes: and also in regard of that agreement which is betweene
it and the diuine nature, both because of the immortalitie of
the soule, as because it approcheth more neere to the nature of God
then of any other creature, except the Angels, whome wee say
also are of a diuine nature and celestiall, for the like reason. For if the
Angels and soules of men were of the proper substance and essence
of God, they should not bee creatures, but Gods themselues, equall
in substance and essence with him, as wee say of the Sonne begotten
of the Father, and of the holy Ghost proceeding from them
both, in the matter of the vnitie and trinitie of the diuine nature: which
by this meanes shoulde bee diuided into partes, and so nothing at all
resemble the fountaine and substance from which they are drawen,
as I shewed euen nowe. And albeit the Philosophers and Heathen
Poets did not so well vnderstand this matter as Saint Paul, neuerthelesse
when they sayde, that the soule of man was of the diuine nature
and part thereof, it is very likely they had regarde to the reasons
touched by mee, not meaning that it was of the very substance and
essence of God. I speake of them that were of greatest vnderstanding
and that wrote best: and namely of them that did best vnderstande
the Philosophie of Plato. For hee confesseth and testifieth

plainly, that the Angels themselues both good and bad, whome in his
language he calleth dae^ones,Platoes opinion of Daemones, or celestial spirits. as the other Grecians doe, are creatures
of another essence and substance then God is of, and that they are
not immortall of themselues, but haue their immortalitie of God
their Creator, who both giueth it and preserueth them in it, and could
take it from them if hee would, and dissolue them as well as hee hath
made them. Nowe if he supposed God to speake so to his Angels, and
to declare these things vnto them, a man may easily iudge, that hee
placeth not the soules of men aboue the Angels, whome hee taketh to
be of a more excellent nature, as he sheweth euidently by that which
he hath written of them both. In which writing wee may see manie
things touching these matters, which come neerer to the doctrine
of the holy Scriptures and of true religion, then in the writings of
many others, who yeelded no further then they were able to knowe
and conceiue by naturall things, without going any further. For they
doe not conceiue so well either of the nature of God, or of that of Angels,
or of the soules of men, as this Philosopher doeth. Moreouer, we
are to know, that Plato had other helpes, and more light them from
his natural reason, whereby he attayned to the vnderstanding of that,
which others were ignorant of, who busied themselues onely about
nature and naturall things.Plato dwelt with the Egyptians. For hee conuersed with the Egyptians,
as Pythagoras did before him, of whome they learned manie
points touching diuine things, which they should neuer haue learned
of the Grecians, nor out of their Philosophie. For the Egyptians had
great acquaintance and familiaritie with the people of Israel that
dwelt in their land, and with many of the ancient Patriarkes, of whom
they had learned manie things of the diuinitie, and of the nature of
soules. But all they that haue beene destitute of the chiefe light of
the spirite of God, haue still mingled many dreames a middest their
writings, as we haue alreadie heard, and shall heare more in the sequele
of our speech. Yet first we will note, howe not onely manie
amongst the Heathen Philosophers, but also amongst the Christians
haue imagined that the soules of men are the substance of God. I
omit to speake of the Heretikes, as the Priscilianists, and some others
that haue been of this opinion,Lactautius lib. 2. cap. 13. but I wonder at Lactantius, a man of a
right Christian heart, who seemeth to haue beene of this opinion.
And there haue beene some, that reasoned after this manner, that
if it bee to bee vnderstood, that of the breath issuing foorth out of the
mouth of God, the soule was created and inspired into the body of
man, then it followeth thereupon, that it is of his verie substance, and
equall to that wisedome which sayeth,Ecclus. 24. 5. I am come out of the mouth

of the most High. But that wisedome saieth not, that shee was breathed
out of the mouth of God, but that shee came out of it. Now
as when we breathe, we make a blast, not of our nature whereby we
are men, but of this ayre rounde about vs, which wee drawe in and
out by breathing:The Soule created of nothing. so the Almightie God made a blast, not of his nature,
nor of this creature of the aire rounde about vs, but euen of nothing.
Which was saide very fittely to haue beene inspired or breathed,
when it was created in the bodie of man by God, who being
himselfe incorporeall, and not of a bodily substance, made the
soule also incorporeall: but yet he beeing vnchangeable, made the
soule mutable, because himselfe beeing vncreated made that a creature.
But let vs goe on with the Philosophie of the Platonists. Wee haue
heard their opinion touching the birth of soules, their entrie into the
bodie, and the pollution which they receiue thereby: namely, that the
soules of men are created long before their bodies, but are afterwarde
sent into them when they are begotten and borne in the worlde, at
which time they are defiled,Of the transmigration of soules. as hath beene declared. But further, according
to the opinion of Pythagoras, who is sayde to bee the first Authour
thereof, they imagined, that after a soule was once entred into
a bodie, it neuer ceased to goe from body to body, entring into one
bodie out of another. So that when it went out of one bodie it entred
into another, whether it were of a man, or of a beast, or of a plant.
For they put no difference betweene the bodies of any liuing creatures
whatsoeuer: but spake, as if euerie soule were fitte for euerie
bodie: so that according as euerie soule guided and gouerned
it selfe in that bodie in which it had liued before, it was receaued
into another bodie, beeing such a one as it had deserued, eyther
by her vices, or by her vertues. Therefore those that had taken
the way of vertue, entered into humane bodies woorthie their
vertue, into such as had beene called to honourable offices and estates:
and as vertue had preuayled most with euerie one, so were
they more or lesse honoured in their bodies. And if so bee they had
ledde a brutish rather then a humane and reasonable life, they passed
into the bodies of plantes, or of beastes, whose nature resembled
the life which they had ledde in their former bodies.The regeneration of the Pythagoreans. This
Transmigration of Soules they called Regeneration, because it was
vnto them as it were a generation and newe birth, in respect
of their life and conuersation, which before they ledde in the
worlde. Moreouer, they accounted this regeneration to be a kinde
of purgation and satisfaction, because that by this meanes

euery soule was punished or rewarded, honoured or dishonoured, according
to her worthinesse or vnworthinesse, and that so long vntill
shee were reduced to her first and right estate. There haue beene
Heretikes of olde,A fond opinion of certaine Heretikes. who following the opinion of the Platonists,
affirmed, that no soule coulde bee fully purged and bee at rest, and
cease from passing out of one bodie into another, vntill such time as
it hath done and finished whatsoeuer can bee done in the worlde,
whether good or euill: accounting both euill deedes and good deeds,
vices as well as vertues to bee a kinde of penance and purgation of
soules. Besides, these Heretikes affirmed, as the Libertines their successours
doe the like in our dayes, that there was no sinne but onely
in the opinion and fancie of men, and that it is but a conceipt in their
minde that breedeth this opinion.
Nowe when I thinke vpon this manner of regeneration and passage
of the soule from one bodie to another,Against the transmigration of soules. I muse howe it is possible
that euer any men, especially those that are taken for such great
Philosophers, should fall into such foppery, and aboue all how Plato
shoulde bee of that opinion, who is by them surnamed, The diuine,
For first of all, we haue alreadie learned by our discourses of the nature
both of body and soule, that the soule cannot dwell nor exercise
her offices in any other then in the bodie of a man, seeing that
is the true forme and perfection of man and of that kinde, without
which hee cannot bee man. Wee may say the same of the soule of
beastes and of plants. For if euery creature had not his proper forme,
and some thing in which the perfection of it consisteth, without
which it cannot bee that which it is, and by which it differeth in
kinde from other creatures, there woulde bee a woonderfull confusion
throughout all nature, yea the whole order thereof woulde
bee ouerturned. For all kindes of nature shoulde bee confounded together,
neither shoulde there be anie one kinde certaine and distinct:
which thing is contrary to all naturall reason, and to all order appointed
by God. Therefore it is a very hard matter to beleeue, that euer
any man of a sounde minde and good iudgement, would admitte of
such a fantasticall opinion. But wee may learne of thee, ASER, in
proceeding with the matter of our discourse, what thou hast learned
of skilfull men concerning this that Plato hath written of transmigration
of soules.



The chiefe causes, as learned men thinke, that mooued Pythagoras, and
Plato to broache the transmigration of soules and transformation
of bodies: the ancient opinion of the Iewes touching the same thing.
Chap. 85.
ASER. The worlde was neuer without certaine wittie men, that
boasted they coulde answere vpon a sodaine to any thing that
shoulde be demaunded of them. And there haue beene alwayes
some others, that in euery controuersie and disputation mainteyned
one while this part, and by and by the contrary: which hath giuen
occasion as I thinke, to certaine of the auncient Philosophers to beleeue,
that a man can know nothing perfectly, and that no man ought
certainely to determine any thing otherwise then vpon his bare and
simple opinion. But in my minde this consideration will finde but
fewe defenders nowe adayes, except it bee amongst the ignoraunt,
who leauing all search of things, liue onely at all aduenture, or else
amongest them that beleeue euery thing that is tolde them, and
are ledde with euerie sentence, which they heare of others, without
any further inquirie made of the reason thereof. Nowe as we would
bee loath to perish with the ignoraunt, so wee must beware that
wee commit not our selues and our beleefe so easily to the daunger
of other mens errours. And in deede oftentimes wee iudge not aright
of their meaning, namely when the question is concerning the
sense of their writing. As I purpose to let you see my companions, in
that which hath beene alreadie spoken of Plato.
I haue learned of manie skilfull men,Why Plato inuented the transmigration of soules. that Pythagoras and Plato
neuer beleeued that transmigration of soules into manie bodies,
which we reade in their writings, but that by these fayned kindes of
speech, their meaning was rather to withdrawe men from beastly
affections, vnwoorthie their nature, and thereby to paint out and
to expresse the diuersitie of those affections, and to set them as it were
before their eyes: thereby to declare vnto them, howe by reason
of their vnruly affections they resemble all other creatures, and
chiefely brute beastes. Wherefore wee may with good reason call
man a little worlde, if there were no other cause but this, albeeit
in this respect it standeth not with his honour and credite. For
there is no kinde of beast whatsoeuer, nor yet of any other creature
vnto which hee doeth not in some sort transforme himselfe by his affections
and by his maners and vices. For when he pleaseth, he transformeth
himselfe one while into a sheepe, then into a woolfe, againe

into a foxe, or into a hogge, or into a dogge, or into a beare,
or into a Lion, or into some other such like beast. Moreouer, sometimes
hee transfigureth himselfe, not onely into one kinde of beast,
but into many together,, and yet those very differing and contrarie
the one from the other. And as he can at his pleasure transforme himselfe
into an Angell, so doeth hee likewise turne himselfe into a Diuell.Mans nature compared to a Monster.
It is not then altogether voyde of reason that Plato sayeth, that
the nature of man is as it were a monstrous nature: yea hee compareth
it to a Monster, whose vppermost part resembleth a Virgine:
whose breast, which is the middest, is like to a Lyon: and the
lowest part, to a barking and bawling dogge. For hee compareth
the highest part to a Virgin, because hee placeth reason in the head, as
in the proper seate thereof, and of the animal powers of the Soule, for
their nature and office sake. Next, hee saieth that the breast resembleth
a Lion, because he taketh the heart to bee the seate of the Vitall
power of the Soule, and also of the affections, that often may well
bee likened to a Lion and to furious beastes. Lastly, hee compareth
the lower partes to dogges, because that part is appoynted
to be the seate of the naturall and nourishing power of the soule, and
of the generatiue vertue, as that which is very brutish and giuen
to all carnall pleasures,How me^ become like to beasts. and chiefely to fornication. If then a man
cannot moderate his affections and concupiscences, hee maketh
himselfe like to so many beastes, as hee hath affections holding of
their nature. This also is the cause, why the spirite of God in the
holy Scriptures, so often compareth men to sundry sortes of beasts,
to teach vs that they are as it were transformed into them, and into
hideous and horrible monsters, to the ende they might bee the
more ashamed of themselues: and that knowing howe they turne
themselues into beastes and into Diuels by their vices, they should
learne also, howe contrariwise through vertue they become men
of beastes, and angels of Diuels. Therefore it is very like, that
Pythagoras and Plato had respect to this which hath beene saide
in those transformations and transmigrations of soules of which
they spake. I thinke also that the Poets, following the same inuention
haue for the like reason, fayned the transformations of
men into diuers beastes, and into other creatures forged by them:
but men through ignoraunce haue taken them in a wrong sence,The ignorant wrest the sence of good writers.
and so reaped small profite by them. No marueile then if this hath
happened both to Philosophers and Poets in their doctrine and
manner of teaching, seeing there are so manie that profite so little
by the doctrine of the holie Scriptures themselues, and by

the studie thereof. For were there euer any Heretikes, that did
not wrest the sence of manie places of Scripture to make them
serue for their heresies? And doe wee not dayly see the like in
all seducers and false prophetes? It is verie certayne, that there
were neuer anie so absurde and straunge heresies, which the fauourers
of them haue not laboured to mainteyne by the holy Scriptures
themselues.
But to returne to our purpose, what meaning soeuer the Authors
and inuenters of such things had, their doctrine was so vnderstood,
that manie helde this opinion, that mens soules passed from bodie
to bodie, as we haue heard. Insomuch that this errour howe grosse soeuer
it were, came not onelie to the Iewes, but to the Christians also,
who boast of true religion, and of the authoritie and knowledge
of the holy Scriptures. I speake not of the Manichees auncient Heretikes,
who were open mainteiners of this opinion. But what shall wee
say of them, who not onely haue their braines infected with this follie,
but, which is woorse, imagine they can confirme and prooue it by
testimonies out of the worde of God? As where it is reported, that
when Herode hearde the fame of Christ Iesus spread throughout
all Iudea,Math. 14. 2. hee sayde,marke 6. 14. This is Iohn Baptist: hee is risen againe from
the dead, and therefore great woorkes are wrought by him. And Saint
Luke sayeth expressely,Luke 9. 7, 8. That Herode doubted, because that it was
sayde of some, that Iohn was risen againe from the dead: and of some,
that Elias had appeared: and of some, that one of the olde Prophets was
risen againe. We reade likewise that when Iesus Christ demaunded of
his disciples,Mat. 16. 13, 14. saying, Whome doe men say that I,luke 9. 19. the Sonne of man am?
they answered, Some say, Iohn Baptist: and some Elias: others, Ieremias,
or one of the Prophets: and some that one of the olde Prophetsis risen againe.Of the Iewes opinion of the transmigration of soules.
A man my iudge by these speeches, that not onelie Herode
was tainted with this Pythagoricall and Platonicall opinion, but also
that it was very common among the Iewes with whome hee conuersed,
and whose religion hee followed, at least in part and in outwarde
shewe. For Iesus Christ was knowen well enough in Iudea,
and in Galilee, and amongst all the Iewes, as it appeareth by
the testimonie of the Euangelists. They knewe his kinred according
to the flesh, and coulde tell that he was brought vp in Nazareth
in the countrey of Galilee:Mark. 6. 3. for which cause they called him
him a Galilean,matt. 13 55, 56 a Nazarean,iohn. 6. 42. a Carpenter, the sonne of a Carpenter,
and the sonne of Ioseph and Marie. They saide that they knewe
his brethren and sisters, whereby according to the Hebrewe manner
of speaking, they meant his cousins, Neeces and his kinred: taking

occasion thereby to despise and reiect him. But on the other side,
many seeing the woorkes and miracles which hee wrought, were
constrayned to passe farther, euen Herode himselfe, hearing onely the
fame that went of him throughout the countrey: so that some tooke
him to bee that Christ, others, to be some great Prophet. And of them
that helde him for a Prophet, it appeareth by those sundry opinions
that were among the people, that they did not thinke him to bee a
Prophet borne at that time, but that some one of the olde Prophets
was risen againe in him, not in bodie but in spirite. For they knewe
well whence hee issued in respect of his bodie, as that which was
commonly knowen throughout the countrey. Therefore it is easie
to iudge that they spake of resurrection in regarde of the soule, as
the skilfullest Interpreters expounde these places, referring these
speeches of Herode and of the people vnto that Pythagoricall opinion,
of the transmigration of soules from bodie to bodie. For according
thereunto, those soules that had behaued themselues vertuously
in their first bodies in which they dwelt, were sent into other
more honourable bodies, endued with greater giftes of God
according to their deseruing. Nowe because Saint Iohn the Baptist
had not the gift of miracles annexed to his Ministerie, neyther
did woorke anie all his life time, it might bee thought that
this gaue occasion to Herode to thinke thus of him, that beeing risen
againe from the dead after a Pythagoricall manner, hee had
this gift and vertue added vnto his former graces, that so he might
haue the greater authoritie. Neither ought wee to thinke it verie
strange, if a great part of the Iewes were infected with manie
foolish and naughtie opinions, seeing they were not onely corruptly
instructed by their teachers, but also had sectes amongst them
there, which plainely denied the resurrection of the bodie, the immortalitie
of soules, and that there was any Angel or spirite. Therefore
wee see their great brutishnesse who woulde ground their transmigration,
vpon that which is saide in the Scriptures touching the opinion
of the Iewes in this point, which notwithstanding is openly
reprehended and condemned by the selfe-same worde of GOD.
True it is, that the ignorance of the true sense thereof gaue occasion
to many to fall into such dreames. For the Lorde speaking thus by
Malachie,Mala. 4. 5. Beholde I will sende you Elijah the Prophet, before the comming
of the great and fearefull day of the Lorde, the Iewes vnderstood
this place diuersly. Some of them thought, that the auncient Prophet
Elias, who was rapt vp into heauen, shoulde be sent againe in
proper person: others vnderstoode it onely of the transmigration of

his soule and spirite into an other body.Iohn 1. 21. For this cause they asked of
Iohn Baptist whether hee were Elias: but Iesus Christ himselfe expounded
those wordes of Malachy,Matth. 11. 14. and 17. 12, 13 and declared vnto the Iewes
that Iohn Baptist was that Elias which should come, and that although
hee were come yet they did not knowe him. For when he spake so of
him, hee meant not that hee was the very person of Elias in body and
soule, or that the naturall soule and spirite of Elias was entred into his
body: but his meaning was according as the Angel spake to Zachary,
when he tolde him of the Natiuitie of Saint Iohn his sonne,Luke 1. 15, 16, 17. saying, He
shall be filled with the holy Ghost, euen from his mothers wombe. And many
of the children of Israel shall he turne to their Lorde God. For he shall go
before him in the spirite and power of Elias. A man may easily iudge by
these words, that he meant not to say, that the naturall spirite of Elias
shoulde enter into the body of Saint Iohn Baptist, but that God would
giue a spirite adourned with such giftes and spirituall graces, and
with such zeale and constancie as he gaue long before to Elias. Therefore
he addeth power vnto spirite, thereby to declare the better what
is meant by Spirite. And before he shewed the meanes whereby this
spirite shoulde be giuen him, when he said, that hee should be filled
with the holy Ghost from his mothers wombe: that is, with the gifts
and graces thereof, as the Scripture calleth them ordinarily. Afterwardes
also, the Angell declareth more at large, after what manner
Saint Iohn came in the power and spirite of Elias, signifying that hee
ought to behaue himselfe and to doe as Elias had done in his time, and
as Malachy had foretolde of him. Moreouer, we haue in the Scripture
other kindes of speaking, that agree very fitly with this of the Angel,
so that the one may well serue to open the other. For it is written of
Moses,Numb. 11. 25. that the Lorde did separate of the spirite that was vpon him, and
did put it vpon the seuentie ancient men, whom he appointed vnder him
to be an helpe and comfort vnto him in the gouernement of the people
of Israel: and when the spirite rested vpon them they prophecied
continually. Euery one knoweth, that the spirite of Moses whereof
the Lord speaketh, is not his naturall spirite: but that he meaneth by
this spirite, part of the gifts and graces which Moses had receiued of
the Lord, such as were necessary for their charge: as likewise he gaue
to Moses according to the charge committed to him. Some also vnderstand
this separation of the spirite of Moses, to be onely a communication
of the graces of the spirite of God, like to those which Moses
had receiued for his charge that was giuen to those, who were ioyned
vnto him for his helpe. Nowe if wee take it in this sense, we may
say, that God vseth this manner of speech, the better to let vs vnderstand

thereby the nature of his gifts and graces, and the meanes hee
obserueth in dispensing of them. For hee doeth not onelie distribute
so much as is needefull for them whome hee mindeth to employ
in his woorke, but giueth also vnto them such manner of graces
as are requisite for the worke,1. Cor. 12. 11. as Saint Paul testifieth. Besides
all this, his purpose is also to teach vs what agreement there is betwixt
all his giftes: as likewise what vnitie proceedeth heereof betwixt
them that are partakers of these gifts, whereby wee may perceiue,
that they come all from one spirite, which, albeit God thereby
powreth out his graces in so great abundance, is yet a fountaine and
sea that is not onely not dried vp,The fountaine of Gods graces diminisheth not. but not so much as any way diminished.
Thus wee see howe one and the same Spirite of GOD gouerned
Moses, and the rest that were ioyned with him, inspiring them
all with his grace, and distributing to euery one according to his
measure: as the winde is dispenced into many Organ-pipes all at
once, according to their seuerall capacitie, and according to that
sound which euery one is to yeelde for the making of a good harmony:
or as many Candles or Lampes are lighted by an other, with
the same fire wherewith that was first tined. Also wee are to vnderstand
in this sence,2. King. 2. 9. the request that Eliseus made to Elias, when hee
demaunded a double portion of his Spirite, because hee succeeded
him: in regarde whereof hee stoode in neede of such giftes and graces
of Gods Spirite, as Elias was guided by, that hee might faithfully
execute his charge as hee had done before. Thus wee see howe
places of Scripture expound one an other, and howe little they help
the Pythagoreans: of whome I woulde not haue made so long a
discourse, if this foppery were driuen out of mens braines, and namely,
among Christians. For to this day there are too many fantasticall
heades (I say not amongest true Christians) but amongest
them that falsely beare that name, who are as much or rather more
infected heerewith, then any Pythagoreans or Platonists in former
times. And for this cause, AMANA, I leaue you to goe on with this
point, that afterwardes wee may returne to our chiefe matter of the
nature, generation, and immortalitie of the soule.



Of the Pythagoreans of these dayes amongst Christians, and of their foolish
opinions: of the opinions of many doctors and diuines touching the
creation and ordinary generation of mens soules: of the moderation
that ought to be kept in that matter: of the cause of the filthinesse and
corruption of mans soule. Chap. 86.
AMANA. There was neuer yet any opinion, errour, or heresie so
strange or monstrous in the world, which hath not always found
men enow to receiue it, so that there were authours and masters to
broach it abroad. For God doeth thus punish the curiositie, ingratitude,
malice, and peruersenesse of men, and that contempt of his word
and trueth, which is ordinarily in them, together with the pleasure and
delight they take in vanitie and lies. Wherefore God through his iust
iudgement deliuereth them vp into a reprobate sence, insomuch as
they can not but reiect the trueth continually and embrace that which
is false,Esay 29. 14. according as he often threatned them,2. tim. 3. 2, 3. and foretolde it by his
Prophets and Apostles.2. thes. 2. 10, 11. And this is the cause why the Pythagoreans
do at this day find men voide of sense and vnderstanding who cleaue
to their fantasticall opinions, and why Epicures and Atheists are neuer
without a great number of disciples.
Now albeit these men be in truth most blockish and grosse beasts, yet
we cannot perswade them so, nor many others also, who imagin they
know much.The Pythagoreans of our time. For there are euen doctors and some that read lectures in
Vniuersities, who keepe not their opinion of the transmigration of
soules so secret to themselues, but they make some profession therof, at
lestwise amongst their schollers and familiar acquaintance. There are
some also, who, boasting of the knowlege of tongues and of the turning
ouer of many antiquities, haue published this fancie of theirs in books
written by them: yea they themselues are perswaded, and they would
make others beleeue the same with them, that their soules are the very
soules of some famous personages that haue liued heretofore in the
world, and that they haue alredy passed through many excellent bodies,
which haue done great things: as likewise they promise to themselues,
that they shal bring to passe great matters, seeing they haue their souls.
True it is, that according to our maner of speaking we say sometimes
of such as agree in manners with others who haue liued before them,
that their soules whom they resemble is entred into them, and that the
others are raised vp in their persons.Of the true transmigration of soules. For example sake, if there be a cruel
tyrant like to Nero, we say that Neroes soule is entred into his body,
and that Nero is raised vp in him. But yet euery one knoweth well enough,
that we vse to speake so by reason of the agreement of natures
and of manners, not because of any transmigration of soule.

And this may be spoken in respect of that Deuillish spirite, which
possesseth the wicked and ruleth in them: as wee say of the Spirite of
Gods seruants in regarde of his vertue, that it is giuen to such as resemble
them and haue receiued the same graces from aboue. For as
the holy Spirite, who wrought heeretofore in others, worketh nowe
also in them that haue receiued like grace: euen so it is saide of that euill
spirite in regarde of the wicked, who are all led with the selfe-same
spirite of Sathan. Wherefore he doth such workes in them whome hee
nowe possesseth, as he wrought heeretofore in their predecessours. So
that in this sense it skilleth not though wee say that the spirite of one
entreth into another, who succeedeth him in the same wicked works.
But the Pythagoreans of whome I nowe speake, take it not so, but as
hath bin already declared. And to set the more colour vpon this so
strange an opinion, their prophanenesse is such, that they dare to alleadge
those places of Scripture, which were spoken of in the former
discourse, whereby they labour to perswade themselues and others
also with them, that the worde of God confirmeth the same.
No doubt therefore, but that they who haue yet such toyes in their
head, are not without others also: yea, there is no question, but that
there are wonderfull puddles of errours and of very strange heresies in
their fantasticall braines, so that they are ougly monsters among men,
and would be abhorred of euery one, if that which they carry enclosed
in their frantike heades might be seene with corporall eies. But leauing
this point, wee are to returne to our principall matter into which
we haue made some entrance, namely, the nature and originall, the
pollution, purgation, and immortalitie of the soule of man: concerning
which thing, we haue heard the opinion of the Philosophers, and
of many that follow them. Whereupon we haue to obserue this, that
notwithstanding any errour in opinion which they helde, yet they alwayes
came to this point, that they concluded the immortalitie of the
soule.
Nowe as touching the ancient Doctors of the Church and the late
Diuines, they haue written diuersly of the originall of mens soules
and of their entrance into their bodies: about which point there haue
beene and are at this day, great disputations and controuersies namely,Of the creation and generation of soules.
amongst the Physicions and the Diuines. Some haue beene of that
opinion touching the generation and beginning of the soule with the
body, whereof we haue already spoken. But some restraine this to
that soule which they call Vegetatiue and Sensitiue, as hath bin shewed
vnto vs, others comprehend also the reasonable soule therewithall.
And besides that which wee haue spoken already touching originall

sinne in the soule, they ground themselues vpon that which is written
in Genesis, howe that after God had created man, who was the last
in the creation of all the creatures, he rested the seuenth day from the
worke which he had made, after he had accomplished whatsoeuer it
pleased him to doe. Therefore they conclude, that from that time forward
God created not any newe creatures, but hauing set such an order
as it pleased him to appoint in the nature of things created, he preserued
the same afterwardes by his prouidence, whereby he worketh
alwaies in the guiding and conseruation of his creatures, although not
after that manner whereby he worketh in the creating of them. And
thus he rested in regarde of the worke of creation,How God rested the seuenth day. so as he created no
more any creatures in such sort and maner as he did the first creatures
in the beginning. Neuerthelesse, he rested not in respect of the worke
of his prouidence, which neuer ceaseth, but daily createth all those
creatures that come newly into the world, by meanes of those seedes,
which he hath put into euery one of them according to their kindes,
and by other meanes which hee hath ordained to that purpose. Hauing
then laide this foundation, they conclude that mens soules are
not daily created of nothing, nor in such maner as the soule of the first
man was created, but by that meanes which God then appointed for
the preseruation of mankinde. But because they knowe well enough
that there is great difference betwixt the soules of men and of brute
beasts, they agree that God vseth other means in the procreation and
producing of mens soules, then in that of beasts, by the concurring of
his generall action, whereby he sustaineth and preserueth the natures
of all things, according to that naturall disposition which he hath indued
them with from the beginning, agreeable to that which is written,Actes 17. 28.
that In him we liue, and mooue, and haue our beeing. Therefore as
God vsed other meanes in the creation of the soule of man, then he did
in that of beastes, and placed it also in the body of man after an other
fashion that was speciall and peculiar vnto man: euen so in the procreation
and production of mens soules, he hath his speciall order for
them, which differeth from the order vsed in the generation of the
soules of beasts. And indeede he sheweth very euidently, that he ruleth
after another fashion in the production of men, and namely, in
regard of the soule, then in that of beasts, by the excellent gifts wherewith
their soules are adorned, not onely in that their soules doe farre
exceede the soules of beasts, but also in that one soule excelleth another
in the nature of man: as wee see it in many to whome God hath
giuen heroicall spirites, which are gifts that cannot proceede from the
body. And so much for the opinion of these men.

Others do not only deny the reasonable soule to be taken from any
portion either of the diuine nature and essence,Another opinion of the creation of the soule. or of the body of man,
but they say farther, that God by his diuine power and vertue createth
it of nothing, after that the body of the infant is made perfect in the
wombe of the mother, hauing all the parts and members thereof. And
being thus created of God, he presently placeth it within that body,
which he hath appointed for the lodging of it, that it may dwel therein
vntil after the death of the body it depart immortall out of it, as it
was created immortall, and was so indeede when it entred thereinto.
These men ground themselues vpon that which we reade in Genesis,
where it is saide, that after God had fashioned man of the dust of the
earth,Gen. 2. 7. he breathed into him the breath of life, and he was made a liuing soule.
For it appeareth plainely by this testimonie of Moses, that the soule of
the first man was not only not created together with the body, as the
soule of beasts was, but also that it was giuen vnto him of some other
nature and substance. For if there were no more in it then in that of
beasts, and if it had no kinde of participation with the diuine nature,
why should God inspite it into the body of man after another fashion
then he did that of beasts? and what should that inspiration or breathing
of God, signifie and import? Wee haue heard already what some
answere vnto this. For they deny nothing of all this, but they say onely,
that God did then establish this order nowe spoken of, which hee
daily continueth in the generation of man. I omit heere many other
opinions touching this matter, which come not so neere vnto the
trueth: namely, a great controuersie betweene the Doctors in Diuinitie
and in Physicke, touching the vegetatiue and sensitiue soule, and
the time when the burthen beginneth to bee nourished and to haue
sence thereby: considering that it is a great deale better to inquire of
these things to sobrietie, and to leaue the resolution to GOD, who
knoweth that which is hidde from vs, then by vaine questions and curious
disputations to thinke to determine of the matter according to
trueth, and to the contentation of euery one. For as we haue before
touched, we can knowe nothing either of the generation, or original,
or of the substance and nature of our soule, or of the immortalitie
thereof, but onely by those testimonies which by the effects it aftoordeth
vnto vs, and which God setteth downe in his word. Wherefore,
according to that which hath beene already handled, wee must distinguish
those things vnto which our mindes may in some sort reach,
and of which wee may haue some knowledge, from them that are so
hidden from vs, that wee can not knowe or iudge of any thing, but
like blinde men, by groping and gessing.

This is a matter then of which wee must speake very soberly,The nature of the soule is not curiously to be searched after. and
with great reuerence of God, contenting our selues with that which
it pleaseth him to make knowne vnto vs by the meanes aforesaid, and
goe no further by desiring to knowe that which wee can not conceiue
or comprehend, vntill such time as God himselfe shall giue vs more
ample and cleere knowledge thereof. And I suppose wee shall not
erre, if wee say the like touching the question propounded by vs in the
beginning of our speech about this matter, namely, of the meanes by
which the reasonable soule shoulde bee infected with originall sinne,
seeing it is not engendered of that corrupt seede of which the bodie is
bredde.How the soule is stained with sinne. Let it then suffice vs to knowe, that albeit the soule can not
be defiled with sinne, as it is created of God, yet as God created all
mankinde in Adam, so when he fell, all the rest of the worlde fell
with him, and in him was bereaued both of originall iustice, and of
other gifts which he lost by his fall. So that albeit mens soules are created
and produced of God pure and entire, yet they keepe not that
puritie stil, neither can they be the soules of men and ioyned vnto their
bodies, and so become members of mankinde in them with any other
condition, then with that into which the first Father brought all his
children by his sinne, as we haue before touched. Wherefore we must
not search for the cause of that original sinne wherewith they are infected,
either in their creation, because they are created by God of a diuine
and immortall essence: or in the generation of the body and in
that seede of which it is engendred, as if the soule took her originall and
infection together with the body fro^ the seede. Moreouer, we must not
(as the Pythagoreans do) search for the corruption of soules in their entrance
and coniunction with their bodies, as if they receiued it from
them: but we must seeke it in that blot of sinne vnto which the whole
race of ma^kind was made subiect through the fall and corruption of the
first stocke, and in that decree of God, whereby hee hath condemned
all mankinde by his iust iudgement, without any further enquirie after
the meanes and manner how it came to passe. For this cause Saint
Paul doth bring vs backe to this consideration, when, in propounding
vnto vs the first stock of mankind,Rom. 5. 12, 15. he saith, that by one man sinne entred
into the world, and by sinne death. And then hee propounded vnto vs this
stocke of sinne, so on the contrary side, he propoudeth to vs the stock
of iustice and righteousnesse, namely Christ Iesus the; new man, who
is an other stocke of mankinde regenerated, renewed, and reformed
after the image of GOD. Therefore hee saieth, that as by the disobedience
of one man,Verse 19. many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one,
many are made righteous. Now as humane Philosopie knoweth not,

either the corruption of all mankinde such as it is, or the fountaine
thereof,Humane philosophie is blinde. so it is ignorant of the meanes whereby it must bee restored,
neither knoweth it that the wound is so great and mortall, as that it
cannot be cured but onely by the hand of God. For which cause hee
was to giue vs his owne sonne to be the Surgion and Physicion. The
ignorance heereof, is the cause why humane Philosophie so greatly
magnifieth the nobilitie and excellencie of the soule, as it is well worthy
being considered in the first nature, in which it was created. But
the sequele of this matter wee will heare of thee, ARAM.


Of those powers and properties, which the soule of man hath common with
the soule of beastes: of those powers and vertues, which are proper and
peculiar to it selfe, according to the Philosophers: of the difference and
agreement that is betweene humane philosophie and Christian doctrine
touching these things. Chap. 87.
ARAM Amongst the heathen, they that were most ancient, and
neerest to the true Church of God, and conuersed most with his
seruants, had greater knowledge and better vnderstanding of the nature
of God, of Angelles, and of mens soules, and of other matters
belonging to true religion, then they that were farthest off and succeeded latest after the other.The causes of errours. For the farther off that the doctrine of
heauenly things was drawne from the fountaine of it, the more hath
it beene altered and corrupted both by ignorance ouerwhelming it,
and by false vnderstanding of it, as also because euery one hath added
to and taken away what seemed him best: and that, either to boast
themselues that they may seeme some body, or to couer their thefts,
that none might knowe from whence that thing was first taken and
borrowed, that so they might bee thought to bee the first members
thereof: or lastly, to please and satisfie the curiositie and vanitie of the
minde of man. No maruell therefore, if there were heathen Philosophers
among the ancients, who beleeued and taught many things agreeable
to the worde of God, and if there be now some amongst vs,
who boast of their study in philosophie, and yet haue no part of that
first innocencie and puritie, but haue their mindes filled with strange
opinions contrary to all reason and trueth. We see wel enough by experience
what impietie raigneth in this our age. For there are an infinite
number to be founde of whose religion no man can iudge, except
it be heerein that they thinke there is none at all, and therefore mocke
at all religion, what shewe soeuer they make to the contrary. But I
knowe not why they shoulde not blush for shame, when they heare

from heathen Philosophers so many goodly instructions as they haue
left vs, concerning the nature and immortalitie of the soule.
It is true that the reason of man cannot of it selfe contemplate the
soule in her first and perfect nature, in which it was created: but it doth
consider of it as it is at this present, and yet as though it were verie
sound. Whereupon the Philosophers greatly magnifie the nobilitie
and excellencie thereof. Therefore when they are to consider of those
points vpon which they ground the powers and vertues of the soule,
for the first they take the vegetatiue vertue, which it hath common
not onely with the beasts,Three faculties vnder the vegetatiue vertue. but also with the plants: and this comprehendeth
three other faculties vnderneath it, namely the vertue of nourishing,
secondly of encreasing, and lastly of procreation, as it hath bene
already declared vnto vs. This vertue with the rest that are comprehended
vnderneath it, is the basest, most earthy and vilest of them all: besides
that it followeth the sensitiue vertue, which may be referred aswell
to the internall as to the externall senses.Two parts of the sensitiue vertue So that we may diuide
it into two parts, and more properly call that the sensitiue vertue, which
the soule hath in taking knowledge of corporall things, by corporall
senses, and by their vse in the body. The other part that belongeth to
the internall senses may more specially be called, the cogitatiue vertue.
And because these two powers serue to encrease knowledge and vnderstanding, they are as it were the fountaine thereof, or rather helps
and instruments.How the Astronomers referre the powers of the soule to the starres. The Astronomers, who referre all to the vertue of
the starres and planets, place the influence of the vegetatiue power
with the parts of it, vnder the Moone, of which the soule (as they say)
receiueth it: the other two parts of the sensitiue power, of which I
spake euen now, they place vnder the Sunne, as they doe the fourth,
which is the will and vertue of desiring, vnder the planet Venus. The
fift, which is called the angry faculty, giuing heart and courage to a man,
and moouing him to wrath, vnder the planet Mars. Then for the sixt,
they place the vertue that giueth motion from one place to another.
For the seuenth, that which the Physicians call the vitall vertue, and
others the spirituall, because it conteineth vnder it the power of respiration,
and both these are attributed to the same, because it is a propertie
of the sensitiue power to moue and breathe. Now all these powers
of the soule are common to man with beasts, or at least wise there is no
great difference. But these which now follow are proper and peculiar
vnto him,Powers proper to the ^easonable soule. namely the reasonable power, of which the other that ensue
are kindes, of which number the Philosophers or Astronomers place
in the first ranke the vertue of speech,Of speech. where by the soule expresseth her
conceits,Of speech. thoughts and affections. And although all me^ vse northe same

words to vtter their thoughts ech to other, by reason of the diuersitie of
languages that is amongst them, notwithstanding as the things which
they vnderstand and conceiue, and by which they are moued to speake,
are al of one substance and nature amongst all nations, so all the conceits
and affections of men, which are signified by their language, are
alike in their soule and minde, where they are written and ingrauen.
This vertue they attribute to Mercurie, as the other that followeth to
Iupiter, which they call the practicke and actiue vertue, whereby a man
that hath his will at libertie, doeth by counsaile and setled reason, exercise
and bring to passe through arte, prudence, and wisedome, those
things of which he hath sure knowledge.Of the speculatiue and actiue vertue. For it is not enough to haue
the contemplatiue vertue, vnles the actiue also be ioined vnto it to declare
it by effect.
Thus you see where they place free will, which comprehendeth
vnder it, first election, then action, which is the practicke that followeth
it. And because the practicke dependeth of the theoricke, which is
the speculatiue and contemplatiue vertue, and goeth before the actiue
vertue, therfore they ioyne this to that, and so referre it to the planet of
Saturne which is melancholicke. And this is that vertue of the soule,
whereby man hath vnderstanding, knowlege, and wisedome: and it comprehendeth
the seats of such things as the minde is able to vnderstand
and comprehend, as also those generall rules and principles, which it
must afterward bring into vse and practise. For this cause this speculatiue
vertue must of necessitie go before the actiue, because the practike
is not very certain and sure without the theorike.Of the politike vertue. Afterward followeth
that which they call the pollitike vertue, which hath for her subiect al
morall philosophie. They vnderstand by this vertue of the soule, that
whereby a prudent, wise, and well experienced man, moderateth his
naughty desires, and pernicious affections through his vertue, and wherby
he declareth by practise and setled reason, that vertue and goodnes,
which is requisit in the publike societie of men, and that not onely in his
priuate behauiour,The kindes of it. but also in his publike affaires. The principall vertues
contained vnderneath it, are prudence, iustice, fortitude and temperance,
which are commonly called cardinall vertues, because they are
chief, and containe vnder euery one of them many other vertues, which
depend of them, as branches do of their stock. He is accompted a ciuil
good man and a iust, that hath this vertue which is diuided into sundry
kinds, according to the diuersity of estats that are in common societie.
For it is sufficient for a priuate person to haue so much of it, as whereby
he may know how to guide himselfe honestly according to his estate.
If he be a father of a family, he hath need of that prude^ce and skil which

is necessary for the gouernment of his house. If he haue any publicke
charge concerning ciuil affaires, it is needful for him to haue that art and
skil, and those vertues without which he cannot wel execute his office,
according to that place and degree in which he is set. For if he occupieth
the roume of a Lawier or Counsailour at the Law, he must haue skill
and knowledge of the lawes. If he be a captaine or souldier, he must be
skilful in military discipline. If he be a iudge and magistrate, it is necessary
likewise, that he vnderstand what belongeth to his office. If he be a diuine
and pastour in the Church, the science of Diuinitie, which is the
knowlege of the holy scriptures, is necessary for him, not only so much
as is requisit for his owne saluation, but also that he may be able to instruct
others, and to direct them in those things that appertaine to religion.Of the heroicall vertue.
Besides, to al these vertues they adde the heroicall vertue, which
is no vulgar and common vertue, but very rare and excellent, and if I may
so speak, rather diuine then humane. In regard wherof they that were
endued with this vertue among the Heathen, were placed in a ranke and
degree by themselues betweene God and men, and were accompted
and taken for demy-gods. And these are those vertues, which the philosophers
by experience find to be in the reasonable soule, which are no
fained or imaginatiue, but true vertues: neither are they found in the
soule of beasts, as those are of which we spake in the first place. Wherfore
albeit man hath the vertue of desiring common with beasts, yet he
hath reason to moderate his desires, which is wanting in beasts. Nowe
al this doctrine touching the vertues of the soule, accordeth well with
the doctrine of Christianitie, so farre foorth as the soule agreeth with
that nature in which it was first created of God. But that which the Astrologians
affirme of the influences and infusion of vertues into the
soule by the planets, as we heard, I take it to be a bird of their owne
braine, whereby they attribute to the creatures that which belongeth
to the Creator only.Against the astronomicall influence of vertues. For although he vseth the creatures according to
that order, which he hath placed in them, neuertheles when the question
is of the reasonable soule, wee must ascend vp higher then the
heauens, vnto which it can not be subiect as the body is, seeing it is
of a farre more excellent nature. For how should the heauens, starres,
and planets giue that to the soule, which themselues haue not? I verely
beleeue that when God created the soule of the first man, and placed it
in his body that was before created of the nature and substance of the
corruptible eleme^ts, he took not those vertues, with which he indued
and adorned it, either from the heauens or from the planets. And seeing
he created al mankind in this first ma^ after his image, which he imprinted
in his soule, no doubt but that which yet remaineth in mans soule,

proceedeth from the same fountaine: as also what euil soeuer is befallen
since, whereby this image abode not perfect, it proceedeth from
sinne, and from the nature of man corrupted by sinne, and not from
the heauens or planets. And as the Astrologians easily beleeue whatsoeuer
they haue imagined touching this point, and woulde haue the
will of man subiect to their influences and constellations: so the other
Philosophers abuse themselues greatly,Philosophers esteeme too highly of mans nature. in magnifying the vertues of
the soule more then they ought to be esteemed in this corrupt estate of
mans nature, not iudging the corruption to be so great as it is. Heereof
it is also that they faile in regarde of vertue, which they attribute altogether
to the libertie of man, as if he coulde by his owne vertue moderate
his affections, and make himselfe iust and righteous. Which fault
proceedeth from hence, in that they content themselues with a iustice
that seemeth so to be before men, and put no difference betweene diuine
and humane iustice: that is, betwixt that which is able to stand and
approoue it selfe in the iudgement of God, and that which men approoue.What iustice God approoueth.
For there is no iustice able to satisfie the iudgement of God,
but that of Iesus Christ, which it pleaseth him to impute vnto his children,
and in regard thereof to accompt them iust. But let vs returne to
our matter.
We haue further to note, that besides the forenamed vertues, the
Platonists attribute to the soule foure others,Foure contemplatiue vertues according to the Platonists. which they cal contemplatiue
vertues, as those that belong to the contemplatiue life, vnto which
they are referred by them. The first is named the purgation or second
death of the soule: for the first death of it say they, is her descending into
the body of man, into which it is throwen as it were into a prison, and
in a maner buried in vices. Therefore they say that the soule standeth
in neede of this second death, whereby she being purged from her vices
is as it were dead vnto them, that shee may liue vnto vertue. The
second kind of these vertues is called pure or purified, because the soule
being purged from all her euill affections, exerciseth good works by
the same. The third is called by them an exemplarie or patterne-vertue
in the minde of God: whereby they meane, that as God conceiueth
and knoweth the Idaeas, kindes and images of all sensible and intelligible
things, so he sendeth downe from heauen this vertue into the
soule of man, who is thereby purged and purified as we haue alreadie
heard. And for the last they adde a fourth vertue, which they account
greatest and chiefest aboue the other, and therefore they call it Diuine,
because it bringeth to the soule a vertue to doe more then humane
workes, euen such as we call miraculous works. Which foure kindes
of vertues appeare euidently to haue beene drawen by them from

christian doctrine, but yet disguised after their fashion. As touching
the first, it agreeth to that which the worde of God teacheth vs of
regeneration,Howe those agree in some sort to foure christian vertues. and mortification of the flesh, whereby wee die to sinne
and to the deuill, that we may liue to righteousnesse and to God. The
second agreeth to good woorkes proceeding of faith, which being
done in the same purifie the heart, and to christian holinesse, which
accompanieth and followeth iustification by faith. The third agreeth
to giftes and graces inspited by the holy Ghost, and to the infusion of
them into the soules of Gods true seruants: and the fourth agreeth to
the giftes of prophecie and to that vertue of working miracles, which
hath beene heeretofore in the holie Prophets, Apostles, and Disciples
of Iesus Christ. But to conclude this whole point, wee are to
obserue this, that what praise soeuer may bee giuen to the Platonicall
Diuinitie, yet it is in no respect to bee compared with Christian Philosophie:
because this is pure, and true, and endited by the Spirite
of GOD, but the other impure, disguised, and counterfaited by
men, who haue mingled with their Philosophie, many things which
they coulde eyther heare or learne out of the holie Scripture.
Moreouer, as concerning the whole doctrine of the Philosophers
touching the nature and vertues of the soule, we may truely say, that
of it selfe it reacheth higher, then those politicke vertues of which we
made mention euen now. For when a ciuil, good, and wise man hath
attained to that politicke vertue and to the highest degree thereof, he
is able to goe no farther, except hee be holpen elsewhere, euen by
the illumination of the holy Spirite. And indeede all those other vertues
of the soule propounded by the Platonists, are but dreames and
opinions in the ayre, by which the Spirite of errour laboureth to disguise
the doctrine of the holie Scriptures, which leadeth vs to those
true supernaturall vertues, which the soule receiueth by the inspiration
and infusion of the giftes and graces of the holie Spirite, who is
the true Doctour, of whom wee must learne this Philosophie, which
is not naturall, but supernaturall. Nowe then being instructed and
guided by him, hauing discoursed of the creation and nature of the
soule, let vs enter into this goodly field of the immortalitie thereof,
in which we knowe there are many ranged battailes of enemies, who
waite to enter into the combat with vs. It belongeth therfore to thee,
ACHITOB, to beginne the skirmish.



How men can haue no certaine resolution of th'immortalitie of the soule,
but by the Word of God: of the peruersenesse of Epicures and Atheists
in this matter: Of the chiefe causes that hinder men from beleeuing
the immortalitie of the soule, and of their blockishnes and euill iudgement
therein: How wee must seeke for the Image of God, after which
man was created in his soule. Chap. 88.
ACHITOB. We are now fallen into a time, which discouereth vnto
vs not onely false religions, but euen an Atheisme, that is farre
worse. For they that are altogether without Religion are farther dist^^t
from true pietie, then they that follow a false religion: and yet at
this day there are as many or moe that declare themselues to be Atheists
and Epicures, as there bee of such as are taken for good Christians.
And if in outward shew they pretend some exercise of Religion,
it is but to couer themselues with the vaile thereof, to the ende they
might not bee esteemed and accompted for such as they are in trueth.
But in their heart and with their companions they doe but make a
mocke of the holy Scriptures, and of al those testimonies that we haue
in them of another life besides this, of Heauen of hell, of the blessed immortalitie
and eternall death of the soule. Now it is an easie matter to
conuince such felowes of error and lies.
But this is a thing worthy to be bewayled in all the affaires, opinions
and counsailes of men, that when any question ariseth of the
trueth and of that which is Good, no proofes or testimonies, how rich
or of howe great authoritie soeuer they bee, seeme sufficient to vs and
worthy to bee beleeued. And yet if the question be of any euil, falsehood
and lyes, no testimony, how slender and bad soeuer it be, but satisfieth
vs very well.Why men encline to lies rather then to the trueth. For by reason that we are euil and ignorant, ful of
blindnesse and darkenesse by nature, we are alwayes the readier, to follow
that which is like our selues, namely wickednes and falsehood,
lies and error: as we see it by experience in Atheists and Epicures, and
in all infidels and scorners of God and of his Word. For there are many skilfull in Artes and humane learning, and in naturall Philosophie,
who reprehend and condemne Epicurus, Lucretius, Pliny and other
such like Philosophers, Epicures and Atheists, in that which they haue
taught and written of naturall things belonging to this life, and call
them ignorant men and voyd of experience. But in that which they
haue spoken against the prouidence of God, the immortalitie of
soules, and all Religion, abolishing them wholie by their false doctrines
and by Philosophie, they imbrace and praise them, for the skilfullest
and most excellent Philosophers that euer were, as hauing deliuered

men from the greatest torments that could seaze vpon them,The diuelish infection of Atheisme.
and brought vnto them the greatest good that could befall them, by
taking from them all feare of God, of hell, and of all punishment after
this life, and all opinion and hope of Paradice and of a better life
after this. In a worde, they extoll them, as if they onely had found
the beane in the cake, as wee vse to say, and as if they onely deserued
to be the Kings of beanes among their fellowes. Forasmuch then
as we are entred into this matter of the immortalitie of the soule, and
seeing at this day so many Atheists herein followe the opinions of
these Epicurian Philosophers before named, I say not onely more
then they doe all the best Philosophers, but also then the authoritie of
the holy Scriptures, and the testimonie of God in them: we cannot
gather too many arguments, whereby at leastwise to cause them to
ponder the matter more diligently, if they will not be confounded
wholy by naturall reasons, seeing they make so small reckoning of
that celestial and heauenly doctrine. It is true that it will bee a very
hard and difficult matter to perswade such in this point, as giue no
more credite to this testimonie of the word of God, then they doe to
all humaine and naturall reasons that can bee alleadged vnto them.
For although the arguments of those Philosophers that maintaine the
immortalitie of the soule, are strong and waightie, yet they can neuer
wholy and fully assure men of their immortalitie, except this testimonie
of God take all doubting from them.Reasons to proue the immortalitie of the soule. But that argument of
all others is most forcible, which hee hath giuen vnto vs in the resurrection
of Iesus Christ, whereby his soule was vnited againe vnto his
body, and so wrought those heauenly workes which followed his resurrection
and ascention into heauen: and namely by the gift of the
holy Ghost, which hee sent vnto his Apostles, and by the effects
thereof, which according to the promise of Iesus Christ appeared so
great and manifest throughout the whole world, and that in so short
a time, that no prudence, wisdome, skill, eloquence, authoritie, power
or force of man, was able to hinder that vertue, or the course of the
Gospel. But because Epicures and Atheists accompt these things
for fables, and are of so peruerse and monstrous a nature, that they had
rather sight against nature it selfe, and cleane to the worst opinions
most vnworthy the nature of man, then to follow the reasons of
the best Philosophers grounded vpon a more sure foundation, let vs
at leastwise put them to some further trouble by vrging them to be fully
resolued in that opinion, which is contrary to the immortality of the
soule. For certainly I doubt not but they wilbe alwaies without resolution.
And in deed fro^ whe^ce should they fetch this resolution of theirs,

seeing they haue no certaine ground of their false opinion, and seeing
there are so many and so forcible reasons to the contrary?Why men beleeue not the immortalitie of the soule. But wee
must note, that the principall cause that keepeth men from beleeuing
the immortalitie of the soule is, partly their ignorance, partly their malice,
and peruersenesse. For some there are so blockish, that they measure
all things according to the knowledge and reach of their bodilie
senses: so that they set downe with themselues to beleeue nothing,
but that which they are able to knowe and perceiue by them. Others
there are who besides this are so wicked and peruerse, that they would
not onely haue their soules not to bee immortall, but wish also that
there were no God, to the ende they might haue no Iudge. For by
reason they are so wholly addicted to the worlde, and to their carnall
pleasures, they would haue no other God, or other life after this:
but wish that all life might end with their delights, and the soule with
the body, that so they might haue no accompt to make to any Iudge.
Therefore they are of that number, whereof mention is made in the
Booke of Wisedome,Wisd. 2. 1, 2, etc. who make these discourses, saying, Our life
is short and tedious,The sayings of Epicures. and in the death of a man there is no recouery, neither
was any knowen that hath returned from the graue. For we were borne at
all aduenture, and wee shall be heereafter as though wee had neuer beene:
for the breath is a smoke in the nosethrilles, and the woordes as a sparke raised
out of our hearts. Which being extinguished, the body is turned into ashes,
and the spirite vanisheth as the soft ayre. Our life shall passe away as
the trace of a cloude, and come to naught as the mist that is driuen away
with the beames of the Sunne, and cast downe with the heate thereof. Our
name also shall be forgotten in time, and no man shall haue our woorkes in
remembrance. For our time is as a shadowe that passeth away, and after
our ende there is no returning: for it is fast sealed so that no man commeth
againe. Come therefore, and let vs enioy the pleasures that are present, and let
vs cheerfully vse the creatures as in youth. Let vs fill our selues with costly
wine and ointments, and let not the floure of life passe by vs. I omit other speeches
of a voluptuous, wicked, and vniust life, which they purpose to lead,
exercising al iniustice, violence, and cruelty, without al regard had to any
right or iustice, either to poore or rich, yong or old, but chiefly against
the seruants of God, who approue not their kind of life, but reproue and
condemne it.Verse. 21, etc. Therefore it is said after al the discourse, that they imagined
such things and went astray. For their owne wickednes blinded them. They
do not vnderstand the mysteries of God, neither hope for the reward of righteousnes, nor can discerne the honor of the soules that are faultlesse. For God
created man without corruption, and made him after the image of his owne
likenesse. Neuerthelesse, through enuy of the deuill came death into the

world:Wisd. 3. 1. and they that hold of his side, proue it, But the soules of the righteous
are in the hands of God, and no torment shall touch them. In the sight of the
vnwise they appeared to die, and their end was thought grieuous, and their
departing from vs, destruction: but they are in peace. Wee see then that
these men go no farther then they can see with their bodily senses:The corrupt opinion of Atheists and Epicures. and
because they see that man liueth by breathing and cannot liue without,
and that hee dyeth when his breath faileth, they thinke that the
soule of man is but a litle winde and breath, and so is scattered and vanisheth
away as it were winde and breath, or as a cloude in the ayre.
The same iudgement they are of in regard of the blood, because life
leaueth the body with the blood, as if it had no other soule but the
blood, or breath. And forasmuch as the eye discerneth no difference
betweene men and beasts in death, they iudge also that there is no difference
betweene their soules. But if they be resolued to giue credit to
nothing but to their corporall senses, and in death consider only what
difference there is betweene men and beasts, they wil not beleeue that
either beasts or men haue any soule at all that giueth them life, because
they see nothing but the body onely. And then by the like reason we
must conclude, that not onely the whole man is no other thing but
this body which we see, but also that there is nothing in all the world,
but that which may bee seene by the eyes and perceiued by the other
senses, and so all that which we haue not seene and knowen by them
shalbe nothing.Atheists may wel be compared to beasts. Which being so, men shal differ nothing from beasts,
as indeed we can say no better of these men. For beastes thinke of nothing
but that which they beholde and perceiue by their senses, and
goe no further: which is so farre from all science and discipline, and
from all iudgement of man, as nothing can be more. Therefore they
that beleeue nothing but their corporall senses, deserue to be compared
not onely to little children, or to fooles, who when they see pictures,
or their face in a glasse, suppose they are liuing men, because
they goe no farther then they see, but euen to the brute beastes, who
haue lesse sense and vnderstanding then children. It is woonderfull to
consider howe men take such great pleasure and paines to become brutish.
For if they doe but see a smoke come out of a place, they will
iudge that there is some fire within, although they behold it not: and if
they smell any ill sauour, their nose will tell them that there is some
place infected, or some carion lying not farre off, albeit they see it not.
What is the cause then, that when by their senses they perceiue somewhat
more in men then in beastes,Reasons to shew the soule of men to differ from that of beasts. they are not induced thereby to
thinke, that of necessitie there must be some what within them, which
causeth them to differ much from beasts? Which is not by reason of

the bodie, but of the soule, that is not seene but onely by her actions,
workes and effects. Whereupon it followeth, that if their actions differ
from the actions of that soule whereby beastes liue, the cause also
from which they proceed, must needes differ: and so consequently,
that there is great difference betwixt the soule of men and the soule of
beastes. For let them consider onely the diuersitie of artes, which
man exerciseth with his hands, and the varietie of so many wittie and
woonderfull workes as are wrought by him, which cannot proceede
but from a great spirite, and from a passing excellent nature, the like
whereof is not to bee seene in beastes, or in anie thing they can doe.
Besides, doe they not see how the spirite of man discourseth throughout
all nature? what reason is in him, and howe his speech followeth
reason? which are such things as haue a certaine vertue, and
the image of a diuine spirite shining in them. Wherefore, albeeit
wee shoulde make man wholly like to a beast, by reason of his bodie,
both in regarde of his birth and death, yet wee must needes
confesse, that hee is of a farre more excellent nature in respect of
that great and manifest difference, which wee see is in his soule. If
then the soule of man bee mortall as well as that of beastes, to
what purpose serue those graces which it hath aboue the other?
and from what fountaine shall wee say they flowe in it, and to what
ende were they giuen vnto it? But for this time I will leaue these
Atheists, hoping that to morowe wee will not leaue any one naturall
reason able to vrge them in their demnable opinion, which shal
not bee laide out at large. And I demaund of them that haue anie
taste of the holy Scriptures, and yet seeme to doubt of the immortalitie
of the soule, or at leastwise are not fully resolued therein, howe
man is said to be created after the image of God, if he shall be altogether
dissolued and brought to nothing? and where shall we then seeke
for this image in him? It is certaine, that this is not in the body, seeing
that God is a spirituall nature and substance, and not corporall. Then
it followeth,The image of God is to bee sought in the soule. that this image is to be sought for in the soule, and not in
the body. And if it be in the soule, we must necessarily conclude, that it
differeth very much from the soule of beasts. For indeed if they were
both one, why should it rather be written of man then of beastes, that
he was created after the image of God? And if man bee the image of
God, especially in regard of the soule, it must needs be then of a diuine
and immortall nature: otherwise there would be no good agreement
betweene the image and the thing of which it is an image. Therefore
a corporall thing cannot bee the true image of a spirituall thing, if
there bee no resemblaunce or agreement of nature betwixt them.

For although a corporall image shoulde bee of another matter then
the thing is of, which it doeth represent, neuerthelesse, there is alwayes
some resemblaunce when both the one and the other is of a
corporall matter, and when the image hath some agreement in
forme with the thing represented. Now if any bee desirous to seeke
for the image of God in a corporall thing, wee shall finde as many of
them as there are creatures in the whole world. And yet it is not said of
any creature, no not of ye sunne it selfe, nor of the moone or starres, t^at
haue no soule, nor yet of the liuing creatures themselues, which are
endued with soule and life, that God saide in their creation, Let vs
make them after our image and likenesse, neither that hee created them
after his image, as it is writte^ of man. If then there be no immortalitie
of the soule of man, where shal we find the image of the immortalitie
of God who is immortal? And if there be no immortality in man, but yt
his soule is, ether the temperament of his bodie, or his vitall spirite, as
in beasts, God shall haue no image that shall more neerely resemble
him in man then in beasts: neither shal he haue any spiritual image
agreeable to his nature, in any creature vnder heauen.
Nowe if any reply and say, that this image is to bee fought for,
not in the immortalitie of the soule, but onely in reason and in the other
vertues, where with it is adorned aboue the soule of beasts, I say,
that these things are in such sort linked together, that they cannot bee
separated.An answere to an obiection. Wherefore hee that taketh away the one, taketh away the
other: because the soule of man shoulde not haue that which it hath
more then the soule of beasts hath, if it were not of another nature the^
theirs is. And we know well, that whatsoeuer it hath more, is not like
to any creature vnder the heauens: and that it cannot agree but to
God, or to natures that haue some participation with the diuine nature,
which cannot be mortall, but immortall. So that when wee see
so many signes and tokens, which testifie vnto vs, that man hath a celestiall
and diuine birth, it followeth that hee hath in himselfe some
greater thing, that is more noble and excellent, then can be seene, or
touched with hands. It is true, that they who stay onely in the corporal
senses, as we haue saide, shall neuer pearce to the contemplation of
these things: but they delight rather, for their confirmation in that
beastly opinion, to heare the common bye-worde vsed amongst the
vulgar sort, that no man knoweth what becommeth of the soules of
men after the death of their bodies, nor into what countrey they goe:
because no body as yet euer brought any newes from thence, and
therefore no marueile if no man either doe or can knowe what is
done there. Which speeches albeeit they be very friuolous, yet are

they heard many times from them that thinke themselues to be none
of the meanest. Therefore it will not be peraduenture without profite,
if we answere them more at large to morow, going forward with our
reasons and arguments of the soules immortalitie against the Atheists:
of which matter, ASER, thou shalt begin to speake.

The end of the eleuenth dayes worke.


THE TVVELFTH
dayes worke.

Of those who desire the returne of Soules departed, to testifie their immortalitie:
what witnes haue beene sent vs of God out of another worlde to
resolue vs therein. Chap. 89.
ASER, We saide yesterstay, that they who stay onely
in their corporall senses, as brute beastes doe, propound
commonly against the immortality of soules,
that which is vsually spoken of the common people,
namely, that it is not known what becomes of mens
soules after the death of the bodie, or to what countrey
they goe, because none euer returned from thence to bring anie
newes.A reason of Atheists confuted by a similitude. Wherefore (say they) no bodie can tell what is done there, neither
can any thing be knowen. Nowe before wee make answere to
so friuolous and false an argument, I would gladly demaund of them,
whether there were nothing at all of those new-found Ilands, (which
were lately found in our time) before they were discouered by them
who not onely were neuer there, but did not so much as once heare
of them before. For no body went thither from hence, neither did any
come hither from thence: so that there was no more intelligence
betweene them and vs, then betweene the liuing and the dead, or betweene
them that are altogether of another world: therefore also their
countrey is called the New world. Nowe then shall it be thought, that
this people were not at all, because they were not knowne of vs, not
their manners and kinde of life? And yet now the time sheweth euidently,
that notwithstanding any distance of place that hath beene
betweene them and vs, there were meanes sufficient to communicate
and trafficke together, and those more easie then any is betweene the
soules alreadie departed out of their bodies, and vs who yet remaine in

the world with our bodies. For concerning the distance and difficultie
of the places, who doubteth but that it is farre greater betweene heauen
and earth, Paradise and Hell? Therefore also Abraham speaking
of the place and estate of the elect and reprobate in another life,Luke 16. 26. saith
to the rich man, There is a great gulfe set betweene you and vs, so that they
which would goe from hence to you, cannot: neither can they come from
thence to vs. And this we may say in like manner of our selues, and of
those that are already departed into another life, in regard of their returne
vnto the liuing. For it is ordained, that they shall not returne againe
into the worlde, as also that they shall depart hence but once.
And they that goe from hence, doe it not with soule and body ioyned
together: for it is not a voyage like to those which wee make in this
world, when we goe from one countrey to another. Now as the Lord
hath determined how long the soules shall abide in their bodies in this
life, so hee hath ordained and set the time in which they ought to depart
and the place where they are to be receiued, according to the estate
of euery one, euen vntill they returne into their bodies at the resurrection.
If they be soules of the reprobate, they are deteined in Hel
in eternall fire, where there is weeping and gnashing of teeth: if
they be the soules of Gods elect, they shine as the sunne in the kingdome
of heauen, in a life accompanied with perpetual ioy and happinesse.
But wee must vrge them better that require testimonie for the
immortalitie of soules by their returne into this world, or of some that
haue come from another world. For it is an easie matter for vs to bring
them as credible witnesses as any can bee, to tell them most certaine
newes, if they will beleeue them, according as they deserue it. And for
the first, haue wee not Iesus Christ, who first came downe from heauen
and became man, to bring vs newes, and to declare the same vnto
vs in his owne person, not onely before his death, but also after his
resurrection? Besides, how many other witnesses haue we, that haue
testified most certainly of the same?marke 16. 14. Math. 28. 9. luke 24. 36. iohn 20. 19, 20* act. 1. 2, 3, 10. 1. Cor. 15 6. who saw with their eyes and touched
with their hands, euen to the number of moe then fiue hundred,
according as Saint Paul testifieth? Moreouer, they that were raised as
wel by him as by Elias and Elizeus, and by the Apostles and disciples,
may they not serue vs also for good withnesse to assure vs, not onely
that soules are immortall, but also that their bodies shall rise againe,
and that God is of sufficient vertue and power to doe it as he hath promised?
I omit here the testimonie which the Angels haue giuen both
of the resurrection and ascension of Iesus Christ: besides that of the
holy spirite, which is the chiefest of all, with signes and giftes wherewith
he came accompanied, and those woorkes and effectes that followed

them. Wherefore seeing wee haue for this point the worde of
God that is most certaine and cleere, which teacheth vs what we ought
to beleeue and hold, let vs rest our selues in the testimonie thereof, and
not desire to make further inquiry.Exod. 3. 6. mat. 22. 32, 33. mar. 12. 26. luk. 20. 37, 38. For it is he that said to Moses, I am
the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Iacob. Whereupon Iesus Christ
concludeth, that Abraham, Isaac and Iacob doe liue yet after their
death, seeing God is the God of the liuing and not of the dead, that is
to say, of them that are yet in being, and not of them that are nothing
at all. For otherwise, if all men should so perish by death, that nothing
of them should remaine in life, at leastwise in regard of the soule, then
should he be the God of nothing. And although it seemeth that Iesus
Christ alleaged this place against the Sadduces, not onely to proue against
them by the doctrine of Moses, the immortality of soules, but
also the resurrection of bodies, we may well gather, that if it be fitte to
proue that bodies arise, it is much more strong to assure vs of ye immortality
of soules. For when the Lord spake these words, Abraham, Isaac
and Iacob were not aliue in regarde of their bodies, but onely of their
soules. And yet Iesus Christ alleaged it to confirme also therby the resurrection
of the dead, although at the first sight it may seem not to be
very fit and firm to proue that so much as the immortality of soules. But
if it be narrowly looked into,The resurrection of the dead proued. his argume^t shalbe found to be very well
deduced and grounded vpon inuincible reason. For Iesus Christ had respect
to ye promise which God made to those holy Patriarkes of whom
he spake, and which was not made only to their soule, but to the whole
man together compounded of body and soule. Wherfore al they to who^
it was made, and to whom it appertaineth, should not haue ye whole effect
of it, nor the ful fruition of that which it co^taineth, if they were not
whole inheriters therof both in body and soule. For if it were otherwise,
the promise should be accomplished but in one part of man, and not in
the whole man. Wherupon it followeth, that seeing the promise is not
of a te^poral benefit, but of an eternal, therefore ye whole man that must
enioy the same, must of necessitie liue an euerlasting life beeing of the
same nature that the benefit is of, which he must inherit. Wherefore seeing
the course of mans life is broke^ off by death in regard of the body,
the body must necessarily rise again to liue again wt his soule in a better
and longer life, to the end yt the whole man may possesse yt inheritance,
which is promised him of God: or els ye promise made by God to his seruants
is altogether vain, or ye testimony which the holy scripture beareth
is wholly false, and so also the scripture that propoundeth the same
vnto vs. But none may once think either of these two last points, without
great horror of blasphemy contained in the^. So that the first point

concludeth very strongly, according to that grou^d which it hath most
certaine in the word of God. Whereunto may be added further, that
seeing the soule of man is created, not to liue alwaies without a body,
as the Angels do, nor yet to wander from body to body, but to be knit
and ioyned to that body, which is assigned to it of God, it must needs
be, that being part therof, as of her lodging, she should once againe returne
thither. Besides, seeing the body hath serued the soule, either in
obeying God,2. Thess. 1. 6, 7. or in disobeying of his wil, the nature of Gods iusticerequireth,
that it should be rewarded also with the soule, according to
the qualitie of those workes whereof it hath bin an instrument. Therefore
according to that which we haue discoursed of this matter, the resurrection
of the body doth so depend of th'immortality of soules, that
it foloweth necessarily vpo^ this: so that if we haue assurance of the one,
we ought to haue it of the other, seeing both of them are certainely
grounded vpo^ the iustice of God, which ca^not be iust vnlesse he iudge
men both in body and soule according to his word, and according as euery
one liueth. But seeing the matter of th'immortality of soules, and that
of the resurrection of bodies are sundry questions, and that wee are to
handle but one of them, we must returne to our first point of the soule
touching th'immortality thereof, which is easily beleeued of al that approue
of the doctrine of holy Scriptures, and that giue credit to ye word
of God. For they are throughly resolued therof. Yea we may know by
the writings of al antiquity, that the common opinion of all people and
nations of what religion soeuer they haue bin, hath bin this, that mens
soules were immortal. Wherfore in regard of this point, we are to fight
only against Epicures and Atheists. And because they wil not beleeue the
word of God, but deride it as tales made vpo^ pleasure: I am of opinion
that now we are to search chiefly for those testimonies, which God
hath giuen vs in nature touching th'immortality of the soule: euen the
actions and effects therof, by meanes of which we come to the knowledge
of hidden and secret causes, from whence they proceed. Therefore
consider Amana, what you mind to speake vnto vs of this subiect.


Of naturall reasons, whereby the immortalitie of soules may be proued against
Epicures and Atheists: and first of the argument taken fro^ the
facultie of knowledge which the soule hath, and from that knowledge of
eternitie which is in it: how it appeareth, that it is not begotte^ of this corruptible
nature, because it ascendeth vp vnto God: and how by a special
benefit of God, it is daily created, and not by the vertue of nature. Cha. 90.
AMANA. Seeing Epicures and Atheists giue credit to natural Philosophy
in things whose causes it proueth by their effects, they haue

no reason to refuse it in the consideration of the nature of mens soules.
Now it is verie certaine, that if we will take this course, besides the testimonies
of God in his word touching the immortalitie of the soule,
which way soeuer we turne our eyes, whether aboue vs or beneath vs,
on the right hand, or on the left, we shall finde euery where arguments
and reasons concluding the same. For we haue nature, and the necessitie
of causes, proportion and similitude, life, the excellent dignitie of
man, the goodnes of God, and the profit of mankind proceeding from
his bountifulnesse, which with one common consent, and as it were,
all with one voyce teach vs, and crie out that the soule cannot bee
mortall.
First then we obserue,How we know the hidden things in nature. that the true and naturall essences of all things
are not knowne of vs by themselues, but continue hidde in the secret
closets of euery one of them, vnto which our minde being burthened
with this masse of the body, and ouerwhelmed with the darkenesse of
this life, is not able to reach. Therefore we must enquire by the accidents
adhering vnto them, and principally by their actions, whereby
our reason discourseth, and concludeth of euery thing, what it is, and
of what qualitie. For euery thing hath his actions, and workes, according
to it owne substance and nature, and by them declareth and maketh
it selfe knowne: so that if wee consider the actions of the soule,
we shall by them know the nature and immortalitie thereof.An argument taken from the knowledge of the soule to proue it immortall. Let vs
then consider her first and principall action, which is to know, and this
importeth also to vnderstande, to comprehende, and to conceiue.
Whereupon we haue to note, that there is no power of Knowing, that
can attaine to the knowledge of any thing, but it hath some agreement
and proportion with the nature of the same thing: because knowledge
is as it were the image of things, which is imprinted in the soule
as in a glasse. Now it is certaine, that a looking glasse cannot represent
the image and similitude of a spirituall thing, because it selfe is a
corporall thing, which hath no agreement in nature with that which
is spirituall. Likewise it cannot represent any thing belonging to the
other senses, but onely that which concerneth the sight: and therfore
it cannot represent either soundes, smelles, or tastes, because the vse
thereof is onely for the eyes, neither doeth it agree with any of the other
senses, but onely with the sight. And as for our externall senses,
they cannot perceiue those things that haue neither quantitie nor bodily
substance, because they themselues are corporal. Neither yet can
they perceiue things that are absent. And the internall senses, as the
fantasie and the imagination, cannot perceiue spiritual things, as namely,
either God or Angels: but onely the spirite of a man doeth perceiue,

know and comprehend them, which power and facultie no other
creature vnder heauen hath. For if it were otherwise, it could not
in any wise comprehend a thing, that surmounteth it with an infinite
greatnes, and with which it hath no agreement at all. For further confirmation
of that which I say,Eternitie considered diuer^ly. let vs consider of Eternitie, as it is whole
and entire in it selfe: then let vs diuide it into that which was since
the creation of the worlde, and finally into that which followed the
same, and which shall be for euermore. When our spirite entereth
into the consideration of that which was before the creation, our
thought is not able to comprehend it, so that it is ouerwhelmed
with the greatnesse thereof: but wee doe well vnderstand and comprehend
that part of eternitie, which shall followe vs heereafter
throughout infinit ages. Whereby it appeareth, that this first consideration
of it, is too great for our soule, as hauing no proportion therewith,
nor yet agreeing thereunto: but it is otherwise with the soule
in the consideration of that other eternitie, for the fruition whereof
it was created. For the soule is not eternall as God is, as though it
had no more beginning then he had: and therefore it hath no agreement
with him in this respect. The soule then entereth into a bottomlesse
gulfe, when it discourseth of an eternitie, of which it is
not partaker: but it hath agreement with the eternitie of God as angels
haue, in that it is created immortall, to liue an eternall life with
him: which appeareth in that it is able to comprehend the same. Therfore
Saint Iohn in the beginning of his Gospel leadeth vs euen to the
gates of this first eternitie: but forasmuch as it is a gulfe in which we
shall be swallowed vp, if we enter farther into it, hee proceedeth not
forward, but stayeth vs there: and calleth vs presently vnto the means
whereby. God manifested himselfe, telling vs how he did this by his
eternall worde: and first by the creation of the worlde, then by those
other meanes, which hee setteth downe afterwarde: all which our
soule comprehendeth well, and so cannot the soule of beasts do. Wherfore
when we consider God in his essence and nature before ye creation
of the world, and the time that was before that, wee are then ouerwhelmed
therewithall, and see no whit at all into it. But if we enter into the
consideration of the times after the creation of the world, and into those
which shal follow stil after vs vnto all eternity, wee looke into it more
cleerely, and are not so much dazeled therwithall, because our soule is
more capable of this consideration, then of the other, which was before
all creatures.A speciall difference betweene the soule of man and (...) beasts. From hence wee may conclude, that the soules of
beasts and plants that haue not in them this cogitation or apprehension
of eternitie, are produced and taken out of the power and vertue

of that matter, of which they are engendered: but the spirit of man
is more specially bredde in the bodie by God, aboue all the powers of
the matter and nature of the same.A firme proofe of the soules immortalitie. For nothing ariseth higher, or passeth
beyond that thing of which it receiueth essence, and beeing, and
those powers and strength that it hath: for if it did, then should it not
receiue being from thence, but of some other thing before and aboue
that, or else farther off, vnto which it tendeth. We see this in all the
senses both externall and internall, which are common to vs with
beastes. For they know nothing else, beside that which is of this nature
which we see, neither doe they ascend higher: but our spirite not
content with the sight and knowledge of the heauens, starres and Angels
themselues mounteth vp to God, and being come thither can go
no further. What other thing els doeth this signifie, and declare vnto
vs, but that the soules of beasts are engendered of this corruptible and
mortall nature, beyonde which they cannot lift vp themselues, but
that ours are produced of God aboue the power of this nature?A fitte comparison. And
so that may bee saide of our soule, which is spoken of a spring water,
namely, that it ascendeth as much vpwarde as it descendeth downeward,
but can goe no higher. For when a man woulde carie the water
of a spring any whither, and would haue it mount vpwarde, it will
be an easie matter to bring it as high as the spring-head from whence
it floweth: but no higher, except it bee forced by some other meane
then by it owne course and naturall vertue. Notwithstanding it will
easily descend lower. And so fareth it with our spirite. For as it came
from God, so it is able to mount againe to the knowledge of him,
and no higher: but it descendeth a great deale lower. And as for
our senses, they remaine lower then the woorkes of nature, and
pearce not to the depth of them, but are alwayes busied about the
externall face of them. Neither is it to bee doubted, but that Moses
meant to teach vs these things by that which hee rehearseth of the
meanes vsed by God in the creation of man, which differed from that
hee kept in the creation of all other creatures, either liuing or without
life. For we haue heard what deliberation and counsaile he vsed, before
he put hand to the worke:Gen. 1. 26. how he fashioned the body, and how
he placed the soule therein by and by after. Therefore in that the Prophet
describeth the creation of the bodie apart, and then that of the
soule, he giueth vs to vnderstand, that wee must seeke for something
more high and excellent in that of man then in that of beastes, whose
soules were created with their bodies, and of the selfe-same matter
with them. Moreouer, he teacheth vs this very plainly when he saith,
that God created man after his owne image and similitude: which hee

did not say of beasts, as we haue alreadie heard. Therefore there must
needes be in the soule of man some other power and vertue, then that
by which it giueth life to the bodie, and which is common to it with
those of brute beastes. So that as God gaue to this dead bodie taken
out of the earth, a soule that endued it with life, motion, and sense: so
hee imprinted and ingraued his image into this soule, vnto which immortalitie
is annexed.Why man was saide to be a liuing soule. Therefore when Moses sayeth, that man was
made a liuing soule, no doubt but by the name of soule he meaneth
another nature and substance then that of the bodie. And in that he
calleth it liuing, hee declareth plainly, that the bodie hath not of it self
and of it owne nature, that life wherewith it is endued, but from the
power of this soule. And although hee there maketh not any speciall
mention of the other vertues thereof, it is because hee considered
the capacitie of the people with whome he liued, vnto whom he
would frame himselfe, being content to speake openly of that power
of the soule, which appeared best without, and which the externall
senses might most easily know and perceiue by the effects thereof. But I
thinke it will not be vnfit for this matter, if wee returne to yt question,
which before we touched concerning the creation of the soule, namely,
whether, since it was created by God in the first creation of man, it
be still created after the same sort as it were by a new miracle, in them
that are daily borne in the worlde, or whether it bee naturally created,
but yet of God by a certaine order appointed for that ende by
him. Nowe albeeit it bee very requisite, that we should bee sober and
not rash in this matter, for the causes alreadie set downe, notwithstanding
we will here propound the opinion of some learned men, grounded
vpon that order,How God dayly createth soules. which God hath accustomed to obserue in his
workes and in his creatures. For seeing he hath set a law in nature for
all other creatures according to which he createth and produceth them,
and not by any new miracle, it is more likely that he createth soules naturally,
and that he hath ordained a stedfast law for mankind, but differing
from that of beasts, so much as his creation differed from theirs.
For hauing once established an order, he vseth not to change it into a
diuers or contrarie order, but keepeth still the same, except it bee that
sometimes he vseth extraordinarie meanes by way of a miracle. For
although all his woorkes bee great miracles, and chiefely man;
neuerthelesse,What a miracle is. wee call none by that name, but onely those which
he woorketh by supernaturall meanes, not against, but beside the
common order of nature. But that which I say, derogateth nothing
from the nature and immortalitie of mans soule. For although it be placed
in that matter which is alreadie prepared and appropriated for the

fashioning of the body, yet he doeth this aboue the vertue of the matter
and of the worke of nature, by a lawe which he hath established to
that effect. For this cause he doeth not onely giue a soule to them that
are begotten by lawfull marriage, but to those also who are brought
foorth in whoredome, whether it be adultery, incest, or any other such
like. For although that honestie, which is enioyned mankind by God,
be not kept in such a birth and generation, but contrarieth the same,
yet it is not contrary to the lawe of generation ordayned by God: as
that generation is which is by buggerie,Buggery violateth the law of nature. wherein not only the Law of
honesty is violated, but also the law of nature. We will conclude then,
that it is not only true, that our soule is not brought forth by the power
of nature, but by the benefit of God only, but also that it is expedient
and very behoofefull, yea necessary for mankind that it should be true:
and because it is behoofefull and necessary, it is true also without all
question. For God hath omitted nothing that is agreeable to his glory,
and profitable and expedient for mankinde. For seeing the soule is
placed within the bodie, not by the vertue of nature, but properly and
peculiarly by a speciall benefite of God, man oweth the chiefest and
best part of himselfe, not to nature, but to God. Which is the cause why
he should acknowledge him as the onely father of his spirite,God is the onely father of our spirite. and consecrate
the same wholly to him alone: not yeelding any right and interest
therein to any other besides him onely, who is soueraigne, almightie,
and the onely father of spirites. For if the question be of the
body and of all the senses thereof, many may claime an interest therein
vnder God, namely Fathers and mothers, the children themselues, nature,
the kinred, the countrey, friends, kings, Princes and Lords. But the
soule belongeth to none but to God alone, which he willeth and commandeth
should be reserued to him only for our happines, because he
only is the author and creator thereof. If it be so then, that our soule is
not begotten or produced by this nature, which is the handmaide of
God and worker vnder him, but by God alone, it followeth very well,
that nothing in nature can extinguish it, but God onely who is able to
do it if he please. Now it is not likely or credible that God would make
a thing by it selfe, and that after a different manner from other
things, which should haue nothing besides the creation of it, and then
within a while after would destroy it. For if it were otherwise, why
woulde hee obserue another meane in the creation of man, then in
that of beasts? Why would he not rather haue bestowed vpon nature,
the power of the generation and corruption of mans soule, as he hath
done that of other liuing creatures? Wherefore woulde hee seeme
to reserue that thing as proper to himselfe, which hee woulde

make subiect to the law and common condition of other things? Thus
much then for those arguments, which we may take from the knowledge
that God hath giuen to mans soule, and from his constant worke
in the creation of it, to proue the nature and immortalitie therof. Now
we are to consider what arguments we haue to the same purpose, in
that vertue of desire, which is giuen vnto it. These things then we may
learne of thee Aram.


Of the argument for the immortalitie of the soule, that may be taken from
that naturall desire thereof, and of perpetuitie, which is in it: of another
argument to the same purpose: of the desire which men haue to continue
their name and memory for euer: an argument to the same ende
taken from the apprehension and terror which men may haue both of the
death of the body, and also of the soule and spirit. Chap. 91.
ARAM.Three things vnseperable. These three things are so linked and knit together, namely
Gods religion, his diuine prouidence, and the immortalitie of the
soule, that they neither may nor ought to bee seperated in any wise.
For if our soules were not immortall, no rewarde or punishment for
good or bad doings were to be looked for: and then God should not
seeme to haue any care ouer vs, which if he haue not, why should wee
worship him? Our hope should be in vaine, and religion vnprofitable.
But if without the grace and goodnes of God we cannot liue, and if
he wilbe sought vnto of vs by prayer, then religion is very necessary,
and the immortalitie of the soule certaine. And euen as a man cannot
renounce those excellent giftes, which naturally are planted in his
spirit and minde, and in that reason which God hath bestowed vpon
him, but hee must renounce himselfe, and become like to the bruite
beast: so fareth it also with him, when he renounceth his immortalitie.
But seeing we are now in handling the powers of the soule, to shewe
that it dieth not, and seeing wee haue spoken of knowledge, wee will
consider what arguments to the same ende may bee taken from the
vertue of desiring that is naturally in it.
Heretofore we learned, that all knowledge both in man and beast,
is giuen to this ende, that they should desire whatsoeuer they know to
be good, and eschue that which they know to be euil. Concerning
the knowledge of our sences, they conceiue well ynough what it is to
be present, and so do the sences of beastes, of which and of our whole
nature, we may iudge both by our external and internal sences that are
common to vs with them, and so we may discerne of all such like things.
But the appetite or desire of beasts goeth no further then the time present.

For that naturall desire of their owne preseruation which is in
them, proceedeth not fro^ any knowledge which they haue of things,
but from the workemanship of nature, and from that naturall inclination
which they haue thereunto, without any motion of reason or vnderstanding.
Whereupon it followeth, that their desire to preserue themselues,
and their power of procreation proceedeth not from their
knowing vertue, that is the chiefest in them, but from the vegetatiue
vertue, which is the basest and most abiect. But man goeth a great deale
further. For man hath knowledge of perpetuitie and of eternitie, as we
heard in the former speach: and because he knoweth that eternitie is
a good and profitable thing for him,The desire of perpetuitie, an argument of the soules immortalitie. he doth also desire the same. This
desire then is naturall: and if naturall, it followeth also that it is a very
meete and conuenient thing for vs, and so consequently, that it is
not giuen to man without cause and to no purpose. Wee must then
conclude hereupon, that it may be accomplished, and that of necessitie
it must be sometime or other. For if it were otherwise, to what purpose
should this knowledge serue which man hath of so great a benefite,
and which also mooueth him to desire the same, if he could neuer
attaine to the fruition thereof? And why should God teach the
same to men, if he would not make them partakers of it? Were it not
rather to debase, then to aduaunce them aboue beastes, whereas hee
hath created them Lordes, and as it were his last and principall peece
of worke, in his worke of creation? Should it not seeme to be not onely
a vaine thing, but also (if I might so speake) as though God delighted
to torment men, to cause them to desire that thing, of which they
should neuer haue any participation? Were it not better for them, at
leastwise as good, that in this respect hee should haue created them
like to bruite beastes? For so they should liue a great deale more quiet,
and not torment themselues as they doe, after a thing, which is altogether
vnpossible for them to attaine vnto. Nowe wee haue a very
euident signe and testimony in vs,Another desire, which is to continue our memory for euer. of the continuall being of this
desire of enternitie, in that longing which men haue to make their
name eternall as much as may be, and that their memory might remaine
in all ages that shall follow long time after them. And which
is more, this affection is so naturall, and imprinted so deepe into mens
hearts, that euen they who deny the immortality of soules, and who
thinke that euery man doeth wholy vanish away by corporall death,
doe couet notwithstanding the immortality of their name, and to
haue a good report amongest men still after their death. Heereof
wee haue very good proofe in the last will and Testament of Epicurus

himselfe, the Captaine and standard-bearer of all Atheists and
Epicures, who haue receiued their name of him. For hee appointed
therein, that the day of his natiuitie shoulde be yeerely celebrated,
and that at certaine times assigned by him, a banket should bee made
for those of his sect, in remembrance of his name. Whereby wee
see that this dogge himselfe, who made no difference betweene
the death of men and of beastes, and who denied vtterly the immortalitie
of the soule of man, coulde not for all that plucke out of his
owne soule the desire of immortalitie: but doeth what lay in him to
make himselfe immortall after his death, by the perpetuitie of his
name and memorie.Another desire of perpetuitie, appearing in funerals. We may take the like argument from that which
men vsually appoynt at their death, touching their funerals, sepulchres
and tombes. For why is it, that they will haue sumptuous funeralles,
and stately and magnificent tombes? Why haue manie caused
Churches and chappels to bee erected, themselues to bee engrauen,
and their escutchions to be hung vp, where they haue laide
themselues? It is certaine, that if they desired not to make their
name as immortall as they coulde, and their memorie eternall among
men, their death would not bee so ambitious, neither would
they leaue behinde them such markes of their ambition, and of
their desire of immortalitie. And as great men affoorde this testimonie
of their desire, so the common people are not without
some one or other for their part. For a poore Artificer, as a Tayler
or Shoemaker, or some such like, if hee bee able hee will appoynt
to haue a stone layde vpon his graue, in which his name
shall bee ingrauen, and his marke, or some such like thing: to
this ende that the Suruiuors, and they that come after him, should
knowe that hee once liued and was in the worlde, and that hee
woulde still liue, at leastwise in name and memorie. And this
is further confirmed by them, who albeeit they cannot continue
their name and memorie by any good deedes and valiant
actes, yet they striue to make themselues immortall by wicked
and execrable dooings. As among others wee haue the example
of Herostratus, who set on fire the Temple of that great Diana
of Ephesus for no other cause, but onelie that hee might
bee spoken of, and that the memorie of him might remaine and
continue for euer amongest men: as in deede it hath done, notwithstanding
the contrarie endeuour of the Ephesians, who by
a publicke Edict ordayned, that his name shoulde neuer be written
in any place.An obiection. But it may bee obiected vnto mee, that this argument
deriued from the desire of men to continue their name,

to proue the immortalitie of soules thereby, is not very fit, nor of great
force: because this desire is rather found in men that are most foolish,
vaine, carnal, and wicked, then in the wiser sort of men, and such as are
more graue, spirituall, and vertuous. For who couet more this immortalitie
of name and memorie, then they that are most vainglorious and
ambitious, vnto whose ambition death it selfe can bring no end, but it
reuiueth and liueth still therein? We see also, that they who least of all
beleeue the immortalitie of soules and scoffe most at it, are greatliest
affected with this ambition, and labor most to become immortall after
that maner,The answere to it. because they expect no other immortalitie. All this I
confesse is true, yet mine argument continueth still firme. For first we
haue alwayes this testimonie from them, that they know and acknowledge
a certaine immortalitie and perpetuitie, and desire to enioy the
same as much as they may, thinking to continue the same euen after
their death: which knowledge and desire is not to be found in brute
beasts. And whereas the vainest and worst men are more moued with
this foolish desire, then the wisest and most vertuous men are, the reason
thereof is good and euident. For the wisest men and such as are endewed
with most vertue make least accompt of this temporary and
fading immortalitie, which is but as it were a winde that goeth from
mouth to mouth, or is but in paper, parchment, wood, stone, brasse, or
in some such corruptible matter: because they expect a better perpetuitie
that is more certaine, more glorious, and of longer continuance,
of which they are certainely perswaded.Of the true immortalitie. Which perswasion can not
be vaine in them, seeing it is grounded vpon the testimony of Gods
Spirit, which saith, that the iust shalbe had in euerlasting remembra^ce,
not onely before men, but also before God and Angelles. But the other
sort of men busie themselues about an immortalitie, which deserueth
not to be accompted so much as a shadowe and image of true immortalitie:
because the desire thereof is infected and corrupted with
that darkenesse of errour and of ignorance, which sinne hath brought
vpon the minde of man, with those peruerse affections that proceede
from the same, and with their euil educcation and instruction, who are
not taught in the word of God. By means whereof this natural desire of
true immortalitie degenerateth into a foolish desire greedy of fame and
name amo^g men: (euen as whe^ good seed falleth into bad grou^d) but
stil it proceeds from a good beginning and fountaine, if it were not corrupted.
As we see also that it falleth out with the greater part of men in
that natural desire they haue of skil and knowledge, which albeit it be in
them by nature, yet they turne it into a vaine and foolish curiositie,
that endeuoureth to knowe that which is not onely not profitable,

but very hurtfull and dangerous for them, in stead of seeking to know
that which is more profitable and necessary. But besides that which
wee haue already spoken, our affections also tell vs plainely, what the
nature is as well of our spirite, as of our senses both internall and externall:
and what difference there is betweene them. For if the Spirite
entreth into a cogitation of it owne death, the internall senses,
with fancie and imagination are not greatly moued or troubled therewith,
but passe it ouer well enough, as if they had no feeling thereof,
supposing that this corporall life will last a long time:An argument taken from the apprehension of death to prooue the immortalitie of soules. but the spirit is
so confounded and troubled, that it feareth and flieth nothing more
then it. And surely I doubt not, but that they who being pressed and
oppressed with great euilles, desire death through a blind fury of their
mind, and wish to be wholly extinguished, woulde change their purpose
and abhorre that kinde of death, and thinke it to be a greater mischiefe
then all those which they suffer, if they might haue leasure and
means for some small time to come out of their dispaire, and to returne
to their right minde, that so they might haue some rest from the troubles
of their spirite, and thinke seriously vpon the death thereof. And
as all the senses are presently troubled, and as it were carried out of
themselues through the cogitation of corporall death: so the spirite
contrariwise, if it be found, quiet, and well setled, abideth firme, and
derideth the ignorance, error, and terrour of the senses, correcting and
reproouing them for the same. We may then conclude from the euidence
of these things, that the death of the Spirite is contrary to the
nature of it, and therefore is afraide of it, and abhorreth euen to thinke
of it, or to make any mention thereof. But the senses care not but for
this bodily life, which the Spirite contemneth in regarde of the other:
whereby it appeareth, that the death of the body doth affect and touch
it nothing at all, but the body onely, and those things that are ioyned
vnto it, as namely both the external and internal senses. For this cause,
those men that are carnall and ledde most by their senses, thinke little
either vpon the one or the other, except it bee when they see themselues
in danger of corporall death. For, perswading themselues that
they shall liue long in this worlde, or at leastwise gathering to themselues
as much hope thereof as they can, they thinke nothing at all in a
manner of death during the whole life, no more almost then if they
were borne immortall, vntill such time as they see in good earnest that
they must dislodge. Then are they awaked out of their sleepe, and if
they be not altogether become brutish, they are constrained to thinke
both vpon the death of the body,Of the ende of good and euill men. and the death of the spirite: and the
lesse they are prepared against them both, the more astonished and amased

they are in themselues. Contrariwise good and iust men, who
of a long time, yea all their life haue thought vpon both, finde themselues
lesse troubled a great deale, because they are resolutely perswaded
and assured of a better life. Moreouer, wee finde by experience,
that when the spirit is troubled with affections, or co^founded through
fancies and imaginations, or ignorant, vicious, prophane, wicked,
without feare of God and voide of religion, it is a great deale more
mooued at the cogitation and remembrance of corporall death, then
if it be sound, well disposed and setled, quiet, skilfull, innocent, religious,
and fearing God. Whereupon we may consider and learne, which
of these two iudgements is more certaine and true, either that of a spirite
that is troubled, diseased, ignorant, euill, without feare of God, and
voide of religion: or that of a spirite, which hath all those perfections
rehearsed by vs, contrary to these vices. It is an easie matter to iudge.
Therefore if we attribute more, as in reason wee ought, to that Spirite
whose iudgement is most true and certaine, the conclusion that I haue
made, shalbe confirmed thereby. And as by the difference of desires,
we may easily iudge of the nature and essence of mans soule, so we may
do the like by those delights wherein it taketh pleasure. But I leaue
thee, ACHITOB, to go forward with the discourse of this matter.


Of the argument that may be taken from the delights and pleasures of the
soule to prooue the immortalitie thereof: an argument to the same ende
taken from the insatiable desires and pleasures of men, euen from such
as are most carnall: of the testimony which they may find euen in their
vices to prooue the immortalitie of their soule. Chap. 92.
ACHITOB. It hath beene a saying heeretofore, that it belonged
not to a vile person to deny God. Which Prouerbe came of this,
that the nobilitie and gentlemen were so ill taught, and so ignorant of
true nobilitie, that they reserued this occupation to themselues as proper
to their estate, turning it to their glory, and endeuouring to bee
feared by this meanes.The right Armes of Mach^au^llian Nobilitie. And surely these were faire Armes, and goodly
scutcheons to set foorth the Nobilitie of their estate by, namely, horrible
and execrable blasphemies, which the very Iewes and Turkes
would neuer suffer among themselues. I woulde to God wee might
nowe say rightly, that this was once, but is no more: and so likewise,
that there were not some among them that think themselues the greatest
men, who haue this in their thoughts, if they dare not speake it openly,
that it belongeth not to men of courage to beleeue in God and
in his word, or to thinke that there is a iudgement to come, at which

men shall appeare: but that this appertaineth to the simple and foolish,
not to these great and noble spirites, which flie aboue the clouds,
and indeede know more then they ought, to leade them into hell.
But as by the difference of appetites and desires,An argument of the pleasures of the soule to shew the immortalitie thereof. wee haue shewed
them that the soule cannot be mortall, which concludeth a diuine prouidence
and a second life, as we declared before, so it is an easie matter
to prooue the same by those pleasures in which the soule taketh
delight. For by how much the more those things that bring delights,
do resemble the vertue of the soule that is delighted, and the greater
affinitie, proportion and agreement they haue with it, so much the
greater, sweeter, and more pleasant are the delights, as also more firme
and of longer continuance. Indeede it may be obiected vnto me, that
if we looke to this we shal find, that the greatest part of men take more
pleasure in those delights which they can receiue by their senses, which
are more earthy and brutish, then in others that are more naturall to
the spirit, and more spirituall and heauenly: and therefore the iudgement
that we can gather from hence of the nature and essence of the
soule,Some more like to beasts then men. may seeme not to agree to this we speake of. It is very certaine
that some men are of such a brutish nature, that a man may well doubt
whether they be men or no, and whether they deserue not rather to
be reckoned in the number of beasts, to which they are more like then
to men, except it be for their face: in which respect also a man may
compare them with Apes. For if they bee led by the same desires and
lustes, and satisfie themselues therein as brute beasts, and goe no further,
wherein doe they differ from them? and to what purpose serueth
that which God hath bestowed vpon their soules more then vpon the
soules of beasts, if they content themselues with a brutish life and pleasure
as they do? For where is the vse of reason and vnderstanding which
God hath bestowed vpon them more then vpon beasts? And if they
vse them no more then beasts doe that are altogether voide of them,
who can knowe whether they are partakers of them more then they?
And so consequently, how shal that definition co^monly giuen of man,
agree to them, wherein he is called a liuing creature partaker of reson?
Therefore when we enquire of the nature and substance of the soule,
wee must followe that rule, which is vsually propounded in searching
out the nature and essence of all other things. For when a man would
haue true knowledge of them, hee taketh not in ech kind of them that
which may bee in some of the same kinde, lesse perfect and monstrous.
As if there bee occasion to iudge of the nature of mans body,
no man will take them that haue some defect of Nature, or that
are more deformed and monstrous then others: but the soundest,

goodliest, and most perfect bodies. We must doe the like when wee
search into the nature and essence of the soule. For to know it wel, we
must not make choice of men that are borne brutish, so that a man can
knowe nothing in them whereby they differ from brute beasts, except
the outward shape of a man.How we must iudge of the nature of the soule. Yea there are some borne with lesse sense
and gouernement of themselues, then beasts haue. The like may bee
saide of them, who being better borne, voluntarily become brutish of
themselues. For this cause, we must chiefly consider what effectes the
noblest and most excellent soules bring foorth, if wee wil iudge of the
nature of al other soules that are of the same kind. For albeit the soules
of some men are more brutish then of others, yet it followeth not but
they are al of one and the same nature and substance, seeing they are all
of one kind: but the difference betwene them proceedeth from hence,
that some are more degenerated from their true and proper nature,
then others are. Neuertheles this changeth not their naturall essence,
but that alwayes continueth one and the same in all: as the ill disposition
of bodies taketh not from them that nature and essence which they
haue common with others, notwithstanding they differ from them, as
a sicke and deformed body differeth from a sound and perfect body.
Nowe there is no doubt,Of the true pleasures of the soule. but that the noblest and most excellent
soules take more pleasure in the internall senses then in the externall,
and more in reason then in fancie and imagination, but aboue all in
the contemplation of the Spirit. And among those things, which the
Spirit doth contemplate, it delighteth most and stayeth longest in them
that are spirituall and eternal, that are highest and of greatest soueraigntie.
And as the spirit longeth most after these pleasures, and retaineth
them with greatest affection, so it is lesse wearie in searching for them
and in the contemplation of them. Whereupon it followeth, that spirituall
and eternall things are more conformable to the Spirite, then
those that are corporall and temporary: and that it hath greater participation
and agreement with heauenly things then with earthly. For
it is maruailously delighted and contented with spirituall things, as if
they were his owne things, which is by similitude, proportion, and agreement
of nature: as contrariwise, both the internall and externall
senses please themselues in corporall things, and are not able to comprehend
or attaine to the other, but onely by coniecture. Whereas if
the Spirite were as mortall as the senses, then the excellentest Spirites,
and such as approch nearest to the heauenly Spirites and to the nature
of God, woulde giue themselues to transitorie and corruptible things
as much as the senses doe, and would search after them as earnestly as
it doeth after true and perfect pleasures. But wee see by experience,

that they ascend vp a great deale higher. Yea the Spirits euen of most
carnall and brutish men,An argument from insatiable pleasures for the immortalitie of the soule. in that they neuer meete with any pleasures
in transitorie things that doe fully content and satisfie them, thereby
giue euident testimonie, that they are borne to enioy greater pleasures
then they can find in all this nature, and that they are of another
nature, surpassing them, which mounteth aboue corporal and temporary
things. For who euer sawe an ambitious man satisfied with honours,
or a couetous wretch with riches? And from whence commeth
this that they are so insatiable, but onely because the spirite that God
hath giuen them, is of so noble a race and of such an excellent nature,
that howe much soeuer it be fallen from his first nature and nobilitie,
yet it can neuer content it selfe with any thing, that is of another nature
more base and vile then it owne, as that which is too much vnworthie
and vnbeseeming the Spirite, and very much disagreeing from the essence
of it. For although, being buried in this body, as in a sinke of all
carnall and brutish affections, it can not so well perceiue it owne nature,
dignitie, and nobilitie, nor acknowledge the same so well, as the
noblest and most excellent spirites, and such as are farthest from this
stincking puddle, are able to do: neuertheles without thinking therevpon
as it were, it hath euermore a secret sense of it owne nature and
dignitie, which keepeth it from being contented with any thing whatsoeuer,
although it be with neuer so great liking and abundance, except
it enioy that thing which is most proper and agreeable to his natural
disposition, which is of a more high, noble, and excellent nature,
then any thing proceeding from this mortall and transitorie masse.
But because it is buried in this darknesse, which sinne hath brought
vpon the mindes of men, the same thing happeneth to the spirite, of
which wee haue already spoken concerning the immortalitie and eternitie
of name and renowne. For the right and naturall desire of true
and immortall honours, and of eternall riches agreeable to the nature
of mans soule, is degenerated into this false and corrupted appetite of
worldly honours and temporall riches. Notwithstanding this is manifest
heereby, that as euery Spirit always searcheth after God as a blind
man goeth by groaping, as wee haue heard already: so it seeketh after
riches and honours agreeable to it owne nature. But because that
darkenesse with which it is ouerwhelmed, hindereth it from knowing
them well, and so consequently from taking that way, which it ought
to enter in that it may attaine vnto them,A corrupt spirite taketh the shadow of things for the things themselues. therefore it changeth them
into others, that are of a differing and cleane contrary nature. So that
it can neuer finde out or attaine to that which it seeketh, because it is
ignorant thereof, and so seeketh for it vnder a maske, which it taketh

for the true face, and vnder a shadow, which it taketh for the very body:
whereby it commeth to passe that the maske and shadow remaine
with it, instead of the very face and body that are lost by means of the^.
In which the same thing hapneth to the spirite that doth in the matter
of religion, when it forgeth vnto it self new and strange gods, and idoles
instead of the true God who^ it searcheth after, because it knoweth not
who he is, although it seeketh him, and desireth to find him. Wherefore
being thus deceiued, and not knowing it, neither the means whereby it
is deceiued, it still desireth, because it perceiueth very well whether it
wil or no, that it hath not attained to that which it wanteth, as indeede
it might wel know the same, if it were not becom very brutish, by reason
that it neuer findeth any contentation in any thing that it doeth, or
can attain vnto.An argument taken from vices for the immortalitie of the soule. By which things we may further learne, that men shall
find euen in their vices, testimonies of the nature, essence and immortality
of their soules, wherby they may be conuicted, and namely in their
ambition and couetousnes, which ought to admonish them of that that
hath bin set downe, and to cause them to thinke more diligently therevpo^.
We may say the same of their lust. For although it be in the number
of those pleasures that are most earthy and brutish, and which the senses
themselues both externall and internall ought to be soonest wearie
of, for the reasons before heard: neuertheles they shew plainely how
insatiable this appetite is in them, in that no kinde of lust can content
them: insomuch as they are caried headlong there withall eue^ beyond
the bounds of nature, within which brute beasts containe themselues.
And truly all these things ought to driue vs into admiration, and cause
vs to consider the iust iudgement of God vpon men, and how he is reue^ged
of them for dishonoring him, and their own nature, by suffring it to
degenerate and wax beastlike, in forsaking spirituall, heauenly, and diuine
things, for those are corporall, earthly, and brutish. Therefore God depriueth
them of that vnderstanding which he had giue^ them,How God punisheth vicious de^ires. that they
shoulde torment themselues after such things as vexe their spirite, as it
were damned soules, and that so much the more miserably and with
lesse contentation, as they enioy more of them. For what a torment is
ambition and couetousnes, and other affections and vices that accompany
them? And if we speake of lust, we see what is the vengeance of
God vpon them, who going beyond the bounds of nature, so dishonor
their bodies and their owne nature, that there is no essence or nature
whatsoeuer, vnto which they may be compared. For none doe so
much peruert their nature as they: I meane not beasts only, but not the
deuilles themselues. And although they be so beastlike, as to consider
no more of the nature and essence of their soule then they doe of

beasts, yet the very figure of their bodies should make them to thinke,
that God hath not made it differing from beasts, and namely in creating
the head and face vpwards, but that hee hath also endued them
with a soule differing from theirs, to the ende it might be correspondent
to the body in which it is. But it belongeth to thee, ASER, to
prosecute this argument, thereby to shew vnto vs the immortalitie of
the soule.


Of the testimonie that men haue of the immortal nature of the soule in their
very body, by the composition and frame thereof: of that which is in the
motion and rest of their soule: how the creation of the whole world should
be vaine, and how there should be no prouide^ce of God no religion no diuine
iustice if the soule were mortall: of the multitude and qualities of the witnesses
that stand for the immortalitie thereof. Chap. 93.
ASER. That good king Ezechias complaining in his sicknes, said,
Mine habitation is departed,Esay 38. 12. and is remooued from me like a sheepeheards
tent: I haue cut off like aweauer my life. This holy man compareth
his body and the life of man in it, to a tabernacle and lodge, or to a tent
and pauillion, which are no firme lodgings but remoueable, and such
as may be transported from one place to another, as souldiers carry away
theirs, when they raise their camp to pitch it in some other place.
And indeed a mans body in this world is as it were a lodging assigned
for his soule to abide in a while, not to dwell there alwayes, as it were
in one place. For this life, is like to a militarie life, and as a continuall
warfare, vntil such time as we depart hence, and that God cutteth it off,
(after wee haue finished our appointed dayes) as a weauer cutteth off
the threedes at the end of his web after it is finished. Therefore Saint
Peter also calleth his body a tabernacle when he saith,2. Pet. 1. 13, 14. I thinke it meete
as long as I am in this tabernacle, to stirre you vp by putting you in remembrance,
seeing I knowe that the time is at hand that I must lay downe this
tabernacle, euen as our Lorde Iesus Christ hath shewed mee. Saint Paul
also vseth the like manner of speech when hee saieth,2. Cor. 5. 1, 2. For wee knowe
that if our earthly house of this tabernacle be destroyed, we haue a building
giuen of God, an house not made with hands, but eternall in the heauens. For
therefore we sigh, desiring to be clothed with our house, which is from heauen.
And to this agreeth that which is written in the epistle to the Hebrews,
For here we haue no continuing citie,Hebr. 13. 14. but we seeke one to come. Here truely
are notable testimonies of the second and eternall life, against them
that doubt of the immortalitie of the soule. But according to that
which is giuen vs in charge to discourse of touching this matter, wee

must bring them other testimonies euen in their bodies, seeing their
spirit cannot mount vp to celestiall and diuine things.
We may easily iudge,An argument taken from the frame of mans body to prooue the immortalitie of his soule. if there be any light of nature remaining in
our minde, that God would haue vs knowe, by the composition and
stature of our bodies, howe the soule and spirit dwelling within them
shoulde be affected, and whither it ought to looke. For why woulde
God lift the head and face of men vpwards, and not the head of beasts,
but that hee woulde admonish them thereby, that they are of a celestiall
nature? and that they must alwayes looke, not to the earth as
beasts do, but to heauen, as to their natiue country, from whence they
receiued their Originall, in respect of their principall part, which al Atheists
and Epicures doe renounce? And if the body be lifted straight
vpward, the spirite is much more, which ascending by degrees from
inferiour things, maketh no stay vntill it come to heauenly and diuine
things: and hauing at length attained vnto them, it stayeth there and
contenteth it selfe therein.Another argument taken from the motion and rest of the soule. In regard whereof, as in naturall things we
knowe by their moouing and resting which is their naturall place, so
by the same reason wee may iudge of the naturall place of mans soule,
which is in perpetuall motion, and can finde no rest here below on the
earth, as the soules of beasts can: which because they are altogether
earthy, and al their natural and proper good comming from no higher
place then from the earth, their snowts also are continually bending
towards it: and the more earthy and brutish they are, the more downwards
do they alwayes bend. This we may easily perceiue, if we compare
not onely the beasts of the earth with birdes, which holde more
of the nature of the ayre, and liue most therein, but also if wee compare
the beasts of the earth one with an other. For albeit all of them
haue their snowts inclining towards the earth, yet the hogge hath his
head more bending downeward then others haue. For it is fashioned
and bowed after such a fashion, that no beast can lesse lift vp the head
and stretch it towardes heauen then the hogge, neither is any so much
troubled as that is, when by force it is compelled to looke vpward.
The same may bee saide of the moule, and of other such like beasts.
Therefore if the Good that is proper and peculiar to the nature of man,
consist not in this eternitie and celestiall immortalitie of which wee
speake, to what purpose is his head lift vpward, and his eies looking
towards heauen, especially seeing God hath ioyned these things with
a soule that is partaker of reason and vnderstanding?Of a fish called Vranoscopos. For among the
beasts, we find one fish, that hath the eyes set in the top of the head,
and therefore it is called by the Graecians Vranoscopos, which signifieth
as much as a Beholder of heauen, or looking towards heauen. But because

it is not partaker of vnderstanding and reason, more then other
beasts are, and seeing the soule of it differeth not from theirs, we
may easily iudge, that the eies of it were not set in that place for the
same reason that man hath his lifted vp towardes heauen. Shall wee
say then that God hath created man and endewed him with so many
graces and singular properties, to make him more wretched then
beastes in this life, who otherwise is so miserable, and compassed about
with so many euilles on euery side? For whereto serueth the disposition
of his nature, but to torment him the more by looking vp towardes
heauen, and by that knowledge which hee hath more then
beasts haue, thereby encreasing in him a vaine desire of such a happinesse
as hee can neuer enioy? And which is woorse, the more noble
spirite that any one hath, the more learned and vertuous hee is, or the
more and longer oppressed he is with the miseries of this life, the more
woulde this vaine desire pricke and torment him. And if there bee
some, who like beasts passe ouer al these things without any sense and
feeling, this befalleth them, either because they are of a heauy, sleepie
and blockish spirite, or else because they are drunken with that
which is commonly called Fortunes fauour, namely, with the honours,
riches, and pleasures of this world. So that wee must conclude
vpon this speech, that because beasts do here all that they haue
to do, according to those powers and gifts that are naturally in them,
therefore they liue and die heere: but because the Spirite giuen to
man, can not doe heere according to his naturall disposition, it followeth
necessarily, that as it is borne in an other place, so it must haue
another place wherein to effect that which it hath to do.Except the soule be immortal, man is created in vaine. And contrariwise,
if the soule of man be mortall, all that hee hath to doe is in this
life, as it is with beasts: and then also it followeth, that hee was created
in vaine and without cause. For God created nothing, but hee propounded
to himselfe the ende for which hee created it, and that such
an ende as is agreeable to the nature and dignitie of euery one of his
woorkes, else all things shoulde haue beene created in vaine by him.
Nowe if he created man onely to liue in this worlde, as hee did other
creatures, then did he not in his creation propound to himselfe an end
beseeming the excellencie of such a nature. Which thing the greatest
Philosophers amongest the heathen haue after due consideration bin
constrained to confesse. And if man, for whose sake the whole visible
worlde was created, and who only can, will, and knoweth how to
vse all things contained therein, was created and receiued this life in
vaine, what shal we think of al other things that wee created because
of him, and for his sake? Shall not the whole worke of creation be in

vaine, and vnworthy the infinite maiestie and wisedome of God the
Creator? and hee that is the Gouernour of the world, shall hee not be
spoiled of all prouidence? Who ought not to abhorre the very cogitation
of such a thing?The immortalitie of the soule is linked to the religion and prouidence of God. And yet the religion of God, his prouidence,
and the immortalitie of our soule are so fast linked and ioyned together,
and depend in such sort one vpon an other, that they can not be
separated, neither indeede is it lawfull to separate them. For he that
abolisheth the one, shaketh also that faith which wee ought to holde
of the rest: because if our soules be not immortall, there is neither punishment
nor reward, either for vertue or vice, or for the good or ill
deedes of men. For wee see euidently, howe all things are mingled
and confused in the course of this present life, that they are turned into
a common robbery, that the woorst men make themselues Masters
and Lordes of the worlde, as if it were created onely for them,
that they might bee in it as gods vpon the earth: and contrariwise
that good and iust men may seeme to haue beene created onely for a
pray to the wicked, and to be lesse accompted of them then the brute
beasts. Which if it were so, then shoulde God haue no care of men:
and if hee haue no care of them, howe shall hee be their GOD and
Creator, and why shoulde they rather then beasts call vpon him and
honor him? For if it were so, what hath hee done, or what doeth hee
yet more for them vnto whome he hath giuen his lawe and commandement
to call vpon him, to honour and serue him, then he doeth for
beasts to whome hee hath giuen no such lawe or commaundement,
and who do not call vpon him nor honour him according to the same
as men doe? And what may wee accompt all religion, all feare and
reuerence of God to be, all holinesse, honestie, and vertue, but superstition,
and a vaine and foolish opinion and fancie of the mind of man?
Notwithstanding there hath alwayes beene a common testimonie
and consent of religion among all nations,An argument taken from the consent of all people. euen amongest the most
barbarous and rudest people that euer werefound. Neither euer were
any so ill taught, but they haue put some difference betweene vertue
and vice, and betweene honestie and dishonestie. It can not be then,
but that religion and vertue, naturally engrauen in the heart of man, are
good things, yea farre better then their contraries. Whereas if God
had no more respect to the one then to the other, and were not to iudge
thereof, to what purpose serueth this difference which men make betweene
them? and what profit shall they reape to themselues by esteeming
better of that which is good, then of euil? Good men should not
only receiue lesse profit by vertue then by vice, but further they should
be damnified by the same: and wicked men should euer haue the better,

yea they should be rewarded insteade of being punished.Other reasons to the same end. For the best
and iustest men are commonly a pray vnto the wicked. And who shall
deliuer them out of their hands, seeing for the most part they are the
strongest, and haue in a maner the gouernement of the worlde in their
power, so that the most innocent persons are at their mercie as it were,
except God should let them haue iustice either heere in this worlde or
in some other? And if God shoulde faile in doing iustice, vpon what
right should the iustice that men vse against malefactors be grounded?
Shall there be more iustice in men, who are altogether iniustice themselues,
then in God who is the fountaine of all iustice, yea iustice it
selfe? All this must be so, or else we must confesse, that all these things
testifie vnto vs, that God hath care ouer vs, and that there is an other
place and time of rewarding euery man according to his workes, then
in this worlde, and heere in this life. For this cause Saint Peter calleth
the day of the last iudgement, in which all shall appeare before God,
the time of the restauration of all things foretolde of God by the mouth of all
his holy prophets since the worlde beganne.Actes 3. 21. For considering that al things
are so confused and troubled in the worlde, that it seemeth there is no
difference betwixt the blessings and curses of God pronounced in his
lawe, and that all things are turned topsie turuy by the malice of men,
the Lord hath ordained a place and time, in which hee will put an end
to this disorder, and wil restore al things to their right estate and good
order. Now if the Lord hath appointed that euery one shalbe rewarded
at that time and place, it followeth that then and there also wee
must search for the end for which man was created, and that his soule
shall liue there. And if the soule then liueth, and in that place, it followeth
well also that there is the end of it.What the end^ of a thing is. For we take the ende for that
which is the last and most perfect in euery thing. So that if the question
be of the authoritie of men, and multitude of witnesses for the confirmation
of that, which hath beene hitherto saide of the immortalitie
of the soules of men,Of the multitude and qualitie of witnesses to prooue the immortalitie of the soule. wee shall haue for this purpose all those, who
from the beginning of the worlde amongest all people and nations,
haue beleeued and thought that there is a God, that there is a Diuine
nature and prouidence, and consequently any religion: yea euen those
barbarous and sauage nations, which were found out of late dayes in
those new Ilands, commonly called the new found world. And if the
qualitie of the witnesses is to be considered, we shall still haue almost
all on our side. For if wee looke vnto the most barbarous and strangest
nations that are, the testimonie of nature which all of them carry
in their hearts, compelleth them to range themselues on this side.
And if we come to others that haue bin more ciuil and better instructed,

we shall haue a greater aduantage. Or if the question be of the greatest,
and of such as by the consent and testimonie of all, were accompted,
and were indeede best learned and most vertuous, we shal not only
finde them to haue beene on our side, but also that they haue condemned
as ignorant men and vnworthy to liue, them that haue beene
of a contrary opinion, betwixt which men and the other there is great
difference.What kinde of Philosophers Atheists and Epicures were. For those among the Philosophers that denied the immortalitie
of the soule, were such as did abolish also all diuine nature and
prouidence, and all religion, and such as placed the soueraigne good
of men in pleasure: which kinde of men were alwayes woorthily taken
to be the vilest and most abiect, and as it were the skumme and
dregges of the professours of Philosophie. For to the ende wee may
the better vnderstand this, by mine aduise we will consider of the best
arguments that are alleadged by Philosophers to prooue the immortalitie
of soules, that they who will not credite the testimony of the
holy Scriptures, may feele themselues vrged in their conscience with
the sayings of Ethnickes and heathen men, who shall rise vp in iudgement
against them, to aggrauate their condemnation. Now it belongeth
to thee, AMANA, to followe this matter.


Of an other argument for the immortalitie of the soule taken from that naturall
desire which men haue of knowledge: of Aristoteles opinion touching
the nature and immortalitie of the soule: of other reasons of Philosophers
to prooue that the spirite can not be of a corruptible and mortall nature:
and how iust men should be more miserable, and should haue more
occasion to feare and to eschew death, then the vniust and wicked, if the
soule were mortall. Chap. 94.
AMANA. There is in all men a naturall desire of knowledge and
wisedome: yea a man may perceiue that most barbarous men desire
naturally to knowe, vnto what Art soeuer they apply their spirite,
iudging the same to be commendable and honest, as contrariwise they
accompt it vnbeseeming a man and dishonest, to be ignorant, to erre,
and to be deceiued. From this desire the wisest and most famous among
the Philosophers tooke a very good argument to prooue the
immortalitie of the soule. For seeing this desire is naturall, and that
in this worlde all the knowledge and wisedome that men can haue,
is very small, and as it were nothing in respect of that which they
want, they conclude necessarily, that there must needes be some other
place and time then in this life, wherein that which is heere begunne
but slenderly, is to be accomplished and made perfect.

The reason from whence they deriue their argument,An argument taken from the desire of wisedometo prooue the immortalitie of the soule. is that common
saying, that God and Nature the minister of God doe nothing
without cause. Wherefore seeing this desire of knowledge and wisedome
is naturall in man, it can not be in vaine, neither is it giuen vnto
him, but that it should attaine to some end and perfection. For to what
purpose serued the corporal eies of liuing creatures, and for what cause
should they be giuen them, if they could neuer see, or were to liue alwaies
in darknes? So likewise, why should the eies of the soule and mind
be giuen to men, thereby to behold celestiall and diuine things, which
cannot be seene with bodily eies, if they could neuer view them, but in
such darknes as they do heere behold them? To what end also should
man be naturally pricked forward with a desire to know the truth and
to haue skill, if he could neuer soundly enioy his desire, but should remaine
always in ignorance for the greatest part of those things, which
he desireth to know, and which are of so great waight, that whatsoeuer
he is able to vnderstand and know in this world, is nothing or very little
in regarde of that which yet remaineth behinde for him to knowe?
For not to speake of those things in which all humane philosophie
must acknowledge her ignorance, let vs come to that vnderstanding
which wee may haue by the holie Scriptures reuealed vnto vs of God.
For although the knowledge wee haue by them, surpasseth without al
comparison all humane philosophie and science,1. Cor. 13. 12. yet Saint Paul compareth
it to a knowledge that is very obscure, to a light that is seene
through thicke and darke cloudes, and to an image represented vnto
vs in a glasse, in comparison of that most high and perfect knowledge
and vnderstanding, which is reserued for vs in another life, and whereof
we haue here but a very little taste and weake beginning. Therefore
if wee could neuer goe further, would it not be a vaine and ridiculous
thing, if God had giuen this desire onely to men, and neuer woulde
vouchsafe to let them haue the effect of it? And if it were so, that God
had not ordained an other time and place, for the finishing of that
which is heere beginne in this life, it seemeth that the complaint
made by some of the greatest Philosophers against Nature, shoulde
not be without some ground of reason.An obiection made by some Philosophers. For what iust cause is there,
that hee shoulde giue a longer life to some beasts then to men, seeing
it skilleth not whether beastes liue long or no, because long life cannot
make them more learned or more wise then they are at their
birth? But it is otherwise in man. For seeing that knowledge and
wisedome are his greatest Good, whereby hee approcheth neerer
to the nature of God, and of which all his other good things chiefely
depend, it seemeth to stand with reason, that God should haue giuen a

longer life to men then to beasts, that so they might the better attaine
to so great a Good, so necessarie for them, in regarde of which especially,
they are preferred before beasts and differ from them. For wee
see by experience, that wee must die so soone almost as wee beginne
to taste of Sciences,The answere. and to waxe wise. But we haue no cause to make
this complaint against the wisedome, prudence, and goodnesse of
God, who hath granted vs life long enough, wherein we may learne
heere as much as wee neede (if wee coulde vse it well) both to passe away
this life, and also to attaine to the other, in which wee shall abound
in knowledge and wisedome, and be fully satisfied therewithall.
And although God had giuen vs a life twice as long in this world
as that wee nowe enioy, so that we might liue as long as the ancient
Patriarkes, whose yeeres were so many, especially before the flood
as Moses testifieth, yet all that which wee coulde possibly learne during
the time of so long life, woulde bee very little in comparison of
the knowledge reserued for vs in that Eternitie. For the eies of our
spirite and minde are not able to endure so great brightnesse of heauenly
knowledge and wisedome, whilest it is heere shut vp and as it
were imprisoned in this body of sinne, and in a manner wholly ouerwhelmed
with darkenesse: but it fareth with the spirite in this respect,
as it doeth with the Owle in regarde of his eies, and of the light of the
sunne. Therefore euery one hath better cause to assure himselfe, that
God hath appointed an other time and place for the full accomplishment
of this desire of knowledge and wisedome, that is so firmely engrauen
in the nature of men, then to accuse God, as if he offered them
iniurie to depriue them thereof by the shortenesse of their life. Now
let vs come to other particular reasons of Philosophers concerning
this matter wee haue in handling.Aristoteles opinion touching the immortalitie of the soule. Although Aristotele so famous amongest
them be very obscure and wauering where hee handleth the
same, so that it is a very hard matter to vnderstand what was his opinion
and resolution therein, neuerthelesse hee dares not plainely
say, that the spirit of man is of a bodily nature and corruptible matter,
or that it is mortall as the body is. But in one place hee saieth, that if
the Spirite be able to vnderstand without the fantasie, it may bee separated
from it: but if it cannot vnderstand without it, then it cannot
be separated. Which is all one as if hee saide, that if the spirite
could vnderstand without the senses, and the vnderstanding and reason
without fantasie and imagination, then a man might certainely
conclude, that there is a difference in nature and substaunce betweene
these things, and that there may a separation bee made: so that the
destruction of the one doeth not bring with it a corruption of the other.

Wherefore none may conclude the mortalitie of the spirite that
is capable of reason and vnderstanding, by the mortalitie either of
the externall or internall senses. But Aristotele leaueth it doubtfull
in this place, whether this separation may bee made yea or no, and
whether a man may conclude thereupon, that the spirite is of an other
nature and substaunce then the senses are, and so consequently
immortall. But it followeth not, that if the soule being in the body
vnderstandeth things bodily, that is to say, by the bodily instruments
that are outward, and then by the conueiance of the internall senses,
therefore it can vnderstand nothing but that which they declare and
bring vnto it.How the vnderstanding commeth to ye knowledge of outward things by the senses. For after the internal senses haue gathered together the
images and similitudes of those externall things that are offered vnto
them, and so retaineth them fast being secluded and separated from
all matter, the vnderstanding is to receiue from thence the first and
simple knowledge of things. So that as the qualities of externall
things are the matter subiect of the internall senses, so their images
conceiued by the internall senses, and purged from all bodily matter,
are the matter subiect of the vnderstanding and spirit. And the
spirite labouring about them draweth out certaine motions, and
knoweth many things from them, which can not mooue the senses,
and which the senses can not know. And yet the spirite is first mooued
by these images, as the senses are by externall things. But wee
must declare these things somewhat more familiarly. We vnderstand
already, howe corporall things are the subiect and obiects of the corporall
senses, and that the bodily senses receiue and know them corporally,
euen such as they are presented vnto them, euery one according
to his nature and office.Howe the outward senses looke vpon things. But they cannot receiue or perceiue any
more then that which is laied open vnto them, and manifesteth it
selfe outwardly.How the internal senses receiue the same things. Nowe after the outward senses haue thus receiued
them and their matter couered with their qualities, the internall senses,
to which the externall are seruiceable, conceiue the images
without the matters and qualities of those things whereof they are images.
For the eye cannot see either the sunne or the light of it, nor
yet any other creature discouered by the light, except it bee present
before it. But the Fantasie and imagination receiue and conceiue
the images of things, euen in darkenesse, although the things of
which they are images, appearant to the eyes, nor yet are perceiued
at that present by any corporall sense. We see then already how these
images are separated from the matter of which they are images, and
how the internall senses behold them without their matter and bodies,
as the external senses look vpon them being ioined with their bodies.

Then hauing receiued them thus purged from their corporall
matter, the spirite receiueth them yet more pure, and goeth further
in the knowledge and vnderstanding of them then all the senses doe,
comprehending other things, of which the senses can haue no knowledge
or apprehension.How the Spirite receiueth them from the internall senses. And thus the Spirite beholdeth and vnderstandeth
corporall things corporally, that is by meanes of those instruments
which it hath in the body, and spirituall things it beholdeth spiritually
without those instruments. Whereupon it followeth, that although
it vseth the senses and such kinde of instruments, neuerthelesse
it is not so tied vnto them that it can not be separated, or do nothing
without them, or not knowe and vnderstand that which they are not
able to conceiue or know.Other reasons for the immortalitie of the soule. So that it is no hard matter to beleeue, that
the soule is of another nature and substance, as a man may iudge also
by this that it is the fountaine and beginning of motion begunne by it
selfe, and not by any other, but as we haue already declared. Likewise
by this, that it is capable of the knowledge of infinite things, of
which it retaineth the memorie, and that it inquireth into secret things
separated from all corporall matter, which can not be perceiued by any
sense: and that it doeth so many and so great things without the
helpe of any bodily nature. Whereupon the Philosophers conclude,
that it is of a simple nature, not compounded, and so consequently that
it is immortall. For that nature, which is adorned and decked with
such vertues, and with the facultie to vnderstand, the like whereof is
not in the body, and which can vnderstand by it selfe without the vse
of the body, can not be compounded of an earthly and mortall nature,
nor haue any part thereof mingled with it selfe, but it is stayed and sustained
by it selfe,The soule can not be diuided. it subsisteth of it selfe and is immortall. Heereof also
it followeth, that if the soule of man be of such a nature, then it cannot
be rent in sunder or diuided, or pulled into peeces, or haue any thing
in it that can be separated from it: and so it must needes be that it can
not die or perish. And therefore the best and most excellent Philosophers
holde that sentence as immooueable, which Aristotle saieth in
an other place, namely, that the spirite is a thing separate and distinct
from the senses and from the body, as an immortall thing from a mortall:
and that it commeth from without, and else-where then from the
body, as we haue already touched it in another place. Whereby to my
thinking, he hath declared very plainely, that he did not take the soule
of man to be mortal. But yet it is somewhat hard to iudge what his opinion
was, because he doth not shew himselfe so openly as the matter
requireth. Yet whatsoeuer he thought or resolued with himselfe, the
soule shal not be therfore any whit the more mortall or immortall. For

the immortality therof depe^deth not vpon his opinion, or of any other
mans whatsoeuer. Neuerthelesse seeing so subtill and sharpe a Philosopher
durst not affirme that it was mortall, euerie one of anie sound
mind may wel iudge, that hee knew there were too many arguments
to the contrary, and those so waightie, that they deserued to bee diligently
examined, and were not so lightly to be reiected. For hee was
not so shamefast and modest, but he durst boldly reiect and condemn
the opinions and sentences of all others that were as wel in his time as
before him, how great and famous personages soeuer they were, when
he thought he could doe it with any shew of reason, insomuch as hee
spared not his master Plato. Therefore albeit we had no other resolution
from him touching this matter, but this only that he was in doubt,
and durst affirme nothing on either side, yet his authoritie ought to
preuaile much with vs against them who depende onely of humane
Philosophie and reason, and are so easily induced to approue rather of
the mortalitie then of the immortalitie of the soule. For at leastwise
they may imagine, that so great a Philosopher who is in such woonderful
estimation amongst all learned men, did not iudge their reasons
friuolous and vaine, who mainteined the immortalitie of the soule, as
our Epicures and Atheists thinke, because they are more blockish and
foole-hardie. And therefore they boldly condemne that which either
they will not or cannot conceiue and comprehend, not considering
what a confusion of things their opinion worketh in all mankinde.Other reasons for the immortality of the soule. For
besides that which wee haue spoken to this purpose alreadie, if it were
so that the soule were mortall, the wickedest and most desperate men
should haue that which they desire most, and which is most expedient
for them: and that should befall the best and iustest men, which
they abhorre most, and flee from as very hurtful for them: contrary to
that which Salomon saith in the Prouerbes,Prou. 10. 24. That the wicked shall fall into
the euill he feareth, and that the desire of the iust shalbe accomplished. In
regard whereof good men shoulde haue farre greater reason to feare
death, then the wicked to desire it. For what good man is there of noble
courage, who will not greatly abhorre death, when hee thinketh
with himselfe, that it consumeth and swalloweth vp the whole man,
as if he were buried in perpetuall darknesse? What consolation will
serue him, and what comfort can a man offer him, that will be able to
surmount the feare and horrour of death, but that he will expect and
suffer it with great impatiencie and despaire, when he shal be through
necessitie brought vnto it? As for that consolation, which is taken
from the necessitie of nature, and from the common condition of all
men, it is very leane if there be no other. We see by them who are so

greatly tormented, that they wish and aske after death, as after a
hauen wherein they may bee deliuered from that tempest and torment
in which they are, although the greefe which they suffer
breede such vowes and desires in them, yet if they haue but a smal
respite, they gather some consolation to themselues by some assurance, that their griefe will in time cease, or els that time and custome will make it lighter vnto them, and will teach them to beare it
patiently.
To be short,Euery one naturally desireth life. life is acceptable and beloued of euery one, that
such as are most miserable and wretched cannot bee brought to
leaue it but with great griefe, no not those who destroy themselues
with their owne handes. Whereby wee may iudge, howe
much more bitter it is to them that haue not all these occasions to
desire it. For euery one may imagine, what extreame griefe it
woulde bee to a good man, who for liuing honestly all his life time,
and for all the good which hee had euer thought, spoken or done,
shoulde not onely receiue no honour nor recompence in this world,
but which is woorse, (as it commonly falleth out among men)
shoulde receiue nothing but euill for good. And yet in the meane
time hee shoulde see the woorst men, that wholly giue ouer themselues
to dishonour and despite God, enioy the honours, riches,
and pleasures of this worlde: and contrariwise himselfe to haue nothing
but dishonour, shame, confusion, famine, pouertie, miserie,
sorowe, torment, and oftentimes cruell death. What comfort
can such a bodie haue, if hee thinke that there is no other rewarde
after this life, nor anie better estate for him then for the
most wicked and abhominable person in the worlde? And although
none of all this shoulde euer happen to good men, yet what contentation
coulde they finde in all the rewardes, which they shoulde
receiue in this worlde for recompence of their vertue? It is an easie
matter to iudge by this, that the memorie of the name and prayse
of well-doing doeth not alwayes take effect, neither is it alwayes
due to them that haue it, but oftentimes verie vniustly giuen. But
from thee, ARAM, wee shall receiue more full instruction touching
this matter.



Of that praise and reward which wisedome and vertue may receiue of men
in this world: how miserable it is, if there be no better prepared for them
els-where: how death would be more grieuous and lamentable to the best
learned and wisest men, then to the ignorant and foolish, if the soule were
mortall: how the best and most certaine iudgement of men is for the immortalitie
of the soule: of them who not beleeuing the same, say that it
is good for men to be in such an errour. Chap. 95.
ARAM. If the Philosophers might draw many arguments of great
waight from the natural desires of men, to proue the immortality
of soules, this which we haue now to propound of ye purpose and reward,
which euery one naturally desireth, is of great consideration touching
this matter. For it is very certain, that the best and most iust among me^,
albeit they could auoide all hurt from wicked men, wherewith commonly
they are rewarded from procuring their good, yet they should
not enioy any true and sound contentation in any of these rewardes,
which they might haue in this world as a recompence of their vertue.
But rather whilest they were expecting and hoping for them, they
should be euer in doubt and feare of missing them, by reason of the inconstancie
of men, and of the vncertaintie of all humane things. So
that nature might well seeme to haue giuen vnto them this desire of
praise and of reward, if they should neuer enioy their desire els-where
but in this present life. Whereof wee may easily iudge by the reasons
that are to be set downe.Reasons taken from reward and praise to proue the immortality of the soule.
For the first, the memory of a mans name and the praise for wel doing,
doth not alwaies come to passe, neither doth it fal out aright in regard
of all, but is for the most part very vniust. For how often is glorie
and honour attributed to vices, yea to very execrable crimes and to
the wicked, whereas it ought to be giuen to vertue and to good men?
And if these haue sometime any commendation, yet it is very sparing.
But it falleth out much woorse, when vertue receiueth blame in stead
of praise. And when something is giuen to them vnto whom it appertaineth,
it cannot be stretched out farre, by reason of the diuersity and
contrarietie of natures, of minds and of opinions, of the manners of
men, and of people and nations. For howe often commeth it to
passe, that some condemne and blame that which others approoue
and prayse? Yea manie times one and the same man will contradict
himselfe through the inconstancie of his iudgement, nowe
dispraysing that which before hee had praysed, and contrariwise.
On the other side, albeit fame and commendation should be neuer so

great, yet it could not bee of any long continuance, considering that
time consumeth, and bringeth an ende to all that is vnder the heauens.
Moreouer, we see what great alterations are daily wrought by time:
and although praise were perpetuall among the liuing, yet what
could it profite the dead?The dead haue no feeling of praise. or what feeling can they haue of that, more
then of blame and infamie? For the praise which good kings and
Princes haue purchased by their vertues, and the memorie they haue
left behinde them among men, can profit them no more in regard of
the world, then the memorie of that infamie and dispraise, which tyrants
haue left behind them can doe them any hurt. For how wel or ill
soeuer men speake and thinke one of another, the dead haue no sense
at all thereof. Yea it is likely, that they care not greatly for it, and that
they rest neuer the lesse at their ease for all that. Therefore wee may
well conclude, that notwithstanding all the praise and reward which
wisedome and vertue can receiue from men in this world, yet they are
still very miserable, if there be no better prouided for them else where.
And if wise and vertuous men hope for another rewarde, they must
needes beleeue a second life, in which they shall bee recompensed for
their good and iust works. But further, when a learned and wise man
hath by his spirite discoursed and gone through the heauens, the planets
and starres, beasts, men, and through all nature, yea hath reached
to the Angels, and euen to God himselfe the Creator and king of the
whole worlde, and hath passed through all histories both new and old,
and hath gotten the knowledge of all things contained in them, that
haue come to passe in the world:Death most lamentable to the best men, if the soule were not immortal. I pray you let vs consider what hee
can be tolde of, that wilbe more grieuous, more bitter and feareful vnto
him, then of death, and what consolation can he receiue when hee
shall vnderstand, that his soule which hath seene and beheld so great
riches, so many goodly and excellent things, and which hath beene as
it were the storehouse and treasurie of them, shall be wholly extinguished
in the middest of such a goodly, pleasaunt, and wonderfull scaffold
and theatre, that is so excellently adorned with all kinde of beautie,
so that it shall neuer be againe at any time or in any place, nor shal
haue any more sense and feeling then the soule of a beast hath. What
is he, who after such a consideration of death, should not haue great
cause to feare it, in so great misery as may befall him in this life? Doe
we thinke that these men among the Heathen who haue heeretofore
slain themselues to eschew the hands of their enemies, and that shame
and infamie which they feared to receiue among men, and who haue
accounted it an acte of great vertue and constancie to kill themselues
in that maner for the auoyding of shame, would haue done that which

they did, if they had not thought that there had beene another life besides
this?Cato beleeued the immortality of the soule. At leastwise Cato Vticensis for his part part testifieth this vnto
vs, who the same night in which hee had purposed to kill himselfe
(which he did because he would not fal into the hands and subiection
of Iulius Caesar, against whom he had taken Armes in that ciuil warre)
caused those Dialogues of Plato to bee read vnto him, in which hee
mainteineth and confirmeth the immortalitie of the soule, according
to the doctrine of his master Socrates.What comfort it is to beleeue a place of rest after this life. We may then iudge by the contrarie,
what consolation it is to a good and wise man, against all the
miseries that can befall him in this world, if he knoweth and is assuredly
perswaded, that there is a resting place prepared for him, not therein
to be depriued of all sense of good and euill, as they imagine who
seeke for rest in death without all hope of another life, but a place of
happines for them that with a good heart and Will haue giuen themselues
to vertue and holinesse, which is appointed by God, who is aliust,
almightie, and algood. For what rest can that thing find, which
is not at all? So that if man bee no more after the death of the bodie,
then death cannot bring him any rest at all. And therefore wee
may say of this rest, that as God is not the God of the dead but of the
liuing, according to the testimonie of Iesus Christ, so rest is not for
them, that are not, but for them that are. For rest presupposeth a beeing,
because the thing it selfe must needes be, as well as the rest that
belongeth to it: otherwise neither of them both should haue any being.
Thus then we may iudge, after so many reasons taken from nature,
and hauing had so many testimonies as haue hitherto beene alleged,
from the authoritie and sayings of men, on which side the truth
is most certaine, whether with them who haue all good and wise men
on their side, or with the other, who haue none but foolish and wicked
men.
Wee haue then in this matter which now wee follow,What store of testimonies stand for the immortality of the soule. the iudgement,
authoritie and sentence of all the greatest and most excellent
men in the world, with the greatest and chiefest part of all mankinde.
Vnto whose testimony we may further adde religion, iustice, holines
and all vertues, which are so grounded, and laide vpon the immortalitie
of mans soule, that if this foundation bee taken from them, they
are altogether ouerthrowen. For albeit they haue their chiefest foundation
in God, neuerthelesse he hath so ordained and ordered them,
that they cannot take place, if there be no immortalitie of soules, and
that for the reasons alreadie declared. It followeth then well, that
trueth is on their side. For trueth will rather stande for them, then for
vices, villanies, and notorious wickednesse, vnto which the mortality

of the soule is more agreeable then the immortalitie. And if all the
Philosophers were not able to attaine to the knowledge of the soules
nature, nor define the immortalitie thereof, wee ought not to bee
greatly abashed, if such as were most ignorant, vile, and abiect of
them (as they are called by some of the best of the Ancients) abused
themselues so grossely, and spake so vnreuerently, seeing many of
the greater sort and of good account, fell so shamefully, and shewed
themselues to be woorser then beastes in some things whereof a man
may iudge by the outwarde senses. For haue there not some beene
founde, who albeeit they sawe the snowe white, yet they durst maintaine
that it was blacke, and that pepper was white, and although
they felt the fire hote and burning, yet affirmed that it was colde?
But for this time let vs leaue the opinions of Philosophers,Of such as say, it is good to keepe men in this opinion of the immortalitie of the soule, and yet themselues beleeue it not. and speake
somewhat of them, who although they doe not beleeue the immortalitie
of soules, nor yet all that is spoken of GOD or of religion,
say notwithstanding that it is good for the life of man, that men
shoulde bee of that opinion, without which humane societie could
not be kept inuiolable, neither would men do any thing, as they
ought, if they were not as it were with a bridle kept backe by this
feare, that there is another life after this, and that there are gods
to take vengeance of such as haue done euill. And therefore they
say, that feare ws the first that made gods. Heereof they conclude,
that religion is nothing, but onely in opinion, yea, that it is
nothing else but superstition, which proceedeth from this foolish
opinion. But seeing this errour serueth for the benefit of mans life,
it is good, say they, to vpholde it, and to confirme men therein.
And they that vse this speech, are none of them that are taken to
bee fooles and ignoraunt persons, but of the greater and skilfuller
sort of people, yea of the wisest men of the worlde according
to the iudgement of men.How wee must iudge of a wise man. For when wee speake of good men and
such as are wise, wee must iudge of them according to the matter
which wee handle, and according to the iudgement of God in his
worde. Therefore, if according to this reason wee iudge of these
men of whome wee nowe speake, they shall be found to be the grosest
and most blockish beasts that the earth beareth. For all science,
wisedome, and greatnes, separated from vertue, are not the things
themselues indeed, but brutishnesse rather, and vile basenesse. And
if we iudge otherwise, what is all the knowledge, wisedome and greatnesse,
that is in all men, in respect of that which is in one Deuil onely?
For what want the deuils from being Angels like to those blessed
Angels that continue still in their obedience vnto God? If there

be any question made for greatnesse of spirite, they are all spirite.
If for such wisedome and knowledge as the cunning and wise men
of this worlde haue, of whome haue worldly wise men learned their
skill but of them, in comparison of whom they are but young schollers?
If the question bee for greatnesse, what King or Prince in the
worlde is so great as they?Ioh. 12. 31. For who is called the prince of this
worlde by Iesus Christ,2. cor. 4. 4. the God of this worlde by Saint Paul,
principalities,Ephe. 6. 12. powers, worldly gouernours, and the princes of the
darknesse of this worlde? Are not the deuils so called, who rule and
gouerne the great ones of the whole worlde, that are great indeede
according to men, but not according God? What then doe they
want of beeing celestiall Angels, but vertue and goodnesse? But
because these men of whome wee speake nowe, beleeue not that
there are Angels or diuels, wee will beate them with other arguments.
For of these men also there bee some that say, wee must hue
as the most doe, but followe the opinion of the fewest. Nowe
then, when they woulde haue men to bee perswaded to vertue, and
to doe their duetie by lying and errour, namely, by intertayning
in them an opinion of religion, and of a second life, although there
bee no such thing, is not this, a very proper meanes to call all trueth
into question,The inconueniences which follow the former opinion of perswading men to goodnesse by false meanes. and to trample all vertue vnder foote? For if any
propounde the immortalitie of soules vnto men, not as if it were
a true matter, but as a fayned and false thing, which yet they would
haue them beleeue as true, to the ende that through the feare of
Gods iudgement they might bee kept backe from euill, and lead
vnto goodnesse, euerie one may guesse easily, howe men will dispence
with themselues, when they once knowe, that whatsoeuer
is spoken and propounded vnto them, is but as a scarre-crowe to
make them afraide, as wee vse to deale with little children and with
birdes by puppets and strawe-men, and such like things. And who
will first perceiue and finde out these subtilties, such as are most ignoraunt
and foolish, or the other that are more skilfull and wise? It is
easie to iudge, that they who haue best wittes and are best learned will
sooner perceiue the same then the other.
Now what wil follow hereupon, but that they being freed from the
feare which held them in before, shall by the same means be let loofe
and sundred from the bond of all religion and vertue, as if it were clean
broken: as it hath and daily doth happen to them that mainteine this opinion,
and to those also that haue beene taught and instructed in their
schoole. And consequently this also will follow, that the quicker and
sharper wit a man hath, and the greater knowledge and vnderstanding

is in him, the more wicked and badde man hee will proue. For if hee
vnderstand that religion is but religion in name, and indeed is nothing
but foolish superstition, and if hee iudge as much of the immortalitie
of the soule: hauing thus shaken off all religion, he will cast away all
feare of God, and not suffer himselfe to be brideled in any sort, either
by any terrour of the iudgement to come, or reuerence of the deitie,
but onely by the feare of mens lawes. And if this take place in men,
we may wel thinke what licence they will take to themselues to commit
the greatest sinnes and abominations in the worlde, especially if
they be in darknes, and thinke that no man seeth them, and that there
is no other iudge that perceiueth them, to whome they must one day
giue an account. And if they be so great, that by their power they may
violate all lawes both diuine and humane, as tyrants commonly vse
to doe, who shall stay them from liuing like sauage beastes among
men? So that as euery one by dexteritie of spirite, by doctrine and instruction,
shall approch neerer to that perfection for which man was
created of God, the more enclined, readie and armed he will bee to
commit all kinde of malice and wickednesse. For how can hee doe otherwise,
when that secret of the schoole shall be disclosed vnto him,
and when he shall learne, that whatsoeuer is here taught concerning
religion, vertue and honestie amongst men, is but fained and inuented
for the nonce to keepe men in feare? Surely this will cause him to let
loose the raines to all licenciousnesse. Nowe what corruption of the
spirite and mind of man is there comparable to this? or what will sooner
turne it aside from that perfection in which the soueraigne and chief
good of it consisteth? Therefore seeing the case standeth thus, this opinion
of theirs cannot be true, but ouerthroweth it selfe. For whatsoeuer
corrupteth the spirite and turneth it from his perfection, is contrarie
to the nature thereof.
Wherefore wee must conclude,That which corrupteth the spirit is contrary to the nature of it. that it is farre otherwise, and that
this saying of theirs is as true, as if one should say, that the perfecter a
man is, the more he is vnperfect: the better he is, the worse he is: and
the more truly he is man, the further off he is from the nature of a man,
and more like to the nature of sauage beasts. Who then can doubt of
the truth of the soules immortalitie after so great a multitude of arguments,
and of so strong and so mightie witnesses, who fight in battel
aray, as it were a strong armie, against them that vpholde the contrarie?
But we haue other no lesse worthie to bee considered of, which
we beare within our selues, and which are so common to all, that there
is no man whatsoeuer, but hee feeleth and perceiueth them, whether
he will or no. Therefore it shall bee good for vs to speake somewhat

thereof also, to the ende that the matter we haue nowe in hande, may
be the better and more perfectly vnderstood, to the confusion of Epicures
and Atheists: and that we may still acknowledge more and more
the testimonies of the image of God in vs, and who we bee, and what
good or euill things are prepared for vs in the immortalitie of the second
life, according as we shalbe conformed and reformed to the will of
God, or els as we shalbe remoued from that image and giue credit to impietie
and lies. Now it belongeth to thee, ACHITOB, to discourse of
this matter.


Of those internall testimonies, which all men cary within themselues, to conuince
them that doubt of the immortality of the soule, and of the iudgement
to come, which shalbe in eternall happines for the good, and perpetuall torment
for the euill: how the very Heathen acknowledged as much by reasons
taken from the testimonies of nature. Chap. 96.
ACHIT. The manifold miseries and scourges of Gods wrath wherwith
men are daily oppressed, should minister vnto the^ iust occasion
to think, how odious their sinnes and wickednes are to God, and that
he will not leaue them vnpunished, neither in this life nor in the life to
come. For as he giueth to his children of his goodnes, and of those good
things which he hath prepared for them in another life, by the benefits
which he communicateth vnto them in this: so he setteth before our eies
testimonies of his wrath and of his iudgement, and of those euils and torments
which he hath prepared for the wicked in another life, by them
wherewith he vseth to correct and punish them here in this world. But
besides this, euery one hath within himself testimonies either of eternal
blessings or curses to come: which may easily conuince them that will
not receiue ye authority of the scriptures, nor any natural reason to proue
the immortality of the soule. For they beare about them all their witnesses
and their owne condemnation; and therefore it wilbe an easy matter
to conuince them,The difference betwixt conuincing and con^ounding a man. although not to co^found them. I say to conuince the^,
because a man is then conuinced, whe^ he is compelled to acknowledge
in his conscience, that he hath no reason whereby he is able to gainsay and
withsta^d ye truth declared vnto him, which co^demneth him. But yet if he
be obstinat, headstrong, malicious and peruerse, he neuer ceaseth for all
that to kick against the prick, and to perseuere in his obstinacy, and peeuish
malice. For when reason faileth him, he armeth himself with impude^cy,
like to a bolde murderer, and to a shamelesse strumpet that cannot be
made ashamed. But howsoeuer wicked men labour to blind their mind,
and to harden their heart against the iudgement of God, yet the same is
neuer declared vnto them, but they feele themselues pricked and priessed

therewith will they nill they: not that it fareth with them as it doeth
with Gods children, who are touched therewith vnto repentance, but
as Saint Paul speaking of the wicked and obstinate saith, that God hath
giuen them a pricking spirite, because they haue a bitter heart, which
stirreth them vp to whet themselues as it were more and more against
God, and to despite him, when they feele themselues pressed and vrged
by his word and by his iudgements.
Now then God hauing created Angels and men,Internal testimonies of the immortality of the soule. that they shoulde
know him and follow his will, gaue them a nature endued with vnderstanding,
and hath set within them rules of iudgement, and of certaine
knowledge, which are vnto them as lawes in nature, and hath also placed
in them the will with the affections, as ministers and practisers of
those rules and lawes. This selfe-fame diuine prouidence hath appointed
also that the affection of ioy should be naturally in men, which
commeth vnto them by reason of some good which they receiue or
looke for, when they obey his lawes that commaundeth them to doe
iust things: as contrariwise, he hath put in them the affection of sorow
and heauinesse to take vengeance of their rebellion against his lawes,
and of the transgression of them. For as God hath decreed, that the nature
of man should leade a ioyfull life, and should by this meanes of ioy
be preserued in the knowledge of God his creator and in his obedience,
and so rest in him: so also he hath appointed flames of wrath and griefe
to destroy this nature, when it doeth not conforme it selfe vnto the rule
of his heauenly wisedome and will. Therefore wee may well say, that
we cary about with vs, as it were our paradise and our Hell, and haue
alreadie in this worlde true beginnings of them both. For so long as we
conforme our selues to God and follow his wisedome and will, so that
we submit our will to his, and desire not to bee wise but in him and by
him, nor iudge any thing good or euil, but according to his iudgement,
neither will any thing but that which hee willeth, and take no pleasure
but in obeying and pleasing him, wee cannot bee thus affected
towards him,The cause of true ioy in the spirite. but we shall receiue an vnspeakeable ioy by that mutuall
participation of loue which is betweene him and vs, and by that taste
which wee receiue thereby of his goodnesse, bountie, grace, and fauour
towardes vs, which is the toppe of all happinesse. For as the nature
of men was created of God, to the ende it might be conformable
vnto him, so also it was ordained by him that it shoulde liue, not to
be extinguished and vndone through griefe, which is an euill that corrupteth
and consumeth as well as diseases. Therefore if it were conformable
to God, so that mens hearts agreed vnto reason and right
iudgement, they shoulde alwayes reioyce in well doing, both before
and after the (...) and so wee (...) as it were

in Paradise. And although God be euery where in regard of his nature
and diuine essence,Where God is said to be especially. which is infinite, neuerthelesse wee meane according
to the stile of the holy scriptures, that hee is properly and specially
there, where hee sheweth himselfe good, gracious, and fauourable.
For this is more proper to his nature in regard of vs, and that which maketh
him more louing and amiable to vs, and which is most necessarie
for vs, and in regard whereof he calleth himselfe properly our God and
our father. But as he kindleth the sparkles of loue in their hearts that are
vpright and sincere, that loue and honour him, which worketh in them so
great ioy and consolation, that all other ioy and pleasure are nothing
vnto them in respect of that: so contrariwise, if wee turne aside and separate
our selues from him, opposing our selues against his wisedome
and will, as rebellious subiects to their Prince, violating all his
lawes and statutes, he kindleth in vs fire-brands of his wrath and furie,
which woorke in vs extreame griefes,The true cause of grief and torment. so that wee cannot beare them,
but are consumed by them. For in this corruption and peruersenesse of
nature, our heart burneth with the flames of this infernall fire with
which it is kindeled, and which striue against reason and right iudgement,
euen before it hath committed the fault: neither doeth it feare afterwards
to commit the same, howe great and enormious soeuer it bee.
But forasmuch as it belongeth to the iustice of God, to destroy that nature
which is disobedie^t vnto him, he hath established this order, namely,
that sorow and griefe (as it were the hangman) should punish and destroy
them that are guiltie, as criminall persons are punished by the appoyntment
of iustice. Wherefore although wicked men are oftentimes
blockish and lulled asleepe, and as it were voyde of all sense and
feeling, so that they feele not this griefe to the quicke, neuertheles in the
ende it is throughly felt of them, so that it vtterly destroyeth them. For
it is like to a fire, which hauing beene couered or smoothered, afterwardes
kindeleth againe, and gathereth strength, when it is vncouered
and receiueth aire, if it haue matter whereupon it may woorke. For besides
that naturall griefe which hath this office, God addeth thereunto
horrible feare and terrour, whereby hee ouerwhelmeth the wicked,
as if hee thundered vpon them: so that euen heere they feele their
Hell, and the fire of Gods wrath taking holde of them, yea they carie
about them their infern all furies, which are vnto them insteede of
Hangmen.
Thus wee may learne,How men cary about them the matter of two fires. howe wee carie about with vs the matter
of two fires, the one celestiall and diuine, the other infernall and
diuelish. Wherefore let vs consider well with our selues, which of them
we had rather haue kindeled in vs, and which we ought to desire most,
eyther that which giueth vs both light and heate, and preserueth vs

in the hope of true life: or else that which burneth and consumeth vs,
and doth wholly depriue vs of that life. Now surely they are very wretched,
who desire not that which is most agreeable to their own nature,
and vtterly detest and abhorre the other. For as we delight in the fire, because
it giueth vs light and warmeth vs: so we feare greatly to be burned
and consumed by it.Deut. 4. 24. heb. 12. 29. Now both these sorts of fire we finde in God. For
he is a fire to giue light and warmth to them that approch and draw neere
vnto him, and desire to walk in his light, but contrariwise, he is a consuming
fire,Esay 66. 24. matth. 22. 13. and 25. 30. ioyned with smoke and obscurity, to them who by rebellion
and disobedie^ce rush against him. For this cause the fire of hell and of Gods
wrath, which is prepared for the deuill and for all the reprobate, is called
eternal fire in the holy scriptures, that is neuer put out: and the pains
and torments of the damned are likewise called darknes without, where
shalbe weeping and gnashing of teeth. And to the end we might know
the nature of this fire the better, God hath put sparkles thereof within
vs. Wherefore we are only to consider what matter we bring to kindle
and encrease either the one or the other: either for the preseruation of
our nature and life, appointed vnto vs by God, or els for the ouerthrow
and destruction thereof. And by the sense and feeling, which wee may
haue here of that ioy, gladnes and contentation, which the knowledge
of God and obedience to his will bringeth to our heart, wee may also
iudge whether there be a paradise, and another life and other ioy besides
this, which we receiue by corporall pleasures, as beasts doe. For this ioy
that commeth to vs from such pleasures, is common to vs with them, and
vsually it endeth in sorowe and sadnesse. But they haue no other that
commeth vnto their soule, of which they may haue any appehension
as we haue. And by the same consideration, we may also in some sort
iudge of that happines in which we shall be in the other life, when this
ioy shalbe perfect in vs wherof we haue here but a very smal taste, in respect
of that we shal haue, when we shalbe fully reformed according to
Gods image, so yt both our vnderstanding, reason, and wil shalbe made co^formable
vnto him, because we shalbe wholy swallowed vp in his loue.
Contrariwise,A sure argument in the wicked of their future torment in another life. if here we feele a Hel which we cary about vs, and which
greatly tormenteth vs after we haue offended the maiesty of God, especially
when we haue co^mitted some horrible crimes, this also is another
argument whereby we may iudge whether there be not a Hel, and vengeance
from God to be executed vpon his enemies in another life. For
that sorow, which our crimes committed doe breede in our hearts, is
within vs as a brand of this fire of Gods wrath, which is daily kindled in
vs more and more. Wherfore if there be in vs already such a veheme^t heat
thereof, when as yet the Lord doeth kindle but a litle the fire-brands of
his wrath in our heartes, how great shal it then be, when all his wrath

shalbe set on fire? Certainly they are very dull that doe not well consider
and vnderstand it. Now we haue heard heretofore how the heathen
Philosophers concluded the immortalitie of mans soule by the nature
thereof,Naturall reasons to proue the immortalitie of mens soules. affirming that it is not created or compounded of corruptible
matter, but is of a celestiall and diuine nature, by reason of that
knowledge which it hath, not onely of particular and corporal things,
as the soule of beastes hath, but also of vniuersall and spirituall things,
and namely, of God, of numbers, of order, of the difference betweene
vertue and vice, and betweene honest and dishonest things.
For the knowledge of al these things is so naturall to mens soules, that
they are within them, albeit they haue not receiued the^ from without,
eyther by doctrine or instruction. Whereby a man may easily iudge,
yea it followeth necessarily, that they are created of a more excellent
nature then is that of the elements, of a nature that is incorruptible
and perpetuall. Wherefore it is verie euident, that this knowledge,
thus naturall to mens soules, is a certaine testimonie, that they
are not borne at all aduenture, but are created by great arte, and by
a woonderfull prouidence of that diuine and eternall nature by which
they haue their beeing, namely God their Creatour, for which cause
also the knowledge of him shineth in vs. So also we may well iudge,
that God hath not in vaine placed in our nature the knowledge of the
difference that is betweene vertue and vice, betweene things honest
and dishonest, and that griefe which is to take vengeance in vs
of those vices and crimes of which wee feele our selues guiltie. And
therefore the Heathen themselues concluded, that there was not
onelie a diuine iustice and nature which discerned good men from euill,
but also that there was another life after this, in which this iudgement
should bee made. For they considered what great torments
the wicked feele in their heartes and conscience, after they haue committed
horrible crimes: and that there is none so audacious and obdurate,
not the greatest mocker and contemner of God and of his
iudgments that can be, who can always exempt himselfe from this dolour
and paine, notwithstanding hee labour with all his might to the
contrarie. For there is alwayes a certaine secrete vertue of Gods iustice,
which goeth beyonde them all, and euermore punisheth the
wicked. Nowe it is certaine, that these things come not thus to passe at
all aduenture.
In like manner,The naturall knowledge of good and euill an argument of our immortality. it is not possible, that this knowledge which men
haue to discerne vertues from vices shoulde bee a casuall thing, and
come thus to passe at aduenture, without the certaine prouidence of
God. For if it were so, that there were no punishment appoynted for
vices, and no more benefite or ioye prepared of God for the good

then for the euill, it should follow that all this knowledge shoulde bee
giuen to man in vaine. For it should doe him no more good then if hee
were without it as brute beasts are. Moreouer, seeing all the wicked are
not punished in this life, it followeth necessarily, that there is another
life wherein they shalbe punished, and in which also God wil acknowledge
the iust, and cause them to enioy that good which he hath prepared
for them. For God cannot bee God, but he must bee all-good, aliust,
and almightie. If hee be good, hee cannot hate the good or them
that doe it, but loue them so, as that hee cannot doe otherwise. For
howe shoulde hee not loue his like? And as he cannot hate goodnesse
or good men, so hee cannot loue euill, nor the wicked that follow after
it; but hateth them necessarily as contrarie to his nature. Nowe
Loue is of that nature,The nature of loue and hatred. that it cannot but desire and procure the good
and honour of him whome it loueth: as contrariwise, hatred cannot
but desire and procure the hurt and dishonour of him whome it hateth.
It followeth then necessarily, that God beeing good and iust, loueth
good and iust men, desiring and procuring their honour and
their good: and contrariwise, that he hateth vniust and wicked men,
desiring and procuring their confusion and ruine. And if hee haue this
desire and this will, no doubt but hee can easily and doeth also execute
the same, seeing hee is all-iust and almightie. Truely this conclusion
cannot seeme to bee ill grounded, and those Heathen Philosophers,
who thereupon haue concluded the immortalitie of soules,
and the iudgement of God in another life, had good reason so to doe.
For it is taken not only from the nature of man and from that image of
God after which he was created, but also from the very nature of God.
So that whosoeuer gainesayeth the same, hath no more reason then
if he saide, that there is no God, and that God is not God, and that
man is not man, and that he differed in nothing from a beast, neither
God from the deuill. And so not onely all nature shoulde bee ouer-throwen,
but God also, the author and Creator thereof. For we see almost
vsually, that the wickedst men haue the greatest honors in this
world, and liue most at their ease, as we haue alreadie shewed. If then
there be a God, and any prouidence and iustice in him (now who can
so much as thinke there is none, but hee may also perswade himselfe
withall that there is no worlde nor any creature, and that himselfe is
not the same he is?)The necessitie of another life after this. it must I say, of necessitie follow, that if God be,
there is also another life, in which that iustice shalbe perfourmed, which
is not heere executed, and in which both iust and vniust shall receiue
euery one the reward of his iustice or iniustice. For it is impossible, that
God who is so good and so iust a nature, shoulde create mankinde in
that sort, as if he had created the best and iustest part thereof, onely to

misery and wretchednesse, and the woorst to ioy and happinesse. Now
continuing our discourse of those internall testimonies, which euerie
one of vs beareth within him of the immortalitie of the soule, we will
speake to morrow of conscience, which presseth men to stand in awe
of God and of his iudgements. It is your part, ASER, to intreate of
this matter.

The ende of the twelft dayes worke.


THE THIRTEENTH
dayes worke.

Of the testimonies which euery one may take from his conscience: of that feare
vnto which all men are naturally subiect to prooue the immortalitie of the
soule, and a iudgement of God vpon the iust and vniust: howe that which
the Atheists say, that feare causeth gods amongest men, serueth to ouerthrow
their damnable opinion. Chap. 97.
ASER. The wicked may flatter themselues, and labour
as much as they list to rocke themselues asleepe
in their impieties and horrible vices, yet
they cannot preuayle so much, but they haue continually
a warning-peece ringing in their eare, and
an Apparitour rapping at their doore without ceassing,
so that they cannot alwayes sleepe at their ease. For that is
euer true,Gen. 4. 6, 7. which the Lorde saide to Cain, Why art thou wroth?
and why is thy countenance cast downe? If thou doe well, shalt thou
not bee accepted? and if thou doest not well, sinne lyeth at the doore.
Which is as much as if hee had sayde, that if Cain doeth as Abel
doeth, hee shall bee receiued of GOD with that honour that hee
is receiued, and shall goe with his face looking vpwarde: but if
hee doe otherwise, his sinne will awake him well enough, and not
suffer him to haue anie rest in his conscience, but will so presse
him,A similitude. that hee shall bee as a man that lyeth alwayes in a portall,
or neere vnto it, who can take no rest for anie long season, by reason
of commers and goers that goe in and out by it, or that knocke
at it euerie houre to haue it opened.Sorow euer followeth sinne. And therefore it is commonly
sayde, that Repentaunce euer followeth after sinne. For, howesoeuer
it may bee slowe in comming, yet it cannot bee without great
heauines and sorow: which no vniust person can eschew, but he shalbe

sure to feele it very sharpe and vehement. For he must needes feele and
haue experience in himselfe, that of euill nothing but euill can befall
him in the ende, and that when he feeleth what euill sinne bringeth vnto
him, he cannot but bee grieued that he hath committed it, and wish
that the thing were to doe againe. Therefore euery wicked man feeleth
himselfe accused and condemned by his owne conscience, which is a
certaine testimonie vnto him, that there is a God and a Iudge, whose
iudgement he cannot auoyde. But before we proceed in this discourse,
it shalbe good for vs to know what conscience is properly.
Wee are then to knowe, that although sinne hath greatly troubled
the minde which God hath giuen vs, by the darkenesse of errour
and ignoraunce wherewith it is filled, yet it coulde not so wholly blind
it, but still there remayned in it some sparkles of that light of the
knowledge of God, and of good and euil, which is naturally in men, and
which is borne with them. This remnant that yet remayneth is commonly
called by the Diuines Synteresis: which is taken from a Greeke
word,What conscience is. that signifieth as much as if wee should say, Preseruation, whereby
that remnant of the light and law of nature that remaineth in vs, is still
preserued and kept in our soule after sinne. And so this worde Synteresis
signifieth that knowledge of the Lawe which is borne with vs:Why it is called Synteresis.
and it is so called, because it alwayes keepeth in man, yea in the
most wicked that can bee, an aduertisement or instruction, which
telleth him what is right and iust, and that there is a iudgement of God.
Some distinguish betweene Synteresis and Conscience, others take
them both for one and the same thing, calling this Synteresis, the
very conscience it selfe: whereas others say it is the naturall iudgement,
and some the light of our minde and spirite. The Philosophers,
who had some obscure knowledge, saide, that there are certaine
Anticipations in our nature, by which they meant the selfe-same
thing in a manner. For by these Anticipations they vnderstande those
principles of knowledge and naturall informations, which being as it
were rules, wee haue not learned of any Masters, neither by vse or experience,
but wee haue drawen and receiued them from nature, whom
God hath appoynted in this respect to be our mistres. For this cause the
Philosophers vsed this word Anticipation,Of the Philosophers Anticipations. or som other of the same signification
in the language wherein they wrote, before we receiue these
natural rules from nature, as from our mother, before we receiue any other,
either by learning of our masters, by vse, or by studie. For to Anticipate,
signifieth as much as to preuent and to take before. It is true, that
these rules of nature are in greater number, and more certayne, in some
then in others: and so are polished and encreased more by studie, by
vse, by experience, and by exercise. Nowe by what name soeuer this

light of our mind, and this naturall censure is called, by which we iudge
what is right and iust, or otherwise, sure it is, that of it owne nature it is
alwaies caried to that which is true and good. And from hence commeth
the approbation of vertues, and dislike of vices, from which also the lawes
and commandements of men touching maners doe afterwards flow, and
so the conscience that is within euery one, to the ende it may argue, reprooue,
and condemne him for his owne faults. So that there is no man
but he hath a Iudge within himself, except he be altogether depriued of
sense and humane vnderstanding, and so being turned into a brute beast,
committeth all vncleannes euen with greedines, as S. Paul speaketh to
the Ephesians.Ephes. 4. 19. And although some men that are most forsaken of God
fall sometimes into this senslesnesse, yet it continueth not alwayes with
them, but God afterwards rowseth them vp well enough, and causeth the^
to apprehend and feele the rigor of his iudgements. For although nature
were so put out and smothred in them, that no sparkle of naturall light to
rectifie their iudgement, appeared in them, nor yet any flame of Gods
wrath, which burneth the hart that is turned aside from him, yet he hath
other means to kindle the fame againe and to set it on flaming, euen after
such a maner,Atheists compared to drunkards and madde folks. that it amaseth them, as if it thundred down vpon the^.
Therfore it fareth with the^ as it doth with drunkards and frantik persons,
who know not whether they haue any soule or sense, any mind or conscience,
so long as they are drunke and out of their wits, vntil such time as
they haue slept their ful, and are restored againe to their right wits. So that
howsoeuer this word Conscience is vsed, it is properly a iudgement that is
in our mind, whereby we approoue that which is wel done, and reprooue
the contrary. According then as our iudgement is vpright and sound, or
weake and corrupted, good or euill, so also haue we our conscience either
more right or more crooked.A sit similitude. But as it cannot otherwise be, but that they
who haue eies see the light, although they will not see it, or say they doe
not see it: so it cannot be but that the eies of the mind beholdeth the natural
light that is in it, and those things that are discouered vnto it thereby,
seeing it proceedeth from God, who is the fountaine of al light, and
who will neuer suffer it to be so cleane extinguished in man, but that still
there remaineth sufficient to condemne him withall.The wicked alwaies condemne themselues. Therefore the very
Heathen coulde say, that a wicked person could neuer be absolued by
himself, nor yet escape and flee from his own iudgement and condemnation,
he being iudge of himselfe. So that although the wicked and
vniust, oftentimes escape the iudgement of men, yet they can neuer saue
themselues from their own iudgement, which their conscience alwaies
executeth after the perfection of their processe. For it exerciseth foure
offices against them.Foure offices of the conscience. The first is, the office of an Accuser: the second, of
a witnes, and so it is as good as a thousand, as we vse to speake: the third,

of a Iudge, the fourth, of an executioner and hangman. For seeing the
iudgement of the conscience is ordained and established by God from
heauen, in that which is well done there alwayes followeth to it, tranquilitie,
rest, and ioy of heart: and in that which is wickedly done, dolor
and torment, which punisheth the offence and taketh vengeance of him
that hath committed it.The more wicked a ma^ is, the greater is his feare. Heereof it is that none liue in greater feare, then
the greatest contemners of God, that are most giuen ouer to all kindes
of vice and wickednes, and who declare most euidently by their works,
that no feare of God or of his iudgements holdeth them in. For they
liue as if they carried death alwayes in their bosome, howe good a face
soeuer they set vpon the matter outwardly. And because they cast all
feare of God farre from them, he vouchsafeth them not the honour to
giue them a heart to feare him as they ought, but hee beateth downe
their pride in such sort, that he causeth them to stand in feare not only of
men, of tempests, of thunders and of lightnings, but hee terrifieth them
also by dreames, and maketh them to tremble at their owne fancies, yea
they quake oftentimes at flies, and mice, and such contemptible things:
but yet so as this feare commeth from a higher cause. For it is sent of
God, who thus derideth his aduersaries, making himselfe terrible in his
creatures to them that know him not, neither feare him as their Creatour
and the Creator of those his creatures.The Deitie prooued by that feare which is naturally in men. I say then, that although we
had no other testimonie in vs of any God, or of any diuinitie and diuine
nature, and so consequently of his iudgement in a second life, yet
this ought to suffice vs, that commeth from feare, which is a naturall
perturbation in man, as we haue heard. For whosoeuer feareth, declareth
plainly thereby that there must of necessitie be some power aboue
him that is able to hurt him. For he that is assuredly perswaded that nothing
can hurt him, is voide of feare.
Nowe there is no humane power, or creature whatsoeuer it be, that
is able to deliuer men from all feare, no not the greatest Emperours,
Kings, and Princes themselues, who are most feared and redoubted, and
who cause all men to tremble vnder them, being as it were terrestriall
gods amongst other men.The greatest persons liue in most feare. Nay these men themselues are so farre from
being deliuered from all feare and terrour, that very seldome any liue
in greater feare then they doe, as they declare plainely in that they must
alwayes haue a great garde of men about them, and yet can not euer
auoyde those daungers which they feare. For it often commeth to
passe, that they are slaine, eyther by poison, or sworde, or by some other
kinde of violent death, and that by such as should haue kept them,
or whome they trusted most, as is to be seene by dayly experience. But
albeit there were no other feare then the feare of death, which is commonly
greatest in the wicked, and which they can not finally auoyde,

yet they can not but liue alwayes in feare. And liuing so, they must acknowledge
will they nill they, that there is some other power greater
then their owne, which causeth them to feare, and before which they
must one day appeare. For if it were otherwise, why shoulde they
feare? Nowe whilest wee seeke for this power, wee must of necessitie
come to one soueraigne power, vnder which all other principalities are
raunged, and which hath no other aboue it selfe. And being come
thereunto, wee must withall conclude, that this power can not be
humane, but must needes bee diuine, and so consequently eternall
and infinite: or at leastwise they must confesse, that they cannot comprehend
this power.The Atheists prouerbe, that feare made gods, turned against themselues. This being so, I thinke wee may fight against
the Atheists with the same reason whereby they woulde perswade
themselues, that there is neither God nor Diuinitie, but onely in the
opinion and fantasie of men: and that their feare, vnto which they
are alwayes subiect, hath put this opinion of God into their heades.
Therefore they alleadge that which a Heathen Poet sayde, agreeable
to this opinion of the Epicures, namely, that feare was the first that
made Gods in the worlde. For men being possessed therewith, and not
finding such helpe amongest all the creatures, as can deliuer them
from all those dangers which they feare, they must seeke for an other
without the creatures, which can not but bee a diuine power, if there
be any at all, as in trueth there is. Whereunto if Epicures and Atheists
will giue no credite, I would fain know of them, what is the cause
of this terrour and feare, which is of such vertue and power in the hearts
of all, that no creature whatsoeuer, being partaker of reason and vnderstanding,
can goe beyond it, or is able to plucke it wholly out of
his heart, and vtterly to extinguish it: as euery one feeleth by experience
in himselfe, and as these men of whome wee speake, confesse
by their owne sayings. Therefore I can hope for no better from them in
defence of their impietie, but that they should stirre maliciously against
the testimonies of their owne conscience.
Wee say then that feare is not without a speciall prouidence of
GOD giuen to men after an other manner then vnto beastes,The difference betwixt the feare in men and in beasts. who
in deede haue some feare put in them, to the ende to keepe themselues
from hurtfull things before they take and vse them: but this apprehension
of theirs goeth not beyond the euils which may befall them
in this life, as that doeth in men, which reacheth a great deale further.
For they that haue committed some horrible crime, can not bee
without feare although they did it so secretely that no bodie coulde
come to the knowledge of it, or else were so mightie and powerfull,
that they stoode not in awe of any humane power whatsoeuer. Now
if they that haue not this authoritie and assuraunce shoulde replie

vpon me, that they are afraid least men should come to the knowledge
of the fact committed by them and so they should be punished, I demand
of them from whence this feare commeth, but from an apprehension
which (will they, nill they) is in them, and proceedeth from a certaine
sense and feeling of nature, which causeth them to feare that their offence
shalbe discouered by some other meanes then humane? As if nature
testified vnto them, that there is some diuine prouidence and vengeance,
which watcheth ouer offences, and discloseth them how secret soeuer
they are, and causeth them to be punished. As experience teacheth
in many, whose secret crimes haue bin discouered by woonderfull and
incredible meanes, so that all men are astonished at it, and are constrained
to confesse, that there is a diuine iustice, which wil not suffer horrible
facts to remaine alwaies hid and vnpunished. Therfore how secret and
close soeuer they carry the matter, this diuine iustice rappeth continually
at the doore of their conscience, as it were an Apparitor or Sergeant,
calling them to iudgement: so that whether they will or no, they must
alwaies liue in feare. And this also hath bin the cause that hath alwayes
induced men (I speake not of Atheists,Strong reasons against Atheists. who are brute beasts and not men)
to seek after some power out of their own nature, and aboue all creatures,
to gard and defend them from the euill which they feare. For, notwithstanding
their diuersity of opinions touching the diuine nature, all with
one consent from time to time haue euermore yeelded publike and constant
testimonie, that there is some diuine essence and power, that can
help or hurt them. Whereupon it followeth, that they can not be without
feare of it, or els not without som hope, that by the help therof they
shalbe kept from the euil which they feare, and obtaine that good which
they desire. Wherefore if Epicures and Atheists say, that feare was the
first shop in which the gods were forged and made in the world, I will
take their saying against themselues. For hereby they are compelled at
least to confesse,Feare is a natural testimonie of a diuine essence. that feare hath constrained men from time to time to
seek after some god: and that the same is a publike testimony of nature,
which hath caused the^ to lift vp the eies of their mind beyond the reach
of brute beasts, and forced them to think that there is some diuine power
and nature. And by the same reason also they may learne, that this is no
light fancie and vaine opinion entred into the braine of man, but a naturall,
firme, and constant notion and knowledge, which no age of man
could euer abolish, nor any thing els in the world. Yea this hath bin daily
confirmed in them more and more, and shalbe continually, notwithstanding
these swinish Epicures grunt in their sties, and these dogged Atheists
barke against God and his prouidence, against his iudgement and
the immortalitie of soules, which is the principall foundation of religion,
and the establishment and preseruation of humane societie.

Nowe then after so great a multitude of strong arguments and powerfull
testimonies, which like a mighty armie fight in battel aray to maintaine
the truth of the soules immortalitie, who can doubt there of in any
wise? Let them that vphold the contrary bring forth their arguments and
testimonies against ours, and place them in the fro^t of the battel, as it were
army against army, that all may know on which side not only the number,
but the strength also is the greatest. For the greatnes of the number
would do small good, vnles strength also were ioyned therunto. For we
must not so much reckon as waigh the sentences, nor consider so much
how many men affirme a thing, as what maner of persons they are, and of
what waight their testimony is, as also what they affirme, and with what
reasons. If we fal into this consideration, I doubt not but that euery way
the aduantage will be on our side for the trueth: namely, in regarde of
multitude, authoritie, nature, reason, and which is more, the testimony of
God, who alone is sufficient. Nowe to the ende that this may bee well
knowen vnto vs, let vs heare, AMANA, the best arguments that our
aduersaries can bring for the ground of their errour.


Whether Epicures and Atheists be reasonable beasts yea or no, and what reasons
they bring to ouerthrow the immortalitie of the soule: of the false opinion
of Pliny touching the same, and of his friuolous and brutish reasons to
this purpose: of the brutish conclusion, vnbeseeming the whole race of mankinde,
which he maketh of this matter, and of the iudgement of God vpon
him. Chap. 98.
AMANA. Many men, by reason of their ignorance in the Latine
tongue,What this worde Animal signifieth. think that Animal is a beast, whereas it signifieth a liuing
creature, and comprehendeth vnder it aswell men as beasts, euen euery
creature endued with a liuing soule. And therefore when they woulde
shew the difference that is betwene men and beasts, they take the contrary
species or kind for the whole, and say that a man is a reasonable beast,
not considering that they speake contraries. For there is as great difference
betwene a beast and reasonable, as betweene a man and brutish, or
brutishnes. For-seeing it is the naturall property of euery beast of what
kind soeuer it be, to be brutish, it cannot bee that any should bee reasonable,
except peraduenture Epicures and Atheists will say that they bee
such beasts. And indeede they should haue wrong offered them, to bee
reckoned among me^, seeing they do voluntarily make themselues brutish.
If then they will not confesse, that they are beasts altogether vncapable
of reason,Atheists are reasonable beasts. I demand of them whether they be reasonable beasts,
and whether they will argue this matter whereof we intreat, with reasons
or no, seeing they wil not rest in the iudgement of humane reason,
and of naturall Philosophie, and seeing all the holy Scriptures, holy Doctors,

wise Ancients, and most notable personages, seeme vnto them to
be no better then toyes and fables. Let vs come then to the reasons of
these vnreasonable beasts without reason.
Is there any point in all humane Philosophie that is better grounded
and laied vpon so strong, firme, and well concluding reasons, and
that hath moe or so many reasons as this, whereof wee dispute at this
present? Howe many things doe these fellowes beleeue according to
naturall Philosophie, for which they haue not so many nor so euident
reasons? And howe many things shoulde bee doubted of, except so
many arguments coulde bee brought for their proofe and confirmation,
as wee haue alleadged, and as might yet bee found out for this
matter? Nowe what can they alleadge on the contrary side? For
if they beleeue nothing but what they see, and whereof they haue experience,
I demaund of them, howe many things there are in humane
Philosophie where of they are throughly resolued, and yet haue no experience
at all in them, neither can haue any certainetie, but onely as
they giue credite to such as haue written of them, who yet are deceiued
themselues oftentimes, and so haue deceiued others? And yet they are not
so hardly brought to beleeue their reasons, as to giue credite to them
that maintaine the immortalitie of soules, which is a matter of so great
consequence and waight.Atheists sitly resembled to Spiders. And as Spiders turne into poison the sweetest
liquors they sucke, so they maliciously gather the reasons, testimonies
and places, not onely of Poets, Philosophers, and others, but
also of the holie Scriptures, which they thinke will serue to confirme
them daily more and more in their errours, and in their false and wicked
opinions, howe little likelihoode soeuer they seeme to haue, and
howe flenderly soeuer they make for them. In the meane season they
dissemble and make shewe that they see not all the other reasons that
fight directly against them, which being in number infinite, are so
cleere and so certaine, as nothing can bee more. There are many of
them that haue no other reason but their opinon, who can alleadge
no other thing but this, It is not so, or, I beleeue it not, or, I doubt
of it, or, Peraduenture it is otherwise. And in trueth none of them all
in a manner haue any reasons of greater shewe, or that can vrge them
that haue neuer so little iudgement, as wee may easily iudge by the
examination of one of their cheefe Maisters and strong Pillers, I
meane Pliny,Plinies brutish opinion touching the immortality of the soule. by whome we may iudge of all the rest. For if hee, who
is so much esteemed among them, shewed himselfe to be such a grosse
and blockish beast, and so farre from reason in that which hee wrote
touching this matter, a man may soone guesse what can bee in the others,
who are no body in respect of him, or at leastwise haue not
gotten so great credite and authoritie. But let vs heare the reasons of

this venerable Doctor. First, he derideth all that men haue spoken or
written of the beeing of soules after the death of the bodies, accompting
all this to be but toyes and dreames: and then hee propoundeth
his resolution, that there remaineth no more of a man after his corporall
death, then there was of him before hee was conceiued and
borne.
After that he laugheth at the vanitie of men in that they are so foolish
as at the very time of their death voluntarily to flatter and beguile themselues,
in promising to themselues life euen after life: some by the immortalitie
of the soule, others by the transfiguration thereof, and a
third sort by attributing sense to the dead and by honoring their soules,
and making a god of that, which hauing beene a man, is now nothing
at all. I maruaile not if Plinie mocked at many foolish opinions that
were among the Heathen touching this matter, and namely, the foo^eries
of the Pythagoreans and Platonists, which I doubt not but hee
meant by the transfiguration of soules.Plato his opinion of the creation of soules. whereof hee maketh mention.
For Plato was so farre from yeelding that the soule of man was mortall,
that hee will not confesse the soule of beasts to bee so, because
according to his opinion of the creation of soules, hee thinketh that
there is but one kinde of soule for all sortes of bodies that haue life, and
that soules passe and repasse from one to an other, as wee heard, vntill
that being well purged they come to the place of the blessed. Likewise
this Authour of the naturall historie had reason to deride the follie and
vanitie of men in deifying them that died, and in making them immortall
gods, that had beene before but mortall men. But from these fond
opinions he had no reason to conclude, that if soules did not passe and
repasse from bodies to bodies, and if men coulde not become gods after
their death, therefore they ceased to be men any longer, and nothing
remained of them but their ashes, so that their soules also perished
as well as their bodies.Plinies reasons against the immortalitie of the soule. But what reasons hath hee to vpholde this
conclusion? For the first hee alleadgeth, that men breathe not otherwise
then beasts doe,Plin. lib. 7. ca. 55. because hee seeth nothing of the soule of either
of them, and goeth no further then to the externall senses, as if the
soule of men as well as of beasts were nothing else but a breath. Wherby
we see what a grosse beast he sheweth himselfe to be. We may say
the same of him, in that he requireth both the internall and externall
senses after the death of a man, and the same offices which the soule performed
in the bodie when it dwelled therein, concluding that without
these things there could be no good for ma^ after death. Then he taketh
this for an other argument, that there are many other things in the
world, which liue a great deale longer then man doth, and yet we attribute
no immortality vnto them. After, he demandeth whither ma^ goeth

after death, what lodging he hath, and what a multitude of soules there
should be in the world from the time it hath bin a world, if al they shuld
liue that haue bin: and so concludeth that they should be but as it were so
many shadows. We haue sufficiently answered all these goodly arguments
before, when we spake of brutish men, who rest only in the witnes
of their senses, and go no further then beasts doe. Besides, what an
argument is that for so great a man, to say that we attribute not immortalitie
to many things that out-liue men, and therefore why should wee
rather beleeue it of mens soules? There are not only many beasts, whose
life is longer then the life of men, but also many trees, and therefore wee
must aske of man, why we should think that he is rather capable of reason,
and more excellent then other creatures are, and that he hath a soule
of another nature and more noble then they? But I will further vrge these
arguments against himselfe, according as we made answere to the complaint
of som Philosophers, who accused nature because she had gra^ted
lo^ger life to many beasts then to me^, seeing it was so necessary for them.
For seeing Nature hath endued man with so many goodly gifts and so
excellent, wherewith she hath not adorned beasts, certainly she should
be a stepmother, and no true mother, or if she were a mother yet shee
should be a very cruel mother, if she had giuen longer life to beasts then
to men, and had not reserued a better and a longer for them. But this reason
would not greatly moue Pliny, who is the man himselfe, that gaue these
goodly titles to nature,Pliny blasphemed God vnder the name of Nature. vnder which name, he blasphemed God whom
he knew not. Neuertheles this argument wil be of force with them that
waigh it aright, considering the prouidence and goodnesse of God towards
mankinde. He addeth further, that this fantasticall opinion is entred
into mens braines, because they woulde neuer faile but be eternall.
But this pretended reason is so far from confirming his opinio^, that contrariwise
it greatly weakneth the same, in that it agreeth with the argument
for the immortalitie of soules, that was taken from this natural desire
which God hath not giuen to men in vaine, as hath bin shewed vnto
vs by good reasons. Moreouer he iudgeth it great follie to keepe bodies
in hope that they shall liue and rise againe, according to the vaine
promise of the Philosopher Democritus,Democritus beleeued the resurrection of bodies. who did not rise againe himselfe.
But I maruel not if Pliny spake so of the resurrection of bodies, seeing
he held that opinion of the mortalitie of soules: and seeing those Philosphers
who maintained the immortalitie of soules, did not so much as
once dreame of the resurrection of bodies, except this Democritus only,
at whom I much more woonder, then at all this which Pliny writeth of
the mortalitie of soules. For it seemeth that Democritus could not learn
this of reason and of natural philosophy, vnles it were so that he builded
his doctrine vpon the same foundation that he took from his Motes, co^cerning

the matter of which all things are made. For according to this
opinion hee taught, that all the essences that euer were, shoulde in
time haue their beeing againe by the meeting together of those matters,
of which they had beene compounded. Surely a very fond opinion
for a Philosopher, so that Pliny may well derde it; although the
argument hee maketh against him is not strong enough to ouerthrowe
his imagination. For hee woulde haue had Democritus to haue confirmed
his opinion by his owne resurrection. But his Philosophie did
not insinuate so much that it shoulde haue beene done so quickely, but
after the reuolution of many Ages, which Pliny shoulde haue stayed
for before hee coulde haue euicted Democritus of his foolish opinion,
if hee had no better argument to ouerthrowe it. Nowe if this Philosopher
did not lay this ground for his opinion which I haue mentioned,
I woulde haue thought that hee might haue vnderstoode the same by
some speech come to his eares, of the doctrine of the holie Patriarkes
and of the Hebrewes touching this matter, by meanes of the Aegyptians
amongest whome those good Fathers long dwelt, because they
that wrote the liues of the Philosophers,What Philosophers went into Egypt to learne wisedome. put Democritus in the number
of them that descended into Aegypt to learne the wisedome of that
people, as Pythagoras, Plato, Orpheus, Socrates and Pherecydes with others,
did the same. But let vs returne to Pliny and heare his other reasons
such as they be.
He accounteth it great follie in men to thinke, that by death a man
may enter into a second life: and thereupon breaketh foorth into an exclamation,
as if men were out of their wits so to thinke. But he would
haue found it no lesse impossible, that generation shoulde come of corruption,
and that of seede, which is but as it were a little slime, a man
coulde be engendered, or a beast, if experience had not taught the
fame. And because hee hath not seene a soule liue after the death of the
bodie, nor a dead man risen againe, therefore hee concludeth, that
there is neither immortalitie of the soule nor resurrection of the bodie.
But wee may call to minde that which was vttered to this purpose,
when wee spake of the similitude that is betweene our first and second
birth. I omit that which he saieth of the rest and quietnesse taken away
for euer from men that are borne, if that diuision of the soule separated
from the body which some Heathen Philosophers made, shoulde take
place, namely, when they so diuided it, that the sence of soules remained
aboue, and their shadowes beneath among the dead: for all
this is but fopperie. Neuerthelesse the argument taken from the common
consent of men touching the immortalitie of soules remaineth
still, and is confirmed euen by Plinie himselfe in this place, although
peraduenture hee neuer thought it.

Let vs then come to the finall conclusion which hee maketh of
this whole matter.The conclusion of Plinie touching this matter. Hee calleth it deceit of woordes, and foolish
credulitie, whatsoeuer men speake or beleeue of their immortalitie,
and accompteth it as a poison that destroyeth the chiefe good of Nature,
which as hee sayeth is death, adding further that by this meanes
death shall doubled, or (as some reade it) the greefe of him that
is to die shall be doubled, when hee shall thinke vpon that which is
to come. For if it bee a sweete and pleasant thing to liue, to whome
can it bee pleasant to thinke that hee did once liue? Therefore hee setteth
this downe for his last resolution, that it is more easie and certaine
for euery one to beleeue himselfe and that whereof hee hath experience
in himselfe, then to trust any other: and to fetch his assurance
from that which a man was before hee was borne. Thus wee
see howe hee laboureth to perswade, that no man can bee blessed
in the life to come, because the cheefe good thing hee can haue in
nature is taken from him, except hee bee wholly like to beastes in his
death, and except hee beleeue that there remaineth no more of him
after death, then there was before his conception and natiuitie. And
to confirme and assure himselfe in this opinion, hee woulde haue euery
one to fetch an argument and proofe heereof from the similitude
of that estate in which hee was before hee was conceiued or borne, to
compare it with that which followeth his death, that a man may iudge
of the one by the other. But what reason is in that? For is there the same
reason from not beeing to beeing, that is from beeing to not beeing?
Wee knowe well howe man is come from not beeing to beeing, but
can wee heereby bee so assured, that hee shall bee no more after hee
hath beene, as we knowe hee hath beene after a time wherein he was
not? And whereas hee woulde haue vs giue more credite to our owne
experience in our death, then to all that can bee saide by others, I
woulde demaund of him what that is of which wee haue experience,
and whether wee ought to conclude, that wee die wholly as beastes
doe, because to the sence of man wee see no difference betwixt their
deaths and the death of man. It seemeth this is his meaning. But as
they of his coate aske who euercame from the dead, to testifie that
soules are immortall, so we may aske of him, who euer returned from
thence, to assure vs of that which euery one may haue experience of in
his death, and whether they perceiued themselues to bee altogether
like to beastes after the same. For they can haue no more certaine testimonie
of this by their senses, then they haue of the other point. Also
I woulde gladly aske of him howe hee founde himselfe, when hee
was choked neere to the mountaine Vesuuius with smoake,The iudgement of God in Plinies death. and with
the smell of brimstone issuing out of the same: and what consolation

he found in death, which hee sayeth is the greatest good of Nature.
Whereby hee shewed howe smally hee had profited in the knowledge
of God the Creatour of Nature,Plin. Nep* epist. ad O^^. Ta^. by the contemplation of his workes
therein. No maruaile then if knowing him no better, hee called her
step-mother and cruell mother, seeing that according to his Philosophie,
the greatest good which shee bringeth to men, is death: and
seeing shee neuer doeth them a better turne, then when he bringeth
them backe againe to that estate in which they were before they were
conceiued or borne into the world. According to which conclusion,
a man may wel approue of that desperate sentence of theirs who affirmed
resolutely, that it were good for men, either neuer to be borne,
or to die presently after their birth. So that the first and cheefest benefite
of nature shoulde be, neuer to bee borne: and the second, to be
borne before the time, or to be as soone dead as borne.
Moreouer it should follow by Plinies Philosophie,The absurd consequents of Plinies opinion. that nature had
made men with such a condition, that they can not but be miserable,
if they liue after this life, and if death doe not wholy destroy them,
and if they be not resolutely perswaded of this, to haue no hope at all
of another life. For that which he sayeth importeth as much. Is not
this then a goodly resolution and conclusion of so great a searcher of
nature, whereof he hath written the historie? With what eies did hee
looke vpon all that which hee might haue scene? Howe much differed
they from the eyes of beastes? and what profite reaped hee by that
knowledge which hee had more then they? In trueth wee haue in this
man a wonderfull example of Gods iudgement vpon the learned and
wise men of the worlde, who so vilely abuse that reason, knowledge,
and vnderstanding which GOD hath giuen them. And forasmuch
as this dogge was permitted to vomite out such horrible blasphemies,
both against God and against Nature, and yet receiued no punishment
for the same from man, therefore GOD himselfe tooke vengeance
of him by smoke, whereby hee was choaked to death. For seeing he
esteemed the soule to be no better then a little winde or breath, he deserued
well to loose the same in the middest of smoake and brimstone.
But we haue spoken enough of him. Nowe you may, ARAM, tell vs
some more lies rather then reasons, wherewith Atheists fortifie themselues
against the trueth of this matter we haue in hand, and howe wee
ought to consider of the iudgements of God vpon them.



Of them who say, that we can not knowe by the light of nature but that
the soule is mortall: of them that alleadge a place of Salomon against
the immortalitie of the soule: how we ought to consider of the iudgements
of God vpon Epicures and Atheists: howe the absurdities,
which followe their doctrine, declare plainely the grosenesse of it: of
the force of those arguments that were produced before for the immortalitie
of the soule. Chap. 99.
ARAM. It is a great matter when men iudge of things, not according
to reason, but according to their affections: because then
their eares are closed vp against all reasons, as wee haue the example of
the Iewes, who were the enemies of Iesus Christ. For after they had
once resolued not to acknowledge him, neither to receiue him for the
true Annointed of the Lorde, but to reiect and condemne him with all
his doctrine and workes, no reason was euer sufficient to remoue them
from this their purpose. But to confirme them in their obstinacie there
needed no great arguments, no not in shew, as it appeareth in that difficultie
of theirs to beleeue his resurrection. For neither all these witnesses
of which they had so great a number, nor all their doctrine, nor
all their holinesse, nor all their signes and miracles, were of any force
with them in regarde of that testimonie, which the theeuish and murdering
souldiers corrupted with money gaue them to the contrary,Mat. 28. 12, 13. and
that by a lowd lie which ouerthrew it selfe.
Therefore we may easily iudge what the minde of man is, when it is
corrupted and peruerted, and when men suffer themselues to be carried
away with their euill and froward affections, so that God doeth euen
blindfold and forsake them. We see many such examples in this matter,
which we now ha^dle touching the immortalitie of the soule. For on the
contrary side, what are the strongest reasons, which these doggish Epicures
and Atheists, enemies to God, to mankind, and to all nature, against
whom we now dispute, can alleadge for themselues? What would they
do if they had as much against vs, as we haue against them? How would
they lift vp themselues against those that maintaine the contrary, and
tread them vnder their feete? We heard in the former speech the strongest
arguments vpon which their error leaneth, wherby we may know
what a badde foundation it hath.Against them who say that the soule can not be knowen to bee immortall according to nature. Others there are who say, that in the
light of faith the soule is immortall, but in the light of nature it is mortal:
so that whilest they would seeme Philosophers, they shew themselues
to be ignorant and grosse beasts. For there is but one only truth both of
nature and of faith, trueth neuer being double, but alwayes one. Therefore
if the soule be immortall in the light of faith, it can not be mortall
in the light of nature, but onely in the darkenesse thereof.

For wee see howe this small remnant of naturall light, that yet remaineth
in the corrupt nature of men, sendeth them with one common
and publike consent to this trueth of the immortalitie of mens soules:
so that none, besides those in whome it is as it were vtterly put out,
and whome God hath by his iudgement wholly reiected and cast into
a reprobate sense, but acknowledge the same. Howe then would
this light of nature shewe it selfe, if it had still continued in integritie?
Therefore I demaund of these men, what it is which they call naturall
light, and whether it be not the reason of man: and if it be that reason
whereby men differ from beastes, I aske againe of them, whether any
thing that may be knowen by arguments and reasons, although they
were all gathered together and examined narrowly, hath greater and
more euident light of reason then this hath. Neuerthelesse I agree with
them heerein, that the light of faith maketh vs a great deale more
certaine of all this matter, then any reason that can be alleadged: because
that is the light of Gods Spirite, which illuminateth the eies of
the minde a great deale more cleerely then any naturall light can doe,
as being grounded vpon the testimonie of God himselfe.Of them that alleadge Salomon against the immortalitie of the soule. Some also
there are, who persuade themselues, that Salomon putteth no difference
betwene the soule of men and of beasts, and that he doeth not affirme,
that one of them is more or lesse mortall or immortall,Eccles. 3. 18, 19, 20, 21. then the other. I
considered in mine heart (saith the Wiseman) the state of the children of
men, that God had purged them: yet to see to, they are in themselues as beasts.
For the condition of the children of men, and the condition of beasts are euen
as one condition vnto them. As the one dieth, so dieth the other: for they
haue all one breath, and there is no excellencie of man aboue the beast: for
all is vanitie. All goe to one place, and all was of the dust, and all shall returne
to the dust. Who knoweth whether the spirite of man ascend vpward, and
the spirite of the beast descend downeward to the earth? But they are greatly
deceiued that thinke to defend their impietie by this saying of Salomon.
For it is most certaine, that his meaning is not to conclude that it
is so indeede, as hee speaketh in that place: as it appeareth manifestly
by his finall resolution in the same Booke made of the matter hee
hath in hand, wherein he concludeth touching the body of man, that
dust returneth to the earth as it was,Eccles 12. 7. and that the spirite returneth to God
that gaue it. Nowe wee may well thinke, that this excellent man, or
rather the Spirite of God which spake by him, woulde not contradict
himselfe, especially in the very same Booke. Wherefore wee must rest
in the conclusion he maketh therein, in which hee giueth vs the meaning
of al his former speech. And as for the place alleadged by vs, which,
as Epicures and Atheists thinke, maketh for them, he would giue vs to
vnderstand thereby, what a man may iudge of the life and soule both of

men and beasts, and of the difference between them, according to
that wee see and perceiue by our corporall sences, and that may bee
comprehended by the minde and reason of man, if wee haue no other
testimonie that looketh beyond this life, in which these dogges and
hogges, and all carnall and brutish men stay themselues. For if there
remained no more of man after his death then there doeth of a beast,
both the one and the other woulde come to one passe. Nay the life of
man shoulde bee so farre from happinesse, that it woulde bee a great
deale more miserable then that of beastes. So that it shoulde seeme
to bee better for men to passe away the time merrily, and to liue like
beasts, according to the Philosophie of Epicures. And although they
shoulde take this course, yet in the ende all woulde be but vanitie, according
to Salomons theame, which hee handleth in his Booke of the
Preacher. Therefore being to set downe the conclusion of his Booke,
hee saieth,Chap. 12. 1. Remember nowe thy Creatour in the dayes of thy youth, whiles
the euill dayes come not, nor the yeeres approch, wherein thou shalt say, I
haue no pleasure in them. Nowe if there were no difference betweene
the soule of men and the soule of beastes, both which the Prophet calleth
by the name of Spirite, taking spirite for soule, what profit should
men reape by this instruction and exhortation? For what greater benefite
coulde hee looke for, who from his youth had giuen ouer himselfe
to the seruice of God, and had alwayes remembred him, then he
that forgat him and turned himselfe away from him? Thus ye see how
Epicures and Atheists feare not to prophane the holy Scriptures, by
snatching at some places of them very maliciously, to the ende to set
some colour vpon their damnable opinion against the immortalitie of
the soule. But wee see what a goodly bulwarke they are able to make,
euen all one with the rest of the arguments, which wee haue already
heard of the same matter. And although they alleadge heere in defence
of their cause, Lucian and Lucretius, two other Patriarkes and Patrons
beside Pliny, whome they accompt as principall pillers of their impietie,
yet wee can heare from them no other arguments woorthie to be
so much as once thought vpon, besides those which wee haue already
handled.The iudgement of God vpon Lucian and Lu^retius two Arch-Atheists. But wee may obserue the like iudgement of GOD vpon
them, that was vpon Pliny the great searcher of Nature. For Lucian,
according as Suidas testifieth, was torne in peeces and eaten of dogs:
and Lucretius being madde and franticke slew himselfe.Euseb. Hier. Crin. de P^^at. For hauing abused
so vilely that good wit and skill, which God had giuen him, did he
not worthily deserue to loose it vtterly, and to haue lesse of it then brute
beasts? Hee became so brutish, that hee woulde not acknowledge,
that any either GOD or man had brought so great a benefite to the
whole race of mankinde, or that was for this cause more woorthie of

greater prayse then Epicurus was,The doctrine of Epicurus commended by L^cretius. because by his Philosophie and Doctrine
hee abolished all diuine prouidence, and so consequently all
Diuinitie and immortalitie of the soule, all hope of an other life, all
religion and conscience, all difference betweene vertue and vice, betweene
honest and dishonest thinges, and reduced all nature both Diuine
and Humane, into meere brutishnesse. This beastly fellowe
thus admiring Epicurus concludeth, that men can not but be wretched
and miserable all their life time, so long as they haue anie opinion
of all these thinges, because they will holde them in continuall
feare, and so consequently in perpetuall torment: but being dispossessed
of all such thoughtes, and so of all feare of GOD, it will followe
thereupon, that they shall haue no more conscience to resist or
gaine-say them, whatsoeuer they thinke, speake, or doe. And so
their conscience shall not torment them with any feare and terrour,
especially of any iudgement of GOD, but will suffer them to bee in
quiet, and not hinder in any respect their carnall pleasures and brutish
affections.
Nowe when they are come to this point, they accompt themselues
happie.Epicures thinke themselues kings and gods. For then they are all of them, not onely as Kings and Princes,
but euen as it were gods, fearing no other power aboue themselues,
and hauing no bodie to hinder their pleasure, but that they
may freely followe their owne heartes lustes. So that the last and best
conclusion of all this Philosophie will bee this, that men can not bee
happy except they become very beasts, and being spoiled of all things
wherein they excell them, waxe altogether brutish and retaine nothing
at all of mans nature, but onely the outward shape of a man.
Therefore wee may iudge by the examples of these personages of so
great skill, and so highly esteemed among men, what man can doe
by his naturall light, if it bee not guided by GOD but vtterly forsaken
of him: seeing those selfe same men who haue beene such great
inquisitours and admirers of nature,The blasphemie of Atheists. haue fallen into such execrable
beastlinesse, and such horrible blasphemies, as in a manner to say, that
God or Nature had brought men into the worlde, onely to make
them more miserable and more wretched then all other creatures: so
that they can finde no better happinesse and felicitie for themselues,
then during their life to become like to beastes, or plants or some other
insensible creatures: or else after their death to bee brought to nothing,
as they were before their conception and birth. Is it possible
for a man to thinke of a straunger thing, more against GOD more
vnwoorthie mankinde, or more iniurious to all nature? For the Atheists
themselues that reiect God, doe yet confesse if they be Philosophers,
that nature doeth nothing without cause: or if they confesse it

not, they haue testimonies enow in nature to conuince them of it. And
yet if their doctrine were true,The absurdities that follow the opinion of the Atheists. God and Nature haue done woorse in
the creation and production of men, then to doe some thing without
cause. For this were a cause most vnwoorthie of God and of Nature,
to create and bring foorth men into the worde onely for this cause and
to this ende, that they shoulde bee more miserable and more wretched
then all other creatures: and to make mankinde onelie to beholde
in him the perfection of all miserie and vnhappinesse, as though God
and Nature tooke pleasure in beholding such cruell pastime, as is the
viewe of mans miseries in such a cursed estate. Wherefore seeing all
the doctrine and Philosophie of these dogges bringeth with it so many,
so strange, so beastlike, and so horrible absurdities, euen once to thinke
of them, being so vnbeseeming God, all mankinde and whole nature,
and so contrary to al the testimonies, which the whole world affordeth
vnto vs in the behalfe of Gods eternal prouidence ouer al his creatures,
I thinke there is no body, except hee be as brutish as the Authours and
Teachers of such kinde of Philosophie and doctrine, but hee can easily
iudge, that it is altogether impossible to bee true, or to haue any foundation
and ground in reason, seeing it confoundeth and ouerthroweth al
reason and al nature. Which causeth me to be so much the more abashed,
that there are men found euen among Christians, yea a great number,
who rather followe the false opinion of these masties, and giue greater
credite to these sottish and vain arguments which they propound, both
against God and all diuinitie, and against all nature and trueth, then to
the true sentence of so many vertuous, learned, and holy men, as haue bin
in the world from the beginning, and to the common and publike testimony
of all mankind, and of al people and nations. But if God hath not
spared the very heathen, who so shamefully abused that knowledge,
which he gaue them of his works in nature, and of the testimonies of his
diuine nature and prouidence manifested vnto them therein, but punished
them with such a horrible iudgement, as to deliuer them vp into are probate
sense, and into a woorse estate then is that of brute beasts: we are not
to maruell if he deale so and more hardly at this day with them that deserue
a great deale more then they did, because he hath manifested him
self more cleerly without all comparison to these men, if they would see
and know him: yea we ought to thinke it more strange if he dealt otherwise.
For the moe means he affordeth vnto men to know him, the greater
iudgement they deserue when they abuse the same, and labour to
blind themselues by their own ingratitude and peruerse malice.Of the force of arguments alleaged before for the immortalitie of the soule. As for vs,
we cannot (God be tha^ked) doubt in any sort of the immortalitie of the
soule, seeing wee see on our side the aduantage, euery way in defence
therof: namely, multitude, authoritie, nature and reason, and which is most

of all, the testimonie of God who alone is sufficient. I doubt not but that
some, to whome God hath giuen more knowledge and greater graces
then to vs, are able to alleage other arguments and reasons for the confirmation
of this matter, which we haue omitted. For truth is not vnprouided,
but hath great abundance of all sorts. But wee haue alleaged the
chiefest, taken out of the writings of learned men that haue written best
of this matter, especially of them that in our time haue written most
Christianly.
And although there are other reasons then those which wee haue
set downe, yet I thinke there are enow in our discourses to stoppe the
mouthes of all Epicures and Atheists, at leastwise to conuince them,
if we cannot confound them. For what can they alleage against them,
that is of any great shew or strength? It may easily bee iudged by their
best arguments discoursed vpon by vs. What will they haue more? Do
they expect or desire of vs, that we should point with ye finger at soules
when they depart out of bodies that dye? Then they shoulde bee no
soules and inuisible spirits, but bodies that may be seene. And yet vnles
they may behold them comming forth, as they do smoke from the fire,
they will not beleeue that they depart at all from the bodies, or that
they haue any beeing at all. Surely I think that these men who would
so faine haue soules to bee mortall, and to bee extinguished by death
with their bodies, would not beleeue that they were departed, and that
they once liued, their bodies being dead, no not although they had seen
them come foorth visibly: but woulde perswade themselues that they
were some illusions, and that their eyes had some mist before them: so
strong is a lying perswasion in a man, when he wil iudge of a thing, not
according to reason,The summe of this whole book. but according to his affection. Now seeing we are
come to the end of our purpose, namely to lay before our eies as it were
a naturall history of man, by the consideration of the matter of his body,
of the diuersitie of that matter, and of the forme that God hath giuen
it, together with the profite and vse both of the one and the other:
and also by a description of the partes, powers, vertues and faculties of
his soule, therby to be instructed at large in the nature and immortality
thereof, by causing the soule to behold her selfe in the glasse of her marueilous
actions, and all to this ende that wee should know our selues as
it becommeth vs, there remaineth nothing now but that wee shoulde
draw out a generall instruction from these aduertisements and lessons,
which God giueth vs in the admirable composition of our nature: to the
end that hereafter we should become more fitte for the contemplation
of this diuinitie, by the consideration of the wonderfull works thereof
in the heauens and in the earth, of which we desire (if God giue vs grace
hereafter) to discourse. Therfore doe thou, ACHITOB, put an ende to

the cause of our present assembly and meeting, by some goodly discourse
vpon all these matters of which we haue intreated.


Of the image of God in the soule of man, and of the image of the worlde in
mans body: of the coniunction that is betweene God, the Angels, and men:
of the sundry degrees of Good that are therein: of those lessons and instructions,
which we ought to receiue from the wonderfull composition and coniunction
of the soule and body. Chap. 100.
ACHITOB. If we could diligently consider of the naturall historie
of man, which we haue prosecuted hitherto, we should finde in it
a goodly glasse, wherein we might beholde God who is inuisible, making
him after a sort visible vnto vs, and come to the knowledge of
him by his woorkes, euen as the soule is made as it were visible to vs,
shewing it selfe vnto vs by the body wherein it dwelleth, and by those
woorkes which it effecteth in the same.The world compared to mans body, and God to his soule. Therefore first let vs set before
our eyes the whole frame of the world, as it were a great body: then all
the partes of it, as the members thereof: and lastly, let vs consider God,
as the soule of this great body, woorking in the same, and doing all his
works there according to that order which he hath set therein, euen as
the soule hath his operation in the body of man and in all the members
thereof. Thus doing, as we know that there is a soule in the body, and
another nature besides that which is corporall, which woorketh in the
same, as we perceiue by the effectes of it: so by the woorkes done in
this visible world, we may iudge that there is another nature that doeth
them, which being inuisible, is some other the^ this whole frame which
we behold, and farre more excellent, filling the same, and being in al the
parts of it, as the soule is in the body.
But whilest we propound to our selues this glasse to looke vpon, let
vs beware we fal not into their fond dreames,Against such as say that God is the soule of the world. who both thought and affirmed,
that this world was the body of God; and that he was the soule
thereof, dwelling in it as the soule of man doeth in his body. For if it
were so, then should God bee mortall and corruptible in regarde of his
body, so that still some part or other of him should perish, as we see that
corporall things daily corrupt. On the other side, God should not bee
infinite and incomprehensible as hee is: for the world doeth not comprehend
and containe him, but hee comprehendeth and containeth
the whole world. Wherefore neither is the worlde God, nor God the
world, but the Creator of it, by whom it is and consisteth. And albeit we
behold him not with our eyes in his nature and diuine essence, yet wee
must not therefore conclude, as Atheists doe, that hee is not at all, no
more, nay much lesse, then the soule is, because those woorkes

whereby hee manifesteth himselfe in the worlde, are farre greater
without comparison, then those which the soule woorketh in mans
bodie. Besides that, all the woorkes of the soule are the woorkes of
God,The image of God in mans soule. seeing it receiueth from him that life and vertue that is in it. Forasmuch
then as the soule is the image of God in man, as his bodie is
the image of all this great worlde, in which GOD woorketh as the
soule doeth in mans bodie, let vs consider diligently, howe God hath
distributed the powers, vertues and offices of the soule in the bodie,
and in all the partes of it, as he manifesteth his glorie, vertue and power
in this visible worlde in all the partes of the same. For the first,
there is agreement heerein, that as one onely soule is in one bodie,
and is sufficient for all the partes and members thereof: so there
is but one God in the worlde, who is sufficient for all his creatures.
Againe, if wee cannot conceiue howe the soule is lodged in the bodie,
howe it giueth life vnto it, displaying all her vertues, and doing
all her woorkes therein, but onely so farre foorth as shee giueth
vs instructions and testimonies thereof by those diuers effects which
wee see in euerie part and member of the bodie: no maruaile then if
wee cannot beholde with the eye, nor comprehende howe GOD
is euerie where, filling heauen and earth, and howe hee displayeth
his power and vertue, woorking in all his creatures, guiding and gouerning
them, and preseruing them by his diuine prouidence and
vertue. For if wee cannot comprehende the creature, or the nature
thereof, howe shall wee comprehende that of the Creator? Iesus
Christ saide to Nicodemus,Iohn 3. 12. If when I tell you earthly things, yee beleeue
not, howe shoulde yee beleeue, if I tell you of heauenly things? Wee may
say the like heere, that if it be impossible for vs throughly to know the
earth, or the bodie or soule of man, or the nature and vertue thereof,
howe shall wee knowe the heauens and spirituall natures, or God
and his woorkes? For if it bee beyonde our reach to discerne them in
our selues no not the woorkes of our soule, howe shall wee comprehende
his woorkes in the whole worlde?Of that coniunction which is betweene God and his creatures. Notwithstanding, if wee can
well consider of that coniunction and agreement that is betweene
God and his creatures, with the the disposition of those sundry degrees
which euerie one of them holdeth in this coniunction, euen from the
highest and most celestiall things, that approch neerest to the nature
of God, vnto those thinges that are lowest and most terrestriall,
then shall we set God as it were present before the eyes of our spirite,
and by the contemplation of him woonderfully content all the partes
of our soule. Therefore to prosecute this poynt, let vs note, that
GOD created and fashioned in his Angels, images of himselfe
that are altogether spirituall, (as indeede himselfe is all spirite)

and not inclosed or shut vp in any bodies that are of an earthly and corruptible
matter. Besides, it pleased him to make another kinde of his image
in the nature of man, which should holde the second degree next
to the Angelical nature, in which hee represented himselfe more excellently
then in any other visible nature and creature, namely in a nature
that came neerest to his owne, next to that of Angels, and in which the
bodily and visible nature was ioyned vnto a spirituall and inuisible nature.
Now for the better vnderstanding hereof, wee will set downe a
coniunction of three kinds of good things, which are in diuers degrees.
The first is,Of God, the first and greatest Good. God the creator, who is the greatest of all, and the soueraign
good of all his creatures, and is a nature without any qualitie or accident
whatsoeuer. For all that is in him, is substantiall and essentiall. This Good
is such a nature, as hath all his mouing of himselfe, and receiueth it not
from any other then from himselfe, but giueth mouing to all creatures
according to their nature and measure. And yet all the motions in God
are without any change, either of time or place, or howsoeuer: so that
hee abideth still immoueable,Mal. 3. 6. and may alwayes say, I am the Lorde, I
change not, as it is in Malachie. For he is euer one. And seeing he is the
Original of all mouing, he must of necessitie, bee firme and stable: because
otherwise he could not giue motion to others, as we haue dayly
experience hereof in our selues. For if we would moue one of our feete,
the other must abide steddie and firme, and both the one and the other
must alwayes haue some stay whereby to take their motion. Nowe because
God cannot haue stay from any other, hee hath it in himselfe, in
that manner which hath beene declared alreadie. For as hee is alwayes
one, so all things are present to him, yea hee is euery where, by reason
that hee is eternall and infinite without beginning and without ende,
Iudge of all and is iudged of none, gouernour of all, and gouerned by
none.Of spirituall natures, which are ye second Good. Secondly, we haue those spirituall natures and creatures, which
are a great Good, but not the greatest and chiefest Good, which cannot
be found but in the Creator. This second Good hath qualities, because
all things in it are not substantial. It hath also motion, but receiueth the
same from the first Good, of which it dependeth, and then it giueth the
same to others. This motion is in time, but without place: and this Good
both iudgeth and is iudged, gouerneth and is gouerned. The Angels
and humane soules are this great Good, and these spiritual natures, which
are spirites hauing all these things. But there is betweene them that difference
before spoken off, namely that Angels are spirits, which were
created to liue an immortal life, and not to bee ioyned vnto any earthly
bodies: and that the spirite of men are created to dwell in bodies and
to giue them life. Therefore I let passe Angels for this time, and purpose
to speake onely of the spirite of man, which is not immutable as

God is, but may receiue change of qualities: as wee see in that it
beeing created good, became bad, and of euill, may also become good
by the grace of God. But no such thing can befall God For hee cannot
but bee good in the highest degree, and the soueraigne good of euery
creature: because goodnes is not accidental to him, as it is to a creature,
but substantial and essential. And as God is the soueraigne mouer, who
giueth motion to all creatures in this great world: so the soule and spirite
of man giueth mouing to the whole body of man, who is the little
world, and to all the members thereof: neither hath it this motion from
any other creature beside it selfe, as the body receiueth the same from
it,The spirit of a man moueth not in place. but onely of the Creator. Nowe although this motion bee made in
time, yet it is not made by any change of place. For what motion soeuer
there is in the spirite, yet it abideth alwaies in his place, so long as it
dwelleth in the body, which it gouerneth vnder God the great gouernour,
by whome also it is iudged, as it selfe iudgeth the body, and all
that is vnder the same. Lastly followeth the body, which is another
Good, but not so great as the spirit. This hath not only quality but quantitie
also, whereas the spirite hath onely qualitie without quantitie. For
to speak properly, no nature hath quantitie, except it be corporal. Therfore
the soule of a great man is not greater then the soule of a little man,Of the body which is the (...) Good.
in regard of corpulency, because it hath none as the body hath. So that
when we say, that a man is of a great spirite, we meane it not in regard
of bodily quantitie, as when we speake of a great body: but wee consider
in him the experience of giftes agreeable to his nature, wherewith
he is endued aboue others. And in taking it so, it will often come to
passe, that the least bodies shall haue the greatest spirites, and the greatest
bodies the least spirites. And by the same reason we consider in a little
infant, euen as soone as he hath receiued mouing in his mothers bellie,
the selfe-same soule that is in all the ages that followe his infancie,
vntill his olde-age, and in death it selfe. But according as those instruments
whereby it worketh during life, are fitte for their offices, and as
afterwarde when they waxe olde, they faile of their naturall force and
vertue: so the soule sheweth her powers and wonderful effects in them
and by them, continuing still one and the same in substance and nature,
as these things haue beene at large declared vnto vs. And as for the motion
of the body, it is made both in time and in place, and is gouerned
and iudged, but it selfe, neither gouerneth nor iudgeth.
Thus wee may see, howe these two good things, the spirite and the
bodie, of which the one is greater then the other, are vnited and ioyned
together in man, as if he caried heauen and earth linked together.
Wee may learne also howe in this coniunction the spirite occupieth the
middle betwixt God and the bodie, and agreeth with them both. Wee

see also the admirable workes of the soule during this coniunction, all
which are so many testimonies of the wonderfull workes of God, and
of his prouidence ouer all nature. Moreouer, we behold a very goodly
disposition and excellent order in all the powers and faculties both of
soule and body.
Let vs then make our profit of all these things,The right end of our creation. and of these instructions
and lessons which God giueth vs in them, to leade vs to the principall
end for which man was created, namely to know and to honour his
Creator. Wherefore we ought chiefly to consider, that seeing God in
the wonderful compositio^ of our nature hath placed the heart between
the head and the belly, and the vital vertue of the soule betweene the animal
and the nutritiue vertue, and the will betweene the vnderstanding
and the most sensual part that is in vs, therefore the heart and will
must alwayes looke vpward and not downeward, to the end that they
may ioyne themselues to the noblest and most diuine part, and not to
the basest, most sensuall and earthly part. For they are in mans body, as
if they were placed betweene heauen and earth: so that as man holdeth
the middle place between Angels and other liuing creatures, by reason
of that communication of nature, which he hath with them both: so fareth
it with the heart and the will, betweene the head and the belly, and
betweene reason with that part which is capable thereof, and the sensuall
part which is without reason.Mans will must looke vp to the head, not downe to the bellie. Wherefore if the will of man be ioyned
with reason, which is celestial and diuine, and followeth the same,
it will become like vnto it, and shalbe able easily to gouerne the sensual
part vnderneath it, to be mistresse ouer it, and to compel it to obey. But
if the Will despise reason and the counsaile thereof, and if instead of
mounting vpward towardes the noblest part, it desecendeth to the sensual
part, and ioyneth it selfe thereunto, then shall the Will be made like
to that, and shal serue it in place of commanding it. And by this meanes
the Will shall become altogether brutish, wheras contrariwise it might
make the sensuall and earthly part as it were celestiall and diuine, by
drawing it with it selfe, if it woulde obey reason rather then the affections
of the flesh, and if it would looke more towardes heauen then
towardes the earth, as men commonly vse to doe. For as they are in
the middest betweene Angels and beastes,Man is a middle creature between Angels and beasts. if they woulde looke more
towardes heauen, from whence their soules haue their Originall,
then towardes the earth out of which their bodies are taken, they
should become celestial and diuine, like to the Angels, and finally like
to God, who hath created them after his owne image. But if insteede
of beholding the heauens, vnto which their faces are lifted, they looke
downe to the earth as brute beasts doe, hauing more care of that then of
heauen, they shall become altogether earthie and brutish like beastes.

Therefore it standeth euery one in hand to bethinke himselfe seriously,
which way he aymeth, whither he desireth to come, and whom he had
rather resemble, either the angels or beasts. Let vs then consider wel of
our nature, and of that order which God setteth downe therein, and
follow the same, and beware that we doe not peruert it. Let vs learne to
acknowledge the image of God in vs, and to beholde his great wisedome
therein, as it were in a little world. First let vs know by our soule,
which is a spirituall and no corporall nature, that God is a spirite and of
a spirituall nature,A spirite is not shut vp in a place. which is not shut vp and inclosed in any place. For
neither our spirite hath any abiding in a place as if it were inclosed and
shut vp therein, notwithstanding that it remayneth in a place as it
were, in regarde of that coniunction which it hath with the bodie.
Neuerthelesse, it is not so inclosed therein, but that it is able, not onli^
to raunge through heauen and earth, and throughout this whole
visible worlde, but euen higher and farther, so that the whole world
is not of sufficient bignesse to containe the same, or to content and
satisfie it, but that it will goe beyond it. What then shall wee thinke
of GOD who hath created it? And howe forgetfull shall man bee
of himselfe, if whereas the whole worlde is not great enough for
his spirite, hee content himselfe with a little angle of the earth, and
doe after a sort burie himselfe therein?It is inuisible. Likewise, let vs knowe and
beleeue that God is inuisible, seeing our soule is so, and cannot bee
seen with bodily eyes. For it is not painted with any colour, neither hath
it any corporal figure, whereby it may be seene and knowen, which is
doen onely by the acts and deedes of it.
Let vs not seeke then to knowe the essence and nature of God by
the eyes, but onelie by the spirite. For hee cannot bee seene by them,
but onelie by the eyes of faith, neither can hee bee founde or conceiued
by corporall senses.The coniunction of our soule and body is a wonderful work of God. Againe, wee ought not onely to consider,
but euen to woonder howe hee hath ioyned our soule with the
bodie, and distributed the vertue thereof into all the partes and members
of the same: and howe hee doeth so excellently knitte together
and conioyne so manie members, so distant one from another, euen
from the one ende vnto the other: all which receiue life and vertue
from the soule according to their nature and office, and are all gouerned
by one and the same spirite. Let vs consider then howe hee
woulde haue that part of the soule, which is partaker of reason,
to haue the principalitie and dominion ouer the part in which he hath
placed the affections: to the ende that the chiefest should commaund,
and the other obey, as himselfe hath the Lordshippe and soueraigntie
ouer all his creatures, as they that must obey him.

Let vs not then suffer the spirite to bee brought into bondage by
the perturbations of the affections, neither let vs suffer them to bee
so lifted vp against reason, as to bee able to turne the vertue of the soule
against it. In like manner, let vs remember, how God worketh in our
mindes, in such sort as that the knowledge of those things which wee
knowe first, is not abolished by the vnderstanding of other things we
learne after, but they are all kept together very surely in the chiefe part
of the soule, and that in good order, by meanes of the memorie, without
confusion one with another, euen as if they were written and
engrauen in a table, or in a piller of brasse. Wherefore
we should be very vngratefull and brutish, if any
thing in the world cause vs to forget God, and if
we haue not his benefites towards vs in
perpetual remembrance.

FINIS.
(...)


