the case of tenor upon the commission of defective title trin. 13. Caroli at the late enquiry concern his majesty title to the county of mayo there be a act of state publish wherein it be declare that it be not his majesty intention to take from his people any thing that be just they and that therefore none who hold any land or other hereditament whatsoever within that county by letters-patent from the crown shall be any way prejudice by find his majesty title although their letters-patent be not find or well and certain find in the great office then intend to be take but that they shall have the same benefit of they as if they have be special find so as they do produce their letters-patent or the enrolment thereof before the lord deputy and council at the council board by a certain day limit in the act and that they be allow by that board to be good and effectual in Law in pursuance of that act there be several letters-patent produce and among the rest the lord viscount dillon do show forth letters-patent obtain from his late majesty and pass upon the late commission of defective title upon perusal and consideration whereof his majesty council be of opinion that they be void in law and therefore it be think fit and so order by the lord deputy and council that the doubt arise upon the letters-patent shall be draw up into a case and that that case shall be open argue at the council board by council learn on both side the case be after draw up in these word king JAMES by commission under the great seal date the second day of march in the four year of his reign do authorise certain commissioner to grant the manor of dale by letter patent under the great seal of this kingdom to a. and his heir and there be no direction give in the say commission touch the tenure to be reserve there be letters-patent by colour of the say commission pass unto a. and his heir to hold by knight service as of his majesty castle of Dublin the question be whither the say letter patent be void in the whole or only as to the tenure this case be argue on several day first by Nicholas plunket for the lord dillon and sergeant catlin for the king and after by John Pollexfen for the lord dillon and osbaldeston attorney general for the King and because it be a case of great weight and importance it be deliver unto the judge and they be require by the lord deputy and council to confer and consider of it and to return unto they their resolution concern it but they upon private conference among themselves do not agree in opinion and therefore it be think necessary for public satisfaction that it shall be argue solemn by they all and thereupon in Trinity term last the case be argue by Ryves puisne judge of his majesty court of chief place barry second baron of the exchequer and cressy one of the judge of the court of chief place and after on another day appoint for the case by Mayart one of the judge of the common plea Bolton chief baron lowther chief justice of the common plea and shur chief justice of the court of chief place and for that I intend to make as summary a report as I can I will first set down such argument and objection as be make by they that argue for the maintenance of the letter patent it be object by they that the letter patent be good for the land and void only as to the tenure for diverse reason 1. regular where a man do less than the authority or commandment commit unto he there the commandment or authority be not pursue the act be void but where a man do that which he be authorise to do and more there it be good for that which be warrant and void for the rest Coke sect. 434. perk. 189. vid. 8 coke 85. but in the case in question the commissioner do that which they have authority to do and they do more therefore for that which they have authority to do that be to grant the land the letter patent be good for that which they do more that be the reserve of a tenure they be void their authority be to grant the manor of dale to a. and his heir that they have full do and if they have stay there no man will deny but they have well execute their authority but they go further and do more and reserve a tenure therefore for that more for that reservation their act be only void 2. where a man have authority to do a act and he do it in substance though he differ in the manner yet the authority be well execute as if a man make a deed of feoffment of blacke-acre and whit-acre and a letter of attorney to enter into both acre and to deliver seisin of both of they according to the form and effect of the deed and he enter into blacke-acre and deliver this livery and seisin be good albeit he do not enter into both nor into one in the name of both and yet this be do in another manner than his authority warrant for his authority be to enter into both and to deliver seisin of both neither of which he do no not so much as enter into one in the name of both so when the feoffment be make to two or more and a letter of atturncy to make livery to both and the attorney make livery of seisin to one of the this be good to both and yet in that case he that be absent may wayve the livery sure this be do by the attorney in another manner than the authority warrant for his warrant be to make livery to both and the intention of the feoffor be that both shall take and the estate be settle in both and yet he make livery to one only and so that the estate may be settle only in he and yet he have well execute his authority for in substance he have do that which be command and though it differ in the manner it be not material both those case be put in Coke sect. 66. but in the case in question the commissioner have do in substance that which be command they therefore their authority be well execute and the act they have do be good that they have do in substance that which be command they appear in itself for their authority be to grant the manor of dale to a. and his heir this they have do and if they have add any thing to the grant whereby it may be say to be do in another manner yet the act be do in substance it shall be good 3. that wherein they have exceed their authority the reservation of the tenure it be not of the essence of the grant of the essence of a grant be only grantor grantee and the thing to be grant and apt word in a instrument or patent beside of the essence of a grant it can be for grant be at common-law tenor be introduce by the conquest Selden in his not. to Eadmer 194. Bracton libr. 2. the acquir domin the tenure be another distinct thing from the land in that they can consist in one person the land be the thing grant that belong to the Patentee the tenure be reserve to the king that belong to he the reservation be or or the grant not and therefore the letter patent may be void for the tenure and yet good for the grant of the land 4. although it be admit that the reservation of the tenure be not a distinct thing or from that which they have authority to do but be rather a do of the same thing for which they have warrant in another manner than their authority do warrant yet it will not follow that the whole act be void for a authority give may be execute in another manner than the commission do warrant and yet stand good for that which be do according to the authority and that may be in these case 1. where the authority be clothe with a interest for there in many case he that have the authority may vary from the authority and the act though it be do in another manner shall be good as where the custom of a manor be that the lord may grant land by copy of court-roll in fee if the grant be in tail or but for life this be good stanton and Barnes his case Hill. 36. eliz. roc. 492. in b. r. Coke sect. 66. so where the custom be to grant copy for two life and he grant to the husband for life and after to the wife this be good down and Hopkins case p. 36. eliz. b. r. the statute of 32. henr. 8. do enable tenant in tail to make a lease for one and twenty year if he make a lease for twenty year only or to one for ten year and after make a lease to another for eleven year more this be good and so it have be resolve in tompson and traffords case Hill 35. eliz. b. r. 2. where the vary from the authority give be in letter or circumstance and not in a point material or in substance for that see the case cite before Coke sect 66. and Litt. 434. 3. where the variance from the authority although it be in matter of substance be supply by operation of law as if a licence be grant to a copyholder for life to make a lease for ten year if he shall so long live the copyholder make a lease for ten year absolute without the limitation if he shall so long live yet adjudge good and the licence well pursue it be hat and Arrowsmiths case hillar 38. Elizabeth b. r. and in the case in question where all agree that the king meaning in this commission be that a tenure in shall be reserve albeit it be not express in word or if it have be in express term that a tenure in shall be reserve and they have only grant the manor without reservation of any tenure yet the law supply this defect and raise a tenure in this shall make the grant good 4. where the variance from the authority be cure by the party himself by some other act as if tenant in tail husband and wife a bishop etc. who be authorize by the statute of 32. henr. 8. to make lease for one and twenty year or three life of land usual let make a lease of land usual let and of land not usual let reserve one entire rent all be void shepherd case but if tenant in tail will make such a lease and reserve the accustom rent for the land usual let and another rent for the land not usual let here the lease shall be good for the land usual let and voydeable only for the other for by these several reservation the variance from the authority be cure Tanfeild and Rogers case trin. 36. eliz. B.R. 5. where the variance from the authority how material soever it be be notwithstanding make void either by the common-law or act of parliament as where the king do licence i. s. to grant twenty mark annuity in mortmain and he grant the annuity with clause of distress by hussey and Bryan chief justice and Starky chief baron and justice Faierfax the addition of distress be without warrant and void yet all admit the grant of the rent good notwithstanding 2. and 3 h. 7. grant 36. by the statute of 1. Elizabeth a grant by a bishop of a ancient office of seneschall-ship to two that have never before be grant but to one be adjudge void 10. Coke 61. the bishop of salisburyes case put case then that such a grant be make by a bishop to i. s. and to a infant joint or the one after the other this be a material variance and yet because the grant in respect of the infant be void as it be hold in Scambler and Welter case m. 40. and 41. eliz. B.R. cite in Coke sect. 1. the grant to i. s. as they hold be good 5. although the etc. be part of a grant yet the may be void and the grant good as in auditor king case cite in 8. Coke 56. in the earl of Rutland case where the case be the king grant land to a. and his heir in the premise to he and his assign omit the word heir in the yet the fee shall pass by the premise and the shall be void the condition may be void as in litletons case a feoffment upon condition that he shall not alien and yet the grant remain good 6. the reservation of a tenure be not necessary in the grant if it be not necessary it be and 3. Coke 10. dowty case 7. the honour of the king shall be prefer before his profit 9 Coke 131. in bewlyes case and therefore when the king grant may be take to two intent good in many case it shall be take to that intent which be most beneficial for the king but if it may be take to one intent good and to another intent void there for the honour of the king and the benefit of the subject it shall be take in such manner that the grant of the king may take effect for it be not the intent of the king to make a void grant vid. 8. coke 56. the earl of Rutland case the lord Stafford case 8. coke 77. the earl of cumberland case 8. coke 167. upon this rule the case of priddle and Napper 11. coke 11. be put which be say to be a far strong case than the case in question and that in case of a authority execute in other manner and yet good the point resolve as to this purpose be this king henr. 8. do grant licence to the prior and covent of Montacute to appropriate the church of Tintinhul to their priory and this be it do appear that at the time of the licence the church be full of a incumbent and so that no appropriation can be make in but in by special word to take effect after the death of the present incumbent and therefore the licence ought to have be special otherwise the king be deceive in his grant and so the appropriation void which by colour of that licence they make to take effect after the death of the incumbent but it be resolve that the appropriation be sufficient in law for the licence be general and therefore it shall be take in such sense that it may take effect that be to take effect after the death of the incumbent and the reason there give be the rule before remember for construction of the king grant in which case it be to be observe first that the licence or authority give by the king be in general word to make the appropriation present second that this authority can not be execute in that manner three by virtue of that licence they make the appropriation in s. to take effect after the death of the incumbent so they do it in another manner than their authority warrant and yet good and their authority well pursue then if that authority execute in so different a manner from the word of the authority be adjudge to be well execute much more shall it in this case be say to be well execute when they have pursue the very word of the authority and if to some intent there may be a construction make to make the grant void yet if by another construction the grant may be make good and the king intention fulfil without any prejudice to he then for the honour of the king and the benefit of the subject that construction shall be make that the grant shall be good and such construction may be make in this case for here the tenure reserve be void as it be agree by all a tenure in be the tenure intend by the commission shall be raise by implication of law by this construction the grant shall be make good and the king intention shall be fulfil without any prejudice to he they agree that in all grant of land by letter patent here in Ireland by virtue of the king commission or letter missive under the privy signet if that tenure be not reserve either by the letter patent or by the la which be direct by the say commission or letter missive there the grant shall be void in the whole both for the land and tenure and therefore where the king give power to grant land and to reserve a tenure which the law will not create or to reserve some other thing which the la itself will not reserve as if the commission have be to grant land and to reserve a tenure by knight service if the land be grant reserve a tenure in socage the grant be void in the whole so if the commission have be to grant land and to reserve twenty shilling rend and they reserve ten shilling in these case the commissioner have not do so much as they shall the king be prejudice and no construction or implication of la can help as in our case it do and here in this case the tenure reserve shall not toll that tenure which be employ by the la because the tenure reserve be void for that they cite the case of Littleton in his chapter of frank-almoigne sect. 140. a man that hold land by knight service at this day grant they by licence to a abbot etc. to hold in frank-almoigne the tenure reserve be void and he shall hold by knight service and so a gift in frankmarriage reserve a rent this reservation be void and he shall hold only by fealty 4. h. 6. 22. otherwise it will be if the reservation be good for there the tacit reservation shall be silent as in wheelers case 6. Coke 6. they agree that if these letter patent have be make by bill sign by the king own hand under the great seal of England the tenure reserve will control the tenure which the law will have raise for in letter patent pass in England the letter patent be and the judge who be to make construction thereof be to ground their judgement upon the letter patent themselves and the content thereof without any regard to the particular or any thing without the letter patent doddingtons case 2. coke 34. but in letter patent of land in Ireland under the great seal of Ireland the letter patent be not but be all to be take and gather out of the commission or warrant from the king under the privy signet upon which they be pass and here the judge be to ground their judgement upon the commission or warrant aswell as upon the letter patent and to these seven argument or reason all that be speak by they that argue for the letter patent may be reduce but it be resolve by the two chief justice the chief baron barry and justice Ryves with who baron lowther agree in opinion though he can not then argue by reason of sickness that the letter patent be void in law both to the land and to the tenure in this case five thing do fall into consideration 1. the commission mention in the case and the authority of it 2. authority and their several sort and how they ought to be pursue 3. the authority in this case what it be if it be pursue as it ought to be wherein it be not pursue 4. tenor what they be in the grant that the reservation of a tenure be that it be not or a distinct thing from the grant that tenor have their original in England before the norman conquest 5. the reason why the letter patent be void in the whole and the authority upon which the resolution be ground 1. the commission mention in the case be the commission that be in force in the time of his late majesty for the strengthen of defective title a commission that be one of the great grace and bounty that ever before that time be vouchsafe by the king of England to their subject of this kingdom a commission that be agree by all to be a good and legal and effectual commission and to contain in itself full power and authority to grant of which the chief justice of the common plea in his argument say that upon this occasion he do serious peruse it and in his judgement it be as full and strong a commission for grant the land as any he have see there be in the commission as he say there be not any question of the commission nor of the power grant by the commission neither as it be declare be it the intention of his majesty to deny unto the subject the full benefit of it in all thing wherein the commissioner have pursue their authority give by the commission and proceed according to the law for that that there be no direction in the commission for the tenure it be no defect in the commission as the chief baron observe nor any omission or negligence in they that be trust with the draw of it it be do upon good advice and of purpose for the case of they that be to pass upon that commission be so different and there be such variety of tenor that it be not possible to give any certain direction in the commission concern they beside the intention of that commission be not to give authority for the alteration or diminution of the king tenor it be intend only for the establish of the estate and possession of the subject and therefore there be not a word in it of any tenure so that the purpose of it be where any former tenure be in to preserve it and where no tenure be in to leave it to the reservation of the Law so that now the commission be clear and agree to be good and legal and to contain full power and ample authority to grant the land the sole question will be of the pursuance of the commission and whither this power grant by the commission be well execute and pursue by the commissioner 2. to find out the law in this case the several sort of authority in our book be consider and how they ought to be pursue for authority these difference be agree for Law. all authority be either authority in law or authority in 8. coke 146. the 6. Carpenter case authority in law be where the law give authority without any authority from the party as the la give authority to the lord to distrain for his rent and service to the owner of the soil to distrain damage pheasant to he in the reversion to enter and see if be be do and the like a authority in be where the authority be give by the party authority in be either nude and bare authority or authority clothe with a interest Coke instit. 52. nude authority be give either by 1. deed 2. commission 3. patent 4. write 5. or act of parliament and for all those authority it be a certain rule and ground in our law that they be to be pursue strict and precise both for matter and form or otherwise the act do by colour of that authority be void 10. h. 7. 15. but the execution of authority that be clothe with a interest be of a more large and favourable interpretation than the execution of those that be but bare authority 5. coke 94. and 95. in barwickes case 1. that authority by deed be to be pursue strict and precise both for matter and manner see the case of 12. Ass. 24. 26. Ass. 39 there the case be that the plaintiff do make a charter of fee-simple to the tenant and a letter of attorney to deliver livery of seisin the attorney deliver livery upon condition this livery be void for the authority be not pursue in the manner so on the contrary if the letter of attorney have be to deliver livery of seisin upon condition and the attorney make livery without condition this be void Coke instit. 258. 11. h. 4. 3. a letter of attorney be make to make livery after the death of I.S. and the attorney make livery during the life of I.S. all be void 40. ass. 38. if I command a man to make a deed of feoffment in my name according to a copy show unto he in latin if he make a deed of feoffment according to the effect of the same word in english or french the feoffment be without warrant for in that case he do not pursue the authority in the manner 10. henr. 7. 9 so where a authority be give to enfeoff and he leavye a fine ibid. and 10. henr. 7. 15. 2. for authority by commission that they must be pursue it be the earl of Leicester case in plough com. 380. the earl of Leicester 1. mar. be indict of high treason before sir Richard Sowthwell and seven other commissioner by virtue of a commission direct to the say sir Richard and fourteen more after another commission be direct to sir Thomas white and other recite that where the earl of Leicester stand indict before sir Richard Sowthwell and fourteen other commissioner of diverse treason etc. by colour of that commission they do arraign he upon that indictment find before eight of the commissioner he confess the treason etc. and have his judgement it be resolve that all that be do be void and for that they do not pursue their authority 3. authority by patent must be pursue the king licence a abbot and covent to alien the abbot sole alien it be void 21. henr. 7. 7. and 8. and the rule give by Frowicke when the king make any grant or licence it ought to be execute according and strict as if the king grant i licence to make a feoffment by deed I can make a feoffment without deed nor e contra so that the licence must ever be pursue or otherwise the act do be not warrant by the licence vid. 18. ass. pl. the lord Clifford case 2. coke 80. Stamf. prarog 31. the licence be to levy a fine of the manor of dale to find two chapleine and he will have levy the fine leave out the chapleine and can not be suffer 3. ed. 3. 5. Stamf. vid. 30. ed. 3. 17. 4. authority by write must be pursue in a there must be two summoner therefore summon by one summoner be not good plough com. 393. 50. ed. 3. 16. 5. authority give by parliament must be pursue the statute of merton cap. 3. ordain that in a redisseisin the sheriff if the sheriff take but one Coroner it be not good for the act appoint a number two at the least which number ought to be satisfy or else the authority give by the act be not pursue 23. ass. 7. plough com. 393. so that by the rule of all these book it be manifest that a nude authority must be pursue strict both for matter and manner or the act do by colour of the authority be void but in what case the act so void for not pursue of the authority shall be void in the whole or in part only this difference be take where he that have a authority do that which he be authorize to do and and another thing distinct from that for which he have authority and where he do the same thing which he be authorise to do in another manner than the authority do warrant in the first case it be good for that which be warrant and void for the in the other it be void for the whole and therefore if a letter of attorney be make to i. s. to make livery of seisin in whiteacre and he make livery in whiteacre and blacke-acre there he do Idem and and therefore it be good for whiteacre that be according to his authority and pursuant to it and void for black-acre which be from his authority perk. 38. otherwise it will be if the letter of attorney be to make livery of one acre and he make livery of two acre there it be void for both because he couple both together and it be not name in certain in the feoffment of which acre livery shall be make according to 4. h. 7. 5. but in the case of perk the acre be name in certain whiteacre and so a difference on the other side when the same thing be do in another manner than the authority warrant there be and therefore all be void as in the case of 12. Ass: 24. 26. Ass: 39 40. Ass: 38. 10. h. 7. 9 the case already cite the true reason why in all those case the act be void be because the authority be execute and so be the reason express give in the book of 12. Ass. why the liverye be void because the attorney do it in other manner than the authority warrant this be the difference that must rule the case one way or other and therefore the only labour will be to find out under which part of that difference the case in question do lie 3. for that first it will be necessary to inquire what the authority in this case be whether it be pursue as it ought to be wherein it be not pursue the authority give to the commissioner in this case be twofold a authority express in their commission s. to grant the manor of dale and a authority imply in la to reserve a tenure in for where there be no direction for the tenure the law will imply a tenure in as the best for the King in this case then by the very commission the tenure be make a part of the grant and for the authority though it be twofold express and imply yet both be put together that which be to be do by virtue of that authority be but one entire act one grant a grant of the manor of dale reserve a tenure so that their authority to grant the land be not absolute but so that they reserve a tenure in and although the power to reserve a tenure in be only employ by the law and be not give by express word in their commission that make no difference for by the rule of our book authority imply in law as well as those that be express must be pursue where a letter of attorney be make to deliver livery of scism the attorney have a twofold authority a authority express in his warrant and that be general to deliver seisin and a authority imply in la that be to deliver a actual and express livery and not a livery in Law. and therefore if the attorney deliver seisin within the view though it be warrant by his express authority yet because he have not pursue his imply authority the act be void and so it be resolve p. 3. eliz. C.B. in yarhams case Coke Instit. sect. 66. this then be their authority s. to grant the manor of dale and upon the grant to reserve a tenure in now how have they execute this authority there be letter patent pass to a. and his heir by colour of the commission to be hold by knight service as of his majesty castle of Dublin here they have not pursue their authority for where by the commission either a tenure in ought to have be reserve or else the tenure leave to the reservation of the law they express reserve a tenure by common knight service that the letter patent as to this tenure thus reserve be void it be agree on all side but whither they shall be only void to the tenure or whither the reserve of a tenure so diverse from the tenure intend and warrant by the commission shall destroy the whole grant both for the land and tenure be the point wherein they do differ 4. and for the clear of that they do inquire what the reservation of a tenure be to the grant whither it be a part of the grant and or whither it be a distinct thing and from the grant as this case be for if as they that argue for the letter patent hold the reservation of the tenure and the grant of the land be and two distinct thing in the consideration of the whole grant make and the authority give by the say commission for the make thereof then peradventure the patent may be void as to the tenure and yet good for the grant of the land but if the reservation of the tenure be incident unto the authority and include within it and the reservation of the tenure and the grant of the land make up but one entire grant so that the one be a part of the other and the reservation of the tenure be then the grant of the land reserve a diverse or contrary tenure to that which their authority do warrant they to reserve be a do of and so the whole act be void they hold that the reservation of the tenure be and that it be not s. a thing distinct and separate from the authority of the grant of the land but imply include within it and incident to it although a grant may be without express or condition yet when they or any of they be add they be and do direct and rule the grant 1. for the the proper office of the be to limit the estate yet sometime it may 1. alter the estate in the premise 2. diminish or enlarge 3. give to a stranger 4. make the grant void 1. it may alter the estate in the premise as where land be give to two in the premise the one moiety to the one and the other moiety to the other by the premise they have a joint estate the make they tenant in common Litt. 66. so where land be give to two to the one for life the remainder to the other by the premise they shall have a joint estate in possession but the do alter that and make the one sole tenant of the freehold for life and the other sole tenant of the remainder 8. e. 3. 320. feoffment and 73. 2. it enlarge or diminish the estate that will pass by implication in the premise and so destroy the implication this be common in every grant 3. it give to a stranger not name in the premise of the grant as if a man give land to I.S. with a. his daughter in frankmarriage there the wife not name in the premise by the take a joint estate with her husband this case be vouch in pl. com. 158. to be in 4. e. 3. which be not find in that year it be there so leave without any further reference but you shall find it in 5. e. 17. so Coke Instit. sect. 17. yet vid. 4. e. 3. 4. so likewise where a lease be make to a. for twenty year the remainder to b. and his heir here b. gain a immediate freehold by the and yet he be not name in the premise of the deed plough com. 158. 4. it will make the grant void as if I have a rent in fee and I grant it to another if I stay there the grant shall be for life but if I say further after the death of I.S. there all shall be void plough com. 152. 156. so if the king grant land by letter patent from a day to come there the whole grant be make void by the 5. coke 93. barwicks case he in the reversion for life grant his estate after Michaelmas and after Michaelmas the tenant atturne yet resolve that the grant be void though if there have be no it have be good by the premise of the deed buckler case 2. Coke 55. in all these case the be void make void the grant which will have be good without it as the have these several operation in the grant so have 2. the as a estate by implication shall be control by a express limitation so a employ reservation shall be control by a express reservation a man make a lease render rend and do not say to who the rent shall be pay this by implication shall be to the Lessor and his heir but if the word be to the Lessor the heir shall not have it 31. h. 8. dyer 45. 12. e. 3. Ass. 86. plough com. 171. in hill and grange case 10. e. 4. 18. and 21. h. 7. 25. the reservation of a rent in some case shall make severance of the grant and make several grant and several reversion as if a man make a lease of three manor reserve twenty shilling for one five pound for another and twenty pound for the three there be several reversion and there shall be several avowry 14. eliz. Dyer 308. winter case 9 e. 3. 12. 5. Coke 55. knight case 3. for the the proper office of the be to reserve the tenure and to toll the tenure by implication before the statute of if a man make a feoffment the feoffee hold of the feoffor by such service as the feoffor hold over but if other service be reserve than the feoffee hold by such service as be reserve that the donee in tail shall hold of the donor as the donor hold over be regular true if the donor make no special reservation for then the special reservation exclude the tenure which the law will create Coke Instit. sect. 19 vid. 34. h. 8. Dyer 52. 4. for the condition that do likewise direct and rule the grant the condition do change the quality of the grant and make the estate conditional and defeasible which otherwise will be absolute and indefeasible so that all these viz. the the the and the condition be and do rule and direct the grant the first limit and set forth the quantity the other describe the quality of the estate and of all these the be inseparable annex to the estate the rest may be determine and yet the estate continue but the tenure can be determine as long as the estate continue 1. the condition may be release 2. the rent may be release 3. the estate may be enlarge but the tenure can be destroy it may be transfer from one to another in case of common person but a tenure in can be transfer or extinct by any release or grant for it be a incident inseparable annex to the crown obj. it be obj. that the tenure be from the land for the land be the subject and the tenure belong to the King Resp. to that 1. it be answ that the question be not whither the tenure be from the land for it be clear the land be one thing and the tenure another but the question be whither the reservation of the tenure be from the authority of grant the land or include in it as s. they shall grant and grant in this manner 2 it be answer both be the king but the tenure be asleep by the possession in the king and it be now to be awaken by this commission in which it appear that the intent and plain meaning of the king be to grant the land to the subject and to reserve the tenure for himself and that the tenure be not such a stranger to the land it be prove by our book in Mary Blages case 1. h. 4. 2. it be say that land lie natural in tenure 2. that land lie always in tenure and therefore the tenure be of the nature of the land it arise out of the land and have existence in the land it be inherent in it and inseparable from it it be upon the matter of the essence of the grant of the land for no grant of land in feesimple to a common person either from the king or a common person can be without a tenure either express or employ we have not in our la proper that be any land in the hand of a subject that be not hold Coke Instit. sect. 1. the land only that be in the king possession be free from tenure for a tenant be he that hold of some superior lord by some service and therefore the king can be a tenant because he have no superior but God and as Bracton say lib. 1. cap. 8. vid. lestatute 16. r. 2. cap. 5. 14. eliz. dyer 313. 1. Coke 47. vid. 8. Coke 118. where it be say that it will be against common right and reason that the king shall hold of any or do service to any of his subject and therefore some have think it not so proper in the king case to say that he be scise in cowel interpret verb. p. 66. as if or be take in our law as it be in the feudal law only for land hold by service but with we it have another signification Littleton tell we and so it be define long before Littleton by Bracton and Briton and Fleta and in truth it have two signification in our book in the first it be take to be the same with a inheritance and so it be proper enough in the king case in the other it be take for land hold as in that of horse son fee and agree with he be Fleta which for the most part be transcribe out of Bracton lib. 5. cap. 5. and here just occasion may be take to clear our master Littleton from that imputation which be cast upon he by the author of the common wealth of England pag. 127. where he lay ignorance to his charge for lay that which say he it do not signify in any language it be easy to make it manifest how proper that sense be but because it have partly appear by that which have be say and for that the author of that book be not know for some have doubt whither sir Thomas Smyth be the author of it or no sir John Fernes generosity pag. 99 and so to argue with he will be to fight with a shadow therefore they do abstain so that it be clear that only land in the king possession be free from tenure but if they once come into the hand of a common person there if the feoffor do not reserve a tenure the law will before the statute of if a man make a feoffment in fee and reserve no tenure the law do imply a tenure and the feoffee hold of the feoffor by such service as the feoffor hold over upon a feoffment make after that statute if no tenure be express the law will imply a tenure and as it be in the case of common person so in the king case in every grant wherein feesimple pass there must be a tenure either express or imply of such necessity be the reservation of a tenure in the king grant that although the king shall grant land without any reservation of tenure or by express word yet the law will create a tenure in 33. h. 6. 7. 6. Coke 7 wheelers case 9 Coke 123. Anthony allows case 14. h. 6. 12. the abbot of st. bartholomewes case the king grant land in fee frankement come esten son corone yet the patentee shall hold in for it be vest in the king by his prerogative and can be extinct it be so inseparable it can be release in Anthony allows case the king grant or release the service to his tenant and his heir this release can extinguish the tenure in all though where the tenure be by common knight service or socage it extinguish all the service but that only which be a incident inseparable to every tenure viz. fealty and all for this reason because there be a necessity of a tenure and the king charter do not alter the law the tenure and service be part and parcel of the manor and shall go with the manor and descend as the manor to the heir of the part of the mother although it be new create 5. e. 2. avowry 207. beside consider the tenure in the commencement and fruit of it it be ever inherent in and relative to the land the commencement of the tenure s. the form of do homage and fealty be that he shall be faithful and true for the land that he hold the fruit of the tenure what be they but the profit of the land wardship livery primer seisin relief fine for alienation and the rest and therefore where the land and signiory meet in a equal estate and right in the same person the signiory by unity of possession be extinguish and there be two reason give of that extinguishment 1. because the signiory that be first extract out of the land when it come to the land again it be natural extinct for it be 2. he that have all the profit entire can be say to have part of the profit sir i. Davys rep. 5. the escheat which be the last resort of the tenure be the land itself and therefore the reservation of the tenure can be say to be a distinct thing from the grant of the land as black-acre from whiteacre obj. it be object that tenor in be bring in by the conquest but grant be by the common la then if grant have be ancient than tenor the tenure of necessity must be from the thing grant to prove that this tenure be bring in by the norman conquest Selden be cite in his spicileg to Eadmer p. 194. where he have that out of Bracton de Acquir domin lib. 2. Resp. it be answer that m. Selden in that place do bare recite the word of Bracton not deliver any opinion of his own for in that book cite pag. 170. and in his title of honour the last edition pag 612. we find that he be of another opinion and that this tenure be in use in England in the time of the saxon what be those or among the saxon but the king immediate tenant of land which they hold by personal service as of the king person by grand serjeanty or knight service in the land so hold be in those time call Thainland as land hold in socage be call Reveland so frequent in doomsday Thainland in Reveland Coke Instit. sect. 117. after some year that follow the come of the norman the title of thane grow out of use and that of baron and barony succeed for thane and thainland whereby we may understand the true and original reason of that which we have in the lord Cromwel case 2. Coke 81. that every barony of ancient time be hold by grand serjeanty by that tenure be the thain-land hold in the time of the saxon and those thain land be the same that be after call barony it be true the possession of bishop and abbot be first make subject to knight service in by William the conqueror in the four year of his reign for their land be hold in the time of the free but he than turn their possession into barony and so make they baron of the kingdom by tenure so that as to they this tenure and service may be say to be but the thain-land be hold by that tenure before as the king thane be a tenant in so the Thanus or middle thane be only a tenant by knight service that either hold of a mean lord and not immediate of the king or at least of the king as of a honour or manor and not in what be that Trinoda which so often occur in the grant of the saxon king under this form see it in a charter of king etheldred in the preface to Coke 6. report etc. but that which be after express by salvo Bracton lib. 2. cap. 26. and 35. 12. ed. 1. gard. 152. 26. Ass. 66. Selden analect Anglobrit. 78. and therefore it be say that sir Henry spelman be mistake who in his refer the original of feud in England to the norman conquest it be most manifest that tenor tenor by knight service tenor in socage frankalmoigne etc. be frequent in the time of the saxon and if we will believe what be cite out of a old french customary in a mss treatise of the antiquity of tenor in England which be in many man hand all those tenor be in use long before the saxon even in the time of the Britain there it be say the first british king divide Britain into four part and give one part to the arch-flamines to pray for he and his posterity a second part he give to his earl and nobility to do he knight service a three he divide among husbandman to hold of he in socage the four part he give to mechanical person to hold in burgage but that testimony be waive there be little certainty or truth in the british story before the time of Caesar neither will they make use of that which we be teach by William Roville of Alenzon in his preface to the grand Customier of Normandy that all those custom among which these tenor be be first bring into Normandy out of England by Edward the confessor beside that which have be say we find feud both the name and thing in the law of those time among the law of Edward the confessor cap. 35. where it be thus provide this law be after confirm by William the conqueror vid. Coke Instit. sect. 103. as these tenor be common in those time so be all the fruit of they homage fealty escuage relief wardship for relief we have full testimony in the relief of their earl and thane for which see the law of king Canutus cap. 68 and 69. the law of Edward the confessor cap. and what out of the book of doomsday coke have in his Instit. sect. 103. Camden in berkshire Selden in Eadmer 154. that wardship be then in use and not bring in by the norman as Camden in his Britt. 179. nor by hen. 3. as Randolph higden in his Polichronicon and other not understand he will persuade vid. seldens note on fortescue 51. among the privilege grant by Edward the confessor to the cinque-port we meet with this that their heir shall not be in ward lambards perambulation of Kent 101. and in the custom of Kent which be in the of tottells edition and in lambards perambulac there be a rule for the wardship of the heir in gavell-kind and that he shall not be marry by the Lord and those custom say of themselves that they be conquest conquest for the antiquity of wardship in England and Scotland see also hect. Boet. lib. 11. Buchanan scot. lib. 6. and the law of Malcolme 2. which prove the antiquity of wardship in Scotland and therefore in England before the norman conquest for in those time it be probable the law of both nation do not much differ as for the time after it appear they do not by compare their and our Glanvill neither be the bare conjecture of sir Henry spelman sufficient to take away the force of those law vid. spelman Glossar upon all this they do conclude that upon consideration of the authority give and grant thereupon make the reservation of the tenure can be say to be s. a separate and distinct thing from the authority of grant the land but rather include within it and that the reservation of the tenure though it be not the grant itself yet it be and a part of the grant and that therefore the authority be not pursue in that the whole grant be void 5. and so it be resolve for these reason and upon these authority 1. the main and principal reason why they do resolve that the letter patent be void in the whole be because that here the commissioner have but a authority and that authority they have not pursue by the commission they be to grant the land and to reserve a tenure in or to leave the reservation to the la now there be a tenure by common knight service reserve so they have execute their authority in another manner than the commission warrant they have do and therefore by the rule of the book before cite the whole grant be void it be agree by all that if the commissioner here have grant the land reserve a tenure in the patent will have be good and effectual or if they have grant the land and reserve no tenure there because the law in that case will raise a tenure in such a grant will have be good and well warrant by the commission 2. this commission be a nude authority for the interest be in the king and the commissioner have only a bare authority to grant and therefore it ought to be pursue most strict both in matter and manner and the execution of it be to be expound strict this all the case that have be put on the other side where a authority in some sort may be execute and yet good as the case of stanton and Barnes where by custom the lord may grant copy-holds in fee and he grant a lesser estate simple or a lesser estate with a remainder over and the other report that have be cite between down and Hopkins where the custom be to grant copy for two life and he grant to the husband for life and after to the wife the case of hat and Arrowsmyth where a copyholder for life be license to make a lease for year and he make a lease absolute without that limitation the case of baron and make a lease upon the statute of 32. h. 8. the case of 3. h. 7. where upon a licence to grant a annuity he grant it with clause of distress and yet for that case see the case of suttons hospital 10. coke the case of priddle and Napper and all the other case that have be put upon this ground for in all those case there be a interest couple with the authority and therefore they be not to be compare to this case in which there be only a mere and a bare authority 3. this commission be a public authority of record to which the subject may resort and of which they ought to take notice to pass according the commission at their peril and therefore if either through ignorance or carelessness or otherwise they neglect to have their patent draw pursuant to the commission the fault be their own they can transfer the blame of this to the king as in like case it be resolve upon the commission of bankrupt 2. Coke 26. so at the common law a patent without recital of a lease for year of record be void for the subject may resort to the public record the king intend this answer the objection touch even that honour of the king that have be speak of and clear his performance of his part in this case for the king in favour of his subject of this realm have grant a good and gracious and effectual commission upon which many legal and good and effectual letter patent have be make that have be allow and approve for good but if upon this commission so good and gracious for the subject the subject shall contrary to the authority give by the commission obtain letter patent in fraud and deceit of the crown to defeat the king of his tenor in a principal flower of his crown if these letter patent be void where be the fault certain in the subject that contrary to the authority of the commission obtain this grant in deceit of the king to defeat he of his tenure which be but a ill return for so great and gracious a bounty and that objection of the operation of law answer not the intention of the party in this case for plain and apparent the meaning of the Patentee be to suppress the king tenure in and to hold by a mean and inferior tenure which be contrary to the authority of the commission and in deceit and prejudice of the King now that patent obtain in deceit and prejudice of the king be clear and whole and utter void to all intent and purpose be a ground so obvious so positive and infallible true that they will not cite any book or authority to prove it for it be marvellous clear and grant of all side that patent obtain in deceit and prejudice of the king be altogether void if any desire a authority he may have a cloud of authority in the case of Alton wood coke 1. report 4. this be a authority appear within the body of the record of the letter patent themselves for the letter patent be of such and such now the tenure in be as strong imply in the commission as if it have be express as it have be confess of the other part for it be upon this implication that they say the patent be void for the tenure it be as much as if the king have give commission to grant the land to hold in and not otherwise now in so much as the commissioner have grant the land in other manner and all this appear within the body of the record of the letter patent themselves the patent be void in the whole for construction be to be make upon the whole patent and not upon any part of it distinct as it be resolve in buckler case 2 Coke 55. and this hitherto have be always the constant resolution of all the judge of Ireland our predecessor that if upon letter of warrant or commission letter patent be make vary in any point material from the warrant or commission and all this appear within the body of the letter patent themselves that the letter patent be all utter void and this have be ever agree upon by reason of the difference between the manner of pass of letter patent in England and Ireland but where the warrant or commission and the variance do not appear within the letter patent how it shall be aid for the king by averment or otherwise have be some doubt and question 5. although that it be true that this commission be of a vast and large extent yet it be not boundless for the law always bound and circumscribe these ample authority with reasonable and equal construction without prejudice to other as it be resolve upon the commission of sewer upon which we have the report case in 5. Coke 99 rook case and 10. Coke 138. this commission of sewer give power and authority to the commissioner to proceed according to their wisdom and discretion which be a most ample power yet the law do bind and circumscribe it with a equal construction s. that their proceed ought to be bound with the rule of reason law and justice and that their tax be equal and that all person that be subject to the danger or receive benefit by the reparation be contributory to a ratable and equal contribution of the charge and if they do otherwise their ordinance be void and they can make new invention as artificial mill for cast out of water etc. for these general commission be all accompany in law with a equal and reasonable construction for the execution of they so this commission be a most ample and large commission for the secure of the estate of the subject in their land but yet it ought to be so execute according to la reason and justice that they do not prejudice the king in his tenor contrary to their warrant 6. because that this reservation of a mean tenure be in other manner than the authority warrant and to the damage and prejudice of the King if the commission be to grant a estate for life and they grant a estate tail or if the commission be to grant in tail and they grant in fee all the patent be void because they do it in other manner than the authority warrant for the be if they reserve another rent then be warrant by the commission or parcel a entire rent where the rent in charge ought to be reserve although that it be several upon the survey yet the whole patent be void because that they do it in other manner than the authority warrant for the be why then shall it not be the same reason in this case for here they reserve another tenure then that which be warrant by the commission and therefore they have execute their authority in other manner than their authority warrant for the also be it be grant by they that argue on the other side that if it be prejudicial to the king the whole patent shall be void now it be most apparent that this employ tenure if it be admit will be great prejudicial to the king for the king shall loose his tenure and the fruit of his tenure in most case for ever and in all case for a long time and neither the master nor the attorney of the court of ward can help it and for that the course of patent here in Ireland be observe first the commissioner give warrant for draw of the patent and the reservation of this mean tenure the king council draw the patent according and so it pass the signature of the lord deputy the privy signet and the great seal than it be enrol in the chancery all this while it be take according to the tenure express in the patent when it be enrol it be transcribe into the exchequer and the transcript deliver into the exchequer by the master of the roll the lord chief baron receive it and deliver it to the second remembrancer and he put it in charge according to the tenure express the escheator and feodary inform themselves of the king tenor there where if they make enquiry the patent be produce in which a express tenure be reserve they can judge the contrary and so it pass according to the express tenure and so have the letter patent now in question pass and the king by colour of they have lose the profit of the land and the benefit of the tenure 7. the express reservation in the letter patent exclude the reservation and implication of law although as in the case in question it tend to make void the whole grant it be a sure rule in law if the king upon his letter patent reserve no tenure it shall be a tenure but if another tenure be express that shall prevail 33. h. 6. 7. Per prisot in wheelers case 6. coke 6. where in a patent the word of the be it be object that the tenure as it be express can stand for that no tenure can be without fealty and the word be 2. it be object that in case where no tenure be reserve or in case where it be express to be the tenure shall be knight service in and therefore it be urge that the tenure in the principal case must needs be a tenure by knight service and that the tenure express shall be void and give place to the better tenure for the King these be strong objection yet resolve in respect of that favour that be give to express reservation that in the say case fealty that be a incident to all service shall be admit to stand with the word and then the tenure express reserve be so complete that it may well exclude the knight service tenure which otherwise the law will have employ hereby may appear the favour that be give to express reservation and tenor that thereby a tenure in by knight service shall be exclude a tenure which shall arise where nothing be reserve which shall arise though the word be vid. Sr John Molins case 6. Coke 5. it be agree on the other side that where the express tenure be good there it control the employ tenure but in our case it be void and where a tenure express be void a tenure by implication of law may arise but it be resolve that although the express tenure be void yet no tenure by implication of law shall arise against the express reservation and so in the case of a void which stand upon the same reason it be adjudge in b. r. between one hag and cross 33 34. eliz. which you may see in buckler case 2. coke 55. where the case be tenant for life make a lease for year and after grant the reversion to a. from a day to come for life after the day the lessee for year attorn in that case the be void yet that void make void the whole grant and exclude the implication of law in the premise and no estate shall pass by implication of law in the premise against the express limitation of the party in the see the case cite before p. 26. so our although it be void yet the express reservation in the shall exclude the implication of Law. for that opinion of Martin in 4. h. 6. 22. that be cite on the other part that if land be give in frankmarriage reserve a rent the reservation of the rent be void by reason of the employ tenure in frankmarriage that opinion as be say may well be doubt of for we find as good authority against it in the old tenor fol. 211 that the reservation of the rent be good and destroy the frankmariage and make it a common estate tail but the best opinion be that both of they shall stand together s. the gift in frankmarriage and also the reservation of the rent s. that the donce in frankmarriage shall hold quit of the rent until the four degree be past and then the rent shall take effect and so be the opinion of the judge in webb and potter case in 24. eliz. and so be the book to be understand 13. e. 1. formedon 63. 31. e. 1. tail 31. 26. e. 3. grant 75. 26. Ass. 66. for the case of Littleton 140. a man seize of certain tenement which he hold of his lord by knight service at this day grant by licence the same tenement to a abbot in frankalmoigne the abbot shall hold immediate by knight service of the same lord of who his grantor hold and shall not hold of his grantor in frankalmoigne in that case they say the express tenure be void a tenure by implication of law do arise it be answer there be a difference between the king case which it the case in question and the case of a common person for the grant of a common person the rule of law be that the grant shall be take most strong against the grantor for the king grant the rule be that they shall be take most beneficial for the king and most strong against the patentee and we have another rule that the grant of the king shall not be extend to pass any thing contrary to the intent of the king express in his grant and if the grant can take effect according to his intent express in his grant the grant be void and therefore for the rule put by they that argue on the other side that the patent of the king shall be take in such sense and to such intent that they shall be good etc. it may be answer that there be another ground in our law that when the king be deceive in his grant so that it can take effect according to his intent express in his grant the grant be void so the best a exposition be to make all these rule to agree together and therefore the rule put on the other side be true with this limitation s. except the king be deceive so that his grant can take such effect as he intend by his express grant in the lord lovel case 18. h. 8. b. pat. 104. the grant land to one and to his heir male if a common person have make such a grant the law will say that the word male be void and the fee simple shall pass but will the law make such a construction in the king grant no there the grant shall be void for he be deceive in his grant in that it can take effect according to his intent express in his letter patent and so in the case of 7. h. 4. 42. and 21. e. 3. 47. the earl of Kent case if the king have a ward of land or a lease of land for year and by his letter patent grant the land to another and his heir the grant be void and it shall not amount by construction to a grant of his estate or interest vid. 21. Ass. 15. and the other book cite in the case of Alton wood upon this ground 29 eliz. in the exchequer the case be king h. 7. be seize of two manor s. ryton he grant that the grant be void the like case be resolve 39 eliz. where the queen be seize of the manor of Millborne and Saperton in the county of Lincoln and the queen grant and Millborne Saperton in Com: Linc and it be hold that neither of the manor do pass and yet if a common person have make such grant the grantee in both the say case shall have have both the manor so in our case the king be deceive in his grant in that his grant can take effect according to his intention therein express for the king intention be to make a grant agreeable in all thing to the authority give to the commissioner by the say commission and that appear plain by the very word of the letter patent for the word be as in the patent and he conceive that the warrant make by the commissioner for pass the patent which here we call the have be according to the intent and effect of the say commission and upon that warrant which exceed the authority give to the commissioner this patent be past yet still with a reference to the intention and effect of the commission now this grant can by any possibility take effect according to the king intention therein express for the king intention in the begin of the grant be that it shall be according to the intention and effect of the commission which must be a tenure by knight service in either by express reservation or by implication and operation of Law. and the tenure reserve in the patent be a tenure by common knight service as of the castle of Dublyn differ altogether from the intention and effect of the commission so as it be not possible that this tenure express reserve can be according to the intention and effect of the commission or that the intent and effect of the commission can any way acoord with the tenure express reserve in the patent so as it be very plain and manifest that the king be deceive in this grant and that it can take effect according to his intention therein express for the authority on which their resolution be ground the principal case be that of 12. Ass. 24. which as it be say be a judgement in effect in the point a judgement in a time when the law be as flourish and the judge as learned as in any time either before or since a judgement approve in all age subsequent 26. Ass. 39 11. h. 43. etc. and no authority in all our book against it for the material case that have be put on the other side be of authority accouple with a interest and by consequence do not come to the point in question and we see that the authority of this judgement be so great and clear that it be confess by they that argue on the other part but the reason of the judgement give by the judge that give the judgement be deny s. pur altar manner and a new reason be invent s. because he do not pursue his authority here we find they put to a straight s. to confess the judgement and deny the reason for who better know the reason of the judgement than the judge that give it this new reason s. that he have not pursue his authority if it be examine will come to the first reason for if it be demand why he have not pursue his authority it must be answered-pur altar manner garrant which be the reason of 12. Ass. but we have other authority in the point upon the same reason that of 10. h. 7. 15. which have be remember keble the most learned lawyer of that time authority altar son authority matter form there be and by the case that he there put if he do it in other form it be void if I enfeoff a man to enfeoff another and he levy a fine this be void yet the matter in substance be the same for a fine be but a feoffment of record but because that he have do it in other manner all be void 11. h. 7. 13. a letter of attorney to make livery to I.S. or i. n. and the attorney make livery to both the livery be void in all and it be not good as to the one and void as to the other but void in the whole because that he have do it in other manner than the authority warrant 8. Cook 85. in sir Richard pexhalls case if the king his tenant to alien two part of his manor of dale which be hold in and he alien all the manor it be void in the whole and it be not good for two part and void for the three and the reason be because he do it in other manner than the licence warrant vid. 10. h. 7. 13. 38. h. 8. dyer 62. 40. Ass. 38. 10. h. 7. 15. there be a report cite by the chief justice of the common plea and the chief baron the case be in C.B. in England t.m. 2. Caroli between George bishop of chichester plaintiff and John freeman defendant intr. Pasch. 1. Caroli rot. 207. and the case be this the bishop of chichester be seize in fee in the right of his bishopric of allingburne park in the county of Sussex and he and his predecessor have ancient grant the office of keeper of this park for life with the fee of five mark Anthony bishop of chichester 2. February 44. eliz. by his deed grant the office of keeper of the park to one freeman for life the ancient fee of five mark a livery coat or thirteen shilling four penny for it the windfall which grant be confirm by the dean and chapter and whither this grant be good against the successor or void upon the statute of 1. eliz. cap. 25. be the question in which the doubt be whither this addition of a livery coat pasturage and windfall will make the whole grant utter void or if the law shall make such a construction that for this addition it shall be only void and shall stand good for the other which be the ancient fee and well grant and by justice Crook and harvy against Yeluerton the grant be void in the whole because that the bishop have not pursue the authority give he by the statute by reason of this express and new addition and yet they profess that they have rather have give opinion for the defendant for that he be a poor man and a ancient servant to the bishop and yet in this case the addition and new augmentation be a several and distinct clause in the grant and the thing add be also several and distinct in from the ancient fee of five mark and in the argument of this case justice Crook cite a far strong case to be adjudge in the case of the archbishop of Canterbury 43. eliz. and the case be this Parker archbishop of Canterbury grant the office of surveyorship with the ancient fee to one he grant unto he in the park and the whole grant be adjudge void and yet here be a several grant by a several and distinct clause and of another thing several and distinct in and these case be far strong than the case in question for here there be not a bare authority but a interest accouple with a authority and in this case justice Crook cite scambler case 41. eliz. to be adjudge that the whole grant be void and not good as to the man of full age and void as to the infant as it have be cite by some that argue on the other side and so upon the whole matter they do resolve 1. that the commissioner by this commission have a good and legal and sufficient power and authority to grant 2. that all letter patent make upon this commission in which they have pursue their authority be good and effectual in Law. s. where they have either reserve a express tenure by knight service in or no tenure for there the law imply a tenure in 3. but where the commissioner reserve a mean tenure the whole patent be void 1. because that the commissioner have but a authority 2. because that this be but a nude authority and not accouple with any interest 3. because it be a public authority of record whereof the subject ought to take notice to pass according at their peril otherwise the patent shall be in deceit of the King 4. because that the authority appear within the letter patent themselves and exposition shall be make upon the whole patent 5. although it be a most ample and large commission yet it be bound and circumscribe by the law with a equal construction s. that nothing shall be do in other manner than the authority warrant in prejudice of the King 6. because that this reservation of a mean tenure be in other manner than the authority warrant and be in damage and prejudice of the King 7. and last because that this express reservation control the implication of law and for that the king be deceive in his grant in that it can take effect according to his intention therein express for these reason they do resolve that this express reservation of a mean tenure tend to the destruction of the whole patent and make it void in law both to the land and to the tenure the order of the council board upon this resolution of the judge by the lord deputy and council WENTWORTH whereas there be a act of council make at this board and date at the abbey of boil the eleaventh day of july 1635. ordain and establish that the lord knight gentleman and inhabitant their heir and assign hold any castle manor land tenement or other haereditament in the county of roscoman by or under any effectual letter patent from his majesty or any of his royal predecessor king or queen of England shall have hold possess and enjoy all the say castle manor land tenement and hereditament of what kind or nature soever they be to they and to every of they and to those who hold any estate under they against his majesty his heir and successor in as full large ample free and beneficial manner to all intent purpose and construction as if the truth of their several case and their several letter patent pass thereupon have be special find in the great office then to be take for find his majesty title to the say county and their letter patent according enter in the say office so that they do produce their say several letter patent or the enrolment thereof before we the lord deputy and council at this board before the first day of the then next easter term and that no possession shall be take from any such patentee or their assign or tenant who patent shall be at this board allow to be good and effectual in law and whereas the like act of council be make at this board for the several county of Slygo mayo and galway and the county of the town of galway and whereas several letter patent pass under his majesty great seal of diverse land tenement and hereditament in the say several county by colour of a commission under the great seal date the second day of march in the four year of the reign of his majesty royal father king james of bless memory be present unto we at this board which be take into consideration by we we think fit for our better information of the validity of the say letter patent to call before we some of those who claim by those letter patent as namely our very good lord the viscount dillon of Costillogallen who we appoint to attend we with his learned council therein which he do according whereupon his majesty learned council and the council learn of the say lord dillon agree upon a case draw up by they to be argue by they on both side before we which case follow in king james by commission under the great seal date the second day of march in the four year of his reign do authorise certain commissioner to grant the manor of dale by letter patent under the great seal of this kingdom to a. and his heir and there be no direction give in the say commission touch the tenure to be reserve there be letter patent by colour of the say commission pass unto a. and his heir to hold by knight service that be to say by the twenty part of etc. as of his majesty castle of Dublyn the question be whither the say letter patent be void in the whole or only to the tenure upon which case his majesty learned council and the learned council on the part of the say viscount dillon argue before we several day and we desirous to take such a resolution in the matter as may be equal and just hold fit to advise therein withal his majesty judge who not agree unanimous in opinion we adjudge it fit that every of they shall argue it and deliver his judgement and opinion therein before we which they do according wherein five of they viz. the lord chief justice of his majesty court of king bench the lord chief justice of his majesty court of common plea the Lo: chief baron of his majesty court of exchequer baron barry and justice rives concur in opinion clear that the letter patent be void in the whole and two only viz. justice Mayart and justice Cressy differ from those five in opinion hold that the letter patent be only void as to the tenure we thereupon take the same into consideration at this board do hereby adjudge order and declare that the say letter patent be whole void in law and consequent that all such letter patent pass under colour of the say commission and that mention the parcel grant to be hold by knight service as of his majesty castle of Dublyn or by any tenure other then by knight service in general be not good effectual or valid in law but void in the whole and therefore we do at this board disallow all such letter patent so grant as aforesaid of any land tenement or hereditament in any of the say county of roscoman Slygo mayo galway or the county of the town of galway give at his majesty castle of Dublyn 13. july 1637. r. dillon ad. loftus w. parson gerr. lowther r. Bolton chr. Wandesford ph. mainwaring cha. Coote geo. radcliffe the end