the first chapter contain a entrance into this treatise or trial how much it import to be a catholic and no heretic and with how great reason his majesty endeavour to clear himself and his royal person from the imputation of heresy if this short cut of our transitory pilgrimage here in this vale of misery be but a moment whereupon eternity of salvation or damnation do necessary seri^ 1. depend according to that of s. Leo the first from the quality of temporal action the diversity of eternal retribution do depend if god secret judgement towards he as ancient Tertullian avouch that be if it be not a matter of bondage or lib. c. 4. liberty manu-mission or captivity that come in question to be discuss before the heavenly tribunal but endless pain or interminable glory if this never-dying life or everliving death be either award or inflict achieve or incur according to man free choice of faith or infidelity catholic religion or heresy make here in the church or out of the church as every man be a member of the church militant or malignant then singular be the importance and absolute necessary the decison and knowledge of this one main question purposely move to discern who be the catholic and who be the heretic since the premise eternity of weal or woe bliss or bale be promise to the one and threaten to the other 2. the very consideration of these two weighty precedent circumstance of eternal glory or endless pain wrought such a impression in the heart of his royal majesty of England yea such care and such fear and such zeal of clear himself to speak in the phrase of the apostle that in my judgement he think that the weighty counsel of Tertullian worthy of eternal memory 2. cor. 7. 11 of every one that have a soul to save ought to be embrace and follow of he to wit lib. it be in his place before cite infer upon those premise which go before that be for avoid of which severity and invite of which liberality our obedience must use such diligence as the thing themselves be of moment which either the severity do treaten or the liberality do promise 3. hence proceed that worthy industry use by his majesty in clear himself from that foul crime of heresy and hence come that voluntary confession concern his majesty religion enforce he to break forth into that earnest and serious protestation viz. I will never be ashamed to render a account of my profession and of that hope 1. petr. 3. 15 that be in i as the apostle prescribe I be such a catholic christian as believe the three creed etc. and then do ensue the his majesty protestation four head before lay down a sentence contain in it a confession worthy to be stamp in character of gold and to be write with a pen of iron and with the point of a diamond that it may be everlasting remember and never bury in ash of oblivion and if word job. 19 23 24. can be witness of the mind the heart must needs be well meaning and sincere whence such word proceed for I will never imagine that of his majesty which be to common now adays Sallust where word pass as coin to serve the present time and as they shall make for the most advantage of the speaker oh what great pity be it that his majesty shall be mislead in matter of that importance as immediate concern his eternal salvation and the soul welfare of all his subject especial since he be in regard of religion which under his authority be there maintain to render a account to God not only for himself in particular but for all his subject in general such be the burden of all they who by their place and dignity have high authority over other 4. now albeit his majesty do upon some occasion or other defer the handle of the scripture and the credit due unto they unto the four and last place yet to i it seem most convenient to treat thereof in the first of this my discourse according to the dignity and pre-eminency of the subject itself but yet before I enter into the list of this argument I have esteem it expedient for sundry cause to premise this other chapter concern the name and attribute nature and circumstance property and difference prerogative and damage of be a Catholic or heretic as also to lay down some way how to try the same to which purpose I have think good to address certain several consideration which do ensue in every chapter the first consideration concern the word catholic and heretic these be great word they do admit a twofold about the word Catholic and heretic and that they can never agree signification the first be general and natural the second more special and ecclesiastical 6. touch the general and natural acception of the word they import as much as universal or whole or choice or chooser and howsoever upon the first view and superficial insight they appear not to be so great opposite and contrary the one to the other but that in diverse respect they may agree and stand together for that both the thing which be whole or universal may be choose and that which be choose by election may in some sense be whole or universal yet in the special and ecclesiastical appropriation of these word invent by the holy ghost and retain and bring into ecclesiastical use and canon by the christian church there be such a extreme opposition and irreconcilable hostility in respect of their contrary nature and effect as that nothing among christian man can be more opposite and contradictory no not light and darkness heaven and hell gen. 21. 9 14. virtue and vice salvation and damnation God and Beliall for as Isaac and Ishmael the son of the bondwoman the implacable hostility between heresy and Catholic religion and the heir of promise can not dwell together in one house as jacob and Esau can not agree together in one womb but contend together whereupon Rebecca complain and expostulate with God if the matter be even so why be I conceive in one word to shut up all in a word as the flesh and the spirit continual gen. 26. 22 jar and be at difference in one and the same man even so the catholic and the heretic as another Isaac and Ishmael as another Esau and jacob as the flesh and the spirit they can never dwell together in God house they can never agree together in one womb the womb of the church one of they must be cast out of the door of the church the one of they must of necessity serve the other so impossible it be that two so contrary the one to the other shall stand together such be the implacable hostility and extreme opposition betwixt they 7. when Abraham the father of the faithful for so the scripture style he perceive that a breach may happy fall out betwixt he and his nephew lot upon a dissension already begin betwixt their herdsman he call unto he consult the case treat and entreat with he and to persuade he to unity use gen. 13. 9 ^ this motive of all the most persuasive let there be no dissension betwixt i and thou betwixt my herdsman and thy herdsman for we be brother etc. but it fare not thus betwixt the catholic and the heretic no union can be make no communion have no condition of peace to be treat and offer betwixt they and if you will have the reason of this they be no brother nay which be more they can be brother for the catholic in his spiritual birth have God for his father and the church for his mother whereas the heretic have a Hittite to his father and a Amonite to his mother that be Satan be his father and schism be his mother he be a stranger to the covenant and a mere alien to the household 4. 9 18. 19 22. of faith and therefore as Ichu first answer jehoram his messenger demand of peace what have you to do with peace get you behind i follow i etc. and second unto jehoram himself when he come in person to meet he and demand be it peace jehu what peace while the fornication of thy mother jezabel and her witchcraft be yet in such abundance so what peace can the catholic make with the heretic while his heresy worse than the sin of witchcraft and his spiritual fornication in worship of false god that be entertain false opinion in religion and dissonant from catholic faith continue a terrible Deut. 13. caveat to all temporizer that will make a linsey-woolsey vincentius Lyrinensis c. 15. of all religion reconcile catholic religion with protestant heresy which be as possible as to unite thing most contrary and deadly jar to these I can give no other counsel than such as Elias give to the worshipper of Baal when his fiery zeal will admit no division betwixt idolatrous superstition and god most pure and undefiled religion how long will you halt betwixt ^ reg. 18. two opinion if Baal be God follow he but if God be God follow he etc. the application be if heretical innovation be God his true worship follow it but if catholic tradition be the only true and soul-saving religion then under eternal pain and hazard of your soul resolve halt no long betwixt the two God will either have all or none he care not for a heart and a heart a divide heart and the church will receive none within her bosom nor help to save any with her sacrament but such as be her trueborn child constant profess her piety abandon all kind of schism and heresy and secure rest only and true within her bosom 8. and although I do not affirm that all catholic shall be save for that evil life and matter of fact may condemn as well as bad belief and matter of faith yet be I most certain and I dare pronounce it that all heretic so live and so die shall be damn agree with that so often time reiterate by s. cyprian Eccles. cap. 5. he shall never aspire to heavenly glory that forsake the church verity and fall away from Christ by apostasy he be a foreigner he be profane he be a enemy and as all perish without the ark and be certain corporal drown so assure all without the ark of the church shall eternal be damn since the scripture teach we that this ark be a lively type of the church and as a heretic and a catholic can never be join together in heaven so can never the catholic and heretic catholic religion and heresy in any one point be conjoin upon earth this be the uniform and to use his majesty word consent of all orthodox pious and religious divine 9 the reason of all the foresay opposition betwixt a right-beleeving catholic and a misbelieve heretic be this the catholic know nay believe it as the groundwork of his faith that Christ our saviour have leave the world in respect of his visible presence continue invisible by the immediate assistance of his holy spirit with his church which be the house of God and the gate of heaven as jacob gen. 28. 17 speak of the place of his vision the pillar and foundation of truth unto this 1. tim. 3. 15 church our saviour reveal all his secret that concern her salvation make she of his privy counsel govern she visible first by his own person second by his apostle direct she invisible by his immediate spirit the holy ghost and so continue she under visible government and invisible direction unto the world general consummation lead she into all truth such be his promise make unto she and here be the performance and the reason that the church be thus near and dear unto Christ be this she be his body according to that of s. matt. 28. 20. etc. all that can be say and aver of Christ be his head and his body the head be the only beget son of God the body be his church bone of his bone and flesh of his flesh for Christ have two body the one and therefore natural the other and therefore mystical and the late be more dear unto he then the former for he whole bestow his natural body to redeem his mystical body 10. the catholic then know this correspondency betwixt Christ and his church believe all whole and without either choice or addition of his own which the catholic can be a chooser but admit that which be deliver the say church universal spread over the world do propose unto he as matter of faith to be believe contain himself within that most sure and infallible prescription of it be not lawful for we to innovate at our pleasure nor yet may I make choice of that which another man upon private fancy have add but as for the heretic it go not so with he for be a heretic that Psal. 1. 5. be a chooser he according to his name and nature because he will not have his name for nought make choice of what he list to believe use his own election Tertull. prescript whether it be to be a author of heresy or a follower as Tertullian speak in the place before cite and all this he do according to his own judgement and fancy ascribe little or rather nothing at all to the authority of the church in any thing that mislike his own judgement so that in conclusion these two man be most opposite the one to the other 11. the first clear knowledge that ever the church have of this peculiar and ecclesiastical appropriation of these two word catholic and heretic be from the holy ghost the 1. ecclesiastical use of the word heretic inspirer of all truth as have be former note and to begin first with the last the very first intimation give of that odious and pestiferous appellation of heresy or heretic be by the apostle themselves as namely s. Paul to the Corinth there must be heresy that those who be approve may be manifest among you which manifestation Tertull. say be cor. 11. 1. 9 mean aswell of those in persecutionib@ who have remain constant in persecution as they who have not decline out of the right path to follow heresy so he second the same apostle in his prescript adverse haer. cap. 4. epistle to Titus write thus avoid a heretical man after one or two reprehension know that such a one be subvert and sin as damn by his own proper judgement and for so I tit. 3. 10. 11. may well expound it that be he sin not so much of infirmity and ignorance as he do of voluntary malice and obstinate industry or else as Tertullian give the sense his own election make good his own damnation and as s. Paul inveigh thus against heresy jibd c. 6. and heretic so do s. Peter as you shall read 2. pet. 2. brand they for (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) damnable heresy and the teacher of they for such as bring upon themselves (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) swift damnation or as it be render in another place immediate follow (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) and their damnation sleep not can any thing be speak more terrible to forewarn we of heresy and heretic than this excellent therefore be the counsel ibid. v 31 of Tertullian wish we to avoid a heretic prescript c. 16. after one reprehension and not after a disputation for that the apostle do therefore forbid disputation because the speak with a heretic shall be for his reprehension and this only once because he be no christian lest after the manner of a christian he shall seem to be chastise once and again and that by two or three witness when for this cause he be to be chastise because there be no disputation to be have with such a one 12. and although the word heresy be use two or three time in the act of the apostle where the sect of the act. 5. 17. 15. 5. 24. 14. scribe and pharisee be call heresy and though s. Paul himself speak out of the opinion of the jew most willing undergo the imputation where christian religion be brand with the term of sect or heresy yet be not the word take in such a heinous signification here in these place as in the other place of the apostle before mention for that of no kind of sin or sinner do they ever pronounce so grievous a sentence as namely that he be to be flee from as subvert and damn by his own judgement that they bring in damnable heresy that they bring upon themselves swift damnation and that their damnation sleep not which they fear not to pronounce nay they bold pronounce of a heretical man they bring upon themselves swift damnation here be nothing but damnation and all to give we a terrible admonition to beware they and avoid they and thus much I think good to say of this dreadful name for stir up my former brother of the ministry to beware thereof but much more to decline the cause and occasion of the same 13. as for the word Catholic it come from heaven and be first reveal from the holy ghost by the mouth of concern the word catholic how eminent it be all the apostle in their common creed for be assemble together to compose a perfect platform of true and saving-beliefe and to keep out heresy while they disperse themselves abroad to sow the sacred seed of evangelical verity they be at this time and for this purpose assemble and their tongue be the pen of a ready writer when they come unto that article which concern the church they by the instinct of the never-erring spirit lay down the form thus I believe in the holy ghost the holy catholic church where they do not think it sufficient to say they believe the holy christian church but they think the word catholic to be more eminent significant and effectual for the purpose neither can this be do without the singular care providence and wisdom of that all-seing spirit that undoubted inspire they prescript cap. 4. 5. 6. etc. and guide they for as Tertull. observe that s. Paul foresee that heresy will afterwards spring up in the church as the weed usual do among the pure and rank corn foretell and forewarn they to come yea point out as it be with the finger to some heresy particular even so the apostle foresee that all heresy be to shroud themselves under the name of christian church assembly and congregation they think it most convenient for preservation of unity and verity to set this remarkable stamp of Catholic upon the church for the more manifest convince and detect of all heresy which badge or cognisance be once set upon the sleeve of the church impossible it be that any heretic that ever be be or hereafter shall be can ever fasten upon this title and since it be more than apparent that the genuine description of catholic require more particular and more easy to be discover then do the name of christian in general most pertinent if not necessary be the imposition of this name upon Christ church for the better exclude and keep forth of all heretical and particular sectary whatsoever 14. from these two fountain then of sacred scripture and common creed original flow the knowledge and use of these two word of Catholic and heretic both of they come from heaven both be particular inspire by the holy ghost and breathe into the church for her better preservation as have be former note the very consideration whereof aught effectual to move we to make great esteem of their knowledge to entertain they as we ought and that be high to reverence and sincere to affect the one since out of the confine of this there can be no salvation as also to detest and fly from the other as from a serpent yea as from Satan that first seduce serpent since this bring with it assure damnation 15. for these and the same cause the ancient father of the primitive church so much commend by his the father judgement about the word heretic and Catholic majesty as that he refer himself in matter of religion to their decision as soon as ever these word and their mystery be reveal in the church lest in time they shall be bury in oblivion do present with their pen advance the most high commendation of the one as the only ordinary high way to everlasting salvation as also by many detestation and execration depress the other as the very path to eternal perdition 16. among which worthy and famous pillar of the church the ancient father pacianus so high commend by s. hier. for his holiness above 1200. year ago write a learned epistle to one a novatian heretic of the excellency of this name catholic for that in catal. illust. those heretic as we also of this day do make very little account of this name but the holy father describe at large how necessary it be for the holy ghost to leave unto we this name or rather syr-name for distinguish all faithful christian from misbeliever his word be very effectual for this purpose say he I bechance enter this day into a populous city and find there some call marcionite some apollinarian some cataphrigian some novatian and other of like sect all call themselves christian I do not know by what syr-name I shall find cut the congregation of my people except by the name of catholic so he and then proceed further pacian epist sempr. certain this name be never take or borrow of man that have not fall or decay for so many age and then he allege the authority of Catholic antiquity and universal church and namely the authority of s. cyprian in particular for the use of that name against all heresy whatsoever conclude thus wherefore our people be distinguish by this appellation from all heretical name when it be call catholic and yet further he say Christian be my name but catholic be my surname the first do name i only the second do point i out by the name of christian I be signify only but by the surname of catholic I be try and examine whether I be a Christion or no. so he 17. this be that high account and esteem wherein that ancient father of the primitive church s. pacianus hold the word catholic after that the christian church have appropriate and assume this distinctive appellation set it as a most certain badge or cognisance upon the breast of the church in general and upon the sleeve of every member of this church in particular and the reason reassume in the conclusion be in effect this that be in plain term this name catholic make a conjunction unite her own and it note a disjunction separate all sectary from her society and here be the wisdom of Solomon even the wisdom of almighty God 3. reg. 3. 15. 19 discern betwixt the true mother and the false this be the true and natural mother of every child of the church she will admit no division of her child she will have all or none for catholic be her name but to leave s. pacianus and to pass to other since that the scripture require that in the mouth of two or three witness every matt. 18. 1^ 2. cor. 13. thing shall be establish where we may note by the way that if the testimony of two or three ordinary witness may stint the strife in matter of controversy and tend to reconciliation how much more then the uniform consent of extraordinary witness witness judge and judge witness great than all exception aught to compromise and final decide the question now in hand 18. these witness consent with pacianus in the premise point of catholic be all the ancient father which live either before or after he in the century of christian religion within the unity and bosom of their mother the catholic church as namely before he s. cyprian who he express mention and before he again old Tertullian one of the most ancient father of the latin church who s. cyprian the martyr so high reverence and when he will read he he prescript c. 26. point he out thus and after these two s. Augustine who ascribe so much and that as he think worthy unto this name catholic as that he fear not to say that it be one special motive both to draw he to it and to hold he in the visible universal church of his day neither do this great doctor bare affirm it upon his word and credit which have be sufficient for we to have believe the same but he yield a substantial reason thereof in the word follow which very name aug. lib. fundament in epist. c. 4. of catholic not without cause this only church have obtain among so many heresy as have spring up again the same father positive and bold affirm in another place that the word catholic be so appropriate to this church ever since the apostle in their creed give that name unto it as that no conventicle of heretic whatsoever can once fasten upon the name themselves or procure the same to be give unto they by other and hereupon he conclude that the very possession of the name and common opinion of man be a sufficient convince proof against all adversary that this church be the true catholic church indeed 19 hitherto s. Augustine now if we descend low to succeed age of the church I mean unto those father that live after s. Augustine his time we shall find such harmony in unity such uniform consent in judgement touch the true explication of this name Catholic as also the very right explication of that unto the visible universal church of their day that we must hence necessary infer that one spirit breathe in all one and the same spirit direct all and here I may produce a whole cloud of witness to speak in the phrase of the apostle as namely s. Damascen oecumenius Theophilact for the greek hebr. 12. 1. P^lgentius s. Gregory the great s. beda for the latin but for that I will not be prolix and because I hasten to my second consideration which be the very main conclusion of all my whole discourse hitherunto I will knit up all with that golden admonition of vincentius Lyrinensis a lib. advers. c. 5. author which who so read and believe it be impossible if he will profess any religion that he shall be aught else but a roman catholic well his word be these the counsel and direction of vincentius Lyrinensis about be a catholic let we hold that say he which have be believe general of all for that this be true and proper catholic as the very nature and signification of the name do import and then for further explication he give a threefold prescription for a more sure and infallible direction and this be universality antiquity and consent all which he must as time and occasion serve adhere unto that will be account true catholic and yet in the begin of his four chapter he illustrate the first prescription of universality most pertinent for our purpose at this time by way of supposition and question move and answer his word be these what then shall a Catholic Christian do if any parcel of the church shall cut itself of from communion of the universal faith this be the question move the answer follow what else forsooth shall he do but that he prefer the health of the whole body before any one pestilent and corrupt member thereof 20. and hereupon I begin to enter into a serious consideration and a severe examination of my own conscience in a secret recollect and most retire conference betwixt God and my own soul touch matter of religion as they shall either doom i or save i at the last day first I consider yea and serious within my own heart debate demand of myself whether the protestant church and doctrine whereof I then be a real and formal member and professor have not cut itself of yea depart and separate itself from the union and communion of the universal faith and from the save and convert gospel of Christ his kingdom which be first to be preach to all nation as Christ matt. 24. 14. promise that it shall come to pass before the world great destruction and general consummation this be my first demand and the answer return unto i by the catholic church of ancient father upon view of the consideration and consultation of the writer about his change in religion their doctrine and compare it etc. nay by the spirit of God since it be promise to be the guider and director of his church I say the answer return be that the protestant church and doctrine have abandon both Catholic name and Catholic faith and therefore as beam cut of from the sun as bough violent break of from the tree and stream and channel part and separate from their original fountain as s. cyprian speak they Eccles. be to perish vanish and come to nought and now what course remain for i to take if I regard at all the welfare of my soul but to follow the sage and weighty counsel of my foresay author vincentius Lyrinensis my author indeed be the only mean next under God of my conversion from heresy to catholic religion and that be to prefer the health and welfare of the whole body before any one pester and infest member thereof his meaning in plain term be that in time of schism and heresy or in particular country apostasy from the catholic christian faith and religion every catholic Christian that be already in the church must hoover under the wing of the church by retire into her lap and bosom in time of any danger and he that be a heretic and of a heretical congregation and consequent forth of the church must endeavour by all mean possible to become a catholic by return again unto the communion of Catholic religion out of which it be impossible there shall be any salvation 21. this first consideration I enlarge yet further extend it by a second supposition to wit if the protestant church and doctrine be catholic indeed as they will bear the world in hand it be than it have be general reaceave of christian over all Christendom in that sense as it be now in opposition against the roman church then the protestant can produce visible church of they that have be extant from the apostle time downward hitherto that have hold the self same point of doctrine the self same number of sacrament and other such difference as now Protestant church have in they from the roman then according to that most sure prescription of Tertullian they can prescript cap. 32. declare the beginning of their church they can turn over and bring forth a orderly succession of bishop run on as he say from the very beginning and continue what be require to prove the protestant church Catholic without any interruption to the apostle time then can they prove that the first bishop that hold these difference be institute and ordain by some apostle or apostolical man for so say Tertullian can the church of the smyrnean prove their succession of bishop from s. ordain by s. John and the church of Rome prove from s. Clement place by s. Peter in one word ibid. c. 32. then according to another prescription of Tertullian can lib. prescript cap. 21. 22. they prove that the doctrine of their church as now it stand in contradiction with we conspire with the doctrine of the original apostolical and mother church and that they hold that very doctrine which the church receive from the apostle the apostle from Christ and Christ from God and that the same have continue by never interrupt succession from that time to this of they these thing if they shall ever be able sound and substantial to prove on their part then shall I acknowledge that they and their religion be catholic indeed and that out of their church there be no salvation 22. but if these thing have be by they attempt and can never yet be prove by they nay if their affirmative have be disprove by a negative in all the forename note mark prescription of the church and against heretic as be already too apparent know to the whole christian world then let they at the last upon so manifest a conviction ingenuous confess that the denomination of heretic rather than the appellation of Catholuke do proper appertain unto they 23. and albeit I can but understand that the heretic of ancient time and all modern sectary in these our unhappy day both in Germany France Holland Scotland and England do ambitious affect this renown name of Catholic to have it give unto their heretical congregation nay which be more howsoever they do fraudulent sometime clothe themselves in sheep skin when surreptitious they invest themselves with this high title and supreme dignity of a Catholic though in point of doctrine among themselves they be never so much opposite the one to the other each condemn other for heretic nay damn themselves among themselves and that to the pit of hell yet notwithstanding let the Catholic but pursue they and arrest they of sacrilegious church-theft for steal this title they dare not stand to try the issue before the tribunal of the church but present as guilty they fly away renounce their steal title and so it return to the right owner and be it any marvel that maugre their head they be enforce to this restitution when they be at such opposition among themselves as be former note which very opposition itself set all other argument of the Catholic a part do evident show and demonstrative convince unto their face that they can be catholic indeed because as the foresay father pacianus note that be catholic in christian religion which be Eccles. every where one and the self same for as Christ seamless coat be whole entire and undivided it be s. cyprian his comparison and it be well worthy our observation even so must the spouse and church of Christ figure by this coat be whole entire undivided and one in itself and thereupon say he can cyprian Eccles. never possess the coat of Christ who rent and tear the church of Christ 24. but alas catholic communion and catholic union can be find much less verify in and of protestant religion not only in those old imagine time and age of their suppose primitive church which they ridiculous and impudent do challenge unto themselves but neither in these very age wherein they have peep out of chymerian nay out of infernal darkness and be know to the world by the name of protestant lutheran caluinist and the like I say not in these time can they show among themselves in main and many article of christian belief and this I can partly speak upon my own experience have among they for many year during which time I can never yet God I take to witness as righteous judge find any two of they agree together in all point of faith and partly I can prove it by infinite book write by themselves wherein they fall together by the ear discover their own shame upon their own skirt Ephraim against Manasses and Manasses against Ephraim and both against judah that be lutheran against caluinist and caluinist against lutheran and yet both like Simeon and levi in in the evil of schism and heresy they can join hand and conspire against catholic and Catholic verity and this convince my understanding that protestant can not be catholic and therefore I pass to the other side where I find indeed every where one in all point of their belief throughout the world together with that universality antiquity consent and succession which the foresay vincentius Lyrinensis that good old monk and professor of evangelical counsel of perfection that live in s. Augustine his time set down in the name of the whole catholic church in his time as the certain sign mark and token of the true Catholic church indeed and this much shall suffice for this first consideration about the word catholic and heretic let we pass unto the second the second consideration if the change of Abraham his name from Abram into of the dreadful misery of be a heretic Abraham be full of mystical consolation because it confirm he in the promise of the Messiah and for that he shall be the father of many nation Genes 17 5. if jacob his name be turn into Israel be fraught with comfort and that for these two especial reason first because he have prevail with God and second because he shall prevail against man Genes 32. 28. o then how comfortable and how amiable how full of solace and heavenly delight ought this glorious and through the whole christian world renown name of catholic to be unto we since it confirm we nay assure and seal unto we all god promise make unto the church it be the father of many nation comprehend all true believe christian within the lap and bosom of the church it prevail with God procure his heavenly benediction and never depart without a blessing and it prevail against man distinguish betwixt wolf and sheep separate all false worshipper from the true believer 26. and now as this name of Catholic begin to be unto i most amiable and comfortable contain in it so many privilege and prerogative and be so high repute esteem and commend by all sacred antiquity even from the apostle day downward unto our time though the novatian heretic object to the forename father pacianus as the heretic do to we in these day that no man be call catholic under the apostle so on the Pacian epist. 1. other side compare contrary together which be opposite be the clear reveal I consider with all possible attention that the name of heretic be most dreadful above all other name upon the earth as before I have note at large and therefore if ever there be a cham accurse of his father as you shall read there be Genes 9 25. then the heretic be this cham accurse of God the father and anathematize of the church his mother this be Benoni that son of the mother sorrow as rachael pronounce of Benjamin the birth of this son will be the death of his mother he gen. 35. 18. come from her womb but he will not abide in her bosom agree with that of the apostle joan. 1. 2. 1^ they go forth from we but they be not of we for if they have be of we they will have remain with we but here by they be manifest not to be all of we and therefore to express if it be possible in a word the horror of this name as the child of the prophet cry unto Elizcus the prophet after they have taste the pottage in in death be in the pot o man of God death be in the pot even so may I more just take up this complaint and cry out unto every man of God that be a true member of the Catholic church and that against all heresy and the very name heretic there be nothing but death and destruction desolation and damnation in this very name 27. and here we shall be enforce as it be to ponder upon this point somewhat more at large and to extend the bond of this ensue consideration especial for so much as concern we so near as it do this matter can be but worthy of our weighty ponderation and the rather will we the more deliberate consider of this point for so much as we hear on the one side the terrible horror of the say name and on the other side we see the common and to much use familiaryty thereof in these our unhappy time late and worse day which be so replenish with all kind of sect and sectary as that each one common call the other heretic and that with as great facility and with as little regard as if the accustomable practice of call heretic have take away the true sense and real feel of a heretic or as though he call he good fellow or witty inventor of new opinion which among the sectary of our age be rather repute for a pleasant jest and ingenious commendation then for that which in sober sadness set all atheistical scoff and jest in matter of such moment a part it be to wit a terrible accusation and dreadful charge of a most high and capital crime commit against God his church his saviour and all to the destruction of his own soul 28. but alas who do not now adays delight and esteem himself the more for his sharpness of wit and subtle ingeny for invent find out devise frame new position new translation new interpretation and that coin and stamp in the shop of his own brain thereby of set purpose to impugn and of desperate malice to withstand some Catholic point of ancient church doctrine and if you tell he that he must keep he to the tradition of the church deliver that to the son of the church which he have uniform receive from the father of the church that he must not remove ancient band in matter of belief for fear of a curse that he must as s. Paul charge Timothy and that with a vehement 1. tim. 6. 20. asseveration and what be that that be as vincentius Lyrinensis excellent expound it 27. cap. advers. that which be commit unto thou not any thing invent of thou that which thou have receive not devise a matter of doctrine not of wit not of private usurpation but of public tradition a matter bring unto thou not bring forth of thou wherein thou must be no author but a keeper no master but a scholar no guider but a follower last tell he that he must content Vincent in praf himself with be a relator only not presume to be a author otherwise his position will prove innovation private invention erroneous election and consequent heresy I say tell he all this and what more you can devise and he will laugh at you for your simplicity in go about to terrify he with such bug and in tie his spirit to any rule of church-authority since the wind blow where it list etc. which he fanatical apply unto his spirit presume it to be inspire from above and with that spirit if you will believe he upon his bare word be he so inspire that he need no other direction no further instruction and this be all the John 3. 8. account that he make of be a catholic or a choose heretic but reflect upon the other side of the roman religion which may true and only be call catholic I experimental find another kind of reckon make of both these word catholic and heretic most high esteem the one as have be former speak and fearful decline the other as the Origen and offspring of all calamity 26. and first I find in the common doctrine of their school they assign heresy for one of the three species d. thom. 2. 2. quaest. 10. art. 6. or member of infidelity opposite to christian religion they hold it to be the worst and most heinous of all three in respect of the extreme and desperate malice thereof to wit that it be in a degree of evil and sin worse and more damnable than either paganism or judaism not for that all heresy deny more part of christian doctrine then do the pagan or jew for in this the pagan heresy be worse than judaism or i sin more than a jew and a jew common more than a heretic but because they do corrupt and impugn the catholic christian faith which once they receive and from which they be now wilful depart which imply more malice than can be ascribe to either jew or Gentile that never receive the same in which respect their sin and damnation be more grievous say catholic doctor then be either of the other two whereupon be infer by s. Thomas and it be the common opinion that a heretic be in worse state than a jew or gentile for the life to come 30. again for further aggravation and exaggeration of the horror of this name and loud-crying sin thereby signify the catholic divine in a more particular explication do constant and with uniform consent aver that a heretic discredit or not believe as he shall any one article of the catholic faith do lose his whole faith and habit thereof in all the rest and the reason hereof be assign by the school doctor for that the chief motive or formal reason why a man do believe any thing in christian religion be because it be reveal by God and propound by the church without which church propound and approve nothing can be secure believe and therefore when a heretic in any one article discredit and detract from the authority of this church which be necessary and primary condition in belief deny it thereby to be a infallible rule of belief in this one article he deny the same in all the rest as for example if a man shall ask a Protestant why he believe the scripture and s. matthews gospel to be s. matthews gospel he can answer no otherwise but that God have reveal the same unto we by the church which propound these book for scripture here then the proposition of the church appertain to the formal reason or cause of belief as devyne do term it which if once it be deny or discredit in any one article as the protestant do when we allege it against they for purgatory prayer for the dead sacrifice invocation of saint and the like then can it not hold in the former about scripture or any other a heretic have no divine faith at all and why article and consequent heretic have no divine faith at all about scripture or any other article but be mere infidel in all and consequent shall be damn say they not only as choose heretic believe one thing and reject the other but as unbelieving infidel devoid of all faith which seem to i to be a very terrible commination and fearful distriction and yet do I see it substantial ground and so orderly deduce as that I must ingenuous confess it so convince my understanding and inform my judgement that I can not do otherwise then give my full consent unto it nor do I possible see how the same may be any way deny or probable with any colour of reason impugn and be there not cause now that I shall look about i examine the ground whereupon I stand serious debate with myself of my late resolution and change make in religion weigh and ponder all thing with mature deliberation and serious meditation 31. wherefore retire myself to the sacred scripture and bless father which according to vincentius direction I have ever resolve upon for the infallible rule and canon of my faith to see what they say in this matter since that other foundation than this can no man lay I find the same severity in their assertion and judgement which argue that the school doctor have original draw the matter of their doctrine from the most pure fountain 32. and first I find that the say heretic and heresy be foretell and prophesy of by Christ and his apostle in the scripture of God as namely that they shall enter into the church immediate after Christ time and his apostle and so that they shall continue from time to time as matth. 24. 5. joan. 5. 44. 1. cor. 11. 19 1. tim. 4. 1. 2. 3. 2. tim. 2. 17. 18. 2. pet. 1. 2. 1. joan. 2. 18. 19 and elsewhere throughout the whole volume of God book all which as large commentary discover unto we the nature and condition of heresy and heretic but I will confine myself within short and straight bound and at this time I will especial ponder upon these three ensue place namely matth. 7. 15. 16. 3. ^it 10. and 11. the epistle of s. jude almost throughout the whole epistle 33. and first he that speak as never man speak the wisdom of the father and the soul best physician that ever be give we both a serious admonition and a perspicuous matth. 7. 15. 16. description of heretic etc. beware of false prophet which come unto you in sheep clothing but inward they be raven wolf you shall know they by their fruit beware there be the admonition of false prophet there be the deception and circumvention which come unto you in sheep clothing there be their fraudulent hypocrisy but inward they be raven wolf there be their violent cruelty you shall know they by their fruit the description of heretic by Christ our saviour there be a manifest discovery of their impiety again beware that be take heed look about you there be imminent peril and hazard of your soul hang over your head of false prophet false deceaver false apostle antichrist heretic which come unto you in sheep clothing pretend outward to be angel of light but inward they be raven wolf messenger of Satan and spirit of darkness you shall know they by their fruit if not by their word yet by their work if not by their say yet by their meaning last beware never be there any more need of circumspection of false prophet I point you to the poison that come from the person which come unto you in sheep clothing have nothing in their mouth but the pure gospel of Christ the pure gospel of Christ but inward they be raven wolf corrupter of his gospel and soule-quellers devour the innocent sheep of Christ you shall know they by their fruit for the liberty of their gospel shall argue to their face the impiety and impurity of their heart 34. the text of scripture be excellent expound prescript c. 4. both by Tertullian and vincentius Lyrinensis and first what be this sheep clothing say Tertull. but the extrinsical name of a christian and what be these raven wolf but deceitful advers. c. 36. gloss and spirit inwardl lurk and infest the flock of Christ who be these false prophet but false preacher who be these false apostle but adulterous euangelizator who be these antichrist now and always but rebel against Christ hurt and persecute the church with the secret impiety of their heresy asmuch as Antichrist shall then do with his open cruelty and tyranny so he 35. second vincentius go further and though he live twelve hundred year ago yet speak he so particular to this point of unmask heresy and heretic as if he have live in the very day of Luther Calvin and the protestant apostasy which enforce i upon a often and scrious meditation to conclude that his spirit be inspire and his pen guide by the immediate hand and finger of God let we hear he then speak and interpret what be this sheep clothing say he but the oracle of the prophet and apostle who be these raven wolf but the cruel virulent and violent interpretation of heretic who always infest the fold of the church and tear in piece the flock of Christ by all mean that possible they can but that they may deceitful steal upon theunwary sheep they put of their wolwish shape continue in their wolvish cruelty and they wrap and cover themselves with sentence of holy scripture as it be with certain fleece that when any man shall perceive the softness of their will he may not fear the sharpness of their tooth a notable interpretation of vincentius Lyrinensis of the place above cite but what say our saviour you shall know they by their fruit that be when they begin not only to bring but also to expound the place of scripture nor yet to brag of they only but further to interpret they then their bitterness than their sharpness than their madness be perceive then their new poison shall be vent forth then their profane novelty shall be detect then shall thou see the hedge and fence to be cut and break down then shall thou see the ancient mere and bound of the father to be translate and remove then catholic faith shall be violate then ecclesiastical doctrine annihilate and destroy hither to my author 36. and can any thing be speak more effectual or be it possible that man or angel can interpret this place more true be not all heretic here unmask be not the protestant palpable discover cover their heretical face with the vizard of scripture when otherwise they dare not appear in their wolvish and thievish shape if this be not so or that I wrong they in aught nay if they be not guilty in their own conscience of much more than I can charge they withal let the just doom of heaven revenge it upon my soul and let i never see the face of God what I speak I speak upon long practice and experience which I have have among they and if this be so then be they of the number of those false prophet concern who our saviour give we admonition here beware of false prophet which come to you in sheep clothing but inward they be raven wolf you shall know they by their fruit etc. why but the protestant will plead in general that they have scripture to confirm every assertion of their religion to this I answer in general that the devil and all heretic have their scripture as well as they as many and more than they but the truth be sheep clothing belong not to wolf nor scripture to they their possession of they be mere intrusion into they and therefore according to that excellent prescription of Tertullian first they shall prove their right of possession of they before they so bold adventure upon the interpretation of they which since they can never yet do it be apparent and out of question that they have no more right unto the scripture than the devil himself and all former heretic have have unto they 37. if beside the scripture they plead the spirit for this be their other ground and these two be all the ground the excuse of protestant refute that ever I can perceive they have for their protestantical religion I answer this spirit be a spirit of private interpretation their own proper invention and election it be not the spirit of the church it be not the spirit of the holy ghost that breathe these scripture and therefore it be the spirit of the devil and the spirit of all their grandprogenitor ancient heretic and now to cut of with one blow the head of all private spirit let s. Bernard himself speak for i and strike for i many think they have the spirit when they bern. ser. 17. s^per cant. have it not and fall into error follow their own sense for the sense of the holy ghost dare any man hereafter vaunt of his private spirit all this and much more be imply in the heavenly admonition of our saviour beware of false prophet and which be my first place of scripture against heretic I come to the second which follow thus 38. the apostle s Paul that trumpet of the apostle preacher of the world and discloser of heavenly mystery thunder out a terrible commination against a heretic whereby he insinuate to leave a premonition to all succeed posterity to be ware of heresy and albeit I have touch the place somewhat in the former consideration in disclose the nature of heresy yet here I must return to the same again for better lay forth the miserable effect thereof and the care the say apostle have to have it eschew avoid say he a heretical tit. 3. 10. 11 man after the first or second reprehension know that he that be such a one be pervert and sin as damn by his own judgement s. Paul judgement of a heretic upon which place s. Hierome write thus heretic give sentence upon themselves and be damn upon their own judgement for that they depart from the church even out of their own self will and this departure seem to be the damnation of their own conscience express mention by s. Paul so s. Hierome and can there be any thing more terrible or dreadful than this again avoid a heretic 2. tim. 2. 17. so s. Thomas upon this place first avoid they in regard of the peril of infection second avoid they in regard of their fellowship and communion that you be not wrap and entangle in their sin while you seem by your familiarity with they to consent unto the same last avoid they even for fear of the punishment of condemnation which hang over their head and yet let he be admonish to see whether he will amend if he amend not after once or twice admonition avoid he if he can be heal of his heresy he be not to be avoid if he can be cure he be to be shun hitherto s. Thomas 39 my three place be out of s. jude contain a very dreadful description of heretic yea so terrible that the very consideration thereof be able to make a man to treamble lest he shall be any way entangle and infect with this fearful sin of heresy either in be a heretic himself obstinate and malicious or in believe they as be seduce by they for after the apostle have premise the salutation together with the motive of his epistle which be to beseech they to stand fast and fight for the faith once deliver unto the saint which be the first christian present he give a most serious warning to all sort of christian of the approach and intrusion of heretic ep. juda^ etc. there have creep in certain man say he prescribe or prepare from the begin unto this terrible judgement wicked man who have turn the grace of God into wantonness etc. and then he thunder out a terrible commination against they sany woe be unto they that have go in the way of Cain and have for reward pour out themselves with the error of Balaam and have perish in the contradiction of chore. so he and that this contradiction of chore against Moses and Aaron for which he and his conspirator be by God just wrath swallow s. judes sentence of heretic quick up into hell the earth open her mouth and devour they represent the contradiction of all heretic against the catholic church and governor thereof no man that have any insight into divinity can deny and therefore our apostle s. jude who allude and compare betwixt they denounce God vengeance yet further against they for who a tempest of darkness or of torment in darkness be reserve for all eternity and this be so will any one call another heretic in jest or be there any cry i so dreadful as this 40. but if we pass from the apostle and scripture themselves unto the succeed primitive church and withal hold their judgement sense and feeling concern heresy we shall find that all of they without exception of any one have this very spirit of detest anathematize fly and avoid heretic above all other sinner and malefactor upon earth yea whereas towards other never so great greievous and offender we be exhort will and join to be benign sweet meek compassionate and the like the detestation of heretic and heresy by ancient father the clean contrary be counsel unto we against heretic to wit not to salute they not to eat or drink with they not to receive they into our house not to converse with they but to fly they abhor they detest and avoid they as pest and plague and poison serpent infect we with the envenom poison of hell as damn soul already upon earth damn by the guilt of their own conscience and by the irrevokable 2. John 1. 10. 11. sentence of divine justice as before we have signify and that which be most worthy our observation such servant of God as be otherwise most compassionate nay who bowel burn with compassion within they towards the great and grievous sinner as for example we read in that notable story of s. John the evangelist who run up and down the mountain again and again after the first relapse to gain a young man that be a thief as s. Hierome and other church story witness yet these self same man be so severe against the enemy of God truth that they never can so much as endure the very sight and conversation of a heretic and so we have not only s. John counsel we not to salute or converse with a heretic but also the say apostle Scriptor Eccle. in joan. practise the same even in his own person in his heroical fact whensoever any just occasion be offer for s. irenaeus who live in the next age after he and recount it upon the relation of s. Policarpe that live with s. John and happy may be present when the thing be do record that s. John be in the city of Ephesus lib. 3. adverse cap. 3. at a common bath whither many do resort and understand that a heretic of his time name cerinthus be within the bath he instant depart again will not enter into that bath with he who have depart out of the church from he can not be persuade to stay any while there affirm that he doubt lest the very foundation of those bath will fall down where such a enemy of God be present who have as much as in he lay ruinate the very foundation of christian religion deny the divinity of the son of God a notable example of this great apostle leave to all posterity give they a sufficient caveat even by his own person and example for avoid of heresy and heretical company 41. and the same irenaeus in the very same place before cite register this story of s. Policarpe himself to wit how he reject and defy a heretic name Martion that meet with he and speak unto he call the say the first beget of the devil irenaeus and then the author end his narration with this most grave and memorable conclusion say so great fear have the apostle and disciple not to communicate in any one word with any of those that have adulterate and corrupt the truth even as s. Paul say avoid a heretical man after one reprehension know that such a fellow be pervert and damn of himself so s. irenaeus 42. and true this one point minister unto i store of matter and exceed enlarge my meditation to consider on the one part how careful and not only careful but fearful these ancient father and apostle be as irenaeus testify to admit any conversation or to enter into communication with heretic fly they as monster serpent and devil upon earth and start affright as it be with the bare name of heresy and heretic and on the other side that now in our day the name and thing itself be grow to be so common and familiar as that we seem to have no sense or feel thereof so senseless and benumb be we in our spiritual understanding but this proceed from a supine negligence and careless inconsideration for such as serious ponder and earnest debate the matter more deep do apprehend far otherwise thereof especial such as be addict to the read of ancient father the sure refuge and pillar for a resolve soul to rely upon for true direction in religion in these miserable day of schism heresy and apostasy say the old holy martyr s. cyprian etc. and let no @ cyprian l. 3. cp. 1. traffic or conversation be join with such man no banquet be make no speech have but let we be as separate from they as they be separate fugitive from the church 43. and after this father again that Atlas of his age and great saint s. athanasius write the life of s. Antony the monk do set down the opinion and feel of they both in this point s. Antony say he do so detest heretic as that he tell all man that they must not so much as come near they allege the authority of s. Paul for the same who often and serious talk of heretic do inculcate these word @ athanasin and these you must avoid and yet my author go further in this relation of s. Antony add this that when the say holy man be at the point of death ready to breath out his soul into the hand of his creator who he have with all fidelity and severity so faithful serve practise over and above the precept of the law Christ high counsel of perfection he exhort the stander by especial and above all other thing to beware of heretic and schifmatike and to avoid their poison say @ the senerity of saint cyprian s. Athanas. and s. Antony in avoid heretic he and do you imitate my hatred towards they for yourselves can bear i witness that I have never so much as any peaceable speech with they this be s. Antony his resolution in this point and this be his last charge that this die saint leave unto his live friend 44. and of the same spirit and judgement be all other saint and holy father ensue that everlive and die in the union and communion of the catholic church and namely s. Leo the great first of that name a most compassionate man other way as by his charitable work of piety well appear yet in this point of heresy he be so inflame with the zeal of God his true religion so rigorous and severe against the enemy of God his truth that he burst forth into this vehement exclamation against they ser. 18. passion Christicap. 4. do you avoid the viperous and serpentine speech and conference of heretic and have you nothing at all to do with they that be adversary unto catholic faith be only christian in name so s. leo. and in this point that heretic be not christian that heretic be no christian but only in name and appellation he have common all the ancient father concur with he with uniform consent as namely s. irenaeus s. cyprian and Tertullian before mention which father do evident prove lib. 2. adverse cap. 9 that heretic be worse than heathen pagan or infidel this argument be handle in like manner by s. Chrysostome and that large in his 50. homily and by s. Augustine in his 21. book cap. 25. and by many other father after they the reason whereof be set down by s. Thomas in the begin of this second consideration 45. upon these ground then reason cause and contemplation the whole stream and rank of ancient father do with full consent concur in this one point and do inculcate the same often in their writing to wit that it be impossible for a heretic exclude from the catholic church to be save or to avoid everlasting damnation and perdition of body and soul though he shall that heretic by no good work can be save live moral never so well give never so great alm do never so many good work suffer never so much by the loss of his good country liberty or life itself which point be oftentimes inculcate reiterate and repeat by that renown martyr s. cyprian in that worthy tract of his as he shall never participate of heavenly felicity that make a rent and breach in the church of Christ by the crime of heresy again the same author in another place to argue his assure confidence of this point add and denounce further macula this blot of heresy or separate himself from the church of Christ can be wash away with blood it be a fault so inexpiable that it can be purge by death itself nay he go yet further and say such suffering or death itself shall not be unto they any crown or reward of their faith and right believe but a punishment of their perfidiousness and false deal 46. conform to s. cyprian be s. Chrisostome who in his 11. homily upon the epistle to the ephesian repeat and justify the former word use by s. cyprian which may well be call his last doom that he pass upon heretic and the same be confirm by s. pacianus before mention in his second epistle to a novatian heretic aug. l. 1. servant in c. 4. ep. 24. donat. presb and l. 4. bapt. Donat. c. 17. tract. 6. in evang. loan l. 2. cont. petil. c. 98. l. 1. cont. c. 33. and after these s. Augustine himself who place I have note in the margin do so full clear and with such effectual word treat and aver the same as that it be labour lose and time misspend to add any more in confirmation thereof 47. and now that I may come to the upshot of all which be the sum and substance of what have hitherto be speak in this consideration my principal conclusion thereof be this to wit that the great misery and calamity that may possible be imagine in this life to light upon any and the great dereliction I mean departure of god save grace or punishment that almighty God for his sin can possible lay upon a christian man be to leave he so far unto himself and to his own choice and election as to suffer he to become a heretic or to admit any participation or communication with heretic and sure if God ever punish sin with sin as you shall read he do rom. 1. 24. which be that fearful fall into the hand of God then sure be sin punish with sin in this fearful sin of heresy which premise be grant as they can be deny have not his majesty of England then great reason trow you to endeavour so diligent and prudent as he do to clear himself of that foul imputation and to put of that abominable and damnable name of a heretic and heresy the great sin of all other have not his Catholic subject of England the great motive and reason that possible may be to stand and suffer so costant as they do for avoid of all participation with heretic or with that religion which in their opinion ground upon the church resolution be flat heresy which be serious consider of his say majesty and deep and due weigh as the weighty importance of the matter crave at his hand in his understanding heart it may first be hope for which hope sake we lift up hand and heart prayer and tear sigh and groan unto the high that he will himself out of his christian piety separate from his royal person all like of heresy as far as the same be separate from God and from his church and second it may be presume for why shall we ever despair our cause be so just that out of his royal clemency and princely equity especial upon a conscionable view of our innocency that he will deliver we from the great rigour of persecution which we suffer for that cause and this we very hope his majesty will the rather do for that we follow but the of our own conscience guide by infallible ground which here be partly open and will appear more full in the sequel of this discourse the three consideration if then the issue and upshot of all that be premise in how a man may discern between Catholic religion and heresy the two precedent consideration to reassume and recapitulate the sum of both in a word be in effect but this that the riches and honour of be a Catholic on the one side to use the word of s. Augustine be so inestimable and that on the other side the disreputation misery imminent danger and most certain damnation in be a heretic to be so intolerable and insupportable on the other aug. verb. Apost. serm. 1. it be more than probable yea infallible as most consonant unto the all-saving mercy and just doom equity of almighty God the most righteous judge of all the world that he have design yea as one of the last legacy of his testament bequeath unto we some eminent and evident way that by better direction and most certain prescription of the same we may come to know and discern what be true catholic religion and what heretical innovation and albeit this may in part be understand by that which already have be treat yet shall it be make more perspicuous by that which be to be handle in the ensue consideration 49. for first since the knowledge of these thing as be of the great weight in the world do so high import our soules-weale or woe everlasting it follow consequent that Christ our saviour have not sufficient provide for our safety in that behalf which can be no less than open blasphemy against heaven majesty accuse the wisdom of the father of imprudency as Calvin blasphemous do of ignorance if he have not leave in Commentar. in 24. matt. v 36. and commend unto we some certain know and infallible way as a sure thread to direct our judgement aright to the knowledge of these thing for if no man can arrive to the design port the haven of heaven and there be save but he that be real a catholic nor any escape the soul shipwreck upon the sea of this world and undoubred damnation that be formal a heretic or partaker of heresy according to that of praescrip. c. 34. they that with heretical preacher hold communion must of necessity participate with their damnation to what purpose then be it that Christ shall leave his throne in heaven descend from his father bosom into the womb of the ever-blessed virgin invest there his glorious deity with the weakness and frailty of our mortality teach preach expose himself to all the world injury misery extremity and last why shall be so plentiful out of so many several place of his body as there be several wound in the same shed his most precious blood for the sin of the world and redemption of mankind if after all this do and suffer for man he shall have leave he no certain mean or infallible way for his obtain the fruit thereof by discern between heresy and catholic religion 50. furthermore since heresy as all ancient and modern orthodox divine notify be nothing else but to choose or make choice that be yet more plain to adhere obstinate to a man own private opinion and proper election when soever different point of religion be propose unto he if then there be not some perspicuous and apparent rule and reason leave by Christ to convince unto each the necessity of clear and universal rule in matter of belief man conscience and understanding or at least to make a sufficient conviction which be truth and which be not which be heresy and which be verity which to be embrace and which be to be abandon I say if this way rule and reason be not most clear leave in the church whereby a man may guide himself then why may not a man make his proper choice and use that benefit of his own election in spiritual matter which God have bestow upon he in moral and civil affair permit therein a choice to his free will why may he not choose or be a chooser which in our sense and the church acception and appropriation of the word import a heretic without so grievous and damnable a sin as heresy be by we already disclose to be why shall a man be damn by his own judgement be leave inexcusable for that no plea of pretend ignorance will serve his turn since be such a chooser or heretical man as s. Paul call he and brand he for he can say as s. Chrysostome s. Ambrose Theophilact and oecumenius joint expound the place for if the mean and way of conviction and decision be not infallible it shall seem that man may make his choice but this particular choice and election out of a man own head and private judgement which make a choosier or heretical man be severe prohibit and condemn and that by the judgement of s. Paul as you have hear at large and therefore it must follow by force and of necessary and inevitable consequence that almighty God out of the depth of his mercy wisdom equity and piety have leave unto we some evident universal certain and infallible way for decide of all doubt and controversy in religion for so he promise when Isaiah prophesy thus say isa. 38. that at the come of Christ there shall be a holy path and a way and it shall be unto you a direct way so as fool may not err therein thus he prophesy and be there any doubt that he perform it have he promise and shall not he make it good have he speak it and shall he alter the thing that be go out of his lip atheism heresy and infidelity may num. 23. 19 question it but all religion piety and Christianity will undoubted believe the same 51. wherefore this ground be presuppose and grant as a chief principle in christian religion that there how this general rule may be find out be some such way leave unto we whither we must have recourse in all doubtful cause and controversy of religion the question than be betwixt the protestant and those of the catholic roman religion where and what this way be how we may come to the notice of it and in what manner it be to be follow after it be once find out the protestant common of what sect or faction soever he be aver that the write word of canonical scripture be this infallible way and directory-guid and this he do not in my conscience so much for any honour and reverence that he bear unto the oracle of god sacred writ as he will false bear the world in hand he do but only upon a heretical intent that he may avoid thereby the judgement of the church and no marvel for the guilt of his joan. 3. 20. heresy fly the censure of the church some other do add that when the canon of scripture be not perspicuous and obvious unto every man then for explication of the word they may inquire of the spirit of God which inspire each man and that will instruct he and lead he unto all truth but now this false suppose and imaginary spirit can be no infallible rule of direction for the way of every man private spirit that s. John have give we a caveat touch these false spirit belove believe not every spirit but try the spirit whether they be of God for many false prophet be go forth into the world and be not this the common trick of all condemn heretic and heresy do they not all of they plead the spirit of God against the lively authority and speak voice of the church do not the whole rank of ancient father that write against they thunder out that terrible commination threaten a fearful woe and vengeance unto all private lie and deceive spirit woe be unto they that follow their own spirit last have not all ancient heresy and heretic arian nestorian pelagian etc. be unjust condemn and therefore must not their heresy be rake out of the ash of hell again and set fresh foot in the church if the rule of interpret scripture be each man his private spirit it can be deny for that all of they vaunt of the spirit as the sectary do at this day well then the conclusion be that this vaunt of the spirit be nothing else but a horrible belie and presumptuous blaspheme of the spirit of God make that spirit of unite verity a spirit of distract heresy and therefore this their private spirit can be no rule to direct they any long and so much of this way in follow every man his own spirit 52. and now for the former way of follow canonical scripture for this only rule and sure direction though this be ever to be grant as most true that the holy scripture breathe by the instinct of the spirit be divine and of infallible truth and direction when they be by the church both know to be scripture and right interpret by the assistance of the spirit in the church voice and sense yet forasmuch as the scripture sublimity fit not with every mean and ordinary capacity for the most part of people be unlearned and can read or understand what they read much less those learned tongue wherein the scripture be original write it follow evident that the scripture alone can be no sure universal and infallible way for the discern of catholic religion and discover of heresy or at least wise this rule be not general to all as it ought to be for as much as all must have sufficient mean leave for their salvation 53. but here i think I hear the protestant object that howsoever the scripture be no way for the ignorant and unlearned yet be it the only rule and canon of faith unto whether only scripture be the infallible way the skilful and learned and that whereas the canon of the scripture be perfect and be of itself alone sufficient enough for all point what need the authority of ecclesiastical interpretation to be add unto this canon to this I answer and first this way we now speak of must be a way for all and a path a way and holy way yea such a way if we believe almighty God speak by the mouth of the most ignorant and unlearned can mistake it for that Christ the way of all have leave this way unto all and that after isa. 35. 8. his incarnation and passion for to that time the prophet Isaiah allude and therefore the scripture exclude the ignorant for want of tongue and other learning and the great part of it be write before the say Christ incarnation and passion can be this way second I answer that as the scripture alone can be the way unto the unlearned no more can it be the rule unto the learned for that not only fool but such as think themselves both learned and wise have err by that way of scripture alone and their private spirit to help they and hereof we have as many lively testimony and example as there have be learned heretic in the church who think themselves wise and learned and yet pretend scripture have run awry so dangerous a way be this way of the scripture without the guide of the church to walk in three and last touch the sufficiency of holy canon without any addition of ecclesiastical interpretation I answer this objection which be the main position and foundation for all the protestant heresy at this day be as ancient as twelve hundred year ago and it be propose by vincentius Lyrinensis in the person of the heretic of his time and answer thus to sacred canon say he cont. haer cap. 2. the ecclesiastical interpretation must be add because in regard of the scripture sublimity all man expound it not in one and the self same sense but this man and that man do diverse interpret the self same place of scripture that in a manner how many man there be so many sense may be wrest from it for Novatian expound scripture one way Photinus sabellius donatus Arius another way etc. and therefore in regard of the manifold turn and wind of several error and heresy it be very needful that the line of prophetical and apostolical interpretation be direct according to the rule of ecclesiastical and catholic interpretation hitherto vincentius Lyrinensis 54. and what I pray you be all our material contention with the sectary and their own capital dissension among themselves fall by the ear and damn each other to the pit of hell let they pretend never so great brotherhood to cozen the world but about the scripture and the true sense thereof to wit which be to be receive into canon and how they be to be interpret according to the intent and purpose of the holy ghost wherein all heretic have upon their own wilful election run out of the way as all the ancient father do continual charge they scripture as they complain they abuse God word August tract. 18. in joan and lib 7. in gen. lit^ cap 9 against himself and scripture the scripture be with they as a sword in a mad man hand they turn it against themselves make that unto they a savour of death unto death which be give they by God to become a savour of life unto life as s. Paul profess himself and all true pastor of the church to 2. cor. 2. 16. be for do not heretic receive some scripture and reject other and those that they do receive do they not turn they and wind they add to they and detract from they of purpose to pervert they for their purpose do they not expound they according to their own fancy and brain prescript cap. 17. this be Tertullian his complaint against the heretic of his time above fourteen hundred year ago and yet more sully to cur point in hand the same father show that it be but lose labour and vexation of mind to enter into conflict with a heretic by scripture say the conflict about scripture with a herericke serve to no other purpose unless it be to overturn a man stomach or his brain again to the same purpose he demand what shall thou gain albeit thou be most ready and expert in labour lose to deal with heretic by only scripture the scripture for so much as if thou defend any thing it will be deny and if thou deny any thing it will be affirm and thou true for thy part lose nothing but spend thy voice in contention and shall gain nothing but choler by his blaspheme and then afterwards he flat conclude again against they wherefore say he there be no appeal to the scripture neither be the cap. 20. combat to be place in they wherein there be either no victory at all or very uncertain or at least wise not any certain can be hope for so he 55. this be Tertullian his judgement touch scripture cite by the heretic in his time and do not this prescription serve against the sectary of our day well then I may conclude with Tertullian his sense that this way of remit each man and woman to only scripture for certification of their faith and that promiscuous without a interpreter can be no certain or possible way evident rule or canon of faith now if the heretic be thus press and follow upon that his ground of scripture alone be enforce for avoid of all inconvenience and absurdity to adjoin and admit a interpreter then the question plain be who this interpreter shall be and of what faction in religion for of what sect soever he be to that side will he wrest and draw the interpretation of scripture say Tertullian prescript c. 17. and then will a adulterous sense of the scripture as much brabble against the truth as he that corrupt the text itself whereof he allege this reason for it holy writ be so fruitful to serve for each matter and point that come in question as nothing seem to a heretic so vain if it please his fancy but that it may be prove from thence neither do I hazard aught to say that the very scripture themselves be so order by the will of God that they minister store of matter unto heretic when I read in scripture there must be heresy which can be without scripture and this ibid. c. 39 be my former author his judgement of the scripture wrest and pervert by several heretic in his day for maintenance of their several heresy which be so here be neither certainty nor generality nor facility nor perspicuity nor infallibility in this way of the scripture bare and naked propose of itself alone neither can it ever be infer by any seem probable conclusion that the scripture alone be this infallible way which we do further illustrate by this familiar example obvious unto every man capacity 56. if some rude and unlearned countryman repair up to the metropolitan city of the kingdom to prosecute some suit in law touch a farm or house or matter of less moment it these man I say after conference have with their learned counsel shall receive no other answer nor comfort nor direction of they for further manage of their suit but be remit by they unto the body of the law itself without any judge or counsellor they be of themselves not able either to read or understand the law much less to apply it to their a perspicuous example proper case and peculiar suit will not every reasonable and conscionable man condemn these lawyer and have not the poor countryman themselves be undo by this mean in their worldly estate just cause to complain and cry out against the falsehood and treachery of their counsellor and yet behold here in a suit of of suit and matter of great moment and importance in the world not in a title or trial of a farm or house but concern our interest and right of inheritance unto the heavenly mansion we be this way worse than thus since the matter be of far great importance abuse delude betray we be promiscuous send learned unlearned man woman young old to the body of the scripture and mystical volume of God his sacred and seaven-fold-sealed book as s. John speak of the revelation Apocal. 5. 1. we must seek search confer compare expound interpret every man must there be a chooser every woman a expositor and every creature must be his own carver all must presume of the spirit that they can err all presume to be teach immediate from God without the ministry of the church say s. Hierome against heretic of his time only the art of scripture be it in epist. paulin. Presb. which every one challenge to himself this the prate old wife this the dote old man this the babble sophist this all of they together presume to know and teach and tear in piece before they learn it so he presumption of heretic in the scripture and this be all the way and ground prescription direction rule and line that our heretical sectary can afford we for the guide of our soul and the ground of our faith will any man therefore hereafter that have but the least care or that can entertain but one thought either of the present of future wellfarre of his soul rely upon such false guide and blind teacher since this ground of scripture alone sense by a private spirit be be and ever shall be the common ground nay rather desperate shift and refuge of all condemn heresy and heretic and that purposely that they may avoid the censure and tribunal of the church 57 there follow then the way indeed appoint by God reveal by the holy-ghost design by Christ the only true way of judge by the church and propose by the catholic and catholic church and this be the sure easy evident general and infallible way indeed which be the universal know catholic church in every age which be perspicuous and notorious easy to be find for that it can be hide it be compare by holy scripture to a city place upon a hill as s. Augustine in diverse prolix treatise of he do evident aug. in psal. 44. 47. and l. 2. cont. petil. c. 32. and Eccl. c. 14. and in epist. joan tract 1. and 2. in Brevic collat. 3. c. 4. demonstrate it be a light upon a candlestick it lighten all through the egyptian darkness of this world schism and heresy and lead their soul into the way of truth it be that pillar of fire that lead all god choose people through the vast and roar wilderness yea and all the night darkness of this world unto the promise land of Canaan I mean the heavenly Jerusalem it be general also figure by the dew that fall upon the floor as well as upon the fleece when Gedeon require the miracle to be double which be a mystical representation of the jewish synagogue and christian congregation imply also that the dew of God truth and save grace shall at last pass matt. 5. 14 15. exod. 13. 12. from the fleece of the jew to the floor of the gentile and all to teach we that this Catholic Christian church shall extend to all serve for all learned unlearned young jud. 6. 37. 38. 39 40. old high low great small for that all sort sex age and condition of people may repair unto she receive her doctrine admit her instruction and direction by the continual succession of her bishop pastor and teacher of every age and final this way be a most sure certain and infallible rule for that Christ have express assure and promise we that he will be continual with this church unto the world end that he will send the holy ghost to instruct direct and induce this church into all truth and it shall suggest unto you all that I will from heaven speak or notify unto you it be Christ his promise unto his apostle and in their person unto his church for ever and last the gate of hell which be the gate of error and heresy shall never prevail against this matt. 16. 18. church 58. this then to exclude all bypath and blind way of heretic be the way indeed this be that rule of faith as Tertullian speak institute by Christ and it be such a rule and so certain that no question be praesctipt c. 14 so much as move with we concern this rule but such as heresy cause and which very question move concern the church do cause and breed heretic 59 this church be once publish by our saviour and the promise he have make unto her be once divulge what follow but that all man present that have any care of the salvation of their soul flock unto she begin to lay handfast and houldfast on this way and to have recourse in all doubt and controversy unto the common know catholic church of their age for explication and final decision thereof so shall you read act. 15 6. that the apostle immediate after the ascension the authority of the primitive church of our saviour assemble the church together for the detide of that great doubt that then arise in the church to wit whether the observation of the old law of Moses shall be join necessary with the new law of Christ and because they will leave a pattern for all succeed age to follow they determine the matter and themselves I mean the apostle and prelate of that first age decide the doubt by those high word of authority take from the foresay commission of our saviour ibid. v 28. and it seem good unto the holy ghost and we for the church and the true spirit of the holy ghost go inseparable matt. 28. 20. together in regard of Christ his promise make unto the church so that the holy ghost ever keep his residence in she guide she govern she direct she and sit as precedent in all her consultation and assembly and therefore this umpiring and determine form of speech have ever since be use in the lawful succession of the say visible church until our day and will be frequent still especial in general counsel even unto the world end to put a firm period and full conclusion unto all controversy that come in question and the reason be for that the same authority and assistance of the holy ghost which that first church have for direct of man soul unto their salvation the very self same and none other have the visible catholic church of our age and have have in all age and shall have in all to come it be a ancient prescription and no more ancient than true god gift and grace confer upon his church be without repentance the holy ghost be ever one and the self same spirit of truth in patriarch prophet apostle martyr and other succeed pastor and doctor and Christ his promise be not for one age only he shed not his precious blood for those of his age alone but for all all be alike near unto he all be alike dear unto he he take our nature in general to save mankind in general and therefore the care he have for one age of the church the same he have for all succeed age of the same as well for the last as for the first and this care of he continue so long as the sun and the moon endure 60. this remittance then and reference unto the authority of the church original proceed from the apostle themselves be continual perpetuate by all succeed age of the catholic church and therefore as s. Paul in a controversy of lesser importance write to the corinthian about woman be veil in the church say to shut up the door to all further contention that if 2 cor. 11. 16 any man will seem to be contentious we have no such custom nor yet the church of God repress the contentious man as you see with the authority and custom of the church so do all subsequent father of the orthodox church whether it be in the private writing or in the world grand parliament in general counsel in all their conflict with heretic they ever use to repel and repress they by one and the self same mean and that be with the authority of the know catholic church and look what sentence they pronounce against they for their contumacy see what censure they inflict upon they for their heresy it remain good against they and irrevocable it be ratefy as the law of the mede and persian which can not be alter their authority dan. 6. 15. be ground immediate upon those word of verity what soever you bind on earth shall be bind in heaven and the tribunal of heaven confirm the authority of the church mat. 16. 19 upon earth nay stand expect what be do by it upon earth such be the mystical dependency betwixt the one and the other such be the mutual correspondency betwixt the head and his member Christ and his church dare then any man hereafter oppose his private spirit against the authority of this church or will he impudent presume to prefer his own conceit and opinion before her public tradition 61. ancient s. irenaeus who be in manner (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) for he live in the very next age after they write against the heresy of his day and have first declare how the primitive church be visible plant by Christ and his apostle and how it be continue to his time do then portray out unto we and discourse at large of the authority sufficiency treasury tradition and absolute perfection of this church for the repel of all heresy and deliver of all truth his word be Iren. lib. 3. cont. cap. 4. these whereas these thing which I have say be so great demonstration of the truth we must not yet seek the truth from other a notable testimony of s. Iren. for the authority of the visible church which be easy take from the church whereas the apostle do most full lay up in she all thing belong to the truth as in a certain rich treasure-house so as every man that will may take from thence the liquor or sustenance of life for that be the entrance unto life everlasting to believe the church and all other that fly this way be thief and murderer and therefore we must avoid they that be such but with great diligence we must affect those thing that be of the church and from she take the tradition of truth and true if our contention be but about some small question in religion yet ought not we to have recourse unto the most ancient church wherein the apostle have once be conversant and so take from they that which be certain and clear for decide of the question and what if the apostle have leave unto we no scripture at all have it not be needful notwithstanding to follow the order of tradition which they have leave unto we to who they to wit the apostle have commit those church 62. thus far s. irenaeus which I have of purpose choose to cite more at large for that it be sufficient alone to disclose his judgement and the judgement of that first age next after the apostle how far the authority of the visible universal church then stretch and be esteem for especial for clear solve and decide of all doubt that possible can arise in religion and the reason there render by the same father be this she be the storehouse wherein Christ merit and the church treasure be lay up she be the way of life whereby we may come to eternal life and escape everlasting death that all be thief yea murderer of soul that do impugn she or seek other way of trial then she and her tradition from hand to hand that this tradition be sufficient though there be no scripture that from she and her alone the truth be to be take and not else to what trial the ancient father provoke the heretic of their tyme where that by she and her authority alone all doubt and question be to be solve and decide can any thing be speak more effectual than this or be there any more plain easy evident and universal direction can any rule be more probable and infallible than the rule of the church and to this do agree both my foresay author in many other place of his work as also all that succeed he and take the like enterprise in hand of writing and prescribe against heretic as Tertullian s. cyprian s. Augustine s. athanasius epiphanius Theodoret s. Hierome s. Leo vincentius Lyrinensis in his golden book against the profane innovation of the heretic of his time and diverse other which to avoid prolixity I omit all these do principal and real provoke and challenge all the heretic of their time unto this only and sure way of the catholic church in their day for the trial of the truth and for discern what be true catholic and what be heretical their several sentence be to prolix to be contain within the strict precinct and narrow bound of my brief intend consideration 63. and now to put a period to this my three consideration lest it exceed a due proportion the upshot be this for asmuch then as this visible christian church begin and found by our saviour under the apostle be a visible church make and consist of visible man govern by visible pastor have visible descend from age to age through the century of the church by all lawful and ordinary succession of bishop which Tertullian require of the heretic of his time as they will avoid the blot of heresy that have lineal come down to our day second for asmuch as the authority of his church be esteem in every age to be the same for infallible direction that it be in the former first age through the assurance of Christ his promise to that effect and last for as much as the whole universal church of the fifteen age have in a general council examine decide condemn the doctrine of the protestant for heresy in more than a hundred main point by name and have accurse and anathematize the issue of this consideration both they and all their participant to the pit of hell and that according to the very self same ground whereby the ancient father do use to curse and anathematize all old heresy and heretic in former time these thing when I consider with more attention and make a general reflection thereon a sudden fear and care astonish yea as it be overwhelm i for that my everlasting salvation depend upon this point I have be so negligent in examine the premise and now I plain see as in a perfect glass of most impartial judgement that unless I can imagine with myself as diverse other fanatical do that Christ promise have fail and that the first visible christian and catholic church found by he and spread over the whole world have fail vanish and perish as be overcome by helgate and over grow with the weed of error and heresy I can never have any hope of salvation as long as I continue in the protestant religion and this be the issue of that consideration the four consideration there remain now a four consideration the subject whereof which notwithstanding perhaps be how out of the premise every man may judge in what state he stand for be heretic or catholic of great importance of all the rest be this to wit how out of the premise a man may probable collect nay necessary conclude who opinion be catholic and who heretical and thereupon may reflect upon himself in what state or condition he stand betwixt both as either affect to the one or interest in the other and albeit this have be partly discover by that which have be speak in the first consideration touch the name catholic that signify universal and whole and not a part or singularity in opinion by choice of a man own will and judgement for so heretic do signify as have be lay forth in the second consideration yet shall it be make more manifest by the particular practice of the thing themselves when the name shall pass into nature and appellation be turn into application and first to speak to the point in a word the catholic admit all whole and entire without addition or detraction which the know catholic church propose to be believe of her son as she have it reveal unto she from God her father but as for the heretic and the chooser as he that will take his own swing though it be in schism and heresy he make himself judge over all I mean God the scripture and the church admit some and reject the rest as it please his private fancy or displease his peevish judgement he neither respect the authority of the church nor regard his own obedience due thereunto his ground be either scripture false by he interpret or a private lie spirit such as Micheas the lord true prophet prophesy to be in the false prophet of Baal wherein he be delude or other argument of reason and nature against 3. reg. 22. faith and the god of nature and thus he be bewitch and pervert contrary to all true and only save catholic ground contrary to that sure certain and infallible way of trial which erst while we treat of in the three consideration and purpose now by God holy assistance to make use of all in this 65. some man I find to entertain this that english protestant and roman catholic may live in their several profession of religion and be save together and much more they be of opinion that all protestant of different profession and sect as lutheran and sacramentary and much more the different sort of one and the self same sect as caluinist in England distinguish by the name of Molles and moderate protestant whether man may be save in religion and fervent puritan and the reason for this their opinion be first of doctrine for that every one of their difference do not make heresy or if they do yet not so grievous heresy as the father of the primitive church condemn and anathematize they mean such heresy as impugn the person of the b. Trinity the nature of Christ God and man the incarnation and passion and the like and consequent though those ancient heresy be damnable yet be not those of our day plead the protestant but that both part live well may be save as his majesty in this his premonition to prince do testify that his noble mother send he word not long before her martyrdom by the master of her household a scotish gentleman yet live that his majesty may persist in his pag. 34. protestant religion and yet do well enough if he live virtuous and govern according 66. but sure how far the credit of that master of household be a Protestant as I hear he then be m. Meluin and now be may extend itself to be believe against the mistress and high lady of that household in a matter of that quality and consequence I know not yet certain I be of this that the opinion that a man may be so save be most false and absurd in itself and very unlikely also to proceed from her majesty wise and religious heart who with that opinion may have make herself a Protestant and thereby have escape the great part of her trouble and perhaps also have avoid the violent stroke of the axe which be well know to have be urge upon she especial in respect of her religion and of the fear that be conceive least in time she may come to the crown and defend the same I mean her religion with public authority 67. and now whosoever it be wherein I remit myself to his majesty as most interest therein both in honour body and soul as her only child and heir and chief jewel in the world evident it be the opinion can stand as now have be say either in reason or religion and may be presume to proceed from such as have little care of any religion at all only they will live quiet enjoy their sensuality pass the time without any trouble or scruple or repugnant conscience for any thing secret atheism touch religion or that whole subject and this if I take not my aim amiss come very near to the point of secret atheism 68 s. Augustine record the like opinion of many in his day who think it do not material import they whether they be donatist or catholic so as they profess the christian faith say he interest aug. epist 48. add Vincent many believe that it concern they not in what side or part each man be a christian so he be a christian therefore they remain on the party or faction of donatus the heretic for that they be bear therein but s. Augustine vehement confute this false pestilent and indulgent persuasion aswell in the place here cite as in many other place of his work confident teach and aver that a man be make a heretic by hold any one error obstinate against the church and consequent damn also say he aug. l. 18. ciu. cap. 5^ those who in the church of Christ be infect with corrupt and naughty opinion if be admonish to believe wholesome and true doctrine they kick against it with contumacy then do they become heretic and go forth of the church be hold for enemy so he and with the same severity hold he in his book of heresy entitle quod-vult-deum that the believe of any one heresy condemn already by the church or to be condemn if rise afterward be sufficient to make the believer and obstinate defender no Christian catholic and consequent a heretic and so impossible to be save 69. to this opinion subscribe s. cyprian who show that every least heresy or schism be able to damn a man that adhere unto it write express thus lib. 1. epist. epist. 1. Magn. the apostle himself do not put any difference or exception of any heresy or schism at all but call they antichrist whosoever be go forth of the church for any heresy or schism whatsoever 70. and yet this point be press further by many other holy father yea strain to every heresy be it but in one word or syllable and this be the opinion of hierom. l. 3. apol. ruff. medium s. Hierome his word be these we shall read that many heresy have be cast out of the church for one or two word that be contrary to the receive faith 71. to this purpose conduce that of s. Basill register by Theodoret to wit that a good man ought to lose his life if need require for the defence of one only syllable basil. theod. l. 4. hist. c. 17. the reason whereof be touch as well by s. athanasius in his creed where he say that he shall most certain be damn that hold not entire and inviolable the whole catholic faith as also by Nazianzen when he say that heresy consist sometime in one word Nazianzen tract ruff. interpret non longe his word be these nothing can be more then heretic who run whole over all do notuill stand in some one word as by a drop of poison infect the sincere and simple faith of our saviour come down by apostolical tradition this be the judgement of antiquity so severe censurer be all those holy father of the least dram of heresy 72. thus than you apparent see that for make of a error or heresy damnable it be not require of absolute necessity that it deny some thing of the bless Trinity direct or some main article of the creed etc. as many of the first old heresy do when the doctrine thereof be not so well explain as now it be though this be a desperate shift of the Protestant and most miserable evasion and yet it will not serve his turn he be guilty of heresy in all those high point yea and of misbelief almost in every article of the creed for that as before have be touch in the three consideration the greatness of the sin of heresy depend more of malice and malignity what sort of heresy be more damnable of the sinner then of the material object about which the heretic err for that he sin of obstinacy and contumacy by his own choice and therefore be say by s. Paul to be damn by his own judgement say Tertullian he choose to himself wherein to be damn or else as s. Leo do more tract cont. Eutich large give the gloss that be he perish by his own pertinacity and through his own peculiar madness depart from Christ who embrace that impiety which he know have be the destruction of many hold that for religious and Catholic which manifest appear to be condemn by uniform judgement of ancient father so bless Leo expound the place the reason follow for that such a one prefer himself by pride and vanity before the whole visible and catholic church he choose to hold that which his own judgement and fancy do lead he unto whence it may come to pass that one man err with less pride and obstinacy about some point of the bless Trinity may sin less damnable than another that err in point of lesser moment but with more malice as about the doctrine of the sacrament or other point of the like nature and the reason thereof be for that this second err with more obstinacy and malice which corroborate the very essence of heresy than the first though both of these man be out of the church must be damn but yet with different measure of punishment 73. this fearful conclusion then of damnation stand a foot and remain in full force to be inflict upon all kind of heretic we be now and next to consider whether the protestant opinion at this day wherein they differ from the catholic be true heresy be compare with the roman faith and religion and second we be to discuss whether the different sort sect and profession of the say protestant religion among themselves especial the principal as lutheran and sacramentary in Germany be heresy to the other and the like of puritan and protestant in England all original rise from Martin Luther I say we be to consider whether all these several head be heretic indeed the one to the other or may be save together each man die in his own religion 74. to proceed then in order unto the examination of the particular and first that protestant religion in many great point throughout the main corpse of controversy now in hand be true heresy to those of the roman that protestant opinion be true heresy faith and Catholic religion this point be so clear need no further dispute for asmuch as the protestant do open avouch above a hundred position against the same Roman Catholic church defend the same with obstinate resolution and the late general council of Trent where the flower piety and learning of the whole catholic Christian world under one spreame pastor and infallible conduct of God his holy spirit be assemble have discuss examine according to ancient ground of holy father discover for heretical and thereupon have anathematize 125. point by name and that in so many different canon enact concern the sacrament only and the controversy of justification beside all the rest I say the case be thus clear against they and their conviction so manifest there need no further dispute for if by s. Augustine his judgement even now allege and other father of great learning and credit in the church one only erroneous proposition or assertion hold with obstinacy against the doctrine of the know christian church be convince for a point of heresy and hold for a matter of most certain damnation to the houlder for that it cast a man out of the say church out of which be no salvation what be to be infer where so many condemn assertion be hold against the know church and authority thereof 75. to the second also to wit whether lutheran and sacramentary who make the first division of protestant whilst Luther himself be yet alive be true and proper heretic the one to the other and consequent that the salvation of one be the damnation of the other be it possible that any sectary can be save this be with as great facility prove as the former and that first by the testimony of Martin Luther himself the original author of all these late sect and then by the mutual and concur consent of all the Lutheran doctor pastor and prelate that succeed he 76. first I say it be well know that Luther himself ever repute the sacramentary that comprehend both zwinglians and caluinist for dammnable and intolerable heretic let his own testification often reiterate and serious aggravate in diverse of his book be a sufficient confirmation of this his first serious censure denounce against they all be this Luther in art. we do serious censure for heretic and alien from the church of God the zwinglians and all other sacramentary who do deny that Christ sacred body and Luther condemn all zwinglians and Calvinist for heretic blood be receive by our carnal mouth in the venerable eucharist can any thing be speak more clear or determine more effectual than this or can any Caluinist with any face hereafter exempt himself from out of the number of they that be accurse and condemn by their own grand progenitor 77. the same in effect he have in his epistle Bremensis his word be these all sacramentary that deny the real presence be heretic and for such to be avoid and yet in a three place lest any man shall think he have alter his judgement of the supper of the lord he condemn by name for damn heretic the very first author of sacramentary doctrine to wit Oecolampadius and and questionless Calvin have never escape his singer as sly a heretic as he be have he be then either of name or note well his final and irrevokable doom for it be denounce against they in his decrepit age be this I be now old and have as it be one foot in my grave do yet carry this testimony and glory with i to the tribunal of jesus Christ that with all my heart I have condemn as enemy of the sacrament and Oecolampadius and all their disciple and follower and have avoid their company and have no familiarity with they either by letter writing word or deed as the lord have command not to have with heretic thus much of Luther himself 78. and now if we shall prosecute the several judgment and censure of all other the most learned lutheran against sacramentary in this matter of heresy and namely against Calvinist who be of no reckon in Luther day for that their new heresy be but then a hatch there will be no end and I shall rather fill a large volume then contain myself with in the precinct of my brief intend consideration let one or two of the principal serve for all Mathias Illyricus a great Lutheran superintendant of Saxony and one of those four that compile the lie century do in a certain book entitle or Luther censure the liturgy or service of the caluinist not only for heretical but to be sacrilegious also proh dolour say he and to involve alas innumerable soul with everlasting perdition 79. Franciscus Stancarus also no mean author one of the Lutheran side write to the king of Polonia in his day pronounce confident of all those new professor under Calvin in Geneva that they be notorious and manifest heretic and yet as though this be little the same author in his book prescribe this caveat to the christian reader concern Calvin and will to God it be as well remember and practise in the university of England where young divine be for the most part poison with the drug and dregs of Calvin doctrine my heart bleed to think of it before they can taste of the pure liquor of beware of John Calvin antiquity well the admonition be this Christian etc. beware christian reader of the book of John Calvin especial in the article of Trinity of the incarnation of the mediator of baptism of predestination etc. for that they do contain most impious and blasphemous doctrine so he whereby be understand not only the censure of the Lutheran church concern the caluinist the caluinist condemn for heretic by the lutheran doctrine but also in what article the difference betwixt they do principal consist and these be neither few in number nor mean in nature as you see confirm by the particular exception which article be reiterate by other Lutheran writer as namely by Albertus Graverus in his book entitle the war of John Calvin with jesus Christ which book be set forth in the year of our the war of John Calvin with jesus Christ redemption 1598. wherein he show that the article whereby the lutheran do chief differ from the caluinist heretical doctrine be of the person of Christ of the supper of our lord of baptism and of predestination and jacobus halbruneir another Lutheran doctor publish a other book the same year before to prove Caluinisme to be heresy and to the former article of Albertus he add other two wherein lutheran and caluinist do deep dissent which be whereby he make it evident that caluinist be true and proper heretic to lutheran and this for the second point 80. it rest now that I come unto the three rank of english protestant and puritan which be two different sect of Calvin doctrine which be find together in no state or kingdom perhaps of Christendom but only in England and although some protestant writer for dissemble their own division when they deal with of the dissension and disagreement of protestant and puritan and whether they be he resy one to the other catholic will needs forsooth acknowledge they for brother as not differ from they in any substantial point of doctrine yet in all their other writing either against they or of they they disclose plain what they think of each other hold they both for schismatic and heretic in respect of their protestant church which be presume by they as they must needs presume to be the only true catholic church it must needs follow that puritan who from their innermost soul detest the same and the communion thereof as antichristian must needs be sectary nay heretic to that church and this be consonant to the doctrine of these scripture and most conformable to the opinion of ancient father as be before copious in the precedent consideration assever 82. for confirmation of which dissension capital and real hostility between our puritan and protestant in sundry main point of their religion I may here allege and produce infinite authority and innumerable argument if I shall not surcharge my treatise the two book yet extant print by public authority in one and the self same year I mean the survey of the holy pretend discipline compile as it be think by he that be now arrive to the high pitch of ecclesiastical dignity in that kingdom and the other bear the inscription of dangerous position ascribe to doctor sutcliffe both of they receive press at London by John wolf dom. 1593. do sufficient notify unto the world how reconciliable the Puritan position be with the protestant religion and that in sundry article of great weight and moment and among many other which to avoid prelixity I purposely omit the title of the 22. and 23. chapter of the survey be these that they to wit the puritan do take from christian prince and ascribe unto their pretend regiment the supreme and immediate authority under Christ in cause ecclesiastical and in the oppugn theros do join with the papist whereupon I infer that if this spiritual supremacy be any substantial point of doctrine among the protestant than the obstinate repugnance thereof by the puritan must needs be schism and heresy 82. I pretermit diverse other book whereof I have be a eye witness how purposely and direct they treat of these matter as namely the answer of the vicechancellor and doctor of Oxford unto the petition of a 1000 puritan dom. 1603. wherein it be plain convince that the puritan hold their platform of ecclesiastical answer pag. 20. government of the government of Christ upon earth for a thing of no less importance then be the gospel of Jesus Christ they hold it further for a essential part of their say gospel for a matter of faith to be receive upon pain of damnation for a essential mark of the true church without the which the protestant church be no church their faith no faith their gospel no gospel etc. and to conform to that which m. Rogers write in his preface to the bishop article where he testify that the puritan do hold their platform differ from the protestant to be a special part of the gospel yea the very gospel itself and to be of such importance as if every hair of their head be a life they ought to afford they all in defence thereof so they and in sober sadness suppose their principle to be true have they not great reason for that their difference be in so main and very substantial point if we refer they to their head whereof there be extant a very substantial declaration and conviction as to i it seem in the preface of the catholic divine in his answer to sir Edward cook five part of report whither I refer the ingenious and judicious reader for further perusal of this point for there it be show and irrefragable against all impugner thereof prove how essential and substantial difference of doctrine there be about the Origen the different Origen of ecclesiastical power in the Protestant Puritan and Catholic church of ecclesiastical power and authority between the protestant puritan and catholic of England the one that be the Protestant ascribe it to their temporal prince the other challenge it as most proper pertain to their private conventicle and assembly the last and three to the succession of bishop from the apostle the consequence whereof be this that whosoever of the three party have the right in this point there only be the true church there alone be the true ecclesiastial authority of preach teach or deign minister administer sacrament exercise censure and jurisdiction bind or lose remit or retain sin and the like etc. and for the other two church they do remain as secular and profane congregation without any vital spirit of ecclesiastical power at all let they then contend never so much about the key of ecclesiastical jurisdiction yet the plain truth be they shall never be able to open or shut the gate of heaven unto their own friend or against their enemy 83. and for as much as the puritan also in their plea do persuade themselves to have the right on their side barorwe book etc. perpetual government of the church they must needs infer the other consequence against the protestant church hold it to be no church as the foresay answer of Oxford doctor pag. 15. do confess that the brownist do ancrre against they say the brownist do confident reproach we that our church be no church our sacrament no sacrament our prince and people infidel as not be baptize at all our christian congregation profane multitude etc. thus write they animate as say these answerer by the millenary Puritan petitioner whereby it may be probable presume that they also to wit the say thousand petitioner in most point at least be of the same opinion 84. these thing be so as no man of modesty can deny my demand be how can these man differ in so main a point be of the same church or how can any man of the mean understanding so he have any capacity at all imagine how these and the protestant can be save together nay true the book entitle the picture of a Puritan license to come forth by authority 1605. contain a comparison of the opinion of the anabaptist in Germany with those the puritan excommunicate as schismatic and heretic by the protestant of the puritan in England in dialogue wise between a english man and a german this book I say do pregnant prove that the protestant do hold the puritan not only for schismatic and sectary but for heretic also as the anabaptist be yea the author hold they far worse than the anabaptist your Ana baptist say he come not near to our puritan in pride and contempt etc. and then he proceed in compare and parallel they as well in their opinion and use of sacrament as in many other point of religion with the say anabaptist most damn heretic as all english protestant themselves general acknowledge they to be yea this author call o. o. Emanuel aggravate the point so much against they that he compare they with jew and other such like infidel and every where throughout his whole discourse detect and censure they for obstinate and wicked sectary and final to waste no more labour in a matter so clear I find they excommunicate by many constitution and canon ecclesiastical of the bishop and protestant church of England Constitut. can. 4. 56. can. 7. 8. can. 9 10. and 12. as namely for impugn their church as also the rite and ceremony establish in the say church for deny the authority of their archbishop bishop their consecrate and order of the inferior clergy for deny of dean and collegiate church for be author of schism and separate themselves as schismatic for maintain of constitution make in conventicle and the like 75. and to conclude every where almost throughout the same constitution they be sharp censure for sectary and schismatic which censure proceed from the protestant church with so full a stroke of authority must of necessity in their own judgement deprive the other of all mean of salvation in that church they stand out with pertinacy against the same as they do and consequent this doom must needs fall upon one of their head that the protestant and they can in no case be save together the five consideration with the conclusion of this whole chapter to his majesty now therefore to return with all humble obedience and loyalty unto your majesty contain myself within all due and just bound of duty fidelity observance obedience subjection and submission which either the law of God of nature of nation reason religion or of my own native country can require of a subject towards his dread sovereign I do even from my innermost and hearty affection implore this one thing of your say excellency and must ever persist to beg it at your highness hand to wit that after these foresay premise consideration to the reader your own princely person will deign to condescend to enter into some serious consideration and mature deliberation and that with some earnest attention within the secret closet of your own most wise judicious and understand heart what be and may be the great consequence of all this that have be hither so general discourse of in the main body of the whole as also to weigh and ponder the weight and importance of each particular treat and infer in their several passage 87. and first may it please your highness to lay together english protestant do not make one part often of those christian which condenne the for heretic and compare the several part and distinct pertye of different profession in religion all dissent from the english protestant church and doctrine therein establish as before have be sufficient prove the instance we bring for a plenary and particular confirmation be these as first the roman catholic which possess the great part of Europe second the lutheran profess throughout Saxony Denmark Suecia and some other state in Germany three the sacramentary zwinglians and rigid caluinist term by we for their moteferuent suppose zeal Puritan and these be disperse throughout Suitzerland Savoy Germany Hungary France Holland and Scotland and some part of England all these I say conjoin together and compare only with the english parliament protestant do make often part of Christendom nine at the least which proportion or rather disproportion as indeed it be especial in religion when I serious consider and weigh it in the even and impartial balance of a indifferent judgement I can in all duty do no less but most humble propose unto the christian prudency and religious piety of your majesty to consider of what importance this be in regard of life everlasting that nine part of ten shall hold the english protestant religion for damnable heresy by which your majesty expect to receive a eternal and neversade crown of glory award by almighty God the most righteous judge of all the world 88 if in a sumptuous and royal banquet prepare of purpose to entertain the person of a king or potent monarch there be never so many please and allure dish never such great store of delicate viand fetch from the sea or provide by land never so great appetite in the princely party invite if often learned physician that be then present attend upon the person of this prince to consult and provide for his bodily health and welfare nine of they shall confident avouch upon their learning and judgement nay life itself two important consideration that all those dainty and please dish be infect with the drug of some mortal and deadly-killing poison some one dish only except which they can not also well discover I think it will make the party invite to look about he to stay himself and examine well the matter before he will desperate adventure to please his palate or if in a great suit of law concern the interest to a princely inheritance pretend by the plaintiff it shall be either by parliament or under the great seal or by some other statute enact yea and without fail execute that if the plaintiff fail in his suit be either drive to non-suite or overcome in his suit that then he shall undergo extreme misery be expose to infinite calamity most certain incur everlasting bondage and slavery though some one lawyer of ten that be of his counsel shall animate and give he all the encouragement that possible he can to proceed in his suit yet if the nine other of equal worth and weight with he shall be of contrary opinion dissuade he from the suit assure he upon their learning that he will be cast in the same yea and condemn if he proceed therein will not this man now begin to consider more serious of his suit intend of his right pretend will he not view over and over his writing examine all his evidence again and again least in aspire to be make for ever he chance for ever to be undo even so the case stand in the point we have in hand here be a royal banquet provide for your princely majesty here be a princely inheritance indeed a incorruptible diadem of glory prepare for your excellency this banquet be not to continue for a hundred and fourscore day as that of Assuerus do to set forth the majesty of a earthly Hester 1. monarch but it endure for ever and ever throughout all eternity to disclose the honour and power and glory and riches of the heavenly deity and divine omnipotency the food of this banquet be neither earthly nor material but heavenly and spiritual Agnus it be the lamb slay from the begin of the world that be to be set and serve on this table nay 1. cor. 15 28. it be almighty God himself who will then as s. Paul teach become unto we all in all that be all in the eye for our vision and all in the taste for our refection and all in the touch for our fruition all in the ear of our consolation and all in our smell for delectation in a word all in the sense of our body and all in the faculty of our soul for our plenary perfection 89. beside this banquet there be a princely inheritance and a incorruptible crown of glory prepare for your majesty and this crown so far excel all earthly crown as immortal exceed mortal incorruptible corruptible in a word as far as God excel man and a thing infinite surmount a thing finite betwixt all which there can be no proportion and be there not cause now that your majesty shall beware of the poison of heresy that kill both body and soul and will not your zealous and religious heart hereafter peruse over all forge writing and never cease search until you have find the evidence of the catholic church whereby your majesty can only lay claim to this crown of immortality 90. and this be all that we your majesties humble subject and servant do in our daily sigh tear and prayer to almighty God beg at his hand to wit that our gracious god will of his merciful goodness vouchsafe so to inspire your princely heart with the principal spirit that you may once at the least come to make this reflection upon the course that you be in now concern religion then shall you easy discover the fraud and imposture of the protestant cause then shall you disclose the poison and envenom drug of their erroneous opinion whereby they will infect both the body and the soul of your princely person suspect no guile fear no such treachery and that to your everlasting destruction last then shall you descry how false and counterfeit their evidence be concern religion and that they can never hold plea for the foresay princely inheritance whereunto your noble person be interest 91. your majesty be bear among the protestant as s. Augustine compassionate complain of diverse bear among the donatist and thereby you can not but receive that impression that be infuse and instill into you by your first educator and thereby you have be make as I trust rather then as the same father say of his friend Honoratus your majesty be earnest now against the catholic roman faith and professor thereof and so be I myself too once and so be s. Augustine whilst he be a manichean and so be that great apostle s. Paul persuade himself no doubt that he ought yea that he shall do God good service persecute that act. 26. 9 way of christian profession until God have open his eye and enlighten his mind to see the erroneous course wherein he then be 92. and now may it please your majesty to consider of this one reason which though it be the last yet be it not the least viz. that so many of your majesty loyal subject man of considerable birth worth and quality yea and some of they such that have spend much precious time and have be content to exhaust their patrimony in your noble university and all in the pursuit of learning and truth of christian religion these man I say have now just reason to expect some preferment with other their equal after their long wearisome labour and endeavour will not so sudden change their mind as they do daily in this point of religion forego all future hope and fortune abandon country kith and kin expose themselves to all temporal difficulty and loss the daily conversion of so many learned man in England and that without constraint of any even voluntary and after all this to be ready to shed their blond and sacrifice their innocent life for their resolution make concern religion all which they can never do be it not that a high hand than human even the hand of heaven lead they into the bosom of the church be it not upon the force and efficacy of evident truth when it please almighty God so to enlighten their understanding as in the midst and thick of the darkness of heresy to show they the only and alone save catholic truth and church as also to frame their will and inflame their affection to yield all obedience thereunto notwithstanding any obstacle whatsoever 93. alas my dread sovereign what be Rome to we english man that we shall so mind it or the church of Rome that we shall much affect it or the pope of Rome that we shall so high honour he be it not that Rome ever be be and shall be the chair of s. Peter the present faith of Rome the former faith of s. Peter be it not that this convert our island this church first plant the christian faith in our island this bishop from time to time repair renew and continue the decay faith in our island in a word be it not that all that separate themselves from this head and Origen of unity in the christian church be as beam cut of from the sun as bough violent break down from the tree as cyprian l. eccles channel and stream divide from their fountain which must needs dry up wither and consume to nothing this be the sole cause my liege lord that Rome be so near and dear unto we the bishop of Rome so honour by we the faith of Rome so receive of we this be may it please your majesty the only cause of our sudden change and constant resolution in region 94. and in all this we have not just offend the king our sovereign let heaven tribunal be witness of our innocency and we must against all detraction and calumniation of our unjust adversary plead it also before your majesty and this same change in like manner will I hope and pray for in your majesty and with this hope will I for this time again dutiful depart from your highness and pass to the christian reader to examine now in particular the four head most prudent and religious propose and resolve upon by your majesty the god of Solomon inspire into your princely breast the wisdom of Solomon and make your majesty as a angel of god that you may discern betwixt the right hand and the left the right and the wrong catholic religion and heretical innovation that you may be able to put a difference betwixt those of your subject that serve God and such as fear he not the second chapter that treat the first head touch by the king majesty for try all of a christian catholic which be the believe of holy scripture among those principal ground serious acknowledge and confident yet religious aver by his excellent majesty of England for testify and convince himself to be a christian catholic king and no heretic the first in place and order of method if we due respect the inestimable weight of the divine and heavenly subject be zealous assever by his royal person in these very word follow to wit as for the scripture no man doubt I will believe they but even for the pag. 36. I hold they in the same account that the ancient do which pious assertion of his majesty I for my part believe with all my heart and be it ever far from i to imagine otherwise of my sovereign in entertain any the least sinister opinion or suspicion but that he give his full consent and assent unto all god his sacred writ which he esteem to be canonical scripture and that he reverence in like manner the other as here he say distinguish they by the name of apocrypha as write compile by good and holy man but yet for such as be or and not canonical or sufficient for so be his majesty pag. 36. word whereupon alone to ground any article of faith except it be confirm by some other place of canonical scripture so his majesty do piousty I doubt not and with great discretion in his sense aver 2. but yet I must ingenuous confess that employ myself somewhat serious in my private meditation and most secret silence about this subject many difficulty occur and diverse be the consideration that present themselves unto i as my mind begin to be somewhat earnest bend about this business and these I have think good to impart unto the christian reader in this place as they ensue the first consideration and first if this be all and that on scripture behalf there be no more to be require to prove and make a man a christian catholic but a frank and ingenious the believe of scripture not sufficient to make a man a catholic acknowledgement to assent unto and to believe all those scripture which we deem for canonical in our opinion and for the sense to judge it agreeable and correspondent to our own private imagination I say if this be all all controversy of religion betwixt all party never so opposite and different in opinion may easy no doubt surcease and speedy without either further delay or difficulty be accord for that all side and party do free and voluntary offer to profess this point and that as I very think from their heart 4. but alas this be neither all nor any sound part of all all be but we deem and we judge this be scripture and this be the sense here be nothing in all but that which mar all and that in the very main point which shall make all and that be proper choice private election which we know by that which have be former treat and sufficient prove must needs be heresy and consequent this main ground of scripture itself thus from ourselves take and thus lay for avoid of heresy open the very main gap unto all heresy and yet I must here though now with no small grief and vexation of spirit I do remember it liberal acknowledge that for some year together when I frame religion in the shop of my own brain proper invention and private gloss as a example of the author case himself all sectary usual do I be so hearty affect sincere as I think delight yea as it be ravish with this allure consideration and best please persuasion of sacred scripture alone who sole authority I seem to myself then to follow and no other human or terrene motive whatsoever no not so much as once reflect back upon the authority of the church whence as I receive the scripture themselves so much more ought I to have receive the sense as I think myself more then half in heaven when God know I be ready to tumble into the pit of hell think this way of the scripture alone of all other way the most infallible and so certain as that I can not possible err thereby 5. and be in this peremptory presume vein and strain of scripture to add as it be fuel unto the fire of this my strong conceit imagination I often time remember and with wonderful admiration repeat yea reiterate again and again that animous courageous heroical sentence and speech of apostolical and prophetical fortitude as to i it then seem of Luther himself who allege scripture for his cause and contemn all other proof thus triumphant insult over king henuy the eight Luther l. cont. Regen f. 342. tom. 1. here I stand here I sit here I do glory here I do triumph here I do insult over papist thomist Henricistes and sophist and all the gate of hell much more over the say of man be they never so holy the strange presumptuous speech of Luther God his word be above all the divine majesty make for i so as I pass not if a thousand Augustine a thousand cyprian and a thousand king Henry church shall stand against i God can err nor deceive but Augustine and cyprian may err and have err so he 6. and true this bold kind of free speech affect i very much as then for that it seem to i simple to proceed out of the exceed great confidence of his cause and i think that I feel and perceive some part and measure of the same spirit in myself at that time which bring i also to this peremptory resolution to wit that whatsoever I speak forth of scripture or can make but the least show of word and warrant for out of God holy book that must needs be true certain and infallible in the very self same sense that I speak it and can not possible no not by man or angel be control the same spirit also do I observe in many other of my brother of the english ministry who in like manner and some of they with great zeal ground themselves upon scripture even as I do which concurrence in opinion do not a little confirm i in this my own headstrong imagination 7. but afterwards upon better insight of matter many occurrence and circumstance of no small importance for the shake and ruinate of this false and totter foundation interpose themselves to the view of my understanding and these great calm this fervour of i and abate the edge of my appetite unto the bare letter of the scripture and my own commentary thereupon 8. for first I find that even Luther himself that do thus confident triumph upon allege of scripture against Luther not ever believe by we although he city the scripture all ancient father thomist sophist Henricistes and the like be not admit nor follow by our english church in many of his main position of religion though we of England do and do hold he for a great saint a fly angel one that have the prime spirit of the new protestant gospel whereupon I have hear some that have presume in their popular pulpit declamation amid their own sectary to invest he with the title of a five evangelist I say he be not believe by we though he city never so many scripture and never so confident in sundry weighty position and controversy now in hand as namely about the real presence wherein he most of all pretend yea and have indeed found himself upon clear and evident scripture and be it any marvel when heresy depart from unity must needs breed variety and cause diversity between the sectmaister and the sectary the father of innovation and the follower the author of schism and the mantainer the inventor of novelty and the embracer thereof let we hear what old Tertullian say to the same above 1400. year ago when heresy be yet but young and as it be in their infancy say he prescript cap. 42. I be deceive if they do not yet differ from their own rule among themselves while every man therefore tune the thing which he receive after his own fashion as the author deliver they according to his fancy the issue of the thing agnize her nature and argue the manner of her Origen the same be lawful for the valentinian that be lawful for Valentinus and for the marcionite that be lawful for Martion to bring in a innovation in religion at their pleasure to conclude all heresy be thorough look into be find in many thing to dissent from the first author and broacher of they hitherto Tertullian can any more effectual prescription be make than this against the heretic of our day do they not seem to express and present the condition and quality of their ancient progenitor and forerunner this than be my first cogitation that albeit our english protestant do well allow and admire that insolency in Luther of press scripture never so mad understand against catholic yet when he urge never so clear scripture against themselves and their opinion they reject and contemn both he and his scripture 9 second I consider that when the devil tempt Christ he come not without his scriptum he have the word for his warrant and therefore the less I marvel abuse of scripture by heretic that all sectary and heretic from the very first foundation of Christian religion have principal found themselves and their heresy upon pretence of scripture as may appear by the several work of all the ancient father that confute they say Tertullian they be frequent in cite scripture they run over the law psalm prophet gospel epistle and the residue of holy scripture with great facility say vincentius Lyrinensis and even in market place and banquet among their own sectary among stranger private public in cont. haer. cap. 35. see the place it be well worth the read their book in sermon will they be full of scripture they bring nothing in manner of their own which they shadow not and cloak with some scripture or other not unlike our London dame and the wife of other great town and city at this day I have almost add Shrewsbury etc. all of they swell with pride all of they promise knowledge they be perfect catechiste before they can their alphabet prescript c. 4. their very heretical woman how saucy and malapert they be which dare teach contend etc. so Tertullian and then further as s. Nazianzen before allege well note these heretical scripturian run over all the corpse of sacred writ nay gallop over the whole field of the scripture as though the whole be but a horserase they do here and there with a word or two of false exposition as with a drop of poison infect the whole pervert the true faith of Christ by their false sense of the scripture and that to their own damnation and damnation of their follower as the apostle s Peter do signify 10. three I consider that not only the ancient heretic but also the modern schismatic and sectary of our time do by the one and the same spirit appeal to the tribunal of scripture and that both general against controversy grow endless by appeal only to scripture those of the roman belief and particular among themselves the one against the other as lutheran against sacramentary and sacramentary against anabaptist and those against these and every sectary against his fellow and all direct against God his church and his truth and though each sectary profess to allege scripture and pretend neither to build upon the sand nor upon the shore of private fancy or his own unstable judgement but upon the main rock of God his word yet heresy grow on all side and thereupon controversy become endless and interminable I remember not long since that light upon a little book of the anabaptist I fall upon thirty place of plain scripture and every one of these place seem by the extern letter to make perspicuous for the aforesaid anabaptist and their heresy which yet in England we do condemn and consequent do hold all those place of scripture to be misallege abuse and false interpret by they be they never so many seem they never so plain or pregnant 11. but here I will demand of any ingenious protestant how the Anabaptist can ever be convince of his heresy by any ground of protestant religion will the Protestant appeal he to the scripture the Anabaptist can produce more text and allege more plentiful place of scripture than he can will he refer the interpretation of the place cite on both side to the spirit the Anabaptist present presume and brag of a great measure of the spirit than he will the Protestant accuse his spirit as erroneous and author of a wrong interpretation as 3. reg. 22. 20. 21. 22. 23 Micheas true charge the false prophet of jezabel when he can they that Satan have offer unto Almighry God that he will go forth and be a lie spirit in the mouth of all achabs false prophet then will he reply again as Zidkiah do and when depart the spirit of the lord from i to Ib. v. 24. speak in thou will he convent he before the consistory and sribunall of the protestant church and bishop thereof as diverse have be and be burn by they the Anabaptist present complain and in this very just that it be no indifferent kind of trial to be judge in their own cause final will the protestant remit it to the umpiring of any other present church or be content that all controversy betwixt they shall fall to the decision of the father the Anabaptist kick against that and cut of all mean of trial with this text of scripture ^ cor. 2. 25. the spiritual man judge all thing and need not to be judge of any thus we see even among sectary themselves controversy grow endless by scripture though all pretend to believe scripture and plentiful to city the same 12. moreover where the puritan action in England swaicth most as very usual in good town and great city it do there shall you find all their preacher of this humour they have nothing in their mouth but the gospel of Christ the gospel of Christ the pure word of the lord as though their false and corrupt Genevian translation be either part of the gospel or word of God and they seem so far forth to confide to their english translation as that they affect to allege scripture only put one upon the neck of a other disdain as it be to quote any father or ancient writer for interpretation of scripture or confirmation of their doctrine esteem their own exposition though never so vain and impertinent to be firm ground for build any thing thereon as out of the scripture 13. and here I remember that not many month past peruse private with myself the foresay book of o. o. Emanuel write by a Protestant against the puritan scripture ridiculous allege by the Puritan he among other thing discover unto the german with who he make his dialogue some 15. several place of scripture so false and impertinent allege by Puritan writer that the German be enforce to conclude thus I see already how ridiculous they be and very he that shall read the place allege and weigh they with any judgement will confess that they be ridiculous apply indeed and yet with their follower all must be scripture which they speak and the pure word of God utter by the instinct of the spirit be it never so fantastical or fanatical apply 14. well then to come to the conclusion when I see and consider all this and have weigh the same with that indifferency of judgement that I possible can as in a matter so much impot my soul it stand i upon I begin first to suspect this spirit of Luther that aver so confident his assurance of the scripture and true understanding thereof against a thousand cyprian a thousand Augustine have no other ground thereof than his own particular persuasion to that effect which persuasion notwithstanding be and be in many point hold and prove to be erroneous by such as follow his breach and namely by the church of England in which I see many that reject he to be as confident in their own persuasion and to aver for scripture and the true word of God whatsoever themselves do find out of the bible in their own sense and consequent I do infer as a most certain sequel that this profession of admit believe or follow scripture each man out of his own sense and judgement without any certain rule band or limit of exposition can be sufficient to prove a man a christian catholic and no heretic for that it may open the way to be a heretic if his choice of interpretation be erreneous and thus much of this first consideration there follow the second the second consideration when almighty God of his infinite goodness and mercy after that immeasurable space of eternity wherein the bless Trinity have reign and glorious that scripture be not write for many year after their church begin triumph without any creature condescend to make a world and to create man and consequent vouchsafe thereby to institute a visible society company or church upon earth to acknowledge serve and honour he leave unto they sufficient direction whereby they may accomplish their service to he and thereby to arrive to the haven of happiness the same most wise God govern the say church for more than two thousand year without any write word that be now extant and after this large space when it please the divine majesty that the history of the world creation man propagation etc. shall be commit to write for the benefit of succeed posterity he stir up that great governor of his people and prophet Moses enable he with a great measure of his principal and prophetical spirit inspire he and then appoint he to compile those famous book common call in greek pentateuch the first five book of the bible to wit genesis the book of creation the book of their departure out of Egypt the book of priest and sacrifice the book of number the people and deuteronomy the book of the law repetition 16. in like manner the same god who pleasure be ever to be with the son of man hold the high hand of his divine providence over his church inspire likewise and appoint other also after the example of Moses holy man to compose and write other book afterward upon diverse and sundry occasion offer as in the old tement may be see but yet we shall not find that any of those book of Moses or any of the rest that be write by the other author be digest and collect in manner and method of orderly institution as in all other art and science be wont to be do but rather by piecemeal and by part as occasion fall out the author thereof principal intend a historical narration rather than any exact doctrinal instruction and the reason be this for that the ordinary institution and instruction of how scripture be first write every man how he ought to believe live fear and serve God be for all this time before the law write to be take only from the church by tradition of father to their child and after the say law be write also every man and woman be not remit promiscuous hand over head to the read of those book but he be send to take his instruction and institution from the ordinary superior doctor governor of that church and these be to expound the law unto he for which direction and tradition we find this warrant and command yea prescribe authority ask thy father and Deut. 2. 7. they will tell thou thy elder and they will declare unto thou again the lip of the priest preserve knowledge and yet in a three place I know that Abraham will demand and teach his son and household gen. 18. 19 that they walk in my way etc. 17. and now to come from the law to the gospel from Moses unto Christ and so to proceed orderly with the history of the church as God be no changeling but ever like himself even so the beginning proceed establish of the new christian faith and church be not much unlike if not altogether resemble the former for first this church be plant by our saviour at Jerusalem and speedy by the industrious ministry of the holy apostle assist by the instinct of the holy ghost spread over the face of the earth and yet neither the church nor the apostle the principal pillar of the church have as at this time any write instruction or methodical institution deliver unto they concern their teach preach or believe except only the article of the creed deliver by tradition in the church as will appear in the subsequent consideration second the institution that they have they receive it by instruction from our saviour his mouth and from the immediate instinct suggestion and inspiration of the holy ghost who be promise by Christ himself who can not lie nor deceive to assist the church continual unto the world end and by this institution and inspiration alone matt. 23. 20. they teach and convert both jew and gentile institute church establish law and order of life by word of mouth and tradition only from hand to hand before any thing of the new testament be commit to writing and this be the condition of the church for some year and that in the infancy and purity of christian religion as the Protestant must perforce confess three when the wisdom of heaven think it expedient that something shall be write the first thing commit unto write in the new testament be the gospel of s. Matthew and this be collect and digest in that very order as it be now present to the church and that some eight year after the ascension of our saviour then the gospel of s. mark some five year after that and then that of s. Luke write twelve year after the former wherein diverse thing omit in the other gospel of be record and last of all be write the gospel of s. John contain in it many great and important matter which be not find in any of the rest and this be not write of 66. year after the first visible christian church be plant and establish by the come of the holy ghost 18. and now as all the rest be write upon particular the church continue many year without write scripture occasion so especial be this famous gospel of s. John which be the very key open the door unto the understanding of all the rest and particular upon the occasion of ebion and cerinthus their heresy which impugn the divinity of the son of God whereupon I do infer that for that which concern the new testament the church be for diverse year without any scripture at all and for 66. year which be the age of a man the point relate by s. John more than be utter in the other gospel which be many and most important be receive and believe in the church by tradition only and now for conclusion of all I will demand but one thing of the protestant that make such show of appeal unto scripture and the primitive apostolical church and this be demand above 1400. year ago by s. Irenaus before cite who live in the very next Iren. lib. 3. cont. har. cap. 4. age after the apostle upon the very like occasion if the apostle have leave unto we no scripture at all yet ought not we to follow that order of tradition which they leave to those to who they commit their church so that holy bishop and martyr especial ought we not to follow that order of tradition since the true worship of God and the save doctrine of the gospel of Christ continue for 2000 year in the time of the law and for many other year in the day of the gospel and that in the breast of the church to be deliver by tradition only without the help of any word write 19 whereby we can but discern and must acknowledge that scripture or the write word of God be not so absolute necessary for the reveal of God his will unto man kind and the continue of man in that save knowledge of he but that his divine majesty may have propagate and preserve his doctrine and man in the truth by tradition only of word of mouth without any scripture at all if it have so please he as he do for many age and generation together both before the first great deluge by water in the day of our first patriarch until Abraban his time who he choose for the head of his people as also afterwards when he direct the same people by like tradition as well in Egypt where they remain in most cruel bondage for 400. year as else where before Moses write his forename book and the like he may have do with christian to the world great general consummation and last inundation by a flood of fire according to s. irenaeus his sentence if he have list as have institute a more orderly exact and authorize church yea and have endue it with great privilege according to the perfection of the new law above the old than he have do unto the former of the jew whereupon it must needs follow by force of necessary consequence that the tradition of this church and pure authority thereof both in propound scripture unto we and discern the same which be true scripture and which be not as also for deliver unto we the true sense and mean thereof in their interpretation and exposition be much more to be respect by we than be that of the jew forasmuch as Christ our saviour promise the continual assistance of his spirit unto this church and that in such measure as that it shall alone be able to withstand all the infernal power of Satan and the gate of hell the very entrance of all kind of error or heresy into it whatsoever 20. these then that never so solemn and never so how heretic do handle scripture confident profess that they for their part do believe and follow the scripture without due reference or respect to the church forsomuch as all sectary and heretikc that be no catholic christian do profess the same as have be already evident show that be to say they will open bear the world in hand that they build their whole religion upon the main foundation of the scripture whereas notwithstanding it be out of question that they rather build upon their own idle head and fanatical spirit forsomuch as they deduce their acknowledgement of scripture and the interpretation thereof from their own brain sense and private fancy and not from any more stable authority at all 21. this be make evident and perspicuous if we exnmine any the least sect or sectary in the world or compare many of sundry sect together for that every one of they though as opposite among themselves as heaven and hell light and darkness God and Beliall yet will all pretend to build upon God his word all will appeal unto scripture the Lutheran Caluivist Anabaptist brownist Protestant and every other sectary but when you tie they to the point bring they to the examination of the scripture question they concern these two particular to wit which be scripture and how it be to be understand then do they appear in the lively colour of heretic then do they discover their own heretical fancy to be both all and the chief ground that ever they have to build their religion upon as by the ensue consideration will better appear in both the head before touch the three consideration if the oracle of the prophet and apostle the divine write I mean so call because the holy scripture be write by the ministry of prophetical and apostolical man be in their own nature of that sublime excellency and transcendent eminency as have be former how to know what be true scripture decipher and discover unto we if the authority of the say sacred writ be not human but divine not the word of any mortal man nor proceed from any earthly spirit but the word of the immortal God breathe he heavenly spirit and consequent if it be not in itself most holy sacred sure certain and of infallible truth then let we assure know that as on the one side it be a capital crime of sacrilege to decree any thing for scripture which be not or to intrude any human writing into the participation or association of God divine word so it be a sin no less damnable on the other side to call rash into question or to disauthorize any part or parcel of that which be scripture indeed or to deny thereunto the honour due to divine and sacred writ and therefore it high import we aswell in the one as in the other to manage ourselves with all humility sobriety modesty and circumspection in a matter so weighty as the scripture be and so near concern the eternal salvation or damnation of our soul 23. now than if the point stand thus it behove we indeed if in any other matter then especial in this to use all careful and exact diligence that we may find out that certain rule and infallible direction before mention that by the immediate guidance thereof we may most certain attain unto this to wit to know what be true scripture and what be not and if ever this be necessary then much more in these late and worse day and time of schism and heresy when as no small controversy be stir up about the same 24. for whereas so many dangerous sect and heresy of perdition to speak in the phrase of the holy ghost the place be above cite be raise up from hell in these our unfortunate time unfortunate indeed in respect or they and that within the compass of one age since one luxurious Luther open the first gap to the general detection all which schism and heresy as before have be notify covert shroud themselves under the name and pretence veil of scripture the first contention and now most necessary question how to know what be scripture and what be not to be discuss with they be what book of the bible or part thereof be true scripture and what be to be wipe away and to be cut offrom the sacred canon of holy writ and all to this end that we may undoubted know upon what ground we may stand safe in cite authority from thence 25. furthermore forasmuch as all the book of the sacred bible God holy volume have common and ancient hitherto be divide into these three order or rank the first into such as be never call into question by Catholic Trenaeun l. 1. c. 20. 22. 29. aug. l. 32. cont. faust. c. 2. and l. 334 cap. 3. man though there never want heretic call themselves christian and reform christian as the protestant do at this day that impugn the same as the basilidim and the marcionist reject the old testament as indict by a evil God and Faustus Manichaeus contemn all the four gospel as write by impostor 26. the second into such book as albeit some man do for some time doubt whether they be canonical or not yet afterwards they be receive into canon by the whole church that be hold for divine book write by the spirit of God and of such infallible truth as they may be a canon or rule or sure direction unto our infirmity for any thing that be find in they for so s. Augustine from the etymology of the word describe the meaning of the word canonical be apply as a fit epethete unto the scripture 27. the three order be into such book which notwithstanding they go ordinary in the common bible and contain in they many good moral instruction of piety and be sometime by some particular man esteem for essential part of the scripture yet be they never so account by the universal church and therefore they be call apecrypha that be hide or obscure for that their authority be never receive or publish general in the church and for such be reckon the three and four of esdras the appendix of the book of job the book of Hieremy entitle pastor the prayer of king Manasses and final the 151. psalm 28. I say now this tripartite division of holy writ be thus general admit and receive by all orthodox divine do it not concern every man that be careful of his soul salvation to inquire diligent after the pursuit and knowledge of these thing especial in this general summon and appeal of all unto the scripture for the final decision of all controversy 29. and now to speak something to the point concern these three rank and order of book the three what book be now in controversy of these be general reject by all as well catholic as protestant the first be admit by all all the question than be concern the second and this comprehend sundry book both of the old and new testament as of Hester Baruch certain parcel of Daniel the book of Tobias judith and the first and second of maccabee out of the old testament and certain part of the gospel of s. mark s. Luke and s. John with the epistle of s. james s. jude the 2. of s. Peter the 2. and 3. of s. John and the Apocalypse out of the new all these I say be receive by those of the roman religion for canonical scripture in the sense before define out of s. Augustine that be to say for holy and divine book write by the finger of almighty God by the ministry of those who be pen of a ready writer and consequent these of the second rank be of no less authority nor infallible verity than those of the first order for that in thing immediate and a like proceed from God his spirit there can not be less or more truth but all be of equal credit and so equal to be receive honour esteem and believe and thus much for the catholic who for a infallible ground and assure direction in this matter follow not any private err spirit but the never-deceiving authority of the church which church and spouse of Christ be guide by the spirit of God according to the promise of Christ her bridegroom have from all ancient time in former age in her counsel synod and ecclesiastical decree notify declare determine and establish the authority of these foresay book of the second row for infallible and canonical that be to say declare they to be such and ever have be such to wit of most certain and infallible truth though sometime and among some man there have be doubt thereof and this be the manner of the church to declare what be scripture but not to make it 30. but as for the protestant I find such diversity and contrariety such opposition and contradiction among they that they seem unto i as man in tangle shall I say nay perplex and distract not know what to do or whither to fly or which way to turn they in this great business of discern and admit scripture and sure the reason of all this misery arise from themselves alone it be speak of Israel transgression but never more true verify than of heretical innovation hos. 13. for that these miserable deceive and deceive soul leave the high road of the church prescription can never possible attain unto any infallible direction one follow one thing and another another and that in this main point of the scripture importance every man will be a chooser every one will show himself a heretic whence it come to pass that God word be wretched abuse blaspheme reject protestant follow their own choice or election in admit or reject scripture by some rend and tear in piece by other and that which on God his part be ordain and prepare for they to be a savour of life unto life become by their misusage of it a savour of death unto death and to speak all in a word through the fault of their own perverse will concur and God his most righteous judgement follow they hard at the heel it come to pass that 2. cor. 2 15. 16. that word which be give as a pillar of fire to direct and lighten they into all verity be turn into a pillar of smoke so darken and infatuate their understanding that they rush headlong into all kind of heresy 31. this be well perceive by his majesty of England according to that notable apprehension of his noble nature he as it be out of a pious zealous and religious disposition though wrong miss by some timeserving and statize theologue who be somewhat to near unto his royal person write as in part before you have hear concern the scripture and it be in effect as follow as for the scripture no man doubt I will pag. 36. believe they but even for the I hold they in the same account that the ancient do they be still print and bind with our bible and public read in our church I reverence they as writing of holy and good man but since they be not find in the canon we account they to be or which be Bellarmine own distinction and therefore not sufficient whereupon alone to ground any article of faith except it be confirm by some other place of canonical scripture thus write his majesty out of a good meaning no doubt and therefore great pity it be that so virtuous and religious a hart shall err or conceit amiss but who shall determine whether these scripture here call which be those of the second order before mention be canonical scripture or not herely the substance of the question his majesty here upon the suggestion of his domestical minister of England say no but the ancient church of Christendom say yea as do also the present and her judgement be in this case above all earthly authority be to strike the stroke betwixt God and man let the word of my sovereign in all otherthing stand as the strong mountain that may not be remove and as the law of the mede and persian which can never be alter only let not my lord the king be displease with his servant and dan. 6. 15. subject in this if his word may not stand but must of necessity fall to the ground as be countermand by the word of God that can nor will not be disauthorize by the word of any mortal man 32. it be suggest to his majesty but sinister be the information that cardinal Bellarmine in his first book cap. 4. hold the former distinction of or and that in his majesty sense but it be nothing so in the sense that here be set down by his majesty to wit that this second order of book be of less authority than the first for albeit Bellarmine do as before have be say divide all the book that be in the bible into three rank or order first into such as be never call in question by any catholic man second into such as notwithstanding sometime have be doubt of by some yet be afterward admit by the whole universal church and three and last into bellarm division of the book of scripture yet do he not either call those book of the second order or as here be set down nor yet in his majesty sense as though they be less to be believe and of less authority than those of the first rank but rather he aver the quite contrary that they be all of one and the self same authority and therefore whosoever he be that suggest this place of Bellarmine unto his majesty he deal not well and sincere therein with his prince and he be bind by the law of conscience and by the law of a subject towards his sovereign to acknowledge his error be it of malice or of ignorance commit and humble prostrate upon his knee to crave pardon for this abuse of his lord and ever after to beware how he presume to whisper any such untruth palpable and notorious falsehood into the ear of his dread lord and King 33. but now forasmuch as this point of deny the infallible authority and irrefragable credit of any the least book part or parcel of scripture be so heinous and temerarious a sin as before we have touch yea and that commit against the bless spirit that breathe they all and stream these pure water of life from one and the same live and life-giving fountain let we in the name of God even with fear and tremble since the horror of the sin commit require this at our hand examine a little in what a dangerous nay damnable state the protestant of our day do stand in about their disauthorize of scripture not in blot out one book alone but in wipe out many together from the number of the sincere canon and let we further consider in what a gaze and maze they stand be uncertain of their ground also what they ought to believe hold or determine after they have lose the sure and stable-staying anchor of the church authority in this behalf 34. as for example the catholic do believe all a sufficient prescription for authorize these book for divine scripture be 1200 year ago those book before mention which be in Bellarmine both the old and new testament to be canonical scripture of infallible truth and the reason be draw from the church for that she in her ancient counsel have admit the same for such at least wise since the 47. canon of the three council of Carthage be enact wherein s. Augustine himself be present and subscribe to the say canon which canon aver they to be book of true canonical scripture among which for example go the epistle to the hebrew and of this my purpose be at this present to make some particular consideration for that the time within who limit I be strait will not easy permit i to treat of all 35. this epistle than be believe of the catholic to be a true part of canonical scripture and write by s. Paul as well as the rest for that it be so receive by the church in old time as namely in the council of Laodicea the 59 canon and after that again in the three council touch the epistle of s. Paul to the he. brew of Carthage before mention and cite in diverse other counsel and namely in the first nicene who authority his majesty of England offer to stand unto in the first Ephesine and of that of chalcedon in all the grand parliament of the world general counsel it be receive and acknowledge as the genuine epistle of s. Paul but now in these our unhappy time matter be rake into controversy again and that after the whole church have in diverse synod establish the thing and every sort of sectary will needs adhere to their own brainsick fancy and will prefer their own private opinion before the public determination and resolution of the church among all other as the captain and ringleader of the rest upstart Martin Luther but it be after he have break vow and cloister and marry a nun take upon he to censure the matter in his prologue to that epistle reverse as erroneous the grave and infallible judgement of so many general counsel direct by the spirit of God his word be these this epistle say Luther be neither write by s. Paul nor by any other apostle and it contain in it some thing contrary to the evangelical and apostolical doctrine this be Luther heady and giddy censure of this admirable parcel of holy writ will any man hereafter so desperate cast away himself in credit he who thus discredit God word 36. with Luther in this point conspire all the learned lutheran about the disauthorize of this holy writ and namely joannes Brentius in his confession of Wittenberg cap. and the four Magdeburgian good fellow in their first loud-lying century the 2. book the four chapter col. 55. and that audacious and impudent Examyner and censurer of all the learning and learned man of the whole christian world I mean martinus Kemni^ius in his of the 4. session of that famous council of Trent and upon this these man adventure all their soul will any man suffer himself any long to be deceive by such pure reformer nay rather impure impostor but John Calvin the next succeed reformer of these reformer be to begin a new sect of his own head he think it most convenient to oppose himself against the lutheran in this point and therefore in his first institution print in the year of our lord 1554. cap. 8. @. 216. he prove that the lutheran do err in this point in hold it not to be a apostolical epistle yet he will not affirm that it be write by s. Paul but rather perhaps by Bannaby or Luke as may appear in the same institution chap. 10. @. 83. and chap 16. @ 25. upon which scruple raise by how Calvin oppose himself to Luther and yet agree not with the catholic m. Calvin the Calvinian minister at a certain conventicle of they hold at Poysy in France in the year 1562. do in the three article of their confession set down this epistle to the hebrew to be divine scripture but yet they leave the author of it to be doubtful and this be a subtle trick peculiar to Calvin his invention to wit to differ from other protestant and yet not full to agree with the catholic but to have something singular to himself as you see in this controversy and it may be prove in many other 37. and here now I will demand upon what warrant in the world do John Calvin and his sectary contradict and oppose themselves against Luther and his follower in this point certain it be he agree not with the catholic at a^l and it seem then nay it be more than certain he follow a several way and strain by himself and have no ground or guide therein but his own will judgement choice and election 38. the like dispute I may propose about other book or part of scripture and namely concern the epistle of s. james and the Apocalypse the former whereof be reject both by Luther and all the forename Lutheran writer Brentius Kemnitius and the magdeburgian all these avouch it to be no scripture but yet it be assert and asscuer by Calvin and the caluinist for genuine and undoubted scripture the second which be that mystical book of the revelation compose by that high-soaring and egale-winged John s. John surname the divine this book though it be in like manner discredit and why the apocalypse reject by Luther be accept of Calvin and caluinist disauthorize from canon by Luther and most of his follower as namely by Brentius and Kemnitius in the place before allege yet be the same book eager defend against they by Calvin and his follower and good reason have they in their judgement for it forasmuch as thence they take upon they to demonstrate the pope to be Antichrist and the whore of Babylon in regard of the seven hill city and I know not upon what imagination beside and this consideration may be presume to have be a especial motive unto those chief lutheran the magdeburgian cause they to forsake both their father Luther and their Lutheran brother in this cause and to concur and conjoin themselves with Calvin and the caluinist in defence of the Apocalypse 39 and yet I do not perceive how his majesty assertion here about these book do not rather agree with the lutheran then with the Calvinist for so much as he hold all those book for and no canonical scripture which be name by Bellarmine to be in which second order as before have be declare the cardinal comprehend also these epistle to wit the epistle to the hebrew that of s. james and the Apocalypse and consequent it be necessary deduce and infer upon his majesties word and discourse that he hold these for no canonical scripture and this be contrary unto Calvin and unto the church of England and unto his majesty himself for he avouch they to be scripture and so upon my knowledge do the present church of England and last his majesty so long stand upon the Apocalypse in this his premonition do well show that he esteem it for scripture and this contradiction also must light upon he who against knowledge and conscience if he have either wrongful suggest the place of Bellarmine unto his majesty 40. but my main conclusion of all be this that nothing can be certain as here it be sufficient prove the conclusion of this consideration when a man once depart from the authority of the church for this be a certain rule unto all and such a rule as be authorize by God himself for then every man may make and unmake scripture at their pleasure and upon their own peril but sure I be that he can neither give nor take away divine authority from the scripture and if you say that neither the church can do this I demand first who be thou that compare thyself with the whole church I grant it to be true but yet let i tell thou this withal that though the church can give divine authority to any writing which from the beginning be not true scripture nor take away the same from any part of that which from the very beginning be scripture yet may the church declare what book be write by prophetical or apostolical man as before have be say and consequent by the finger of the holy ghost and so be canonical scripture and of infallible truth and this may the church know partly by tradition other not know the same may without suspicion of heresy doubt of their authority before the say declaration of the church and partly also by the ever guide assistance of the holy ghost in her synod when any such weighty matter for direction of the whole church be treat in which counsel the say church after due inquisition make and invocation of the holy ghost as her common custom be may no less conclude and bind all with then do they of the first council in the act of the apostle which no private man have authority to do though Luther and Calvin presume to determine the same the four consideration the brief sum of all hitherto treat of in this second chapter concern the scripture be in effect how the true sense of scripture may be try thus much first every believe and appeal unto scripture be not sufficient to prove a man a christian catholic for that each sectary do offer this second that tradition without scripture may have continue as sufficient for instruction if God have so please according 1. to that of s. irenaeus before cite and this be prove for that both the church under the law and under the 2. gospel be institute and ordain by tradition without scripture as appear by the very time of the write of the scripture both of the old and new testament after that the church be first plant three the write 3. scripture be distinguish and discern what be scripture and what not what canonical and what and that by tradition and this be all about the letter of the scripture only there rest yet the great 4. point of all and of most importance behind and this be how true scripture be to be right sense and interpret for if that of Tertullian be true in the 17. chapter of his prescription a false gloss mar the truth as much as a naughty text or that of hier. c. 3. in epist. Ephes. neither let we think that the gospel rest in the word of the scripture not in the sense of the scripture not in the rind or barky letter of the word but in the marrow of the meaning not in the wordy leaf but in the root aug. in psal. 140. of reason by a right understanding thereof or that of s. Augustine to the same effect if there be profound mystery in holy writ which be therefore hide that they become not vile therefore seek after that man may be exercise and set on work therefore disclose that they may feed last lib. 3. ep. epist. 19 constant. as s. Ambrose aver if divine scripture be a sea contain in it bottomless depth of profound sense that be the depth of prophetical riddle question and prediction etc. etc. as the same author have it if it be a sword with a sharp and cut edge oh then how wary ought we Ambros. l. 3. c. 3. in to walk in this way of sense scripture as s. Gregory speak which be nothing else but a certain epistle lib. 4. epist. regist. epist. 40. of the omnipotent God unto his own creature 42. if a subject shall either malicious or negligent misinterpret the letter of his prince and that in a matter of some great moment shall he escape severe punishment and shall the treacherous heretic who wilful the danger of rash use or abuse the scripture and malicious upon his own perverse choice deprave corrupt and misinterprete the scripture the letter epistle and proper hand-writing of his god escape deserve condemnation so s. Hierome it be no small in Commentar. Galat. 2. hazard to speak in the church least happy the gospel of Christ become the gospel of man or that which be worse the gospel of the devil and all by a perverse and naughty interpretation be the scripture a bottomless sea and be there no danger of drown nay damn in hell if man be to busy with it to abuse it be the scripture a sword as s. Ambrose resemble it or a two-edged sword for so s. Paul to the hebrew compare it and be there no danger of cut and wound and kill by this sword if it be unwary handle say lib. 3. in Lucan c. 3. lib. and cap. sacred scripture must be heedful read lest any man that read they be unskilful to handle these strong weapon as a child by reason of his infancy skill not how to handle a sword and consequent rather receive and incur the wound of damnation through his imprudency abuse they than the help of salvation by the right read of they for the weak be wound by their own weapon neither can he use weapon well who know not to wield they 43. it be excellent observe by Theophilact and it be the common observation of all the father that when the apostle curiousl inquire for as yet the holy ghost be come upon none of they after the knowledge of the day and hour of judgement when the time precise shall be he hide the day he be not ignorant of the day let Calvin and his sectary blaspheme as long as they will against the knowledge of Christ sacred humanity and the reason render of this lest the knowledge of the day of judgement reveal by Christ unto his apostle shall prove a sword put into a child hand thus than you see both by all former example and especial by this last of the apostle themselves what a dangerous way the path of the scripture be to walk in if we be not wary guide therein for as by the native and genuine interpretation of God sacred epistle as s. Gregory style holy write man be direct aright through the surge of the sea of this world to arrive secure at the haven of salvation even so by the erroneous and false exposition of the same scripture man be deceitful misguide and wrongful lead as it be blindfold into the brake and brier of pestiferous and pernicious heresy to the everlasting damnation both of the beginner and follower 44. s. Paul call the scripture the savour of life unto life and the savour of death unto death which as it be true in that place in respect of the save of some and the perish of other so it be most true in regard of the right sense of it by the son of the Catholic church who follow catholic interpretation and the wrong interpret of it by other as be out of the church and adhere unto false exposition and heretical innovation 45. Tertullian of opinion that the scripture themselves be so dispose by the will of God that they shall cap. 39 prescript minister matter unto heretic his reason be because he read in scripture that there must be heretic which without scripture can not be and yet his meaning be not that the scripture be the cause thereof Christ prophetical prediction be no cause of judas treason but rather man temerarious presumption upon God word and the cause of heresy precipitate intrusion into his book by erroneous and false conceit opinion be the true cause of all error and heresy 46. s. Augustine write to consentius do excellent discover the cause of heresy in these word all heretic to seem to themselves to follow scripture when in very deed they rather follow their own error and hereby it come to pass that they be make heretic not for that they contemn the scripture but for that they understand they not 47. but hear i think I hear the heretic object the heretical objection that the scripture be easy and open answer as I have hear they often while I do frequent their heretical conventicle and sermon that the scripture be easy to be understand that the word be near we not far from we that it be a lantern unto our step and a light unto our path and thus will they fly through the law and the psalm the prophet and apostle as vincentius note of the heretic of his time to prove the facility of the scripture to this I answer Psal. 1 8. and grant it to be true in respect of sundry passage of holy cont. haer. cap. 35. writ where the lamb may wade as well as the elephant may swim yet that other place of scripture be hard intricate mystical and very apt to be mistake beside many proof and those most pregnant that may be bring out of the scripture and father the experience of our unfortunate day do most clear evince 48. for otherwise how come it to pass that all Christendom be in a uproar about the exposition of scripture how grow so many contention among the learned at this day why have we so desperate and obstinate heresy ground as the heretic think upon such apparent and pregnant place of scripture as that the author thereof be deceive themselves and deceive other by the scripture will rather desperate choose to lose their life and their soul together then to forego and abjure their opinion in matter of religion which once by the least apparent show of scripture they have begin to defend these man though never so learned never so wise never so moral virtuous yet be they deceive shall I say by scripture nay rather they wilful by their own heretical choice against the know interpretation of catholic church roman church ancient church abuse the scripture and so be deceive entangle blindfold and this they can never be bring unto if the scripture be so easy that a private spirit may interpret without the public spirit and interpretation of the church and to this s. Augustine allude say aug. l. 1. Christiana cap. 6. they which do rash read scripture be deceive with many and sundry obscurity and ambiguity take one sense for another which will not be if all be easy in the holy scripture as all sectary do pretend 49. the understanding then and true sense of the scripture be the very main point which import and importune we for our salvation and in seek out this if ever by seek we mean to find it we must first abandon our own judgement and particular election and embrace the common and public judgement of Christ his church this be the interpreter of the scripture this be the controller and guider of all certain and sure exposition to cite the whole sentence out of Tertullian this sense require the prescript c. 9 stay of a sure interpretation and this be only that which can make a man a true catholic christian. 50. s. Augustine among those manifold conflict which he have with the manichee concern the catholic church and her authority open and ingenuous profess s. August will not have believe the gospel but for the authority of the church unto the say manichee that he will not have believe the gospel if the authority of the catholic church do not move he thereunto whence I do observe that if we receive the gospel upon the credit of the church for that the gospel will not be believe to be the gospel unless the authority of the church do tell we that it be the gospel then follow it necessary for the argument be draw that much more shall we depend and rely upon the church and take from she the true sense meaning and exposition of the gospel from who we have believe and receive that it be the gospel and therefore say the same father to his friend honoratn I shall much more easy persuade myself that we ought not to believe in Christ at all then that any thing be to be learn concern he of any man but only of those who I be teach to believe in Christ can any thing be speak more effectual for the authority of the church since this be the sole cause of his believe the gospel this be the only motive of his embrace the faith of Christ 51. but now whether protestant do follow this trade and way of true Catholicisme in their sense and understand of scripture that be not hard to discover for when we come to particular controversy and to join issue together and that they and their adversary do allege scripture and expound the same then do it the difference between catholic and protestant in gather the sense of scripture appear as clear as the sun who follow a private interpretation and who adhere to the true catholic church exposition for the roman catholic first desire to find out the truth and then willing to embrace nothing but the truth reflect upon the former interpretation of ancient church when the present controversy be not yet in hand and consequent when the exposition can be so much as in any semblable reason suspect to be wrest or wrong interpret by man of those age who neither fear nor favour any party but must needs be according to the common meaning and sense of the church in those ancient time and this interpretation which the protestant also in some of their better humour do admit for good the catholic follow and upon this as upon the rock of God his word true sense by the church he stay himself and build his religion 52. now the protestant being guilty in his conscience and know well that antiquity detest and have already anathematize his heresy he by all mean possible by vociferation and exclamation seek to extenuate the authority of this church much like to the thief or malefactor who arrest by the law to abide the trial of the same begin to rail and exclaim against his lawful judge and juror and then in his imagination he devise certain chimaera and idea of his church in former time in the air of his own brain which lineal say he but God know how for he know not descend unto Luther and Calvin etc. and from these people partly and partly from himself frame the Protestant his exposition of scripture and upon this foundation buildeeh he all his religion of his own device 53. and albeit all father do not always agree in one and the self same sense and exposition of scripture for that there may be be diverse sense of one and the self same place of scripture as before you have hear at large yet do the holy ghost so run and strike upon the string the tongue and pen I mean of these ancient wortny of the church that all the variety that ever I can find yet among they sound forth a heavenly harmony and neither jar not yet be dissonant from scripture verity or faith analogy so far be the church unity from all contrariety and very this diversity of antiquity in the execution of scripture without all repugnancy or any contrariety be no small motive unto i to embrace the present roman catholic religion which all so I find in they for I can not but conclude that as one spirit breathe out these scripture intend all these sense so the same spirit guide all and therefore no marvel that neither the age wherein such father live nor any succeed century of the church reprehend their exposition for the wisdom of the spirit ever continue in the church and thereby they know that such variety breed no contrariety whilst one father sense the scripture literal another allegorical and another mystical or anagogical but yet all to a pious sense and with no obstinate protervity or animosity against that which the church do hold or determine for true 54. and now to come unto some particular exposition or scripture by the father let we instance in the age of s. Augustine position of the church s. Augustine for the protestant be wont to grant that the true church flourish in his time and his majesty also condescend to extend the trial of controversy to his time and somewhat further the same father write of this church we have former mention prove the aug. l. 2. cont. petil. c. 33. and lib. eccles c. 14. same first to be visible and obvious unto every man eye against the assertion of the protestant invisibility of the church and this he confirm out of the word of our saviour register by the evangelist matth. 5. a city upon a hill can be hide that be to say the church can be invisible which be many time repeat by the same father aug. in ep loan tract 2. to this effect as also forth of those word of the psalmist Psal. 18. he put his tabernacle in the sun that be he place his church in the sight of the world to be see of all man 55. in like manner the same father apply and expound those word of Christ matth. 5 about the that it ^ visible candle place on the candlestick to signify the visibility of the catholic church cry out against they who wilful aug. shut their eye against the candle place on the candlestick who can see so great a hill as the church be and last for conclusion of all he give his censure of they in these word what shall I say more of they but that they be blnd thus do s. Augustine interpret and apply these scripture and many more to this purpose as you shall read throughout his whole tract andel where 56. and the same s. Augustine to prove that this catholic visible church do not consist of the good and elect only which be another erroneous position of protestant religion and prove large by s. Augustine to have be that it consist of good and bad the heresy of the donatist and pelagian their brother but of good and bad together unto the world end and for confirmation thereof he do produce and interpret those parable use by our saviour matth. 3. to wit of the good corn and chaff in the floor and of the net cast into the sea that bring up both good and bad fish and last of the weed and good corn command to be permit to grow together upon which place s. Leo the first give the gloss thus in the last judgement some thing be to be burn with the flame of damnation other thing be to be gather into God granary all these place and many more both s. Augustine s. Leo and many of the father do interpret of the good and bad that be promiscuous mix in the church together do our protestant follow these exposition 57 three my foresay author go yet further for prove of a three assertion as contrary to the protestant as they be opposite unto truth to wit that that it can fail or perish this public and visible church grant once by protestant themselves to have be the true church can never fail or ever fall away to the world end for prove of which assertion he allege sundry passage of holy writ far different for interpretation from the protestant sense his word be that church say he that be once of all nation he mean the catholic be it not now aug. co^c. 2 in psal ^01 have it perish they say so that be not in she o impudent voice be not she because thou be not in she this abominable and detestable voice full of presumption and falsity sustain by no truth illuminate by no wisdom season with no salt vain temerarious precipitate and pernicious be prevent and refute by the holy ghost etc. and then do he city several place of scripture to prove that notwithstanding all exposition and contradiction of heretic that the say visible church bring once collect of all nation and place upon the open hill and mount of this world and conspicuous unto the eye of all can never possible vanish away again or fall from Christ as protestant do false charge the mother roman church and consequent they will never agree to expound these scripture as s. Augustine do but who shall we rather believe whether be a Luther or a Calvin or s. Augustine to be follow or which church he or this of the protestant be like to go near the truth and to light upon the true meaning of the holy ghost in expound these scripture for certain I be their exposition vary and be repugnant one to the other 58. and in this manner may I proceed in disclose this great doctor and famous pillar of the church s Austin his judgement for the exposition of scripture concern s. August full agree with the opinion of the modern catholic all controversy or the most of they between the catholic and the protestant at this day wherein the say father be no less perspicuous and copious then as if be a eyewitness and a earwitness of all point now controvert he have write in these very day of sirife among we and either this be or I know not what can be a manifest demonstration that the holy ghost guide the pen of this worthy doctor to tax and prescribe against the manifold heresy of our time as for example touch the doctrine of purgatory who doctor field out of a fanatical spirit and spirit of heresy surcharge and false traduce of heresy what writer of this time can deliver and set down his opinion more resolute than he do he prove the same irrefragable both by the allegation and exposition of sundry passage of holy scripture as namely by those word of our saviour matth. 12. it shall not be remit unto he either aug. l. 21. c. 13. and l. 6. cont. juiian cap. 5. in this life or in the next whereupon this great doctor infer that some sin be remit in the next and consequent there must be a purgatory and so that place of s. Paul 1 cor. 3. every man work shall be try by the fire of what sort it be s. Augustine do also apply to prove the same purge fire to remain for some sin or bad work in the in Psal. 31. Enchir. c. 67. and 68 and l. fid. and oper. c. 25. l. 21. civit. c. 21. and 26. next life and these exposition of scripture confirm purgatory deliver by s. Augustine and oftentimes reiterate in his work be never reprehend by any as false nor the father tax as teach any erroneous doctrine dissonant from the doctrine and belief of the catholic church which doubtless he can never have escape have his assertion of purgatory be erroneous live in the age of s. Ambrose s. Hierome and other learned father who want neither learning nor zeal to have both match he and confute he have he swerve in aught from sound faith and the doctrine of their present church and consequent purgatory be then hold for no error or heresy and the like I may abundant prove in many other point both out of s. Augustine and sundry other of like antiquity learning and sanctity 59 final the conclusion of all this main chapter and treatise of sacred scripture must of necessity fall out to be this that not all believe of scripture nor appeal the conclusion of this chapter and consideration unto scripture nor sense of scripture nor presume of the spirit be sufficient to make a man a Christian Catholic for that as have be former note forth of s. Bernard many man presume of God spirit when it be not but their own spirit or rather the spirit of Satan and consequent take or rather mistake their own spirit exposition for the interpretation of the holy ghost again some when they err in expound scripture be notwithstanding of opinion that they follow scripture when indeed they follow their own error so s. Augustine observe 60. three other by a perverse interpretation make of Christ gospel man gospel or that which be worse the devil gospel as s. Hierome note and yet all these with the devil and all former heretic pretend to urge and build upon scripture but no marvel if all these appeal unto scripture upon a false confidence think that the word of God make for they when it make against they for let these scripturian be but mark let they be unmask that be as vincentius Lyrinensis Vincent cont. haer. cap. 36. excellen deliver the observation against they let not only their say but their meaning not their word but their sense of scripture be note than their bitterness shall be detect their madness disclose their a notable speech of vincentius Lyrinensis new poison vent forth their profane novelty reveal then the hedge shall be cut than the bound of father shall be translate than catholic faith shall be violate and the church position cancel hitherto vincentius 61. the only way then to make a man a true christian catholic indeed if all ancient rule and canon of the church fail not be first to admit and reverence that for scripture which the universal catholic church have by lineal descent of tradition deliver and commend unto we for scripture and that after all doubt and controversy discuss about the same and not that which Luther or Calvin who can make and unmake scripture at their pleasure or our own private spirit shall conceit to be scripture and second for the sense and true meaning of the scripture if we have any care of that or imagine that it do import we at all we be no less to stand to the judgement of the say church for the exposition and interpretation thereof than we do before for the deliver of scripture unto we and so much for this chapter the three chapter concern the second point or general head profess by his majesty concern his believe of the three creed receive by the church as the former offer so constant aver by his majesty of England concern the believe of all canonical scripture be a sign and liberal token of a religious inclination zealous affection and pious disposition as before have be intimate and relate even so no less religious zealous and pious be this assertion also here so confident assever by his highness touch the acceptance and admittance of the three ancient creed and that in the very same sense as the ancient father and counsel that make they do understand they for these be his majesty very word which I have think good here to relate wish they to remain upon a everlasting and time-out-wearing record and that for these two principal reason first that I may not undutiful forget to defer and bring the just describe honour and the most high respect commendation unto my sovereign lord the king most due to his grace for this his confession which also out of a true subject love and loyalty towards his prince I can sincere wish may never by any the least cloud of error in his royal understanding be eclipse or obscure and second for that I trust my former brother of the protestantical church of England will either now at last stand to their ground of creed counsel father scripture voluntary choose by the lord and head of their church that hitherto upon my knowledge will never be confine within the list and limit of any even trial or else that my lord the king will easy out of the depth of his judicious understanding unmask and discover these man for such as they be even wolf in sheep clothing false gospeller antichrist deceaver seducer impostor and now to come to the word themselves as they be substantial couch together in his majesty book of premonition they be lay down as follow 2. and now for the point of heretic I will never say he be ashamed to render a account of my profession and that hope that be in i as the apostle prescribe I be such a Catholic Christian as believe the three creed that of the apostle that of the Prem p 3^ council of Nicea and that of athanasius the two late being paraphrase to the former and I believe they in that sense as the ancient-fathers and counsel that make they do understand they to which three creed all the minister of England do subscribe at their ordination and I also acknowledge for orthodoxal those other his majesty honourable offer form of creed that either be devise by counsel or particular father against such particular heresy as most reign in their time hitherto extend the word of his majesty and can any thing be speak more honourable than this this form of confession punctual and so substantial deliver by his highness I can never sufficient commend for that this be so far from savour of any spice of heresy as that here be nothing else but true catholic divinity for what can be more require for more full supplement of a catholic christian man confession then to believe the three creed in the very self same sense as the holy apostle ancient father and general counsel do understand they and now if the minister of England that do subscribe unto they in their ordination will keep and confine themselves within that sense which the ancient christian church do both constant and religious hold and will not of their own fancy presume to add any other new gloss or private interpretation of their own brain the world shall never have see and hear such breach and tumult such uproar and outcry such inundation and innovation and all about religion as now there be 3. but the truth be as s. Augustine affirm aug. l. 3. bapt. cont. donat. cap. 15. a man may hold and profess all the word of the creed he mean the apostle creed and yet not have a true belief of all the article of the say creed nay s. Augustine in his book go yet further say most part of heretic have go about and endeavour under these few word of the apostolical creed to cover their poison heresy so as the believe of these creed in general they contain but capita universal head of thing to be believe be not sufficient to make a man a Christian Catholic except also we give our firm assent unto all the particular that necessary may be reduce or deduce from those general head for better explication whereof I have think it convenient in this place to address certain consideration that here ensue the first consideration as the skilful and careful physician employ no less industry spare neither counsel in physic how the first three creed and why they be ordain and how great they be to be reverence nor prescription in diet for the conserve and continue of the bodily health of his patient until he have bring he to former health and full strength than he do bestow pain and travail in recover he of his infirmity and raise he from the bed of his malady even so the apostle as so many sovereign soul best physician most painful and diligent watch over the soul of man their sick patient to uphold and continue they in christian piety and catholic verity as well as they have cure they of their spiritual leprosy and raise their soul which have long lie sick upon the bed the cause of ordain the apostle creed of heathenish infidelity and all that they may recover full strength in save and believe faith and grow to be perfect and whole man in Christ jesus and here you have the occasion motive drift reason and intention of Christ holy apostle in compile the perfect platform of wholesome faith and christian belief I mean this methodical and apostolical form of creed which involve in it either explicit or implicit in plain word or necessary supply whatsoever belong to the object of our faith and therefore say s. Augustine aug. ser. 181. temp. etc. the holy apostle do deliver a certain rule of faith which rule be comprehend in twelve sentence according to the number of the 12. apostle be call by they by a greek word and borrow metaphor symbolum a symbol or collation of many thing together and their intention as be before intimate be that by this symbol sign and sum of christian faith and doctrine as vincentius Lyrinensis speak of his golden rule of faith deliver unto he from all his ancestor that cap. 2. cont. the truth of catholic faith and verity may be discern from the falsehood of heretical pravity this have our ancestor leave we by tradition and for the first in stitution of it it be in this sort as the history of antiquity the very life of memory have by write register and commend it unto we 5. after the glorious visible ascension of our saviour from the low pitch and vale of the earth misery into the high top of heaven and bosom of his father eternity this being aswell as it be in that great motion of heaven Christ incarnation and man redemption the place whither he ascend as it be the place whence he descend according to that I say after this ascension and descension of the holy ghost in the visible shape of fiery tongue upon the apostle in able they and qualify they with the tongue of nation for the convert of nation than the apostle be ready to separate themselves and to depart into all part of the earth to preach the gospel for the conversion of the whole world they do compose and lay down a perfect platform of their future preach and other believe by devise a certain square rule and canon of faith and that not so much for their own direction be so assist with the inward inspiration of the spirit that they can not possible err in their doctrine though their teach be ever to be conform unto these head as for the christian church instruction and premonition that by have recourse unto these general head of faith commend unto they by the true apostle they may more easy discern and avoid the heretical doctrine of all false disciple wherefore the apostle be assemble together and meet as it be the second time in council be each of they several replenish with the holy ghost and all of they joint direct by the self same never-erring spirit who be both now and ever in such assembly as these to sit as precedent in the church I say be thus prepare every one propose as he believe and all be put together in the upshot do make the shot or symbol of a brief yet entire methodical sum of christian doctrine include all point of faith either to be preach afterwards by the apostle or to be believe by their disciple and this sum do the apostle themselves appoint to be deliver by tradition or from hand to hand unto every one that believe both for a direction unto that which they be to preach and other be to believe as also to discern and put a difference betwixt all faithful christian and misbelieve infidel 6. thus s. Augustine who sense I have keep though I have somewhat dilate upon his word relate the matter which before he have be record by Ruffinus 181. temp in the exposition of this creed so that s. Augustine borrow not only sense but the self same word also for the most part be take from Ruffinus and further the say Ruffinus do add another signification of the word symbol beside a collation or contribution of many thing unto signification of the word symbol or creed one say that it signify also a sign or badge whereby one sort of soldier be distinguish from other and in this acception also of the word it consort well to our present purpose that by this brief sum of doctrine as by a badge or cognisance true catholic Christian man may be distinguish here from infidel and heretic since after death there be such a external distinction and separation to be make and for this purpose at the beginning this creed serve but afterward charity and the love of God and christian piety decay and the malice of man exceed multiply upon the earth this brief and plain sum will not serve the turn against infernal and heretical subtlety for that as s. Augustine before have well observe sundry sort of heretic presume to shrewd their heresy under the article of this creed pervert also the meaning and misunderstand aswell the word thereof as the sense so as in fine the bare and outward profession of believe this creed become at last to be no certain argument of prove a man to be a true christian catholic except other due convince circumstance concur as we have before show of the canonical scripture themselves 7. furthermore the father and doctor of the church do joint affirm and express s. Augustine in the place before cite that albeit the word be few and brief of this creed yet be they so substantial punctual and material as that they contain the full and entire sum of whatsoever be to be believe by we his word be these the great substance of the apostolical creed whatsoever be prefigure in the patriarch whatsoever be denounce in the scripture whatsoever be foretell in the prophet either of God the father unbegotten or of God the son beget or God the holy ghost or of receive any sacrament or of the death of our lord or of the mystery of his resurrection all this be brief contain in this creed so that the observation hence deduce must needs be this that albeit in the bare word of the creed many thing belong to faith be not literal and syllabical express yet be they imply comprehend and intend by the apostle and namely and particular about the admit of sacrament of their nature number necessity efficacy manner of administration and the like as s. Augustine do here expound which yet in the word be not express but be lock up with in the sacred breast and closet of the church as in the safe treasury there to be expound dilate amplify more large and particular unto the faithful as either the church necessity require or heretical pertinacy and importunity oppugn shall at any time or occasion require which exposition of the church as the sound commentary upon the creed he that in all humility of judgement and opinion submit not himself to believe and obey can be true say to believe this creed notwithstanding he shall protest and confess open ten thousand time that he admit all the word and every syllable thereof 8. it be also to be consider that it be most worthy of a christian man his observation especial if he have either care or make any conscience to preserve himself the apostolical creed no scripture and yet necessary to be believe sound in the faith and thereby to save his soul that albeit the ancient father do with uniform verdict affirm that these article of the apostolical creed be set down by the holy apostle replenish and direct with no small measure of the holy ghost as now have be observe I will not stand to discuss at this present whether every several article of the twelve which it contain be set dowue by several apostle though diverse grave and ancient father do affirm it yet be these article never hold for canonical scripture no nor yet be they at this day either by catholic or Protestant and if any man reply that they be consonant unto scripture and may be thence deduce I deny not that only I say this be nothing to argue that authority that they have obtain in the church since that all other writing of orthodox man be both consonant unto scripture and to be deduce from they and yet they be not hold in that esteem as the creed but my consequence that hereupon I infer be this that something must be grant of necessity beside canonical scripture to have be necessary believe in the christian catholic church and that by tradition only without any other foundaation and that from the very beginning of christian religion 9 this appear by the former word of s. Augustine that this creed come down along through the century of the church by tradition and Ruffinus say in his exposition of this creed ruff. in symbolum etc. and therefore do the apostle deliver these thing not write in paper and parchment but to be retain in man heart to the end it may be certain that no man shall by read have the same for that write be accustom to come also into the hand of infidel aswell as christian but that it shall be sufficient to have learn the same from the tradition of the apostle and this be the reason that Ruffinus give of the tradition of the creed 10. the very same have s. Hierome his word be clear say he in the creed that contain our faith and hope which be deliver by tradition from the apostle be not write the force of tradition in the church in paper and ink but in the fleshly table of our heart etc. and all this do evident convince unto the judgement of any understand man that these article of the apostolic creed be deliver by word of mouth unto christian and the church be put in trust with they to teach they unto her child before that any scripture of the new testament be commit to writing and that many thing of great moment about the mystery of christian religion be leave to be understand and expound therein and that according to the wisdom learning and judgement of the whole Catholic church especial concern sacrament which be not express and this be the cause why s. Augustine and other father before he do often reiterate and frequent use that impsove kind of speech Norum the faithful do know what belong unto these matter which purposely they do not reveal unto the ear of new christian least infidel may take any advantage thereby to the disadvantage of the church so as my conclusion of this must of necessity hold correspondence with that former conclusion touch the argument of scripture to wit whosoever he be that never so open and plain profess that he do accept admit and believe this creed of the apostle but refuse the understanding thereof expound by the church and deliver in her sense he believe it not at all to salvation neither shall it avail he any more to admit the word and not receive the sense then if at once and altogether he reject both word and sense 11. and here may some demand but where now shall we be sure to find this exposition of the church esspecial a question solve where the voice of the church may be find in these distract time of schism when so many several sect plead for the church cry out according to Christ his prophetical prediction here be Christ and there be Christ here be the church and there be the pure chospell here be the word true preach and there be the sacrament sincere administer and c to this I answer we shall easy come by this orthodox exposition of the creed if we have recourse unto the public doctrine of the church deliver from age to age even until our time throughout every century of the church and this church be ever visible unless it be unto such as be blind as s. Augustine have already observe 12. s. Ambrose in his time remit we unto the church of Rome the supreme pastor whereof be than siricius for our direction herein say he let faith be give to the apostle creed which the roman church have ever keep and preserve inviolate and yet be this upon the very point of 400. year after Christ his ascension so as in that time and in this great saint and doctor judgement the roman church be then the best and sure direction to know the true content and meaning of this apostolic creed and consequent if our english ministry who at their ordination do subscribe unto this creed will follow also the same direction for the true understanding and sense thereof all matter will quick be reconcile and controversy accord but in default of this and for that pride and self will have so be witch the mind of many that they can in humility stoop down their private censure unto the public judgement of the church it come to pass that this great discord and difference that now be reign betwixt catholic and protestant and among protestant themselves concern the exposition thereof and this shall appear in part in the next ensue consideration of this chapter but yet before we enter into the other consideration we shall speak a word or two of the other creed mention here by his majesty 13. the other creed then be the nieene conclude gratian. as s. Ambrose note with the suffrage of 318. renown father allude to the just number of Abraham soldier when he rescue lot and of s. athanasius and these be write upon occasion of heresy afterward arise and impugn some fundamental point and consequent the creed of the council of nice and of s. athanasius be but explication of the former as his majesty do learned and excellent observe and therefore these do principal depend thereon this be evident if we reflect a little upon the principal subject of the 2. creed for do not they both expound and unfold that high and obstruse mystery of the godhead of Christ his identity and equality of substance power and glory with God his father witness those word add and use in the council of nice about 310. year after Christ conc. Nicen l. 4. p. 565. edit. Venet. God of God light of light very God of very God beget not make be consubstantial to the father etc. witness s. athanasius his creed that be make by he in Rome for confession of his faith some 15. year after that again wherein there be find that exact manner of speech distinguish the person of the bless trinity such as the father be such be the son and such be the holy ghost and then he set down more particular the distinctive appellation and peculiar propriety belong unto every person as the father unbegotten the son beget of the father the holy ghost proceed asmuch as if in plain term he have say the father distinguish with this personal propriety of beget a son be a father and no son the son distinguish with his personal propriety of be beget be a son and not a father the holy ghost distinguish by his personal propriety of proceed be a holy ghost and neither father nor son 14. by all which we see the exceed great authority of the church in determine these different manner of speech in disclose this ineffable and inutterable mystery of the trinity which be not find at all in the scripture and therefore be deny by the scripturian heretic for as learned hosius note and it be the observation of s. Ambrose against one only article of our saviour consubstantiality with his father they allege 50. place of scripture I mean the arian who Ambros. hos. do bear great sway and insinuate themselves into the favour of the emperor for the better support of their damnable heresy as the protestant do creep into the favour of our king at this day for the uphold of their error and therefore great pity it be that the protestant and arian have not live in one age together that they may have join hand each one with another who do so near resemble each one the other in their behaviour and manner of proceed 15. well then we see that the former mystery of the deity and trinity can be determine by no other power and authority upon earth then by that supreme power of the church for that express warrant of scripture there be none in their pretence for many of these word that be now use and frequent by the church in the explication of these creed be not then in use but invent and apply afterwad by the church according to the present necessity and yet notwithstanding have they be so acknowledge and receive ever since by all Christendom that the authority of the church in that behalf determine and expound have stand inviolable and such as have not admit the same have ever be repute and account for wicked and damn heretic and this be to be note with attention as before I have partly touch in general that albeit the council of nice represent the whole christian church of that age do not nor can not make any new article of belief that be not true before but only do more full and plain explain and declare such thing as the impudence and importunity of heretic call into doubt and question so do not the say council explain all that belong to the divine person for they leave at I believe in the holy ghost and there break of not unfold any thing particular the great authority leave in the church for decide controversy touch the procession of the holy ghost from the father and the son about which there be afterward so great strife and contention and be to this day with the late obstinate greek affirm the same person to proceed only from the father and not from the son but leave that by God providence to be expound afterwards by other counsel when that point shall be call into question and so it be so that it be more than evident unto every one that will not wilful shut his eye against the clear sun shine of truth that there be leave continual power in the church to explain and determine with authority and that irrefragable and unresistible any doubt never so weighty about the person of the trinity or any other article of belief or any other high point of divine mystery that shall arise among christian and that unto the world last end and every one under pain of damnable obedience against Christ spouse and the holy spirit the director thereof be bind to submit and captivate his judgement and understand thereto and not to stand in contention against the same and thus much of these three creed in general how they be to be reverence now let we descend unto the several article and position thereof in particular the second consideration now succeed our second consideration about the examine of certain particular of these three that the minister of England believe notwholy and entire the faith of the 3. creed creed how they be receive and believe you have hear before how the minister of the church of England do subscribe unto the same at their ordination now let we examine whether this english clergy notwithstanding all their subscription thereunto do indeed true believe they and expound they in the self same sense interpretation and meaning as the general counsel and ancient father that collect they mean they as they do persuade his majesty they do a man will think that so solemn a oath take before a ecclesiastical judge at the tribunal of the church and that for preservation of religion and conseruaaion of the integrity of ancient faith lay down in ancient creed and general counsel shall religious bind before God and man people of their quality and condition but behold heresy that neither fear God nor revetence man observe no band at all but draw every thing to every man particular judgement and censure and therefore it do little avail the minister of the church of England to reverence and receive the word of the creed whilst they reject the church sense and true meaning of the same to swear unto they in word by subscription at their ordination but to forswear they in deed by a perverse and sinister interpretation and exposition and this God willing shall be make good against they in the subsequent consideration direct and address for this especial purpose 17. first than it be set down and denounce in the creed of s. athanasius read every sunday in the english church by order of the communion book that Whosover no salvation without believe the whole catholic say entire do not believe whole and inviolable the catholic faith shall without doubt perish everlasting by which catholic faith he understand the whole catholic faith and every article or point thereof not only of those article which he there set down principal against the arian and other heresy as do also the council of nice for that otherways some man may object and say that the nine article of the apostle creed I believe in the holy Catholic church the commumon of saint which s. athanasius mention not be no article of belief and that a man may be save without the faith thereof especial for so much as the say article with the other three next ensue to wit I believe the remission of sin the resurrection of the flesh and life everlasting together with the five article he descend into hell all which be permit by the Nicen creed do not belong to the integrity of the whole Catholic faith which be a heathenish absurdity to imagine 18. s. athanasius then as also that ancient orthodox council of nice albeit they set down and expound those article in their creed which the church necessity instant require to be explain in those time against the heresy which then most infest and trouble the church yet be they joint ever of this opinion and belief that whosoever do not believe all and every point of the whole catholic faith and that that be both firm and faithful as s. athanasius his word be shall most certain be damn everlasting and conform unto this I have show before in the first chapter of this book the uniform consent severity of all antiquity that any the least heresy or error defend obstinate and with pertinacity against the church be it but one sentence word syllable nay letter be sufficient to cast a man out of the bosom of the church unity into heretical pravity and diabolical novelty and consequent to bring a man unto everlasting perdition and destruction both of body and soul and this we have already prove by the verdict of s. athanasius s. Basill s. Nazianzen s. Hierome s. Augustine and other which s. Augustine in the very close period of his book of heresy direct to quodvult Deus pronounce bold and denounce confident against all heretic and heresy that whosoever do hold any one of these heresy register in that book of he or any other that shall spring up afterwards he can be a catholic christian and consequent can be save for that he hold not the whole catholic faith entire and inviolable 19 and now to descend from the general to the protestant do not receive the whole faith but mingle with many heresy special and to make just proof of all the former accusation and imputation lay upon the clergy of England first the minister of that church do stiff hold sundry of those heresy which s. Augustine have record for heresy and as condemn of the church in his time in that book of his before cite 20. and for example it can be gainsay but they deny all external sacrifice and prayer for the dead with the heretic aerius this be one heresy and a capital one too if we do believe s. Augustine second the protestant fall into another heresy of aerius for they deny that solemn fast appoint by the church be not to be observe but that every man shall fast when he will lest he may seem to be under the law these be the word of s. Augustine out of epiphanius and be not this the very speech of our minister and preacher of England at this day nay I have hear some of they myself proceed so earnest in their rail humour against this sacred and angelical abstinence that they have not stick to condemn the holy time of Lent as popish and superstitious tend quite to the overthrow of man health and bodily constitution and therefore that the author thereof say they want wisdom and discretion for institute it in such a time of the year as the spring be when man his body require the best and pure nutriment 20. three there be also record by s. Augustine haeres. 69. the heresy of the donatist that affirm that the universal church be whole corrupt and perish except only among their follower and do not the protestant to avoid the judgement of the church utter the same contumelious slander at this day condemn all other to justify themselves 21. again do not the protestant fall into the heresy of the jovinianist as it be register by the same s. Augustine haeres. 88 that hold the equality of sin and do equal marriage with virginity and thereupon be the cause diverse ancient heresy hold now by protestant say s. Augustine that diverse sacred virgin consecrate to God by the holy and lawful vow of sacred single life leave their profession and marry and be not this also practise and defend by protestant at this day do they not deny all evangelical counsel of perfection delude scripture and reject father though never so many never so pregnant for prove and convince of this witness a treatise late publish by a former * * m Humfrey Liech minister of your church in defence of the doctrine of evangelical counsel not long since preach by he in the university of Oxford 22. I pretermit the heresy of the manichee that deny free-will and of the novatian who will not grant that priest have authority in the church to remit sin all which ancient heresy with many more which I purposely omit be hold in like manner in some degree or other yea defend with great resolution by our english minister they can be account to believe entire and inviolable the Catholic faith and creed which condemn all these for heresy 23. and furthermore if beside this we will but consider the variety and multiplicity of other new sect of these our day with which our english minister do participate and make open profession to communicate as with their brother we shall discern clear that they can so much as pretend to hold the sincere integrity of one only faith and the reason be for that they have ever hitherto admit for brother and man of one faith the lutheran for example who express condemn they for heretic and profess in the open ear of the world themselves to dissent real from they in diverse weighty and capital point as touch the real presence the person of Christ justification free-will the law the gospel and many other more of like nature as by their own book and writing do appear and how then may they be say to agree with the sense and meaning of s. athanasius his creed which pronounce damnation against all such as do not faithful and firm hold the whole entire catholic faith without any violation in any one article at all and so let we pass unto the two other creed to wit unto that of the council of Nicea and the apostolical 24. in the nicene creed for the better and further explication of Christ his godhead and equality with his father against the arian heresy there be certain word purposely devise and set down by the say council and they be these that follow that be God of God light of light true God of true God beget not make be of one substance with the father etc. by all which word the meaning of the sacred council be not only to prove the about the nicene creed equality of godhead betwixt the father and the son most blasphemous impugn and deny by the arian but further to illustrate the very identity of essence immediate sole and whole communicate from the father unto the son in his eternal generation and therefore do those thrice bless father call Christ to intimate thus much unto our understanding for the better comprehend of that mystery that as a light import his whole full and perfect light unto another and yet retain the whole in itself even so in that mystical and inscrutable generation of God the son beget of God the father the father as a light impart unto the son as a another light in regard of his distinctive personal substance his whole light that be his whole entire nature essence substance and godhead without section division motion mutation or alteration in the father according to that of s. Nazianzen prescribe against a certain curious heretic too busy in this point (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) cast away thy fluxion thy division and section let the generation of God be reverence with silence and yet the father retain the whole in himself this form and manner of speech so material and methodical set down by this great council and that doubtless by the immediate instinct and apparent assistance of the holy ghost against so great enemy of the sacred person and divinity of our saviour as the in epist. Polonos and l. cont. arian be m. John Calvin fall into the old vain of his arianize humour as doctor Hunnius prove do utter mislike and condemn and presume to censure it thus that it be improper and hardly speak in the creed that the son of God be God of God light of light very God of very God beget not make consubstantial to the father etc. affirm moreover (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) that be that Christ be God of himself and not God of God the father but may not I say and have therein the whole christian world to bear i out that it be catholick speak by the father and heretical change by John Calvin 25. and though here his disciple will go about to free 2. lib. Christ c. 19 their master by urge cardinal Bellarmine his defence for he in a certain place of his work wherein he excuse the say Calvin in some part of his meaning and sense yet poor and miserable be the defence for that the cardinal express condemn the manner of Calvin his speech as Calvin his autotheisme heretical heretical and intolerable proud and it be heretical say he because it contradict the scripture it be intolerable proud it impugn general counsel and resist the uniform consent of all pious and religious antiquity thus the cardinal to who I remit the judicious reader for more ample and learned proof of the same the three consideration our three and last consideration of this present chapter in what particular article of the creed english protestant do not agree with we shall insist upon sundry article of the apostle creed in particular wherein the minister of England that make a profession and that by subscription to admit the whole creed as it lie do notwithstanding differ from the sense interpretation and exposition of ancient church and to exemplify some particular article the five article be Christ descend into hell which the ancient father do understand literal as it lie for so all the article of the creed be literal to be expound to wit that our saviour Christ after the consummation of our redemption by the precious blood of his passion leave his body in the sepulchre he descend victorious like a triumphant conqueror of death Satan and all the power of hell with his soul into the low part of the earth show and exhibit himself thereby a conqueror of death and deliver from thence diverse prisoner and namely the soul of the ancient father patriarch and prophet who ardent expect his come to open unto they the gate of heaven according to that in the hymn of which be in word acknowledge by the church of England when thou have overcome the sharpness of death thou do open the kingdom of heaven to all believer 27. thus the ancient church understand this article as may be easy prove by consent of all antiquity that expound it so for first the four council about Christ descend into hell of Toledo cap. 1. and the Lateran gather under innocentius the three expound the article so as appear by their word plain to that purpose Christ descend into hell that he may deliver the soul which be detain there 28. second thaddeus one of Christ 70. disciple who as he live in the very time of the apostle so be it most like nay it can not be otherways but he know the apostolical sense of this article and yet he as Eusebius record deliver the sense thus Christ descend lib. 1. hist. cap. ult. into hell and break down the partition-wall which no man have break from the foundation of the world who indeed descend alone but ascend with a great multitude which be suppose then have you the testimony of one of Christ holy disciple and no doubt inspire with the spirit of God for warrant of this doctrine 29. with Thaddaus agree Ignatius another great saint and martyr that live immediate after the apostle and have conversation with some of they say in epist. Trallian the same father Christ descend into hell alone but he ascend with a great multitude with these two so ancient so apostolical man accord justinus martyr a ancient and renown author in the self same age next after the apostle who in his conference or dispute Triphone judaeo for so be his dialogue entitle complain of the impiety of the jew for raze forth the testimony of Hieremy where our lord be say to descend to hell that he may deliver his dead thence 30. and now with these three do all antiquity consent to wit s. irenaeus in his five book towards the end Clemens lib. 6. Origen in his 15. homily upon genesis his 2. book against Celsus and 5. book upon the roman Eusebius lib. 4. demonst. evang. cap. 12. s. Cyril of jerusalem Cateches 4. Christ descend into hell that he may deliver his just from thence s. athanasius and in diverse other place of his work s. Basil upon the 14. psalm and 48. s. Gregory nissen in his first oration s. Gregory Nazianzen 2. Paschate epiphanius in anchor s. Cyril Theodosium and Theodoret upon the 15. psalm 31. to these greek father I may add these Latin Tertullian in his book cap. 31. 32. Hippolytus the martyr in s. cyprian in his sermon s. Hilary upon the psalm 138. and in his 10. book 6. the exod. Prudentius he 9 and 10. s. Ambrose cap. 3. 4. and cap. 10. upon the roman and 4. to the ephesian 3. of Eccles. and upon the 9 chap. of Zachary Ruffinus upon his exposition of the creed s. Augustine epist. 47. dardanum the first question and infinite other place of his work s. Leo sermon the first lib. 3. 23. Vigilius the martyr in his book against Eutiches the subdeacon in his first book upon the act the 2. chapter s. Gregory in the 13. book of his morales cap. 20. and 21. upon the psalm beda in his three book upon job the 7. chapter all these and many other may be allege as all consent about the literal meaning of this article 32. and yet do the protestant of our unhappy time differ from all these in the understanding of this article of Christ his descent into hell though they do profess to admit the whole creed and among the rest the very word of this article of the creed for some of they by descend into hell understand that he descend into his sepulchre this be the opinion of Bucer that be Regius professor Bucer in cap. 27. matth. and public reader of divinity in Cambridge in king Edward the six his day and the same hold Beza in his commentary upon the second chapter of the act of the apostle and Calvin himself mislike not this interpretation in his commentary upon the 15. psalm where he interpret these word thou shall not leave my soul in hell thus thou shall not leave my soul in the grave or but how improbable a interpretation this be each man of common reason will discern for who ever hear that soul be shut up in sepulchre 33. but m. Calvin after his fashion persist not long in in this but nath another more solemn interpretation in Calvin horrible opinion about the article of Christ descension into hell cal. 2. inst. c. 16. 6. 8. 9 10. 11. 12. his second book of institution and in diverse other book of he and the exposition be this that Christ do suffer the very self same pain of hell itself and all the torment of the damn in his soul upon the cross as fear despair distrust horror and the like by apprehend God his heavenly father to be angry with he and in this Calvin be so confident that he fear not to go further and to blaspheme and say that without this his corporal death have be to no purpose say he nothing have be item in iten psych. item in cap. 27. math. effect if Christ have only die a corporal death and so according to this interpretation of Calvin Christ bodily death on the cross do not deliver we without these pain of Christ soul and yet say he the soul go not down local to any place of punishment for this do he not only deride say there be no such place but especial do he hold it for a fable as present we shall see but rather endure as he affirm and suffer the 2. inst. cap. 16. @. 10. pain of hell and of the damn as be before say but the truth be this be a blasphemous speech and quite overthrow the whole mystery of our redemption for let we search the scripture from the Alpha to the Omega from the begin of genesis or book of creation to the end of that mystical book of s. john revelation and we shall not only find not any the like speech to this but the clean contrary in infinite place all and every where ascribe the whole mystery of our redemption to Christ his precious bloodshed and bodily passion and unto this will every indifferent protestant easy subscribe and yield 34. and now touch his contemptuous censure of all antiquity in the point of Limbus which be the place where the soul of the ancient father and patriarch remain and be detain until Christ resurrection say he 2. c. 16. @. 9 this fable of Limbus or prison of the father for who deliverance they recount Christ to have descend albeit it have great author that make for it yet be it nought else but a fable 35. and who be these author who m. Calvin both account great and yet reject but those principal who before we have name pillar of the church in the primitive age and do ever any man since the first foundation of christian religion speak so of all the light learning piety devotion and religion of all the whole christian world together this one wretched impostor except 36. thus than we see that Calvin though in word he admit this article of the creed yet he dissent from a story of the contention of english minister about the descent of Christ into hell all antiquity in the exposition thereof now as for the church of England what they hold therein it be hard to say though many and sore conflict there have be among minister and preacher of my quality for many year together about the exposition of the article he descend into hell only two memorable thing I call to mind that pass there in my time in diverse part of that kingdom and all about the exposition of that article which here I have think good historical as it be to interlace the first be in manner as follow it happen that some dozen year since I light by chance upon a certain exercise for so the brother call it hold by a certain number of minister of the pure strain as usual these kind of exercise be the town where this meeting of minister be be call maxfield in the very uttermost skirt and confine of Cheshire and the text then and there treat upon by the brother be the psalmist prophetical prediction of Christ descension into hell as it be mention Psal. 15. v 8. and repeat again act. 2. v. 27. quonian Psal. 15. because thou shall not leave my soul in hell and the place be very pregnant for prove the point the bench be set the minister each in time and order speak but God know how few wise and true word be speak among they the first start up and expound it of Christ his suffering upon the cross a second understand it of the grave a three extend it to Christ his suffering of hell torment in soul and the four yet add and interpret it of Christ be in the state of the dead the moderator for such a one they have in all their exercise he as wise as the rest instead of mend all he mar all for he commend all approve all and receive all and then fall out into a wonderful admiration of the diversity of the gift of the spirit that every one of his fellow labourer in the gospel shall have his several exposition and yet all to agree and all to be intend by the holy church but this be just according to Tertullian his prescription Tertul. prescript it import not among heretic though so many man be of so many mind whilst they can conspire to impugn one truth and do not so many several and erroneous exposition band against one true meaning of the article forcible make good this prescription and note of Tertullian 37. and for my part as then so now I be of absolute opinion that if all my brother and their moderator with they have be as far out of the town as they be every one of they from the truth of the text and meaning of the holy ghost in that place they will never more have return either to wife or cure or make such a other fanatical exposition tend only to the overthrow of the article 38. but yet my second observation go far beyond all this and for the novelty and absurdity of the exposition it deserve to be register in the record of eternal memory that all the world may take notice of the palpable blindness of heresy and it be of diverse stipendiary preacher who as they several succeed one the other in a very eminent place of that kingdom so they diverse expound the article one of they expound it of hell torment in Calvin sense a second succeed of the grave in Beza his meaning the three and last because he will be sure to prove himself a heretic he find out such a exposition as be never hear of before unless it be by one jacob a turbulent and schismatical spirit that oppose himself against the bishop of I say no more touch this article his exposition in plain word be this Christ descend into hell that be say he he ascend into heaven a strange and ridiculous exposition of the article and this he think he prove substantial out of the greek word (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) which say he signify no more than that Christ go (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) that be say he to a invisible place and this must be proportion according to the dignity of the person and consequent must be heaven for what place can be fit for the son of God be thus in the state of the dead but heaven and so as before his conclusion for a full and perfect exposition of this article be he descend into hell that be he ascend into heaven and be not this as Luther merry gibe at the canonical exposition of as if a man take upon he to interpret this text God create heaven and earth shall interpret it thus acroked staff be make a kite or the cuckoo do eat up the kitling bone and all for certain I be there be as much truth and correspondency betwixt the one as the other oh miserable preacher o thrice miserable people that thus suffer their eye to be put out and their soul to be delude beguile and betray by such heretical impostor 39 and now to proceed forward and to see what the church of England do hold in this point m. Thomas Roger minister of Horninger and chaplain to the lord of Canterbury have take upon he to set forth in print of late the faith doctrine and religion process and protect in England for so be his word in 36. article agree upon as he say by the bishop and clergy of England when he come unto this article he seem not to know what to say for have lay forth this article of Christ descent into hell he have these word that Christ go down into hell say tho. Rogers in his 39 article pag. 15. 16. etc. he all sound christian both in former time and now live do acknowledge howbeit in the interpretation of the article there be not that consent that be to be wish and so after he have set down diverse opinion of other forget to put down his own he pass and post the matter over in such sort as that no man can tell what they of England do hold or what it be that be agree upon by the bishop or whether they hold any thing at all though in the title of the church of England adversary to many of her own for many hold that Christ descend not into hell at all his book he do promise to set down 39 article uniform agree upon by the say bishop and clergy belike he find no concord or agreement in this behalf only he recount the adverse opinion which he hold for opposite error and adversary to the truth and then go on further he say but until we know the native and undoubted sense of this article and mystery of christian religion we persist adversary unto they that say that Christ descend not into hell at all or that Christ descend into the place of everlasting torment or endure in soul the pain of damn spirit etc. which opinion you have hear now to have be partly of Calvin partly of other protestant so as with they the church of England hold not nor yet with the papist say he for that present he add for a opposite error unto they that Christ in soul go down into limbo lake to fetch from thence Thaddaeus Ignatius justinus martyr irenaeus and all antiquity be dream papist in m. Roger definitive opinion the soul of our forefather which soul say he before Christ death as papist dream be shut up in the close prison of hell now then to reflect upon the premise and out of they to infer the conclusion the illation must needs be this though all part do in word admit this article of Christ his descent into hell yet do they great differ in the sense and the minister of England as it seem have no certain faith therein at all neither do they ascribe so much assistance of the holy ghost to their church which the true church can never want as to be able to explain the native and undoubted sense of this article and mystery of christian religion to use m. Roger word so as their belief herein be only negative as their whole religion be which be to believe that all other be deceive beside themselves and yet do they affirm nothing in particular and let this suffice for this article 40. let we now a little cast about and take a view of the nine article in order as the creed natural branch it and it be this etc. I believe the holy catholic church the word of this article be agree upon on all part but the sense frame thereupon and believe of different christian be most different and repugnant for first those of the roman and true catholic religion do according to the exposition of ancient father which be a most certain and infallible rule of their faith understand by this catholic church that visible congregation of the first believe the visible beginning of the catholic church christian gather together in Jerusalem at the time of our bless saviour his ascension at which assembly the holy apostle themselves who make this article be present together with the bless virgin mother of God and other holy man and woman upon who the holy ghost descend enlighten they and inflame they to preach the name of Christ and further establish and confirm they in the truth encourage they to go forward manful without fear of any opposite human power and promise they that the power of Christ and assistance of the same holy ghost shall be with they and the director of they unto the world end to preserve this church and holy congregation in all necessity and extremity so that the gate of hell and damnable error shall never prevail against it 41. moreover the say catholic christian do ever understand this church to be call holy in respect both of the great sanctity of her doctrine and the holiness of many of her child who beside the precept of the law as s. Gregory speak nay over and above the precept of the law as s. Basill and s. Chyrsostome joint speak lib. 25. in ob. c. 24. 5. shall endeavour to transcend the precept of the law by devote themselves unto the observation of Christ his high counsel of evangelical perfection 42. also this church be call holy for the immediate and perpetuate assistance of the holy ghost inspire she inward direct she outward and especial for the mean of sanctification convey unto she through the conduct of her sacrament as chief and most holy instrument to that effect confer grace for our assistance in the perform of all good work whereof none can be partaker to salvation out of this church 43. this church be also call catholic for the reason before set down in the first chapter and first consideration to wit that it be universal spread over the world by the ministry of the apostle in the very beginning and so have hitherto continue still and ever shall to the world end and further it have these sign and mark to be know by and to be distinguish from all heretical congregation whatsoever to wit antiquity universality union and succession by descent of bishop and final for full complement it have that communion of saint both by union in faith and communion of sacrament which no other schismatical conventicle or heretical congregation have and out of this communion there can be no possibility of life or salvation Vincent Lyrinensis harese c. 3. Tertull. prescript cap. 32. all this and much more which here I be constrain to omit do those of the roman religion understand by this article I believe in the holy catholic church the communion of saint and it will require a whole volume to set down the several sentence discourse and authority of ancient father that joint concur in this exposition and explanation 44. but now on the other side if we cast our eye upon the state of the english clergy we shall find that the protestant mean about this 9 article howsoever they do admit the same in word yea and subscribe thereunto in their ordination for that they teach their rligion to follow their state as their state bring in their religion yet exceed great be the difference and large be their conscience in understand the same as may appear in part out of the 19 article publish by m. Rogers as agree upon by our english bishop concern the church about which he have seven several proposition first agree in some of they somewhat with the catholic and they have learn it from the catholic religion and as their usual practice be and then make their own choice to dissent and disagree at their pleasure as the enure custom of all heretic have ever be 45. his first proposition than be this there be a church 1. of Christ not only invisible but also visible whereto suppose he to understand of the true catholic church for otherwise he say nothing we do also agree as their bishop late proposition of the protestat about the church in like manner may be suppose to do and yet can I speak this upon my own knowledge that it be against the common know tenant and practice of their academical school for there the question be among the most forward protestant whether the true church be invisible and yet be hold affirmitive to wit Rogers ar. 19 pag. 86. that it be invisible and not visible to mansey for the visibility of the church tend to flat popery which they can endure 46. his second proposition be that there be but one church 2. which we affirm also and they from we have learn so to speak and yet I do not see how the Protestant Puritan and other sectary lutheran and sacramentary can make one church they differ so fundamental among themselves and in such weighty point of faith and religion as they do 47. his three assertion be the visible church be a Catholic church 3. m. Rogers will have say or at least wise shall have say that the catholic be a visible church and the reason be for that all visible church be not catholic but all Catholic church be visible and what be the reason of this his incongruity of speech I do not see unless he mean thereby to steal the name of catholic unto every visible congregation of sectary which be clear overthrow by the definition and large explication of the word catholic set down in the first chapter 48. his four proposition be the word of God be and 4. for time be before the church which be understand of the scripture or write word for otherwise it be nothing to our purpose it contain in it a senseless and gross absurdity for thereupon it will follow that before Moses time the first writer of the bible which be more than two thousand year after the creation of man God have no church because there be extant no write word or scripture which be very ridiculous to affirm but the only refuge that I can possible perceive that m. Rogers have leave he to make good his four assertion in prove the word of God more ancient than the church be to fly to the unwritten word but this will not serve his turn neither since we have only in this place to do with the literal or write word of God begin by Moses the first pen man of the holy ghost and so successive upon sundry occasion continue 49. m. Rogers his first proposition be that the mark 5. mark of the church and token of their visible church be the due and true administration of the word and sacrament but these mark be not admit by the catholic but worthy reject for that they be as hard and obscure to find out and as much controvert as the thing itself whereof they shall be mark for that all part yea all sect and heresy do pretend to have due and true administration of the word and sacrament and it be as hard a matter to determine this controversy as the other viz. to find out which be the true church but the mark of antiquity universality unity and succession before mention and give by catholic for such be tertullians 1400. year ago when he write that excellent book of prescription and vincentius Lyrinensis 1200. year since to take away your late imputation and denomination of Papist unto catholic be so clear and evident in themselves that present they will distinguish betwixt one church and another betwixt roman catholic and all heretical sectary and albeit some sectary be press therewith will pretend to have these mark in their church and will set a good face upon the matter and challenge they also yet be these word out before they be aware for the matter be so evident against they they present give over their claim they be content to hold hand of run to other obscure mark the common plea of all condemn heretic of the due and true administration of the word and sacrament when God wot they have neither word nor sacrament according to the catholic integrity and sincerity 50. m. Rogers six proposition about the church be that the visible church to wit the true and Catholic church 6. may and have from time to time err both in doctrine and conversation which assertion the Catholic in his sense do hold for so blasphemous and absurd yea ridiculous also as nothing can be more for if this be true that the true visible catholic church spread over the whole christian world can err and induce into error then be there no surety or certainty in the world no not in the promise of Christ and his apostle who assure we the contrary 51. but let we take a view of m. Roger proof out of scripture for confirm this his six assertion which ridiculous proof that the church may err sure be so fantastical and impertinent for any consequence to be draw from they so absurd in reason and ridiculous in religion that no man of judgement or conscience can read they without indignation and laughter as by the view will appear for thus he set they down in his own word only I will add the inference upon every probation out of scripture his first place be take heed matth. 24. 4. therefore the church may err believe it not matth. 23. 26. therefore the church may err beware of the leaven of the Pharisee and of the leaven of Herod mar. 8. 15. therefore the church may err many shall be deceive yea the very elect be it possible matth. 24. 11. therefore the church may err shall he find faith upon the earth luc. 18. 8. therefore the church may err we know in part 1 cor. 13. 12. therefore the church may err beware of dog therefore the church may err beware of evil work beware of concision philip. 3. v. 2. therefore the church may err God shall send they strong illusion that they shall believe lie 2. thess. 9 10. therefore the church may err and be not this a sound proof out of the scripture 52. these be those clear text that m. Rogers bring forth to prove that the universal christian visible catholic church for that only we now treat of may be deceive and have err determine matter of doctrine and yet as you see here be not one word that be speak or may be apply to the say universal catholic church but only caveat give to the church to beware of particular deceaver heretic pharisee Herod and the like and consequent these place be so idle urge and so absurd apply by the author that I shall waste time in spend any more labour about peruse they any further only one of his place I will but touch in one word many say Christ shall be deceive yea the very elect if it be possible out of which place for the overthrow of m. Roger proposition and infer the clean contrary assertion I reason thus and let tribunal umpire betwixt we both which be the better and fit consequence deduce out of this place if it be impossible that the elect shall be deceive though many be deceive than the church comprehend the elect as a part of she can be beceive for truth itself have speak it and this be the true meaning of those word if it be possible etc. the like consequence I will infer out of all the rest but the place be so absurd and against all common sense and reason urge that they be not long to be stand upon 53. the like miserable course or rather more pitiful if possible it may be do he take to prove the second part of his proposition which be that the say catholic visible church may err in determine matter of life and manner for that be the question and not his idle word of err in conversation and first he do allege the word of Christ iniquity shall be increase and the love of many shall wax can matth. 24. 12. therefore the church may err in determine matter of life and manner second he cite that of s. Paul restore etc. lest thou also be tempt gal. 6. 1. therefore the church may err in determine matter of life and manner three I do not the good thing which I will but the evil which I will not that do I if I do that which I will not it be no more I that do it but the sin that dwell in i rom. 7. 19 20. therefore the church may err in determine matter of life and manner four there be a fight even in the best man and member of Christ rom. 7. 23 therefore the church may err in determine matter belong to life and manner for this must be his conclusion out of every one of these place as his former of doctrine be out of the other and be not these goodly argument to prove his assertion his assertion as you have often hear be that the visible catholic church may err in determine matter belong to manner to wit in define and final determine this be good that be bad this be lawful that unlawful and the like and he come in with his misapply text to prove that particular man may have infirmity in they and fight of their passion or concupiscence do he not hit the nail on the head think you 54. but now last let we come to his seven and last exposition upon this article of the creed the church of Rome say he have most shameful err in life ceremony and matter of say this he shall have prove according Roger p. 96. as he undertake in other article from the warrant of divine writ but here he leave God word and run to poet that say mare etc. Rome love boy as who will say that this horrible and execrable sin if it be or have be in Rome be not also in other city of the world or as if this alone be sufficient to prove his purpose if he can show that there be many lewd liver in Rome the thing he ought to prove be this that the whole church of Rome that be to say the catholic roman church spread over the whole world acknowledge Rome for the chief head and member thereof have err from her public decree set forth to be deliver throughout the whole church either for position of faith or direction of manner for this only be the point in controversy and not whether any man have live loose in Rome or any pope have be naughty man or may be hereafter so as for the point controvert he bring not one word of proof and all that he have scrape together of spiteful slander and contumelious reproach against diverse pope and other prelate of that city as in consequence of argument they be nothing to the purpose nor can make any inference at all against the matter in question so be they in fact prove by diverse catholic author to be shameful lie contrary to the testimony lib. Pont. cap. 8. cap. 15. of the best and most authentical author that have write whereof the reader may see effectual proof in Bellarmine and other that do answer those slander against Rome 55. now than we see how out of this one article of the apostle creed which all part do admit what different doctrine there be draw by different exposition and I may show the same in sundry other article as namely in that which ensue immediate after I believe the remission of sin which article those of the roman faith do understand according as the ancient father do and this be not only of the remission of sin by our saviour his passion and grace thereby merit to this effect but also of the ordinary mean leave by our say saviour in the church for ordinary remission of sin and namely by faith and baptism for such as enter first into the church and the holy sacrament of penance which be according as ancient father do call it the second table of the soul after baptism ship wrack for such as sin after baptism and other sacrament all which sacrament and other mean to this effect do work their effect in the power and virtue of the say passion of our saviour so hold the catholic but the Protestant that come forth with a not imputation say that this remission of sin consist only in this that they be not impute and consequent draw a far other sense upon this article so as I must perforce conclude with that which often have be say and repeat that it be not sufficient to admit these creed in word as the minister of England be say to do in their ordination but the true sense and meaning be especial to be stand upon which meaning be far dissonant from the understanding of the know catholic church as late we have show their oral and verbal admission of the say creed can be sufficient to make they Christian catholic or deliver they from the imputation of be heretic for that this very choice and election which they do make of particular sense and interpretation of the article of these creed opposite unto our former rule and consideration before set down at large proper and effectual convince they to be heretic indeed and so much of this matter for the present the four chapter concern the approbation and allowance of the four general counsel which be the three general head of trial offer and propose by his excellent majesty of England as in the former two ground of believe canonical scripture and admit the three usual creed and that only upon the church public tradition his majesty have give forth a declaration unto the whole christian world of his confident persuasion of be a Christian Catholic and no heretic even so in this three general head I mean in the admit and receive of the four first general counsel his royal grace have not only continue and persevere in the former declaration of his good intention and persuasion but have further and much more ratify and confirm the same as appear by these his word where he write I reverence and admit say he the four first general counsel as catholic and orthodox and the say general counsel be pag. 35. acknowledge by our act of parliament and receive for orthodox by our church in which word though I must ingenuous confess that I can retain the least scruple or doubt of the sincerity and candour of his majesty meaning but that according to his noble apprehension and the information give he by his doctor he do indeed for his princely part and person reverence and admit the four first general counsel and will be ready like a pious meaning prince to receive all the particular point of faith conclude therein when they shall be discover unto he yet since this parliamentary admission of counsel be then ground of all and must prove the admit and reject of they either good or bad on the church of England behalf my first demand shall be but this what have lay parliament to do with religion what business make they with the counsel of the church who design unto they this authority to alter chop and change religion at their pleasure upon what ground do they admit some counsel and reject other especial have exclude from parlamentall suffrage all their catholic bishop and clergy man as it be evident they do the thing remain yet register upon authentical record and fresh in the memory of many now live when at the first and second lie parliament in the first year of the late queen they banish Catholic religion out of the land 2. but suppose these four counsel to be admit and receive if we consider how these counsel indeed be acknowledge by our act of parliament how reverence and in what manner receive for catholic and orthodox by our english congregation at this day we shall be so far from justify the Protestant parliamentary admission of these counsel or any other of their action whatsoever though never so outward veil and cover with a colourable show of piety as that in how the parliament and church of England do admit the first four general counsel very deed we shall discover nought else throughout the passage of their whole proceed but fraud imposture collusion dissimulation hypocrisy and heresy which to make good against they in the particular carriage and passage of this present business of counsel let we but leave the barky rind and outward cork and enter into the inward marrow and substance that be let we give no credit to their word but look into their deed and we shall easy discern yea the matter will disclose itself for to set their word aside who we have ever find contrary in their deed if the church of England do sincere embrace and receive for catholic and orthodox these four first general counsel which do resemble comprehend and present the whole primitive church for more than four hundred and fifty year together after Christ then must it follow if they mean as they say and that their word shall not prove wind that the english church and our lay parliament must acknowledge and admit also that doctrine for Catholic and orthodox which without impeachment or contradiction of any can be substantial prove to have be teach and hold in this visible universal church whereof these four council collective represent the whole body for all that tyme which foresay doctrine that both it and every point thereof pass for so many age uncontrolled this one reason may suffice to prove instead of all for that the say doctrine shall otherwise have be note espy out reprehend and censure by some of these counsel else have they not do their duty neither have they be so vigilant for the good of the whole body as they ought to have be if have condemn some heresy as they do they have wink at other which once to imagine of a Ambrose a Augustine and a Hierome for the latin church a Basill a Chrysostome and a athanasius for the greek nay to suppose it and that confident though most impudent of all the great saint and learned doctor in the world together this can be no less than senseless absurdity gross stupidity yea heathenish impiety when as the least of these which I have name be for learning able to have resist the whole christian world and for their zeal will have spare none in a point of error or heresy as I may instance and prove by Tertullian Origen and s. cyprian be any of these though never so great by the rest spare be any former merit though never so many respect if once they presume to innovate the least error whatsoever and therefore to strike at the point I aim at in the period of the conclusion do the english church and parliament admit all the doctrine that be teach in the church and that continue without the impeachment of any notwithstanding all the zealous and vigilant pastor in the church I think it will make great difficulty and let it reject they or any of they there need no more to prove that church to be heretical let it admit they it prove itself by departure from they and their doctrine to be apostatical for that it hold not the same point of faith with these four first counsel which it make show to receive and embrace in a word let it admit they or reject they they shall never be able to wipe away the blot and blemish imputation and innovation of damnable error from their church for better understanding whereof as also of some other particular thereto belong and hereupon necessary depend I have think good to decipher out these ensue consideration the first consideration my first consideration which I promise as the very why and how these four first counsel be gather and how thereby it be convince that the church can err groundwork and foundation of all the rest must of necessity be this that the parliament and church of England admit these four first general counsel of Nicea Constantinople Ephesus and chalcedon for orthodox and true catholic as represent in their bishop the complete and entire body of the catholic church in their several age must needs acknowledge in like manner that for these first four hundred and fifty year or rather five hundred for that it be not probable nay possible that within the compass of fifty year the same shall now fail which have already by virtue of Christ his promise continue four hundred and fifty year the aug. eccles in true Catholic church of Christ consist not only of the elect and consequent be invisible but of good and bad and thereupon be visible under visible head and this be figure by the parable of the net that catch both good and bad fish and by the field that bring forth good corn and weed and further that this visible external church in those day be the very same whereof Christ word be to be understand when he give this in charge to one upon occasion and supposal of mat. 18. 15 16. 17. 18. 1. tim. 3. 15. a complaint make against his brother which if he succeed not then tell the church as also that other of s. Paul that the church be the pillar and foundation of truth so as if a man in those day will have have any controversy in religion debate and resolve if he will have know what scripture the apostle and evangelist have commit unto the custody of the church for canonical and authentical and further if he desire to know which they be how they may be know from counterfeit how they may be true sense and right understand what and how many sacrament be leave by Christ unto his church which they be what be their effect and operation how they be to be administer and such other like and if he be a jew or Gentille that thus demand question these doubt and will upon the resolution thereof become a Christian but be unlearned will be instruct in all these case and the like he be to have make his repair and recourse unto this external visible church and to have stand in all point whatsoever unto her final determination decision direction instruction and perpetual government in all these first five age without malapert repugnancy or obstinate reply if he ever intend to be save and if upon any animosity or pervicacity any man be cast out of that church in all that time either for interpret scripture in his own sense according to a private spirit or for pervert or innovate of his own head or brain in any the least point of faith and mystery of christian religion as the protestant do both his damnation be by all hold and conclude for certain except he repent and listen yea and obey the voice of the church his mother that seek to reclaine he for that the authority of this church be ever hold for God his high tribunal upon earth and therefore irrefragable since the tribunal of heaven stand expect what be here do by the church upon earth be ever ready to lose or bind to deliver over unto Satan or to release from the band of sin error and heresy according unto the former pass doom and sentence of the church as among other father s. John Chrysostome in his book of chrys. l. 3. sacerdot. priesthood do very well declare 4. and now to come unto these counsel and council of nice assemble 327. to speak particular of every one of they as they lie in order the council of Nice be gather together somewhat more than three hundred year after Christ and the occasion of this first great ecclesiastical assembly of all the world meet together by their bishop in this general council be for the censure and suppress of two capital and damnable heresy that then invade and infest the church of Christ the first be the heresy of the arian and this impugn nay flat deny the second person his identity of essence to wit the son his equality of substance and hodhead with the father grant he to be (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) like unto the father but deny he to be (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) of the same substance with the father which be the faith and belief of the catholic church in those day 5. the second heresy be the heresy of the quartadeciman concern the celebrate of easter-day of which heresy to speak any thing in particular at this time I intend not since it be not to my present purpose only I refer the reader unto the author of the three conversion of England where this point be both substantial and punctual discuss the main point whereof I be to treat in this place be to intimate unto the reader how both these heresy of the arian and the heretical quartadeciman be determine censure and anathematize by the authority of this sovereign and supreme ecclesiastical tribunal I mean the first general council of nice which consist as s. Ambrose observe allude to the just number gratian. of Abraham his soldier of three hundred and eighteen bishop gather from all part of Christendom and this be the first general council that can be assemble until that time in respect of the most bloody and cruel persecution that have continue for the great part of the prcedentage 6. and here we be to observe that albeit that three other provincial national counsel be record to have be celebrate before this of Nice and after that of the apostle act. 15. to wit one at Rome of 60. bishop against under Decius the cruel emperor and Cornelius the martyr pope another at ancyra in Galatia under Dioclesian the three at Neocaesarea under Constantine father and pope anno. 252 melchiade according to Prateolus his account yet this council anno. 308 of Nicea be the first great and glorious ecclesiastical tribunal which be public erect in the christian 311. church for all nation to repair unto after the first plant of the faith of Christ 7. the second general council be that of Constantinople somewhat more than fifty year after in the year of the second general council of Constantinople an. 383. our lord 383. and it consist of a hundred and fifty bishop gather together against macedonius patriarch of Constantinople who open deny and blaspheme against the divinity of the holy ghost for which damnable heresy of he both he and all that partake with his heretical faction be condemn censure and cast out of the church and deliver over to Satan for that they blaspheme against the three sacred person of the bless Trinity and this second great and general council be hold under gratian and Theodosius emperor and under damasus then bishop of Rome 8. the three general council be that which be the three general council of Ephesus ann. 434. assemble at Ephesus almost other fifty year after that again in the year of our lord incarnation 434. this council consist of two hundred bishop gather against another archbishop of Constantinople name Nestorius but a archhereticke and it be hold under the emperor Theodosius and pope this Nestorius as vincentius Lyrinensis in his golden tract against heresy and 17. chapter describe his heresy whilst he make show of distinguish two nature in Christ he sudden bring in two person and by a execrable impiety thereby make two Christ the one God the other man the one beget of God the father the other bear of the virgin his mother and therefore he do further aver that holy Mary be not to be call (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) but (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) the mother of God but the mother of Christ because forsooth that Christ which be God be not bear of she but the Christ which be man hitherto my author and for this damnable heresy be Nestorius condemn by this three council and worthy cast out of the catholic church howbeit I must confess that I can see how Calvin and Beza upon the point of Christ incarnation and hypostatical union with diverse other protestant follow they lib. 1. inst. c. 13. @. 9 23. 24. can possible avoid this old condemn heresy but that Nestorianisme must follow as a necessary consequence of the doctrine which they deliver upon the point of Christ incarnation and union 9 the four general council be that of chalcedon and this be some twenty year and upward after the the 4. general council be that of calcedom 20. year after foresay counsel of Ephesus in which council there be assemble six hundred and thirty bishop archbishop and patriarch this great assembly be gather against on Eutiches a Archimandrite or abbot of Constantinople in like manner who so confound the nature in Christ that he absolute deny that there be two distinct nature in he for which monstrous opinion of he differ from the canon of Catholic faith he be condemn together with his fautor and partner of his heretical faction I mean dioscorus archbishop of Alexandria as be Nestorius another archbishop before he for hold two person in Christ and this famous and through the whole christian world renown council be assemble and hold under martian that then sway the empire and s. Leo the first than bishop of the apostolical sea of Rome 10. and now to make use in general of that which have be speak concern the four counsel by some particular application and illation the inference must needs be this that if the church of England do indeed admit and reverence these four first general council as it shall seem his majesty be of opinion it do and their act of parliament confirm the same then do it follow by necessary and inevitable consequence though the conclusion overthrow a main ground of protestantical religion that they must needs will they will they grant the catholic church not only to have be visible at this time but also to have be in great splendour and magnificence otherwise how can it possible be that fix hundred and thirty bishop can assemble and meet so ready together and all these for the most part out of the eastern part of Christendom only to speak nothing of the west 11. furthermore for as much as our english church in admit these counsel and that in the great consistory of the kingdom the high court of parliament do thereby acknowledge and condescend unto that this external visible church consist of good and bad be Christ true church endue with all the privilege above mention of ecclesiastical power piety purity sanctity and the rest I will ask first how this so visible a church so conspicuous for majesty so illustrious for sanctity a evident declaration that the whole church can err so adorn and beautify with all sort of heavenly grace and eclestiall verity shall or can afterward grow to be invisible be spoil of her dignity bereave of her authority be rob of her sanctity and lose all her grace and verity or how of the spouse of Christ be it possible that she shall become the enemy of Christ of the church of God the synagogue of Satan protestant principle may imagine this but this over throw the very principle of all christian religion for how can the late be preserve inviolable if the former be so unstable or from who can we suck the pure milk of christian religion or receive the strong food of the high mystery of divinity if it be not from the breast of the church if it be not from the hand of our mother learning wisdom and tradition and now to follow this heathenish and irreligious principle of the protestant a little further if the church I mean the former mention visible catholic church of these general counsel if this I say have thus fall by false doctrine as the protestant imagine than this apostasy and defection must either begin first from all or from one or from a few only to the part then if from all how be it possible that so great a body nay Christ own body mystical for so s. Augustine call it found by the blood of Christ propagate by the ministry of the apostle water continual with the blood of many million of martyr and disperse over the visible face of the whole world I say and demand how be it possible that this church shall be corrupt all at once and that by willing corruption of affection and judgement 12. but if this defection vain and idle suppose by the protestant do begin either from one or arise from a few private man contrary to the main current of the church doctrine and tradition which have continue and lineal succeed in the century of the church from Christ time to the council of chalcedon then will no doubt the prelate of the church which now be in possession of the ecclesiastical key and practice of the power and authority of the same by censure and condemn archbishop abbot and patriarch as have be see have resist and several punish these suppose novelty and new fangle in religion and true albeit we shall set aside the promise and providence of our bless saviour for conserve this his church which he have buy with so great a as his own precious blood and bring unto such eminent greatness at this very time of the council of chalcedon which be more than four hundred year after his ascension yet in all human reason set the light of religion apart it can be so much as imagine how such a body Christ his body with such a vigilant senate and head over it shall by secret stealth or little and little be infect corrupt poison and consume as their phrase be with popery heresy superstition or innovation and all without sense or feeling resist and complain or any record leave thereof in author of antiquity and yet if we will give credit unto the protestant and suffer their religion to set the least footing in the church we must against all sense reason faith and religion imagine and believe all this and much more to wit that such and so potent a body so fortify with defence by our saviour be so steal away from itself and from God also as that it be lose pervert corrupt conquer by the gate of hell make Babylon the seat of Antichrist and city of Satan before any man be aware of it and be not these position of protestant monstrous paradox strange idea and chimaera which no man of perfect sense can believe 13. I read in the ancient father that be enlighten with so great a measure of god holy spirit very earnest reprehension and severe invective against the absurdity of these imagination let s. Augustine one that be wont to be full of reverence in some of the protestant mouth speak for all say he aug. in Psal. 101 that church which be propagate and spread over the world consist s. aug. excellent speech of the perpetuity of the church of all nation as now at the time of chalcedon be it now no more be she perish or vanish away so say those that be not in she o impudent voice be not she because thou be not in she see lest therefore thou be not for she will be though thou be not 14. thus s. Augustine in his day argue against the donatist who say then just as our protestant do now when they be press with the authority of the catholic visible church that indeed that have be for a time the true church but that afterwards it perish it fail and fall into apostasy it do apostatate and perish except only in the people who only in their own judgement make the true church indeed 15. and can any thing in the world be more like than this to our case do not the protestant and the donatist so conspire together that a man can distinguish they by their voice the protestant acknowledge the whole body of the christian catholic church under these four counsel for the space almost of five hundred year together neither can he choose but confess since the point have be so often extort from he the outward lustre hierarchy government and authority thereof but if you ask he five hundred year after than he will answer with the donatist suit and it be the true church but it be not now or at least wise not in that perfection of authority as than it be and if you demand of he five hundred year after that again about the time that Luther spring up he will not stick flat to blaspheme with the same donatist it have fall into apostasy it have perish which speech you have hear s. Augustine before call a impudent voice but present after in the very same place he term it by far worse epitheton as blasphemous to the holy ghost which though I have touch before yet will I repeat it here again for the better impression of it in our memory and the great detestation of the like sin 16. say he the spirit of God in the 101. psalm do foresee this abominable and detestable voice of some that shall say that the catholic visible church have perish and fall into apostasy a speech full of presumption and falsehood sustain with no truth enlighten with no wisdom season with no salt a vain temerarious headlong and pernicious speech so s. Augustine and then further some few line after the same father bring in the say visible church of his age to expostulate with those furious and frantic donatist in this manner what be the cause I know not why certain people that go forth of i do murmur against i what be the cause why certain lose fellow do contend and say that I be perish for this be their say that I be the true church but be not now etc. the scripture say they have be fulfil for that all nation have believe but the church have apostate and perish throughout the world etc. when we urge the promise of Christ behold I be with you unto the matth. 29. ^0 consummation of the world here they say that Christ promise to be with the church until the end of the world for that he do foresee that they the faction of donatus shall arise and continue the true church upon earth so. s. Augustine of and to the donatist and sure nothing can occur and be represent unto our understanding more conform and answerable unto the sense judgement voice agreement and speech of the sectary of these our time concern their false imputation and most unjust calumniation against the present roman church 17. now if this grave and holy father s. Augustine one of the chief pillar of the latin church in his day speak in the voice and sense of the say universal catholic application of s. augustin speech unto our sectary church in his age do so grievous and dreadful censure this speech and blasphemous slander of the apostasy of the visible church so trivial and familiar unto protestant now adays as that he call it impudent abominable detestable presumptuous false foolish rash temeratious and pernicious as you have hear if he condemn even to the lowermost pit of hell all those that frequent the same call and account they for lose and damn people apostate from the church upon a false surmise of their own foolish fancy suppose that the church itself have apostate or may fall into apostasy what shall we say of protestant that do the same and stand in the very same case 18. but here it may be perhaps some man will reply that s. Augustine in the place before cite say not that the visible church can apostate or perish but that it have not so do and fall away in his time when the donatist do false impute the same unto it but that it may err and fall away from truth in time to come that s. Augustine do not deny 19 to this I answer that albeit s. Augustine do not say in so many word the church in time to come may not apostatate yet in pure force of argument and true substance of matter he do affirm it in that he allege against the donatist and urge to convince they the very promise of our saviour make unto his disciple and in their person unto the church for ever behold I be with you unto the consummation of the world which promise hold for all time in s. Augustine his judgement even until the world general consummation and therefore the same father in another place write upon another psalm have first show how the church be the city build upon a hill he further add aug. in psal. 47. but happy this city that have possess the whole world shall in time to come be overthrow God forbid for God have found the same for ever as the psalmist speak if therefore God have found the same for ever why do thou fear lest this foundation may fall which very point s. Augustine repeat again in his first book and the five chapter to show his constant and unvariable resolution in this matter of the church 20. and here I may allege father upon father Greek upon latin and produce so many testimony of the ancient worthy and ancient father as may suffice to fill a large volume and all of they tend direct to that the church shall never apostatate this effect to wit that the visible church plant by our saviour he be the foundation stone and by his apostle and spread over the face of the whole earth shall never perish or apostatate from Christ by any the least damnable error or heresy unto the end of the world and Christ his second come unto judgement and to prove this they do all of they allege and bring many pregnant and evident place of scripture 21. as for example these two here urge by s. Augustine as also that plain text utter by way of promise unto his disciple matth. 16. by our saviour the gate of hell shall not prevail against this church and on this place s. Chrysostome dilate himself much as be by occasion treat upon the 148. psalm and in a homily make at that time when he be to be expel from Constantinople he infer these word upon that place if you will not believe Christ word the thing themselves here speak believe his work how many tyrant have go about to impugn the church etc. where be they that go about these thing how do thou think thou most impure devil that thou can overthrow the church etc. which demand this bless father will never have urge unto the wicked spirit if the devil may have reply that in time to come he shall be able to overthrow it by sow the tare of ignorance error and heresy in it and now that s. Chrysostome mean of the external visible church it be more than evident by the instance that he bring of the horrible and inhuman persecution raise and stir up by infidel and heretical emperor against the same most holy church 22. and s. cyprian that ancient and renown martyr Eccles. treat of this argument sound forth this eulogy in praise of the church the spouse of Christ can be adulterate she be unspotted she be chaste she know one house she keep the sanctity of one chamber one bed and that with a chaste shamefastness and love so s. cyprian in that excellent tract of his which tract alone though it be but a very short one yet be it sufficient to be the bane of all heresy and to keep any man desirous of truth within the bosom of catholic unity 23. with s. cyprian agree s. Hilary write to the the invincible strength of the church same effect in express word affirm this be peculiar unto the church that when she be hurt by persecution than she win and overcome when she be reprehend by heretic then be she perceive that be to say when she be misconceive she make herself in her doctrine to be better understand by declaration of matter call into question when she be forsake either by rebellious child that go out from she or by God permission exercise she by tribulation then do she obtain the victory and glorious triumph so as here you see that they speak not only of the church of their time but of all other ensue age that it can perish or be corrupt and with these agree s. Ambrose say so speak s. Ambrose in his book entitle the Salomone the 4. chapter that be to say this ship therefore of the apostle that be toss upon the sea of this world as the true church of Christ which albeit it do daily find and feel the world to be troublesome unto it as a certain tempestuous and stormy sea yet do it never dash and split in piece by strike against any rock nor yet be it ever drive and drown to the bottom all which privilege can not be verify of the say church if it be possible that the spouse of Christ can become a harlot or fall away from Christ by entertain any damnable error or heresy 24. and as s. Ambrose so speak s. Hierome in his commentary upon the four chapter of Isaiah his word be these the church be found upon a rock be sh^uered with no tempest be overwhelm and overthrow by no fury and violence of wind whatsoever and the same holy father in another place put a real distinction betwixt the synogogue of the jew and the christian church but especial betwixt the promise of God make unto both assume the speech of Christ and speak to the jew in the person of our saviour your house your church your synagogue shall be leave desolate and empty unto you matth. 23. but as for the christian church say he for that Christ promise unto his disciple behold I will be with you or as other Readins have it I be with you to the consummation of the world and the same speech be reassume and reiterate by he in his commentary upon the nine of the prophet amos and upon the 28. of the gospel of s. Matthew 25. and here I may tire out both the reader and myself also with allege the consent of all the ancient father to prove that the visible catholic church of their day can never perish apostatate or fall away from Christ to the end of the world in regard of Christ his promise make unto it and yet the contrary heretical tenant be a common receive doctrine in the protestant school in this last and worst age of the world for do not the protestant as though it be a matter of the life or death of their religion as in very deed it be no less stiff and peremptory defend that the visible church that hold these four general counsel which be admit by his majesty and the church and parliament of England and fourteen other no less general from that of chalcedon to the last of Trent this church say I descend by succession of christian people and by lawful and ecclesiastical ordination of prelate pastor and bishop for government of the same have after the aforesaid council of chalcedon by little and little say the protestant apostate from Christ and his true doctrine and have leave their room and place for protestant to enter and supply their defect and this be just like the allegation and pretence of the donatist in s. Augustine time and no marvel that protestant and donatist thus conspire against the true church for sure the right of the donatist be as good to lay claim thereunto as the interest of the protestant for aught that I can see to the contrary and let this suffice for my first consideration the second consideration my second consideration concern this present subject of the four first general counsel receive by the protestant lay parliament as be already premise why protestant do not nor can remedy their division by any general or national council shall be this that for as much as this ecclesiastical device and invention of call general counsel and this spiritual authority in erect this great consistory and supreme tribunal of the church for the decide and determine of all doubt and controversy that may possible arise therein either by the friend or rather enemy of the church must be presume to have come peculiar and proceed original from the holy ghost partly for that the first form Origen and practice thereof be prescribe by the apostle themselves as you shall read act. 15. according to that which we have former note and partly and especial in regard of the infallible assistance of the say holy ghost that ever-blessed and never err spirit of truth testify by the word of high and sovereign command authority use by the apostle in that first counsel decree it seem good to the holy ghost and we why I say this be so have the protestant in our day have now almost have a full age since their defection from catholic roman religion never as yet call a general council among themselves to repair their own breach reconcile their own emnity determine and decide their own controversy which as before I have show be both many and weighty implacable and irreconcilable true it seem unto i that if they have be of the same spirit with the ancient apostolic church that gather these four first general counsel to hold all in one union and communion nay if they have not be lead or rather mislead with a contrary spirit of schism heresy and division they will have tread in the steep of these ancient father and have imitate they in apply the sovereign remedy of general counsel for cure the wound of their own homebred division and damnable dissension at least wise they will without fail in a whole age have call some one forasmuch as the ancient church gather and assemble four within the compass of one age and a half and the protestant prince and people do bind and border near together then do the christian in former time which be in a manner disperse here and there far and near over the whole face of the earth 27. if reply be make that then there be but one emperor to afford his imperial consent for the assemble of the synod and now since the division of the empire into many dukedom princedom kingdom and free state there be many particular prince who will and judgement can more hardly be agree who assent be with great difficulty to be require and obtain I answer this evasion be but a mere collusion and therefore must not be suffer to pass without due reprehension for since the foresay division of the christian world into several kingdom and state many general council have be call and gather among catholic as before have be show yea and that in the midst of tumult uproar and garboil in the temporal estate of the christian world and this a man of common sense and reason may comprehend and imagine to have byna great let and impediment unto the gather of general counsel than any encumbrance and inconvenience that the protestant surmise or pretend but the truth be heresy and schism original ground upon proper election protestant can abide parley and treaty neither with catholic nor among themselves private invention stubborn selfwill and proud conceit judgement together with obstinacy against the church authority this I say can never abide that exact discussion which a general council do require for how can the protestant thus divide as they be and know the weakness of their own cause endure parley and treaty either with the catholic who they account adversary or among themselves with their own sectary 28. not with catholic as may be see by example of ancient heretic condemn in these 4. first general counsel to wit the arian in the first the macedonian in the second the nestorian in the three and the Eutychian in the four who flee what they can those counsel appeal only to scripture whereof there be one notable example among many other in the last of these four counsel I mean that of chalcedon wherein the Archimandrite and archereticke Eutiches be send unto with notary from this grave and learned council to yield a account to the council of his heretical opinion hold of one only nature in Christ after his incarnation he first bethink he of this evasion to say that he will agree and subscribe to the exposition of the father that have sit in the Nicen council and that of Ephesus but this be but mere collusion for thereby he only mean most crafty and heretical to evade and fly both the other two counsel of Constantinople that have already deal against he and condemn he as also this of chalcedon that be now gather against he to hear his cause and to be his judge 29. but yet second for fear that he may yield also to far in this he add present a exposition say conc. Calced. act. 3. p. 163. edit Venet. if not withstand it have happen that the say father of the Nicen and Ephesine counsel have be deceive and err in many of their say than will he neither reprehend the same for modesty sake nor yet subscribe thereunto but that he for his part will attend himself whole unto the scripture alone as be more firm and sure than the exposition of any father whatsoever and be not this speak like a Protestant 30. three when he have repeat and urge again his blasphemous heresy of one only nature in Christ in presence of those grave and reverend prelate that be the terginersation of the heretic Eutiches full represent the protestant send by the whole synod to take his confession and further when he have read unto they a book compile apologetical for defence of the same heresy he then tell they open and plain that this be his faith according unto the scripture and as for the other to wit the catholic assertion that Christ consist of two nature divine and human unite in one person he say flat that he have neither learn any such assertion in the exposition of the holy father he mean the bless father of the nicene and Ephesine counsel nor yet will he for his part admit and embrace it if any such thing shall happen to be read unto he out of their write and his reason be that which be so common urge by protestant for that the divine scripture be better than the doctrine of all father the which though it be true in itself yet be his meaning to deceive thereby as you see think by this fair glosle and goodly pretence of scripture to have avoid and escape the tribunal and censure of the catholic church in that time but the council condemn his opinion and person notwithstanding his shift evasion to the contrary 31. and true the very consideration of this particular I mean the conformity of spirit in this old heretic and diverse of the new protestant that cry out with full and open mouth to have all thing in general counsel try by scripture alone leave in i a very great impression and the matter itself seem unto i very considerable and worthy of all diligent attention for I patticuler reflect upon that sentence of Calvin wherein in my poor judgement and opinion I right compare the two arch-hereticke together and whether I wrong Calvin let his own word witness and his best favourite lib. 4. just. cap. 9 @. 1^ and sectarir defend their master from speak like a heretic I mean like Eutiches say he we be not to pass for counsel father bishop it be not in name of all or any one of they can bar we from examine all kind of spirit according unto the square rule of God word and we may call they unto account and sift they by the word of the lord whether they be of God or no. so far he 32. and here also I remember that I have see the condition require by the protestant of Germany when as they be invite to come unto the council of Trent at the very first gather thereof and the say condition be publish in a several book which do bear this inscription the cause why the elector prince and other addict to the confession of Augusta do not come to the council of Trent resp. Gaspar for justify of which cause eight condition be require by they to be observe in that council whereof the four be that the decision be make in all controversy only out of scripture and not out of ecclesiastical canon or tradition the five be that decision be again make not according to the plurality of voice or suffrage but according unto the norm and rule of God protestant shift to avoid come to counsel word but what this norm or rule be they expound not but do leave it as they find it still to be contend about whereunto if we adjoin two other condition of they which be the last to wit that the protestant minister may give voice equal with bishop in decide of all question and that if they shall not be able to defend their cause yet not only their person shall be secure but their cause also not to be condemn for heresy these I say if we add as the late unto the former we shall plain discern that they have not so much as the least thought to stand unto that council at all but to their own head and by these to their own unreasonable condition and unconscionable to make their controversy and heresy endless and indeterminable for if every man or at least every minister have authority to determine out of God word when will there be a end 33. and here you see the small or rather no hope that be of agreement betwixt protestant and catholic by way of general counsel and that the protestant reserve themselves only to scripture for the decision of matter and not admit general counsel and father to be umpiring judge of the sense and mean thereof they tread first into the step and rake into the sacrilegious ash of all former ancient condemn heretic even for this very point condemn by the church in many of her general counsel and second by such condition they make themselves sure and secure from be condemn in such sort as that they will yield thereunto and the self same fundamental reason or rather desperate refuge and evasion of they in profane and abuse this sacred sanctuary of scripture by their profane spirit and unhallowed gloss hold also for their never agree among themselves by meeting conference colloquy disputation synod or counsel for that the lutheran and sacramentary whether zwinglians or caluinist for of these two only I mean to speak at this time stand upon this resolute principle on all hand that nothing be to be determine but by scripture and then each one interpret that scripture different from the other and acknowledge no judge on neither party how be it possible that they shall ever come to any end of determination 34. and this will evident appear if we cast our eye upon those conventicle meeting conference synod counsel and colloquy hold betwixt these reform brother for the space of threescore year together to wit from the year 1530. unto the year 1590. which be set forth stan. Resc l. 1. atheism etc. by stanislaus ambassador unto the king of Polonia at Naples upon the year 1596. and which do amount to above threescore synod and counsel and meeting hold at Smalcaldium Frankesord Constance Tygure Wittemberge berna Ratisbone spire Norimberge Lipsia worm Luneburge Maulnbourne Petricovia Varadine gratz Brunswick Dresda Alba julia Cracovia and diverse other place all these and many more if we look into with a indifferent eye we shall ever find the protestant disagreemento in their meeting that they be so far from conclude any peace in religion or reconcile of their controversy by these synod and counsel as that they depart far great enemy and more disagree in their opinion then when they first meet witness their departure at one meeting of they above mention when they will neither give nor take nor fellowship of fraternity nor fellowship of humanity which be a token that they have not the spirit of union nor any mean leave they to come unto it and consequent that the example and precedent of these first four general counsel that determine with authority and uniform judgement the controversy of their time over all the world do prejudice all together and condemn the protestant of our age and do convince that they be not of their spirit or religion and that neither general national provincial or particular counsel synod Tertul. prescript aug. l. 3. cont. epist. Parmen. c. 4. and ser. 11 verb. etc. or meeting can bring themselves to any concord or agreement together especial division and dissension be a note as it be ascribe by all ancient father peculiar unto heretic that they be always irreconcilable and divide among themselves and this be the effect of my second consideration the three consideration my three consideration be that by read these counsel I do not only find a complete hierarchy particular point of difference between these 4. general counsel and the protestant of our time for doctrine and manner and ecclesiastical regiment of the catholic church to be observe in those former ancient time consist of bishop archbishop patriarch and prelate govern the say church conform to that of the catholic of our day and whole different from the protestant church which they call reform though in my judgement they may more true be call deform in that they have take away all such hierarchy of bishop except only a small glimpse thereof reserve in England for a show but in many other particular point also I plain perceive their sense opinion and judgement to be far dissonant from these of our protestant whether we regard their practice for conversation and reformation of our manner or respect their doctrine for instruction and information of our judgement whereof God assist I shall lay forth some few brief and punctual observation purposely pretermit infinite other that may be gather out of the foresay four general counsel 36. in the first of the four I mean Nicen and the 3. canon thereof these word represent themselves unto my view the holy synod do forbid by all mean and determine it to be unlawful for any bishop priest deacon or any other of the clergy to have any extern woman with they except perhaps it be their mother sister grandmother or aunt by father or mother side for in these all suspicion that may arise about dwell with woman be decline and he that shall do contrary to this shall lose his clergy thus that first and famous council decree ratify and enact for the angelical continency of the clergy in those day 37. and the true meaning of this holy council be according to the plain purport of the word as they be set down in the canon to wit that clergy man can not marry after they be of the clergy at least nor yet use their wife that they have marry before it seem more than evident by the plain word of the council for if it have be lawful to have have a wife in the house the council will not have omit the same but will first of all other have except the wife when it name mother sister aunt and grandmother 38. beside this the provincial council of Neocaesarea that be hold not above some four of five year before this Nicence council and of which council some of the same bishop also sit in the say council of nice decree the matter in the very first canon in these word conc. Neocaes can. 1. an. 316. which be extant in three different translation the decree of the council of nice and Neocaesaraea against the marriage of priest if a priest do marry a wife let he be remove from his order of priesthood and if he commit adultery or fornication let he be utter thirst out and bring to penance and this canon be confirm afterwards again in the six general council at Constantinople common call in Trullo almost tower hundred year after that of Nice and in the mean space between those two general counsel there ensue diverse other provincial or national that confirm the same as that of Eliberis ann. 711. dom. 3 2 5. can. 33. Arelatense the second cap. 2. and 3. Carthaginense the three 397. wherein s. Augustine be present and subscribe cap. 17. and Carthaginense the basil. epist. 1. Amphi c. 3. Epiphan. hares. 59 five 400. c. 3. andogavense as Baronius record 453. Tolet a the second cap. 3. 5 3 1. and many other all common sound themselves as diverse ancient father s. Basil epiphanius and many other do upon this canon of the Nicen council which yet as I think our bishop and minister of England will not accept of for I be certain their practice of wive be contrary to this canon of nice not withstand their outward show and pretence of admit these four first counsel 39 and albeit I know they have here a certain shift the answer unto Calvin objection about teach they by m. Calvin out of the speech of who stand up in the council of nice against a decree that the say council will have make against the use of wife in the clergy that have be marry before they be clergy man yet do this help they very little for first only mean that clergy man shall not be bar from the company of their wife which they have take unto they before they be of the clergy but he do not grant that they shall take wife after they be make clergy man nay that with the whole council he forbid and condemn but the english church permit marry also after they be clergy man thus you see suppose this a true story of it rather make against they then for they but Bellarmine do prove by most evident argument and reason and namely by the authority of epiphanius s. Hierome Ruffinus and diverse other that the narration of Socrates and Zozomenus in this point of as in many other story that they recount be nottrue 40. another place I note out of the 14. canon of the say council of nice who word be these another canon of the council of nice about the real presence it be come unto the knowledge of this holy synod that in diverse place and city deacon do give the eucharist unto priest which neither the canon of the church nor custom have deliver that those that have not power to offer sacrifice shall give the body of Christ to those that do offer the same in which word though they be but few yet sundry weighty thing be signify which make direct against the protestant and Protestant religion as first that the eucharist be reserve in those day for the present use of such as shall have need when there be no priest to say mass and in such like necessity of the church deacon that have authority to administer the say sacrament to other and may do it lawful do presume also to do it unto priest as when they be sick and upon such other like occasion and this they can not have do except the eucharist be keep and reserve forasmuch as here it be express say that they can not offer or say mass 41. second we may see here how much be ascribe unto the canon and ecclesiastical custom in so much as the whole council do argue negative thereof for so much as neither canon nor custom have deliver this use of the deacon therefore it be a abuse how much more will they have argue affirmative from the authority of ecclesiastical canon and custom have there be any to the contrary 42. three the eucharist be here call the body of Christ it be insinuate also that it be a true and real sacrifice in that it be say that the priest have power of offer the same and the deacon have not which can stand with the protestant opinion of a spiritual and metaphorical sacrifice of thanksgiving only for certain this kind of sacrifice ' deacon may offer as will as priest and consequent this canon also seem nothing to agree with the doctrine of our english communion as neither do many other which to avoid prolixity I willing over pass 43. out of the second council to wit the first of Constantinople hold under pope damasus in s. hiercmes time I see many thing most worthy of due observation but those word of the seven canon concern the receive repentant heretic into the church I reflect upon with some diligence as show the church manner of proceed in those day we do receive say the canon such as have be arian macedonian sabatians novatian and the like when they offer and give up unto we the supplication accurse therein all heresy which do not believe as the holy catholic and apostolical church of God do and we receive they sign and anoint first with holy chrism both in their forehead their eye their nose their mouth and their ear and when we sign they we do say this be the sign of the gift of the holy ghost etc. all these I say that desire to be admit unto the true faith we do receive they as grecian etc. and in the first day we make they christian the second day Catechumenes a canon of the second council much make against protestant and then three we do exorcize and adjure they breathe three time one after a other on their face and ear and so we catechize consecrate and cure they ordain that they live a great while in our church and hear the scripture and then we do baptize they so enact that ancient canon conclude by a hundred and fifty bishop and now whether this antiquity be more observe or better resemble by the Protestant or roman church I leave the point to every man to consider of for intend brevity I mean not to prosecute matter at large but only to point at these two thing by the way that may show conformity or deformity between that ancient church and the Protestant or catholic roman church at this day 44. out of the three council hold at Ephesus in the year of our lord God 42 8. sundry weighty point occur and represent themselves worthy of observation albeit all of they be over long here to be recite and first I remember the manner of proceed and condemn of Nestorius the archhereticke as it be most faithful record vincentius Lyrinensis his relation of the council of Ephesus by vincentius Lyrinensis in the very beginning of the second part of his the 42. chapter and it be lay down by he who live in the very time of the council and for aught we know may be present there at in this manner this council of Ephesus discuss and reason touch the establish of some rule of faith lest any profane novelty like to the armenian treachery may creep into this council all the catholic bishop and priest thither assemble which be almost 200. conclude and agree upon this as best and most Catholic to wit that the opinion and judgment of the holy father shall be bring forth before the council such father as have be either martyr or consessor or at least constant catholic priest and according unto their joint consent and decree the point then controvert betwixt Nestorius and s. Cyrill shall be decide and final determine this be the rule and canon of faith first enact and according unto this Nestorius as contrary to catholic verity be condemn for a heretic and bless s. Cyrill be judge consonant unto antiquity so vincentius and now will the church of England that make show of receive this council stand to this rule and canon of faith about the examine of doctrine by the father enact and put in practice by this council against Nestorius and will they submit all their judgement unto the assembly of father as this council do 45. my second observation out of this council be this that when great stir and trouble be expect by the pious and religious emperor Theodosius and valentinianus by the reason of the great concourse of people of all sort unto that place especial many favourite of Nestorius the archbishop of Constantinople against who this council be gather it seem necessary unto the say emperor to send thither a earl of their court name candidianus who shall represent their person for see peace and good order keep but yet with express protestation that it belong not unto they conc Ephes. tom. 1. cap. 22. in epist. Imperat. nor any other secular man to have any deal in ecclesiastical cause in that council and this be the thing which I observe which now follow say they we have command the most honourable count candidian one of our religious family to go unto your holy synod but with this charge and condition that he have nothing at all to do with any question of controversy that fall out about secular man may not meddle in ecclesiastical consultation matter of faith for that it be not lawful for he that be not a bishop to meddle with ecclesiastical affair or consultation so those two emperor which convince sufficient that they hold not themselves for head of the church nor judge in ecclesiastical matter but inferior unto bishop in that behalf and will the church of England admit this council admit this also 46. but now as on the one side the religious emperor disclaim from this ecclesiastical authority over the council so I find that then bishop of Rome do acknowledge the same to appertain unto he and it be by the whole council without either opposition or contradiction grant unto he for first he be not able to be present himself he design and depute s. Cyrill archbishop of Alexandria to be his substitute as appear by his own letter read and approve in the council his word be these conc Ephes. tom. 1. c. 16 wherefore you take the authority of our sea upon you and use our room and place with the power thereto belong shall execute with punctual severity the sentence give against Nestorius to wit of excommunication and deposition and that if he do not revoke his heresy within ten day after this our admonition give unto he that you present provide the church of Constantinople of another bishop and let he know that he be by all manner of way cut of from our body so he 47. thus write pope from Rome where he have hold a particular council and condemn the heresy of Nestorius in the west before the council of Ephesus be gather in the east in which Coucell of Ephesus he not be able to be present as be aforesaid design his authority to s. Cyril as well for preside in the same council as also for execute the sentence of condemnation which proceed of be recount afterward again by the say council and approve in a general letter which the whole council write unto the con. eph. tom. 2. c. 17 two emperor which begin 48. but this be confirm yet further for that the say holy father send from Rome three other legate to join with s. Cyrill in that legation for the presidence of the council whereof two be bishop and Arcadius the three a priest only call Philip who always be admit for legate in the council do firm and subscribe their name after s. Cyrill before the other patriarch of Jerusalem and the rest yea when the two bishop-legate be absent from the council upon any occasion this Philip though but a priest do subscribe next after s. Cyrill as may appear in the council itself the supremacy of the pope of Rome confirm by the council of Ephesus 2. cap. 13. and moreover at his first come and appearance in the council he use this speech we yield thanks unto this holy and venerable synod that upon the read of the letter of our most holy and most bless pope Celestine you have exhibit and show yourselves by your holy applause and praise as holy member of the church under your holy head for your beatitude be not ignorant that s. Peter be head of the whole christian faith and of all the rest of the apostle etc. this and much more speak he to this effect which I pretermit for brevity sake in the assembly of all those great bishop that be present and yet not one of all those zealous and learned bishop oppose himself against his usurp supremacy as the heretic slander it a point very considerable and remarkable in my opinion and far different from the ground of protestant religion 49. out of the 4. council gather at chalcedon under the council of chalcedom the authority of pope Leo the first surname the great a man of singular holiness wonderful learning famous for miracle renown through the whole christian world about this council I say I may produce many thing of great ponderation especial about the say supremacy of the sea of Rome profess challenge practise most evident as may appear in that council for first Lucentius legate and one of the three send from s. Leo in that council utter free these word Dioscorum conc calc act. 1. must needs render a account of his judgement because when he be not personal invest with any lawful power of judge and umpiring he creep and steal in and dare gather a synod without authority of the sea apostolic which be never right nor can be lawful do 50. and another legate in the same council add but of these thing he mean the supremacy of the bishop of Rome there be ecclesiastical canon and decree of father so far he 51. second I observe that every where almost throughout this council pope Leo be there style act. 2. in libel Theodor Ischir Sophon etc. universal bishop and patriarch of the great city of Rome also he be call bishop of the universal church and again in the same three action it be say to one of pope Leo his legate ibid. in subscript count Dioscorun now your holiness have the primacy of most holy Leo and yet again we do request your holiness which have or rather who have for they be three legate to wit Lucentius and Caelius bonifacius that you will in the place of most holy pope Leo promulgate against he and pronounce the sentence that be contain in the canon and afterwards when they come to subscribe against dioscorus for his condemnation first of all the foresay three legate of s. Leo do subscribe in these word conc. calc act. 3. tom. 2. p. 252. edit. Venet. i bishop of Lylibaeum in Sicilia in behalf or steed of the most bless and apostolical pope of the universal church and city of Rome pope Leo preside over this holy synod have subscribe by consent of the universal council to the condemnation of dioscorus so he and after he subscribe immediate the other two roman legate and then again the patriarch of Constantinople Antioch and the rest and the same be repeat and observe in many other place as particular in the 4. and six action where the bishop name and bishop be record be above six hundred as have be say my conclusion of all be this and will the protestant allow this for sound doctrine when they take upon they to receive this council with the rest 52. but beside this point of the supremacy of the bishop of Rome in this council I fall upon sundry other thing that enforce i to reflect upon they as namely in the canon themselves the 16. canon have these marriage of monk and nun forbid by this council word it be not lawful for a virgin that have dedicate herself to God as neither for monk to marry and if by chance they shall be find to have do so let they be excommunicate and be this currant doctrine in England or be this receive together with the council 53. another point that I cast my eye and bend my mind somewhat serious upon be the 24. canon of the same foresay council and it lie thus the monastery that be once consecrate by the will of the bishop must perpetual remain monastery and all thing belong to the same we have decree that they be preserve to the use of the say monastery and that they can any more be make secular habitation and that they which shall permit such thing to be do shall undergo the condemnation that be appoint to be inflict according to the canon so that canon and this seem also to i very hard to stand with the doctrine and modern practice of England where monastery be turn into secular use without the fear of the threat here set down by the spirit and authority of this general council as every one will confess wherefore here also we must imagine that albeit the church of England and parliament do admit this council yet will they not easy yield to obey the commandment of restore the monastical land and house unto those religion use again whereunto they be institute and so it seem that they will remain with the name and curse of the council let we pass over to the last head of his majesty offer the five chapter concern the admittance and acceptance of the ancient father of the first five hundred year after Christ which be the four and last head of trial offer and allege by his majesty of England have discourse at large of the three general head to wit scripture creed counsel in the three precedent chapter we be now according to order and method both offer unto we and accept of we to treat of the last general head in this subsequent chapter and the subject we have how in hand be touch the high esteem credit and authority to be give to the ancient father unto which his majesty do appeal in this last place say thus I do reverence the ancient father as much and more Prem p. 35. than the jesuit do and asmuch as themselves ever crave for what ever the father of the first four hundred year do with a consent agree upon to be believe as a necessary point of salvation I either will believe it also or at least will be humble silent not take upon i to condemn the same but for every private father his opinion it bind not my conscience more than Bellarmine every one of the father usual contradict other I will therefore in that case follow s. Augustine his rule in judge their opinion as I shall aug. l. 2. cont. Crescon c. 31. find they agree with the scripture what I find agreeable thereunto I will embrace what be otherwise I will with their reverence reject so the King and that his majesty for his part have also a good meaning in this as far as his education and instruction can possible permit and further that he be persuade that he speak and mean like a good catholic and orthodox Christian I do with all diligence and due respect of loyal duty unto his royal grace endeavour to persuade myself 2. and yet nevertheless it be more than evident and apparent yea obvious unto the eye of any discreet indifferent judicious and understand man that his excellent grace have be notorious abuse and very sinister a erroneous inform in sundry passage of this point and main head concern the reverence respect and authority due to the father of God church and that by such statize and temporize minister that be no long able to sustain their weak and false cause will derive the shame a complaint against the minister of England for misinform his majesty blame and burden of their now present totter religion upon the person of his princely majesty engage he thus in their heretical quarrel and therefore they suggest from time to time such particular out of every general as serve rather for their own sinister respect then either for the prevention of error or decision of truth or preservation of the honour and sovereign reputation of his princely person whence it come to pass that they impressionate his princely heart with their own particular humorous passion exagitate his grace with their odious and malicious calumniation bend against the upright and the innocent in a word they rather avert his affection from ancient catholic verity and pervert his judgement by their erroneous fancy and late upstart novelty then lay forth the plain and simple truth unto his majesty though they profess themselves to be minister of simple truth either in sound substance or sincere circumstance and this God willing we shall discover by many particular passage in this present business and point of ancient father that we have now in hand 3. and first to proceed in order and to begin with the accusation and imputation lay upon the lesuit for that they be here charge according to that which have be suggest unto his majesty for I will never lay this imputation and false accusation upon his princely person that they do not reverence the authority of the ancient father indeed not so much as his majesty do who say here as you have hear that when the father of the first sour hundred year do with a consent agree upon any thing to be believe as a necessary point of salvation his highness will believe it also or at least will be humble silent and not condemn the same but he that will peruse and read over the learned and manifold laborious volume of the jesuit shall find they to go much further in this point teach and constant assever with vincentius Lyrineusis and with the joint agreement of antiquity that the consent of father upon any point make it a infallible truth say gregorius de Valentia Valent l. 8. ana. c. 8. whatsoever the father and doctor deliver with one consent about religion that be infallible true and the same do hold all other jesuit which also vincentius Lyrinensis more than a thousand year before they do confirm in these word these therefore he mean the ancient father and doctor of the lib. con harese church give and grant by God throughout all age and place whosoever shall contemn they agree upon any one point in Christ in the sense of Catholic doctrine he contemn not man but God 4. and this be ground and prove as the say Valentia note upon that discourse of s. Paul Ephes. 4. where he show how Christ ascend into heaven leave his church furnish and fence with all kind of necessary furniture for her present instruction future direction and perpetual prescruation as with apostle prophet evangelist pastor doctor and this unto the world end and the reason of this be that which the foresay author observe out of the apostle himself that we shall not be carry hither and thither and toss up and down with every blast of doctrine 5. and final he confirm the same by show that this great absurdity will otherways follow that if the whole consent of father may err then may they induce the whole church to err yea enforce she thereunto for that the church be bind to follow and believe the consent of her pastor doctor governor and teacher and that throughout all age of the church 6. this be the doctrine which I find among the jesuit concern the account and reckon that be to be make of the uniform and consent of father for with Gregory de Valentia as now I have say do agree the opinion of jesuit about the authority of the father all the most eminent and principal writer of that society as for example doctor Petru Canis^us in his late catechism cap. 11. cardinal Bellarmine in his four book cap. 9 vasquez tom. 1. in part Disp. 12. cap. 1. Maldonatus in 6. joan. Tolet upon the 6. chapter of s. John and many other which as I take it be a great deal more than here be grant by protestant unto the father since there be no more yet promise and profess then either to believe they or to be humble silent and not condemn they 7. further I find that the jesuit be never so strict with the father as to restrain their credit and authority to the first four or five hundred year only and consequent to accept some and reject other and all at their proper pleasure as the protestant do but that they think the same spirit of truth and the same assistance of the holy ghost descend also to the father of the succeed age and shall do unto the end of the world 8. nor do I find they any where to affirm that every one of the father do usual contradict other nor yet be they ever of this erroneous and dangerous opinion that it be lawful for each particular man to arrogate that liberty and authority over the father as where he find they to agree with the scripture there to believe they and where otherwise in his opinion there with their reverence to reject they for that this will come to the same issue before mention to wit that every man private judgement shall be his own rule and then will it consequent follow that we shall have as many controversy touch the exposition of the father as we have already about the interpretation of the scripture and who see not whereunto this secret tend even to leave nothing sound stable and certain in religion which must be needs at last the overthrow of all religion 9 and now if it be lawful for every private spirit and particular man to judge when father do allege a consequence of great inconvenience scripture whether they do allege they right to the purpose or no then arise another question interminable whether in all likelihood of reason it be probable that that private man shall understand the scripture better than that father or ancient doctor 10. and as for the rule of s. Augustine suggest unto his majesty by our english minister for patronize of this point and reduce of all both scripture and father unto the examine of a private spirit I have diligent peruse the place as it lie in his second book against cresconius cap. 31. and 32. and upon a exact survey of the place I find that s. Augustine give no such general rule or warrant for particular man to judge of the father writing and citation of scripture use by they but only in the case and cause of s. cyprian that have hold contrary unto the whole church viz. that man come from heresy be to be rebaptize who epistle also be urge by cresconius the donatist against as ground of canonical truth to use s. Augustine his word I say upon these premise the say father answer thus unto the authority of s. cyprian object that in a manifest point of heresy for so be the opinion and yet s. cyprian be no heretic since he never defend it with obstinacy against the church but in all his opinion submit himself to the judgement of the church we do no injury unto cyprian when we do distinguish any of his epistle from the canonical authority of divine scripture 11. and afterward again have name the epistle which cresconius urge he proceed thus I be not bind to admit the authority of this epistle for that I do not hold the epistle of cyprian as canonical but do consider they by the scripture which be canonical etc. final after a long praise how s. augustin do not admit the authority of s. cyprian in a particular case of s. cyprian of his wit eloquence charity and martyrdom s. Augustine conclude that notwithstanding all this yet for that in this point he dissent from the residue of the doctor and pastor of the church he refuse to follow he his word be these this that s. cyprian hold different from other though not obstinate I do not admit I do not admit I say that which bless cyprian do hold about the rebaptize of heretic and schismatic and I do not admit it for that the church do not admit it for which church bless s. cyprian do shed his blood 12. so then we see that this which s. Augustine here instance and speak of compare and try s. cyprian his epistle by the scripture be no general case nor common rule nor warrant that every particler man may do the same to the writer of every particular doctor for first s. Augustine himself that make this examine of scripture be a great and learned doctor yea one of the great that ever the church of God have and consequent be personal invest with some more ecclesiastical authority than every ordinary protestant minister second he perceive right well that the opinion of s. cyprian be much like the religion of the protestant at this day to wit new and dissonant from scripture and different from the uniform consent of doctor expound those scripture not receive by the catholic church nay and that which be above all condemn by the church three s. Augustine do not presume upon his own authority to condemn s. cyprian opinion as dissonant from the scripture for that in this case the authority of s. cyprian may seem to have be as good as the of s. Augustine especial have seal the gospel with his blood which the other though a great saint have not do nor be put unto but s. Augustine find s. cyprian his opinion dissent from the true scripture exposition as it be carry along by the most holy tradition of catholic church and so be s. Augustine to be understand for scripture and church ever go together in the ancient father and they never understand the one without the other all which circumstance be of exceed weight and importance in this case about which notwithstanding I have think it convenient as before so here to lay forth some further and particular consideration the first consideration first then touch the different esteem which the different esteem that catholic and protestant do make of ancient father when they agree in one roman catholic and profess protestant do hold of consent of ancient father in matter of religion which be the first point here touch and therefore of we in the first place to be discuss I consider yet further what I have read in s. Augustine concern this point which holy saint and great doctor though as now in part we have show he do always postpone what authority of ancient father soever to the canonical scripture and all particular opinion of some one or few unto the consent of the great part but especial unto the judgement of the church yet be the same father so respective in all his write to conserve the reverence and just deserve reputation of these great saint and servant of God and renown pillar of the Catholic church ever most due unto they for the expound of those scripture as he do never urge any thing more earnest or eager against heretic than their authority for exposition of sacred writ which he know to be natural hateful unto they who be inventor of novelty and enemy to antiquity and false interpreter of scripture which all sectary be as be define and determine in the second general council hold at Ephesus against the heretic Nestorius 14. and therefore say the say s. Augustine unto julian aug. l. 2. con. julian. Pelag. ver. the Pelagian heretic we have prove this now by the authority of the Catholic saint that do affirm it against you and they be such man and so great in the Catholic say which be spread over the world that your vain and subtle novelty be crush whole by their only authority and then again first of all your contumacy be to be repress or beat down by their authority he mean the ancient father and this be the principal s. Augustine opinion for the esteem of the father way that s. Augustine take with they though all these heretic as forerunner of the protestant be very frequent in cite of scripture as fast as any other heretic 15. but s. Augustine will have the true meaning of holy scripture to be seek out by the interpretation of ancient father and so do his word flat prove tun aug. l. 3. say he then the limit of sound say to wit the canon of scripture defend by we when we do not change and alter the bound thereof place by the holy father but rather do observe and defend the same that be we do follow their interpretation and ancient exposition 16. and further yet reason of this matter in his second book to the count or earl Valerius I mean concern the sincere exposition of the lib. 2. 29. ancient father to be prefer before the novellant he say what shall I say of the expositor themselves of sacred scripture which have flourish in the catholic church how they never attempt to turn these place allege into other sense then from antiquity they have receive they for that they be most firm and stable in the most ancient and strong say and be nothing move with late hatch error so he 17. and for confirmation of this have allege the example both of s. cyprian and s. Ambrose show and prove out of they that original sin be in infant scoff of Pelagian heretic against ancient ceremony of baptism and that for remedy and remove thereof they be baptize in the catholic church with the old ceremony of exorcism and exufflation the Pelagian heretic that not only deny but scoff at these thing call the use thereof Manicheisme be answer by s. August thus let he dare to call those two father manichaean and let he lay the same wicked crime of Manicheisme upon the most ancient tradition of the church by which tradition infant as before I have say be exorcize and breathe on at their baptism that by these mean they may be translate from the power of darkness of the devil and his angel unto the kingdom of aug. ibid. Christ so s. Augustine who add present that albeit he be scorn at for this by heretic yet such be his resolution that he burst forth into these word follow we be more ready say he with these father and with the church of God root in the antiquity of this say to suffer and protestant become pelagian in deride ancient ceremony abide all kind of reproach and contumely then to be exalt with the praise of any Pelagian eloquence whatsoever and do not this fall just upon the neck of all our modern protestant do they not scorn deride and jest as much at these two ancient ceremony of exorcism and exufflation as ever the Pelagian heretic do 18. with what face then can they challenge s. Augustine to be they nay be not Pelagius and his rank of heretic fit for their society since they do so jump and conspire together and that against s. Augustine and the Catholic doctor nay I find s. Augustine to go yet much further in take upon he the patronize of the reverend rank of holy father against profane heretic though some of those ancient worthy who he commend live either in his own time or not very long before he for that eyt their doctrine against julian the Pelagian that make so light account of they and scoff at they he expostulate thus Iraeneus cyprianus Reti^ius aug. l. 2. cont. julian. Pelagiau olympius hilarius gregorius Basilius Ambrose and joannes chrysostomus a etc. be Iraeneus cyprian and the rest here name of the low house or have they vulgar seat in your parliament as out of your Tullian eloquence you do scoff be they raise up for envy of you be they young soldier or auditory scholar be they shipman taverner host cook butcher be they dissolute young man make of monk and c. who you by your scoff urbanity or rather vanity do exagitate vilify condemn and contemn 19 thus write s. Augustine that holy saint and great doctor in God church against the malapert sauciness of that heretic that so little regard and so base account of the ancient doctor and have allege their authority he make this inference of honour and reverence on their behalf under such planter after the apostle under such waterer builder pastor and nourisher as these be and be have the church grow up and do tremble at the profane voice of your novelty and a little after repeat again for honour cause the very same father with addition only of two more of his time to wit pope innocentius the first and s. Hierome he account their testimony and of such other as hold communion and participation with they to be the very speak voice and lively oracle of the whole church and that it be plain madness in the heretic to make so small account of they nay he further resolve and with mature deliberation conclude that the tical faith and belief of all these father conspire and agree together in one be to be defend against he and against all other such like heretic as he be no other way than Christ gospel be to be defend against infidel his word be these 20. how contemptible the authority of heretic be to s. augustin in respect of the ancient father against this miserable desperate madness of thou which God turn from thou I do see that I must so answer to thy book that the faith of these father be defend against thou as the very gospel itself of Christ be to be defend against impious man and as against the very profess enemy of Christ so he and yet in another place press again the authority of the say father he do entreat his adversary julian to believe these holy father and by they to be make friend with he yea to be reconcile unto he and to the catholic church from which he stand as yet separate and be not this the very same offer we make to the protestant at this day and then s. Augustine go on forward in ratifi their authority sad present for further corroboration of the doctrine and tradition of antiquity lib. 2. cont. julian. circamed what these father do believe I do believe what they hold I hold what they teach I teach what they preach I preach yield unto these and you will yield unto i have peace with these and you will have peace with i and last of all say he if you will not by they be make friend with i at least wise be not you by i make enemy unto they a golden sentence and then he go forward say shall Pelagius and the author of your heresy be of such authority with you that you for their society will leave the fellowship and company of so many and so great doctor of the catholic faith and church disperse from east to west from north to south and those both ancient and near unto our age partly dead and yet partly live so he 21. which speech of s. Augustine do seem unto i so fit and proper to touch and concern the protestant of our day who for the love of Luther and Calvin author of their novelty do forego all the doctor of the catholic church not only ancient but modern also as that nothing in my judgement can be produce of near affinity to hold great correspondency or be more like or more semblable 22. neither yet do s. Augustine determine only that the doctor of the church be absolute the best witness and judge in matter of controversy that arise and spring up after their day but together with his authority which have be alone sufficient he yealede a very substantial and convince reason for the same and it be this that the father can not be partial judge of such cause as come into controversy after their death for that they give forth their verdict and judgement before any controversy be stir or move about the same and thus much do his word import as they follow 23. say s. Augustine aug. l. 2. cont. julian. propefinen etc. the father do judge of this cause at that time when no man can say that they do wrongful favour or disfavour any party for that you pelagian be not then in the world with who we may have contention about this question etc. they do not attend unto any friendship either with we or with you they do not exercise amity or enmity with either of we they be angry neither with you nor with we neither yet have they commiseration towards any of a excellent reason of s. Augustine our part that which they find in the church they hold that which they learn they teach that which they recyve and learn from their father by tradition they teach and leave unto their child we do not as yet plead with you before these judge and yet by they be our case decide and determine nor you nor we be know unto they and yet do we out of their work produce their sentence against you we have as yet no strife with you nor plead any cause and yet have we conquer you by their verdict hitherto be the word of s. Augustine 24. which when I have consider and ponder well with myself as also reflect upon all s. Augustine his former sentence compare they all together and confer they with the state of our present time and manner of man therein I seem to behold as in a clear glass before the eye of my understanding the very person and self same cause of saint Augustine to be in the catholic writer of our day as contrariwise also that of the pelagian and of other old heretic to be in the protestant the one and the other make like account of the ancient father I mean the catholic esteem they high and stand to their judgement the other reject they where they make against they which as it have be sufficient prove before so may I here adjoin also many other proof thereof if I will spend more time in allege their sentence let m. whitaker assertion speak for all who of this matter write thus if you argue from the witness of man be they never so learned and ancient we yield no more to their word in cause of say and religion than we perceive to be agreeable to scripture neither think you yourself to have prove any thing although you bring against we the whole consent and swarm of father except that which they say be justify not by the voice of man but of God himself the second consideration as my first consideration be whole conversant about the just deserve credit of ancient father agree to gather in general either in the full voice of all how catholic and protestant do esteem of the testimony of particular father or in the great part and consent of they so be my second employ about the same credit and authority of particular father either one or two or more aver any thing which be not reprehend by other in matter of religion about which point I see less ascribe in his majesty book unto their promerit estimation than catholic do hold in their orthodox assertion and much less than I myself have purposely read and observe in the former mention holy father s. Augustine concern that point for as his majesty yield less to the common consent of doctor which must of necessity make the visible catholic church if ever Christ leave behind he any church at all to continue when he write that he will either believe they or at least wise will be humble silent and not condemn they as before have be show so in this very second point of particular father I find it thus write by his majesty 26. but for every private father opinion say he it bind not my conscience more than Bellarmine every one of the father usual contradict of other the first part of which sentence to wit that every private opinion of every father bind not a man conscience in matter of religion be so clear that it need no proof at all for it can be deny for if the opinion be indeed private then be it not true catholic and consequent be not the opinion of the true church it bind no man 27. but for the late period of the sentence be whole derogatory from the credit of antiquity that be to say that every one of the father do usual contradict other in matter concern religion this must needs presubpose to have some favourable interpretation afford it to free it from open injure and wrong of the father and so my hope be that this be the meaning of his excellent majesty to wit that these contradiction suppose to be a among the father be only diversity of judgement in matter that be not determinate or that do not concern any article of belief but either such matter as s. Augustine say that may without breach of union or charity be diverse dispute of among catholic aug. l. 1. cont. julian. Pelag. cap. 2. man or else when diverse father do give diverse sense of scripture some the literal other the allegorical and all true all intend by the holy ghost as we have former note now the rule that we must here observe concern these point wherein consent of father be and must necessary be have be that which vincentius Lyrinensis a author that I can never sufficient commend have excellent lay down in his 37. chapter his word be these the ancient consent of holy father be with great care and study to be both search out and follow of we not in all their question of holy writ but only in the rule of faith 28. and unto this s. Augustine allude where he write thus there be lib. 1. cont. julian pelag cap. 2. some thing wherein sometime the most learned and the best defender of the Catholic rule do not agree among themselves but one speak better and more true than another of the self same thing but yet without breach of the link of faith 29. but forasmuch as particular father do often time set down and deliver the public belief of the church and not any private opinion though they seem to speak private and not in name of the whole church when they mention this or that point concern religion some certain rule or note for our better direction and thesure rule how to judge of particular father opinion or assertion about matter of faith distinction must be set down and the sure rule to discern how far forth private father opinion aught to be esteem or may bind a man in conscience be for a man to consider upright in the impartial judgement betwixt God and his own conscience whether that opinion of his if he be but one or they if they be many have be withstand or gainsay contradict or impugn by any other father or father Synod or council provincial general or national of the same or other precedent or subsequent age for if this can be make good against any one particular father opinion then may it more than probable be infer that forsomuch as this particular father be general repute for a catholic doctor in his time never reprehend tax note condemn for this opinion as false doubtful or erroneous it must needs be I say necessary infer and conclude that that very opinion of his be the opinion judgement and doctrine also of the catholic church in the age and time wherein he live and of which he himself be then a father and doctor for if this be not so it can be so much as with any probability imagine that this father can have teach this opinion in his day or divulge it in his writing unto posterity without some note or memory of controlment or taxation of the same either whilst he live or after his death 30. and hereby it follow that albeit this doctrine shall have but one or two ancient father that do express mention it in their day other father of the same time either not have occasion to speak thereof or else busy and encumber about other as weighty point yet be this alone sufficient to make we understand that in their day that mention the same the foresay opinion of that father or father be hold for Catholic doctrine and throughout the universal church for that otherwise without all doubt it will then or afterwards have be when any private father do err he be present note by other descry and censure by the careful and vigilant watchman of God church neither can any instance as I imagine be give to the contrary for that from the very first infancy of Christianity unto our day it can be show that any father or doctor though otherwise never so renown for wit and learning piety or sanctity do ever begin any new doctrine or erroneous opinion different from the catholic belief but that present the same be except against by other and this be more than evident in the particular case and slip of Tertullian Origen cyprian and other ancient father of the church and yet when any of these transgress the ancient bound innovate any thing from the receive faith they be all of they except and cry out against note and tax for such their private and erroneous opinion as dissent from public union and Catholic communion 31. neither do any man in my judgement explain this point better than s. Augustine himself and therefore as I serve myself principal of he in the precedent consideration so do I mean also in this for as on the one side when many father do agree in their opinion against one or few as in the case of s. cyprian about the rebaptize of heretic it fall out the great part be there to be prefer before the less as the say father do often affirm so notwithstanding when no such opposition and contradiction be of the mayor part s. Augustine himself make high and singular account of every private father opinion as namely when he extol the authority o. s. aug. l. 3. bapt. Donatist c. 4. l. 2. con^ Crescon^^ cap. 32. hilarius against Julian save who be ignorant or who do not know that earnest defendor of the catholic church against heretic venerable Hilary the french bishop 32. and then again of aug. lib. 1 contr. julin cap. 2. hearken unto another excellent steward of God house who I do reverence as my father for in Christ jesus he beget i by the gospel I mean bless s. Ambrose and then of a three also to wit s. Gregory Nazianzen he give this commendation or rather by a interrogation will enforce his adversary unto a admiration of this great saint and learned divine do it seem unto thou a small authority that be in one only Gregory Nazianzen among the eastern bishop and then follow the reason which true be very well worth the mark 33. say he one doctor opinion the doctrine of the church he be true so great a person as neither will he speak in this matter as he do but out of the most know manifest christian faith nor will man hold he for so excellent and venerable except they do know that what he say he speak out of the rule of most know truth thus s. Augustine 34. and in these his word consist the whole substance of this my consideration about private father to wit that s. Gregory Nazianzen surname the divine for his admirable and profound knowledge in the great mystery of divinity though he have be but one in that matter against julian as he be not but accompany with many as have be make clear in the former consideration yet so great be the authority of his person in the church as that neither he will have say as he do but out of the common sense of the church in his time nor shall he ever have be hold for a famous nor venerable a doctor renown throughout the christian world but that the church be sure that he will affirm nothing hold nothing publish nothing but out of the common rule and infallible canon of the most know truth for that otherwise he shall even to his face have be contradict by other doctor and father his equal and compeer that live with he or ensue after he so as we see that particular father say and opinion when they be not gaynesay by other or reprehend or condemn by the church they be not so light to be respect or reject as protestant do both ordinary teach and practice but the main point to be weigh and consider be this to wit to know in what time they be write upon what occasion of what credit or authority the father be whether other do write the same and accord with he whether any exception have be take against it and then by who and when and how it stand in the church either as justify or condemn and many other such like material circumstance by i before touch for that sometime it may fall out yea and often time do as now we have in part show and may do much more at large that particular father opinion and assertion not contradict nor yet on the other side agree upon in express term by the mayor part of father in their writing though otherwise believe and receive by they in the faith and belief of the church may make a very strong argument that the church do then believe it especial if the same be so understand also by the general consent of the father follow in the subsequent age and church and consequent it may bind every man his conscience to give more credit thereunto than protestant incredulity will allow and this shall suffice for my second consideration the three consideration hitherto have we treat of the father show first what credit we ought to afford and yield unto their joint consent when in any point of doctrine they agree in that the father of every age for the first 500 year do make for catholic and against protestant in matter now in controversy one and that be as vincentius speak without any further question contradiction or opposition most faithful to believe they and embrace their judgement as the lively oracle of God and the whole speak voice of Catholic church in the mouth of her doctor and pastor which if you consider it well be a great deal more than the alternative allow unto they by protestant which be either to believe they or to be humble silent without condemn they as though the Protestant be at his liberty in every thing to make his choice which as we have hear in the first chapter be no less than heresy and as though the renounce and forsake of cap. 4. and 42. cont. they let it be promise with never so much silence and reverence be not on the protestant part a sufficient condemn of they and this for that point 36. there remain yet behind the chief and principal point of all other in this present business and matter we have now in hand to be handle and to be especial consider of which be this to wit to know whether the ancient father of the first five hundred year after Christ for so far do his majesty offer in the last edition of this his english premonition extend itself do make for protestant or for we which point though to discuss at large throughout all the controversy will both require and fill a very large volume and consequent far surpass the bound of my intend brevity yet shall jendeavour in this last consideration to give a sufficient glimpse of the truth therein in very few word for any indifferent reader that will stand attent and judge according unto reason the more by the less 37. for first in general it may be here see by that which his majesty lay forth that the protestant do deal diffidenter distrustful on their own behalf with the father authority for they do first limit their year within the compass of four hundred in the first english edition and then of five hundred year in the next and last of all they call it back again unto four hundred in the latin edition which argue that they know not well upon what ground nor where nor when they stay themselves be still afraid lest that they grant to much unto they as indeed whatsoever they grant unto they it be to much on their behalf since that whatsoever they grant it make direct against they which will not be if their friendship with they or hope in they be confident or any at all 38. second they restrain their credit yet more when they do not promise absolute to believe the consent of father but only they promise silence and when they say they will believe the father of those first age when with one unanyme consent they shall agree upon any thing to be believe as a necessary point of salvation which seldom fall out in matter especial now in controversy for that they be busy in other matter as before have be touch either of write apology during the time of persecution or in convert and instruct the new convert christian or in confute other heretic and heresy it must needs be a rare case to find all the father agree together with one consent except it be in a general council and to determine that this or that point be a matter of faith and article of belief 39 neither be it absolute necessary to the purpose that they shall do so for that our principal scope and drift be to seek and trace out from time to time by testimony of the father in every age where the true catholic church go and whether the protestant or our church at this day have more resemblance unto she there diverse thing may lead we to discern the true church though they be not article of necessary belief be diverse other argument and probable conjecture to seek out the same at least wise probable then only article of belief agree upon by consent as for example sundry ceremony use in baptism and other sacrament as exorcism exsufflation christen and the like mention by s. Augustine and by diverse other ancient father as also the use of the cross taper candle reverence of holy relic and kneel before picture image and crucifix and other rite testify by the whole senate of christian antiquity which though they be not by the say father commend and deliver as article of our faith yet these be practise by the primitive church which be grant to be the true church and compare to the custom of protestant and we in our church will easy disclose which of the two they or we do more imitate or impugn the true church of antiquity but content ourselves at this time with the only mention of they by the way we will make a short and brief passage or rather step throughout the foresay four or five hundred year limit unto we and this God willing we will do not by cite but lay down the father authority themselves in particular for it will be over long as before have be say but rather by produce such witness who be of most credit with our adversary can be well mistrust or discredit to wit the magdeburgian century who have in every age diligent though partial examine the same and how substantial a proof this be of Catholic religion by the very confession and concession of their great adversary I appeal for judgement unto the discreet and indifferent reader the first Age 40. and as for the first hundred year after Christ his glorious incarnation which be depute general unto Christ and his apostle age as the chief doctor and father that govern the church and instruct the people in that time I will take only the note of one position Centur. lib. 2. cap. 4. or article of faith which the say Magdeburgians do gather out of all writer of that age as agree upon against the protestant by the teacher of that age and continue ever after throughout all subsequent age and this be concern the real presence of the true body and blood of our saviour in the supper of our lord common call the eucharist which point the ancient father against all heretical and protestantical trope and figure do prove abundant out of the gospel themselves out of the act of the apostle out of the epistle of s. Paul out of the consent of the whole church in that first age and ever after to wit that the word of Christ do evident contain the same be proper and literal to be understand as they be to be and not by any figure or trope as the zwinglians caluinist and all other sect of sacramentary do faythles imagine 41. this first prescription then of this important article of faith the magdeburgian do find to be for we against 1. about the real presence all our english protestant aswell in the very first age under Christ and his apostle as in all other successive time for that in every age they prove this diligent out of the consent of all father and doctor of that age to wit that Christ his true body be real present in the bless sacrament by the very power and virtue of Christ his own word use by the priest in consecration and if any heretic demand a reason of this admirable transmutation I can give he no other then that which s. Augustine give in the like miraculous case it be in his three epistle and it be such a one as will suffice any right believe christian if he will not continue a heretic or a infidel here if a reason be seek for it be not wonderful if a example be demand it be not singular let we grant that God can do some thing which we must confess we can search out for in such matter as these be the whole reason of the deed be the power of the doer and be not this one substantial point of popery as our protestant brand it prove for we by their own friend 42. but as for other point of our religion in controversy betwixt we and the protestant though the magdeburgian will not willing grant they to be so ancient as the first age which we notwithstanding do prove abundant in handle of every controversy yet do they will they will they grant sundry of they to have begin and creep in present after the apostle in the second age and so continue and increase in number in the three four five and six when all the whole christian world go clear with we that be to say all the doctrine of such as be chief doctor and father for their learning and piety in those time and age as here shall appear by a just view of that which here brief I purpose to set down the second Age 43. in the second age immediate after the apostle the magdeburgian do grant the very principal father of Magdebur cent. 2. c. 4 pag. 55. 56. 57 etc. that age to make for we not only in the foresay article of the real presence against sacramentary but also in sundry other point now in controversy against the protestant and first concern free-will remain in man after his 2. about free will fall for proof whereof they city s. irenaeus lib. 4. cap. 72. harese and that with great indignation and reprehension say that he wrest the word of the prophet as also of Christ our saviour and s. Paul and the word which they reprehend in s. irenaeus be these the prophet and apostle do exhort man to do justice and to work good work for that this be in our power and be not this a great offence in s. irenaeus to speak so like a Papist 44. they accuse also other father of the same age for like fault as justinus martyr if it be his book in his answer unto the hundred and three question and Clemens alexandrinus lib. 2. say of this latter do every where defend free-will and final they give this censure of all that age there be no piece of doctrine that begin to be darken so soon as this of free will which darken be nothing else with they but the Catholic sense of that doctrine which now also we hold to wit that albeit man his free-will be great 3. the doctrine of good work wound by Adam fall yet be it not so extinguish but that nature be relieve by the holy assistance of Christ grace and not otherwise the free-will of man may cooperate in do of good work which be also these holy father meaning 45. the like the say magdeburgian do complain of the article of good work and perfection of life to wit that this doctrine also begin to be darken in this age so as according unto they the candle lighten by our saviour and his apostle and set upon the golden candlestick of the church dure but a little while 46. furthermore they city also that say of s. Clement lib. 5. which anger they very much we be save by grace but not without good work lib. 6. whensoever we shall hear those word of our saviour unto the cananaean thy faith have save thou we do not understand that he say absolute that they shall be save whosoever believe in any sort except good deed do also follow and be this aught else but catholic doctrine to wit that faith must go before and good work follow and be not this the self same doctrine which s. Paul teach say that the save faith be the faith which work by charity in we 47. moreover concern the law that it do not 4. whether the commandment be impossible command impossible thing but that with the assistance of Christ grace Christian man may observe the commandment this the magdeburgian do censure for erroneous doctrine also in the father of this second age namely in justinus martyr resp. 103. who prove it out of the example of s. Paul himself and of Zachary and Elizabeth that be both of they just and s. irenaeus teach the say doctrine lib. 4. c. 30. and Clemens lib. 2. be all father of this second age which doctrine be confirm afterward by all the father of subsequent age and yet do the goodfellow Magdeburgians condemn the same with great resolution out of a maxim of Aristotle most foolish and wicked apply say one inconvenience be grant by these father to wit the doctrine of free-will infinite other inconvenience be wont to follow which speech of the father though it be incommodious unto the magdeburgian and for such set down by they yet be the word plain for the Catholic doctrine now hold by the roman church in that behalf 48. but yet further concern the external usual sacrifice of christian then accustom to be offer on the 5. external sacrifice of christian altar the same magdeburgian be much trouble about certain speech of s. Ignatius and s. irenaeus the first have these word in his epistle Smyrnenses louse offer it be not lawful without the bishop to make oblation or offer sacrifice and the like word they city out of s. irenaeus 4. cap. 32. say of he say they seem to speak incommodious enough when he say that Christ do teach a new oblation of a new testament which the church receive from the apostle do offer unto God throughout the whole world so they of the external christian sacrifice of those day check and condemn the father of that first age after the apostle 49. about tradition in like manner rite and cerimonye they complain in this age as they do of other 6. about tradition point before to wit that that the doctrine of christian liberty begin not a little to be darken with rite and ceremony in this age also and say they and the error of necessary observation of tradition do by little and little grow up whereof they give a example out of s. Ignatius his epistle add philadelphios where he say do not dishonour holy day do not neglect lend for it contain in it the imitation of Christ his conversation who be our god do not despise the passion week do you fast upon wensdaye and fry day and that which be leave of your meat give it unto the poor and this be the darkness which the magdeburgian do observe or rather this be the light which those angel of darkness and instrument of Satan will darken in the apostolical write of s. Ignatius and other ancient of this very next age after the apostle contrary unto their carnal and evangelical liberty which their first luxurious and Cloysterbreaker Luther set abroach 50. the same magdeburgian do cite a plain sentence out of s. irenaeus lib. 3. cap. 3. whereby he prove the primacy of the church of Rome to wit for her more powerable principality the primacy of the church of Rome it be of necessity that all church shall come unto she that be to say all faithful people from all part of the world for that in she have be conserve ever the tradition of the apostle which plain sentence the magdeburgian do endeavour to delude by diverse shift as first that it seem to savour of novelty then that this sentence be find say they in the copy that now be extant of irenaeus as though there be other not extant that have it not three they do interpret irenaeus his meaning that he understand only by tradition write doctrine but by this we may see how they be encumber with the write of father even in this very first age after the apostle when these and all other the like doctrine of Christian Catholic religion be seal with the fast shed blood of her martyr and doctor 51. another point also offend they much which be the excellency and great merit of martyrdom which 8. excellency and merit of martyrdom the father of this age do in all their writing exalt say they the father of this age begin to think too glorious of martyrdom belike these same good fellow never mean that their finger shall ache for Christ or christian religion and then they say of holy s. Ignatius that constant martyr in many of his epistle do speak very dangerous of the merit of martyrdom also they do check the same saint and holy martyr for that in his epistle unto the roman when he be go unto martyrdom and to be devour of wild beast in the amphitheatre of Rome he cry out suffer i that I may be the food of beast and thereby promerit to enjoy God himself and what so great peril be there I pray you in this doctrine for that throughout the whole fpistle it appear that he ascribe unto Christ his grace all the fortitude which he expect for this combat and consequent all his merit of enjoy God proceed principal from the say grace of his master and so do the catholic at this day hold in the doctrine of merit if malice and envy can suffer the protestant to see it and acknowledge it 52. but they be very angry with he for frequent use of another phrase in three distinct epistle to wit 9 intercession of saint to those of Antioch of Ephesus and to I shall be come a intercessor for your soul when I shall deserve to obtain the fruition of Christ in which word as you see be not only express mention make of the singular merit of martyrdom but also insinuate the intercession of martyr depart unto the next life for their friend leave behind they upon earth as have not aspire unto the heavenly bliss 53. and final not to go any further they quarrel also with the say Ignatius about the merit and praise of 10. about the state of virginity virginity as diverse heretical caluinist have late do in Oxford say they it appear out of Ignatius his epistle that even then man begin more earnest to love and reverence the state of virginity wherefore they give sundry example as namely in his epistle let virgin consider unto who they have consecrate themseleve and in his epistle honour those that live in virginity as the sacred of Christ so excellent a opinion have this holy father and martyr in those first day of the primitive church concern the state of virginity so little esteem now by protestant 54. all these point of controversy then betwixt we and the protestant at this day to wit of free-will good work possibility of the commandment external christian sacrifice tradition and rite the primacy of the church of Rome merit of martyrdom and state of virginity to pretermit sundry other article as overlong to be handle here we see to have be avouch by the principal father of the second age and that in our defence against the protestant 55. and howsoever the magdeburgian go about to discredit these doctrine together with their author call the conclusion of this age they incommodious opinion blot stubble and error in the father yet seem this only reason and consideration to be sufficient to convince they of heretical insolency in their condemn these father for that it can be show and if it can let the Protestant speak that the say father be ever tax or condemn for these doctrine by the church or other doctor of that age or of any age afterward for the space of fourteen or fifteen hundred year together until Luther profane and unclean spirit break forth of the cloister and make way for heretical insolency to bark against orthodoxal antiquity and this shall suffice for this second age let we now pass to see how conform and agreeable the three age be unto the second for by this lineal and personal descent of doctor and century we shall evident and infallible discover how in all time age and person the business and doctrine of the church be still carry by tradition from hand to hand the three Age 56. concern this three age wherein be doctor Tertullian Origen Dionysius alexandrinus cyprianus methodius and many other which for brevity sake I be enforce to pretermit the magdeburgian do begin with this preface both complain and tax the further of that we go from the age of the apostle the more chaff do grow into the purity of doctrine and yet you see we have go but one age from thence for the last be the first after the apostle and this be the second and in the last you have hear what chaff they complain of but now we shall see that they complain not only of the same point of chaff reiterate and confirm again by the father of this age to wit about free will and good work perfection of life possibility of commandment sacrifice tradition rite 11. invocation of angel supremacy merit of martyrdom and virginity for all these head they do show in their several title of doctrine to have be continue repeat and confirm again by the father of this age but furthermore they do also show and complain of other article explain by the father of this three age in behoof of the modern catholic religion much more abundant than before as for example they show that it be a opinion of this magd. ce^t. 3. c. 4. p. 75 76. and age Angelosinuocandos that angel be to be pray unto according unto the doctrine of Origen who set down also a certain form of pray and invocate upon angel to wit come angel and receive he that be convert hom. 1. in Ezechielen from his error by the word preach neither be this ever reprehend in Origen or number among his error and consequent this may be presume to have be the form of pray in the public church at that day according to the rule before set down touch the authority of particular father 57 touch the article of justification which be a other head beside those 9 or 10. before mention the magdeburgian 12. justification by good work write thus of the father of this age they do attribute to good work their justice before God which if you read in the place of the father by they mention and allege you shall easy discern it to be the very same doctrine that catholic do hold at this day though misreport slander and abuse by heretical calumniation for that the say father do hold nothing else but that this justice by they mention do proceed from the grace of Christ as from the principal original concurrent and concomitant cause thereof though yet not exclude the cooperation of man will stir up and strengthen by that grace 58. next to this they handle of good work and the merit thereof which chapter they begin thus 13. the merit of good work the doctor of this three age do decline more from the true doctrine of Christ and his apostle about the merit of good work they do the doctor of the precedent age and here I will entreat the ingenuous and judicious reader to consider what kind of accusation this be and the rather for that they be not abash for the make good of this accusation to cite diverse place out of Tertullian Origen cyprian and other that do plain aver the merit of good work reprehend by they and as for s. cyprian they allege this place out of he in his sermon that sin commit after baptism be extinguish by alm and good work for which they say that he allege three place of scripture first that of Toby the 4. sin be purge by alm and faith the second be out of the 3. as water do extinguish fire so do alm sin the three be the speech of Christ behold thou scripture and father reject together when they fit not the protestant fancy be make whole take heed that thou sin no more lest some worse thing do happen unto thou notwithstanding all which scripture and the venerable authority of that bless martyr s. cyprian in expound they the magdeburgian do condemn the sentence with all the scripture as erroneous so as it avail not father to allege scripture when they do not interpret they as the Protestant will have they 59 as for the article of penance they begin with 14. about penance magd. ce^t. 3. c. 4. p. 81. it thus the most part of the writer of this age and do you note the most part do wonderful deprave and pervert the doctrine of penance and the reason be for that they make mention of satisfaction in do of penance for proof whereof they city diverse place out of Tertullian Origen and s. cyprian as for example how much time say Origen homil. 3. in lib. thou have spend in offend of God so much spend in humble thou unto God and and do satisfaction to God and s. cyprian lib. 1. epist. 3. wash of and redeem thy sin by satisfaction and in the three book of his epistle and 14. epistle he say be of opinion that such as fall into sin may be holpen with God by the intercession of martyr here then beside satisfaction be intercession of martyr 60. in the article of baptism they take up and reprehend s. cyprian sharp for write thus in his first book 15. bless of the water of baptism of epistle the 12 epistle the water of baptism must be purify and sanctify by the priest that he which be baptize may have his sin wash away where s. cyprian say the magdeburgian dare to avouch that he which baptize confer the holy ghost and do inward sanctify he that be baptize a very great absurdity forsooth if you mark it especial if you confer it with their protestantical opinion that hold the sacrament of baptism to wash only the external man and not the internal 61. the same magdeburgian also accuse the same saint cyprian for that lib. 1. epist. 12. he speak dangerous 16. chrism and holy unction in baptism as they call it of chrism and holy unction in baptism it be necessary for he to be anoint that be baptize to the end that have receive the holy chrism or unction he may be anoint of God and have the grace of Chryst in he 62. furthermore they do reprehend the say s. cyprian for that he write epist. epist. 3. eucharist in the eucharist be sanctify upon the altar and lib. 1. epist. 3. they reprehend he for say that priest do sanctify the cup. and again for write thus that the priest perform the office of Christ and offer sacrifice to God the father and diverse other such speech aswell out of Tertullian and s. martial in Burdegalenses do displease they 63. in the controversy of prayer unto saint their first word be these you may see in the writing 17. prayer unto saint of the doctor of this age manifest sign of prayer unto saint for you have say they the form set down in Origen a little before the end of his second book upon job obeate job or a o bless job pray for we afflict cyprianus say they cyprian lib. 1. epist. 1. in fine that be s. cyprian be plain of opinion that martyr and saint after their death and dissolution do pray for those that remain behind they on earth alive 64. I pretermit many other point but especial those eight or nine head which I touch in the precedent age whereof much more may be speak here as namely of primacy of the church of Rome for aver of which they great stomach and reprehend Tertullian and s. cyprian say erroneous seem to think that the key be only give by Christ unto s. Peter and that upon he the church be build and then they do city five several place out of s. cyprian they may have cite many more and all antiquity with he as concur with Tertullian in this his opinion and further they do conclude thus do ordinary in other place affirm the church to be sound upon Peter as lib. 1. epist. 3. lib. 4. epist. 9 tract. 2. serm. 3. 65. and the same have Origen say they tract. 5. in matth. in these word 17. by the promise of Christ deserve to be make the foundation of the church and again in his 17. homily upon Luke Origen call s. Peter the prince of the apostle thus the magdeburgian be force to show the father of this age to be against themselves 66. and now by this the prudent reader may judge what a volume I may make up if I shall here recite all the authority which in this kind the magdeburgian cent. 3. c. 4 p. 85. 86. do allege for confirmation of the general head touch in the forego age and the other here adjoin for thus they begin the article of martyrdom and merit thereof all the doctor and it be worth the mark that they say all of this age do extol martyrdom immoderate and in like manner they begin their article of chastity thus as in the history of the former age so here shall you find continency to be over much commend and extol and thus much for these so many and so several point as before have be touch 67. now let we add one article or head more of Roman Catholic doctrine discover by the same magdeburgian cent. 3. c. 4. pag. 85. in the father of this three age not hitherto handle to wit the article of purgatory for thus they write you 18. the doctrine of purgatory may see here and there the seed of purgatory sow in certain place of origin his work as homily the 2. in psalm 36. and homil. 3. in cumdem and homil. 8. in and homil. 12. in Ezechielem and in and lib. 1. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) cap. 6. and albeit the magdeburgian do call this but a strong imagination of Origen yet I do consider this that among so many opinion reprehend and condemn in Origen by the father of the subsequent age yet none do ever reprehend this his opinion of purgatory as a error of he but rather follow Origen themselves hold the same as a catholic truth so as now the other head of roman catholic doctrine hold by the chief father and doctor of two precedent age to wit about free-will perfection of life possibility of the commandment tradition and rite supremacy of the pope of Rome merit of martyrdom state of virginity and the like here in this age the same head be not only confirm and ratify but as many more disclose as prayer unto angel justification by work penance and satisfaction intercession of martyr for sinner in this life sanctify the water of baptism by the priest necessity and efficacy of holy chrism sanctification of the holy eucharist upon altar the form of invocation of angel and saint purgatory and diverse other such like point which be at this day controverse I here for brevity sake do pass over hasten unto the four age the four Age 68 the four age of Christ beginning from the year 400. have for chief father of the greek church s Cyril of Jerusalem s. Ephraim s. Basil s. epiphanius s. Gregory Nazianzen Gregory nissen and many other as also the chief doctor of the latin church be s. Ambrose s. Hierome Prudentius Philastrius Ruffinus and other in which age two principal point be to be consider here for our purpose first whether all the former catholic opinion that be discover in the second and three precedent age to be then hold by the church and father thereof be now confirm also in this four age and second whether any other point be further insinuate and inculcate touch the same doctrine 69. and as for the first it be evident that the low we descend from the apostle time the great confirmation and illustration upon occasion of heretical opposition shall we find of the same article as for example the magdeburgian have a chapter 4. c. 4. pag. 242. of the lord supper wherein they do prove out of Gregory Nazianzen Eusebius Ambrose hieronymus hilarius Arnobius Basilius epiphanius and diverse other father and doctor of this age the real presence of Christ in the say supper which they hold to have be true and catholicke defend by they then pass over unto the other head which lie in controversy between we they do show to be hold also but as they say erroneous by the chief father of this four age no less then by those of the former age and then begin with the article of free will they say all the father of this age do speak in a sort confuse of free will but howsoever the father speak confuse certain it be that the magdeburgian speak and censure false and heretical according to their old wont 70. and yet present after they make mention of Lactantius athanasius Basilius Nazianzen epiphanius s. Hierome and s. Gregory man who speak as plain and distinct thereof as man may do and as it may possible be imagine Hieron ep. demetriadem and not confuse let we hear s. Hierome speak in steed of all say he liberty of free-will be leave unto every age and unto all person God say I do not force I do not command but I do propose unto thou the crown and do show thou the reward it be thy part to choose if thou will win the crown in the fight and conflict so he 71. and the very same point of doctrine be often time by he reassume reiterate and urge in incite man to embrace the doctrine of evangelical counsel where he use the self same word in many place of of his work the say Magdeburgians do allege most plain and clear place and sentence forth of Lactantius Nilus chromatius Ephraim and s. Hierome who teach plain that man be not justify by only faith it be not say lib. 8. con. in Isaiam s. Hierome sufficient to have the wall of faith except that faith be confirm with good work 72. and as for the merit of good work the magdeburgian do open confess that both the say Lactantius s. Gregory Nyssen hilarius Nazianzen s. Ambrose Theophilus alexandrinus Ephraim and other all father of this age do open defend the same whereupon they I mean the magdeburgian conclude in these word I be cent. 4 cap. 4. p. 293. now let the godly reader consider how far this age depart from the doctrine of the apostle in this article of good work but I will think it more reason to exhort yea and to beseech the reader even as he have care of the everlasting welfare and salvation of his soul to consider serious and indifferent set all kind of prejudice apart whether it be not more likely that so many learned and holy father that live with so great admiration of their virtue learning piety in this age shall know what agree with the apostle doctrine and what agree not aswell or as a man will imagine somewhat better than these four quarrel companion the magdeburgian I mean Illyricus Wigandus and Faber for these four do only subscribe their dedicatory epistle to queen Elizabeth upon the year 1560. 73. s. Bernard rule and prescription of antiquity be this the near the holy father be unto Christ his incarnation the more full receive and perceive they the mystery of our redemption and yet these four good fellow do thus presume to censure the most reverend and learned ancient father as you see 74. and on this fashion these man go forward in set down all the 18. or 19 head of doctrine before mention as hold by the father of this four age to wit pennance satisfaction invocation of saint cite above a dozen father of this age for the same of tradition about virginity monastical life and the like wherein they do so check condemn and contemn the say holy father as pass all modesty and must needs be a token of manifest heresy 75. s. Ambrose say they in his second book Ambrose do pronounce to insolent of the merit of virginity the like and worse they speak of s. Ephraim and s. athanasius cent. 4. p. 301. for that they write of monk and namely s. Ephraim that they be perfect fighter that have before their eye the sweetness of paradise these man cry out against this what can be speak more monstrous against the merit of Christ 76. and for that s. Ambrose serm. 6. Margarita have these word whosoever therefore do honour martyr do honour Christ and he that contemn saint contemn the lord of saint which be conform to the gospel the magdeburgian complain cry out let the godly reader consider how horrible these thing be the godly reader have consider and he find nothing deliver by these father but the holy catholic doctrine and as for your exclamation they be but the bark of Vigilantius or rather as s. Hierome more fit call he Dormitantius and other ancient condemn heretic against the holy relic of saint and martyr revive and renew by you again rake out of the ash of hell and hellish heresy 77. and final not to be tedious in go forward with a copious enumeration of the foresay article I do only admonish the reader for the last article mention of purgatory how they do produce three father more of this age that hold the same to wit Lactantius Prudentius and s. Hierome as they may have do many more and they add unto the say former number diverse other article which the father of this age do teach as of the particular rule of religious people now in use of celebrate the memory of martyr in church and altar erect and set up in their honour of the external use of the sign of the cross and miracle that thereby have happen whereof write thus in commendation of the cross and the benefit that redound by use this laudable christian ceremony etc. the sign of the cross keep of all sin from we and s. Ephraim lib. cap. 3. advife we thus let we paint the sign of the cross in our gate in our forehead in our mouth in our breast etc. and many other such say of holy father of this age 78. wherefore to conclude we see that this four age agree with the former three in all point of doctrine hold for catholic throughout the whole christian world at this day and as the father of this age do consent with their predecessor so shall we see they not dissent from their successor as shall appear by the next ensue age and if this be not a sufficient demonstration of the true roman Catholic church and of her doctrine confirm by all record of antiquity even by the confession of our adverfary the magdeburgian then let the english protestant answer unto this evidence and give a better if they can but we shall pass further yet to make a insight into two other age that ensue the five and six age 79. there follow the five and six age whereof the former be receive here by his majesty in the second edition of his english premonition though in the first the first 400. year be only allow as have be say and the late be comprehend in m. jewel his challenge at s. Paul cross who promise there open to allow any of the father or counsel that can be bring within the first six hundred year but this public declamation be but a vain ostentation of the challenger and this large offer be also restrain and revoke afterwards by other both at Paul cross and in either of the university in so much that doctor Humphrey in oxford in a funeral speech make of the say m. jewel by the former d. Humphrey do not for bear to tax he open of inconsideration for his so large and liberal offer of father for six hundred year to decide all controversy 10. but here in this our affair and business we have now in hand we have think good to join both these age together for that in they both the like descent of doctrine one after the other be still to be find the latter repeat and confirm the former and for proof of this point I shall need to go no further then to the confession and concession of our cent. 5. c. 4 p. 501. 502. etc. adversary themselves the magdeburgian for there they show for example in the first century first of free-will to wit that albeit the doctor of this age albeit the father sometime speak well and sound yet at length they affirm that man have free-will even in spiritual thing and then they begin with s. Chrysostome allege many plain place out of his work at large say chrysostomus s. Chrysostome do every where play the advocate for free-will from s. Chrysostome they pass unto s. Augustine and from s. Augustine to s. Cyril and from they to Theodoret Hesichius Thalassius Faustus Marcus Eremita and joannes cassianus all father and doctor of this five age and the same they do in the six age allege many place out of s. Gregory the first as also out of Euodius olympiodorus and other 81. then pass they unto the article of justification show that the father of these age do not ascribe justification unto only faith but require also work for which they allege large sentence out of s. Chrysostome s. Cyril s. Augustine though more contract and out of s. Leo the great who offend they much by say by right faith and good work we come to the kingdom of God and from he they pass to s. prosper Hesichius sedulius Primasius Theodulus all of the forename father hold the same erroneous opinion as it please their mastership to call it for that work be by they ever join with faith and that in the last judgement Christ shall question with they not so much what they have believe as what they have practise 82. and the same do they in the next hundred year after allege for it the writing of cassiodorus olympiodorus Andraeas hierosolymitanus and above all and more large they allege above a dozen place out of s. Gregory the great who say life everlasting in the next world Gregor. in 1. reg. c. 1. be prepare and get by pious action in this life 83. from this article they skip unto another of the cent. 5. pag. 506. excellency and merit of good work which article they begin thus this five age do ascribe to much unto the good work of man which they declare large first out of Chrysostome his write say that he be a immoderate commender of good work and from he they pass unto s. Augustine shake he also by the sleeve and take he up for halt and say Augustine also attribute some time too much to good work then they pass unto pope and show the same excess out of he and from these they come unto s. prosper to Saluianus to Maximus to salonius to Thalassius to Theodulus to eucherius to Paulinus and some other all doctor and father of this five age 84. and then in the six age follow the same methood under their article they reprehend for ascribe to much thereunto s. Gregory the great Euodius cassiodorus olympiodorus Fortunatus and justus father of the church and doctor of those day 85. there follow the article of penance wherewith they begin thus Chrysostome do ascribe to much unto confession fast and other rite of penance and of the same error do they condemn Hesichius for that lib. 2. in cap. 6. levit. he say that true penance do consist in fast watch haireclothe tear prayer and almsdeed the same error they ascribe to Maximus joannes cassianus eucherius doctor of this five age and in the six century they lay the same imputation upon cassiodorus and s. Gregory especial chide he for that he say this be to do penance to moan and bewail our sin we have commit and not to commit again thing hom. 34. in evang. worthy of bewail what can be speak more divine by this heavenly doctor and will a man judge these man to be christian dare thus to open their mouth and public to blaspheme 86. I may pass further to allege much more out of these Magdeburgian centuriator which they produce out of every age most manifest against themselves and their own cause with this only fond confidence that all authority and credit of the venerable testimony of the ancient father be shift of by say only that they be incommodious opinion blot stubble and error of the father as though the very glean the father injurious handle by the Magdeburgians of the father be not better than their whole vintage and these blot and stubble and false suppose error be not to be prefer before their best truth but who tell these good fellow that these be error what church ever hold they so what general council ever conclude they so nay what one father or one ancient writer the grand heretic their ancient predecessor except do once open his mouth to speak against either all or any one of these doctrine if they can disprove any one of these doctrine according to any one of the forename challenge church counsel one father or many we do faithful promise to renounce they all as stubble and error as they speak but if none of these thing can be make good against any one the least and weak suppose doctrine then must these doctrine as hitherto they have stand in the church for orthodox so must they hereafter continue catholic and they themselves for confess the father to hold they and we withal urge antiquity that do deny consent of father in any point of doctrine general receive by the church in their day can be no less than great and rash presumption 87. and yet for full conclusion I must advertise the reader to note this one point which in my judgement be very remarkable for these magdeburgian do the conclusion scarce allege one place of ten of these that be to be find in the father work themselves for proof of the roman catholic religion as every man may easy discern if he please to read the catholic writer that make profession purposely to allege the place of ancient father as namely canisius in his large catechism cardinal Bellarmine throughout all his work cardinal Baronius Coccius in his catholicus and other but yet these that the magdeburgian please to cite be sufficient to daunt the english Protestant his confidence in the ancient father since that they alone of themselves confute and confound both he and his religion with what face then can the english protestant vaunt that the ancient father be for he and further these few place of many that may be heap together may as I hope suffice to give his excellent majesty our sovereign satisfaction or at leastwise sufficient light by these to pass further and to seek more sound information of the true faith and belief of the ancient father of the first five hundred year which his say majesty most royal offer to follow for open the window unto which light I have think it my bind duty both before God and man to take this small labour and to lay these few head of consideration before the eye of his highness most wise judgement and understanding the six chapter contain a brief contemplation of what have be hitherto say with the conclusion of the whole to his most excellent majesty and now have handle these point at some more length then at the beginning I have purpose I hope the benignity and clemency of his majesty will take in good part that leave the reader I do return unto he again as unto my most dear belove reverence and dread sovereign to lay before the eye of his prudent consideration the sum of that which hitherto have be consider of 2. first then the point of be a true catholic according unto the name and nature of the word be of such importance necessity and consequence as have be show in the first chapter that no riches in this world no wealth no treasure no state no power no policy no human felicity may be compare with it as right s. Augustine do intimate and for that your majesty eternal weal after the brief and transitory passage of this life depend thereof I can but most humble most hearty and most dutiful fall prostrate at your foot beseech you to give some serious attendance and importance of be a catholic attention to this high and main point of everlasting salvation to seek out what be true catholic both in the church for who the name be first by the apostle invent as also in particular man who be a true catholic and who follow the rule which the name describe to wit he that in christian religion follow universality and not singularity the whole and not a part ancienty and novelty that which have be deliver and conserve from time to time and not invent frame and set forth in late time 3. and for that on the other side heresy be the opposite and contradictory unto catholic religion for that it make choice of a part to itself and thereby be hold to be the high sin in the sight of almighty god that be or can be commit upon earth for that it overthrow the very foundation of faith under pretence to establish the horror of heresy and reform faith my desire be so ardent in this point that your majesty shall enter into due consideration thereof as almighty God bear witness unto my soul and spirit that nothing in this life stand more near my heart consider the eternity of the next world the immutable weal or woe thereof the or euge that each man be to receive as well prince as other and that these earthly princedom will seem but shadow at that day and not worthy one hour of that glory or misery that be to be get or lose by Catholic religion or heresy in this life and this be my first contemplation and I shall pray almighty God that it may be also your majesty 4. the second be about those four way propose by your majesty for aver Catholicisme and clear from heresy which be the admit and believe of all canonical scripture the receive of the three creed the approve the four first counsel and the acceptance of the ancient father of the first four or five hundred year in all which if with the admit in word there be also a the 4. head propose true catholic sense no doubt but they do make a man to be a catholic and do condemn heresy but the importance of all stand in the exposition for to believe the scripture in the sense that I think best myself or to acknowledge they for canonical or not canonical as I or some few with i of late time shall please to prescribe or to admit the three creed with that exposition of the article as I and i shall best allow or the first four counsel in some thing and not in other or the first four hundred year of father so far forth as they in my censure do agree with scripture be to reduce all to my own judgement a thing most opposite to Catholicisme and proper to heresy as we have at large declare 5. wherefore upon my knee I do most humble supplicate your majesty to consider well of this and especial of the last point concern the ancient father which do in effect contain all the rest for that these man deliver unto we the scripture together with the true understanding thereof according to the sense of the church in their day these man deliver unto we the three creed the first as from the apostle the other as from the church the three as from a private man but yet approve by the church these man deliver unto we the first four general counsel wherein diverse of themselves sit as judge and bishop and have voyee and suffrage in the same these man be they that examine the controversy determine the catholic doctrine condemn heresy a athematize heretic and clear the coast of all these wicked and turbulent encumbrance which seditious and headstrong spirit have raise in the christian world by their contention 6. and final these be they who our saviour Christ do use as sanne to winnow his corn and to purge the of his church separate the chaff from the wheat and eroneous doctrine from the truth wherein they be so zealous and diligent labourer as not the least weed can spring up in this field of the church but that these careful good watchman and faithful gardener do present note and pursue the same until it be either root out or condemn by the church and thereby as branch cut of from the body of the vine suffer to wither away and to consume of themselves for proof the great profit receive by the ancient father whereof we may allege as many example as there have be different heresy and heretic in the christian church for the space of fifteen hundred year which albeit they ruffle much and mighty for the time and have often great prince king emperor and potentate to favour and patronize they as the protestant have now your majesty yet be they so consume in time and by virtue of the holy ghost as the very name of many of they be now scarce remember and much less their argument reason proof and scripture which they bring for the same and be it not that in these father book who be their enemy some mention be make thereof we shall scarce know that there have be such man in the world 7. but on the contrary side the church that condemn these man and the father and doctor live therein remain ever both then and after victorious and shall do to the world end and still by succession and continuation the same church have come down from age to age and one age give testimony to another of the purity of the say church by raze out these evil humour from the body 8. and now your majesty have see by the former discourse how many point of old condemn heresy have be revive and renew again by the protestant of our time and that contrariwise almost twenty several position about principal point of controversy hold by the say protestant to be papistical be assert by the say ancient father as catholic in their day even from the first age after the apostle with repetition and confirmation of the same in the subsequent age by the chief doctor that live therein and that the say position or assertion be never note or censure by the the dangerous estate of believe the protestant in England church for erroneous heretical or scandalous this I say be and aught to be your majesty prudence and love of your everlasting good so weighty a argument and motive as nothing more for alas dread sovereign if the sentence of s. Paul be just and true that a heretical man be damn by his own judgement and if that of s. Augustine before cite be not false that whosoever hold any one of those eighty three heresy which he recite in his book to or any other whatsoever which shall spring up hereafter can be a Christian Catholic and consequent must needs be a heretic alas I say my dread sovereign and alas again in what eternal danger do your princely soul consist in that by the evil current of the time and temerarious course of such as you give credit unto your majesty be draw to hold and defend not only sundry of those position which s. Augustine and before he s. Epiphamus do recount for condemn heresy by the church in their day but many other also yea all the opposite proposition to the Catholic assertion before mention out of the ancient father as namely about free-will justification good work invocation of saint real presence primacy of the church of Rome and the like 9 and true to have such a grand inquest or rather parliament of peer to bear witness against a soul for convincement of heresy at the day of judgement as the rank of these father be in all the first and pure age of christian religion make my soul to tremble even in think of it for if the cause be temporal and that there go therein but only the interest of your majesty temporal and terrene kingdom yet be the case frightful to see so many great lawyer and judge upon the one side so resolute as the father show themselves to be but now for so much as the matter concern a everlasting and heavenly kingdom and sentence irrevocable in itself never alterable or to be change and of such inflexible severity as no respect no regard no difference of prince potentate or people be to be hold it make the consideration more hideous and dreadful 10. and it may further be add to this consideration that in this public trial about this point of protestant religion your majesty be not only to have this venerable rank of foreign father and doctor for adversary therein but so many domestical also as have be catholic within all your realm for these thousand year at least I mean bishop pastor and governor of those flock together with the flock that be once subject of your ancestor nay all your majesty ancestor themselves which be of most consideration I mean above two hundred king of both crown that have go before you and together with the descent of their noble blood leave also in their inheritance of catholic religion as of their kingdom to be defend by your majesty which no doubt have be most noble perform if the a strange pitiful case happen to his majesty strange case that ever perhaps fall out in the world have not happen to hinder it and such a one as all posterity may and will wonder at and this be that be violent deprive at once as it be in your cradle of both your parent who shall and will have instill to your tender ear the most honourable inheritance of Catholic religion the opposite and contrary feces be in place thereof pour into your majesty noble breast by such as have be author or instrument of both their ruin and mean no doubt also to be of your majesty if they shall not find you pliable to their design for overturn of that religion whereof they be enemy 11. this then be the case most dread sovereign notorious to the whole christian world and further that if your majesties noble grandmother regent of Scotland have not be vex and turmoil with rebellion toss and tumble weary out and bring to despair by the first Scottish and english gospeller if your noble father and grandfather have not be horrible murder if your renown mother have not be pursue take cast into prison drive out of her realm and final make violent away if all these thing I say have not be do your majesty by all likelihood have never be a Protestant and shall we think that of such diabolical premise there can ensue any good conclusion or any godly or wholesome effect of so abominable cause 12. I deny not but that the inscrutable wisdom and providence of almighty God do often time draw out how God concur with the action of evil man but not with their intention of the counsel and action of evil man good effect as out of the wickedness of the jew and gentile that pursue and murder our saviour he wrought the salvation of the world but never do he this according to the counsel and purpose of the wicked that be to say these effect be never intend by the wicked as for example that the redemption of mankind or salvation of the world be never intend by the jew or gentile that persecute our saviour and procure his bless passion 13. but here in our case the matter fall out quite contrary for that the chief and prime intention of those wicked who I have mention be to effectuate this very point that now we see bring to pass to revolve that crown expel catholic religion pull down monastery and church drive out or destroy the the mark aim at by the first gospeller in Scotland concern his majesty prince that then govern as also their issue if they shall leave any or else get the same into their hand the better thereby to have title of govern in the infant name to preserve it so long as it may stand commodious for they and after to dispose thereof as time shall tell they to be best but their chief aim of all be unto that which out of a infant education they may probable hope for and now have arrive unto which be that during the time of that education they may perhaps so enchant the mind of the young prince so change his judgement and affection from the judgement and affection of his say parent and other progenitor as when he shall come to the year of understanding to discern the merit of man action and affection towards he he shall approve for good all that be do to his high hurt to wit in matter of religion appertain to his everlasting salvation to the ruin and destruction of his parent to the revolution of his kingdom and the like and shall we think that God will ever concur with such man to such designment God have permit they for our sin and for the sin of thousand else that have perish and be to perish thereby but any concourse of he to such man intention no pious mind can yield unto 14. for if this shall be grant that God do concur with the action of these seditious man in draw his majesty infancy by so turbulent and wicked mean from the union of that faith and religion which all his parent and predecessor profess for so many age together then must it follow that the same God never concur with the other I mean his noble ancestor by who notwithstanding he do work and achieve throughout all those age so many notorious work of christian piety as perhaps by no nation more and to think that all this notwithstanding they live out of his favour deprive of true faith infect with erroneous doctrine deceive with false sacrament be no member of his true church but rather cast out from his face and deliver over to the delusion scorn and power of Satan be no doubt temerarious impiety to imagine or affirm 15. wherefore most noble and renown prince the epilogue of all and sovereign I do not only out of the dutiful zeal of a love devote subject exhibit this humble petition to your majesty but also on the behalf of our saviour jesus Christ entreat that it may please your highness if not to entertain and cherish yet not to persecute that religion wherein your ancestor have live so honourable and pious for that this will be to persecute they in their religion and your majesty princely nature I know of persecution and persecutor can but abhor the hateful name of persecution and violent proceed as well know out of your own great prudence that nothing be more durable or more subject to hatred and malediction in the world especial the cause be so universal and common to so many other great prince and some of they the near of your royal blood as all man see it be 16. but the very fundamental reason indeed be that this Catholic religion be no novelty or innovation but that whereunto your majesty realm be first convert from paganism when they be make Christian and whereunto they yield their obedience promise subjection submit the regiment of their soul profess constancy therein to the world end and now then in any justice can they be punish for hold that which be so solemn sow root and so general admit so long and faithful contive so firm ground so deliver and so commend by our father to this their posterity if all our great grandfather and ancient predecessor be alive again may they not as lawful be pursue and persecute for their religion as we be now for the same if they shall look upon the church which themselves build to the honour of Christ for divine service and especial for the use of the public sacrifice use throughout Christendom at that day and shall see the same not only take away but penal statute also make against the fame by imprisonment vexation payment of money and other tribulation will they not complain of great injustice do unto they in that so sharp persecution shall be lay upon their child for keep their or pledge receive as the apostle say and for observe their fidelity both to God and they 17. wherefore most noble prince let this be as far from your action or permission as it be from your royal inclination and disposition to be a persecutor of those that stand only in defence of their conscience and these not frame upon wilful fancy as all those of sectary and innovator be but necessary lay upon they by obligation of religion leave unto they by tradition of God whole church and by the church of England in those day as a principal member thereof who communion in religion if these man do break and leave now for what cause soever either of fear flattery ambition worldy favour and preferment peril or persecution then must they consequent break of for ever that eternal band and link of be save together or ever enjoy more the one the other in the next life for that no association can be for eternity in the life to come but by observe one and the self same religion in this world which cogitation do strong work with your highness Catholic subject and they do hearty pray our saviour jesus that it may no less work with your majesty in like manner